BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
OF THE RIPON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the First Amended 
Accusation Against: 
 
THERESA MESSICK, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                                     Respondent. 
 
 

 

DECISION 

     
 
    OAH No.  2006080465 
 

 

 

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) of the Ripon Unified School District (district) in Ripon, California, 
from June 7 through June 10, 2010.  Commission members are Davina M. Keiser, 
Russell K. Sperling, and Chairperson Marilyn A. Woollard, Administrative Law 
Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). 
 

Marleen L. Sacks, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the 

district, whose Superintendent Dr. Louise Bennicoff-Nann was present throughout the 
hearing. 
 

Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., Driscoll & Associates, represented respondent Theresa 

Messick, who was present throughout the hearing. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the parties presented oral 
closing arguments on June 10, 2010.  Due to time constraints, the district was given 
until June 11, 2010 to file a reply brief to respondent’s closing argument.  The reply 
brief was timely received and marked for identification as Exhibit 12.  On June 14, 
2010, the Commission reconvened and deliberated the charges set forth in the First 
Amended Accusation and First Amended Statement of Charges that Cause Exists to 
Dismiss a Permanent, Certificated Employee.  The record was then closed and the 
matter was submitted for final decision on June 14, 2010. 1 
 
 

                                                 

completed its deliberations.   

1 On June 10, 2010, the parties stipulated that the record would close when the Commission 

1 

ISSUE 

Did respondent engage in unprofessional conduct, persistent violation of or 

refusal to obey reasonable regulations of the district’s governing board, and/or 
demonstrate evident unfitness for service within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44932, sufficient to justify her dismissal, based upon her: (1) repeated failure 
to sign a commitment form agreeing to complete a supplemental English Language 
Learner teaching certification (EL certification) and/or (2) failure to complete the 
district’s EL certification  requirement?2 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
Jurisdiction/Procedural History 
 
 
On May 9, 2006, the district’s former Superintendent Leo Zuber, in his 
official capacity, made and signed a “Statement of Charges That There Exists Cause 
to Dismiss a Permanent Certificated Employee” (Statement of Charges) against 
respondent, which was approved by the district’s governing board (board) on May 10, 
2006 (Resolution No. 05-07).  The Notice of Intent to Dismiss was served on 
respondent on May 11, 2006.  On July 6, 2006, the district served its Notice of 
Accusation, Accusation, Statement of Charges, and Notice of Intent to Dismiss with 
supporting documents on respondent.  On July 20, 2006, respondent filed her Notice 
of Defense denying and objecting to the Accusation and raising affirmative defenses.  
 

2. 

On August 15, 2006, the district filed its Notice of First Amended 

Statement of Charges and First Amended Statement of Charges.  On September 25, 
2006, the district filed its Notice of First Amended Accusation and First Amended 
Statement of Charges.3 
 

3. 

On January 2, 2007, Administrative Law Judge Sarli ordered the 

dismissal of the district’s First Amended Accusation and First Amended Statement of 
Charges.  In her dismissal order, Judge Sarli concluded, inter alia, that “there is 
nothing unprofessional about respondent’s maintaining that the District has no right to 
require her to obtain supplemental certification.  She is correct in arguing that the 

                                                 

2 Unless otherwise indicated, all further statutory references are to the Education Code.   The 

following are different types of authorizations to teach English Language Learners: CLAD [Cross-cultural, 
Language and Academic Development], BCLAD [Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and Academic 
Development], Bilingual Credential or SDAIE [Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English] 
certificate].  For ease of reference, unless otherwise indicated, these certifications will be referred to 
collectively as EL certification. 
 

3 Paragraph IX of the First Amended Accusation erroneously references a “Second Amended 

Statement of Charges” as setting forth cause for respondent’s dismissal.  This was a non-prejudicial error 
by the District.   
 

 

 

2 

CTC [Commission on Teacher Credentialing] and the Legislature hold the authority 
to dictate the requirements for credentialing and teaching.  Likewise, respondent is 
not “unfit” for duty because she refused to obtain additional certification not 
mandated by the legislature or the CTC.”  Judge Sarli also found that the district’s 
agreement with the Ripon Unified District Teacher’s Association (RUDTA) was not a 
reasonable regulation under Education Code section 44932, and that the agreement 
violated Government Code section 3543.2, “which limits the scope of permissible 
bargaining between a teachers’ union and a school district.” 
 

4. 

On March 23, 2007, the district filed its Petition for Administrative 

Mandamus in San Joaquin County Superior Court seeking to overturn Judge Sarli’s 
decision.  Superior Court Judge Thomasson granted the district’s petition and, on 
March 27, 2008, judgment was entered in San Joaquin County Superior Court.  On 
April 28, 2008, respondent filed a Notice of Appeal of this decision.  
 

5. 

On September 29, 2009, the Third District Court of Appeal issued its 

decision affirming Judge Thomasson’s decision. (Governing Board of the Ripon 
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence [Theresa 
Messick, Real Party in Interest] (Ripon) (2009) 177 Cal. App. 4th 1379.)  The Court 
held that the district has the authority to require teachers to become certified to teach 
English learners (ELs) and that respondent failed to establish that the district’s broad 
authority was preempted by conflicting state laws.  Consequently, the district had 
lawful grounds on which to initiate termination proceedings against respondent based 
upon allegations of her persistent refusal to comply with the certification requirement.  
Further, the Court rejected the argument that the EL certification requirement was 
outside the permissible scope of bargaining between the district and RUDTA.  In 
doing so, the Court noted that the district was not required to negotiate with the union 
about the EL certification requirement; however, it chose to do so “instead of 
imposing the requirement outright under its reserved authority…” (Id. at 1391.) 
 

6. 

On December 1, 2009, the Court of Appeal’s decision in Ripon was 

final and the Remittitur was issued.  OAH then set the matter for prehearing 
conference and hearing.  On May 24, 2010, the undersigned ALJ issued an order 
denying the district’s motion to dismiss the case in light of the Court of Appeal’s 
Ripon decision.  The district’s alternative motion to preclude respondent from putting 
on any evidence at hearing was also denied.  Thereafter, in June 2010, the evidentiary 
hearing commenced and concluded. 
 
Background 
 

7. 

Respondent has a Bachelor of Arts degree in music.  In 1978, she 

obtained her preliminary teaching credential.  In August of 1981, respondent was 
hired by the district as a certificated employee.  On July 8, 1985, respondent was 
issued a single subject “life” teaching credential in music, which authorizes her to 
teach preschool through adult classes, with no restrictions.  At no time during this 

 

3 

proceeding has respondent been certified to teach students with limited English 
proficiency, known as “English-Language Learners” or “English Learners” (ELLs or 
ELs).  She has never signed a commitment form indicating her willingness to be a 
“teacher in training” pending completion of an EL certification. 
 

Respondent was employed by the district for approximately 29 years.  For the 

past 12 years, respondent has worked exclusively as a music teacher at the district’s 
Ripon High School, where she typically taught six periods a day with 220 to 250 
students.  Respondent’s classes have included concert choir (a non-auditioned choir), 
music ensemble (an advanced choir), music appreciation and concert band.  During 
the time period at issue, in addition to her teaching activities, respondent was actively 
engaged in extracurricular activities with students, pursuant to agreements with the 
district for additional stipend payments.  These positions obligated respondent to 
produce two theatrical performances (generally one musical and one play) and four 
musical performances (two each for chorus and band) each year.  In addition, the 
concert band generally performed at football games and in parades.  At times, 
respondent’s students participated in field trips to Disneyland and engaged in 
additional performances. 
 

Respondent was laid off by the district at the end of the 2009-2010 school 

8. 

Coordinated Compliance Review by California Department of 

year.  She will not be employed by the district during the 2010-2011 school year due 
to the district’s reduction in force and her seniority relative to the district’s other 
music teachers.  Accordingly, the dismissal action will only impact her right to be 
rehired by the district. 
 
EL Certification Requirement 
 
 
Education (CDE):  In May of 2002, CDE conducted a compliance review of the 
district.  In its May 8, 2002 Notification of Findings (Findings), CDE determined that 
the district was noncompliant in its program for English Learners at one of its four 
elementary schools and at its only high school.  Specific to Ripon High School, CDE 
found that “students with designated English learner identification needs are placed in 
classrooms which do not have CTC authorized ELD/SDAIE instructors and students 
are not offered a structured English immersion setting.”  In addition, “documentation 
indicates that not all students who have a designated need for SDAIE instruction 
…have been placed with teaching staff who hold the required authorization.”  
Parenthetically, CDE’s findings noted that “not all teachers at the elementary and 
high schools who have English Language learners placed in their classes have 
completed the training or have a letter on file indicating that they will complete the 
training in a timely manner.”  The district was required to resolve the identified 
noncompliance issues or face the possibility that CDE would initiate fiscal sanctions, 
such as withholding funds or terminating contracts. 
 

 

4 

9. 

On June 11, 2002, the district filed its Proposed Resolution of 

 
Noncompliance Findings with CDE (Proposed Resolution), including the following: 
 

The district will provide in house staff development and 
require teachers who have students with EL identification 
in their classrooms to enroll in this training or other authorized 
training.  The district will obtain a letter from each teacher 
indicating they will complete the training in a timely manner. . . 

10. 

The district developed a commitment form which provided that 

“teachers assigned to teach limited English proficient (LEP) students” are required by 
federal and state law to possess appropriate EL certification, but that teachers without 
the proper authorization “may teach LEP students as long as they have been 
designated by the school district as ‘teachers in training.’”  By signing the 
commitment form, teachers “agree to be designated as a ‘teacher in training’ and will 
complete the necessary requirements” to obtain the EL certification. 
 

11.  Despite the language of the commitment form, the district did not limit 

its EL certification requirement to those teachers who had EL students actually 
enrolled in their classrooms.  Superintendent Zuber testified that the district decided 
to require all certificated staff to complete EL certification, based upon the concerns 
CDE raised in the compliance review and the district’s belief that eventually every 
teacher would have to obtain EL certification. 
 

In the fall of 2002, in response to the compliance review, the district undertook 

actions to ensure that its certificated staff obtained EL teaching authorization and 
signed the commitment form while they completed their training.  A series of 
memoranda was sent to all certificated staff informing them of this requirement.  For 
example, on September 27, 2002, Director of Curriculum and Instruction Lisa Boje  
informed certificated staff who did not have EL authorization about training options 
to obtain CLAD/BCLAD/SB395 EL certifications, through classes offered at the 
County Office of Education (COE) or a university.  The district agreed to pay for the 
SB395 and CLAD courses.  This letter indicated that the “commitment letter must be 
signed and returned to your site administrator by Friday, October 4, 2002.”  On 
October 31, 2002, Ms. Boje wrote to certificated staff about changes in CLAD 
requirements.  She prefaced this memorandum:  “as you know the District is requiring 
all staff who do not possess an authorization to teach English Language Learners to 
obtain authorization through SB 395 or CLAD training.  The District will pay for this 
training if it is completed through the county…” 
 

12. 

Superintendent Zuber worked with Ms. Boje to develop a plan to 

advise all certificated staff that the district and the union had come to an agreement 
about the EL certification requirement. 
 

 

 

5 

On November 15, 2002, a memorandum jointly authored by Superintendent 

Zuber, Ms. Boje, and RUDTA President Rod Wright was sent to all certificated staff.  
In pertinent part, the memorandum provided: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The district has been meeting with RUDTA and we have 
come to an agreement regarding the CLAD/BCLAD and  
SB 395 training.  The agreement is that all staff will complete 
the necessary training by December 30, 2005. . . 

 
 
 
 

 

At this point it is up to each individual to select the type of  
training they will take…  The district realizes the importance  
of this authorization and has agreed to pay for SB 395 and  
CLAD courses taken through the county. . . Teachers who  
enroll in classes but do not finish will pay the district back  
for the expense of the training.  In addition, (if the training  
is incomplete) the employee may be released from his or her  
current position. (Underline original.) 

13. 

Respondent refused to sign and return the commitment form.  On 

The memorandum also referenced an attached “commitment letter or letter of 

 
 
retirement [which] must be signed and returned to your site administrator by Tuesday, 
November 26, 2002.”  The district later agreed to pay a $400 stipend to teachers once 
they timely completed the training. 
 
 
November 25, 2002, respondent sent a memorandum to her principal Mr. Handel 
explaining why she would not sign the form, stating:  “I am uncomfortable signing a 
letter saying that I will take courses to get certified in CLAD.  I am afraid that I might 
not be able to follow through with this promise.  I am not planning on retiring within 
5 years, therefore I cannot sign the form.” 
 
 
complete the commitment form and engage in training.  On February 28, 2003, 
Superintendent Zuber drafted a letter to certificated staff who had not yet returned 
their signed commitment forms.  He advised them that the compliance review had 
placed the district “on notice that this certification process had to be completed or the 
district risks loss of state and federal funding.  Discussions with RUDTA have 
resulted in an agreement that the certification can be a requirement of continuing 
employment.”  He further advised that “continued failure to secure the necessary 
training and certification may be grounds for transfer and loss of employment…” 
 

The district continued its efforts to have respondent and other teachers 

14. 

15.  On April 2, 2003, CDE informed Superintendent Zuber that the 
district’s Proposed Resolution “resolves all non-compliant issues related to the 
English Learners Program.”  No sanctions were ever imposed on the district based 
upon its non-compliance with the EL program. 
 

 

6 

16. 

The district’s agreement with RUDTA about the EL certification 

 
requirement was never contained in a collective bargaining agreement.  Respondent 
was unsure about its binding effect and discussed the requirement with her union 
representatives. 
 

On August 25, 2003, respondent sent an email to various union officers 
expressing her concern that, if she signed the commitment letter but did not finish the 
certification, the district would have grounds to fire her.  She also posed questions 
about what effects her failure to obtain EL (CLAD) certification would have on the 
district’s state funding, on her teaching credential, and on her permanent employment 
with the district. 
 
 
Machado at the high school. 
 

On August 26, 2003, respondent forwarded a copy of this email to Mary 

17.  On August 27, 2003, respondent received an email message from 

RUDTA’s chief negotiator Charles H. Carley, expressing his understanding of the 
informal agreement reached between the district and RUDTA on EL certification.  
Mr. Carley indicated: 
 

 

My understanding is:  This was a negotiated agreement 
and you have no option.  The District can choose to release 
you from your contract and hire someone who is CLAD 
qualified.  The Office of Civil Rights could come to Ripon  
if a parent of a second language student complains. According 
to the CTA, this has happened all over the state.  

Respondent did not accept Mr. Carley’s opinion and sought further advice 
from CTA adviser Vicky Miren.  According to respondent, Ms. Miren told respondent 
she was not sure if the EL certification requirement was legal. 
 

18.  On October 22, 2003, district memoranda were sent to certificated staff 

who still needed to sign commitment letters and to their site principals, with 
instructions to complete and return the attached commitment letter by October 31, 
2003.  Respondent did not comply. 
 

19.  On January 20, 2004, district personnel clerk Ms. Luis sent respondent 
a memorandum advising her that, due to a severe budget shortfall for the 2004-2005 
school year, layoffs were being considered and that “one of the primary factors that 
will be used to determine the order of layoff will be the possession of CLAD 
certification.”  An update on respondent’s current CLAD status was requested. 
 
 
 

 

 

7 

On February 2, 2004, respondent informed Ms. Luis that she did not respond 
because the memorandum stated the district would assume she did not have a CLAD 
and did not plan to pursue one if a response was not received by January 30, 2004.  
Respondent further stated: 
 

I have a life credential.  As far as I know getting or not getting  
CLAD will not affect my teaching license in this state.  I do not 
need units or professional growth.  I have twenty-five years of 
experience teaching high school music and drama (20 with this 
district.)  I have many extra-curricular hours I work with students.  
I do not have the time to pursue this certification.  I DO NOT PLAN 
TO PURSUE THIS CERTIFICATION.¶ Sorry. 

20.  On February 9, 2004, the district’s board passed Resolution No. 03-11 

“Establishing Competency Standards,” in anticipation of an economic layoff of 
certificated employees.  In its recitals, the Resolution referenced the CDE’s 
noncompliance findings in the district’s EL Program and provided that: 
 

WHEREAS, to correct these out-of-compliance findings, the  
District and the Teachers’ Association agreed that all teachers 
must obtain CLAD, BCLA, or SDAIE certification by December  
2005, resign, or be terminated. 

The Resolution provided that teachers who either possessed EL certification or 
were “in training” to obtain such certification would be considered “competent” in the 
event of certificated layoffs and “shall be entitled to be retained over a more senior 
teacher who lacks such credentials or is not a ‘teacher in training’.”  The board 
directed the Superintendent to implement these competency criteria.   
 

Ultimately, the district did not lay off any certificated employees for the 2004-

2005 school year. 
 

21. 

Both Mr. Zuber and Ms. Boje testified that the teachers’ union never 

voiced any objection to the requirement that district teachers must sign the 
commitment letter, complete the training by December 30, 2005, resign or be subject 
to termination. 
 

22. 

In 2004, Ms. Boje sent reminders to certificated staff still needing EL 

authorization regarding their training options. 
 

On March 25, 2004, respondent returned the CLAD status form to Ms. Luis, 

indicating her continual refusal to obtain EL certification by marking the form’s box: 
“I do not have CLAD certification and I am not participating in a program.” 
 
 

 

 

 

8 

23.  On February 2, 2005, Ms. Boje sent respondent an email memorandum 
to remind her that the District “has an agreement with RUDTA that all teachers would 
obtain the needed certification to teach English learners by December 30, 2005.  
Furthermore, it was agreed that teachers who fail to get the certification might be 
terminated at the conclusion of the 2005-2006 school year.”  Ms. Boje asked 
respondent to send her any evidence of training or coursework by March 4, and stated 
that “failure to complete the needed certification may result in termination at the 
conclusion of the 2005-2006 school year.”  Ms. Boje advised respondent to contact 
her if she had any questions.  Respondent did not respond. 
 

24.  On July 7, 2005, Ms. Boje sent respondent an email memorandum 

which provided in part: 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Since fall of 2002 I have sent several reminders to you  
regarding your need to complete this training.  In addition, 
you have received notification from the personnel  
department and the Superintendent also reminding you of 
your need to complete the certification.  To date you have 
not provided the district with any information regarding  
your intent to complete the requirement. 

My records indicate that you will not pursue the training. 
Again, I must remind you that failure to complete the 
needed certification may result in termination at the  
conclusion of the 2005-2006 school year.  

26.  On January 31, 2006, Ms. Boje sent respondent an email memorandum, 

25.  On October 28, 2005, as the deadline approached, Ms. Boje sent 
respondent additional reminders, advising respondent to contact Ms. Boje’s office if 
she was concerned about her ability to meet the deadline. 
 
 
noting that “as mentioned in prior communication, lack of CLAD certification will 
result in a recommendation from the Superintendent that a contract not be issued to 
you for the 2006-2007 school year.”  Respondent was advised that the district would 
recommend to the board at its March 13, 2006 meeting that she would not receive a 
contract for the upcoming year, but that the recommendation could be rescinded on 
proof of certification before that meeting.  Ms. Boje urged respondent to meet with 
her to discuss her status in the certification process. 
 

Respondent was not willing to work with Ms. Boje and never responded.4 

                                                 

4 Respondent allowed her dislike of Ms. Boje to create a barrier to communication. Ms. Boje 

conducted respondent’s evaluation for the 2003-2004 school year.  In her May 12, 2004 evaluation, Ms. 
Boje “dinged” respondent by rating her as “needing improvement” in several categories.  Respondent took 
umbrage at this evaluation and subsequently avoided interacting with Ms. Boje. 

9 

 

 

 

27. 

In February 2006, respondent began an email correspondence with 

 
Superintendent Zuber about becoming EL certified, which was copied to Ms. Boje.  
On February 10, 2006, respondent acknowledged that “I now understand that I should 
get my CLAD certificate.”  She advised Mr. Zuber that she had enrolled in San Diego 
correspondence certification classes and “will have them completed by March 2007.”  
 
 
and faster for her to complete.  Respondent replied that: 
 

Superintendent Zuber suggested that the COE’s coursework would be cheaper 

I really don’t have the evenings to spare because of play rehearsals 
and concerts, etc.  I don’t think it does our students any good to just 
cancel those sorts of things.  I will move as quickly as possible to  
get it done through San Diego, but I don’t want to commit to June 
2006.  I should be able to finish before the start of the next school 
year.  I’m pleading for you to consider an extension.  

28.  On February 13, 2006, Ms. Boje sent respondent an email with a flyer 

 
 
about the COE’s AB 2913 (formerly SB395) training for EL certification that was 
scheduled from January 31 through May 16, 2006.  Although respondent had already 
missed several class sessions, Ms. Boje advised respondent that she would have an 
opportunity to make up the missed time and that, if the board did not grant her an 
extension, “this may be your only opportunity to complete the needed training before 
June 30, 2006.” 
 
 
could take the AB2913 SDAIE training offered from June 13 through 22, 2006.  
Respondent expressed her belief that she qualified for this training because she was a 
permanent district employee in 1999 and had “two years of full-time or equivalent 
experience teaching English learners (I have had EL students almost every year…?).”  
With approval, respondent indicated she would have her certification by June 23.  
 

29.  On March 2, 2006, respondent sent an email to Ms. Boje asking if she 

On March 3, 2006, Ms. Boje replied that respondent was qualified to take the 

course and that the district would accept this in fulfillment of the EL certification 
requirement once she had successfully fulfilled all requirements. 
 

30. 

In March 2006, at Mr. Zuber’s recommendation, the board agreed to 

extend the EL certification deadline to June 30, 2006, as long as the teacher was in the 
process of completing the training.  Mr. Zuber testified that the board allowed 
respondent to continue teaching during the 2006-2007 school year even though she 
had not completed the certification, based upon his assurance that she was in the 
process and it was a “reasonable risk.”  He also advised the board that any EL student 
seeking admission to respondent’s classes would have to be denied and that the board 
risked charges by the Office of Civil Rights (OCR) for denying access to an 
educational program.  At the time he made this recommendation, Mr. Zuber had no 
idea the process would extend an additional 4 years. 

 

10 

31. 

Notice of Unprofessional Conduct:  On March 14, 2006, 
Superintendent Zuber signed a “Notice of Unprofessional Conduct” (Notice) directed 
to respondent and five other teachers pursuant to Education Code sections 44932 and 
44938.  Respondent was advised that the following alleged specific behavior 
constituted “unprofessional conduct” because: (1) she failed to take any steps toward 
completing a supplemental ELL teaching certification to become qualified to teach 
students with limited-English proficiency; and (2) she was insubordinate on 
November 25, 2002 and August 26, 2003, when she refused to sign a Letter of 
Commitment to complete the supplemental ELL certification as requested by the 
district.  Respondent was provided with various documents in support of these 
allegations. 
 

The Notice advised respondent that the district also considered these specific 
behaviors to demonstrate “evident unfitness for service” and “persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 
board of the district.”  By this Notice, respondent was given an opportunity to correct 
her behavior and she was advised that further unprofessional conduct of this type 
would result in her dismissal. 
 

32.  Original and Amended Statement of Charges and Accusation: As 
indicated in Finding No. 1, on May 9, 2006, the district filed its Statement of Charges, 
which alleged that respondent had still not completed the EL certification requirement 
despite receipt of the Notice and had therefore engaged in unprofessional conduct, 
evident unfitness for service, and/or persistent violation of laws and reasonable 
regulations, as described by Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), 
(a)(5), and/or (a)(7).  Based upon this conduct, Superintendent Zuber recommended to 
the board that respondent be notified of its intention to dismiss her as a permanent 
employee.  On May 10, 2006, the board adopted Resolution No. 05-07, indicating its 
“Resolution of Intention to Dismiss a Permanent, Certificated Employee.” The 
Resolution directed that respondent and five other permanent certificated employees 
be served with notices of intention to dismiss and related documents (Resolution No. 
05-07).  The Notice of Intent to Dismiss was served on respondent on May 11, 2006. 
 

On June 7, 2006, respondent and other teachers filed a request for a hearing.5 

33. 

By the June 30, 2006 extended deadline, respondent had not completed 

her EL certification. 
 

                                                 

5 On June 8, 2006, Mr. Driscoll as attorney for each of these teachers wrote to Mr. Zuber outlining 

his position that the district had no authority to require EL certification and that, if ELL instruction is 
required in a particular class, the district “must assign the teacher with the proper authorization, but you 
cannot order, compel or coerce any teacher, directly or indirectly by agreement, to obtain additional 
authorizations in order to keep their job.”   

 

 

11 

As indicated in Finding No. 2, on July 6, 2006, the district served its Notice of 

Accusation, Accusation, and supporting documents on respondent.  The Accusation 
incorporated the specific charges outlined in the Statement of Charges. On July 20, 
2006, respondent filed a Notice of Defense denying and objecting to the Accusation 
and raising various affirmative defenses.  On August 15 and September 25, 2006, 
respectively, the district filed its First Amended Statement of Charges and First 
Amended Accusation. 
 

35. 

34. 

Completion of EL Certification Coursework and One Test:  In June 
2006, respondent participated in the COE’s AB2913 SDAIE coursework training, 
completed the course, and took the required test.  On July 21, 2006, COE’s Director 
of Multilingual Education Claudia Lockwood advised respondent that she had passed 
the “short answer essay” assessment test. 
 
 
after passing this essay test, respondent had to prepare and finish a “portfolio” that 
was designed to “demonstrate individual classroom use of ELD and SDAIE 
methodologies.”  To complete the portfolio, respondent had to: (1) “pull up” EL data 
about the district; (2) design four lesson plans for EL students, (3) implement the 
lesson plans with EL students in the class, and (4) write “reflections” based upon the 
delivery of the lesson plans. 
 

Failure to Complete EL Certification:  To complete her EL certification 

Ms. Boje worked with other district teachers who had to complete portfolios as 

the final step in obtaining EL certification.  Based upon this experience, Ms. Boje 
estimated that five to eight hours of “non-contractual” (uncompensated) time was 
required to prepare the portfolio’s lesson plan and reflection components.  The lesson 
plans could be implemented during working hours.  Other teachers Ms. Boje worked 
with completed their portfolios within one to eight weeks.  If the teacher did not have 
any EL students in their classes, the district would arrange for the teacher to deliver 
the lesson plans as a substitute in classes with EL students.  For music, an 
arrangement could be made for respondent to teach music at an elementary or junior 
high school site where EL students were present. 
 

Ms. Boje never directly advised respondent of these options and respondent 

36.  At the end of the 2005-2006 school year, respondent agreed to teach 

never contacted Ms. Boje for assistance in completing her portfolio. 
 
 
seven periods during the 2006-2007 school year.  When she agreed to teach this load, 
respondent believed she would have completed the portfolio over the summer.  Once 
summer arrived and she finished the COE coursework and test, respondent decided to 
“take a summer break.” 
 
 
 

 

12 

37. 

COE’s deadline for completing the portfolio was October 3, 2006. 
Respondent’s COE instructor had informed the class that they would have eight 
weeks after the start of the 2006-2007 school year to finish their portfolios.  This 
would provide them an opportunity to implement the lesson plans in the classroom. 
 

Once school began, respondent realized she had no EL students and had not 

completed the portfolio.  She called Ms. Lockwood.  Respondent testified that she and 
Ms. Lockwood developed a “good plan” for respondent to take a few EL students 
from another teacher’s class and implement her lesson plans with those students 
between 2:15 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
 

Respondent took no action to follow this plan.  Instead, respondent found that 

39. 

In March 2008, respondent learned that the Superior Court had 

38.  After ALJ Sarli dismissed the district’s dismissal charges in January 

she “was really tired at 2:15 p.m.” and she “didn’t manage to get the portfolio 
together.”  The deadline for completing COE’s EL certification program passed. 
 
 
2007, respondent believed she could not be terminated for not having an EL 
certification. 
 
 
overturned Judge Sarli’s ruling.  Respondent took no action to complete her portfolio 
or otherwise obtain EL certification. 
 
 
affirmed the Superior Court’s decision overturning Judge Sarli’s order.  Respondent 
then signed up for the California Teacher of English Learners (CTEL) test, by which 
she could become CLAD certified.  On December 5, 2009, respondent took the 
CTEL.  In January 2010, respondent learned that she had only passed two of the three 
required CTEL tests. 
 
 
41.  As of the conclusion of the hearing, respondent had not completed her 
EL certification.  Respondent testified that she signed up for the next available CTEL 
and would retake the CTEL on June 12, 2010. 
 

In September 2009, respondent learned that the Court of Appeal had 

40. 

42.  Until her recent layoff, the district allowed respondent to continue 
teaching pending her appeal.  Respondent received positive biennial performance 
evaluations from her site principal for the 2005-2006, 2007-2008, and 2009-2010 
school years.  Respondent’s most recent evaluation recommended that she be 
evaluated every five years. 
 

Superintendent Dr. Nan testified that the district’s decision to allow 

respondent to keep teaching without her EL certification was a pragmatic one.  Due to 
the district’s strained budget, millions of dollars in spending have been cut, vacancies 
have not been filled, layoffs have been required (15 full-time equivalent staff 
reductions for 2010-2011), and class sizes have been increased.  Under these 

 

13 

circumstances, it did not make fiscal sense to hire another music teacher while it paid 
respondent to be on administrative leave.6 
 

Dr. Nan testified that the superintendent does not review performance 
assessments.  Dr. Nan agreed with some of the positive comments about respondent; 
however, because respondent refused to obtain her EL certification for eight years 
despite consistent directives to do so, Dr. Nan disagreed that respondent’s 
performance was satisfactory in the categories of “professional growth,” “climate for 
student diversity,” and “sensitivity to student needs.” 
 

43. 

In April 2010, respondent addressed the board about the reasons she 

did not obtain her EL certification and her current efforts to do so. After hearing from 
respondent, the board took no action to change its recommendation for her 
termination. 
 

44.  Dr. Nan testified that the district needs EL certified teachers to ensure 

compliance with federal and state laws. The district’s EL population is growing, from 
5 percent of the student population in 2002 to 12 percent of the student population in 
2010.  It is discriminatory to deprive even a single student of the opportunity to take a 
class because a teacher does not have an EL certification and therefore cannot have 
the student enrolled in the class.  Respondent’s failure to obtain her EL certification 
has resulted in depriving the district’s EL students of the opportunity to take music.   
Because of her conduct, the district was unable to place EL students in respondent’s 
classes and was systematically excluding groups of students from its music classes in 
a manner that is unfair to students, other teachers and staff.  That the district has not 
been the subject of complaints does not alter this conclusion.  Parents of the district’s 
predominantly Hispanic EL students have language barriers and fear of authorities 
that make complaints about their children’s treatment less likely.  Both Dr. Nan and 
Mr. Zuber expressed their opinions that respondent’s conduct constituted 
unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service and persistent violation of the 
district’s reasonable rules. 
 
 
In his October 9, 2006 verified responses to respondent’s Requests to 
Admit, Mr. Zuber admitted that, “[s]ince the 2001-2002 school year, no Ripon High 
School English Learner has been denied access to music education at Ripon High 
School.” 
 

45. 

                                                 

6 Prior to her lay off, respondent also took the untenable position that the district should simply 
hire another music teacher with an EL certification to which EL students could be assigned.  As credibly 
explained by both Mr. Zuber and Dr. Nan, the district’s financial circumstances do not allow this.  
Additionally, to do so would result in the creation of small segregated music classes where all EL students 
would be in one class. 
 

 

14 

As indicated in respondent’s testimony, as well as in the testimony of the 

 
district’s counselors, however, EL students at Ripon High School have been denied 
access to music education at least since 2006. 
 

46. 

Respondent testified that, during the first week of each school year, she 
always looked at the computer list to ensure that EL students were not assigned to her 
classes.  Respondent had two EL students, brothers who spoke no English, placed in 
her music appreciation class one time for a few months.  On another occasion, an EL 
student who spoke little English, played drums with her band class.  None of these 
students was issued a grade. 
 

During the 2008-2009 school year, respondent discovered that a brother and 
sister enrolled in her class were designated as EL students.  Respondent was aware 
they had good English skills.  These students were tested and were found to be 
“redesignated fluent English proficient” (RFEP) students rather than EL students; 
they were never removed from her class. Respondent acknowledged that an EL 
student (Child No. 1) was removed from her music ensemble class during the 2008-
2009 school year.  She worked with him informally on guitar.  During the 2009-2010 
school year, this student was re-designated as RFEP.  He then auditioned for and was 
enrolled in music ensemble class.7 
 

Other than these students, respondent has never been told that EL students  

have been kept out of her classes. 
 
 
47.  District high school counselors Michael Morenzone and Dawn 
Goudeau testified that they help students select classes each year, including electives.8  
Students complete a course preference form, ranking classes in order of desire.  Both 
Mr. Morenzone and Ms. Goudeau were aware that respondent did not have EL 
certification and that the district could not place EL students into any of her classes.  
These counselors worked to ensure that EL students were not erroneously placed in 
respondent’s classes.  Ms. Boje and respondent were also aware that EL students 
should not be placed in respondent’s classes and would bring any potential problems 
to the counselors’ attention.  Ms. Boje would compile a list of the district’s EL 
students and call the counselors to ensure that none were assigned to respondent’s 
class, or to remove them if they had been assigned.  After Ms. Boje left the district, 
other administrators worked with the counselors to catch potential assignment errors. 
The counselors would try to find another elective for the EL student before classes 
began.  If assignment errors were not caught, EL students would be placed in 
respondent’s class and removed during the first several weeks.    
 
                                                 

7 To protect confidentiality, a “Child Number” is substituted for the names of students; their true 

names are contained in the confidential names list. 

 
8 Each counselor is responsible for half of the alphabet of student names. Ms. Goudeau testified 

that she considers respondent to be a friend.   

 

15 

Ms. Goudeau estimated that, during her six years in this position, three to ten 
EL students had to be removed from respondent’s classes during the first few weeks 
of school.  Three of these students were replaced in respondent’s class after being 
reassessed for language proficiency and determined to be RFEP rather than EL 
students.  Ms. Goudeau never had an EL student come to her and complain about 
being removed from respondent’s classes. Respondent was aware that Ms. Goudeau 
would have to remove EL students from her classes.  Ms. Goudeau stated it is not 
unusual for students to be denied desired classes or to have their classes changed 
within the first two weeks of school.  Non-EL students were deprived of music when 
respondent’s classes reached their limits. 
 

48. 

Respondent’s classes can be used to fulfill graduation and college 

requirements.  For example, music can satisfy a fine arts requirement for graduation.  
Music and band can fulfill college preparatory Visual and Performing Arts (VAPA) 
requirements.  Respondent actively worked to have all her music classes accepted for 
VAPA certification. 
 
 
 
Respondent’s testimony 
 

49.  All other district certificated staff have completed the EL certification. 

50. 

Respondent knew she was directed by the district to sign the 

commitment letter and complete the EL certification training.  In her testimony, 
respondent acknowledged her understanding that the district required all certificated 
staff to obtain EL certification and that the district was not able to place any EL 
students in her classes without it.  From 2002 through the spring of 2006, respondent 
received regular memorandums from the district regarding this requirement.  Even 
though the union’s agreement with the district was not written in the collective 
bargaining contract, respondent understood that the union agreed to the requirement 
and had never repudiated it. By 2004, it was clear to respondent that she had to obtain 
EL certification, resign or be terminated.  Even though respondent had not consulted 
an attorney, she persisted in not obtaining EL certification because she did not think 
the requirement was legal.  Respondent wanted to see if the district would actually 
pursue her termination; letters from Ms. Boje only indicated that respondent “might 
be” terminated.  As a result, she did not consult an attorney until she received the 
Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and it became clear that the district would fire her 
for noncompliance.  Respondent “was willing to risk being fired.”  Even though she 
was aware that the district risked losing funding, respondent did not believe that her 
behavior was problematic for or risked harm to the district.  She never really 
understood that signing the commitment letter made her “magically able” to teach EL 
students as a teacher in training.  Respondent agreed that, at her deposition, she stated 
she would rather do housework than complete her EL certification. 
 

 

16 

52. 

51. 

In her testimony, respondent acknowledged that many district teachers 

Respondent understood that, until she had her EL certification, no EL 

 
are busy and have extracurricular commitments.  For each school year from 2002 
until her layoff, respondent chose to accept additional assignments for stipends. 
She agreed to teach an additional class period during the 2006-2007 school year.  
Respondent engaged in these activities instead of completing her EL certification.9 
 
 
students could be placed in her class. Respondent did not believe this to be either 
discriminatory or problematic because many other students wanted to enroll in her 
classes as electives and were not able to get in.  Respondent denied that she had any 
responsibility for EL students being unable to take her class and denied personally 
discriminating against EL students because she “does not do the scheduling.”  Based 
upon Superintendent Nan’s testimony, respondent did acknowledge that potentially 
10 to 12 percent of the high school population could miss the opportunity to take 
music. 
 

53. 

Respondent provided various explanations for why she did not 

complete the commitment letter and EL certification.  Respondent believed the 
commitment letter and EL certification requirement were ambiguous and did not 
apply to her because she did not have EL students in her class.  She was very busy on 
nights and weekends and did not want to pay for a course that might not be required.  
A CTC advisor told her it was unclear whether the requirement was just for “core” 
classes or not.  The union’s agreement with the district was not in writing; however, 
union people told her that “it happens all the time that things are not written down.”  
Ms. Boje only told respondent that she risked losing her job in a layoff proceeding.  
Respondent thought her chances of being laid off were slim because she did not think 
the district would cut her classes and she had good seniority.  Respondent told Ms. 
Boje she would not sign the commitment letter because, other than layoff, she was not 
sure what the consequences of not signing would be.  Ms. Boje’s letters never said 
that respondent “would be” fired, just that she “might” be.  Respondent’s life 
credential did not require her to complete any continuing education requirements. 
 
Fitness to Teach 
 

54. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230, 

the State Board of Education revoked a teacher’s teaching certificates based upon 
conduct alleged to be “immoral” or “unprofessional” under the Education Code.  On 
review, the California Supreme Court held that conduct cannot be determined to be 
“immoral” or “unprofessional” unless it first indicates a teacher’s “unfitness to teach.”  
The Court identified the following factors to be considered in determining whether a 
teacher’s conduct indicates unfitness to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may 

                                                 

for drama, chorus and band performances.   
 

9 Respondent received a total of approximately $7,200 additional income per year from stipends 

 

17 

have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity 
anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of 
teaching certificate held by the party involved; (5) the extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood of the 
recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action 
may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 
teacher involved or other teachers.10  Similar requirements are imposed on charges of 
“evident unfitness for service.”  (Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 
691.) 
 

Courts have suggested that “fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact.11  

55. 

Impact on Teachers:  Respondent testified that she has personally 

The fitness criteria are applied to the facts of this case, as set forth below. 
 
Likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers 
 
 
received no complaints from other teachers about her conduct and was not aware of 
any animosity against her.  Other evidence supports a finding that respondent’s 
conduct did adversely affect her peers.  Mr. Zuber was the district’s Superintendent 
until he retired in 2008.  He testified that, during his tenure, the district had 145 
teachers.  With the exception of respondent, all teachers obtained their EL 
certifications.  Many of these teachers had busy schedules and were involved in 
extracurricular activities.  As superintendent, Mr. Zuber received individual 
complaints from five to ten teachers who expressed their concerns about why they 
had to comply with the policy and obtain EL certification when respondent did not.  
 
 
and 62 respondent’s persistent refusal to agree to obtain and to obtain her EL 
certification had both an actual and a potential adverse impact on the EL students the 
EL program is designed to serve. The extent of this impact is addressed below. 
 
 

Impact on Students:  As set forth in Factual Findings 39, 54 through 58, 

56. 

                                                 

10 Similarly, the Court of Appeals in Board of Education v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 555, 560, stated:  

 
Our high court in Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, delineates the  
process to be considered in determining fitness.  This opinion upheld the standard established 
in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in which not only his  
conduct but also these factors are analyzed: (1) likelihood of recurrence of the questioned  
conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the effect of notoriety  
and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers and students relationships; (5) disruption of  
educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of conduct. 
 
11 Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 102 Cal.App.3d at 560-

561, citing Board of Education v. Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d 691, 698, fn. 3. 

 

18 

57. 

Teachers:  Respondent’s conduct has had a moderately negative impact 

Degree of adverse impact on teachers and students anticipated  
 
 
on her fellow teachers.  While respondent may not have been privy to complaints 
about her failure to accomplish what all other teachers were required to accomplish, 
the district received expressions of dissatisfaction and perceived unfairness from other 
members of the certificated staff.  In addition, EL students had to be removed or 
screened out of respondent’s classes and placed in other teachers’ classes.  
Respondent’s conduct placed her peers in the position of having to teach students she 
was not qualified to teach. 
 
 
supportive banners, respondent is a popular teacher who is viewed as something of an 
institution at Ripon High School.  Over the years, respondent has helped to create and 
has positively contributed to the district’s music and drama performance culture.  In 
this context, respondent has worked with and positively affected many district 
students. 
 

Students:  As indicated by the students who attended the hearing with 

58. 

Nevertheless, respondent’s conduct has had a moderate to severe adverse 

impact on EL students who have not been allowed to take her music classes.  These 
classes not only enhance personal skill and development but are electives that can be 
used to fulfill graduation and college preparatory requirements.  While the number of 
EL students affected might be small, the discriminatory impact on a single student is 
great and may never be fully understood.12  The district’s demographics indicate a 
growing EL population that cannot legally be ignored and that it attempted to 
proactively address.  Further, students who are not English learners are negatively 
impacted by the lack of diversity in their classrooms.  It is significant that, in her 
testimony, respondent displayed a complete lack of remorse or regret for the effect of 
her conduct on students. 
 
Proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct  
 

59. 

This factor weighs against respondent.  Her refusal to comply with 

repeated directives to complete EL certification has spanned a period of eight years 
and was still unresolved at the conclusion of the hearing. 
 
Type of teaching certificate held by the party involved 
 

60. 

By failing to obtain her EL certification, respondent did not 

demonstrate the “lifelong learner” philosophy that is an integral part of the teaching 
profession.  Respondent’s single subject music credential is a neutral factor.   
 

                                                 

12 As an example of the potential negative impact, the district likened the impact to placing an EL 

student with musical abilities akin to Yo Yo Ma into an art class rather than a music class.  

 

19 

Extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct  
 

61. 

Respondent’s busy schedule:  Over the years, respondent has argued 

that she is “too busy” to complete the certification requirement.  In addition to her full 
teaching load, respondent voluntarily agreed to assume additional positions for a 
stipend.  As indicated in Finding No. 7, respondent was involved in preparing for 
dramatic, choral and band performances after hours throughout the year. 
 

Mr. Zuber testified that he did not objectively believe respondent was too busy 

to complete this requirement.  He noted that all teachers are busy, that some other 
teachers had more extracurricular obligations than respondent, and that all other 
district teachers obtained their EL certifications.  During a conversation in 2006, Mr. 
Zuber told respondent that if the plays and music were “in the way” of her fulfilling 
this obligation, he would suggest that her responsibilities be removed for one 
semester to allow her time to complete the certification process.  Respondent declined 
this offer because she had already begun casting a play and many students were 
depending on it. 
 

Respondent’s refusal to abandon the play in this specific context was 
reasonable.  However, respondent had nearly four years before being served with the 
Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and nearly four years after that Notice during 
which she should have curtailed her volunteer activities to comply with her 
employer’s requirement. It is unfortunate that the district did not affirmatively require 
respondent to give up her stipend positions pending completion of her certification.  
Given respondent’s many years with the district, the district bears some blame for 
leaving this question completely in respondent’s discretion.  Viewed in the larger 
context, however, it is apparent that respondent’s busy schedule was not the reason 
she failed to obtain her EL certification and it does not mitigate her actions. 
 

62. 

Reliance on Judge Sarli’s order:  After the January 2007 issuance of 
the order dismissing the termination action, respondent believed she was not legally 
required to obtain the EL certification.  Respondent’s conduct from 2002 through the 
end of 2006 is not mitigated by this order.  In particular, respondent’s failure to 
complete her portfolio in the summer of 2006 or before COE’s October 2006 deadline 
was in no way excused by this subsequent dismissal order.  Respondent’s conduct 
during this time period is a significant aggravating factor which underscores her 
blatant determination to do as she alone saw fit. There was no reasonable justification 
for respondent not to complete her certification during this period.  Similarly, 
respondent’s failure to take any action to obtain EL certification after the Superior 
Court overturned Judge Sarli’s ruling in of March 2008 until December 2009 is an 
additional factor in aggravation. 
 

63. 

Respondent’s 2007 conduct regarding marching band:  Mr. Zuber 

testified that respondent had been uncooperative with the district regarding a request 
to develop a marching band for the football games.  Evidence presented did not 

 

20 

establish that respondent’s conduct regarding this issue should be considered a factor 
in aggravation. 
 
Praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct 
 

64. 

Respondent has an admirable history of being dedicated to producing 

student performances and not wanting to disappoint students engaged in these events.  
There was no persuasive evidence that respondent undertook these activities to obtain 
the modest stipends involved. 
 

66. 

65. 

This factor weighs against respondent.  Respondent still lacks her EL 

Respondent’s conduct has been the subject of local news reports and 
student protests.  As indicated in Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977), supra,  19 
Cal.3d at 700, the fear that students will emulate a teacher’s negative conduct (there 
“immoral” and/or “illegal” conduct) “becomes realistic only under two conditions. 
First, the teacher’s conduct must be sufficiently notorious that the students know or 
are likely to learn of it. . . Second, the teacher must continue to model his past 
conduct. .  .” (citations omitted.)  By her conduct of repeatedly flaunting her 
employer’s directives, respondent has provided a negative example to the district’s 
students. 
 
Likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct 
 
 
certification, eight years after being instructed to obtain it.  Assuming respondent 
passes the June 2010 CTEL, this specific factual scenario will not recur.  
Nevertheless, respondent’s demeanor suggests that she will continue behaving as she 
alone sees fit, without regard to her employer’s requirements, student needs, or 
perceptions of other teachers.  Respondent’s testimony and overall conduct 
demonstrates that she views herself as “special,” and as not bound by her employer’s 
directives unless they are, in her own mind, absolutely clear and reasonable.  She 
persisted in this conduct knowing that the district might be subjected to sanctions 
from CDE or civil rights complaints.  The fact that the district was not actually 
subject to such negative consequences is irrelevant.  Given the lengthy history of 
refusal, the district has no basis to trust that respondent would act differently in the 
future when faced with a different employment condition. 
 
Adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved 
or other teachers: 
 

67. 

This factor does not weigh in respondent’s favor.  Respondent’s 

conduct does not implicate the exercise of constitutional rights. For approximately 
four years before the district initiated the termination proceeding, respondent 
repeatedly refused to comply with the district’s directives.  Respondent raised 
statutory challenges to the district’s authority to impose the EL certification 

 

21 

requirement.  The court in Ripon, supra, rejected these challenges and affirmed the 
district’s authority. 
 

68. 

The Morrison factors, individually and collectively, do not weigh in 

respondent’s favor or substantially mitigate her recalcitrant behavior. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The burden of proof is on a school district to show by a preponderance 

of evidence that a teacher should be dismissed.  (Gardner v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040.) 
 

2. 

A permanent certificated teacher may be dismissed for any of the 
following causes:  “unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service,” or 
“persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 
Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.”  (§ 
44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (5), (7).) 
 

3. 

Unprofessional Conduct:  For the purpose of dismissal of a teacher, 

“unprofessional conduct” is defined as “the unprofessional conduct particularly 
specified as a cause for dismissal or suspension in Sections 44932 and 44933. . .”  
(§ 44938, subd. (c).)  As set forth in Factual Finding No. 41, the district timely served 
a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct on respondent and satisfied jurisdictional 
prerequisites to pursuing this charge.  (§ 44938, subd. (a);  Crowl v. Commission on 
Professional Competence of the Governing Board of the San Juan Unified School 
District (Third District 1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 334, 348.)   
 
 
Evident Unfitness for Service: Pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(5), a permanent certificated teacher may be dismissed for 
“[e]vident unfitness for service.”  
 

4. 

In Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (Woodland) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444, the Third District Court 
of Appeal defined the term “evident unfitness for service,” as used in Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), to mean “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies.”  The court found that the term “connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.)   The court held that 
the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether 
the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.”  (Id. p. 1445.)  As the court in 
Woodland explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to 

 

 

22 

5. 

Persistent Violation of or Refusal to Obey the School Laws of the State 

determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is 
caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.)  
 
 
or Reasonable Regulations Prescribed for the Government of the Public Schools by 
the State Board of Education or by the Governing Board of the District:    A charge of 
persistent violation of, or refusal to obey school rules requires a showing of 
insubordination.  (Midway School Dist. of Kern County v. Griffeath (1946) 29 Cal.3d 
13, 18-19.)  Persistence requires a showing of “continuing or constant” behavior.  
(Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) 
 

6. 

The Commission has considered the Morrison factors in light of the 

record as a whole.  On balance, these factors weigh against respondent.  As set forth 
in the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent’s conduct was unprofessional and 
persistently insubordinate over a period of eight years.  Consequently, the District 
sustained its burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, respondent’s 
“unprofessional conduct” and “persistent violation” of rules within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (7).) 
 
 
unfitness to teach rises to the level of a non-remediable character defect required for a 
finding of “evident unfitness for service,” as used in Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(5), and as interpreted in Woodland, supra.  Respondent’s conduct 
since December 2009 indicates that she does have the capacity to change her 
behavior. 
 

The district did not meet its burden of establishing that respondent’s 

7. 

ORDER 

Respondent Theresa Messick is dismissed as a permanent certificated 
employee of the Ripon Unified School District pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (7). 
 
 
DATED: __________________ 

 

 
DATED: __________________ 

 
DATED: __________________ 

 

 

_________________________________ 
DAVINA M. KEISER, Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

_________________________________ 
RUSSELL K. SPERLING, Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

__________________________________ 
MARILYN A. WOOLLARD, Chairperson 
Commission on Professional Competence 

23 

 

 

