BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

BARBARA WOLAK,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2009120040

DECISION

This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission)

in Santa Ana, California, on May 25-27, 2010. The Commission consisted of Shanti
Gallegos, Mimi Gaudette, and Administrative Law Judge Amy C. Lahr, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the Santa Ana Unified School District

(District).

2010.

Carlos R. Perez, of Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Barbara Wolak (Respondent).

At the close of the hearing, the District moved to amend the Statement of Charges, to
conform to the proof regarding incidents with students D.A. and J. For the reasons discussed
below, the District’s motion is granted in part.

The case was deemed submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing on May 27,

MOTION TO AMEND

1.

At the close of the hearing, the District moved to amend the Statement of

Charges, to conform to the proof regarding incidents with students D.A. and J. Respondent
objected on the grounds that the District did not provide a reasonable opportunity for her to
prepare a defense.

2. Government Code section 11507 states

At any time before the matter is submitted for decision the agency may file or
permit the filing of an amended or supplemental accusation. All parties shall
be notified thereof. If the amended or supplemental accusation presents new
charges the agency shall afford respondent a reasonable opportunity to prepare

his defense thereto, but he shall not be entitled to file a further pleading unless
the agency in its discretion so orders. Any new charges shall be deemed
controverted, and any objections to the amended or supplemental accusation
may be made orally and shall be noted in the record.

3.

Although Section 11507 permits the amendment of an accusation prior to the

submission of the hearing, it also requires that a respondent must be given a reasonable
opportunity to prepare a defense. With regard to D.A., the Statement of Charges sufficiently
identifies D.A., albeit by the wrong initials and gender, to provide Respondent with notice of
the charges against her. In addition, Respondent cross-examined D.A. during the hearing.
Thus, Respondent had a reasonable opportunity to lodge a defense against the charges
regarding D.A. The same cannot be said for the charges regarding student J. The Statement
of Charges does not identify issues with student J. Given that the District’s amendment was
at the close of the hearing, Respondent’s contention that she did not have adequate time to
present a defense is valid. To the extent that the statute gives the ALJ discretion to deny the
motion to amend, the ALJ finds that the prejudice to Respondent outweighs the District’s
interest in amending the Accusation. Accordingly, the District’s motion to amend the
Accusation with respect to student J. is denied.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

4.

5.

Jane Russo, District Superintendent, made and filed the Accusation and

Statement of Charges in her official capacity.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. Her most

recent position was that of a second-grade teacher at Santiago Elementary School.
Respondent holds a clear multi-subject credential.

6.

The District filed the Accusation and Statement of Charges on or about

November 4, 2009. Respondent requested an administrative hearing on or about November
5, 2009; she filed a Notice of Defense on or about December 14, 2009.

7.

The District seeks to dismiss Respondent for allegedly engaging in immoral

conduct, and displaying evident unfitness for service.

Zip Fizz Incident

8.

On March 13, 2008, Respondent provided her students with small water

bottles and containers of “Zip Fizz” energy drink mix, and required them to drink the
concoction. Respondent told her students that it would help them focus and make them
smarter when they were taking a test. Respondent also informed her students that if they did
not drink the Zip Fizz cocktail, they would be “benched,” meaning they would have to skip
recess. Two students refused to drink the mixture, and they were benched. Respondent
required the two students who refused to drink the mixture to stay after the school, in order to
drink the mixture. Respondent told student K.G. that if she didn’t finish it that day, she

2

would have to drink it the following day. Respondent also instructed K.G. to lie to her
parents, by explaining that the reason she was delayed after school was because she was sick
in the bathroom, rather than telling the truth that she failed to drink the Zip Fizz mixture.
L.L. stated that he did not like the taste of Zip Fizz and only drank half of it. Respondent
detained him after school and told him to say that he was in the bathroom. L.L. told his
mother the truth when he got home.

Student B.N. testified at the hearing. He stated that Respondent gave the energy drink

to the class to help them with a test, and she told them that they had to drink it, or else they
would have to stay in class. During his testimony, B.N. broke down into tears while
describing the Zip Fizz incident.

9.

The Zip Fizz container states that the product is “[n]ot recommended for

children, pregnant women, people sensitive to caffeine, or people with a health condition.”
Respondent did not read this label before administering the product to her students.

10.

In the fall of 2007, Principal Linda Bell had previously admonished

Respondent for giving energy drinks and vitamin water to her students. Ms. Bell specifically
instructed Respondent not to give energy drinks to children, and she thought that Respondent
was in agreement with her. In a written undated rebuttal, Respondent responded:

I was confused why Ms. Bell told me “Don’t give the students anything.” I
questioned if that meant junk food and sodas. She repeated, “Just don’t give
them anything.” I also mentioned that I have a treasure box full of pencils,
erasers, stickers, flashcards, and workbooks as part of my behavior/homework
incentives. Since then I have returned 82 workbooks, three class sets of
flashcards, 100’s of glitter pencils and numerous erasers and stickers fearful
that she may find something wrong with them. Although I did not agree with
Ms. Bell I was trying to comply with her demands.

11.

a.

Respondent explained that she was conducting a unit on bravery, and

thought it would be a good strategy to have the students try “weird, yucky foods.”
Respondent had attended a boys’ soccer game the weekend before, and claimed that she
observed the team members, who were approximately the same ages as her students,
consume Zip Fizz during their game. Respondent recognized that in hindsight, it was a bad
idea to have her students drink Zip Fizz.

b.

Respondent denied that she forced her students to drink Zip Fizz; she

claimed that she gave them a choice about whether or not to drink it. Respondent also denied
that she told her students that they would be benched if they did not drink it. Her testimony
is contradicted by the testimony of the students and their parents. As noted above, the
students stated that Respondent did not give them a choice about whether to drink the Zip
Fizz. The parents of both students also testified at the hearing. K.G.’s mother corroborated
K.G.’s testimony, and noted that she had previously told her daughter not to drink energy
drinks. K.G.’s mother explained that K.G. was very upset that Respondent forced her to

3

drink something that she knew she wasn’t supposed to consume. L.L.’s mother was upset
that Respondent had given Zip Fizz to her son, because he has Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and ingesting high levels of caffeine and other substances
could have serious repercussions on his condition. Their testimony is credited.

c.

Respondent demonstrated abusive and immoral conduct by requiring

her students to consume Zip Fizz.

12.

The District initially suspended Respondent for fifteen days because of the Zip

Fizz incident. It ultimately negotiated a shorter suspension, of three days, in exchange for
Respondent’s voluntary transfer to another school site.

Running Laps as Punishment for Missing Vocabulary Words

13.

On May 26, 2009, Respondent required her students to run laps around a

school field because they were not able to read certain words from their decodable books. A
decodable book is a book that emphasizes certain sounds and spellings, which are supposed
to be appropriate for the target age-group. Respondent’s class had several students who were
English-Language Learners, and Respondent knew or should have known that some of them
struggled with the English language. Respondent became frustrated with her students
because she thought they should know certain words from the decodable books. At the end
of the school day, Respondent took the entire class outside for physical education.
Respondent instructed the students who had missed words in their decodable books to run
laps around the field, while the other students played in another area. At dismissal time,
Respondent assigned student S.G. to be in charge of the running students, while Respondent
took the other students to the dismissal area. Essentially, Respondent left a second-grade
student to supervise other second-grade students. Eventually the students left the field and
went to their respective dismissal areas; however, one student was so late that she missed her
bus.

14.

Respondent admitted that she required the students to run laps for missing

their vocabulary words. She claims that she instructed them to run until the bell rang, which
would have been approximately twenty minutes. Respondent claimed that upon dismissal
time, she waved to the students as a signal to them that it was time to go. Respondent said
that she saw some of the students shake their heads, but she did not remain there until all of
the students were off of the field.

15.

Respondent did not grasp the gravity of her punishment for the students that

had missed their vocabulary words. The concept of physical punishment for academic errors
is inappropriate. In addition, Respondent compromised her students’ safety when she left
them alone on the field. Respondent’s conduct was abusive and immoral and demonstrated
unfitness for service.

4

16.

As a result of the running laps incident, the District suspended Respondent for

eight days without pay. The District warned Respondent not to leave students unattended,
and that she would face dismissal if she did so in the future.

Unsupervised Student

a.

17.

On May 28, 2009, Respondent had a disruptive student, A.V., in her
class. A.V. was not doing his work, so Respondent gave him a “time out,” and sent him to
another teacher’s classroom to complete his work. Shortly before recess, A.V. was sent back
to Respondent’s classroom. While Respondent was taking her class to recess, she saw A.V.
by the water fountain. He was visibly upset, and she told him to calm down. Respondent
claimed that she gave him a choice of whether to go to the office with a friend or go play,
and that A.V. chose to play. She claimed to watch him walk around the corner and head
toward the playground. Respondent’s story is contradicted by other evidence. Another
teacher, Pauline Cole, was also going to recess during that time. Ms. Cole found A.V., alone,
by the water fountain, in a very distressed state, hitting his head on the wall and the fence.
He was violent and injuring himself, and muttering to himself, and would not stop. Ms. Cole
unsuccessfully tried to calm him down, and bring him to the office, but he would not listen.
She then went immediately to the office to report the incident.

b.

Respondent claimed that she had to go to the bathroom very badly, and

that she first went to the office, and then the bathroom. Maggie Miller, another teacher,
testified at the hearing. Ms. Miller stated that she was in the break room at recess time, and
she recalled that Respondent came into the lounge and said that she was entitled to a break
too. Eventually, Ms. Cole found Respondent and told her that her student was alone by the
drinking fountain and was very upset. Ms. Miller stated that Respondent remained in the
lounge area. Ms. Miller was amazed that Respondent did not handle the situation properly,
because there was a child hurting himself and she did not help. Respondent claimed that she
went outside at some point thereafter and found A.V. playing by the lunch tables.

c.

Respondent’s conduct represented poor judgment and evident unfitness
for service; she left a child alone when he could potentially harm himself. There were other
ways that Respondent could have addressed the situation that would have protected his
safety.

18.

The District suspended Respondent for eight days as a result of her leaving a

student unsupervised.

Book Throwing

19.

On October 20, 2009, Respondent threw a science book, which weighed

approximately three pounds, at student A.T, from approximately several feet away. The
book hit A.T.’s arm, and left a bruise. A.T. told her parents about the incident when she
returned home from school that afternoon. The following morning, A.T.’s father reported

5

the incident to the principal and the school police. In writing his report, the police officer,
Dermot Chambers, did not question Respondent regarding the incident.

20.

On another occasion, Respondent threw a folder at student D.A. The folder hit

the student in his chest and left a bruise.

21.

Student G.R. testified at the hearing. She witnessed both events, where

Respondent threw items at A.T. and D.A. G.R. stated that she was afraid that Respondent
would throw something at her.

22.

Respondent could not recall throwing books at students D.A. and A.T. Her

testimony is contradicted by that of the students A.T., D.A. and G.R. The students’
testimony was consistent, and is credited. Respondent’s actions were careless and
demonstrated unfitness for service.

Parent Complaints

23.

In September and October 2009, the District received numerous complaints

from Respondent regarding her conduct and teaching practices. Student G.R., and her
mother, C.W., testified at the hearing. They explained that Respondent embarrassed G.R. by
announcing errors that G.R. had made in front of the whole class. C.W. stated that G.R. has
consistently been an above-average student who enjoys school, and when she entered
Respondent’s class, her grades began to fall, and she began acting insecure and afraid with
regard to school. C.W. stated that she talked with Respondent on multiple occasions, and felt
that Respondent’s attitude was dictatorial, and C.W. felt that Respondent ignored her
concerns.

24.

Respondent kept a color-coded behavior chart in her classroom. At the

beginning of the day, the students began with a green color. If they misbehaved, the color
would change to yellow, and then red; with corresponding consequences. When a student
asked to use the restroom during Respondent’s class, Respondent required a color change on
the student’s behavior chart; i.e., Respondent imposed negative consequences whenever a
student used the restroom. Respondent contended that she had this policy throughout her
teaching career, and saw nothing wrong with it. She changed her policy after being
instructed to do so by the District.

25.

The District alleged that Respondent set the air conditioner on high and would

not permit students to put on sweaters. The evidence did not support this contention.
Respondent stated that the District controlled the air conditioning, and that she could not
adjust it. She spoke to the custodian several times, and to the principal at a staff meeting; to
no avail.

26.

The District also alleged that Respondent “yells and is always angry.” The

evidence did not support this contention.

6

27.

Finally, the District alleged that Respondent “is inflexible with her students
and creates negative pressure.” Respondent’s initial bathroom policy lends support to the
allegation that she is inflexible with her students. Respondent’s reaction to Principal Bell’s
admonition not to give anything to the students also indicates her inflexibility. Respondent’s
use of physical punishment for academic errors, and announcement of student errors before
the entire class, forcing students to drink an energy drink, and throwing of books
demonstrated that she created negative pressure.

28.

Respondent contended that she did not know about many of the parent

complaints, and that she addressed those of which she was aware.

Rehabilitation

29.

Respondent has been employed as a teacher for 28 years. She has been

teaching in the District since 1987. Respondent has received positive notes in many of her
evaluations. She was nominated for teacher of the year in 2008-09. Respondent stated that
she maintained a good relationship with many parents. She acknowledged that she made
mistakes, and stated that on the whole, she’s a good teacher. Respondent believes that
teaching is her passion.

30.

Respondent presented two character witnesses, Danh Nguyen and Martin

Hernandez. Both witnesses had children in Respondent’s class. They had high praise for
Respondent and her teaching abilities.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

31. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District
under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), (immoral conduct) based on Factual
Findings 1 through 28, and Legal Conclusions 33 through 37.

32. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District
under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), (evident unfitness for service) based
on Factual Findings 1 through 28, and Legal Conclusions 33 through 37.

33. In this case, Respondent engaged in immoral conduct by forcing her students to
drink a substance that is specifically not recommended for children, and by using physical
punishment for academic errors. This conduct is specifically set forth in Factual Findings 8
through 16.

34. “Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for service be attributable to

a defect in temperament . . .” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on
Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445.) Such temperamental defect
“connotes a fixed character trait, not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails
to meet the expectations of the employing school district. (Id. at 1444). A determination of

7

evident unfitness requires an analysis based on criteria set forth in Morrison v. State Board of
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.

35. In Morrison, the Supreme Court of California held that the determination of
whether a person is fit to teach must be based on an objective and analytical approach,
consisting of a review of the teacher’s conduct and an assessment of a variety of specific
factors including: (1) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the presence
of extenuating or aggravating circumstances; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) the
likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (5) the disruption
of the education process; (6) the motive underlying the conduct; and (7) the proximity or
remoteness in time of the conduct.

36. As applied to this case, the Morrison factors suggest the following conclusions:
first, Respondent’s conduct reflects poor judgment on multiple occasions, and demonstrated
that she does not use foresight when making decisions. Based on the evidence presented, it
is likely that Respondent would engage in similar conduct. Next, no extenuating
circumstances existed that would explain Respondent’s actions. With regard to the Zip Fizz
incident, an aggravating factor is the fact that Principal Bell had previously admonished
Respondent for giving similar substances to students. The evidence showed that
Respondent’s conduct affected numerous students and their parents, as well as her
colleagues. Finally, Respondent’s conduct was very recent, having occurred in 2008 and
2009.

37. The Morrison factors as applied in this case support Respondent’s dismissal.

Respondent engaged in immoral conduct and repeatedly demonstrated unfitness for service,
and her lack of sincere remorse or recognition that she has endangered students demonstrates
a lack of rehabilitation.

ORDER

The determination of the Governing Board of the Santa Ana Unified School District
to dismiss Respondent Barbara Wolak as a permanent employee of the District pursuant to
Education Code sections 44939 and 44932 is affirmed.

Respondent Barbara Wolak is dismissed from her position as certificated employee of

the Santa Ana Unified School District.

DATED:

DATED:

AMY C. LAHR
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

SHANTI GALLEGOS

8

DATED:

Commission Member

MIMI GAUDETTE
Commission Member

9

