BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
GILROY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

AMANDA GORI,

OAH No. 2009040760

Respondent.

DECISION

A Commission on Professional Competence heard this matter in Gilroy,
California, on October 10 and October 11, 2011. The Commission consisted of
Ms. Marilyn Fuller, Ms. Jenay Kiddoo, and Office of Administrative Hearings
Administrative Law Judge Perry O. Johnson, who served as chairperson.

Nitasha K. Sawhney, Esq., and Rodrigo E. Guevara, Esq, of GCR, LLP,
313 West Winton Avenue, Suite 372, Hayward, California 94544, represented
complainant Dr. Deborah A. Flores, Superintendent, Gilroy Unified School District.

Joseph A. Cisneros, Esq., of The Biegel Law Firm, 2801 Monterey-Salinas

Highway, Suite A, Monterey, California 93940, represented respondent Amanda
Gori, who was present for the proceeding.

On October 11, 2011, the parties submitted the matter for decision and the

record closed.

Issues

Did respondent Amanda Gori’s acts and omissions constitute evident unfitness

for service as a school teacher by way of: (i) acts of enabling students to cheat on
tests; and (ii) acts of dishonesty when dealing with a District administrator?

Did respondent Amanda Gori engage in dishonesty by: (i) knowingly
encouraging and assisting students to cheat on tests; (ii) deceitfully lying to a district
administrator; and (iii) purposefully misleading a District administrator about her
completion of student report cards?

Did respondent Amanda Gori persistently refuse to obey school laws of the

State or reasonable regulations prescribed by the District’s Governing Board by
helping students cheat on tests so as to violate the District’s policies regarding student
conduct and academic honesty?

1

Did respondent Amanda Gori’s acts and omissions constitute immoral conduct

by way of encouraging and assisting students to engage in academic dishonesty and
by deceitfully lying to a school administrator?

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Accusation and Statement of Charges against respondent Amanda

Gori were brought by complainant Dr. Deborah A. Flores (complainant), in her
official capacity as Superintendent, Gilroy Unified School District (the District).

2.
employee.

Respondent Amanda Gori (respondent) is a permanent certificated

The District employed respondent over the span of six school years. During
most of the 2010-2011 school year, respondent served the District and its students in
the capacity of a fourth-grade school teacher at Rod Kelley Elementary School.
During the preceding school year (2009-2010), respondent taught at the third-grade
level at the same school. And during the 2008-2009 school year with the District, she
acted as a second-grade teacher. Respondent’s first three school years with the
District were spent at Antonio Del Buono Elementary School where she taught
students in the first grade and second grade.

3.

On June 16, 2011, complainant caused an Accusation to be served on

respondent. A Statement of Charges and Recommendation of Dismissal and
Immediate Suspension Without Pay was served upon respondent on or about May 12,
2011. And on May 4, 2011, complainant caused respondent to be served with a
Notice of Proposed Suspension and Dismissal. (Effective May 13, 2011, the District
commenced respondent’s status of suspension without pay.)

The Accusation and Statement of Charges recommend respondent’s dismissal

from her employment with the District for the following causes under Education
Code1 sections 44932 and 44939: (1) evident unfitness for service; (2) dishonesty; (3)
refusal to obey the school laws of the State or reasonable regulations prescribed for
the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the
Governing Board of the District; and (4) immoral conduct.

4.

5.

Respondent submitted a Notice of Defense. On June 6, 2011, respondent

filed with the District her Request for Hearing and Notice of Objection to Decision.

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met by the parties

and jurisdiction exists for these proceedings.

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.

2

The District’s Evidence

MARGARIDA OLIVEIRA

7.

Ms. Margarida Oliveira has been a teacher for 16 years. She has had an

assignment as a teacher at the District’s Rod Kelley School over the past 12 years.
Before the 2010-2011 school year, Ms. Oliveira had never taught as a fourth-grade
teacher. For more than a decade she taught first-grade and second-grade students.
The current school year (2011-2012) is the second year that Ms. Oliveira has been a
fourth-grade teacher.

8.

Ms. Oliveira had never been a teacher at the same grade level to which
respondent was assigned as a teacher before the 2010-2011 school year. They began
teaching at the fourth-grade level during the same school year and they were each part
of the same team of fourth-grade teachers at Rod Kelley School

9.

Ms. Oliveira is knowledgeable regarding the District’s Benchmark

examinations for math and reading ELA (English Language Arts). She pointed out
that a Benchmark examination was administered in the same manner as a state-
prescribed assessment examination in that a teacher reads aloud to students certain
instructions and then the students independently take the examination. But Ms.
Oliveira noted that students have asked “oftentimes” for “help” during the course of
taking Benchmark tests, namely on matters such as “decoding,” that is, interpreting
words the student cannot read. Ms. Oliveira’s approach has been to tell a student to
“sound out” the word to the best of the ability of the student. And also on the topic of
students who sought her assistance during the administration of a Benchmark
examination, Ms. Oliveira has reminded a student of strategies including an act of
“going back” to reread a story or to underline a phrase in a story in addressing test
questions.

The data gained from Benchmark tests are used in preparing report cards and

to “regroup” a student into a different reading class.

10.

Regarding the District’s Accelerated Reading (AR) program quizzes,
Ms. Oliveira learned only after the first two to four weeks into the 2010-2011 school
year that open book assistance was disallowed when a student took a computerized
AR quiz. Ms. Oliveira learned about the school’s policy by way of a memo that was
issued from “administration.” The means of transmission was believed to have been
through an email message. Also at some point in time at the end of January 2011, she
read a printed document by the developer of the AR program.

11.

Regarding the Accusation’s allegation that respondent helped students

to cheat, Ms. Oliveira had no personal knowledge regarding respondent’s
administration of either Benchmark examinations or the AR quizzes. But she recalled

3

an incident involving a single fourth-grade student, J.Y., and that student taking the
weekly reading assessment test. While Ms. Oliveira was administering a general,
weekly reading comprehension assessment test and was in the process of distributing
the test booklets to the class, the subject student, J.Y., exclaimed spontaneously, “Oh,
I’ve taken this test before.” (The student was in Ms. Oliveira’s reading group class,
which was to only receive the test from the teacher.) J.Y. had asserted that
respondent, in a homeroom setting, supposedly had given the girl the test to study
“over the weekend.”

But, Ms. Oliveira’s account regarding J.Y.’s assertions was not reliable due to
other matters that undermine the trustworthiness of the child’s claimed statement. In
particular the source of the words, namely a child in a classroom setting, was not
reliable. It is implausible that the 10-year-old child was accurate with a claim that she
had seen the exact test before Ms. Oliveira distributed the test to her “below basic”
reading group because the words were spontaneously uttered as the test booklet was
distributed and the child had yet to open the book. (And, Ms. Oliveira was not clear
as to what measures she took with regard to the test that girl said she had “already
taken.” Did she allow J.Y. to take the test notwithstanding the girl’s words? Did she
single out J.Y. in the class to prevent the fourth-grade student in taking the test that
she had supposedly “already taken”?)

Moreover, Ms. Oliveira acknowledged that she had no knowledge about a

teacher-parent conference whereby respondent understood J.Y.’s mother’s concern
about the child’s difficulty with reading tests and respondent offered a solution of
providing the child with “old” or previously administered reading comprehension
tests for the child to prepare.

After hearing J.Y.’s supported report of having previously seen the reading
test statement, Ms. Oliveira did not confer with respondent about the comments the
teacher believed J.Y. had made. Rather, Ms. Oliveria informed the school’s most
veteran fourth-grade teacher, Ms. Mesa, about J.Y.’s remarks. (Ms. Mesa passed the
report onto the school principal, and she never talked with respondent about the
child’s claimed words.) Also, Ms. Oliveira never talked with the parents of J.Y.
about respondent’s act of providing J.Y. with a weekly reading assessment test’s
questions to read over various weekends.

12. Ms. Oliveira noted that after respondent was placed on administrative

leave in March 2011, 10 students from respondent’s homeroom class were assigned to
Ms. Oliveira’s class. At no time after the time that the 10 students joined her class
did Ms. Oliveira observe any different behavior in test taking by those students.
Those students, who previously had been assigned to respondent’s homeroom, were
“a very good group of students” as they “followed the rules very nicely” upon being
part of Ms. Oliveira’s classroom through the balance of the school year. In fact,
“nothing stands out” regarding the students who had been in respondent’s classroom.

4

13. Ms. Oliveira acknowledged on cross-examination that she had no
personal knowledge regarding any act or omission on respondent’s part that indicated
respondent helped her assigned students to “cheat” on Benchmark tests.

No student ever informed Ms. Oliveira that respondent had helped a student to

cheat on any Benchmark test.

14. Ms. Oliveira recalled respondent as being dedicated and that she

exhibited a caring demeanor towards her students. Ms. Oliveira upon reaching the
school’s grounds at an early morning hour often found respondent’s vehicle parked
next to the school. And on occasions when Ms. Oliveira left the school grounds after
school hours, respondent remained late at the school.

Ms. Oliveira observed that at fourth-grade teacher team meetings, respondent

did not ask many questions. Respondent was a reserved and quiet individual.

NANCY MESA

15. Ms. Nancy Mesa has been a fourth-grade teacher for 20 years. She has

spent 19 years at Rod Kelley Elementary School.

At the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, Ms. Mesa summoned a

meeting with the new fourth-grade teachers, namely Ms. Oliveira and respondent.
The purpose of the meeting was to orient and acquaint the new teachers with “how
things were done in the past” and to get to know them. Ms. Mesa and the other
experienced fourth-grade teacher, Ms. Mesa, devised “agreements at that point” on
topics such as imposition of a discipline system and the designation of student reading
groups.

At the beginning of the school year, Ms. Mesa “worked hard” to welcome the
new teachers to the fourth-grade level. And she set weekly meetings on Wednesday
afternoons to plan lessons, discuss strategies, and review new materials. As the
teacher with the most seniority, Ms. Mesa “prided” herself regarding “grade level
consistency” for the students from class-to-class.

At some point during the 2010-2011 school year, Ms. Mesa formed an

unfavorable opinion that respondent had not subscribed to her plan for the team of
fourth-grade teachers at Rod Kelley Elementary School. Ms. Mesa perceived some
“disorganization” with lesson planning. Also Ms. Mesa noted that respondent was
not fully participatory in the grade-level planning and that as a new teacher,
respondent “did not ask any questions.” When Ms. Mesa made inquiries of
respondent as to whether she had any questions, respondent’s reply “was always
‘no.’” And Ms. Mesa took issue with the need to seek out respondent to ask that the
new teacher “participation in things” because respondent did not volunteer to “take
part in things.”

5

16.

In late January 2011, after conferring with Ms. Haley Saldana and Ms.
Oliveira, Ms. Mesa prepared a memorandum regarding the grade level concerns that
revolved around respondent. Without first interacting with respondent, Ms. Mesa
delivered the memorandum to the school’s principal. The two and one-half page
memorandum, dated January 27, 2011, which bore the typed names of three fourth-
grade teachers (Ms. Mesa, Ms. Saldana, Ms. Oliveira), set out, in part:

As per our discussion today, here is the documentation that you
requested regarding the concerns [the other three teachers for
fourth grade classes] have with [respondent]:

1. Not being consistent with the grade-level discipline policy

2. Returning student assessments from ELA (weekly skills
and selection tests)

Keeping up with the pacing schedule and implementation

3.
for ELA (including Universal Access), Writing, and Health.

Keeping up with the pacing schedule and implementation

Keeping up with shared fourth grade duties (planning of

5.
lessons, running of copies, etc.)

6.

Reporting for yard duty in a timely manner.

7.

Unwilling to ask for help or clarification when needed.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

4.
for math.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

6

Most of these concerns have already been addressed with
[respondent], however they have not been resolved. If you
would like to discuss these issues further, please contact us and
we will be happy to meet with you at your convenience.

On February 16, 2011, a meeting occurred among the four fourth-grade

teachers, as well as a PAR teacher-Kathleen Taylor, a retired third-grade teacher-
Linda Moore, and Principal Luis Carrillo. Following the meeting, Ms. Mesa prepared
a memorandum, titled “Fourth Grade, Grade Level Meeting Notes-Grade Level
Concerns About [respondent]” The February 2011 memorandum set out three areas
of concern under headings captioned: “Students are not receiving equitable
education;” “Lack of Communication;” and, “Lack of Professional Courtesy.”

But neither the January 27, 2011, memorandum nor the February 16, 2011,

memorandum raised allegations concerning: respondent helping students to cheat on
tests; respondent engaging in dishonesty; respondent participating in immoral
conduct; respondent persistently violating of policies established by the state or the
District’s governing board; or respondent showing a character that was not inclined to
remediation.

17.

On cross-examination, Ms. Mesa acknowledged that before the

February 2011 meeting, which included the school principal and a total of seven
participants, the subject most senior Rod Kelley School fourth-grade teacher never
met one-on-one with respondent to discuss, in depth as a block of issues, the matters
raised in the January 27, 2001, and February 16, 2011, memoranda.

18.

In either December 2010 or January 2011, respondent went to Ms.

Mesa to confide in that senior fourth grade teacher regarding respondent’s perception
that Principal Carrillo was engaged in a pattern of harassment of respondent. Ms.
Mesa did not offer respondent any suggested, specific course of action, plan or
otherwise aid the newest fourth-grade teach to resolve the conflict with Principal
Carrillo.

19. Ms. Mesa had no personal knowledge regarding any act or omission on
respondent’s part that indicated respondent helped her assigned students to “cheat” on
Benchmark tests.

No student ever informed Ms. Mesa that respondent had helped a student to

cheat on any Benchmark test.

HALEY SALDANA

20. Ms. Haley Crammton Saldana has been a fourth-grade teacher at Rod

Kelley Elementary School for eight years.

7

Ms. Saldana established that the cadre of fourth-grade teachers and the

administration at Rod Kelley Elementary School grouped students according to the
reading ability of each child. For the 2010-2011 school year, Ms. Saldana’s group of
students, who had scored on a third grade administered test, were designated to come
within the “basic” reading group. Ms. Mesa was assigned the “proficient” or
“advanced” group of students. And Ms. Oliveira had reading group that had scored at
the “far below basic” and “below basic” groups. And Respondent’s student were
deemed to be the “below basic” group.

21.

The Benchmark examinations are District-administered tests, which are

administered quarterly to assess student progress. The Benchmark examinations are
grounded on prescribed standards in a manner similar to the “state exams,” which are
also known as the CST. Each teacher, including respondent, was expected to
administer the ELA Benchmark examination to her assigned reading group; while
fourth-grade students took the Benchmark math examination in their homeroom class.

Ms. Saldana had some of respondent’s homeroom students in Ms. Saldana’s
reading group class. At no time did she notice any different technique for handling
testing material or using circles upon questions in testing booklets as between the
students from respondent’s homeroom class and other students assigned to the
reading group taught by Ms. Saldana.

22. Ms. Saldana thoroughly described the AR Program as used at the Rod
Kelley Elementary School. As of the date of the hearing, the program was in its third
year of implementation. The AR program revolved around a student reading a book
and then taking a computer-generated quiz regarding topics or issues raised in the
book. For the fourth grade at Rod Kelley Elementary School, the teachers devised a
classroom-oriented competition to enhance students’ interest in reading by awarding
prizes to the classroom that earned the highest aggregate score on the AR computer
quizzes for a month’s period. During the first year of the AR program, students were
permitted to use open books during the AR computer quiz process. But during either
September or October 2010, which was the second year for use of the AR program, a
prohibition against open-book aid for AR program quizzes was “brought up” at a
teachers’ staff meeting.

23.

The district’s policy regarding a prohibition against the use of an “open

book” technique by students taking quizzes under the AR program was learned by
Ms. Saldana at a grade-level staff meeting in the early part of the 2010-2011 school
year. And the prohibition regarding open book use by students for AR program
quizzes was expressed in a teacher instructional document published by the AR
program creator and distributed in January 2011. A written directive, which
prohibited open-book test taking, was also reported in a document titled, “Rod Kelley
School Student Guideline for Taking Accelerated Reader Quizzes,” dated January 28,
2011.

8

24. Ms. Saldana was not believable when she asserted that she was aware

that respondent personally learned in October 2010 about the District’s prohibition for
open book usage by students taking AR quizzes. Ms. Saldana alluded to an email
message, which was supposed received by her no later than mid-October 2010, that
transmitted the school policy on banning open books during AR quizzes; but, that
document was never produced at the hearing.

25. Ms. Saldana offered no evidence regarding her personal knowledge

with respect to an allegation that respondent prompted students to cheat.

At most with regard to allegations pertaining to respondent engaging in
unethical acts of aiding or encouraging student cheating, Ms. Saldana expressed only
one instance regarding questionable teaching techniques by respondent. On that one
occasion, during a reading class or an ELD class, Ms. Saldana raised with students,
who were assigned to respondent’s homeroom, topics pertaining to figurative
language, that is similes and metaphors, which according to the fourth-grade teachers’
plan, were to have been taught during “writing time” in homeroom periods. However
on that occasion the students were at a loss when the teacher raised the topics. When
Ms. Saldana directed the attention of the students to the writing lessons, students
replied “we’re not doing that in writing.” Rather than interacting with respondent
about the students’ supposed lack of educational progress, Ms. Saldana brought her
concerns to Ms. Mesa regarding her perception of “inequitable” educational
experience for students because of respondent’s perceived inadequate teaching
techniques.

26.

After respondent was placed on paid leave in March 2011, the Rod

Kelley Elementary School principal tasked Ms. Saldana to prepare memoranda
regarding the remaining fourth-grade teachers’ impressions of respondent’s acts and
omissions. As the principal’s agent, Ms. Saldana composed two memoranda in May
2011.

a.

The first memorandum, titled “Writing Lessons for ‘Responding

to a Poem’ Assignment,” pertained to fourth-grade teacher meetings between
November 15, 2010, and December 10, 2010. The memorandum, undated, ended
with:

As you can see, [teachers] gave instructions, but
the writing was done independently by the
students. [Teachers] didn’t offer help with
spelling or editing besides telling the students to
refer to the examples from the text and their
checklists. When [respondent] came to
[teachers’] planning meeting, she wrote down all
of the same plans [that the other teachers] wrote
down. [Respondent] did not ask any questions for

9

The first memoranda by Ms. Saldana did not objectively or reasonably
establish respondent’s acts of prompting student cheating, respondent’s dishonesty or
other alleged respondent misconduct that warrants respondent’s dismissal from her
position as a District fourth-grade teacher.

b.

The second, undated and unsigned, memorandum set out:

clarification. The three other members of the
team collaborated to create the lesson sequence,
and she quietly sat at the meeting and wrote plans
in her plan book. [Respondent] didn’t mention
anything about her handout at any time, nor did
she contribute to the planning process. She is
responsible for teaching the curriculum and
delivering it in an equitable way, especially when
the assignment will be graded and used for data
collection and reporting to parents (this grade was
used for report cards as well.)

In November [2010, fourth-grade teachers]
worked on a writing piece in class focusing on
responding to literature. [The teachers] used the
Write Source book to write a response to a haiku.
As a grade level, [the teachers] decided to create
lesson plans following the ideas from the Write
Source text for [the teacher’s] next writing
assignment/assessment. On Monday, November
15, 2010, [the teachers] began the lessons, and
[the teachers] continued working on the piece
taking the kids through December 10, 2010. This
process was to be taught through a guided
process, but all writing was to be done by the
students. . . .

During [the teachers’] grade level meeting on
December 10, 2010, I checked with [respondent]
and the other teachers to see how their classes
were progressing. [Respondent] said that the
lessons were coming along fine. At that point
[the fourth-grade teachers] decided that [teachers]
would bring the assignments to [the teachers’]
next Wednesday meeting, where [the teachers]
would have the chance to score them holistically.
. . . . [Respondent] (and the rest of the fourth
grade teachers) brought the writing assessments

10

the following Wednesday, and we sat down and
began scoring them. [The teachers, that is Ms.
Saldana and Ms. Mesa] were unsure about how
[respondent] was able to complete the assignment
in less than a week, when it had taken [the other
teachers’] classes so long to complete.

Last Wednesday, May 25, 2011, [which was two
months after respondent had been placed on leave
and two weeks after respondent was served with
Notice of the Proposed Dismissal], [fourth grade
teachers] were in room [three] using the
classroom for a reader’s theatre performance.
During that time, [teachers] spotted some of
[respondent’s] writing assessments sitting on a
counter, as well as a sheet that were unfamiliar
with. This sheet . . . was a handout of
. . . paragraphs that had minimal amounts of
spaces for filling in the blanks to be done by
students. The directions ask the students to
recopy the work on lined paper.

This handout is a concern to [fourth grade
teachers], as a grade level, because it wasn’t given
to all of the students. Therefore, [respondent’s]
students had extra support to complete this
assignment that [teachers] used to give to students
[as] a grade for writing. [Teachers] are also
concerned, because [respondent] never mentioned
this additional support that she was going to
provide to her students. [Remaining fourth-grade
teachers] feel that this [sheet] should have been
disclosed at the grade level meeting, or even the
scoring session. Because [respondent] didn’t
share the fact that she provided this extra support
. . ., [teachers] feel that [respondent’s students’]
scores for that assignment were not an accurate
picture of her students’ capabilities.

During cross-examination, Ms. Saldana had no recollection of whether

students could work on the haiku poem at home or whether parents could help the
students. But Ms. Oliveira and respondent recalled that students could work on the
haiku at home. And it was established that there was no prohibition upon students
accepting out-of-school assistance with the haiku poem. (And Ms. Saldana had no
explanation for her disdain for respondent’s extra effort with her “below basic”

11

reading students to respond to the intricate nature of a haiku poem, when Ms. Saldana
taught a basic reading class and Ms. Mesa taught a proficient or “above basic”
reading class.)

The second memorandum by Ms. Saldana did not objectively or reasonably

establish respondent’s acts of prompting student cheating, respondent’s dishonesty or
other alleged respondent misconduct that warrants respondent’s dismissal from her
position as a District fourth-grade teacher.

27. Ms. Saldana recalled respondent being a reserved individual. At

weekly meetings of the four teachers of fourth-grade students at Rod Kelley
Elementary School, respondent neither posed many questions nor engaged actively
fellow teachers in the meetings.

28. Ms. Saldana credibly expressed at the hearing of this matter that
respondent worked hard and cared about her students. In her view, respondent “gave
up a lot of free time” to work with students after regular school hours, at lunch-time
breaks and during the recess periods.

29. Ms. Saldana acknowledged on cross-examination that she had no
personal knowledge regarding any act or omission on respondent’s part that indicated
respondent helped her assigned students to “cheat” on Benchmark examinations.

No student ever informed Ms. Saldana that respondent had helped a student to

cheat on any benchmark test.

PATTIE JOHANSEN

30.

Over approximately the past five or six school years, Ms. Patricia

Johansen has been a third grade teacher at Rod Kelley Elementary School. She has
been employed by the District since 1984.

During the 2009-2010 school year, Ms. Johansen and respondent worked

together as part of the team of third-grade teachers. Ms. Johansen and respondent
enjoyed a good relationship during the only year respondent served as a third-grade
teacher. (Ms. Johansen knew that during the preceding school year (2008-2009)
respondent had been assigned as a second-grade teacher at the subject school.)

31.

During the 2009-2010 school year, Ms. Johansen and respondent

administered the District’s Benchmark tests in reading and math. On one occasion
during that past year, Ms. Johansen engaged respondent in a “casual conversion”
regarding the then approaching Benchmark examination. Ms. Johansen heard
respondent assert that she “really wanted to help these kids” with the Benchmark
examination.

12

Further Ms. Johansen noticed that students in her homeroom class received

test scores from examinations in respondent’s class that seemed “alot higher” than she
had expected the students to have attained. But Ms. Johansen never conferred with
respondent regarding the observations.

32.

During the year that they worked as third-grade teachers, Ms. Johansen
observed that respondent cared about her students. According to Ms. Johansen’s view
respondent worked hard at meeting the educational objectives of being a teacher.

33.

Before becoming a third-grade teacher, Ms. Johansen served as a

fourth-grade teacher and she was part of the team with Ms. Mesa and Ms. Saldana.
Ms. Johansen asked to be transferred from the fourth-grade team because of a
personality clash which developed between her and another teacher on the fourth-
grade team.

34. Ms. Johansen never observed, or otherwise gained knowledge, that

respondent provided students with answers for any Benchmark examination or
California Standards Test (CST) assessment.

Ms. Johansen possessed no personal knowledge regarding any act or omission
on respondent’s part that indicated respondent helped her assigned students to “cheat”
on Benchmark examinations.

No student ever informed Ms. Johansen that respondent had helped a student

to cheat on any benchmark test.

THREE STUDENTS FORMERLY ASSIGNED TO RESPONDENT’S CLASSES

35.

The District called three students to provide testimonial evidence at the

hearing of this matter. But the testimony from those young children was not
supportive of allegations that respondent prompted children to cheat on Benchmark
tests or AR quizzes.

A.L.

36.

A.L. is a 10-year-old girl. She is now a fifth grade student during the

2011-2012 school year. Last year, when she was a fourth grade student at Rod Kelley
Elementary School, respondent acted as A.L.’s teacher in homeroom, math, and
history class settings. Also during the past school year, Ms. Saldana was A.L.’s
reading teacher and ELD (English Language Development) teacher.

A.L. understood the district’s Benchmark examinations for math and reading

to have occurred “in the middle of the year.” She took the Benchmark tests in
respondent’s class as well as in Ms. Saldana’s class. Upon taking a Benchmark test in
Ms. Saldana’s classroom, the teacher would collect the test. In respondent’s

13

classroom, A.L. had a supposed recollection that respondent circled numerals that
preceded a question for which a wrong answer had been provided by the student. By
the circled question, A.L. understood that she should closely reread the question so as
to then mark the correct answer among the remaining other three printed multiple
choice answers. But A.L. had no recollection that respondent looked to the second
selection made by her on the Benchmark examination. And A.L. noted that there
were occasions when she personally circled numerals that preceded questions in the
benchmark test booklet.

A.L. offered non-compelling testimony regarding respondent’s administration

of the computer-generated AR quiz. The AR quiz entailed competitions among the
fourth grade classes so that the students’ classroom with the highest AR score earned
a trophy and banner that should be displayed in a window to broadcast the joint
accomplishment of the students. During an unspecified time frame, respondent
allowed the students in her classroom to use an open-book method to locate answers
for “really hard questions” on the AR quiz. A.L. recalled, however, at an unspecified
time that Ms. Saldana required the students to place reading books upon the top of the
computers so that the books could not be accessed while student took the quiz.

And A.L. recalled that during recess periods, fellow students were allowed by
respondent to help other students on AR quizzes to search through text books in order
to complete the AR quiz. But in Ms. Saldana’s class when A.L. did not know the
answer to questions while taking the AR quiz, she and other students would “just
guess.”

On cross-examination, A.L. affirmed that respondent did not administer any
reading test to her during the student’s fourth-grade school year. During all times,
however, respondent was a “nice teacher,” who showed that she wanted A.L. to do
her best in her school work.

During the Benchmark examination, respondent stood next to the desk of A.L.
when she circled numerals preceding questions for which an incorrect answer initially
had been made by the student.

A.L. established that in those instances during recess periods when a student
acted as a “helper” for another student on an AR quiz, respondent had established a
rule that the helper could only go to the page “where the answer might be” located.
The helper, however, could neither identify the answer on the page nor tell the correct
answer to the AR quiz taker

Regarding the Benchmark math examinations as given her in the fourth grade,

respondent told A.L. to “go over” and “check” the test answers on the student’s
completion of the entire examination as to those questions that the student was
uncertain for which an initial correct response had been selected. And A.L. recalled

14

that respondent instructed her to “show [her] work” by setting out on a scratch paper
or the test booklet the actual multiplication calculation.

At the hearing of this matter, A.L. never stated that she personally cheated on

any examination or test. A.L. did not express at the hearing that she ever suffered any
adverse consequence of a breach of District policy that proscribes a violation of the
code of student conduct in so far as academic dishonesty of her part.

K.Q.

37.

K.Q. is a 10-year-old girl who is currently a fifth grade student in a

District elementary school. During the 2010-2011 school year, while attending the
Rod Kelley Elementary School, K.Q. was a fourth-grade student who had two
teachers, namely Ms. Oliveira and respondent. Ms. Oliveira acted as the home-room
teacher for K.Q., while respondent functioned as the student’s reading teacher.

K.Q. was familiar with the Benchmark examinations in reading and

mathematics that were administered to her as a fourth-grade student. But she did not
recall the number of occasions on which the tests were given to her.

K.Q. had a recollection of the different approaches taken by her teachers for
the tests. She recalled that respondent would allow the students to “check back” on
tests questions and the teacher would allow the test takers to change “their answers”
so as to allow the student to “get the right answers.” But in the classroom of Ms.
Oliveira when student “were done,” that teacher would collect the testing sheets and
then direct the test takers to read in their own books.

K.Q. was not persuasive at the hearing when she asserted that in a Grade Four
ELA Benchmark 2 test on January 19, 2011, after she completed the test, respondent
circled numerals preceding certain test questions for which K.Q. had made an
incorrect selection among four possible answers on that multiple choice test sheet.
According to K.Q., respondent returned to the student the test questions and answer
sheet and that the student was expected by her teacher to reread the marked test
questions and to select from the remaining three possible responses for the marked
questions the correct answers. K. Q. was not certain as to what other pupils did with
the test; but she did reread the circled questions and exerted herself to determine for
herself the correct answer.

Since the time that she took the January 2011 test as a 10-year-old child, K.Q.
has been a student in the school as administered by Principal Carrillo. The nature of
the child’s testimony suggests that she may have been influenced by suggestions
imparted to her by adults as to respondent’s role in her taking a Benchmark exam.

K.Q. understood the AR quiz programs during her fourth-grade school year.
She recalled that classroom competition existed among the fourth-grade classrooms

15

and that prizes were awarded to the classroom with the best scoring students on the
AR quizzes. When she took an AR quiz in respondent’s class, and during an
unspecified period of time, K.Q. was allowed to use an open book to search for the
correct answers to quiz questions. In Ms. Oliveira’s classroom, however, the AR quiz
takers had to place books on top of computers so that the students could not look for
answers to quiz questions.

Even though respondent was the teacher in her third-grade homeroom, K.Q.
had no recollection that respondent ever helped her on any tests during that school
year.

On cross-examination, K.Q. acknowledged that respondent was a “nice”

teacher, who wanted the students to do well in their educational endeavors.

Also, on cross-examination, respondent demonstrated that regarding the
Benchmark examination taken by K.Q. on January 19, 2011, there were several
circled numerals that preceding test questions; however incorrect final responses were
made by K.Q. And according to K.Q., respondent had circled the numerals so as to
indicate the student had an incorrect answer; yet, in some instances the faint
remainder of an erasure exists at the correct answer while an erroneous answer is
provided as the final response. And for another question where an incorrect original
answer exists on K.Q.’s benchmark test, there is no circle around the numeral for the
test question.

Further, on cross-examination, K. Q. credibly asserted, “I never did,” when

queried regarding whether she had ever asked respondent to help her on AR quizzes.
And when the subject student-witness took Benchmark examinations, K.Q. never
asked respondent for help with the questions.

And to an inquiry made by a commission member, K.Q. understood that the

computerized AR quiz points were sent to her homeroom teacher, Ms. Oliveira, rather
than respondent.

At the hearing of this matter, K.Q. never stated that she personally cheated on

any examination or test. K.Q. did not express at the hearing that she ever suffered
any adverse consequence of a breach of District policy that proscribes a violation of
the code of student conduct in so far as academic dishonesty of her part.

H V.

38.

H.V. is a fifth-grade student, who is now 11 years old. During her

fourth-grade school year, H.V. had three teachers, namely Ms. Saldana, Ms. Oliveira
and respondent. Ms. Saldana was her homeroom teacher from the middle until the
end of the school year, while respondent was H.V.’s homeroom teacher at the

16

beginning of the fourth-grade school year. Ms. Oliveira was the teacher in H.V.’s
reading classroom.

H.V. recalled taking the District’s Benchmark test for reading and
mathematics during her fourth grade school year on one or two occasions. She
understood the benchmark tests to be a “big deal.” In respondent’s classroom, H.V.
took both the reading and math Benchmark examination.

On cross-examination, H.V. asserted that respondent had been her second-

grade teacher. H.V. had recollection that Ms. Gori was a nice teacher. While H.V.
took the CST test, respondent instructed her to do her best.

During her fourth grade year, Ms. Oliveria gave H.V. the reading benchmark

test. Respondent administered the math benchmark test to H.V.

39.

H.V. was not wholly believable while providing testimony. Before the
hearing date, H.V. recalled meeting with the school principal, Mr. Carillo, on matters
pertaining to her anticipated testimony in this matter. And the record shows that
before the matter of the allegations regarding respondent’s supposed unethical aid to
students on taking examinations, H.V.’s mother made a demand that H.V. be
reassigned out of the homeroom where respondent was the teacher. Further, during
the course of the hearing, H.V. grew emotionally upset and tearful so that a recess
was necessary for the proceeding. The child appeared to be conflicted or influenced
by matters beyond her personal recollection of respondent’s acts in the administration
of tests to the young student more than one year ago. Hence, by the matter of her
demeanor and her attitude towards the proceeding while giving testimony in the
presence of her current school principal and her mother, H.V. was neither credible nor
persuasive witness regarding matter for which complainant seeks to dismiss
respondent.

H.V.’s testimony is further rendered doubtful regarding her recollection of

respondent’s supposed assistance to the subject student during tests. H.V. asserted,
during cross-examination, that as a second-grade student when she asked for help on a
test question respondent “just pointed to the answer.” Yet, H.V. asserted that during
the fourth-grade year, she never asked for help on any fourth-grade benchmark tests.

Complainant did not extract from H.V. an acknowledgement that the young

child personally engaged in acts of cheating on any examination that had been
administered by respondent.

DOREN KOENE

40. Ms. Doren Koene is a District Assessment Paraprofessional.

17

Among the duties, responsibilities and functions of Ms. Koene is her work to

analyze, compile and record test scores by students on various standardized tests
including the District approved Benchmark examinations in math and reading ELA
areas.

In her role, Ms. Koene gathered and complied data regarding students’ scores

on the Benchmark examinations. During the course of examining the fourth-grade
test scores for students in respondent’s classroom, Ms. Koene made findings that the
answer sheets reflected an inordinate number of erasure marks. And she noted that
many test books from respondent’s students showed circles around numerals to
questions. Ms. Koene made a comparison between the answer sheet erasure marks
and the circled test questions. Ms. Koene determined that some form of irregular or
unacceptable activity was associated with the Benchmark examinations given to
students in respondent’s classroom

However, Ms. Koene’s findings and determinations do not establish that

respondent engaged in prompting students to cheat on Benchmark examination, or
that respondent exhibited dishonesty in performing duties as a teacher.

LUIS CARRILLO

41. Mr. Luis Carrillo (Principal Carrillo) has been the Rod Kelley
Elementary School principal for 16 years. He has been a District employee for over
30 years.

Rod Kelley Elementary School is a kindergarten through fifth-grade school,

which has a total enrollment of 762 students.

42.

Principal Carrillo functioned as respondent’s immediate supervisor

during the nearly three-year period during which respondent worked at Rod Kelley
Elementary School.

43.

Principal Carrillo presented at the hearing the District’s Governing

Board’s policy regarding student conduct as contained in Board Policy NO. 5131 as
supplemented by Board Policy NO. 5131.9.

Under the titles “Students” and “Conduct,” the preamble states, “The
Governing Board believes that all students have the right to be educated in a positive
learning environment free from disruptions. Students shall be expected to exhibit
appropriate conduct that does not infringe upon the rights of others . . . .” The second
paragraph further states, “Conduct is considered appropriate when students are
diligent in study . . . .” The third paragraph under “Conduct” regarding students sets
out, “Prohibited student conduct includes . . . .” Then under that sentence, 11
numbered proscribed activities follow, including number 7, which reads, “Plagiarism

18

or dishonesty in school work or on tests.” Number 7 under the prohibits acts of
conduct makes reference to Board Policy NO. 5131.9-Academic Honesty;
NO. 6162.54-Test Integrity/Test Preparation; and NO. 61.62.6-Use of Copyrighted
Materials.

Following the list of 11 prohibited forms of student conduct, Board Policy NO.

5131 sets out,

Employees are expected to provide appropriate
supervision to enforce standards of conduct and,
if [employees] observe or receive a report of a
violation of these standard, to immediately
intervene or call for assistance. If an employee
believes a matter had not been resolved, he/she
shall refer the matter to his/her supervisor or
administrator for further investigation.

Mr. Carrillo also produced Board Policy NO. 5131.9. That policy directive
states, “The Governing Board believes that academic honesty and personal integrity
are fundamental components of a student’s education and character development.
The Board expects that students will not cheat, lie, plagiarize or commit other acts of
academic dishonesty.”

Also, Board Policy NO. 5131.0 sets out, “Students, parents/guardians, staff

and administrators shall be responsible for creating and maintaining a positive school
climate that encourages honesty. Students found to have committed an act of
academic dishonesty shall be subject to district and school-site discipline rules.”

44.

Complainant offered no evidence regarding a determination of cheating

by students. No admission was uttered at the hearing by a student as an
acknowledged by a pupil regarding such individual’s act of cheating. And no
disciplinary action was leveled upon a student for violation of the District’s student
code insofar as violating the prohibition against academic dishonesty.

Allegations regarding Respondent’s Role in Student Cheating

45.

Principal Carrillo had no personal knowledge pertaining to any

observation by him that respondent engaged in prompting, assisting or directing
fourth-grade students to cheat on any form of test.

46.

Principal Carrillo made certain notes regarding information purportedly

told to him by fourth-grade students regarding circles, erasure marks and techniques
used during the course of the administration of Benchmark tests. However, the notes
made by Principal Carrillo regarding the out-of-hearing statements by students are
neither reliable nor trustworthy. The notes do not fall with any recognizable

19

exception to the hearsay rule; hence, use of such notes violates respondent’s right of
cross-examine the students. Principal Carrillo’s notes were not made at or near the
time of the students’ examination taking. (The reading benchmark test ended on each
of the two-day examination process no later than 10:55 a.m. However, his earliest
note with pupil H.V., (who only took the Benchmark math test with respondent), was
made at 1:40 p.m. on January 20, 2011. And Principal Carrillo’s notes regarding his
interview of students, who took the ELA reading Benchmark examination, occurred
on some time during the afternoon of January 21, 2011.)

And Principle Carrillo’s notes regarding the supposed recorded comments
from fourth-grade students are internally inconsistent2 and are not sufficiently exact to
establish respondent’s wrongdoing.

47.

Complainant’s theory of the prosecutorial case against respondent has
as its foundation the notion that respondent encouraged fourth-grade student cheating
by her placement of circles around numerals to Benchmark examination questions
that the subject teacher perceived that a student had initially and independently gotten
wrong. That theory proceeds to the idea that the student, having received
impermissible assistance from respondent, then had an opportunity, which other
fourth-grade teachers’ students did not have, to take a second chance at getting a
correct answer. However, the inexact notes by Principal Carrillo reflect the student
made very different reports regarding respondent’s alleged acts during the
administration of Benchmark examinations.

48.

On cross-examination, Principal Carrillo acknowledged that a review of

Benchmark examination booklets showed that many numerals were circled for
questions where had changed an initially correct response to a wrong answer.

Respondent further demonstrated that one student, who was in respondent’s
reading class, had submitted a reading ELA Benchmark test booklet that showed no
circles around numerals preceding test questions. That student-A.M.-only filled in 14
responses out of 35 questions on the test (bubble) answer sheet. And student A.M.

2 As to the inconsistencies among the principal’s notes of supposed

statements by 10-year old children, one student-H.V.-was recorded as saying:
“[Respondent] went to [the girl’s] desk [and] told her which was wrong, and [H.V.]
had to correct it” as well as on that “10 problems –were wrong. [Respondent]told her
to circle number (sic) that were wrong.” Another student-A.L.-was recorded by
Principal Carrillo as saying: “[respondent] told her, she is checking them and
[respondent] circled the answers for her. There were a lot that were wrong. Told her
to go back [and] check them again.” And as a further example, another student was
supposedly recorded on January 21, 2011, to have said to Principal Carrillo,
[respondent] “starts to solve the problems with him. She helped with about [three]
questions. She told him to circle some of the problems because they were wrong.”
(Emphasis added.)

20

got only four correct answers for a score of 11.4 percent on the reading benchmark
test.

49.

Principal Carrillo acknowledged at the hearing of this matter that no

award was bestowed upon any student who performed well on Benchmark
examinations. And Principal Carrillo noted that no bonus, prize or special recognition
was given to a teacher whose students performed well on the Benchmark tests.

Further Principal Carrillo could not cite any motivation or incentive for

respondent to permit, assist or encourage her students to “cheat” on the Benchmark
examinations.

50.

Regarding Board Policy No. 5131 that pertains to student conduct
insofar as student dishonesty in school work and consequence for cheating by a
student, Principal Carrillo offered no evidence that any student ever made an
admission of being involved in cheating, and no discipline was ever personally
directed against a student for alleged cheating.

Late Report Cards and Respondent’s False Denials

51.

Principal Carrillo offered extensive testimonial evidence regarding

respondent’s neglect to timely issue report cards to her fourth-grade students during
early February 2011. Principal Carrillo offered credible testimony regarding
respondent’s false denials to inquiries made by the administrator. But the evidence
from Principal Carrillo did not establish respondent as having a character for
dishonesty so as to warrant dismissal.

52.

On August 19, 2010, the Rod Kelley Elementary School’s

ELD/Literacy and Intervention Facilitator sent to all teachers a document titled
“Formative Assessment and Parent Reporting Schedule.” That document prescribed
February 2, 2011, as the date for issuing report cards to students in the first through
fifth grades.

On February 3, 2011, Principal Carrillo learned that some students in

respondent’s class had not received second-quarter report cards. On that date,
Principal Carrillo dispatched respondent an email reading, “Did each of your students
receive and take their report cards home yesterday? I heard that some students had
not received them yet? Please explain.”

On February 4, 2011, respondent sent Principal Carrillo an email response

stating, “Yes, they did. Sorry you misheard.” Respondent’s email reply was a false
denial3 and not true.

3

“ ‘Falsely denying’ refers to a separate moral category, which involves both

lying and non-lying deception that occurs in the context of a person's falsely denying

21

On February 4, 2011, after receiving the email from respondent, Principal

Carrillo interviewed students in respondent’s class and he concluded that only three
students had received report cards by February 2, 2011. He also calculated that seven
students had received report cards by February 3, 2011, and that three students
received report cards on February 4, 2011. Principal Carrillo determined that 11
students had not received report cards by the time of respondent’s email reply and the
commencement of his inquiry about the report cards.

On February 7, 2011, Principal Carrillo asked respondent to produce the report
cards. Respondent delivered to the administrator 13 report cards, and she conveyed to
Mr. Carrillo that the balance of the report cards “were at home.” Mr. Carrillo
understood respondent to say that every student in her charge had received report
cards by February 3, 2011.

53.

At the hearing of this matter, the district offered no corroborating

documentary evidence or independent evidence of a credible, competent nature to
refute respondent’s pronounced declaration at the hearing that by February 7 or
February 8, 2011, all report cards were issued by her to students, except for students
whose parents she sought to engage in a teacher-parent conference regarding the
students’ progress.

54.

Although on February 10, 2011, Principal Carrillo learned from about
seven students that each had not received a report card in hand, complainant offered
no evidence that the seven students were not those students whose parents were
scheduled to engage in a parent-teacher conference with respondent.

55.

On February 10, 2011, Principal Carrillo met with respondent regarding
her failure to timely dispatch report cards. Respondent made an admission during the
meeting that all students assigned to her class had not timely received report cards by
February 2, 2011.

But Respondent noted that she wished to conduct parent-teacher conferences

with parents of some of the students who had not timely received report cards.
Although Mr. Carrillo later telephoned some of the parents who relayed that they had
not heard from respondent regarding the scheduling of a conference, the administrator
did not offer testimonial evidence regarding his understanding of respondent’s
scheduling plan or the proportion of parents who stated that they had received calls

some prior accusation of wrongdoing.” (Green, Lying, Misleading, and Falsely
Denying: How Moral Concepts Inform the Law of Perjury, Fraud, and False
Statements (November 2001) 53 Hastings L. J. 157, 170)

22

from respondent. And no evidence was produced that established that respondent did
not conduct parent-teacher conference’s with parents of children who were not timely
issued report cards in early February 2011.

56.

The District did not establish that an objective assessment of the

circumstances revolving around respondent from January 2011 through early
February 2011 would have determined respondent’s emotional condition not to have
reached being “overwhelmed” so as to affect the subject teacher’s delay in timely
preparing and issuing report cards. By the time of issuing report cards (February 2,
2011), respondent’s relationship with the team of fourth-grade teachers had been
strained by a surprise confrontation in a meeting with three co-workers, who
expressed that she showed a lack of full-engagement in the directives set by the senior
fourth-grade teacher. And that she sensed that pressure was being exerted by
Principal Carrillo with regard to her various job functions.

57.

Under the circumstances, respondent’s false denial regarding her

neglect in timely issuing report cards, and her other uncourageous behavior in
meeting the scrutiny of the principal, do not show that she had a defect in character
that evidences a lack of integrity or a disposition for dishonesty.

Respondent’s Case-in-Chief

SCOTT WHITE

respondent.

58. Mr. Scott White offered credible and persuasive evidence on behalf of

Mr. White was the owner of Sylvan Learning Center in Salinas, California

from 2000 until 2009. During his ownership of that company, Mr. White employed
respondent from 2004 until approximately 2008.

Mr. White was believable when he asserted at the hearing that respondent was
very good instructor at Sylvan Learning Center. In the view of Mr. White, respondent
demonstrated that she was a person of integrity in performing services as an educator,
who was employed by that profit-oriented educational company. And Mr. White
observed that respondent’s teaching skills were not only of a high standard, but
students very much liked her as a person.

Mr. White noted that although a Sylvan Learning Center teacher may have an
opportunity to create inflated, fabricated or distorted assessment test of students, but
Mr. White found respondent’s dedication to the teaching profession did not lend to
her engaging in acts to encourage or assist students to cheat on tests.

The evidence offered by Mr. White was not refuted as no cross-examination

was pursued by complainant.

23

RESPONDENT AMANDA GORI

59.

Respondent spent her youth in Moorpark, California.

In 1999, respondent earned a bachelor’s degree from California State
University, Northridge. In 2002, Pepperdine University awarded a Master’s Degree
to respondent.

The Commission on Teacher Credentials has issued respondent as Multiple

Subject Teaching Credential-Professional Clear as well as a Supplement
Authorization in Science.

Respondent’s first teaching position for a public school district was with the

Newhall School District during the 2001-2002 school year. She worked for two other
Southern California school districts. In the 2004-2005 school year, respondent
worked for the Salinas Unified School District.

When the Gilroy Unified School District hired respondent for the 2005-2006
school year, she began teaching a “first/second-grades combo” class at Antonio Del
Buono Elementary School. For the three years that she worked at Antonio Del Buono
Elementary School, respondent taught no grade higher than the second grade.

For the 2008-2009 school year, the District reassigned respondent to teach at

Rod Kelley Elementary where she taught second-grade students. During the next
year, Principal Carrillo assigned respondent to teach third-grade classes, which was a
transition that she found difficult. Then for the 2010-2011 school year, Principal
Carrillo tasked respondent into the fourth-grade classes, which was again a transition
of teaching that she found very challenging.

60.

Respondent was persuasive regarding the strained and awkward

relationship that she has experienced with Principal Carrillo from, at least, her second
year at Rod Kelley Elementary School. (Principal Carrillo acknowledged at the
hearing that there was a point in time when respondent showed that “she was nervous
around” him.)

First she perceived that the principal neglected to hear her concerns at the end
of the 2009-2010 school year when respondent questioned her prospective assignment
change in two years, namely from the second grade to the third grade, and then from
the third grade to the fourth grade.

At the time of respondent’s reassignment from a third-grade teaching
assignment to a fourth-grade teaching assignment, the principal made disparaging
comments regarding respondent’s slowness in cleaning out her personally purchased
supplies and equipment from the third-grade class. And at the time, in referring to the

24

preceding year when she changed from a second grade class to a third grade class, the
principal told respondent that she had “a history” of procrastinating classroom
preparation for the beginning of the school year.

There was another occurrence in mid-June 2009 that respondent was offended

by the principal confronting her with regard to a parent’s objection to respondent’s
clothing. Respondent took issue with the male principal approaching her in the
school’s cafeteria to engage in any form of discussion regarding her breast
dimensions and that her nipples were too conspicuous or evident through her blouse.
During that experience, respondent felt cornered and upset. Thereafter, she sought to
avoid being alone in the presence of Principal Carrillo.

On another occasion, the principal confronted respondent in a newly assigned

fourth-grade classroom with an allegation that she had “stolen” supplies from a
previously assigned third-grade school room. Respondent was shocked and aghast
that the principal accused her of stealing items including books, staplers, a tape
dispenser and clipboards. And his angry demeanor at the time was frightening and
upsetting to respondent.

On a date in December 2010, the principal yelled at respondent in a voice what

she perceived to be an “irate voice” regarding a field trip by various students. In the
presence of children, the principal angrily berated respondent about a lunch event she
had scheduled with other teachers and he repeatedly declared that respondent’s event
had not been scheduled.

In February 2011, respondent filed a complaint that focused upon Principal

Carrillo on allegations of harassment that created a hostile work environment for her.

61.

Near the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, respondent sustained

injuries in an automobile collision. Her treating physician determined her to be
unable to work and respondent was placed on medical leave from September 15,
2010, until Monday, October 4, 2010. (Despite her physical impairment, respondent
attended a fourth-grade teachers’ meeting on September 30, 2010, in order to
demonstrate her support for the teaching team.) On her return to the school on
October 4, 2010, respondent was disappointed with the apparent lack of sympathy
from the fellow fourth-grade teachers regarding her injuries and emotional trauma she
experienced in the freeway collision that “totaled” her automobile and left her with
physical pain.

62.

Respondent’s account was credible and persuasive regarding her

involvement with the administration of Benchmark tests to fourth-grade students
during the 2010-2011 school year.

25

MATH BENCHMARK TESTS

a.

b.

homeroom students on two dates during the subject school year.

Respondent administered the math Benchmark tests to her

As to the math Benchmark examination, which was given on

December 15, 2010, respondent established that the average scores for her homeroom
students did not exceed the scores of students assigned to the homeroom classes for
the other three fourth-grade teachers.

c.

Respondent was persuasive at the hearing through her testimony

that compellingly countered the District’s evidence regarding the extent of erasure
marks made by her students. Respondent showed that a review of answer sheets by
her students for the math Benchmark exam reflected a greater proportion of erasure
marks as compared to the answer sheets to the multiple-choice questions on math
Benchmark examinations for students with other fourth-grade teachers. From the
commencement of the school year, respondent had instructed her students that for any
examination that a test taker could recalculate or reread a question, and then change a
response found to be in error. She had further instructed students that changing a
response believed to be in error was an acceptable test-taking technique before the
student submitted the examination answer document. Respondent recalled having
observed certain students actually erase nearly all-initial responses on an answer sheet
during the course of a Benchmark examination.

d.

Respondent’s homeroom students did not generate

extraordinarily high scores4 on the math Benchmark test that was given on December
15, 2010. While respondent’s students generated an average score of 62.5 percent,
the scores for the other teachers’ students averaged: 65.8 percent for Ms. Mesa’s
class, 68.7 percent for Ms. Oliveira’s class; and 70.8 percent for Ms Saldana’s class.

4 On the Math Benchmark test, dated December 15, 2010, among students in

respondent’s homeroom class, there were three students with a high score of 89.3
percent. One student in respondent’s homeroom class has a low score of 17.9
percent. And other students had low scores of 53.6 percent, 35.7 percent, 26.6
percent, 28.6 percent, 32.1 percent, and other low scores. Yet, in the homeroom of
Ms. Nancy Mesa, two students had high scores of 92.9 percent, and the lowest score
was 21.4 percent. Ms. Oliveira had two students with high scores of 96.4 percent, and
the student with the lowest score for a student was at 28.6 percent. Ms. Saldana had
one student with a high score of 96.4 percent and several students with scores in the
mid-80 to low-90 percent range. No student in Ms. Saldana’s homeroom class scored
less than 42.9 percent.

26

e.

Complainant called three child witnesses to the proceeding.

Two witnesses-A.L. and H.V.-had been in respondent’s fourth-grade homeroom and
they would have been given the math Benchmark test by respondent. On the
December 15, 2010, Benchmark test, A.L. earned a score of 67.9 percent, while H.V.
had a score of 71.4 percent. Respondent noted at the hearing that a score of 85
percent was proficient.

f.

At the hearing of this matter, by her demeanor while testifying,

her attitude toward the proceeding, and the manner of her unswerving, adamant
responses regarding her innocence to allegations that she assisted or encouraged
student cheating, respondent was credible5 that in asserting that she never assisted, or
otherwise promoted, cheating by fourth-grade student on the District’s math
benchmark test.

During the course of the time for students to take the math
Benchmark test, respondent did not circle numerals for questions on test sheets.

g.

READING BENCHMARK TESTS

h.

Respondent was compelling and credible when she asserted at
the hearing of this matter that her objective to fulfill her obligations as a teacher was
to assure that students in the fourth-grade ELA reading group actively sought to
strive. Respondent sought to assure that students performed well on tests and that
they learned lessons given to them.

i.

During a parent-teacher conference when a parent of a child

named “A.” informed respondent that the child did not seem to be progressing,
respondent agreed to work with the child during after-school hours to personally tutor
the child. In time other parents sought out respondent to provide the tutoring
sessions. Also by March 2011 when she last worked for the District, respondent had
up to 15 students in her after-hours tutoring program. Furthermore an aspect of the
after-regular hours tutoring program involved giving students strategies or techniques
regarding taking standardized examinations. And on a daily basis, respondent
provided students in her “below basic” ELA-reading group with test taking strategies.

j.

Regarding the reading ELA Benchmark examination,

respondent offered persuasive testimony. When the Benchmark test was to be given,
respondent emphasized to students that they should employ the strategies that she had
sought to instill in the students. Those strategies included a student circling a numeral
to questions that the student was not confident with the available multiple-choice
answer. Respondent had conveyed to students to reread the previously circled
question, and to eliminate the obviously erroneous answer and to proceed from the
approach to reach a correct answer.

7 Government Code section 11425.50, subdivision ( b), third sentence.

27

k.

The reading ELA Benchmark test, which consisted of 35

reading passages with questions and multiple-choice responses, was administered by
respondent to her fourth-grade students over two days during 45 minute-periods.

l.

On the first day of the Benchmark examination, no adult other

than respondent who acted as the test proctor was present.

After the first day of the test, respondent collected the test bubble (answer)
sheets and booklets and stored those items in her teacher’s desk drawers. Between
the end of the first day’s test administration and the second day’s test, respondent
neither examined particular student test responses nor tampered with the test
responses given by students.

On the second day of the Benchmark exam, respondent was surprised to

observe Principal Carrillo walk into her classroom on three or four separate
occasions. And she was disconcerted and distressed when at the end of the second
date for the reading Benchmark exam, Principal Carrillo collected the test sheets,
which was contrary to expected practice.

m.

Complainant called only one student, who had been in

respondent’s reading class, to offer testimony at the hearing of this matter. That
student was K.Q. At the hearing of this matter, respondent offered a persuasive
account of K.Q.’s participation with the reading ELA Benchmark exam. During the
course of that test, K.Q. specifically stated that she was “not sure” about particular
answers she had set out on the test page. In response, respondent bestowed the same
advice she had given to other students, namely that K.Q. should reread a question,
eliminate the obviously incorrect possible responses and provide the student’s best
answer.

n.

Some time after Principal Carrillo collected the reading

Benchmark exam from respondent’s classroom, he confronted respondent. To his
questions regarding whether she had assisted students with the reading Benchmark
test, respondent absolutely denied the implication that she had enabled cheating on
the test.

o.

At the hearing of this matter, by her demeanor while testifying

and her attitude toward the proceeding, respondent was credible that she never
assisted, or otherwise prompted cheating, by fourth-grade student on the District’s
reading ELA Benchmark examination. During the administration of the reading
Benchmark exams, respondent did not provide any student with a correct answer to a
test question.

28

Respondent’s Past Interaction with Student H.V.

63.

Respondent offered credible testimony regarding her experiences with
student H.V. on the matter of testing. During the 2007-2008 school year, respondent
was the second-grade teacher for H.V. Although H.V. attempted to “give her best,”
the child was a struggling student in reading subjects. Respondent provided H.V.
with “extra support” by devoting recess time and after-school time in tutoring the
child outside the regular classroom hours.

On reading tests that respondent administered to H.V. from September 2007

until June 1, 2008, the student scored “below basic.” Respondent has a vivid
recollection of H.V. taking the California Standards ELA on May 1, 2008. On that
date, the test was given with two students sitting together at a table. During the
course of the test, respondent observed H.V. repeatedly looking onto the answer sheet
of the neighboring student, who was known to be a highly capable student. When
respondent observed H.V. making erasures onto her sheet after she had looked onto
the other student’s examination, respondent moved H.V. to another table to sit alone
during the remaining time of the examination. H.V. received a score of “advanced”
on the California Standards ELA test.

Accelerated Reading Quizzes

64.

Respondent was persuasive regarding an account of her students taking

Accelerated Reading program quizzes. During the 2010-2011 school year, the AR
program was in its second year of use by teachers at school.

a.

As a third-grade teacher, her students read stories and then went

into the school’s computer lab to take quizzes under the AR program. There was an
occasion when respondent sought clarification from Principal Carrillo regarding the
AR program when a student asked if he could take the quiz at home. Respondent
heard the principal state that the AR program was designed to “motivate” students
and that an open-book approach to taking the quizzes was acceptable.

b.

In December 2010 or early January 2011, while students in her
class took the AR program quiz, Principal Carrillo came into the classroom to speak
with a student. After the principal exited the room, respondent queried the student on
the matter upon which the principal had approached the student. The student told
respondent that the principal had uttered to the child that she was not to take the AR
program quiz with an open book. Because respondent was surprised by the student’s
comments, respondent sent an email message to the entire fourth-grade team of
teachers. Only Ms. Saldana replied and conveyed to respondent, in essence, that
probably during the period of respondent’s temporary disability absence a policy
change had been made whereby the AR program quizzes could not be taken by
students by way of the “open book” method.

29

Other Matters

65.

Respondent exerted efforts beyond the services expected of a school
teacher. Because the Rod Kelley School’s library lacked certain books, respondent
used her personal library card to check out from the public library several books at a
given time for use by her students. (After her summary placement on administrative
leave, respondent was unable to collect from students three or four books, which
remain recorded by the public library as a borrowing obligation of respondent.)

66.

Respondent offered a credible explanation regarding her provision of a

weekly reading test to J. Y., who was a student in respondent’s fourth grade class.

Respondent compellingly asserted at the hearing that during a parent-teacher
meeting, J.Y.’s mother tearfully approached respondent to lament that her daughter
was struggling with taking reading tests. Respondent “reached out” to the mother and
offered to provide extracurricular study work. Over a period of time, respondent gave
the girl copies of past weekly reading passages and corresponding tests.
Respondent’s practice was to provide J.Y. with previously administered tests.

At some point in time, respondent learned that J.Y.’s reading teacher, Ms.
Oliveira was alarmed that the student had proclaimed in a classroom that she had
previously seen the test that the reading teacher was distributing in the classroom.
Although Ms. Oliveira did not personally bring to respondent’s attention the
spontaneous assertion by the student, respondent did not intend to provide her
homeroom student with a test that the reading teacher had not previously
administered. A reasonable inference may be drawn that respondent had no
motivation to gain any tangible reward by unethically giving J.Y. the weekly reading
test. Respondent’s account of making the mistake of placing the new reading test into
J.Y.’s hands amounted to a degree of a lack of due care; but, it is found that
respondent’s act did not constitute any form of aiding the student to cheat.

67.

At the hearing of this matter, respondent made an admission that on the

question of issuing a single set of report cards in early February 2011, she was not
truthful. But her conduct in February was understandable, though inappropriate. And
although she uttered false denials, which may be viewed as lying to Principal Carrillo,
her conduct did not constitute dishonesty of such an egregious extent so as to warrant
employment termination.

Respondent did, in fact, send Principal Carrillo a false response to the
principal’s email, dated February 3, 2011, that asked whether “each” of her assigned
students been issued report cards. And she again, over a five to seven day period
expressed that the report cards either had been passed out to students for delivery to
their respective residence or that respondent had attempted to make telephonic contact
with parents for a teacher-parent conference before transmission of report cards.

30

On February 10, 2010, which was one week after the initial inquiry by
Principal Carrillo about report cards, respondent told the principal that she had not
completed the report cards because she had been “overwhelmed.” At the hearing of
this matter, respondent compellingly described that in late January 2011 her three
fellow fourth-grade teachers had surprised her, in a meeting with the school principal
and others, with a list of topics that suggested that she had not performed all the
functions expected of her as the most junior fourth grade teacher. (The topics ranged
from respondent not spending adequate time monitoring all students during recesses
to respondent’s neglect in making duplicate copies of teaching materials). Also in
January 2011 respondent perceived that Principal Carrillo had her singled out for
scrutiny on an array of matters to such a degree that she deemed the principal’s acts to
be harassment. And by early February 2011, respondent had become gravely
unsettled by Principal Carrillo’s unannounced entry into her classroom, his
surreptitious questioning of students in respondent’s classroom and the principal
“taking notes” while in her classroom. Also during the period of being a fourth-grade
teacher through January 2011, respondent could not recall that the school principal
had extended to her any “positive re-enforcement” for the good work that she had
volunteered to perform on behalf of her students. And by February 4, 2011, when she
had been obligated to issue reports cards, respondent had received the charge by
Principal Carrillo that she had wrongfully assisting students with Benchmark the
examinations.

Over the three-year period at Rod Kelly Elementary School before February

2011, respondent had never failed to timely issue report cards.

Ultimate Factual Findings

I. FIRST CAUSE FOR TERMINATION: ALLEGATION REGARDING

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH

A. ALLEGATIONS OF CHEATING

68.

During the District’s Benchmark examination in January 2011,

respondent did not assist or encourage students in her class to cheat on the
examination.

69.

Respondent did not engage in acts so as to aid students to cheat on the

first District Benchmark examination administered in October 2010. Nor did she
engage in conduct that constituted assisting or encouraging students to cheat on other
examination during the school year.

70.

During the 2010-2011 school year, respondent did not allow students to

cheat on Accelerated Reading quizzes. Although respondent allowed students to use
the open-book method to take those quizzes, her acts arose out of negligence, that is a
breach of a standard of due care expected of a fourth grade teacher. Respondent had

31

not gained knowledge of the District policy against open book use for AR quizzes
before a written publisher’s guideline was issued on January 26, 2011.

71.

Respondent did not deliberately give a student, J.Y, advance access to a

weekly reading test so that the child could cheat. Respondent’s acts arose out of
negligence or inattentiveness, rather than out of a disposition for dishonesty.

B. ALLEGATION OF DISHONESTY

72.

Respondent did not engage in dishonesty with regard to her consistent

denials of accusations made by Principal Carrillo that respondent aided or encouraged
her classes of students so that those students could cheat on various examinations and
quizzes.

73.

Respondent acknowledges that she was not truthful when she told
Principal Carrillo over span of one week that she had presented her students with
reports cards. Her false denials to Principal Carrillo over the period between
February 3, and February 10, 2011, however, did not constitute dishonesty so as to
warrant dismissal.

II.

SECOND CAUSE FOR TERMINATION: ALLEGATION REGARDING
DISHONESTY

74.

Respondent did not engage in dishonesty regarding her work as a

proctor for Benchmark examinations. She did not knowingly encourage or assist
students in her class to cheat on assessment tests.

75.

Respondent’s conduct did not manifest dishonesty when she uttered to
Principal Carrillo false denials, which may be viewed as lies, regarding her neglect to
timely dispatch report cards to students.

III. Third Cause for Termination: Allegation regarding

Refusal to Obey District Regulations

76.

Because she did not assist or encourage students to cheat on

examinations or quizzes, respondent did not demonstrate persistent and willful refusal
to obey reasonable regulations prescribed by the Governing Board. Respondent’s acts
did not cause any person to violate Board Policy number 5131 (Prohibition regarding
Student Plagiarism or Dishonesty on Tests) or Board Policy number 5131.9
(Academic Honesty)

32

IV. FOURTH CAUSE FOR TERMINATION: ALLEGATION REGARDING
IMMORAL CONDUCT

77. With regard to the matters developed at the hearing of this matter,

Respondent’s acts and omissions did not manifest immoral conduct.

Dispositive Finding

78.

It would not be in the public interest to terminate respondent Amanda

Gori’s employment as a certificated teacher of the Gilroy Unified School District.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION

1.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to

Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 5.

Burden and Standard of Proof

2.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter because it is seeking
to dismiss respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The standard of
proof is preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1040.) A party required to prove a
matter by a preponderance of the evidence need prove only that it is more likely to be
true than not true. Also a preponderance of the evidence means that the evidence on
one side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence on the other side,
not necessarily in the number of witnesses or quantity, but in the effect of the
evidence on those to whom it is addressed. In order words, the term refers to
“evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.” (People ex rel.
Brown v. Tri-Union Seafood, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Due Process under the Education Code in the Matter of Teacher Dismissal Actions

3.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after an
administrative adjudication hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

Hearings to determine if permanent public school teachers should be dismissed

are held before a Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) - a three-
member administrative tribunal consisting of one credentialed teacher chosen by the
school board, a second credentialed teacher chosen by the teacher facing dismissal,
and an administrative law judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings who serves
as chairperson and a voting member of the commission and who is responsible for
assuring that the legal rights of the parties are protected at the hearing under
Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b). The Commission’s decision is
deemed to be the final decision of the district’s governing board under Education

33

Code section 44944, subdivision (c). (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.) The Commission has broad discretion to
determine the issues before it, and whether dismissal6 is the appropriate sanction.

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may

only vote for or against it. The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking
dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944,
subds. (c)(1)-(3); and, (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California supra 20
Cal.4th at p. 343.).)

Statutory Grounds for Dismissal

4.

Complainant’s Accusation in this matter specifies four grounds for

respondent’s dismissal as a District certificated employee. Those grounds are
expressed at Education Code section 44932, which provides in pertinent part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be dismissed except

6 The Commission had considered that respondent’s acts and omissions may

have justified suspension due to the false denials that she told to the principal
regarding the timely issuance of report cards. But, suspension without pay for a
specific, but limited, period of time is not available in this matter. Education Code
section 44933, subdivision (c), does set out that “the decision of the Commission on
Professional Competence shall be made by a majority vote, and the commission shall
prepare a written decision, containing . . . a disposition which shall be solely: (1) That
the employee should be dismissed; (2) That the employee should be suspended for a
specific period of time without pay; (3) That the employee should not be dismissed or
suspend.” But two paragraphs after the foregoing the same Code section states, “The
imposition of suspension pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be available only in a
suspension proceeding authorized pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44932 or
Section 44933.” Subdivision (b) of Code section 44932, sets out, in pertinent part:
“The governing board of a school district may suspend without pay for a specific
period of time on grounds of unprofessional conduct a permanent certificated
employee . . . .” And Code section 44934 states, in part: “Suspension proceedings
may be initiated . . . only if the governing board has not adopted a collective
bargaining agreement . . . .” (Emphasis added.)

In addition, Education Code section 44038 establishes that “a governing board
of a school district shall not act upon any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at
least 45 calendar days prior to the date of the filing” the affected teacher is given
written notice of alleged unprofessional conduct and the teacher had an “opportunity
to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge.” And before a
board may issue charges on allegations of “unsatisfactory performance,” the targeted
teacher must be given 90 calendar days as “an opportunity to correct his or her faults
and overcome the grounds for the charge.”

34

for one or more of the following causes:

(1)

Immoral or unprofessional conduct.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(3) Dishonesty.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(5) Evident unfitness for service. . . .

(7) Persistent violation or refusal to obey the
school laws of the state or reasonable regulations
prescribed for the government of the public
schools by the State Board of Education or by the
governing board of the school district employing
him or her.

Credibility Matters

5. A witness may be contradicted by the facts he states as completely as by

direct adverse testimony, and there may be so many omissions in his account of a
particular transaction or of his own conduct as to discredit his whole story. (La Jolla
Casa de Manana v. Hopkins (1950) 98 Cal.App.2d 339, 346; Bassett Unified School
Dist. v. Commission On Professional Competence (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 1444,
1451.)

It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness
and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (Stevens
v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also “reject part
of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the
accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other
witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.” (Id., at 67-68,
quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.) Further, the fact
finder may reject the testimony of a witness, even an expert, although not
contradicted. (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon ( 1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.) And,
the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence,” including
a single expert witness. (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance (1986) 189
Cal.App.3d 1040 at 1052.)

The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to that which is
deemed untrustworthy. That is, disbelief does not create affirmative evidence to the

35

contrary of that which is discarded. That the trier of fact may disbelieve the
testimony of a witness who testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself
furnish any evidence in support of the affirmative of that issue, and does not warrant a
finding in the affirmative thereof unless there is other evidence in the case to support
such affirmative. (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ State License Bd. (1956) 143
Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. Central California Traction Co. 191
Cal. 295, 304.)

This is a controversy where the aforecited principles regarding the resolution

of credulity questions are of critical importance.

Evidence of a Hearsay Nature

6.

Complainant’s prosecution of this matter turns upon several statements

gathered by Principal Carrillo. Most of those statements were purportedly made by
fourth-grade students who were not called to provide testimony and thus they were
not subject to cross-examination. And there were handwritten notes made by
Principal Carrillo regarding the recordation of supposed statements given by those
mostly 10-year old students, the District seeks to use the principal’s hand written
notes, which supposedly recorded statements by students, in support of the case
against respondent.

Government Code section 11513, subdivision (c), addresses the admissibility
of evidence generally in administrative hearings. It states: “The hearing need not be
conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses, except as
hereinafter provided. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of
evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of the evidence over objection in civil actions.”
And Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), sets forth, “Hearsay evidence
may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but shall
not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over
objection in civil actions.” (Emphasis added.)

Hearsay evidence is “evidence of a statement that was made other than by a

witness while testifying at the hearing and that is offered to prove the truth of the
matter stated.” (Evid. Code, § 1200.) Exceptions to the hearsay rule are permitted
because, through the course of practical application, an out-of-court statement is
deemed not to be inadmissible at hearing by reason of a hearsay exception because
the circumstances or manner of the making the excepted assertion have been shown to
be trustworthy and reliable.

Evidence Code section 1280 makes admissible a writing that records an act,
condition, or event if: “[t]he writing was made by and within the scope of duty of a
public employee; [¶] (b) [t]he writing was made at or near the time of the act,

36

condition, or event; and [¶] (c) [t]he sources of information and method and time of
preparation were such as to indicate its trustworthiness.”

In this matter, the source of much of the offered hearsay statements, that is

information regarding supposed acts of respondent’s aiding student cheating, comes
from purported statements by 10-year-old children. And the method of preparation of
a record of the statements entailed a school principal, who cannot necessarily be
deemed to have been an objective, unbiased observer. The principal did not have a
duty, such as a police officer, to accurately record statements by witnesses to an
incident under investigation. By his appearance at the hearing and his account of his
tenure as a principle, Principal Carrillo exudes an authoritarian aura. A reasonable
inference may be drawn that the principal’s confrontation of students at the time of
the children’s stress in taking a standardized test was not met with a forthright
account of what the students knew to be true regarding respondent’s testing
techniques and instruction on strategies to take examinations. There is no evidence
regarding whether the principal asked neutral, open-ended questions or whether his
questions suggested a closed-end, accusatorial tone. And the time of preparation
relative to when words were spoken by the students is unknown. Complainant could
not show that Principal Carrillo’s handwritten notes were prepared in such a manner
as to assure the trustworthiness of the notes containing statements of 10-year old,
fourth grade students. Hence the notes by Principal Carrillo regarding the statements
of the students who took the reading ELA Benchmark examination on January 21,
2011, cannot be deemed to meet the requirement for trustworthiness and reliable.
Thus those notes of supposed students’ statements must be viewed as inadmissible
hearsay. And no factual finding may be made with regard to those handwritten notes.

Evident Unfitness for Service - First Cause for Dismissal

7.

“Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932,

subdivision (a)(5), means not fit or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of a
temperamental defect or inadequacy. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)
Evident unfitness for services requires that unfitness be attributable to a defect in
temperament that “connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remedial upon
receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing
school district.” (Id. at 1444.)

FITNESS TO TEACH-THE NEXUS REQUIREMENT: The applicable standard or

determinative test in teacher discharge cases is whether the person is fit to teach.
“Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact. (Board of Education v. Commission
on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 560-561.)

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, held that where

certain charges are raised in teacher discharge cases, the applicable standard is
whether the person is fit to teach. Terms such as “evident unfitness to teach” have

37

been held to be too vague, standing alone, and must be applied to a specific
occupation and given context by reference to fitness for the performance of the
occupation. The California Supreme Court delineated the following factors that
should be considered in determining fitness: (1) Likelihood of recurrence of the
questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teacher-student relationships; (5)
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of
conduct. (Bassett Unified School Dist. v. Commission On Professional Competence
(1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 1444, 1453 .) The Morrison factors must be applied in cases
involving allegations of evident unfitness to teach (Woodland Joint Unified School
District v. Commission on Professional Competence supra 2 Cal.App.4th 1429,
1445), and in cases involving allegations of dishonesty. (Bassett Unified School Dist.
v. Commission On Professional Competence (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 1444, 1453.)

The Accusation in this controversy alleges that respondent’s supposed evident

unfitness to teach arises out of two areas, namely “cheating on student tests” and
“dishonesty when dealing with administrators.”

A.

CHEATING ON STUDENT TESTS

The crime of obtaining property by false pretenses was unknown in the early
common law so that particular offense was restricted to the offense of “common law
cheating.” The offence of cheating arose out of a fraud perpetrated by means of a
false token or symbol, such as selling goods by false weights or measures, or other
like act or thing of a character calculated to deceive and defraud the individual or the
public to their pecuniary injury and against which ordinary prudence could not guard.
(18A Cal. Juris. 3d., Criminal Law-Crimes Against Property, Theft by False
Pretenses, Cheating, § 165 )

The modern use of the wrongful conduct of “cheating” has come to include

immoral acts of a student’s deceit, subterfuge or illicit gamesmanship to generate an
ill-gotten higher score on an examination than the student could not earn without
cheating. Student cheating in a school setting is universally seen as a serious act of
dishonesty and immorality. But cheating as known with regard to misconduct
continues to turn upon an individual’s act in committing “fraud” for personal gain.
And student cheating when detected by school authorities generally results in serious
consequences upon the student cheater.

In this matter no evidence showed that any of the students who were identified

as cheating on Benchmark examinations or reading assessment quizzes suffered any
form of disciplinary action by way of suspension, exclusion, receiving a failing grade
on a report card, or sending a report of the cheating to a student’s parents. And no
evidence showed that respondent fostered in the mind of any student a belief that the
student should commit a fraud or deceitful act, that is cheating, when taking the
District’s Benchmark examination or the AR quizzes.

38

Accordingly, if the District made no determination for the imposition of a

sanction upon a cheating student, the record is weak relative to the District’s theory
that respondent assisted or encouraged student cheating.

B.

LYING TO ADMINISTRATORS AS DISHONESTY SO AS TO SHOW
EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH

The Accusation seeks respondent’s dismissal on grounds of evident unfitness

to teach by reason of alleged lying to the school principal on the matter of the
untimely issuing of report cards to students.

As set out in Factual Findings 51 and 52, respondent’s words to Principal
Carrillo constituted acts of “falsely denying.” That concept is best illustrated with the
following:

Most people would agree that it is a virtue to accept
responsibility for one’s wrongdoing. We teach our children that
it is better to admit to a wrongful act than to cover it up by
lying; indeed, one of our great national myths is that of George
Washington and the cherry tree. . . .

[But, the] fact is that people often do fail to accept responsibility
for their wrongful acts. Sometimes they do so by remaining
silent. Other times they do so by falsely denying the
accusations that are made against them or by engaging in acts of
deception to avoid detection. Imagine that B asks A about some
wrongdoing in which A has engaged, and A responds with a
false denial. How should we judge A's conduct? The answer is
not likely to be simple: it will depend on a wide range of
complex factors, including the circumstances of A's
wrongdoing, the nature of the relationship between A and B, the
form of A's denial, the consequences of his denial, and, perhaps,
the basis for B's suspicion.

[¶] . . . [¶]

The basis for this moral sentiment is an implicit recognition of
the right to self-preservation--a right not to cooperate with those
who would seek to bring adverse consequences against
oneself. [One legal scholar] has referred to [false denial] as ‘a
basic right to avoid very destructive consequences to [one’s self]
even if submission would serve the welfare of others.’
Although often associated with a narrow constitutional right ‘of
silence,’ the right of self-preservation is better understood as

39

linked to a broader right against self-incrimination. That the
right to self-preservation might include a right to falsely deny
seems particularly plausible in cases in which remaining silent
in the face of accusatory questioning would be tantamount to
admitting guilt. . . .

[Hence certain legal scholars] tend to view the false denial of
accusations as morally distinct from other kinds of unjustified
deception, and to offer an account of why that might be.
(Green, Lying, Misleading, and Falsely Denying: How Moral
Concepts Inform the Law of Perjury, Fraud, and False
Statements (November 2001) 53 Hastings L. J. 157, 171-172)

Under the circumstances as set out in the factual findings, respondent’s false

denials to Principal Carrillo did not constitute dishonesty.

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for evident unfitness for service,

pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), for the reasons set forth in Factual
Findings 68 through 73.

Dishonesty as a Cause of Dismissal of a Certificated Employee-School Teacher

8.

“Dishonesty” may very well be something less than criminality. The

term dishonesty seems to be incapable of exact definition or precise limitation
because, among other things, of the infinite variety of circumstances which affect the
relations and affairs of mankind in our society. (Wayne v. Bureau of Private
Investigators and Adjusters (1962) 201 Cal.App.2d 427, 436.)

“ ‘Dishonest’ is defined in Webster's New International
Dictionary, Second Edition, as “characterized by fraud;
indicating a lack of probity; knavish; fraudulent; unjust’ or
‘disposed to cheat or defraud.’ In Black's Law Dictionary, Fourth
Edition, the word ‘fraud’ is described as consisting ‘of some
deceitful practice or willful device, resorted to with intent to
deprive another of his right or in some manner to do him an
injury’ or, more generically, as ‘embracing all multifarious
means which human ingenuity can devise, and which are resorted
to by one individual to get advantage over another by false
suggestions or by suppression of truth, and includes all surprise,
trick, cunning, dissembling, and any unfair way by which another
is cheated.’ Although perhaps not synonymous terms, ‘fraud’
and ‘dishonest’, as generally used, have similar meanings.
Implicit in each is the concept of ‘bad faith’ or an intent to
accomplish some wrongdoing. The district court specifically
instructed the jury that if the acts or omissions which the

40

appellant claimed were dishonest or fraudulent were the result of
‘good faith’ transactions, the appellant had not sustained its
burden of proof. We feel that the instructions given sufficiently
apprised the jury of the state of mind necessary to characterize an
act as dishonest or fraudulent, as distinguished from a mere
exercise of poor judgment or negligence, and can see no way in
which appellant could have been prejudiced by them. (Sherwood
& Roberts-Kennewick, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co.
(C.A. Wash., 1963) 322 F.2d 70, 74 -75)

Within the teacher dismissal context, the California Supreme Court observed

that, “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest fib to the most flagrant lie. Not
every impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, and not every
falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” (Fontana Unified
School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, at footnote 12.)

And all lies7 do not constitute dishonesty. Here respondent’s lies or false

denying were not shown to come within a grave pattern so as to reflect a character
defect on her part.

Cause does not exist for to dismiss respondent’s employment termination
because of dishonesty, pursuant to Code sections 44932, subdivision (3), by reason of
the matters set forth in Factual Findings 74 and 75.

Refusal to Obey School Rules

9.

Under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), the violation of school rules

must be persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.”
(Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28

7 “There is even a taxonomy for types of lies. The venal lie is a serious

misrepresentation without any redeeming properties (I have never had sex with that
woman). The white/social lie is a relatively innocuous misrepresentation without
serious implication where the liar views truth as potentially disadvantageous to the
hearer (We couldn't make it because we couldn't find a baby sitter). The fib is a non-
serious, small but selfishly motivated misrepresentation (We have never had any
flooding in the basement). The compassionate lie is a misrepresentation of a serious
state of affairs to spare the hearer. (Even though you have a serious illness, there is a
good chance for a high quality of life for quite a while). The justified lie involves a
situation where consequences of telling the truth are serious and most people would
agree that the goal justifies the deception (Let the hostages go and you will be treated
well).” (Fraser, The Neutral as Lie Detector: You Can’t Judge Participants by Their
Demeanor, (2004) 4 Pepperdine Disp. Resol. L. J., 259, 260.)

41

Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.) Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved
over a period of time are generally not considered persistent. (Bourland v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) Cause for
discipline may be based on the violation of school rules as well as district-wide
polices. (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-1181.)

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for persistent violation of or refusal

to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the
government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing
board of the school district employing her, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision
(a)(7), for the reasons set forth in Factual Finding 76.

Immoral conduct - Fourth Cause for Dismissal

10. “Immoral conduct,” according to Code sections 44932, subdivision

(a)(1), and 449398, has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of
the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it
can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Board of Education
of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808,
811; Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, Inc. (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)

Immoral conduct cannot be the basis for removal of a teacher unless that
conduct indicates that the teacher is unfit to teach under the criteria established by the
California Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education supra 1 Cal.3d
214.

The published California Court of Appeal and California Supreme Court
decisions that sustain a charge of “immoral conduct” in the context of a teacher
dismissal or credential revocation action, show that the cases fall into three categories.

8 Education Code section 44939 provides, in part;

Upon the filing of written charges. . . or upon a written
statement of charges formulated by the governing board,
charging a permanent employee of the district with
immoral conduct . . . the governing board may, if it
deems such action necessary, immediately suspend the
employee from his duties and give notice to him of his
suspension, and that 30 days after service of the notice,
he will be dismissed, unless he demands a hearing.

42

Those categories may be defined as: (i) sexual harassment or public sexual9 activity
by a teacher at or near school grounds or involving students; (ii) teacher drug10 use or
possession; or (iii) theft11 of property or taking compensation through false pretenses
by a teacher, especially where a school district is involved.

The evidence at the hearing of this matter did not show that respondent’s
alleged conduct, which was the focus of the proceeding, fell with any of the three
areas where appellate court decisions have found immoral conduct.

Also of importance, the allegations against respondent were not show to rise to

the level of “moral turpitude.” Moral turpitude has been held to “substantially
overlap” the meaning of immoral conduct. (Morrison v. Board of Education supra
1 Cal.3d 214, 221.) For an offensive act or crime to involve moral turpitude, the
wrongdoer’s actions must demonstrate “a readiness to do evil” or “the intent to
corrupt others.” (People v. Castro (1985) 38 Cal.3d 301, 314-317.)

It was not established that respondent’s conduct constituted immoral conduct

within the meaning of the Education Code. While her conduct is not condoned by the
Commission, given all the evidence, it cannot be found that her conduct was immoral;
her actions cannot be determined to be depraved or indecent, especially given the
context in which they occurred.

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct, pursuant to
sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, by reasons of the matters set forth in
Factual Finding 77.

9 Appellate court decisions that upheld teacher dismissal because of immoral
conduct due to sexual harassment or sexual activity by a teacher include: Palo Verde
Unified School District v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967; Compton Junior College
District v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820; Moser v. State Board of Education
(1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988; El Monte School District v. Calderon (1974) 35
Cal.App.3d 490.

10 Appellate court decisions that upheld teacher dismissal because of immoral

conduct due to drug use or drug possession by a teacher include: Comings v. State
Board of Education (1972) 23 Cal.App.3d 94; Nicasic School District v. Brennan
(1971) 18 Cal.App.3d 396; West Valley Mission Community College District v.
Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766.

11 Appellate court decisions that upheld teacher dismissal because of

immoral conduct due to the context of theft or taking compensation through false
pretense include: San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179
Cal.App.2d 803; Pittsburg Unified School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1983) 143 Cal.App.3d 964.)

43

Ultimate Determinations

9.

By way of close study of the allegations, the evidence, and the

controlling principles of law, the Commission has determined that the most egregious
charges against respondent were not proven. In the opinion of the Commission,
certain facts may have amounted to a deficiency in best practices for a certificated
school teacher that might constitute unsatisfactory performance or even
unprofessional conduct; but, despite those proven facts respondent’s acts and
omissions did not amount to cause for dismissal under the grounds set out in
complainant’s Accusation.

ORDER

1.

2.

The Accusation against respondent Amanda Gori is dismissed.

Respondent Amanda Gori may not be terminated from her employment

as a permanent certificated employee of the Gilroy Unified School District.

DATED: November___, 2011

DATED: November ___, 2011

DATED: November 14, 2011

____________________________
MARILYN FULLER, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
JENAY KIDDOO, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
PERRY O. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge and Member
Commission on Professional Competence

44

