BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. 2009040760

RONALD RUBINE,

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional
Competence (Commission) at Los Angeles, California on February 1, 2 and 3, 2010. The
Commission consists of the following members: Karina Gerger, teacher, Manhattan Beach
Unified School District; James Nadler, teacher, Lennox Middle School; and David B.
Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings.

The Los Angeles Unified School District (District) was represented by Fagen
Friedman & Fulfrost, by Howard A. Friedman and Angela Gordon, attorneys at law.
Respondent Ronald Rubine was present and was represented by Trygstad, Schwab &
Trygstad, by Lawrence B. Trygstad and Deborah Eshaghian, attorneys at law.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the parties submitted argument. The

Commission considered the matter in executive session. The matter was then submitted for
decision. After due consideration of the entire record herein the Commission makes the
following factual findings, conclusions of law, and order:

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. The Accusation and Statement of Charges were brought by Vivian K. Ekchian in

her official capacity as Interim Chief Human Resources Officer for the District.

2. Respondent Ronald Rubine (Respondent) has been employed by the District since

1986. He is a permanent certificated employee. Since 2006, he has been employed as a
Program Coordinator for the District’s Office of Human Relations Diversity and Equity.
Although he is often assigned to particular school sites for specific or continuing
assignments, his office is located on the 16th floor of the headquarters office of the District
located at 333 S. Beaudry Avenue, Los Angeles, California.

3. The Statement of Charges is dated February 11, 2009, and recommends the

dismissal of Respondent from the District for the following legal causes under Education

1

Code1 sections 44932 and 44939: (1) immoral conduct; (2) evident unfitness for service; (3)
unprofessional conduct; and (4) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the
state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State
Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing Respondent.
An Accusation was signed April 27, 2009.

4. Respondent was given written notice of the District’s intention to dismiss
Respondent unless he demanded a hearing. On May 6, 2009, Respondent submitted a Notice
of Defense including his demand for a hearing.

5. All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met by the parties and

jurisdiction exists for these proceedings.

6. On April 17, 2008, at approximately 3:25 p.m., Respondent and another employee,

Myrene M., who were dating each other, walked from the elevator area of the 16th floor at
District headquarters back towards their office areas. They hugged and started kissing.
Myrene M. took Respondent by the hand from the hallway into the lobby of the freight
elevator. Respondent leaned up against a wall in the freight elevator lobby and they kissed.
Thereafter, Respondent and Myrene M. engaged in oral sex in the freight elevator lobby.
More specifically Myrene M. dropped to her knees in front of Respondent and placed his
penis in her mouth. According to Respondent, they were in the elevator lobby for 35 to 40
seconds when Respondent decided to stop and return to their office areas. The episode of
Respondent and Myrene M. engaging in oral sex was seen via a surveillance camera in the
freight elevator lobby, and was witnessed in the surveillance office on the 2nd floor of
District headquarters by a District School Security Officer and a contractor working on the
surveillance system. The Security Officer estimated that Respondent and Myrene M. were in
the elevator lobby for two to three minutes, and the contractor’s estimate was five minutes.

7. Respondent believed that the freight elevator was not operating and was not aware

of the surveillance camera. In fact, the freight elevator was operational.

8. The District reviewed Respondent’s District-issued computers and determined that

several inappropriate emails and images had been sent by Respondent.

9. Respondent sent an e-mail to his co-workers on Tuesday, December 11, 2007, at

11:45 a.m., which included a picture of a partially-clad female in a suggestive pose and
inappropriate text.

10. Respondent sent the email to his team members because, when he received it

from another person, he thought the subject line was funny (“A Playa and a Pimpstress has 4
different types”).

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.

2

11. Respondent sent an email to

@yahoo.com on Friday, November 30,

2007, at 4:22 p.m., which included a picture of three nude males, one of whom is
Respondent.

12. Respondent had learned from Keicher, a former girlfriend of his, that she wanted

a picture of a mutual friend. Respondent sent this picture, taken at a male retreat, in which
he, his brother and the friend are all seen facing the camera, and are nude from head to toe.

13. Respondent sent an email to a co-worker on Thursday, November 29, 2007, at

8:59 a.m., with a picture of a naked man on a golf cart.

14. Respondent had received this email, titled “Do you know what Santa looks like in

summer?,” thought it was funny, and forwarded it to a co-worker.

15. The District alleged that Respondent used his computer on Monday, March 3,
2008, at 5:59 p.m., to access and/or view a picture of a partially-clad female and another
picture of a nude female. However, Respondent was not using his office computer at that
time; he was at a social function away from the office. As Respondent usually left his
computer on after he left the office, it is likely that someone else used his computer to access
these pictures.

16. The District reviewed Respondent’s District-issued cell phone and determined

that several inappropriate text messages and images had been sent or received by
Respondent. Respondent admitted that the messages had been sent or received by him.
They are set forth below, with some phone numbers deleted and with additional evidence
interpreting the substance as necessary.

17.

a. February 2, 2007, 2:54 p.m. (Friday); sent by Rubine:

213-663-
U my first client?
CB 213-505-[XXXX]

b. April 1, 2007, 6:02 p.m. (Sunday); received by Rubine from Kysalin

Michael, a District employee with whom Respondent had a personal relationship:

(Photograph, female, bare breasts)

The photograph was of Kisalyn.

c. April 1, 2007, 7:33 p.m. (Sunday); sent by Rubine to Kisalyn:

Ay caramba.
Is it too Soon to say I love you?
Those r beautiful breasts.

3

d. April 2, 2007, 7:13 p.m. (Monday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

U r a wonderful
Spirit. I miss u already.

[Photograph, female)
Hey you!

The photograph was of Kisalyn.

U r one adorable mutha
Fucka Miss Michael

I will be
Leaving my client house in
30 min.

Thank you.
U looked
Unfreakinbelievable! The
Twins were in wonderful
Form.

e. April 2, 2007, 8:20 p.m. (Monday); sent by Rubine to Kisalyn, in response

to the message in paragraph 17.d.:

f. April 11, 2007, 6:36 p.m. (Wednesday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

g. April 25, 2007, 12:09 p.m. (Thursday); sent by Rubine to Kisalyn:

h. April 28, 2007, 2:49 p.m. (Saturday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

RE Thanks for the Encouragement...Also I really
Appreciate the use of
Your laptop...Smooches
Cheating is ALWAYS an option.

i. April 29, 2007, 8:27 p.m. (Sunday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

Yeah, I got
Ur cash. Make it rain.

The reference to “make it rain” is to throwing cash in the air.

4

j. May 15, 2007, 1:38 p.m. (Tuesday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

I want to kiss you.

k. May 16, 2007, 8:35 p.m. (Wednesday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

May not be able to show too much affection
In the presence of friend...She is not in the
Loop...Yet...Can’t wait to see you.

l. May 29, 2007, 8:47 p.m. (Tuesday); sent by Rubine to Kisalyn:

Loving text message
Bandwagon or Bust
Another pic of yours
Award-winning bosoms. Capiche?

m.(1)2 May 30, 2007, 7:50 p.m. (Wednesday); received by Rubine from

Keicher:

I’m looking forward to you tonight, cutie!

m.(2) June 2, 2007, 10:15 p.m. (Saturday); received by Rubine from Keicher:

What the fuck is da?

n. June 6, 2007, 8:19 a.m. (Wednesday); received by Rubine from Kisalyn:

(photograph, female waist down in thong)

o. July 7, 2007, 8:19 am (Saturday); received by Rubine from Crod, which

refers to Cynthia Rodriguez, a District employee:

(Photograph, female from neck up)
Eat my pussy

p. August 5, 2007, 2:36 p.m. (Saturday); sent by Rubine to Crod:

(Animation of naked man outdoors-no text)

2 The Accusation contains two separate messages in its paragraph 3.m. Both are

listed here, as paragraph 17.m.(1) and 17.m.(2). The same order and numbering have
generally been used for ease in tracking the allegations and the related Findings.

5

q. August 13, 2007, 12:53 p.m. (Monday); sent by Rubine to Crod:

Fwd w/Attachment
(Animation of caterpillar on a French fry)
Knock it off asshole; I’m a French fry!

r. September 24, 2007, 4:57 p.m. (Monday); received by Rubine from

COOIER.KID.KWEEN (not identified):

Hey, Mr. Naughty, maybe we could hook
Today, if ur not busy after work, and
Want to play. Ha Ha! It’s cool 2 hit
This number if anything

s. October 31, 2007, 3:32 p.m. (Wednesday); sent by Rubine to Miishe Addy,

a former District employee whom Respondent had dated:

Why couldn’t the great pumpkin have children?
Because he had a HOLLOW-WEENIE! Have a delightful Halloween.
Miishe aka legally brown.

t. November 6, 2007, 1:02 p.m. (Thursday); sent by Rubine to Miishe:

u. November 14, 2007, 8:17 a.m. (Wednesday); received by Rubine from

Crod:

v. November 21, 2007 (Wednesday); received by Rubine from Keicher:

Pagan idolatry. That is
What my relationship with
Your derriere is. I call it
Bootyus perfectus.
213-505-[XXXX]

Got 2 agree had a very
Good night sleep. Gotta do it
Again
Cynthia

[Photograph of 2 females and male)
Ron, Keicher, and Negris

6

No reach around on
Turkey day Van.
Otherwise I give you big
Drumstick!

Gobble my Knobble
Happy Tgiving
CB: 213-505-[XXXX]

w. November 22, 2007, 1:37 p.m. (Thursday); sent by Rubine to Crod:

According to Respondent, he was “just being silly” in this message, which

includes a reference to oral sex.

x. November. 25, 2007, 8:18 a.m. (Sunday); received by Rubine from Crod:

My ass is sore. Didn’t make
It with the running group.
I will probably go back 2 the trail later.
Cynthia

y. November 29, 2007, 8:51 p.m. (Thursday); received by Rubine from Crod:

z. December 1, 2007, 10:10 a.m. (Saturday); received by Rubine from Elaine

Willis, who is not a District employee:

aa. December 2, 2007 (Sunday); received by Rubine from Myren, a former

District employee:

(Photograph)
What do you think?

Hello just getting home
From Happy Hour. Wont be
Able 2 make it my lov 2
Chloe[dog]car.
CynthiaXX

Hi, Ron. How r u? Good
Talking w/you last wk.hope
U had good wk and hvg grt
Wknd. I am trying to find
Your brothers business
Online Unable to. Is it
CCF.Com? Elaine:)

7

bb. December 6, 2007, 8:16 a.m. (Thursday); received by Rubine from Crod:

cc. December 6, 2007, 8:47 p.m. (Thursday); received by Rubine from Crod:

Christmas is CANCELLED! Apparently
You told Santa you were
Good in bed and he died
Laughing. Thanks a lot. So
CB: 323-243-[XXXX]

Hey DICK! Couldn’t make it
Cynthia
CB: 323-243-[XXXX]

Ur a vagina
CB[callback] 1-213-505-[XXXX]

dd. December 7, 2007, 10:04 a.m. (Friday); sent by Rubine to Crod:

According to Respondent, he was making a playful response to the message in

paragraph 17.cc., where Cynthia Rodriguez referred to him as a “dick.”

ee. December. 13, 2007, 12:35 p.m. (Thursday); received by Rubine from

Patty Mendoza, a District employee:

@yahoo.com

XOXO
CB: 323-496-[XXXX]

18. The District has written policies concerning personal use of District-issued
computers and cell phones and an Employee Code of Ethics. Included in those policies are
warnings that, although personal use is permitted, the computers and phones are primarily for
District purposes; there is no expectation of privacy in the use of District resources and
email; personal use may be monitored and stored; and personal use should not create an
appearance of impropriety and can not include offensive, pornographic or obscene content.
Employees are made aware of these policies by written handout, training sessions, and
notices sent to their computers.

19. Respondent was given three Notices of Unsatisfactory Conduct by the District.
The first related to the incident in the elevator lobby, and included a recommendation for a
15-day suspension and dismissal. The second related to Respondent’s improper use of his
computer because of the emails. The third was due to the messages found on the cell phone.
The second and third notices included recommendations for five-day suspensions and
dismissal.

8

20. Respondent’s job with the District included providing crisis intervention, training
and ongoing programs relating to tolerance and respect for diversity and differences. He was
part of a four person team often sent to respond to volatile situations, such as conflict
between ethnic student groups in high schools. He also performed preventive work in this
and related subjects, such as a transition program for ninth grade students who were entering
high school.

21. The program in which Respondent worked was under the supervision of Sharon

Curry, who was at the relevant time, the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Student
Integration Services. Ms. Curry met with Respondent after the elevator incident.
Respondent was embarrassed and contrite. He admitted his actions. Ms. Curry advised
Respondent of the District’s policies, including respectful treatment of others and sexual
harassment. She ordered him to turn in his computers and cell phone. She issued at least one
of the Notices of Unsatisfactory Conduct, and was aware of all three. Among the concerns
she stated at the hearing was that the 16th floor at District headquarters has visitors present
on District business, including other District employees, parents and students. Also, the
emails and messages seemed contrary to the goals of Respondent’s teamwork and program,
which included helping students develop respect for others. Ms. Curry believed that the
materials at issue were racist, sexist and insensitive. In her opinion, they demonstrated
Respondent’s lack of good judgment, impulsivity and disrespect.

22. Respondent was billed, and paid, for his personal use of the District-issued cell
phone. He believed that personal emails and messages on District-issued equipment were
private. Respondent also had a personal cell phone; however, he would use whichever phone
was most available and did not distinguish between the use he made and the phone he was
using, whether personal or District-related, when using his cell phones.

23. When the incident with Myrene M. began, she hugged Respondent in the hallway

and Respondent said that they should not do that in the hallway. Myrene M. led him to the
elevator lobby, which they believed could be locked. After beginning to engage in oral sex,
Respondent stated that they should stop and go back to their work cubicles. The totality of
the evidence did not support the District’s contention that they only stopped when the freight
elevator arrived at the 16th floor lobby. (A patrolling Security Officer had been contacted
from the surveillance room and took the freight elevator to the 16th floor.) Respondent
testified credibly that he was embarrassed by the episode, hoped it would not place his career
in jeopardy, and would never engage in such conduct again.

24. Respondent was born in 1959. He received his Bachelor’s Degree in

communications in 1984, a Master’s Degree in counseling in 1991 and a Masters Degree in
administration in 1996. He holds a multiple subject teaching credential and credentials in
pupil personnel services and educational administrative services, tier one and two. He began
employment with the District in 1986 as an elementary school teacher, continuing until 1994
when he began as a human resources advisor in the Student to Student Program, training
students from the 4th to 12th grades. From 2001 to 2004, he was an administrator with
duties including Small Learning Committee Coordinator, Human Resources Specialist and

9

Professional Development Coordinator. From 2004 to 2006, he was assigned to a high
school as the PHBAO (Predominantly Black, Hispanic, Asian and Others) Counselor.
Respondent has received positive evaluations of his work for the District. Respondent also
founded an organization, Standing on Common Ground, designed to assist middle and high
school students, and which has operated in conjunction with California State University,
Dominguez Hills, where Respondent has been a professor in an attempt to stress the
importance of higher education and increase the potential for students to be successful while
in college. Respondent is active in other community organizations and causes, and there are
numerous letters of reference, as well as character reference testimony, attesting to his skills,
experience and energy in such activities.

25. Respondent contends, among other things, that he and Mylene M. had an

expectation of privacy in the freight elevator lobby; that he was the subject of an
unreasonable search of his emails and cell phone messages; that his activities with Mylene
M. and the emails and messages were among consenting adults; that the emails and messages
were ribald and risqué humor, but not a basis for dismissal; that the District did not search
the computers or cell phones of any other employees involved in the emails and messages;
and that other District employees were not disciplined even though they may have violated
District policies or engaged in consensual sexual acts while on school property.

26. Respondent’s attorneys served the District with Requests for Admissions (Exhibit
BB) and received responses from the District’s attorneys (Exhibit CC). Some of the requests
were admitted by the District. As set forth more specifically on the record, as a result of the
District’s failure to properly respond, some of the Requests were deemed to be admitted. As
a result, the District admitted, among other things, that in the last five years, other District
employees have violated District policy for use of computers, the internet, email and cell
phones, and that in that same five-year period, not every such employee has been disciplined
by the District. Further, the District was deemed to have admitted that, in the past five years,
not every District employee who had a consensual sexual relationship on District property
has been disciplined or terminated.

27. All other allegations and contentions raised by both parties were not established

by the evidence or legal authority.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION

1. The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to Education

Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 5.

2. The District has the burden of proof in this matter because it is seeking to dismiss

Respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The standard of proof is
preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

10

3. The Accusation and Statement of Charges does not set forth specifically which of
the District’s factual allegations relate to each of the four alleged bases for dismissal (that is,
immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, unprofessional conduct, or refusal to obey the
school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public
schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district).
Rather, the District alleges that all four bases for discipline exist “by reason of the following
charges” (Accusation, page 2, line 3) and that the charges “separately and, in any
combination,” support the recommendation for dismissal (Accusation, page 11, lines 11-13).
The Commission has examined each charge to determine whether it was proven, and for
those proven has determined, as set forth below, whether such charges were a violation of
one or more of the four statutory bases for dismissal as alleged.

4. “Immoral conduct,” pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939,

has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and
contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of
corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it can be conduct that is willful,
flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the
public welfare. (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

5. “Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision
(a)(5), means clearly not fit or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of a temperamental
defect or inadequacy. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445 (Woodland).) Evident unfitness for
services requires that unfitness be attributable to a defect in temperament which “connotes a
fixed character trait, presumably not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails
to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Id. at 1444.)

6. “Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(l), may be

defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct
that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. (Board of Education v.
Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) However, the conduct in question, to amount to
unprofessional conduct, must indicate unfitness to teach. (Perez v. Commission on
Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

7. Under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), the violation of school rules must be
persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.” (Governing Board of
the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.) Isolated events
or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are generally not considered
persistent. (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d
317.) Cause for discipline may be based on the violation of school rules. (San Dieguito
Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d
1176, 1180-1181.)

11

8. Even where immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or evident unfitness for

service are established, it must also be established that such immoral conduct, unprofessional
conduct, or evident unfitness renders the Respondent unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 (Morrison); Fontana Unified School
District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208 (Fontana); Woodland, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at
1444-1445.)

In general, the determination of fitness requires an analysis based on the

criteria set forth in Morrison, to determine whether, as a threshold matter, the questioned
conduct indicates unfitness for service. In the Morrison case, the Supreme Court of
California held that the determination whether a person is fit to teach must be based on an
objective and analytical approach. Under the facts of that case, the Court reviewed the
teacher’s conduct and determined that a school board may consider such specific criteria as:
(1) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the
degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type
of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or aggravating
circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of recurrence of
the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent that discipline may adversely impact or have a
chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the teacher.

Application of the Morrison standards indicates that the Commission has

broad discretion in disciplinary matters. The role of the Commission is not merely to
determine whether the charged conduct in fact occurred, but to decide whether the conduct,
as measured against the Morrison criteria, demonstrates unfitness to teach. (Fontana, supra,
45 Cal.3d at 220.)

9. In its review of the allegations and the evidence, the Commission determined that

some allegations were not proven (see Factual Finding 15). In the opinion of the
Commission, other facts, although proven, may have amounted to poor taste but did not
amount to cause for dismissal (see Factual Finding 17, subparagraphs a, d, e, f, g, h, i, j,
m(1), m(2), q, r, u, x, y, z, aa and ee).

10. The Commission determined that some emails and cell phone messages were

improper, and assigned a level of impropriety to them as follows:

a. The following messages were considered to be at a low level of

impropriety: Factual Findings 9, 10, 13, 14, and 17, subparagraphs k, l, n, s, v, w, bb, cc and
dd.

b. The following messages were considered to be at a moderate level of

impropriety: Factual Finding 17, subparagraphs o and t.

c. The following messages were considered to be at a high level of

impropriety: Factual Findings 11, 12, and 17, subparagraphs b, c and p.

12

11. In reaching its conclusions, the Commission was mindful of the totality of the

evidence related to Respondent’s use of emails and cell phone messages, including that some
of the messages were sent to Respondent by others and that in some instances he forwarded
messages he received to others. Respondent actively participated in the exchange of such
messages and there was no evidence he dissuaded others from sending such messages.
Rather, his participation in the exchange may have encouraged others to send him such
messages. Also, Respondent would use whatever cell phone was available for use,
sometimes his personal phone and other times his District-issued phone, without considering
the effects of his use of the District-issued phone or email for personal messages.

12. Further, in its review of Respondent’s messages and actions, the Commission

looked at the proven conduct in the aggregate. This applied also to its determination of
whether Respondent’s conduct showed unfitness for service. This approach was approved in
Woodland, where the court found that it was not necessary to determine if each and every act
demonstrated unfitness for service. Rather, it was proper to examine the totality of the
offensive conduct. “When the camel’s back is broken we need not weigh each straw in its
load to see which one could have done the deed.” (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1457.)

13. The Commission concludes that Respondent’s actions as set forth in Conclusion

10, and the Factual Findings listed therein, constitute misuse of District equipment and
subject him to dismissal.

14. The nexus between Respondent’s actions and the type of immoral conduct,

unprofessional conduct and/or evident unfitness to teach necessary to conclude that
respondent should be dismissed are found herein. The factors identified in Morrison (see
Conclusion 8) have been considered. Some of those factors do not apply to these scenarios.
Some of the factors of significance to the Commission were that the actions were relatively
recent; some occurred on District property during business hours; the potential for
involvement of the public or other employees did not deter Respondent; the potential for
publicity and notoriety may affect Respondent’s ability to function effectively in his position,
and may affect the District’s ability to control its workforce and workplace; and in total
depict a lack of judgment that is particularly troublesome considering the types of sensitive
subjects that Respondent is responsible for in discharging his job duties.

15. In examining the required nexus, the Commission was also mindful of
Respondent’s position and job duties and the expectation that he would have an increased
sensitivity to inappropriate acts and a greater appreciation of how acts between people can
have adverse affects on others. Although Respondent depicted the sexual encounter with
Myrene M. as an isolated act, the emails and messages show a longstanding, permissive
attitude of use and acceptance by Respondent of material that is sexually charged, indicative
of the type of temperamental defect relied upon in determining that he lacks the necessary
fitness to teach.

13

16. Respondent’s contentions of his expectation of privacy in the elevator lobby and

the messages sent and received are rejected. For such an expectation of privacy to be
recognized, it must be reasonable under the circumstances. Every employee and visitor to
the 16th floor of District headquarters had potential access to the location of Respondent’s
sex act with Myrene M. Indeed, anyone using the freight elevator could have seen them.
The fact that a District Security Officer and a contractor actually viewed the sex act by
security camera disproves any notion that there was a reasonable expectation of privacy
there. Similarly, the District’s policies concerning use and monitoring of emails and
messages clearly notifies employees such that it was not unreasonable, or a violation of any
rights, for the emails and messages to be retained and reviewed by the District.

17. That the District did not discipline or terminate other employees who may have

engaged in inappropriate emails and messaging, or consensual sexual acts on District
property, offers no safe haven for Respondent. The specific circumstances of other incidents
were not in evidence. Nor is it necessary to compare Respondent’s acts to the acts of others.
Rather, the Commission must determine whether Respondent’s acts were proven, whether
there is a basis for termination, and whether Respondent’s employment should be terminated
based on the evidence in this case.

18. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent for immoral conduct, pursuant to sections

44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, for the reasons set forth in Factual Findings 9, 10, 13,
14, and 17, subparagraphs b, c, k, l, n, o, p, s, t, v, w, bb, cc and dd, and Conclusions 3, 4, 8,
10, 11, 12 and 14.

19. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent for evident unfitness for service, pursuant to
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), for the reasons set forth in Factual Findings 9, 10, 13, 14,
and 17, subparagraphs b, c, k, l, n, o, p, s, t, v, w, bb, cc and dd, and Conclusions 3, 5, 8, 10,
11, 12 and 14.

20. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent for unprofessional conduct, pursuant to

section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), for the reasons set forth in Factual Findings 9, 10, 13, 14,
and 17, subparagraphs b, c, k, l, n, o, p, s, t, v, w, bb, cc and dd, and Conclusions 3, 6, 8, 10,
11, 12, 13 and 14.

21. Cause exists to dismiss Respondent for persistent violation of or refusal to obey

the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the
public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school
district employing him, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), for the reasons set
forth in Factual Findings 9, 10, 13, 14, and 17, subparagraphs b, c, k, l, n, o, p, s, t, v, w, bb,
cc and dd, and Conclusions 3, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.

22. Cause does not exist to dismiss Respondent for the reasons set forth in Factual
Findings 15 and 17, subparagraphs a, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, m(1), m(2), q, r, u, x, y, z, aa and ee,
and Conclusion 9. These Findings do not establish any basis for dismissal as contended by
the District.

14

23. Respondent should be terminated from his position as a certificated employee of

the District, based on Legal Conclusions 1 through 10, 14 and 18 through 21, and their
factual predicates.

24. In reaching these Conclusions, the determinations that there is cause to dismiss

Respondent and that Respondent should be terminated from employment were made by votes
of two Commissioners, constituting a majority of the Commission, except with respect to
Conclusion 20, where the vote was unanimous.

WHEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:

ORDER

Respondent Ronald Rubine is dismissed from his employment as a permanent

certificated employee of the Los Angeles Unified School District.

DATED: July ___, 2010.

DATED: July ___, 2010.

DATED: July ___, 2010.

____________________________
KARINA GERGER, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
JAMES NADLER, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
DAVID B. ROSENMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Member
Commission on Professional Competence

15

