BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

OAH No. 2009100569

ELIZABETH NAVARRO,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

On May 10 and 11, 2010, a Commission on Professional Competence heard this
matter in Fontana, California. The Commission consisted of Donald P. Cole, Administrative
Law Judge, Joseph Hyde, and Jose Alcala.

Dean T. Adams, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, represented complainant Yolanda

Mendoza, Associate Superintendent, Fontana Unified School District.

Carlos R. Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, A PLC, represented respondent Elizabeth

Navarro, a permanent certificated employee of the Fontana Unified School District, who was
present throughout the administrative hearing.

On May 11, 2010, the matter was submitted. On June 10, 2010, Administrative Law

Judge Donald P. Cole signed the decision on behalf of the Commission, whose vote in the
matter was unanimous.

1.

2.

Did respondent Elizabeth Navarro demonstrate evident unfitness for service in

the course of her employment as a teacher with the Fontana Unified School District?

Did respondent Elizabeth Navarro engage in dishonesty in the course of her

employment as a teacher with the Fontana Unified School District?

ISSUES

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction

1.

On September 11, 2009, complainant Yolanda Mendoza, Associate

Superintendent, Human Resources, Fontana Unified School District, signed the notice of
intent to dismiss and statement of charges for dismissal. On September 17, 2009, the district
served this document on respondent. On October 1, 2009, the district timely served a request
to set for hearing. On October 16, 2009, complainant signed the accusation in her official
capacity. On the same date, the district timely served respondent with the accusation and
other required jurisdictional documents. On October 20, 2009, respondent timely served an
amended notice of defense and request for a hearing. On November 9, 2009, the district
timely served respondent with a notice of hearing. On January 7, 2010, the district timely
served respondent with an amended notice of hearing. On April 29, 2010, the district timely
served respondent with a second amended notice of hearing.

On January 5, 2010, the parties executed a joint motion to continue. On February 18,

2010, the parties submitted a joint motion to continue.

On April 15, 2010, the district timely served notice of its appointment of a
Commission on Professional Competence member. On April 19, 2010, respondent timely
served notice of her appointment of a Commission on Professional Competence member.
Neither nominee was related to respondent, neither was employed by the district, and each
held a valid teaching credential and had at least five years’ experience in the past ten years in
respondent’s discipline. Each nominee was qualified to serve on the commission under
Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b).

The parties satisfied all jurisdictional requirements.

2.

On May 10, 2010, the record in the administrative proceeding was opened and

opening statement was presented. On May 10 and 11, 2010, sworn testimony and
documentary evidence were received. On May 11, 2010, closing argument was presented,
the record was closed, and the matter was submitted. On May 11, 2010, the commission met
in closed session to determine the matter, and a unanimous decision was reached.

3.

The draft of the decision was circulated between commission members. Due
to the difficulties anticipated in attempting to secure the signatures of all three commission
members on the final decision, commission members agreed that Administrative Law Judge
Donald P. Cole would sign the decision on behalf of the commission.

4.

The NovaNET System is a computer-based, online learning (credit recovery)

system. Students work at their own pace to earn credit for both core and elective courses.
NovaNET is primarily used by upper division students who have failed a course or who are
behind in credits and need help to graduate on-time.

The NovaNET System

2

A NovaNET course is comprised of modules, each of which contains several lessons.
Depending on the course, a student takes a pre-test at the beginning of each module. Based
on a student’s performance on the pre-test, NovaNET assigns lessons to the student. If a
student does well on a module pre-test (normally a score of 80 or better), the system either
passes the student on to the next module, or assigns lessons and tests in the areas where the
student did not do well.

After completing each lesson within a module, a student takes a test. If a student

earns a passing score (again, normally 80 or higher), the student moves on to the next lesson
until all lessons within a module are completed.

If a student does not earn a passing score on a particular lesson test, the student may
retake the test up to three times. After failing a test for the third time, a red flag appears on
the student’s computer, which a teacher must “clear.” Clearing a red flag, among other
things, enables the student to review the lesson and retake the test. Teachers can clear red
flags in one of two ways, either at the instructor’s computer by using an instructor’s code, or
at the student’s computer by using a bypass code. At A.B. Miller High School, where
respondent taught, each teacher had a uniquely assigned instructor’s code; all NovaNET
teachers shared a single bypass code.

By using the bypass code, a teacher can review answers to test questions with the

student, assign a new lesson to help the student learn the concepts missed on the test,
reassign the test, or move the student on to the next lesson (e.g., if the student received a
passing score but for some reason the system did not advance the student to the next lesson).
In other words, the bypass code is intended primarily to provide a one-on-one teaching and
learning opportunity between teacher and student.

By using the instructor code, a teacher can change a student’s score on a test to a
passing score, change the amount of time (in minutes) a student spent on a lesson or test,
change the number of attempts a student made to work through a lesson or take and pass a
test, and change a lesson or test from a “not started” or “not completed” to a “completed”1
status. Similar changes can be made with regard to post-tests. A teacher cannot accomplish
any of these modifications using the bypass code. Any changes made by using the
instructor’s code are recorded on NovaNET’s servers at its national headquarters.

At Smith, once a student earned a passing score on each lesson within a module, and
completed each module within a course, the teacher completed and signed a “pass slip” and
sent it to the student’s counselor so that the student received credit for the course.2

1

2

By changing a lesson to “completed,” the student may then move on to the next lesson.

The facts contained in this Finding are taken almost verbatim from an investigative report prepared by

Deborah Cesario, counsel for the district, in December 2008. These particular facts are not in dispute.

3

5.

During the 2007-08 academic year, three A.B. Miller teachers, including

respondent, taught NovaNET. Each teacher was assigned to teach NovaNET during one
specific class period during the school day. NovaNET instruction took place in the computer
lab. About 27 to 30 students were formally assigned to each of the three NovaNET periods.3
The assigned teacher monitored a student’s progress during the course of study, and signed
off on the student’s completion of the course. However, students were, with a teacher’s
permission, allowed to work on a NovaNET course during periods other than their formally
assigned NovaNET period. Students often worked on their NovaNET courses during zero
period (which started at 6:30 a.m., before the regular school day began) or as part of “Project
Hope,” an afterschool program (4:00 to 6:00 p.m.) designed for students who had dropped
out of school or who were far behind the academic credits needed to graduate.

Respondent’s District Employment

6.

Respondent has been a high school teacher with the district for about 13 years.
During the 2007-2008 school year, she was assigned to A.B. Miller High School, where she
taught English Language Development, World History, and NovaNET. She was assigned to
NovaNET during “zero” period. In addition, twice per week, she taught/monitored Hope
Academy, where, as noted, students also worked on NovaNET courses.

Allegations Re Respondent’s NovaNET Activities

7.

Mark Ullrich was one of the three NovaNET instructors at Miller High School
during the 2007-08 school year. Late in that year, within the week or two before graduation
(which took place on June 10, 2008), Ullrich noticed that certain students seemed to be
progressing through their NovaNET courses much more quickly than had previously been
the case. By using a NovaNET feature (“Insight”) that enabled him to view in real time the
computer screen a NovaNET student was viewing, he discovered that a particular student
was entering the bypass code so that she could repeatedly take a test, view the answers to the
test and eventually, after repeating this process a number of times, obtain the correct answers
to all possible test questions for the lesson she was working on. As a result, Ullrich
contacted the NovaNET company and requested an action log of all NovaNET activity at the
school for the previous 60 days, i.e., from April 8 to June 6, 2008.

8.

The NovaNET log, which was received in evidence at the hearing, reflected an

inordinate amount of NovaNET activity (record modifications) by respondent, i.e., nearly
400 instances during the two-month period covered by the log, including about 260 instances
in the last week (June 2 to 6) alone, when respondent used her instructor code to perform
such actions as: (i) Changing post-tests from “not started” to “completed”; (ii) changing test
scores from “no score” (i.e., test not yet taken) to passing scores; (iii) increasing the time
spent on a particular lesson; (iv) increasing the time spent on a particular test; (v) changing

3

Students who took more than one NovaNET course during a particular semester were assigned to one

NovaNET period for each such course.

4

the number of attempts at working through a lesson (e.g., from zero to one); (vi) changing
lessons from “not started” to “completed”; and (vii) changing post-test scores to passing.
More specifically, the NovaNET log reflected approximately: 75 grade (test score) changes,
including 41 during the final week covered by the log; 162 lesson or tests changed to
completed, including 92 during the final week; 90 changes in the amount of time students
spent on a lesson or test, including 69 during the final week; and 70 changes in the number of
lesson attempts, including 56 during the final week.4 The log also reflected that most of the
changes were made during zero period, when respondent taught NovaNET, or in the late
afternoon, at or after the time when respondent participated in the Hope Academy program.5
Finally, the log reflected numerous instances where changes were made in rapid succession
(e.g., a minute apart or less) for a number of different students.

9.

Evelyn Calderon, who graduated from Miller High in the summer of 2008,

was enrolled in respondent’s NovaNET course during the second semester of her senior year.
Calderon testified that several of her friends, though not she herself, knew the NovaNET
bypass code and used it to ascertain the correct answers to lesson tests. On two occasions, a
friend of Calderon used the bypass code to help Calderon herself secure the answers to a test.

Calderon testified that on about four occasions, respondent changed a test grade of

hers to a passing grade.6

10.

In late 2008, at the district’s request, Deborah Cesario, a partner with a law

firm7 that represents the district in certain legal matters, conducted an investigation of alleged
misuse of the NovaNET system by Miller students and staff during the 2007-08 academic
year. Several students told Cesario that they had personally used, or knew of other students

4

5

6

7

Several estimates of the numbers involved were proffered by witnesses at the hearing. The numbers

reflected here are based on the commission’s own review of the NovaNET action log.

The action log also reflected record modification activity by another NovaNET instructor, Kevin Gerke.

However, the amount of Gerke’s activity was much less than that of respondent. During a subsequent district
investigation of improper NovaNET use (see below) by respondent and Gerke, the latter was determined to have
“provided reasonable explanations and written documentation supporting his actions,” so that it was concluded that
Gerke “did not misuse the NovaNET system.”

Calderon also testified that two female students knew respondent’s code. However, Calderon was vague as

to how she knew this, saying no more than that she learned it from her “guy friends.” More importantly, her
testimony was also vague with regard to whether she really had respondent’s personal instructor code, as opposed to
the common bypass code, in mind. During the district’s investigation, Calderon told the investigator that she
“believed that Ms. Navarro did something on the teacher’s computer to indicate that she completed a lesson even
though she had not. . . .” This imprecisely-worded statement suggests that Calderon did not even know of the
existence per se of an instructor code. This is consistent with statements of other students to the investigator (see
below). For all of these reasons, the evidence did not establish that any students told Calderon that they had
obtained respondent’s instructor code, or that any students had in fact obtained that code.

Another attorney with the same firm represented the district at the administrative hearing in this matter.

5

who had used, the bypass code to secure answers to test questions. No students told her they
had used, or knew of other students who had used, an instructor’s code to change grades or
manipulate other NovaNET data.8

11.

Respondent testified that she never used the bypass code during the 2007-08

academic year. She did clear red flags (i.e., through her instructor’s code) to permit students
to move forward to the next module, on occasions when a student had taken the same test
numerous times and had genuinely tried but could not pass the test, and when the student’s
score was close to a passing score. On these occasions, respondent accomplished the change
by entering “completed” in NovaNET. She did this once or twice per week. She confirmed
that the students in question had made a genuine effort to learn the material by reviewing the
student notebooks that she required students to maintain, and by looking at the amount of
time the student spent on the module in question. She testified further that on two occasions,
she changed a student’s status in a module from “started” to “completed.” She said she did
this because she had seen the student working on the module on a particular day, and on the
next day the NovaNET system for some reason did not have a record that the student had
ever started the module, i.e., some sort of computer glitch had occurred. On a few other
occasions, respondent changed a student’s status within a module from “not started” to
“completed.” She denied that she entered any other changes, such as changing a student’s
score or changing the amount of time a student spent on a module. She denied making the
nearly 400 changes reflected in the NovaNET action log. She did not affirmatively claim
that any students or other persons had obtained her instructor code, and she could not explain
how students might have acquired it. She did, however, state that she had written out
NovaNET instructions as well as her instructor code and kept them in her unlocked desk, for
use by substitute teachers. She thus suggested the possibility that students might have had
access to the code.

Respondent’s Alleged Lateness and Absence From Class

12.

Calderon testified that respondent frequently was late for class or left the

computer lab during the NovaNET class period. She estimated that respondent was present
during class time about 55% of the time. However, Calderon’s attendance record reflected
that she herself was absent from respondent’s NovaNET class over 44% of the time. It thus
appears that it was Calderon, not respondent, who was present about 55% of the time.
Further, no other student testified that respondent was frequently late or absent from class.
Respondent testified that she was late for class perhaps twice during the 2007-08 academic
year. She denied that she left her classroom for significant periods of time during the
NovaNET period. No teacher attendance records, which might have shed documentary light
on respondent’s attendance, were proffered at the hearing. Accordingly, the evidence as a
whole did not establish that respondent was late to or absent from class a significant portion

8

Students did not use the term “bypass” or “instructor” code. However, their description of how the code

was used implied that it was the bypass code to which they had access. No students described the kinds of
modifications that could only be accomplished with an instructor’s code.

6

of the time. It thus was not established that any improprieties of respondent with regard to
the NovaNET system were motivated by a desire to mask irregular attendance.

Evaluation

13.

The evidence established that during the two-month period from April to June
2008, and especially during the first week of June, respondent improperly used the NovaNET
system on an extensive basis to change student test scores to passing scores, to increase the
time spent on particular lessons, to change the number of attempts a student made on a
particular lesson, and to change lesson status from not started to completed, among other
modifications as described above.

The foregoing changes are amply documented in the NovaNET action log for the

period in question. The log clearly identified respondent as the individual whose instructor
code was used to accomplish the changes. No direct evidence was presented that any
students somehow gained access to respondent’s instructor code. It did not, in fact, appear
that students were even aware of the existence of the instructor code. Further, the pattern of
use (e.g., during zero period and after school, and changes made for multiple students in very
close temporal proximity) was consistent with respondent having made the changes herself,
and the pattern of changes was inconsistent with individual students having done so.

Without question, the bypass code had been compromised and disturbing numbers of
students used the code to gain answers to test questions. However, the bypass code used to
gain those answers could not have been used to make the kinds of modifications attributed to
respondent as reflected on the action log.

Since it was not established that respondent was frequently late for class or that she

left the computer lab during substantial portions of class time, no clear motive for the misuse
of the NovaNET system can be discerned. However, establishing a motive is not required,
particularly here where the documentation of respondent’s misconduct was clear and
unimpeachable.

Finally, while it is true that a teacher should retain a certain amount of discretion in

determining whether a student has passed a class, respondent’s conduct went far, far beyond
what could possibly be deemed an exercise of reasonable discretion. Her conduct can only
be characterized as falsifying NovaNET data in a variety of ways to enable students to
receive credit for coursework they did not earn. Such conduct goes to the very core of a
teacher’s responsibilities, duties, and public trust.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal

hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

7

Under Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b), the dismissal hearing must be
conducted by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence. Two members of
the commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the respondent and one by the
district, and the third member of the commission must be an administrative law judge from
the Office of Administrative Hearings.

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the commission may only vote

for or against it. The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by
imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (c)(1)-(3).)

2.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of
the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d
1035, 1039-1040.) The preponderance-of-the-evidence standard requires a party to convince
the trier of fact that the existence of a fact is more probable than its nonexistence.
(Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.)

3.

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2) provides that a permanent

employee may be dismissed on the ground of “dishonesty.” Based on the evidence
presented, the Commission concluded that respondent’s conduct constituted dishonesty.

4.

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) provides that a permanent

employee may be dismissed based on the ground of “evident unfitness for service.”

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, identified certain criteria
to be applied in determining an individual’s fitness for service. These criteria include “such
matters as the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow
teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the
conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party involved, the extenuating or
aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the recurrence of
the questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse
impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other
teachers. These factors are relevant to the extent that they assist the board in determining
whether the teacher’s fitness to teach, i.e., in determining whether the teacher’s future
classroom performance and overall impact on his students are likely to meet the board’s
standards.” (Id., at p. 229-230.)

The Morrison criteria “must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether

the cited conduct indicates an unfitness for service. [citation omitted] If the Morrison
factors are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e.,
whether the offensive conduct was caused by a defect in temperament.” (Woodland Joint
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th
1429, 1445.)

Applying the Morrison factors, the commission concluded that the preponderance of
the evidence established respondent’s unfitness to teach, and that such unfitness was evident.

8

5.

By reason of Findings 1 through 13, and Conclusions 1 through 4, cause exists

to dismiss respondent from her teaching position with the Fontana Unified School District.

DISPOSITION

The Accusation and Statement of Charges are sustained. Respondent shall be

terminated from her employment.

DATED: ___________

_____________________________
DONALD P. COLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

For the Commission on Professional
Competence

9

