BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE OF
THE SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. 2009100118

FRANCISCO ARROYO,

Respondent.

RULING AND ORDER
REGARDING
MOTION TO RECONVENE PANEL AND COMMENCE HEARING

Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings,

prepared to convene this matter on December 10, 2009, at Los Angeles, California.

Judy Berndt, Respondent’s Panel member appointee was present. Matt Eeles, the

Santa Ana Unified School District’s Panel member appointee was not present. His absence
is discussed further below in paragraph 7, note 1 of the Ruling.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the Santa Ana Unified School District

(SAUSD or District).

Kent Morizawa, Attorney at Law, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Francisco

Arroyo (Respondent). Respondent was present.

Before going on the record, District counsel informed the ALJ that SAUSD intended
to withdraw the Accusation against Respondent because, as set forth in the findings below, it
asserted that due to the alleged expiration of his teaching credential, it could dismiss
Respondent from employment without the instant hearing process, and Respondent was not
entitled to such a hearing.

Respondent objected. As SAUSD had not informed Respondent of its intention to

proceed in this manner until the morning of hearing, and upon Respondent’s counsel’s
request, the ALJ provided Respondent an opportunity to present written argument against
SAUSD’s intended withdrawal and a motion to reconvene the Panel of the Commission on
Professional Competence in this matter (by January 11, 2010). The ALJ provided the
District with an opportunity to present a written reply (by January 25, 2010). The parties
made timely submissions.

On December 10, 2009, the ALJ had informed the parties that he would allow

telephonic oral argument. On January 27, 2010, the ALJ informed each party that, in his

1

estimation, the written arguments filed by the parties adequately set forth each party’s
argument; nevertheless, he would allow telephonic oral argument, upon either party’s
request. The parties submitted on the papers filed.

RULING

1.

The Accusation sought the dismissal of Respondent. SAUSD hired

Respondent as a teacher to teach in the 2004-2005 school year. The California Commission
on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) issued Respondent a preliminary teaching credential on or
about June 15, 2004. Pursuant to this preliminary credential, Respondent could (and did)
teach at SAUSD. As Respondent’s teaching credential was preliminary in nature, his
authorization to teach was time limited. Within five years of the issuance of the preliminary
credential, Respondent was to complete the requirements necessary to receive a CLEAR
teaching credential.

2.

Respondent did not take all of the necessary steps to obtain a CLEAR teaching

credential. Consequently, Respondent’s preliminary teaching credential expired on July 1,
2009.

3.

SAUSD contends it may now dismiss Respondent without affording him the
right to a hearing, as provided in Chapter 4 of Part 25 of the Education Code. It argues that,
as Respondent no longer holds the credential necessary to teach, he is no longer a certificated
employee and is therefore not entitled to a hearing on his proposed dismissal as certificated
employees would be entitled, pursuant to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939.

4.

In support of its position, SAUSD offered the case of Stewart v. Acalanes

Union High School District (1989) 209 Cal.App.3d 1142. In Stewart, the Court of Appeal
upheld a school district’s suspension of a school nurse who had allowed her five-year
preliminary health services credential to expire. The Court of Appeal in that case wrote,
“[e]mployees such as Stewart who held [sic] no valid credential do not fall within the class of
employees whose employment is governed by the provisions of chapter 4. Holding the
necessary credential or certificate is a prerequisite to the enjoyment of the rights and benefits
under chapter 4, including the right to notice and an opportunity to be heard prior to
suspension or dismissal with limited exceptions.” (Stewart, supra, 209 Cal.App.3d at 1146-
1147; see also Shields v. Poway Unified School District (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 955, 961,
note 7.)

5.

Respondent argued that Stewart is inapposite and/or distinguishable from
Respondent’s case because the school district in Stewart was suspending the nurse, not
dismissing her. Respondent further argued that, as Respondent’s case deals with
employment termination, Respondent has a greater property interest at stake than the
suspended nurse in Stewart, an interest that raises constitutional concerns.

6.

Contrary to Respondent’s argument, the ruling in Stewart does apply to

Respondent’s case. An employee must hold a valid credential or certificate to assert the right

2

to a hearing, as Chapter 4 of Part 25 of the Education Code is entitled, “Employment—
Certificated Employees.” Furthermore, while Stewart dealt with the temporary suspension of
a school nurse, in its ruling, the Stewart Court made clear that the due process rights enjoyed
by credentialed or certificated employees involved both “suspension” and “dismissal”
matters. (Stewart, supra, 209 Cal.App.3d at 1147.) Thus, pursuant to the holding in Stewart,
Respondent is not entitled to the administrative hearing process set forth in the Education
Code, and the District may withdraw its Accusation.

7.

Respondent contended that SAUSD can not withdraw the Accusation without

the District’s Governing Board first taking action. Respondent noted that, at the time
Respondent filed his brief, the District’s Governing Board had taken no action to withdraw
the Accusation, leaving it in effect. He argued that District counsel’s assertion on December
10, 2009 (when the hearing was to begin), that SAUSD intended to withdraw the Accusation,
was therefore defective. Respondent further argued that, as it appeared to him that SAUSD
did not intend to present its case-in-chief on December 10, 2009, it engaged in the litigation
process in bad faith. Respondent further noted that District counsel had directed its Panel
member Eeles not to appear at the hearing, and asserted that such direction was evidence of
the bad faith alleged.1

8.

It is noted that on January 26, 2010, the SAUSD Superintendent filed a
Withdrawal of Accusation, dated January 11, 2010, with the Office of Administrative
Hearings. Such action cures any defect in the withdrawal, as argued by Respondent’s
counsel. Separate of this, however, Respondent cited no law in support of its contention that
the District’s Governing Board needed to act first to withdraw the Accusation and that failing
to do so entitles Respondent to an administrative hearing. The ALJ understood District
counsel to be submitting the question of whether SAUSD may withdraw its Accusation,
together with whether this Panel of the Commission on Professional Competence has
jurisdiction over this proceeding, given SAUSD’s intention to withdraw the Accusation. As
such, it would have been appropriate for the District’s Governing Board to await the ALJ’s
Ruling and Order before filing its withdrawal. Indeed, if the ALJ would have found contrary
to the instant Order below, the ALJ would have ordered the Panel to reconvene and would
not have given effect to the Withdrawal filed. However, in this instance, while District

1 In SAUSD’s Reply, Respondent correctly recounted the events that led to Panel
member Eeles’s absence. On the day set for hearing, December 10, 2009, District counsel
asserted, and the ALJ accepted as true, that Eeles was not present due to a
miscommunication. As the ALJ understood the District’s intention to withdraw the
Accusation and Respondent’s objection to such action would require at least written
argument, it became clear to the ALJ that the hearing on the Accusation would not go
forward on the day set for the proceeding. Furthermore, as the ALJ would, in such
proceedings as the instant one, exclude the Panel members from procedural law and motion
matters of this kind, the ALJ concurred with Respondent’s counsel that Eeles’s presence was
unnecessary on December 10, 2009. Respondent’s counsel concurred upon the ALJ’s
inquiry. Therefore, Panel member Eeles’s absence on December 10, 2009, did not constitute
an act of bad faith.

3

counsel’s last minute intention to withdraw the Accusation should have been made sooner to
inform Respondent and his counsel with reasonable time to prepare a response, it cannot be
concluded that this procedural act constitutes the engagement in bad faith litigation.
Furthermore, nothing under this argument by Respondent would entitle him to the
administrative hearing process he seeks.

9.

Lastly, Respondent contends that SAUSD may not summarily terminate him

because he possesses a Clear Pupil Personnel Services Credential. That credential authorizes
Respondent to provide services as a school guidance counselor. Respondent provided
evidence that on September 23, 2009, the Commission on Teacher Credentialing issued
Respondent such a credential. As such, Respondent argues that he is a certificated person, as
defined in Education Code section 44006; and thus, he is entitled to a hearing as a
certificated employee.

10.

However, the District hired Respondent to provide his services as a teacher,
not a guidance counselor. The District is now seeking to dismiss him as a teacher. As the
District points out in its brief, despite having a counseling credential, Respondent is not
licensed to engage in the service for which the District hired him. Support for this position is
found in the Stewart Court’s wording when it explained that the nurse’s hearing right, in that
case, required that she hold the “necessary” credential or certificate. (Stewart, supra, 209
Cal.App.3d at 1146.) Respondent’s counseling credential is not the necessary credential, as
it would not authorize him to provide the services for which the District hired him. As
Respondent’s preliminary teaching credential expired and he does not have a CLEAR
teaching credential, he does not hold a valid or necessary credential or certificate that would
entitle to him to an administrative hearing on the issue of his dismissal as a certificated
teacher.

Respondent’s Motion to Reconvene the Panel and Commence the Hearing is denied.

The Santa Ana Unified School District, through its Superintendent, may withdraw its
Accusation. Respondent is not entitled to an administrative hearing pursuant to Education
Code sections 44932 and 44939.

Date: January 29, 2010

________________________________
Daniel Juárez,
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER

4

