BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF ORANGE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

KIRK LAST,

OAH Case No. L2009101455

This matter came regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional
Competence, Capistrano Unified School District, County of Orange, State of California
(Commission), in San Juan Capistrano, California, on June 7, 8, 9, and 10, and August 23 and
24, 2010. The Commission consists of the following members:

Respondent.

DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Chairperson
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

Judy Berndt, Member
Selected by Respondent

Holly Jefferson, Member
Selected by the Governing Board

Anthony P. De Marco and Heather A. Dozier, Attorneys at Law, represented the

Capistrano Unified School District (District).

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented Kirk Last (Respondent), who was present

throughout the hearing.

The District seeks to dismiss Respondent on grounds of alleged immoral conduct,
laws.

dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and persistent
to obey school
Respondent disputes the allegations and maintains that grounds for dismissal do not exist.

refusal

Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by written and oral stipulation on the
record, was received at the hearing and the matter was submitted for decision on August 24,
2010.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Parties and Jurisdictional Findings

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

2.

Respondent received a Bachelor’s Degree in physical education from California
State University, Long Beach. He thereafter received a credential from California State
University, Fullerton, that authorizes him to teach physical education, and a credential from the
University of California, Irvine, that allows him to teach special education. He has also received
a master’s Degree in education administration from National University.

3.

On October 5, 2009, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services, Jodee
Brentlinger (Brentlinger) submitted a Statement of Charges recommending Respondent’s
immediate suspension and dismissal to the District Governing Board pursuant to Education
Code1 sections 44934 and 44936. The Governing Board approved the recommendation, and on
October 12, 2009, Brentlinger sent notice to Respondent of the District’s intent to immediately
suspend him without pay and to dismiss him. On October 21, 2009, Respondent made a timely
request for hearing.

4.

On October 26, 2009, Brentlinger filed an Accusation pursuant to section 44944
and Government Code section 11507 seeking Respondent's dismissal. On November 3, 2009,
Respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense.

On November 24, 2009, the parties stipulated to waive the time requirements set

out in section 44944, subdivision (a), regarding commencement of the hearing.

5.

6.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Respondent’s Employment and Assignments

7.

Respondent has been employed by the District for 17 years, starting in the 1993-
1994 school year. He has been teaching middle school students. He has taught a variety of
subjects, including physical education. He was transferred to the Marco Forster Middle School
at the start of the 2007-2008 school year.

1 Unless otherwise stated, all further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

2006-2007 School Year

8.

One of the incidents alleged to constitute grounds for dismissal allegedly
occurred in January 2006, while Respondent was working at Las Flores Middle School. No
student or other witness in Respondent’s class testified in support of the allegations that
Respondent made offensive comments about gays. Respondent recalled a discussion in class
about the “1000 Steps” beach in Laguna Beach, in which he stated that he did not go to that
beach because of its clientele, but denied making any offensive comments about homosexuals.
The allegations set forth in paragraph 47 of the Statement of Charges, therefore, were not
established.

2007-2008 School Year

9.

Respondent taught seventh grade physical education classes during the 2007-
2008 school year. The classes typically adhered to the following routine. After changing into
physical education clothes in the locker room, students assembled on a specified area in the
blacktop referred to as the physical education and basketball courts area. They sat on the
ground on preassigned numbers. Once warm-up exercises were completed, students moved to
the specific area of instruction. The basketball area, which contained several courts, was
surrounded on three sides by classrooms and other structures. North of the basketball courts
were grass fields and a track. Two classrooms had been converted into a fitness room with
various exercise machines and free weights.

a.

10.

In October 2007, a student in one of Respondent’s classes, R

H.2,
continued talking to other classmates and getting up from his assigned area in the fitness room
despite Respondent’s directives against such behavior. Frustrated with the disruption,
Respondent walked over to the student, who was again trying to get off the ground, and placed
his hand on the student’s shoulder to keep him from standing. The student was approximately
four to six inches off the ground, and Respondent applied sufficient force to prevent him from
fully standing up and to cause the student to sit back down.

R

b.

H. reported the incident to Assistant Vice Principal Jeff Jones
(Jones). Jones also spoke to other students in the classroom who had witnessed the incident.
When asked what happened, Respondent told Jones that he had placed two fingers on the boy’s
shoulder and applied pressure for the student to sit down.

2 Initials have been used for the students’ last names in order to protect the students’

privacy.

3

c.

On October 31, 2007, Jones counseled Respondent about the incident,
and told him there was no need to ever place his hands on a student. Respondent acknowledged
the directive. On November 5, 2007, Jones issued a written confirmation of the counseling,
which document stated, in pertinent part: “I informed you that your conduct negatively
impacted the safety of the student and yourself. You were directed to refrain from using any
physical contact in disciplining students. Failure to comply with this directive may result in
further disciplinary action.” (Exhibit 3, at p. 81.)

On December 17, 2007, Respondent was involved in an incident with a
a.
11.
student, G
R., in an open area between classrooms. The student did not testify, and it was
not established that Respondent pushed the student against a kiosk. As Respondent recalled at
R., as was typical, was misbehaving during class, which involved a “dodge
the hearing, G
R. from the class activity and placed him by a
ball” activity. Respondent removed G
basketball pole. The student continued to talk and disrupt
the class from his location.
Respondent directed him to stop, to no avail. Finally, Respondent asked another teacher to
R. to the office. When they were walking, Respondent
watch his class and accompanied G
in the lead and the student about two paces behind, G
R. made an offensive remark. As
Respondent turned around, G
R. ran into him. Respondent stated that he grabbed the student
to keep him from falling, and that the student tried to move away and hit the kiosk.

b.

As a result of the incident, on January 28, 2008, Respondent received a
written reprimand for failure to provide an effective learning environment. In pertinent part, the
reprimand stated: “Effective immediately, you are to cease and desist from ever physically
touching a student as a behavioral consequence.” (Exhibit 3, at p.78.)

c.

Principal Carrie Bertini (Bertini), in the presence of Assistant Principal
Judith Roman (Roman) and Respondent’s union representative, asked Respondent about the
incident after school on December 19, 2007. Respondent said he was so angry that he did not
remember what happened.

d.

At the hearing, Respondent testified that he did not necessarily recall the
incident on December 19, 2007, and he told Roman that he had to write down the details before
he could talk about the incident. He further testified that on January 28, 2008, when he received
the reprimand, he has “his story straight” and could talk about it.

e.

Respondent’s statement to Bertini on December 19, 2007, is not credible.
Bertini’s inquiry was made close in time to the incident and the event was fresh in
told Bertini he did not
Respondent’s mind. Rather than truthfully answer, Respondent
remember so that he could, as he said at the hearing, get his story straight.

4

a.

12.

On December 20, 2007, while students were gathering in the blacktop
A., was
area by their numbers, a developmentally disabled student in Respondent’s class, J
running and jumping in the blacktop area, by the numbers. Respondent tried to ignore the
disruption and addressed the other students, but was unable to effectively attend to the others
A. was moving about the area. As the student passed close to Respondent,
while J
A. to
Respondent grabbed him by the shoulder with both hands and, in a loud voice, told J
“sit still.” The student became still, and Respondent let him go.

b.

Respondent did not dispute that he grabbed J

A. or that he raised his
voice for the student to sit still, but testified that he did so after the student refused to obey him
and to prevent the student from hurting himself. However, in light of the fact that Respondent
tried to ignore J
A. for some time, this generalized claim that the activity was dangerous is
insufficient to justify the force used. Rather, the totality of the circumstances establishes that
A. in order to stop the disruptive behavior.
Respondent grabbed J

c.

frustrated and that he did not know that J
reiterated that Respondent was not to touch any student as a form of classroom management.

Bertini spoke to Respondent, and Respondent stated that he had become
A. was a special education student. The principal

a.

13.

On May 16, 2008, a student named G

R. had been mocking
Respondent throughout the day by calling him “Ultimo,” a Spanish translation of Respondent’s
last name. At about 8:00 or 8:15 a.m., G
R. had called out “Ultimo” to Respondent from
across campus, apparently on his way to another class. The taunt continued in the afternoon
class with Respondent, while the teacher gathered the students by the numbers. As punishment
for the behavior, Respondent retained G
R. by a basketball pole while the rest of the class
R. refused to stay by the pole, and joined his classmates in
went to the fitness room. G
R. “got in his face” and
line to enter the fitness room. As Respondent testified, when G
again called him “Ultimo,” Respondent grabbed the student by the sweatshirt sleeve and pulled
him out of the line to enter the fitness room. Respondent stated that he only used two fingers
and that he applied “slight” force. Respondent also stated that the two might have “scuffled a
posed no
bit.” Respondent placed the student in an area outside the classroom, and G
additional problems that day. The student did not testify, and it was not established that
Respondent pulled the student back for approximately five feet.

b.

The student complained to Bertini, who in turn spoke to Respondent
about the incident. Respondent did not deny grabbing or pulling the student, and told Bertini
that he had been angry and frustrated because the student did not want to participate in class
and kept calling him “Ultimo.” Bertini disputed Respondent’s claim that the force had been
insignificant, and again told him not to touch any student as a form of classroom management.

5

c.

Bertini placed Respondent on administrative leave while the incident was
investigated. After a third-party investigation, Respondent was suspended for three days for his
conduct
then Deputy
Superintendent Suzette Lovely wrote: “This type of behavior will not be tolerated and, if
continued, will force the district to initiate proceedings to terminate your employment as a
teacher.” (Exhibit 3, at p. 76.)

recommending the discipline,

In the letter

toward G

R.

14.

During the 2007-2008 school year, Bertini had received complaints from other
staff members about Respondent’s students being disruptive of other teachers’ classes and
about their destruction of school property and equipment shared by others. However, with the
exception of incidents involving Respondent’s students jumping out of the low-level classroom
window on a couple of occasions, no other specific incident, as set forth in paragraph 42 of the
Statement of Charges, was established at the hearing by competent evidence. Nevertheless,
Bertini relied on the reported incidents, as well as those set forth in factual finding numbers 10,
11, 12, and 13, to evaluate Respondent at the conclusion of the school year.

15.

On May 6, 2008, Bertini gave the 2007-2008 Formal Evaluation to Respondent.
In the evaluation and in the discussion about the evaluation, she criticized him for failing to
maintain an effective learning environment, primarily by not having appropriate classroom
control and by not enforcing school-wide disciplinary policies. Respondent was formally placed
on a Personal Improvement Plan (PIP) for the 2008-2009 school year that would include formal
and informal observations by Bertini. The following were listed in the PIP as specific areas of
concern: assessing student learning and communicating with students, family, and others about
student progress; creating and maintaining effective environment for student learning, and
establishing and maintaining standards for student behavior that creates a climate that promotes
fairness and respect; planning instruction and designing learning experiences for all students;
and developing and sequencing instructional activities and materials for student leaning. The
principal also urged Respondent to seek the assistance of a consulting, or mentor, teacher
through the District’s Peer Assistance and Review Program (PAR).

2008-2009 School Year

16.

Respondent taught eighth grade physical education classes during the 2008-2009
school year. The students followed the same routine of assembling by the numbers on the
blacktop area before moving to the specific class activity of the day.

a.

17.

On September 25, 2008, Bertini conducted an informal observation of
Respondent’s fifth period class. After students ran a warm-up lap, Respondent separated the
students into those that would perform a “shuttle run,” and those that would engage in free play,
which consisted of basketball or handball. Two female students left the group and went to the
water fountain near the locker rooms. They were out of Respondent’s sight for approximately
five minutes. Respondent noticed they were absent when he called their names for the run.

6

b.

On September 29, 2008, Bertini discussed her observations with
Respondent, and provided a written record of them, which contained suggestions for
improvement. She encouraged Respondent to continue to issue tickets to reward good behavior
and suggested that a greater variety free play activities might engage a greater number of
students in physical activity.

18.

During another class on September 25, 2008, Respondent directed two students
who were not participating in the class activity to walk around the track as a form of
punishment. Respondent did not have the students within his line of sight for part of the walk,
and the students disrupted other students using the track. Respondent failed to properly
supervise the two students, and he made no effort to redirect them when they disrupted the
other class.

19.

Bertini returned to Respondent’s class on October 7, 2008, this time to observe a
second period class. Respondent was providing instruction through a soccer dribbling drill.
Cones were set up in a line, and students were instructed to dribble the ball through a series of
cones to and from the end of the cones. Some of the students did not dribble on the return trip.
Respondent walked around the students, repeating instructions to dribble in both directions.
However, Respondent did not effectively clarify the instructions, and several students still did
not perform the drill as instructed. The scene appeared chaotic to Bertini, and she suggested,
during a post-observation discussion on October 9, 2008, that he could have better positioned
himself to instruct the students and that he could have had some students model the activity
while the rest watched.

20.

On October 9, 2008, Respondent met with Bertini after school, and left her office
at approximately 3:50 p.m. Respondent testified that he injured his back after arriving home
that afternoon, and that he called the District to report his problem and to request a substitute.
The District charged Respondent with dishonesty, alleging that he actually called to request a
substitute teacher before he left the school. The District did not present any credible evidence
regarding the time Respondent actually requested the substitute, and, therefore, it was not
established that he engaged in dishonest conduct.

21.

On October 10, 2008, Respondent was absent from school, and left a lesson plan
for a substitute teacher. The students in one of Respondent’s classes misbehaved, pulling down
the school’s volleyball nets. However, it was not established that the misbehavior was the result
of Respondent’s failure to provide adequate lesson plans.

a.

22.

The next observation by Bertini occurred on October 16, 2008, during the
fifth period. During the warm-up period, two students were lying down on the blacktop and
were not participating. When the students finished warming up, Respondent told everyone to
stand up. The two non-compliant students continued to lie down and Respondent did not
attempt to correct or direct them.

7

b.

Respondent then guided the students to the track, and directed some to
run one mile and others to walk one lap. While his back was to three of the students, the
students left the track and wandered into the class of another teacher. The other teacher had to
direct Respondent’s students back to their class.

c.

Bertini discussed her observations with Respondent, suggesting that he
provide non-compliant students with immediate feedback and redirection, that he follow
classroom behavioral expectations consistently, and that he consider his location to maximize
supervision. With respect to the latter, Bertini told Respondent that he could have positioned
himself on the south end of the track to better observe all students.

23.

On October 22, 2008, Respondent directed his students to a reading activity in a
, went into the room ahead of Respondent and took the
classroom. One of the students, A
teacher’s book from the cabinet before moving to his seat. Respondent saw the student take the
book, and asked A
asked if was accusing him of taking the book
because he was Mexican. Respondent replied, sarcastically, with something like, “oh, yeah,
sure, that’s it.” The student’s parents complained to the principal about the comment, which
they deemed racist. Bertini told respondent that the comment was inappropriate even if said in a
sarcastic tone. Respondent called A
’s parents and told them that he was not being racist
with his comment, but that A

is always “pushing the envelope.”

why he took it. A

24.

On November 7, 2008, Bertini conducted an informal observation of
Respondent’s fourth period class. The class activity was for students to run a lap in the grass
field. Students from another class were also using the field, to run cross-country. Respondent
directed his students to return to the blacktop after they finished their lap. Some students
remained in the field for an undetermined period of time after finishing their lap, interfering
with the students in the other class who were still running. In discussing her observations,
Bertini reminded Respondent to better position himself to maximize supervision.

a.

25.

On November 12, 2008, Bertini observed students in Respondent’s fourth
period as they performed activities in the fitness room. One student arrived late, and was not
dressed for the activity. Respondent directed the student to seat by a location near the radio. The
student changed the radio stations during the class, despite Respondent telling him to stop doing
so. Respondent did not take further action to prevent continued interference by the student. His
classroom management was therefore ineffective.

b.

Several students failed to properly use the handles on a trampoline-like
machine called the “rebounder,” despite Respondent’s verbal instructions. Respondent moved
around the room, but did not stay long enough with the students to ensure that his instructions
were followed. In addition, Respondent did not have an effective method of signaling students
to move from one machine or activity to another, resulting in some students not being able to
consistently access all the equipment.

8

c.

As discipline for misbehaving during the class, Respondent excluded four
students from the fitness center activities for five to ten minutes. He had them stand outside the
classroom, in an area where he could see them through the classroom window. While outside,
some of these students looked into another classroom and disrupted the other classroom.
Respondent failed to properly supervise the students in that he placed them where he could not
fully observe their activities, or, if he saw their misbehavior, failed to take corrective action.

d.

Respondent released the class approximately three minutes early in order
to talk to one student in private, leaving the majority of the students unsupervised for one to two
minutes while they walked from the fitness center to the locker rooms.

a.

26.

On December 10, 2008, Bertini conducted an observation of
Respondent’s fifth period class, in the fitness room. The students had seven minutes of physical
activity with the equipment, instead of the regular 20 minutes. However, it was not established
that the reduced time was the result of Respondent’s actions.

b.

Some students misused the equipment on December 10, 2008. They did
not hold the handles on the rebounder. They failed to perform step exercises. One student sat
incorrectly, sideways, on a machine called the “trunk twister.” Respondent moved about the
room attempting to redirect the students, but was unsuccessful. Respondent imposed no
consequences for the students’ failure to follow his directions. Respondent still did not have an
effective method of signaling students to move from one machine or activity to another. Bertini
characterized her observation as “seven minutes of chaos that Respondent could not stop or
correct.”

c.

Bertini shared her observations with Respondent, and provided the
following suggestions: “Reteach students the appropriate manner to use the machines. [¶] Pick a
spot in the room where you have good visual coverage of the students. Use a megaphone if
necessary to correct behavior and to be heard. [¶] Maximize time on task. Students only utilized
the machines for about 7 minutes. I would expect a use time closer to 20 minutes. [¶] Observe
your peers when they are in the fitness center to get management ideas.” (Exhibit 3, at p. 61.)

a.

27.

On January 12, 2009, in the fitness room, Respondent was addressing his
class about physical fitness. A student proudly referred to his physique as a “six pack.”
Respondent pointed to his stomach and joked that he had a “keg.” Another student, J
A.,
who was overweight, joined in by lifting his shirt and moving his stomach mass up and down.
Respondent joked that J

A. had “a whole brewery.” The students laughed at the comment.

b.

Respondent apologized to J

A. the following day, stating that he did
not mean to make a disparaging comment and that he was just joking. The student accepted the
apology, and no complaint was filed about the incident. At the hearing, Respondent testified
that the comment was probably inappropriate and that he should not have made it.

9

a.

28.

In January 2009, Respondent noticed that J

F., a student who was
seated on the blacktop in the front of the class, about one foot from him, had both hands inside
his pants. Respondent got close to the student and told him to stop doing what he was doing.
The student replied with a snide remark, and Respondent sent him to stand by a basketball pole.
As the rest of the class walked to the assigned physical activity, Respondent walked over to
F. and, in private, told the student that he could not continue to do what he was doing.
J
Respondent followed up with a call to the student’s mother, who seemed to appreciate the
teacher’s report.

b.

The student did not testify, and it was not established that Respondent
told him, in a tone loud enough for the class to hear, to “stop touching himself,” or that the
student was embarrassed by comment by Respondent.

a.

29.

On February 11, 2009, Bertini observed Respondent’s second period
class. Respondent supervised fitness testing of the boys while the girls played basketball. He
faced the boys, and the girls were behind him. Respondent periodically turned around to
supervise the girls. Some of the girls were not on task for at least part of the time. Five of the
girls were talking by a fire hydrant and another five were talking by a restroom, all outside
Respondent’s line of sight. Respondent either did not notice that ten girls were not engaged in
the activity, or, if he did, did not act to redirect them. The principal told the students to return to
play basketball.

b.

After

the
supervision of the girls, and suggested: “When planning an event that does not involve all
students, plan a structured activity for non participants. [¶] Be certain that at all times al of your
students stay within an area that you can visually scan.” (Exhibit 3, at p. 59.)

the observation, Bertini expressed her concern about

a.

30.

On March 23, 2009, Respondent noticed that a student, I

V., took a
shortcut instead of completing the entire assigned run activity. Respondent told the student to
do the proper run, and the student replied that he had done it. Respondent told I
V. that he
“was full of crap,” and to complete the run. The student refused and was sent to the office.

b.

The student complained to the principal, stating that Respondent had said
he “was full of shit.” In response to Bertini’s inquiry, Respondent denied using profanity and
said he had told the student he was full of “crap.”

c.

Neither I

V. nor any other student testified at the hearing about the
incident. Hearsay handwritten statements are insufficient, given Respondent’s contrary
recollection, to establish that Respondent told I
V. that he was “full of shit.” Accordingly,
the statement made by Respondent to Bertini was not shown to have been false.

10

a.

31.

On March 30, 2009, during a third period class observation by Bertini,
Respondent directed his class to run a warm-up lap. Four students walked instead of running
the lap. Respondent told the students that they would lose points if they did not run the lap.
Respondent’s statement did not alter the students’ behavior, and he told them to stay after class.
The students did not stay, and there is no evidence that they received any consequence for such
failure.

b.

After the warm-up lap, students were directed to a shot put activity. After
providing some background and instruction, Respondent lined up the students, by sex, so that
one from each line would take a shot. Respondent situated himself between the two shot putters
and provided direction and instruction. His location was appropriate for the activity. Some of
the boys in line engaged in disruptive activities, such as wrestling and throwing clods of grass.
Respondent addressed the misbehavior, first by telling the students to stop, and, second, when
they failed to do so, by directing them to walk around the track.

c.

While a boy was preparing to take his shot, a girl in the other line, who
had taken her shot, started to move to retrieve the ball. She briefly entered the throw zone,
which was a safety hazard. However, Respondent saw the girl and immediately told her to
return, which she did.

32.

On March 30, 2009, N

O. came to Respondent’s class in loaned physical
education clothes. This indicated to Respondent that the student had again failed to bring her
own appropriate physical education clothing, something she did about twice each week. Trying
to motivate the student, Respondent told her that she was going to have a difficult time passing
classes in high school, especially physical education,
if she was not come prepared.
Respondent also asked N
O. where she had gotten the shorts she was wearing. If she did
not complete high school, Respondent continued, she might end up eating out of trash cans. The
girl said something like “you’re not being very nice, Mr. Last.”

33.

It was not established, as alleged on paragraph 18 of the Statement of Charges,
that Respondent failed to supervise students on April 20, 2009. No witness with personal
knowledge of the events testified at the hearing, and Respondent did not recall the incident.

a.

34.

In addition to the discussions after classroom observations, Principal
Bertini provided Respondent with quarterly PIP updates. She summarized any progress, and set
forth incidents or continuing problems. For instance, on the positive side, it was noted that had
not been any incidents involving the touching of students, and some parental complaints had
decreased. On the other hand, there were still parental complaints; continued concerns existed
regarding Respondent’s classroom management; and, other teachers reported that Respondent’s
lack of classroom control was disrupting their classes. Bertini presented the last PIP update
report on April 23, 2009.

11

b.

With respect to one of the new complaints presented with the document,
information about a student with the
Respondent agreed that he shared confidential
noncustodial grandfather. He did not realize he was not supposed to share the information, and
subsequently apologized to the complaining parent.

35.

Also on April 23, 2009, Bertini presented Respondent with the 2008-2009
Formal Evaluation. Citing her observations as support, Bertini noted ongoing deficiencies in
Respondent’s performance, particularly in the area of creating and maintaining effective
environments for student learning. In this regard, Bertini noted Respondent’s inadequate
supervision and inconsistent application of discipline; she also pointed out that sarcastic and
other inappropriate comments undermined the creation of a climate of fairness and respect.
Respondent’s overall performance was rated as “unsatisfactory.”

a.

36.

On May 13, 2009, Respondent utilized a substitute teacher for his classes.
He left a lesson plan for the substitute, which plan was not submitted in evidence. However,
Respondent conceded that he does allow his students to engage in “free play,” and that his
lesson plans, including the one for this day, refer to such activity. Respondent testified, and
submitted a copy of a lesson plan used on May 11, 2009, to show that he typically limits “free
play” to specified activities, such as basketball or a game called “elimination.” He denied
leaving instructions for the substitute teacher to permit an activity called “jungle ball,” and no
evidence was presented to contradict this testimony.

b.

It was reported to Bertini that on May 13, 2009, students engaged in
“jungle ball,” and that one student was hurt during the activity, requiring the school nurse to
treat a swollen eye, a scraped knee, and bruising. However, it was not established that, even if
students played “jungle ball” and that one of them was injured, that the game or the injuries
were the result of Respondent’s lesson plan.

37.

On June 4, 2009, after receiving complaints of disruptions by Respondent’s
students, Bertini and Assistant Principal Sean McNamara, went
to the athletic field to
investigate. Bertini did not observe any actual disruption, but did see a student hiding behind a
storage container. Three others were seated on a bench not within Respondent’s line of sight.
Respondent explained that the students on the bench had earned the privilege of being there by
obeying the rules. Bertini told Respondent it was his responsibility to supervise the three
students, even if they had a free pass from the class activity. Respondent confirmed that a
student was missing, or “AWOL,” and told Bertini that he had tried to find the student without
success. Bertini told Respondent that he should have reported the matter to the office so that a
campus supervisor could have searched for the student. Respondent testified at the hearing that
the student hiding behind a storage container was subsequently placed on detention.

12

38.

On June 8, 2009, as Respondent was walking in front of his students, guiding
, jumped on top of a
them to the athletic field. One of the students behind Respondent, B
12-foot container. Once there, the student threw a plastic cone and a chair to the ground.
Respondent noticed the student after he was on top of the container, although it was unclear
whether he had done so before the chair and cone hit the ground. Respondent told the student to
come down from the container, which he did without the assistance of a ladder. Respondent did
not impose any discipline for Bruno’s actions.

39.

On June 8, 2009, Respondent sent a student to the office for making offensive
remarks to another student. Respondent could not see the student travel the entire distance to
the office, and he did not seek or assign an escort for the student. The student did not go to the
office, and his location for the rest of the day was not established at the hearing.

40.

On June 17, 2009, one of the students in Respondent’s fifth period class,
F
E., repeatedly disobeyed Respondent’s directive for him to sit on the blacktop by his
number and continued to talk to two of his classmates. Respondent subsequently walked the
class to the library, where they were to view pictures projected to a screen. F
E.
continued to talk to his two friends, and refused to sit down once in the room. Respondent had
sit next to him, and away from the other two students. However, after seating in the
F
E. started to get up again. When his verbal
front of the class for two or three minutes, F
commands for the student to sit down were disregarded, Respondent placed his hand on the
student’s shoulder and applied sufficient force for the student to fall back to the floor. The
student was not fully upright when Respondent pushed him down. Surprised, F
E.
stated something like “why the f--- did you push me down!” The student was sent to the office
after the incident, and was suspended for the one day left in the school year for using profanity.

Assistance by Consulting Teacher

41.

Following issuance of the PIP, Bertini referred Respondent to PAR. Respondent
agreed to participate, and Lisa Ezratty (Ezratty), a physical education teacher at another school,
served as Respondent’s mentor from September 2008 through May 2009. Ezratty and
Respondent met approximately nine times and communicated by electronic mail on several
others. She observed Respondent’s classroom approximately five times. Ezratty arranged for
Respondent to visit physical education classes at another of the District’s middle schools.

42.

Ezratty had been told by Bertini that Respondent needed assistance in the areas
of classroom management and communication with students. Based on her observations,
Ezratty concluded that Respondent had not made clear his expectations and consequences for
failing to meet them. She also felt that Respondent did not have interpersonal rapport with the
students. As a result of both deficits, students did not always follow Respondent’s directions
and refused to perform class assignments. Starting after her first observation, on December 9,
2008, Ezratty provided suggestions for Respondent to address these issues.

13

43.

Ezratty suggested that Respondent should be more personable with the students.
He should have clear and definite standards regarding what was expected in class, provide clear
consequences for failure to adhere to the rules, and consistently enforce the rules. She
concluded that Respondent’s lesson plans were adequate, and made no suggestions in this area.

44.

The mentor teacher’s last observation of Respondent’s classroom was on May
21, 2009. She did not observe improvement in his classroom management. He had to repeatedly
redirect the students, and did not seem to apply consequences for misbehavior. The students
appeared out of control and were disrespectful. Ezratty felt she had done everything she could
for Respondent. She concluded that Respondent had not made sufficient progress, and that he
was no longer being effective.

Additional Findings Regarding Supervision and Discipline

45.

Respondent was cooperative with Bertini and Ezratty, and he tried to follow at
least some of their suggestions. Respondent started using a positive reinforcement system in
which he used tickets to reward good behavior. He also used positive verbal reinforcement.
Starting in the 2008-2009 school year, he discussed the school’s Rules and Regulations
regarding uniform requirements, grading policy, locker room and blacktop requirements,
medical excuses, and behavior expectations, and required students to obtain parental
acknowledgement of having reviewed the rules.

46.

Respondent testified that he employs a progressive discipline system. Verbal
admonitions are followed by increasingly severe penalties, namely, reduction of class points,
disciplinary clean-up projects, separation from the class,
to the office, and
recommended suspension.

referral

47.

However, the classroom rules and regulations were not always consistently
enforced and discipline was not always imposed. As set forth in factual finding numbers 18,
22, 25, 26, 31.a., 38, 42, and 44, Respondent failed on multiple instances to impose
consequences for the students’ failure to follow his instructions or class rules. Both Bertini and
Ezratty had repeatedly emphasized the importance of consistent application of rules clearly
explained.

48.

As demonstrated in factual finding numbers 17, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 26, 29, 37,
38, and 39, Respondent failed to adequately supervise his students. Despite multiple
suggestions from Bertini, Respondent repeatedly failed to position himself to maximize his
ability to monitor the students. On several occasions, he placed students, some due to
disciplinary reasons, in locations where they were not always in his line of sight. In some
instances, students were away from class activities longer than they should have and
Respondent failed to timely notice their absence.

14

Additional Findings Regarding Dishonesty

49.

R. incident,
Except as set forth in factual finding number 11 involving the G
it was not established that Respondent engaged in dishonest conduct with respect to the other
incidents involving physical contact with the students.

Additional Evidence Presented in Support of Continued Employment

50.

Respondent enjoys teaching and interacting with students. He has been involved
in teaching young people for most of his life. He has coached several sports, including football,
surfing, tennis, and volleyball, in settings ranging from little league to college. He has
supervised recreational activities and has taught school at his church.

a.

51.

Respondent presented three witnesses who attested to his good character
and judgment. Patrick Gleason (Gleason), a teacher, has known Respondent for approximately
35 years. They have volunteered together on church and other community volunteer projects,
and Respondent taught a class in the early 1980s in a program Gleason supervised. In the class,
Respondent interacted well with seventh and eighth graders. Gleason described Respondent as
one of the most honorable and honest men he knows.

b.

Marla McKeown met Respondent 35 years ago in church. She and her
family have socialized with Respondent and his family over the years. She described
Respondent as a man of character and high integrity.

c.

Jim Seiger, a retired principal in the District and Respondent’s brother-in-
law, has spent considerable time with Respondent over the past 23 years. Respondent is a good
father and family man, who regularly attends church. He has never seen Respondent raise his
fist in anger, and stated that Respondent possesses the appropriate temperament to be a teacher.

Respondent’s Fitness to Teach

52.

Respondent’s conduct shows unfitness to teach in several respects.3 The

3Courts require evaluation of a teacher's alleged misconduct in terms of its impact on
fitness for service utilizing the following criteria first enunciated by the Supreme Court in
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (Morrison): the likelihood that
the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such
adversity anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching
certificate held by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any,
surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in
the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; and the extent to
which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the
15

evidence received at the hearing established several shortcomings in Respondent’s teaching,
and Respondent repeatedly failed to maintain the necessary environment for learning. He did
not always properly supervise students or consistently discipline misbehaving students, and he
made comments that
further undermined his authority. Despite several admonitions,
Respondent physically restrained four students as a method of discipline. The results of his
inability or unwillingness to properly discipline and supervise students, disrespectful and
disruptive classes, were apparent to others in school. Respondents’ students were adversely
affected by his conduct, as they lost learning opportunities. The degree of adversity was
significant because the disruptions and poor learning environment lasted for most of two school
years. In the cases of the four students whom Respondent physically restrained, they were
particularly adversely impacted. Other teachers whose classes were disrupted by Respondent’s
unsupervised students were also adversely impacted. Respondent’s conduct is relatively recent.
Although Respondent argued that some of students presented particular challenges and were
difficult to control, these are not extenuating circumstances. Similarly, Respondent’s assertion
that he restrained J
A. to keep the student from hurting himself was not established by
credible evidence, and Respondent’s actions with respect to this student were not shown to have
been guided by noble motives. While Respondent enjoys teaching, his failure to adequately
supervise the students, his inability to consistently enforce disciplinary rules, and his physical
restraint of students were not guided by praiseworthy motives. Because Respondent’s actions
or inactions occurred over a significant period, spanning over most of two school years, they
are likely to recur. The other factors are neutral or do not apply.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “immoral or unprofessional conduct.” The term “immoral conduct” as a basis for
dismissal of teachers has long been included in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), in its
predecessors, and in other provisions pertaining to teachers employed in community college
districts. The term was first discussed in the context of teacher dismissal in Board of
Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808 (Weiland), and the court’s definition in that
case has often been cited by other courts. (See, e.g., Palo Verde v. Hensey (1970) 9
Cal.App.3d 967 (Hensey).) The Weiland Court stated:

constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. Not all factors may apply in
each case, and only the pertinent ones need to be examined. (West Valley-Mission Community
College District v. Conception (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777; Governing Board v. Haar
(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384 (Haar).) The determination of fitness for service required by
Morrison is a factual one. (Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 C.3d 691, 698, fn. 3
(Jack M.); Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d. 208, 220-221; Haar,
supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 384).

16

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of
the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency,
depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful,
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)
Further, whether immoral conduct can form the basis of dismissal must be evaluated in terms of
the teacher's fitness for service under the Morrison factors. (Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d at pp.
696-697.)

Courts have found immoral conduct where a teacher stated that

the district
superintendent spent too much time “licking up the Board” as he simulated licking of the wall
in an up and down manner (Hensey, supra); where a teacher knocked a sheriff deputy down
with his car after the deputy discovered a partially naked female student in the car (Board of
Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820); where a teacher performed oral copulation
in a doorless toilet stall in a public restroom in a department store during business hours
(Governing Board v. Metcalf (1974) 36 Cal.App.3d 546); where a teacher purchased and
received goods known to be stolen (Pittsburg Unified School District v. Commission of
Professional Competence (1983) 146 Cal.App.3d 964); and where a teacher made repeated
comments containing sexual innuendo to middle school girls, tightly hugged female students,
and placed his hand on and rubbed a female student’s thigh (Haar, supra, 28 Cal.App.4th 369).

Respondent’s conduct does not constitute immoral conduct. The District charged
Respondent with three instances of immoral conduct pursuant to section 44932, subdivision
(a)(1). However, as set forth in factual finding numbers 11, 20, and 30, it was not established
that Respondent pushed Gage R. against a kiosk, that he lied to Bertini about being sick, or that
V. Cause for dismissal, therefore, does not exist for
he used profanity in his exchange with I
immoral conduct under this provision.

2.

immoral conduct.

Section 44939 permits districts to immediately suspend teachers who are
charged with immoral conduct. In this case, the District alleged that Respondent’s physical
contact with five students constitutes immoral conduct pursuant to this statute. However, as
with the three incidents specifically charged to constitute immoral conduct pursuant to
section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), Respondent’s conduct toward these students did not rise to
It was not established that Respondent engaged in
the level of
inappropriate conduct with respect to G
R., as set forth in factual finding number 11.a.
With respect to the other four incidents, the evidence presented at the hearing, as set forth in
factual finding numbers 10, 12, 13, and 40, showed Respondent’s lack of control and
frustration, but did not establish his willful desire to hurt students or a reckless disregard for
their safety or welfare. Respondent’s conduct toward these four students, whether examined
indecency,
individually or collectively, does not constitute lack of rectitude, corruption,
depravity, or conduct willfully indifferent to good order and public welfare analogous to

17

conduct previously found by courts to constitute immoral conduct. Therefore, cause did not
exist for Respondent’s immediate suspension under section 44939. However, because cause
does exist under other provisions for Respondent’s dismissal, as set forth below, this conclusion
does not result in a backpay entitlement for Respondent.

3.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “dishonesty.” In an often-cited definition,
the court stated in Hogg v. Real Estate
Commissioner (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717: “Dishonesty necessarily includes the element
of bad faith. As defined in the dictionaries and in judicial decisions, it means fraud, deception,
betrayal, faithlessness. [Citations.] As phrased by the court in Alsup v. State, 91 Tex. Cr. 224,
‘dishonesty denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive
and betray.’ ”

In Fontana Unified School District v. Burman, supra, 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12, the
Supreme Court
the Morrison factors to the determination of
“dishonesty.” As the Court noted: “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest fib to the
most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, and
not every falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” (Ibid).

required application of

As set forth in factual finding number 11, in the only incident of alleged dishonesty
established at the hearing, Respondent falsely told Bertini on December 19, 2009, that he did
not recall the details of an incident two days earlier involving student G
R. Respondent
sought to avoid culpability over the G
R. incident and his statement constitutes more than a
small fib. Therefore, his conduct constitutes dishonesty.4

However, this single statement is insufficient to demonstrate unfitness to teach under
Morrison. Thus, while the conduct occurred in the relatively recent past, and the statement was
self-serving, it was not established that Respondent’s statement was likely to adversely affect
students or fellow teachers or that the conduct is likely to recur. The other factors are neutral or
do not apply.

4.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), permits dismissal of a permanent certificated
employee for “evident unfitness for service.” Evident unfitness for service is established by
conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching,
ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. [Footnote omitted] Unlike
‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait,
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the
expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) As a
threshold matter, the Morrison criteria must be examined to ascertain whether the conduct in

4 Member Berndt did not agree that Respondent’s conduct constitutes dishonesty.
18

question indicates unfitness for service. “If the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to
determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a
defect in temperament.” (Id., at p. 1445.)

In Woodland, during the span of approximately one year, the teacher in question had
failed to follow proper instructions for disciplining students, had written sarcastic and belittling
notes about students, had insulted students in class, had used profanity in class, had behaved
rudely and contemptuously toward parents, had made sarcastic remarks about other teachers in
the hearing of students, had displayed insubordination and disrespect toward administrators,
had threatened other teachers, and had disrupted the grading process by interfering with the
grading policy of a substitute who took over one of his classes. The court concluded that the
teacher’s conduct demonstrated unfitness to teach and that the conduct was traceable to a defect
in temperament, namely, the contempt for fellow teachers and the administration.

In the instant matter, as set forth in factual finding numbers 10, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 44, 47, 48, and 52, Respondent failed to
maintain an environment conducive to learning, failed to properly supervise students, failed to
consistently discipline students, made inappropriate comments toward students, and resorted to
physical restraint to control misbehaving students, which failures establish unfitness to teach.
The fact that the problems have persisted over most of two school years period despite repeated
admonitions against touching students and suggestions for improvement indicates that a fixed
temperamental defect or inadequacy is at the root of Respondent’s behavior. Of particular
concern is the lack of self control displayed in the continued use of physical restraint to modify
student behavior. Therefore, in the existing circumstances, Respondent’s unfitness to teach,
established pursuant to the applicable Morrison factors, has been shown to be the result
temperamental defects or inadequacies under Woodland, and cause for dismissal exists pursuant
to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).5

5.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), permits dismissal of a permanent certificated
employee for “persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board
of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.”

A violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be established by reference to
the Morrison factors. If unfitness to teach is shown, then the District must further establish that
Respondent’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and
continuing.” (San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1982) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183 (San Dieguito); Governing Board of the
Oakdale Union High School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82 (Seaman).) In
Seaman, the court stated: “The word ‘persistent,’ is defined by lexicographers as ‘refusing to

5 Member Berndt does not concur in this conclusion.

19

relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly
repeated.’ [Citation omitted] And in the judicial decisions of this, as well as other states, the
word has been interpreted to mean ‘continuing or constant.’ [Citations omitted].” (Seaman,
supra, 28 Cal.App.3d at p.82.) Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved
over a period of time are not generally considered “persistent.” (See, e.g., Bourland v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317; Seaman, supra, 28
Cal.App.3d at pp. 81-84).

District Board Policy 4119 makes each teacher responsible for the teaching and
supervision of the children in his class. As set forth in factual finding numbers
17, 18, 19, 22,
24, 25, 26, 29, 37, 38, 39, and 48, Respondent repeatedly failed to provide proper supervision to
his students. Significantly, such failure occurred despite multiple suggestions and directives
from Bertini and Ezratty for Respondent to improve his supervision of students.

District Board Policy 5150 requires teachers to enforce discipline in a firm, fair and
consistent manner and to demonstrate respect for students sufficient to establish control and
order within the classroom. Respondent continually failed to enforce discipline in a firm, fair or
consistent manner, as set forth in factual finding numbers 18, 22, 25, 26, 31.a., 38, 42, 44, and
47. As Bertini and Ezratty concluded, such failure was likely the cause of his inability to
establish sufficient control and order in the classroom. His inappropriate comments to students,
set forth in factual finding numbers 23, 27, 30, and 32, did not demonstrate respect for students
conducive to establishing control and order in the classroom. Respondent’s failure to properly
discipline students was also demonstrated by his resort to physical restraint as a form of
behavior control in four instances, as set forth in factual finding numbers 10, 12, 13, and 40.

Respondent’s violations of District Board policies 4119 and 5150 were numerous,
continuous, and thus “persistent,” pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(7). Moreover, as
set forth in factual finding number 52, the conduct that resulted in violation of these policies
demonstrates unfitness to teach under Morrison.

6.

Section 49001 and Policy 5150 prohibit use of corporal punishment as a
disciplinary measure. Section 49001 defines corporal punishment as the “[w]illful infliction of,
or willfully causing the infliction of, physical pain on a pupil.” However, Respondent’s
conduct, despite being serious and repeated, did not meet the statutory definition of corporal
punishment. The students did not testify that Respondent caused them pain, and it was not
established that Respondent was willfully trying to cause them pain.

7.

All evidence presented against dismissal has been considered. However, this
evidence is insufficient to mitigate or excuse the conduct found to constitute evident unfitness
for service or persistent violation of school laws and regulations. The District has therefore
established that dismissal is appropriate and warranted.

20

ORDER

The District’s decision is upheld, and Respondent Kirk Last may be dismissed as a

permanent certificated employee of the Capistrano Unified School District.

DATED: _______________

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

_____________________________________
SAMUEL D. REYES, Chairperson
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

_____________________________________
JUDY BERNDT, Member

_______________________________
HOLLY JEFFERSON, Member

21

