BEFORE THE
COMMISSON ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. 2009101532

SAMUEL CARTER,

Respondent.

DECISION

The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on February 16 and 17,

and March 3, 2010, at Port Hueneme, before the Commission on Professional
Competence. The Commission consisted of Thomas Holtke, Virginia Escobar, and
Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative
Hearings.

Complainant was represented by James R. Lynch and Natashia Sawhney,

Garcia Calderon L.L.P. Respondent appeared and was represented by Richard
Schwab, Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad.

Evidence was received, the case argued, and the matter was submitted for

decision on the March 3, 2010.

The Commission hereafter makes its Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions, and

Orders, as follows:

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE

The Hueneme Elementary School District (District) brought this proceeding to

terminate one of its permanent certificated employees, Respondent Samuel Carter
(Carter or Respondent). Respondent has taught sixth grade in the District for the past
ten years.

The Accusation filed against Respondent asserted three of the statutorily-

authorized bases for termination. It was first alleged that Respondent was evidently
unfit for teaching. The second claim was that he had engaged in unprofessional
conduct. Finally, it was alleged that his actions constituted immorality. The factual
allegations included assertions that Respondent had called students names, made them
run sprints and laps as a disciplinary measure, threatened the children with violence,
and threw a backpack at a child. It was also alleged that Respondent acted

unprofessionally in a meeting with two parents, which degenerated into an argument,
and then a challenge to fight.

Respondent, at hearing, admitted to some unprofessional acts, provided

evidence to disprove other claims, and submitted evidence of efforts toward
remediation of any professional deficiencies.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

A. The Parties, Jurisdiction, and Procedural Background

1. Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, and had

been employed by the District for 13 years at the time of the hearing. He has taught
sixth, seventh, and eighth grade classes, and as noted above, has been in a sixth grade
classroom for the past ten years. During his entire tenure at the District, he has been
assigned to E.O. Green Middle School (Green), one of the two middle schools in the
District.

2. Complainant Deborah DeSmeth executed and filed the Accusation while

acting in her official capacity as Assistant Superintendent of the District. The
Accusation was executed on September 15, 2009.

3. The Governing Board of the District had previously voted, on July 27,
2009, to immediately suspend Respondent without pay, effective September 15, 2009,
and to proceed with dismissal of Respondent.

4. Respondent requested a hearing and the case proceeded to hearing. All

jurisdictional requirements have been met.

B. Findings Pertaining to the Charges Against Respondent

I. The Parent-Teacher Meeting of February 27, 2009

5. On February 27, 2009, Respondent participated in a parent-teacher
conference with Mr. and Mrs. F., and Ms. Felicitas Perez, one of the assistant
principals at Green. As detailed below, that meeting devolved into a loud
confrontation between Respondent and Mr. F., which confrontation could have
become violent.

6. The parents in question had a son, R

F., in Respondent’s class. Before

the school year they had asked the school administration to place their son in
Respondent’s class, because he had taught their older son, and they considered
Respondent to be a good teacher.

2

7. In the weeks prior to the meeting, R

had been misbehaving, mainly by
harassing conduct aimed at another boy, N.A., who was a special education student.
While N.A. was not severely handicapped—he was placed in a regular day class—the
boy was not as socially adept as other children in the class, and it is inferred from the
would bother N.A., harassing and teasing
record that he was a sensitive child. R
him. Respondent had told R
terms, not to bother N.A.1

, on more than one occasion, and in no uncertain

8. Prior to the February meeting, R

had been suspended, and he was

required to attend Saturday school because of an incident where he harassed N.A. to
the point that the other made a violent response, and was transferred from
Respondent’s class. Thereafter, Respondent referred R
boy had thrown an eraser during class. This second suspension brought R
mother to school, where she met with the principal, Mr. Carlos Dominguez
(Dominguez). During their discussions, she raised the possibility of transferring her
son from Respondent’s class. They decided to set up a meeting between the parents
and Respondent before that step was taken.

for suspension because the

’s

9. Respondent was told of the meeting about one day before it was to occur.

Dominguez told Respondent that he should be ready to detail R
issues. Dominguez informed Respondent that he would like to avoid transferring the
boy, as the principal thought such action might be perceived as rewarding bad
behavior.

’s behavioral

10. On the day of the meeting the parents met with Ms. Perez, because Mr.
Dominguez was busy, and Ms. Pena, another vice principal who had dealt with the
suspension and R
’s mother, was also unavailable. It is clear that Ms. Perez had
little or no information about the purpose of the meeting.

11. When the parents and Ms. Perez arrived at Respondent’s classroom, he

was at his desk, finishing up some work. It was not established, as alleged, that
Respondent ignored them, nor was it established that he only came to meet with them
after Ms. Perez retrieved him. Instead, he finished his task within approximately one
minute of the others’ arrival, and he came and sat with them.

12. It was not established, as alleged, that Respondent interrupted Ms. Perez

to speak to the parents. Nor was it established, as alleged, that he belittled the child in
question. He did describe matters pertaining to the boy’s misbehavior, but it was not
established, as alleged, that he stated he would not take the boy’s “B.S.” It was not
established that he was rude, confrontational, or interrupting, as alleged. To the
contrary, Mr. F. in his testimony described Respondent’s recitation of his son’s

1 R

was one of the students to whom Respondent made statements of a

threatening type. See Part B. III, below, at Factual Findings 21 and 27.

3

behaviors as being delivered in a monotone, though he perceived Respondent as
somewhat agitated.

13. It was established that after Respondent finished with his description of

R
F.’s behavior, Mrs. F. told her husband that “this isn’t going to work.”
Although she testified she did not say it loud enough for Respondent to hear, that
statement was heard by Ms. Perez, and it is inferred that Respondent did hear Mrs. F.
let her husband know that she did not consider the meeting was going to be fruitful.

14. Mr. F. asked Respondent why the behavior problems had not previously

been brought to their attention. Respondent stated that he did not want to do so
because when a teacher has something negative to say about a student, parents and
administrators “get bent out of shape.” (Ex. 6, p. 2, 2d par.) He also stated that in
general he did not like talking to parents.

15. As the parents neared the door of the classroom, Respondent was at his

desk retrieving his jacket. Mr. F. said that his son wasn’t going to be picking up any
more trash for Respondent.2 Respondent reacted by saying, “then you pick it up.”
Mr. F. replied, “make me.” The exchange quickly escalated, with Mr. F. resorting to
profanity, and calling Respondent an old man. Rather than de-escalate the matter,
Respondent moved closer to Mr. F., and he began arguing with Mr. F. The two men
soon were outside of the classroom, almost bumping chests, yelling at each other,
essentially each daring the other to throw a punch and thereby start a fight. The two
was
were eventually separated by Mrs. F. and Ms. Perez. Shortly thereafter, R
transferred from the class, and he did not have to serve the two day suspension that
had brought his mother to school and set the events in motion.

16. Respondent acted unprofessionally by allowing himself to become
embroiled in a shouting match with a parent, a confrontation that came close to
fisticuffs. The Commission does not find unprofessional conduct until the point
where Respondent told Mr. F. that he should pick up the trash, and from that point on.
While Mr. F.’s actions are not excused in these findings, and while the Commission
does not find that a teacher must be required to submit to profanity, name calling, or
threatening behavior, it is incumbent on a professional to take steps not to escalate
such a situation. Had Respondent not replied to Mr. F.’s statement about his son’s
future behavior, or if he had simply left the room without comment once Mr. F.
became angry, this situation could have been avoided.3

2 Apparently, the teachers could assign such duties to students who had

misbehaved, and Respondent had assigned R
the latter had misbehaved.

to pick up trash on occasions when

3 This finding against Respondent is not an endorsement of the
administration’s handling of the matter prior to the meeting. The purpose of the
meeting was not clearly communicated to Respondent, and Ms. Perez had not been

4

II. The Notice of Unprofessional Conduct

17. On March 11, 2009, Ms. DeSmeth issued a Notice of Unprofessional

Conduct (NUC) to Respondent, pursuant to section 44938 of the Education Code.4
The NUC made clear that Respondent’s behavior was deemed unprofessional and
unacceptable, and was a violation of District administrative regulations. The NUC
then “direct[ed]” Respondent to take the following steps to remediate his
unprofessional conduct:

“1. Talk to co-workers, parents and staff in a professional

manner.

“2. Refrain from engaging in threatening or aggressive
body movements or tone of voice towards co-
workers, parents or students.

“3. Refrain from making disparaging, derogatory or
belittling comments to or about students.”
(Ex. 7, p. 2.)

18. The NUC warned that failure to comply with the directives could lead to

discipline including suspension.

III. Respondent’s Conduct Toward Children in the Classroom

19. During the 2008-2009 school year, including during the period after
issuance of the NUC, Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct by his behavior
in the classroom and while instructing. His unprofessional conduct manifested itself
in statements he made to his students, individually or together, as well as other
conduct. Respondent’s unprofessional conduct included the following acts:

20.

(A) He called many of the children names, on more than one occasion,
and in front of all the children in his class. He repeatedly called one particular boy a
“buffalo head” which embarrassed the boy.5 He also referred to children as

briefed on the situation. She appeared to have no knowledge about the problems that
. However, such can not justify Respondent’s
Respondent had been having with R
action.

4 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

5 Just what the significance of this term is, or what was meant by it was never

established, although several students, including the boy referred to in this way,
testified to Respondent using this term on more than one occasion.

5

“knucklehead[s],” “stupid,” “chump[s],” and “twit[s].” Other terms he used included
“ignorant” and “tart.”

(B) Respondent engaged in these acts by either by calling the child by

such names, or making statements to the effect that a certain child was “acting like a
chump” or was “being a knucklehead,” or words to that effect. On some occasions,
the statements had an admonishing tone, i.e., “don’t act like a knucklehead.” In the
context of classroom instruction, a professional should not compare a child’s behavior
in this way to some negative stereotype, as it is tantamount to calling the child that
name, and that is how the child will perceive the teacher’s conduct.
In fact, some
children who testified perceived Respondent’s comparisons as actually calling the
children the name in question.

21. Respondent made threatening statements to students, saying things such as

“I will rip your throat out” or “I will rip your skull out.”

22. During a lockdown that occurred on or about March 6, 2009, and after
turning the lights off in the classroom, Respondent wanted the children to remain
quiet. So, he told them stories to frighten them, attempting to show why they should
be quiet in an emergency. He told them stories about combat in Vietnam, where
some soldiers, in an effort to remain undetected by the enemy, would slit their friends
throats to silence them. He also told them about a group of nurses who were
murdered because some could not stop crying, and were located by the murderer.6 He
stated that he would snap the children’s necks if they did not be quiet.

23. It was not established, as alleged, that Respondent poked his finger in the
because the boy would not be quiet.

chest of a boy named T

24. During the period after the issuance of the NUC, 2009, and at other times

during the school year, Respondent yelled at the children, on a regular and nearly
routine basis, often slamming desks or other objects and yelling in their faces. Much
of the Respondent’s yelling was aimed at a group of four or five children who were
often misbehaving. Respondent would get his face close to the children’s faces when
yelling at them, the distance estimated by child witnesses as being from a few inches
to one or two feet. He face was described as angry during these incidents.

25.

(A) During the period after the issuance of the NUC, and at other times
during the school year, Respondent often made students run laps or sprints outside of
his classroom. During the day, he would keep a tally on the board of how many laps
or sprints would have to be run by students in the class. This occurred during class
time not devoted to physical education. Although Respondent asserted that the

6 From the testimony of the students it is reasonably inferred that he was
talking about the infamous case involving Richard Speck, who murdered eight student
nurses in Chicago in 1966.

6

purpose of these exercises was not punitive, and that he was only trying to burn of
some of the students’ excess energy, the weight of the evidence is to that the activity
was disciplinary, and punitive in nature.7 More than one student testified that they
were made to run because they had talked in class, or not paid attention, or otherwise
had failed to comply with the rules. The student witnesses clearly perceived the
sprints and laps as a disciplinary response. For example, one testified that he told his
mother that he had had to run sprints, and when she asked why, the student told her it
was because he had misbehaved.

(B) One child, M.M., testified that he sometimes had to run more than

once per day. He also testified that Respondent made him run in the rain, and he
recalled that another boy had been forced to run in rainy weather as well. One boy,
T.J., passed out while running laps, or appeared to.

(C) It was not established, as alleged, that Respondent did not

supervise his students when he made them run sprints or laps.

26.

(A) On or about May 21, 2009, Respondent became angry with
several of his students, who were misbehaving while he was trying to teach. He
directed the students, who included a 12-year-old girl, A.S., to go outside and run
some sprints. As A.S. was in the process of going outside, Respondent picked up her
backpack, and threw it across the room in her direction. However, it did not strike
her.

(B) It was not established, as alleged, that A.S., had to duck to avoid

being struck by the backpack, and it was not established that Respondent meant to
strike her with it. However, he stated to the rest of the class, after the girl had left the
classroom, that he wished the backpack had hit her.

27. On or about May 21, 2009, Respondent became angry with a student, J.,

12 years old, and Respondent told the boy, that if he were the boy’s age, he would rip
hit throat out. Respondent’s intention was to warn the boy that his behavior could
lead to conflict with others, but Respondent’s method was inappropriate and
unprofessional. On another occasion, Respondent held up his fist to the face of one of
the children, who had been roughhousing with another child, and asked the child how
the child would like it if Respondent socked him. On yet another occasion, he told
R

F. that if he were that boy’s father, he would throw him off the roof.

28. At various times Respondent told the students stories of how people

involved with violence could be badly hurt. He told stories, purportedly from his
youth, of people having their teeth broken out on street curbs by assailants, or being

7 During his testimony, Respondent stated that the running was not punitive,

just “corrective behavior.”

7

stabbed with knives. This was apparently done with an eye toward convincing the
children not to become involved with gangs and drugs.

29. While it was established that one or two students did not want to come to

school due to Respondent’s demeanor during classes, it was not established, as
alleged, that the students feared Respondent and found his class a terrifying
experience.

IV. Respondent’s Conduct Toward the School Principal

30. Respondent acted disrespectfully toward the school principal, Mr.
Dominguez, during the period from March 11 to May 21, 2009, in front of the
children, although not in Dominguez’s presence. He would call Dominguez by his
first name, Carlos, in front of the children. He stated that Dominguez did not know
how to run things, and he stated that he did not care what Dominguez said or did, and
that he was not afraid of Dominguez. He also stated that he would go “toe to toe”
with Dominguez, or words to that effect. He led the children to believe that they
would not have recourse with the school principal, and they perceived that
Respondent did not respect the principal.

C. Respondent’s Efforts at Remediation and Improvement

31. Respondent failed to improve his performance following his receipt of the
NUC, as established by Factual Findings 19 through 21, 24, 25(A), 26(A), 27, and 29.
Although the NUC called for professional and courteous behavior on Respondent’s
part, and required him refrain from loud, aggressive, and threatening behavior, and to
refrain from disparaging or derogatory remarks to or about students, he continued to
do so in the approximately 90 days following service of the NUC.

32. After he was suspended, and beginning in October 2009, Respondent

began receiving counseling on a regular basis.8 His counselor, Ann Kosinski,
testified on Respondent’s behalf. She is a licensed clinical social worker, and is
licensed to act as a psychotherapist. At the time of the hearing, she was seeing
Respondent once per week, on average.

33

(A). Ms. Kosinski attested that Respondent has attempted to and has
gained insight into his conduct and why it was problematic. From her sessions with
Respondent, she has gleaned that he is passionate about teaching, and that he was not
aware that many of his behaviors, which were meant to control the classroom, assist
in instruction, and inculcate certain values in the students, were in fact negative
actions. Thus, for example, he was not aware that his constant yelling, or pounding
the desk, which he did to get the children under control and paying attention, was so

8 He testified that he had obtained some counseling at his church in the

summer of 2009, but it is clear that routine counseling began in October.

8

inappropriate and potentially frightening to the children. Although he grew up in a
cultural milieu where name-calling was an everyday occurrence, he had not
understood that it could have a negative effect on children when coming from a
teacher.

(B) Regarding the incident with Mr. and Mrs. F., Ms. Kosinski

perceived that Respondent felt that his authority was being attacked and challenged,
and that Respondent felt that his character was being assaulted as well. She
counseled him not to respond in kind to those who might do such things. She is of the
opinion that over a period of time Respondent had come to take responsibility for the
teacher-parent conference becoming an ugly confrontation.

(C) According to Ms. Kosinski, Respondent has come to understand

that many of his actions are inappropriate and counterproductive to his goals as a
teacher. She has counseled him to use positive approaches with students, rather than
the negative ones he had been using, and that he must give up some of the control he
has maintained. She is of the opinion that wrongful conduct would not recur if he
were placed back in a classroom, in part because his being placed on leave was a
wake-up call, and because he has obtained counseling.

(D) Much of Ms. Kosinski’s work with Respondent has focused him
on teaching strategies. Thus, at the hearing, she produced a list of goals he has set.
All pertained to changing Respondent’s methods in the classroom.

34.

(A) Respondent became a teacher relatively late in life, after having
served in the Marine Corps, and in various business positions, such as stock broker,
and personnel management. He has also served as a Vista volunteer. He has earned
a Masters Degree in Christian Education. He holds a multiple subject credential.
There was no evidence of any disciplinary action against him by the District in the
four years leading up to the filing of the Accusation.

(B) Respondent attested that he did not realize that the students were

frightened by his stories of real life disasters, acknowledging that he said too much in
his efforts to quiet them during the lockdown, or in his efforts to deter them from
involving themselves with gangs and drugs. When he yelled, he was not intending to
scream, and was not controlling what he describes as a voice that is loud to begin
with. He asserted that he has learned that some of his methods were counter-
productive. He acknowledged that he should not have escalated the encounter with
R
F.’s father, and that name calling is inappropriate. He attested that he would
maintain his counseling if he were retained in his position.

D. Findings Pertaining to the Morrison Factors:

35. Where there is conduct that might justify termination of a teacher, an

examination must be made of whether or not that conduct indicates that the

9

Respondent in question is unfit to teach. This requirement was first set forth in
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229. There the Supreme
Court held that factors that may be examined to determine fitness include the
likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers;
the degree of such adversity anticipated; and, the proximity or remoteness in time of
the conduct. Other factors may include the type of certificate held by the teacher;
extenuating or aggravating circumstances; the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood that the
conduct in question will recur; and, the extent that discipline will cause an adverse or
chilling impact on the constitutional rights of the teacher involved, or other teachers.

36.

(A) Adverse consequences on students and teachers, and the degree

thereof: There were adverse consequences for students in Respondent’s class.
Calling children names, directly or indirectly by comparison, is detrimental to them.
Two students did not want to come to class due to the tone set by Respondent.
Threatening children or telling them stories that frighten them, is detrimental to them
as well. Engendering disrespect for school administrators is also detrimental to
students and can be to other teachers.

(B) Proximity in time: This conduct occurred in the period 2008 to

2009. Thus, the events described herein must be deemed recent.

(C) Type of certificate held by Respondent: Respondent holds a

multiple subject teaching credential.

(D) Likelihood of recurrence: The conduct in question was ongoing

during much of the 2008-2009 school year. While Respondent began seeing a
counselor, that did not occur until the proceeding was well under way. It did not
occur after the confrontation with Mr. F., or at any time during the second semester of
the 2008-2009 school year. Although Respondent’s counselor has a positive outlook,
it must be noted that the focus of the counseling has been on developing teaching
goals, and it is not clear that there has been a real gain in insight by Respondent, aside
from developing a sense of why he does what he does, i.e., his experience as a youth,
and how education helped him achieve during his life. Based on the entire record and
the inferences reasonably drawn from it, Respondent’s unprofessional conduct is
likely to recur.

(E) Implication of constitutional rights: No constitutional rights, of

either the Respondent or other teachers, are implicated if Respondent is terminated for
his conduct described in this decision.

//

//

10

(F) Extenuating or aggravating circumstances:

(i) In aggravation, Respondent’s actions occurred over a period

of months, and after he received an NUC that flowed from seriously unprofessional
conduct.

(ii) While there is some extenuation regarding the events of the
parent-teacher meeting, in that Mr. F. had used profanity and had escalated the matter,
there is no extenuation in Respondent’s other actions. Respondent’s desire to scare
his students straight, or to make them behave does not justify his methods, which can
not be allowed in public schools at this time. Likewise, there is some extenuation by
the way the school administration failed to curtail Respondent’s use of laps and
sprints to control his students.9

37. Under all the circumstances, Respondent’s ongoing conduct establishes
that he is unfit to teach in the district, within the meaning of the Morrison decision,
and he should be terminated as a teacher.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Legal Conclusions Generally Applicable to the Case

1. The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to

section 44944, and Factual Findings 1 through 4.

2. “Unprofessional conduct” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), may

be defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is
such conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing.
(Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) However, the conduct in
question, to amount to unprofessional conduct, must indicate unfitness to teach.
(Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167,
1174.)

3. “Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932,
subdivision (a)(5), requires that the unfitness for service be attributable to a defect or
inadequacy in temperament, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice
that the teacher’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school

9 Ms. Perez testified that at some time prior to the events in question, she
came upon Respondent and a female student outside the classroom; he was having her
run. The child had been transferred into his class because she was a behavior
problem. Mr. Perez took the child to the office, and the child was transferred out of
the class. Respondent testified that Mr. Dominguez knew that he was using running
as well.

11

district. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (Zuber) (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)

4. “Immoral conduct,” of which Respondent has been accused, has been
defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary
to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of
corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it can be conduct that is
willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good
order and the public welfare. (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified
School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland).)

5. Even where grounds for termination under the statutes are established, it

must also be established that such conduct renders the Respondent unfit to teach.
(Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230; Fontana
Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208; Woodland Joint Unified
School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (Zuber) (1992) 4 Cal.
App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)

6.

(A) It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony

of a witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part
accepted.” (Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact
may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted,
and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the
testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.”
(Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)
Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a witness, even an expert, although
not contradicted. (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon (1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.)
And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence,”
including a single expert witness. (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance
(1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040 at 1052.)

(B) The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to
that which is deemed untrustworthy. That is, disbelief does not create affirmative
evidence to the contrary of that which is discarded. That the trier of fact may
disbelieve the testimony of a witness who testifies to the negative of an issue does not
of itself furnish any evidence in support of the affirmative of that issue, and does not
warrant a finding in the affirmative thereof unless there is other evidence in the case
to support such affirmative. (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ State License Bd. (1956)
143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. Central California Traction Co.
191 Cal. 295, 304.)

7. It was not established that Respondent’s conduct constituted immoral
conduct within the meaning of the Education Code as set forth in Legal Conclusion 4.
While his conduct is not condoned by the Commission, given all the evidence, it can

12

not be found that his conduct was immoral; his actions can not be determined to be
depraved or indecent, especially given the context in which they occurred. The
Commission was unanimous in this Conclusion.

7. It was established that Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct
during the 2008-2009 school year, based on Legal Conclusion 2 and Factual Findings
5 through 16, 19 through 22, 24 through 28, and 30. The Commission is unanimous
in this Conclusion.

8. It was established that Respondent is evidently unfit to teach within the

District, based on Legal Conclusion 4 and Factual Findings 5 through 16, 19 through
22, 24 through 28, and 30. Commission member Escobar was not in agreement with
this Conclusion.

9. Respondent’s conduct renders him unfit to teach within the meaning of

Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, based on Legal Conclusion 5, and
Factual Findings 5 through 16, 19 through 22, 24 through 28, 30, 35 through 37. The
Commission was unanimous in this Conclusion.

10. Based on the foregoing, Respondent should be terminated as a teacher

within the District. Ms. Escobar does not join in this Conclusion, and would,
notwithstanding Respondent’s unprofessional conduct, retain him, relying on Fontana
Unified School District v. Burman, (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208.

Discussion:

Complainant established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that Respondent

had engaged in numerous acts of unprofessional conduct over several months, even
after receiving notice that he must change the way that he interacts with children and
others. Respondent provided evidence that his style of instruction and classroom
control was designed to convince his students to study hard, to succeed in school, and
to avoid drugs, gangs, and other pernicious activities. This had aspects of a “scared
straight” program, but it was not appropriate for a sixth grade classroom. The
inappropriate nature of the Respondent’s methods is exacerbated by the fact that
Respondent took the concept too far. It is one thing for a teacher to tell a 12-year-old-
boy that if he bullies others one of the consequences might be a fight in which that
bully himself gets hurt; it is quite another for the teacher to hold his own fist in that
boy’s face and to say what he, the teacher, would do to that child.

Respondent provided evidence that he has endeavored to change his ways,

through counseling and introspection. For those Commissioners who would
terminate him, it does not appear that such change is deep enough, and it comes late
in the process given that the NUC and the events of the conference with Mr. and Mrs.
F. occurred early in 2009.

13

As noted in Legal Conclusion 10, Ms. Escobar would, despite his failings,
retain him in his position. She would note that school administration had, in part,
contributed to the situation in that expectations had been set by prior conduct by site
administrators. Further, she does not find Respondent to be evidently unfit, and
therefore more amenable to remediation. However, the balance of the Commission
has found factual basis for termination, and has concluded that under applicable law,
Respondent should be terminated from his position.

ORDER

May ____, 2010

May ____, 2010

May ____, 2010

___________________________
Joseph D. Montoya
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

____________________________
Thomas Holtke

____________________________
Virginia Escobar

14

