BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

DEAN VENANZI,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2009120039

DECISION

This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence

(Commission) in Santa Ana, California, on October 19-20, 2010. The Commission consists
of Karen Schuett, Panama Buena Vista Union School District; Shanti Gallegos, Bellflower
Unified School District; and Administrative Law Judge Eric Sawyer, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided.

Eric Bathen, Esq., and Jordan Meyer, Esq., Law Offices of Eric Bathen,

represented the Santa Ana Unified School District.

Joshua Adams, Esq., Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented Dean Venanzi

(Respondent), who was present each day of the hearing.

The parties presented opening statements, oral and documentary evidence, and

closing arguments. The case was deemed submitted for decision at the conclusion of the
hearing on October 20, 2010. The Commission thereafter deliberated in executive session on
October 21, 2010.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Governing Board (Board) of the Santa Ana Unified School District

(District) is the duly elected, qualified and acting governing board of the District, organized,
existing and operating pursuant to the provisions of the California Education Code and other
laws of the State of California.

2.

Respondent was, at all times relevant, a permanent certificated employee of

the District assigned to Wilson Elementary School (Wilson) where he taught third grade.

3.

On October 6, 2009, Respondent was advised in writing that he had been

placed on paid administrative leave while the District conducted an investigation regarding
allegations made against him, the details of which are described below.

4.

On or about October 23, 2009, the District’s Superintendent caused to be

served on Respondent notice of the Board’s intention to dismiss him, as well as notice that he
would be suspended without pay immediately upon action of the Board. Respondent
requested a hearing to contest the Board’s proposed actions.

5.

On or before November 23, 2009, the Board requested the District’s

administration to prepare charges alleging that cause existed for the dismissal of Respondent
as a permanent certificated employee of the District, and for his immediate suspension
without pay, to serve said charges upon Respondent after filing them with the Board, and to
initiate dismissal procedures should he request a hearing.

6.

On or after November 23, 2009, the Accusation was filed and served on

Respondent. On or after November 30, 2009, the District received a Notice of Defense from
Respondent, which contained a request for a hearing to contest the Accusation.

Respondent’s Background Information

7.

Credential. Respondent has a clear single subject teaching credential, a clear
multiple subject teaching credential, and a clear bilingual certificate of competence from the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

8.

Employment with the District. Respondent became employed with the District

in August of 1988. He worked as an English language development (ELD) teacher at three
different campuses from 1988 through 2001. From 2001 through 2009, Respondent
performed various duties on different campuses, including as an outreach consultant, third
grade teacher and high school Spanish instructor. He was teaching a self-contained third
grade elementary class at Wilson at the beginning of the 2009-1010 school year.

The Events of September 21, 2009

9.

At least 80 percent of Wilson’s students are from poor families and/or are

learning English as a second language.

10.

On September 21, 2009, while teaching in his third grade classroom at Wilson,

R.1 and pushed him down into
Respondent put his hands on the shoulders of student J
his seat. The reasons for this conduct were not established, although Respondent concedes
’s mother discovered the incident
his actions on that occasion were inappropriate. J
occurred after she picked her son up from school and he cried in the car on the way home.

1 The identities of the involved students and their parents are omitted to protect their

privacy.

2

11.

J

’s father complained about the incident the following morning to Norris

and felt his story
Perez, who is the principal at Wilson. Principal Perez interviewed J
was credible. He thereafter investigated the complaint in an attempt to corroborate J
’s
version of events. He interviewed three other trustworthy students present in the classroom
on the day in question, none of whom saw anything. Instead of confronting Respondent
about J
questions about how that day went. Respondent did not mention any incident with J
Principal Perez observed Respondent teach in his classroom on a few occasions, but saw
nothing unusual. Under these circumstances, Principal Perez was unable to corroborate
J

’s complaint, Principal Perez instead questioned him in a general way, by asking

’s complaint. No action was taken against Respondent.

.

The Events of October 5, 2009

12.

down into his seat. E

’s upper right arm and pulled E

by his upper arm, put his hands on E

toward his desk. It is not clear whether E

On October 5, 2009, Respondent was teaching his third grade class at Wilson.
F. was standing

’s shoulders, and
later reported this incident to Principal Perez that

to sit down and be quiet. Respondent then grabbed
fell
later reported that he had to Principal Perez. In any

Toward the end of the school day, at approximately 2:00 p.m., student E
up and talking. Respondent told E
E
down and hurt his hip, although E
event, Respondent pulled E
pushed E
afternoon when school was out, and he completed a written statement. E
that Respondent “used a bad word” in front of the class, i.e., that Respondent had told the
class to “shut up.” District Police Department Officer Chambers conducted an investigation.
Officer Chambers asked Respondent, “Did you grab a hold of [E
“Yes, [E
on [E
grabbed E
and pulled E
students. I lost it and that’s my fault.” Officer Chambers asked Respondent if this was the
first time he had grabbed students and forcefully pushed them down into their seats, and
Respondent responded, “No, I did the same thing to another student about two weeks ago.”
Respondent said he could not remember who the student was.

’s] shoulders and I pushed him down forcefully. I lost my temper and I was mad. I
’s upper right arm with my right hand and with my left hand I grabbed his desk

] was standing up at his seat, I had asked the students to sit down. I put my hands

and his desk about five or ten feet. I relocated him away from other

]?” Respondent said,

also commented

13.

Just moments after the incident with E

, at approximately 2:05 p.m.,
F. to sit down in his seat. Respondent then grabbed J
later reported this incident to

Respondent told student J
his shoulders and pushed him down into his seat. J
Principal Perez that afternoon when school was out and he completed a written statement.
As part of his investigation, Officer Chambers also interviewed Respondent about this
occurrence. Officer Chambers’ asked, “Did you grab a hold of [J
Respondent said, “Yes, [J
desk seat. I told [J

] today during class?”
] kept talking, I got frustrated and I pushed him down into his

], ‘I’m done, come here.’”

by

3

to sit down. J

Shortly after the incident with J

and pushed the back of his head forward, causing J

reported this incident to Principal Perez that afternoon when school was out and

14.
, at approximately 2:10 p.m., student
R. was standing at his desk seat and talking to other students. This is the same
J
student with whom Respondent had an encounter on September 21st. Respondent told
J
sat down and attempted to put away his book. Respondent
approached J
’s forehead to
felt pain and tears welled in his eyes, but he tried not to
strike the edge of his desk. J
cry so he would not get in further trouble. Respondent did not say or do anything further to
him. J
completed a written statement. Officer Chambers interviewed J
regarding this occurrence as well. J
during his interview, and Officer Chambers observed that J
his forehead just above his nose and his left eye. During his interview with Officer
Chambers, Respondent admitted to pushing J
frustrated, I tried to get him to sit down.” Respondent further admitted he did not check to
see whether J
Respondent told Officer Chambers, “When I pushed [J
turned around and walked to the front of the classroom and addressed the students about their
homework and moved on.”

and Respondent
told Officer Chambers that his forehead hurt

sustained any injuries after he pushed his head down into the desk.

’s chair, saying, “Yes I did, I was

’s] seat forward, I immediately

had a two-inch red line on

Other Relevant Facts

15.

The next morning, i.e., October 6, 2009, Respondent, on his own initiative,

telephoned the mother of E
were good boys and they deserved better teaching. Respondent did not contact the parents of
J

and apologized to her for his conduct, saying they

for reasons not established.

and J

16.

Respondent’s last formal evaluation from the District was done in the spring of
2007. His performance met expected standards in most categories, although his performance
in other categories had not been observed. However, in the comments section his evaluator
noted that Respondent’s transition from an outreach consultant to a third grade teacher “has
been challenging for you.” She recommended that Respondent watch other third grade
teachers and that he work with the school’s literacy coach.

17.

Although the events of October 5th were investigated by the District’s Police

Department, no criminal charges were brought against Respondent.

18.

After his suspension went into effect, Respondent completed a one-day Rick

Morris seminar, which included classroom management strategies.

19.

Respondent did not appear particularly remorseful of his conduct while

testifying. At times he admitted that his conduct was inappropriate, and at other times he
attempted to minimize his misconduct or deflect responsibility for it by intimating that the
three students involved posed behavior problems for him. However, it was not established
that those students posed any particular behavior challenge out of the ordinary.

4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof is

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) (Factual Findings 1-6.)

2A.

It was not established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for
the immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent pursuant to Education Code section
449392 for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as
prescribed by the rules and regulations of the District.

2B.

There are no cases that interpret the meaning of this part of section 44939.
However, cases interpreting section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), which provides cause for
discipline for insubordination, require a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to
cooperate.” (San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) The charge of insubordination is viewed
as analogous to the charge of willful refusal to perform regular assignments. In this case,
Respondent did not intentionally or willfully refuse to perform a regular assignment. His
misconduct was the byproduct of abusing three students, not of intentionally deciding to alter
or ignore a regular assignment. (Factual Findings 1-14.)

3A.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for the

immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent pursuant to section 44939 for immoral
conduct.

3B.

The term “immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful,
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the
public welfare. (Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) In this case, Respondent physically abused three students in his
classroom, inflicting pain and a visible injury on one whose head he pushed onto a desk-top.
Respondent compromised the health and safety of his students on that occasion. There is no
respectable person in this community who would not be offended by such behavior under
these circumstances. Such misconduct is viewed as equating to willful, flagrant and
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable people in the
community. (Factual Findings 1-14.)

4A.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for the
dismissal of Respondent pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a) (5), for evident unfitness
for service as a teacher.

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless noted otherwise.

5

4B.

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.
(Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992)
2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “’Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait,
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the
expectations of the employing school district.” (Id.) In this case, it was demonstrated that
Respondent is apt to lose his temper when his students engage in minor misbehavior. He
manifested his anger by manhandling students in his classroom, in one case by causing a
visible physical injury on the student’s forehead. He reacted angrily on two occasions within
a few weeks of each other. On October 5th he abused three students within just minutes of
each other, seemingly getting angrier as time went on. As a former outreach teacher,
Respondent should have known better than to lose his temper as he did. It is also concerning
to the Commission that it took a small level of misconduct by his students to cause
Respondent to lose his composure as he did. Thus, it was demonstrated that Respondent has
a temperamental defect, literally. (Factual Findings 1-14.)

5.

In reaching the above, we also conclude that Respondent’s misconduct relates to

his fitness to teach, within the meaning of Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1
Cal.3d 214. The Commission considered all the factors suggested by Morrison and
compared them to the facts established above. However, it is settled that not all “Morrison
factors” need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. (Governing Board of ABC
School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the Morrison analysis need
not be conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the
accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.)

(A)

The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow

teachers. This factor applies against Respondent, in that he improperly used physical force
against three students, injuring one, and undoubtedly scaring all three. Moreover, these
events occurred inside the classroom, and were undoubtedly unsettling to other students who
observed them. Respondent broke the trust his students had in him, and compromised the
health and safety of those in his classroom at the time.

(B)

The degree of such adversity. The adversity under these circumstances

was serious, in that it impacted not only those students in the classroom, but the parents of
the involved children. Such misconduct would cause the parents to lose confidence in the
District and seriously compromises the public’s trust in Respondent and the District.

(C)

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The misconduct is

proximate.

(D)

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. This factor

has neutral application to this case.

6

(E)

The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any,

surrounding the conduct. Neither aggravating nor extenuating circumstances were proven.

(F)

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in

the conduct. This factor applies against Respondent, because we find that there are only
blameworthy reasons for Respondent engaging in his misconduct.

(G)

The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. This factor
applies against Respondent. He engaged in similar misconduct on two different occasions
within a short time frame. He has not done much to remediate his inability to control his
classroom so as to avoid the student behaviors that caused him to lose his temper, nor has he
demonstrated any awareness of or attempt to control his temper problem. If put back in the
classroom under these circumstances, we foresee similar events occurring.

(H)

The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon
the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. This factor is not relevant
to this dispute, because no constitutional rights or issues were involved in this case.

6.

As discussed above, the District established that it had good cause to

immediately suspend Respondent for immoral conduct pursuant to section 44939.

7A.

It is the decision of the Commission that, based on the above Factual Findings

and Legal Conclusions, cause exists to dismiss Respondent from employment with the
District, for immoral conduct and evident unfitness to teach, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44932 and 44939.

7B.

“The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes

unfitness to teach . . ., and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.”
(California Teachers Association v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.) In
this case, the District is responsible for guaranteeing the safety and protection of its students
at all times. The District’s teachers are expected to deliver educational services to students
entrusted to their care, and to provide a safe and constructive learning environment.
Teachers are expected to demonstrate good and admirable behavior and to provide a positive
example for their students. Respondent violated the District’s trust when he engaged in
physical violence toward three elementary students in his classroom. Respondent’s abusive
actions on October 5, 2009, negatively impacted the District’s ability to guarantee the safety
and protection of its students, and his outbursts significantly threatened the physical safety of
vulnerable elementary students. That was not the first time that Respondent had engaged in
similar misconduct. Respondent did not appear remorseful when he testified about the
events in question. If anything, he appeared rather casual about his use of force. He has
taken very few rehabilitative measures to help him cope with his poor classroom
management skills and his temper. Under these circumstances, similar misconduct would be
likely should Respondent be placed back in the classroom. Termination is therefore
warranted. (Factual Findings 1-19.)

7

ORDER

Respondent Dean Venanzi is hereby dismissed from employment with the

Santa Ana Unified School District.

DATED: _________________

______________________________
Eric Sawyer, Commission Member,
Administrative Law Judge

8

I concur.

DATED: _________________

___________________________________
Karen Schuett, Commission Member

9

I concur.

DATED: _________________

________________________________
Shanti Gallegos, Commission Member

10

