BEFORE THE
COMMISSON ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. L2009060818

GEORGINA JARRAH,

Respondent.

DECISION

The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on January 12, 2010, at

Bellflower, California, before the Commission on Professional Competence. The
Commission consisted of Tim Delia, Anthony Zegarra, and Joseph D. Montoya,
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH).

Complainant was represented by Eric Bathen. Respondent appeared and was

represented by Carlos R. Perez and Ken Morizawa, Reich, Adell & Cvitan.

Evidence was received, the case was argued, and the matter was submitted for

decision on the hearing date.

The Commission hereafter makes its Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions, and

Orders, as follows:

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE

The Bellflower Unified School District (District) brought this proceeding to
terminate one of its permanent certificated employees, Respondent Georgina Jarrah
(Respondent). Respondent is a special education teacher for the District.

The Accusation, which incorporated a Statement of Charges, originally asserted two

bases for termination. It was first alleged that Respondent had failed to maintain the
appropriate credentials needed to properly hold and discharge her position, in that she had
failed to obtain a CLAD (Crosscultural Language and Academic Development) certificate,
despite efforts by the District to make sure she obtained that certificate. The second claim
originally alleged that Respondent had failed to provide satisfactory performance in the
classroom.

Just prior to the hearing, the District elected not to proceed on the claim of

unsatisfactory performance in the classroom. The parties therefore tried the claim that
Respondent had not obtained the CLAD certificate, and whether such a failure would support
Respondent’s termination as a teacher in the District.

A. The Parties, Jurisdiction, and Procedural Background:

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. Respondent1 is a permanent certificated employee of the District. During the

relevant time period, the 2008-2009 school year, she was assigned as a special education
teacher at Mayfair High School.

2. The Accusation and Statement of Charges (Accusation), is the combined document

that asserts the grounds for termination. The Statement of Charges was executed by Rick
Kemppainen, Superintendent of the District, on May 28, 2009. On that same date, he
executed a Notice of Intention to Dismiss and Notice of Intention to Suspend which was
based on the Statement of Charges. On June 3, 2009, Respondent executed a Notice of
Defense, requesting a hearing on the matter of her dismissal. Thereafter, Mr. Kemppainen
executed the Accusation, on June 15, 2009, and caused it to be served on Respondent.

3. On June 20, 2009, Respondent and her attorney executed a stipulation with the
District, whereby the parties deemed the hearing in this matter to have been commenced
within the 60-day deadline set out in Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(1), 2 and
agreed to extend the time period for completion of discovery. All jurisdictional requirements
have been met.

4. Thereafter, Respondent was suspended without pay, effective August 31, 2009.

B. Findings Pertaining to the Charges Against Respondent:

5. State law requires that teachers who work with children who are English-language

learners must hold a CLAD certificate.

6.

(A) Respondent was a teacher who was working with English language

learners, but she did not hold a CLAD. In August 2008, the District gave Respondent written
notice that she needed to have such a certificate, or that she must enroll in courses so that she
could obtain such a certificate.

1 Respondent’s teaching credential, Exhibit 18, indicates that she has also been

known as Georgina Whyte.

2 All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.

2

(B) Specifically, on August 25, 2008, Lisa Azevedo, Assistant Superintendent

for Instructional Personnel and Programs, wrote to Respondent regarding CLAD
certification. Ms. Azevedo’s letter informed Respondent of her need to have a CLAD, and of
the District’s “expectation” that Respondent would enroll in an approved program so that she
could earn that certificate. Respondent was told that she could obtain an emergency
certificate for the 2008-2009 school year, and the letter further informed her that if she held
such an emergency credential, was enrolled in appropriate courses, and held six units of
coursework, an emergency CLAD could be renewed.

(C) The last paragraph of Ms. Azevedo’s letter stated:

Please be advised that if you do not apply for the emergency credential,
enroll in a program, and complete a minimum of six units, you may be
reassigned and or relocated based on the needs of the students at your
site. Failure to comply may lead to termination. . . .

(Ex. 1, p. 23. Emphasis added.)

7. Ms. Azevedo’s letter also stated that Respondent would need to complete an
updated Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) pertaining to the needed CLAD certificate.
On October 10, 2008, Respondent executed an MOU. That document states that teachers
working with English learners are required to hold a CLAD or similar credential, or be in
training to obtain one, and it further stated that “to be counted as ‘in training’ you must be
currently enrolled in coursework to obtain a certificate or the paperwork to apply for a
certificate must be in process.” (Ex. 1, p. 24. Emphasis in original.)

8.

(A) In executing the MOU, Respondent stated that she was “currently

enrolled in coursework that will lead to obtaining a certificate authorizing the provision of
instructional services to English learners” and that she was working to obtain a CLAD. She
stated, in her own hand, an anticipated completion date of June 2009, and stated that she was
attending Azusa Pacific for the coursework.

(B) However, Respondent’s statements were not true, because she was not
then enrolled to take the courses needed for a CLAD at any college or university. She had
not been enrolled in classes at Azusa Pacific for several years. It should be noted that the
MOU form had a provision where a teacher such as Respondent could state that she was not
currently enrolled in the necessary coursework, and she could then state a plan of action.
Rather than choose that option, Respondent misled the District.

9. On March 12, 2009, Ms. Azevedo, in her capacity as Assistant Superintendent,

again wrote to Respondent regarding a CLAD certificate. The letter was similar to the one
she wrote in August 2008, in that it called attention to the legal requirement for certification
of those teaching English learners. This second letter referenced the August 2008 letter, and
stated that the District was requesting proof of enrollment or completion of a program by

3

May 8, 2009. The letter specifically stated that failure to provide proof of
“enrollment/completion will lead to a recommendation for termination.” (Ex. 1, p. 8.)
However, the letter advised that if the program had not been completed, then-current
enrollment would allow Respondent to apply for an emergency credential. The letter
concluded with the admonition that if Respondent did not apply for the emergency
certificate, enroll in a program, and complete six units, she would be terminated.

10. Respondent has never obtained a CLAD certificate, and she has never enrolled in

a program to obtain a CLAD certificate, through the date of the hearing. Respondent’s
failure to provide proof of certification, or enrollment in appropriate coursework, led to a
recommendation that she be terminated, and this proceeding ensued.

11. The District is not able to re-assign Respondent to a special education classroom

where she would not need a CLAD. A substantial percentage of the District’s students are
English learners, and every special education class contains such students, and did during the
2008-2009 school year.

12. Respondent stopped teaching in March 2009, taking a leave because of stress.

She attested that she had been harassed by the District regarding her teaching methods; she
further testified that others were teaching her classes (while ostensibly trying to help her
improve her techniques), which created a chaotic situation. During the hearing, Respondent
could not recall the exact date she went on leave, but did recall that it was after she received
Ms. Azevedo’s March 12, 2009 letter, described in Factual Finding 9.

13. Respondent attested that she had plans to take the necessary courses for a CLAD

certificate, but family issues interfered with her intentions. Three of her grandparents died
during a two year period. Her mother required heart surgery, and so Respondent moved in
with her mother to take care of her. However, the surgery occurred in 2003, and Respondent
stayed with her mother for approximately one year. Furthermore, her grandparents died well
before the 2008 school year. There were financial issues with taking the courses, in that
Azusa Pacific, where she had obtained the education to become a teacher, charged
approximately $1,500 for each of the two courses necessary to obtain the CLAD, and
Respondent asserted that she did not have the necessary funds to take the classes.

14. Respondent admitted that she never took steps to enroll in the necessary classes at

a public university, although she was aware that both the University of California and the
California State University systems had the courses, and that they would be less costly than
at a private school such as Azusa Pacific. There are schools that allow a teacher to take such
courses on line as well. The District provides information to its teachers regarding the
availability of required courses such as those needed to earn a CLAD certificate.

15. Testimony by Ms. Azevedo established that the requirement to hold a CLAD if

teaching English learners has been in place since at least 1994. It is fairly inferred by the
Commission that Respondent knew of this requirement well before August 2008, given that
she has been credentialed for several years.

4

Findings Regarding the Morrison Factors:

16. Where there is conduct that might justify termination of a teacher, an examination

must be made of whether or not that conduct indicates that the teacher in question is unfit to
teach. This requirement was first set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1
Cal.3d 214, 229. There, the Supreme Court held that factors that may be examined to
determine fitness include the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected
students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity anticipated; and, the proximity or
remoteness in time of the conduct. Other factors may include the type of certificate held by
the teacher; extenuating or aggravating circumstances; the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood that the conduct in
question will recur; and, the extent that discipline will cause an adverse or chilling impact on
the constitutional rights of the teacher involved, or other teachers.

17.

(A) Adverse consequences on students and teachers, and the degree thereof:

There is little evidence of directly adverse consequences for students or other teachers,
though some may be inferred. First, it is inferred that if Respondent can not teach the classes
she normally would teach, because she lacks a necessary credential, then other teachers
would have to assume that responsibility. Second, it is inferred that if she lacks a credential
required by the state, then her students are not receiving instruction from a qualified teacher,
which threatens to leave them behind students who do receive such qualified instruction.

(B) Proximity in time: This conduct occurred in the period 2008 to 2009.

Thus, the events described herein must be deemed recent.

(C) Type of certificate held by Respondent: Respondent holds a special

education credential.

(D) Likelihood of recurrence: The conduct in question has been ongoing, and

therefore is recurring conduct. The record establishes that despite warnings that failure to
obtain the CLAD would lead to termination, Respondent failed and refused to even enroll in
classes. Further, she made a misleading statement about compliance, covering up her failure
to enroll in coursework. The fact that she would mislead rather than comply indicates that
the misconduct would recur in the future.

(E) Implication of constitutional rights: No constitutional rights, of either the

Respondent or other teachers, are implicated if Respondent is terminated for her conduct
described in this decision.

(F) Extenuating or aggravating circumstances:

(i) In aggravation, Respondent’s failure to comply with her obligations

continued over many months, despite notice of the consequences of non-compliance. The
requirement to hold a CLAD certificate if teaching English learners has been in existence for

5

many years, and thus Respondent has had ample notice of her obligations and ample
opportunity to complete six units of education. Respondent’s failure to obtain the CLAD
while teaching exposed the District to sanctions by the State. Further aggravating the matter
is the manner in which she misled her employer in executing the October 2008 MOU.

(ii) Respondent offered, in extenuation, testimony that various family

problems had impinged upon her ability to complete the necessary classes, but those
problems arose months, and even years, before August 2008, when the District wrote to her
about the CLAD. She also offered as extenuation her poor financial condition, but, when
placed on notice in August 2008, she was then employed full-time, and in a position to find
classes at a lower cost than the private university which she favored. Thus, there is little
extenuation in the record.

18. Under all the circumstances, Respondent’s ongoing conduct renders her unfit to

teach, and she should be terminated as a teacher for the District.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to Education

Code section 44944, and Factual Findings 1 through 4.

2. “Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision

(a)(5), requires that the unfitness for service be attributable to a defect or inadequacy in
temperament, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that the teacher’s
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district. (Woodland Joint
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (Zuber) (1992) 4 Cal.
App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)

3. Pursuant to section 44939, a teacher may be terminated for refusal to obey regular

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the
employing district.

4. Even where grounds for termination under the statutes are established, it must also

be established that such conduct renders the Respondent unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230; Fontana Unified School District v.
Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208; Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on
Professional Competence (Zuber) (1992) 4 Cal. App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)

5. Cause has been established to terminate Respondent due to evident unfitness for
service, pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). This Conclusion is
based on Factual Findings 1 through 15, and Legal Conclusions 1, 2, and 4. Respondent
suffers from a defect in temperament if she can not bring herself to even enroll in necessary
courses when threatened with termination.

6

6. Cause has been established to terminate Respondent pursuant to section 44939, for
her refusal to obey the assignment of enrolling in and completing courses needed to obtain a
state-mandated credential. This Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 1 through 15, and
Legal Conclusions 1, 3, and 4.

7. Based on Morison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, it has been

demonstrated that Respondent is unfit to teach. This Conclusion is based on Factual
Findings 1 through 18.

8. Respondent should be terminated from her position as a certificated teacher with

the District, based on Legal Conclusions 1 through 7, and their factual predicates.

ORDER

Respondent Georgina Jarrah shall be terminated as a permanent certificated teacher in

the Bellflower Unified School District.

Dated:

Dated:

Dated:

__________________________________
Tim Delia

__________________________________
Anthony Zegarra

__________________________________
Joseph D. Montoya
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

