BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

OAH Case No. 2010030667

NANCY BEACH,

Respondent.

DECISION

On February 28, and March 1, 2, 3, 2011, Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law

Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this matter, together with
Edward Chavez and Robert Petersen at Santa Ana, California.

Eric Bathen, Esq., and Jordan Meyer, Esq., represented Petitioner Santa Ana

Unified School District (SAUSD).

Ernest F. Ching Jr., Esq., and Robert W. Miller, Esq., represented Nancy

Beach (Respondent). Respondent was present on all days of hearing.

The parties submitted the matter for decision on March 3, 2011.

STATEMENT OF THE CASE

SAUSD seeks the dismissal of Respondent, contending that between
September 2009, and January 2010, she emotionally abused and intimidated students
and SAUSD employees, and created a hostile classroom environment for students,
and a hostile work environment for SAUSD employees. SAUSD alleged numerous
incidents to support its contention, described post. Based on these incidents, SAUSD
contends Respondent engaged in immoral conduct, is evidently unfit for service, and
has willfully refused to perform her regular assignments without reasonable cause.

Respondent denies the majority of SAUSD’s allegations occurred as SAUSD
purports, and denies that she created hostile environments for students or employees.
Respondent seeks to retain her employment with SAUSD.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction

1.

SAUSD filed the Statement of Charges on or about February 16, 2010,

and the Accusation on or about March 3, 2010. SAUSD served Respondent with a

1

Notice of Intention to Dismiss and a Notice of Intention to Suspend on or about
February 16, 2010. SAUSD filed the First Amended Statement of Charges on or
about June 3, 2010, and the Second Amended Statement of Charges on or about
October 18, 2010.

2.

Respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense, dated February 16, 2010.
The additional contentions contained in the First and Second Amended Statement of
Charges were deemed controverted by Respondent, in accordance with Government
Code section 11507.

Respondent’s Background

3.

Respondent is a teacher. She is a permanent, certificated employee of

SAUSD. Respondent has bachelor’s degrees in psychology and music, and a master’s
degree in education. She has single subject credentials in music, mathematics, and
social science, a multiple subject credential, and a BCLAD authorization. BCLAD is
an acronym for “bilingual, cross-cultural language and development.”

4.

Respondent began working as a teacher with SAUSD in 1989. From

1989 through the 2007-2008 school year, Respondent taught mostly mathematics,
choral, and choir at an intermediate school. Respondent has no history of discipline
during the 19 years she taught at the intermediate school level.

5.

In the 2008-2009 school year, Respondent moved to SAUSD’s

Segerstrom High School (Segerstrom) and taught mathematics. Respondent suffered
no discipline during this first year teaching high school mathematics.

6.

In the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent remained at Segerstrom, but

instead of teaching mathematics, she began teaching five choral classes exclusively,
replacing a long-standing teacher who had previously taught choral at Segerstrom.

The Period at Issue in this Matter

7.

The incidents at issue in this matter occurred at Segerstrom during the

2009-2010 school year, specifically between September 2009, and January 2010.

Respondent’s Advertisement and Choir Dress Payments

8.

In the syllabus for her Treble Choirs class, Respondent advertised that
she was available for private voice lessons at a rate of $17 for 30 minutes of lessons.
No student ever signed up. In that same syllabus, Respondent informed students that
they would have to pay $50 for their choir dresses. There was no evidence that any
student paid any amount for his or her choir dress. After being informed of the
contents of Respondent’s syllabus, SAUSD staff informed Respondent that it was
inappropriate for Respondent to advertise private voice lessons, nor was it accurate

2

that students had to pay for their choir dresses. Respondent acknowledged this
information. She explained that she was unaware of the inappropriateness of
advertising voice lessons or requiring students to pay for their choir dresses, but
complied with SAUSD’s directions.

Respondent’s Interactions with Students1

Respondent’s Outburst and Interaction with Student J.S.

9.

In approximately late November, early December 2009, during

chambers class, the students, while standing on risers2, were developing choreography
with Respondent. Respondent called for the students to stop moving and pay
attention on numerous occasions but the students would not comply. The students
were unruly and talked and danced among themselves, failing to comply with
Respondent’s requests for their attention. As a result, and after several unsuccessful
attempts by Respondent to control the class, Respondent yelled, “shut up.”
Consequently, the students stopped moving and talking, and Respondent continued to
teach the class. There was no evidence that Respondent’s outburst harmed the
students in any way.

10.

At another point during this same class, most of the students, including
student J.S.3 continued to dance and move and failed to pay attention to Respondent,
despite Respondent’s repeated requests to stop their movements. J.S. was a senior.
According to SAUSD and the deposition testimony of J.S., Respondent then walked
over to J.S., grabbed his wrist firmly and said to him loudly, “just stop.” J.S. got
angry, but did not respond to Respondent. J.S. and the other students in the class
stopped dancing. According to SAUSD and the deposition testimony of J.S.,
Respondent held J.S.’s wrist for between approximately five and 13 seconds and then
let go. According to J.S., Respondent left no marks and did not hurt J.S. by grabbing
him. Respondent and the students continued on with class. Several students in the
class asserted that they saw Respondent grab J.S. by the wrist, while other students in
the class asserted that they did not.

1 No student testified at hearing. Instead, and upon the parties’ stipulation, the

deposition transcripts and written statements of certain students were introduced into
the record as direct evidence and numerous written student statements were
introduced into the record as administrative hearsay, pursuant to Government Code
section 11513, subdivision (d).

2 Risers were described as progressively elevated steps, like bleachers, on
which students would stand so that the students closest to the front were at floor level,
and each row of students behind would be elevated by a consistent number of inches.

3 All student names are referred to by initials to protect their privacy.

3

11.

SAUSD alleged that while Respondent held J.S. by the wrist, she

pulled J.S. off the riser. The evidence did not establish this allegation.

12.

On or about December 2 or 3, 2009, Respondent was called to a

meeting with Katrina Callaway (Callaway) regarding the J.S. incident. Callaway is
an Assistant Principal at Segerstrom and had previously spoken with J.S. Respondent
explained the incident to Callaway. Callaway asked Respondent if she had grabbed
J.S.’s wrist. Respondent denied grabbing J.S.’s wrist, but told Callaway, that if she
had grabbed J.S.’s wrist, she would have grabbed it in a specific manner, and then
demonstrated on Callaway’s wrist how she would have grabbed it. Respondent
grabbed Callaway’s wrist abruptly, in a manner that startled Callaway, but did not
harm her.

13(a). At hearing, Respondent again denied grabbing J.S.’s wrist. The piano

accompanist, Tanya Khurgel (Khurgel), was present in the class when this incident
was alleged to have occurred, but Khurgel did not see Respondent touch J.S.
Considering Respondent’s testimony, the deposition testimony and written statements
by J.S. and other students in the class, and all other pertinent evidence, it could not be
concluded by a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent grabbed J.S.’s wrist.

13(b). Commission Member Petersen departs from the majority on this point

and would find that Respondent grabbed J.S.’s wrist.

14.

Respondent denied grabbing Callaway’s wrist during their meeting or

stating to Callaway that if she had grabbed J.S.’s wrist, she would have done it in a
particular manner. Respondent’s testimony on this point was unpersuasive, when
considered in contrast to that of Callaway. However, it should be noted that
Callaway’s overall testimony was given less than full weight, as a result of her
testimony regarding student A.S. (See Factual Finding 28 and Legal Conclusion
5(g).)

15.

Thereafter, Respondent called J.S.’s father and informed him that J.S.

was exhibiting behavioral problems in her class. Respondent asked J.S.’s father to
speak with J.S. about this problem.

16.

According to SAUSD, Respondent then told J.S.’s father that if J.S.’s

behaviors continued, she would press charges or file a lawsuit against J.S. J.S.’s
father testified that he did not recall Respondent stating that she would “press
charges” but instead, he believed Respondent stated she would have to “go to court.”
J.S.’s father, however, could not definitively recall what Respondent specifically told
him. J.S.’s father could not conclusively explain what he understood Respondent to
mean by “going to court.”

17.

After the telephone conversation with Respondent, J.S.’s father was not

upset with Respondent. J.S.’s father was mostly concerned with assuring that J.S.

4

acted properly at school. There was no evidence that the telephone conversation
between Respondent and J.S.’s father was angry, threatening, or hostile in tone.

18.

J.S.’s father displayed a forthright demeanor at hearing.

19.

At hearing, Respondent denied threatening to pursue any charges or
litigation against J.S. or J.S.’s father during the telephone call at issue. Respondent
testified that she told J.S.’s father she would have to “write him [J.S.] up.” The
evidence did not conclusively establish what Respondent specifically said to J.S.’s
father.

20.

Several witnesses for SAUSD, including Callaway and Segerstrom’s
principal, Amy Avina (Avina), testified that J.S. was a good student, captain of the
basketball team, and a student leader. Callaway and Avina could not recall any time
before the incident with Respondent, when J.S. had been involved in any kind of
disciplinary issue. Both Callaway and Avina were surprised that Respondent would
characterize J.S. as a behavioral problem in her class. However, in his deposition,
J.S. conceded that he was not always behaving in class and paying attention to
Respondent. The evidence established that Respondent’s characterization of the
students in class, including J.S., during the incident in question, was accurate.

Student E.C.

21.

In approximately early December 2009, E.C., a senior, was asked by
his teacher to deliver a document to Respondent. E.C. went to Respondent’s office,
but Respondent was not there. E.C. sat in Respondent’s office chair and accessed and
used Respondent’s computer to view and hear music. Respondent entered her office,
saw E.C. at her computer, and asked E.C. sternly what he was doing there.
Respondent stated sternly, and in a raised voice, that he needed to leave. E.C. made
no effort in response to leave at that moment; and so Respondent placed one hand on
E.C.’s right shoulder and pushed on E.C.’s shoulder to move him out of her chair and
out of her office. E.C. left, and Respondent shut the door behind him. The door
slammed shut.

22.

In his written statement and deposition, E.C. stated that he did not
appreciate Respondent touching him. E.C. characterized Respondent’s touching,
stating, “it wasn’t, like, a shove”; instead, he described it more like a slight push.
However, E.C. also referred to the touching as a “shoving.” He wrote, “I didn’t like it
[Respondent’s touching of him] at first, but, you know, that was a little extreme, her
shoving me. In the end, we all—I apologized just for entering her classroom. We
cleared it up.” E.C. acknowledged he should not have been in her office, nor should
he have accessed Respondent’s computer. E.C. was not harmed by Respondent’s
touching.

5

23.

At hearing, Respondent first described her touching of E.C. as a mild
push to encourage his movement. However, she also described her touching of E.C.
as a shove. Respondent asserted that her touching of E.C. was not violent, hard, or
intended to cause any physical harm, but solely meant to encourage E.C.’s movement.
The evidence supported Respondent’s description.

24.

SAUSD alleged that, on another day, while in class, Respondent
grabbed E.C. by the wrist. The evidence did not establish that Respondent ever
grabbed E.C. by the wrist.

Student A.S.

25.

On or about December 9, 2009, student A.S., a 17-year-old senior, was

in Respondent’s class. Contrary to school policy, A.S. took her cellular telephone
into class and kept it on her lap. The cellular telephone was turned on. Respondent
noticed that A.S. was causing a distraction and noticed the cellular telephone on
A.S.’s lap. Respondent approached A.S. and asked her for the telephone. A.S. asked
Respondent several times why she wanted the telephone; Respondent continued to
request the telephone. A.S. complied, while telling Respondent, “You’re weird.”
Respondent took possession of the telephone and told A.S. to stand in the furthest
corner of the classroom. A.S. complied, and remained standing as the class
continued. A.S. felt embarrassed by Respondent’s punishment of her, considered
standing in the corner a “ridiculous” circumstance, and wanted to leave the classroom.
After one or two minutes, A.S. took her school agenda book, signed herself out of
class, and asked Respondent to sign the book as well, as Respondent’s signature
would allow A.S. to leave the class. Through this process, A.S. would be allowed to
go to the school counselor’s office. Respondent agreed, but told A.S. that she would
escort A.S. to the counselor’s office herself. Respondent took steps to take the
cellular telephone to the school office with A.S. and left the piano accompanist,
Khurgel, in charge of the students while she and A.S. exited the class. Respondent
left A.S. at the school office, where A.S. began to cry. Respondent thereafter returned
to her class.

26.

A.S. explained that she cried because she was frustrated. She asserted
that she was not using the telephone, but had only picked it up to see the time. Other
students in the class stated that they saw A.S. texting with the telephone. A.S. further
explained that she had it on her lap because she was wearing a dress and had no
pocket in which to place it. A.S. also explained that she refused to keep the telephone
in her purse or backpack, items she kept in another section of the classroom, because
she was afraid others might steal the telephone. A.S. believed that she had not done
anything wrong. A.S. felt Respondent had picked on her, and further asserted that
since that episode, she did not want to return to Respondent’s class, because she felt
“awkward” in the classroom and she did not “feel safe” anymore.

6

27.

Segerstrom’s school policy does not allow students to have cellular

telephones in the classrooms. The school policy states, “They [cellular telephones,
among other electronic devices] are not to be visible or on at any time, for any reason
during school hours.” As the policy states, there are no exceptions. The policy
further directs telephones in classes to be confiscated.

28.

On direct examination, when asked whether it was appropriate for A.S.

to have her cellular telephone on her lap during class, Callaway stated that it was
appropriate because A.S. was wearing a dress and had no pocket in which to place it,
as long as the student was not using the telephone. On cross-examination, after
acknowledging the school policy and the lack of any exceptions to the policy,
Callaway conceded that it was appropriate for Respondent to confiscate A.S.’s
telephone. Callaway did not explain why she opined as she did on direct
examination, in light of the school policy.

Respondent’s Disciplinary History at Segerstrom

29.

SAUSD administrative staff were made aware of Respondent’s

interactions with the students discussed in Factual Findings 8-28, as well as on-going
problems with SAUSD staff, as set forth post, in Factual Findings 44-50. As a
consequence, on December 14, 2009, SAUSD suspended Respondent without pay for
seven days, effective December 10, 2009, through December 18, 2009.

30.

Effective January 27, 2010, SAUSD placed Respondent on

administrative leave with pay, while SAUSD investigated the claims against
Respondent of which SAUSD personnel had been made aware.

SAUSD’s Overall Allegation of Retaliation

31(a). SAUSD contended that as a consequence of the student complaints

against her, staff complaints against her (see generally Factual Findings 8-28 and 44-
50), and SAUSD’s suspension of her in December 2009, that Respondent retaliated
against her students and generally against SAUSD, by emotionally abusing students
and staff, requiring students to do inappropriate assignments and take inappropriate
examinations, exhibiting threatening and intimidating behaviors toward students and
staff, and treating students poorly, as described post. The evidence did not establish
that Respondent retaliated against students and staff in response to any actions by
SAUSD or student and staff complaints.

31(b). Commission Member Petersen departs from the majority on this point,
and would find that, by her actions, including her curt and rude manner, Respondent
retaliated against students and Khurgel after returning from the December 2009
suspension.

7

Student K.M.

32.

In or about January 2010, Respondent met with student K.M., K.M.’s
mother, and K.M.’s sister. K.M. was a senior. The meeting was precipitated by an
earlier incident where K.M. failed to complete a worksheet assigned by Respondent.
K.M. argued that the reason she was not able to complete the worksheet was because
Respondent had not taught the subject matter on the worksheet adequately or at all.
K.M.’s greatest concern with Respondent at that time was that Respondent had not
covered the subject matter during the semester and that Respondent had failed to
develop a study guide for the class. K.M. and her mother requested the meeting to
discuss these concerns. By the time of the meeting, Respondent had developed a
study guide and had presented one to K.M.

33.

During the meeting, K.M., her mother and her sister, all explained to

Respondent how K.M. was “stressed out” by Respondent’s class and the overall lack
of preparation for the final examination, and the earlier lack of a study guide,
particularly because final examinations approached. Respondent told K.M. and her
family that, contrary to K.M.’s assertion, Respondent had been teaching and
reviewing the worksheet subject matter over the course of the semester. Respondent
explained to them that most students had completed the worksheet, and that if K.M.
sought additional time to complete assigned work, Respondent would only be able to
provide additional time if K.M. secured a reasonable accommodation from the school.
Respondent further explained that such an accommodation could only be secured if
Respondent had a recognized disability and an individual education plan (IEP)
through the school’s special education program. Respondent further suggested that if
K.M. wanted to consider obtaining an IEP, she would need to talk to the school’s
counselor. K.M.’s sister testified that Respondent’s general attitude during the
meeting was “cold” and off-putting.

34.

K.M.’s mother was unaware what an IEP was, but K.M., having acted

as a student aide in Segerstrom’s special education program, explained the IEP
process to her mother. K.M., K.M.’s mother, and K.M.’s sister were upset by
Respondent’s suggestion. According to K.M.’s sister, and K.M., Respondent’s
suggestion of an IEP appeared to them more like a condescending remark meant to
belittle K.M. K.M. believed Respondent was implying that K.M. was intellectually
slow, or had mental retardation. K.M. described Respondent’s suggestion as
“absolutely horrifying.”

35.

K.M. described in her written statement that on the day of the meeting,

she had noticed Respondent driving through the parking lot looking for a parking
space. K.M. wrote, “I became very scarred [sic] not knowing what would happen
after this meeting. I truly wouldn’t be comfortable enough to remain in a classroom
with her [Respondent] again.”

8

36.

The evidence did not establish that Respondent sought to belittle or

offend K.M. by her suggestion. The evidence did not establish that Respondent spoke
to K.M. or her family members in a condescending or belittling manner, but K.M.’s
sister’s characterization of Respondent as “cold” was believable, given that
Respondent did not squarely dispute that description in her testimony. Furthermore,
the vast majority of students and staff who provided written statements and testimony
also described Respondent generally as cold, aloof, insensitive, and rude; and there
was no persuasive evidence to counter these descriptions. As to K.M, however, there
was no persuasive evidence that K.M. genuinely feared Respondent or was otherwise
harmed by Respondent’s suggestion of how to seek an accommodation for extra time
for assigned work.

Respondent’s Disclosure of Personal Health Information

37.

Sometime between September 2009, and January 2010, while in an all-
girl class, Respondent told a group of female students that she would be out of school
for a time, as she was undergoing a medical procedure. A few students inquired if
anything was wrong. Respondent responded, informing the students that she was
undergoing a procedure to correct a problem with her bladder that made her “leak” on
occasion. She explained that such a condition commonly occurs after childbirth.
Some students found the information “disgusting” and inappropriate to convey to
students in the classroom. Other students did not consider the information
inappropriate, nor did they find it embarrassing. Some students considered it odd and
many laughed as Respondent explained her condition.

38.

At hearing, Respondent explained that she felt comfortable explaining

the situation to the all-female class, and did not consider the information
inappropriate.

Grading the Winter Concert

39.

In or about January 2010, Respondent’s class was preparing to perform

at a winter concert. The students expected to be graded on their performance and
understood that the winter concert grade was a significant portion of their overall
course grade. Respondent was serving her suspension at the time of the winter
concert and therefore did not attend the performance. After the concert, and after
Respondent served her suspension and returned to teaching the class, Respondent told
the students that she felt she could not give the students grades for their winter
concert performance because she did not observe the performance. The students felt
this was unfair. Students complained to the school administration. Avina directed
Respondent to derive grades by seeking the input of staff who attended the
performance. Thereafter, Respondent issued grades to students for the winter concert.

9

Respondent’s Written Final Examination and Other Coursework

40.

Respondent did not believe when the school year started, that a written

final examination was required, but as the semester came to a close, she was led to
believe a written examination was indeed required. She quickly developed a written
final examination that contained what she believed was appropriate subject matter.
The examination contained music notation that was photocopied from other material
and pasted onto ruled paper. Respondent also cut out questions printed on other
documents and pasted those onto ruled paper; questions related to the pasted music
notations and these additional questions constituted the final examination.

41.

SAUSD argued that the final examination was inappropriate in both

appearance and subject matter. Avina opined that the examination as inappropriate in
appearance and “embarrassing.”

42.

Respondent explained at hearing that she believed the academic quality

of the examination was appropriate and that the sloppy appearance was due to the
rapidity with which she had to put the examination together. There was no persuasive
evidence that the examination’s subject matter was inappropriate. Commission
Members Petersen and Chavez, who have teaching backgrounds in music, find the
examination’s subject matter appropriate for Respondent’s students. Thus, the
examination had a messy and sloppy appearance, but the subject matter was
academically appropriate.

43.

On one occasion, Respondent assigned a crossword puzzle to students.

The crossword puzzle’s questions related to music history. SAUSD contended that
the crossword puzzle was inappropriate. However, the crossword puzzle questions
were thematically and academically appropriate for Respondent’s class(es) and the
evidence did not establish that Respondent ever assigned more than one crossword
puzzle to the class.

Respondent’s Interactions with SAUSD Staff

Tanya Khurgel

44.

SAUSD alleged that between September 2009, and January 2010,

Respondent emotionally abused and intimidated Khurgel, the school’s piano
accompanist. Khurgel’s first language is Russian, and while she speaks English well,
she feels unsure of her English proficiency. At hearing, Khurgel exhibited a good
grasp of the English language, but a moderately limited vocabulary. That is, Khurgel
understood the questions being asked of her and could easily make herself
understood, but her word use was awkward, as might be expected of a person whose
first language was not English.

10

45.

Several students asserted that Respondent regularly spoke to Khurgel
rudely, in a demeaning and condescending manner, and generally treated her badly.
The students gave general examples of how Respondent would get easily frustrated
with Khurgel when Respondent believed Khurgel was not following Respondent’s
direction or instructions, and Respondent would speak to her in a short and rude
manner.4

46.

On one occasion sometime between September 2009, and January

2010, during class, Respondent insisted that Khurgel play a musical piece in a
standard “four-four” tempo, but Khurgel continued to play the piece in a “two-four”
tempo. Respondent became upset and walked quickly toward Khurgel, who remained
sitting at the piano. After reading the sheet music herself, Respondent understood
that Khurgel was properly playing a “two-four” tempo, but Respondent failed to
apologize to Khurgel for her demeanor.

47.

On another occasion, during class, Respondent became upset and

frustrated at Khurgel when Khurgel could not follow Respondent’s direction to play a
musical piece in a particular fashion. Respondent walked quickly over to the piano
where Khurgel sat. Respondent moved quickly to sit at the piano bench without
thought to Khurgel occupying the bench. Khurgel quickly moved out of the way and
stood up while Respondent angrily explained to Khurgel how the piece should be
played. Respondent angrily circled the sections of music Respondent expected
Khurgel to play, while curtly stating how she “hated” Khurgel’s “passive, aggressive”
manner. Khurgel felt intimidated and demeaned by Respondent’s statements and
mannerisms. Khurgel believed that if she had not moved off of the bench quickly at
that time, Respondent would have pushed into her. Respondent and Khurgel did not
touch on this occasion.

48.

On or about December 7, 2009, Respondent and her husband, David
Stankey5 (Stankey) approached Khurgel while Khurgel sat at the piano bench. Both
Respondent and Stankey are tall. Respondent is approximately five feet, nine inches
tall, and Stankey is approximately six feet, three inches tall. Khurgel is not tall. As
Khurgel sat, Respondent and Stankey leaned over Khurgel and asked her if she had
spoken with the school administration regarding one of the student incidents.
Khurgel felt intimidated by Respondent and Stankey and consequently told them that
she had not. This was untrue; Khurgel had spoken with the school administration
regarding the particular student incident, but Khurgel felt intimidated by Respondent
and Stankey when they asked her about it, and consequently, Khurgel felt the need to
misstate the truth to Respondent and her husband. The evidence did not conclusively

4 Most students consistently asserted that Respondent was rude and short with

them in class as well.

Segerstrom.

5 David Stankey is also a teacher employed by SAUSD, teaching at

11

establish that Respondent or her husband spoke to Khurgel in a threatening or
intimidating manner.

49(a). The evidence did not establish that on any occasion between September

2009, and January 2010, Respondent touched Khurgel, made absurd demands of her
or unreasonably required her to do a job out of her job description, as alleged. While
Khurgel credibly testified that she felt demeaned and belittled by Respondent’s curt
and short manner, and it was clear that Respondent and Khurgel were each easily
frustrated by the other. The problems between Respondent and Khurgel were based
on miscommunications, misunderstandings, and misperceptions on the part of both
individuals. However, the evidence established that Respondent acted in a rude and
demeaning manner toward Khurgel on various occasions. However, the evidence did
not establish that Respondent was intending to intimidate, threaten, or otherwise harm
Khurgel. Additionally, the evidence did not establish that Respondent’s manner
toward Khurgel was so negative that Respondent’s manner objectively made a hostile
work environment for Khurgel.

49(b). Commission Member Peterson departs from the majority and would

find that Respondent’s overall actions against Khurgel created a hostile work
environment for Khurgel.

Raul Garcia

50.

Between September 2009, and January 2010, Respondent interacted

with the school’s band director, Raul Garcia (Garcia). Garcia and Respondent were
required to share office space. Garcia found Respondent a very difficult person with
whom to interact. At various times, he would find furniture moved into improper and
inconvenient places—actions he attributed to Respondent. Garcia believed these
actions were intentional and meant to annoy and harass him. Garcia explained that
Respondent would demand things instead of ask for things and would treat him
rudely. On one occasion, in November 2009, Garcia entered his office and found
Respondent and her husband going through Garcia’s things. Garcia was concerned
by this and complained to the principal, Avina. Over time, as Garcia consistently
encountered Respondent to be rude and unpleasant toward him, he believed his work
environment was hostile and considered resigning his position. When Garcia had
brought his concerns to Avina’s attention, Avina suggested to Garcia that he meet and
speak with Respondent. Garcia never spoke directly to Respondent about his
concerns.

51.

The evidence did not establish that Respondent’s actions objectively

made a hostile work environment for Garcia.

12

Evidence of Respondent’s Character and Reputation

52.

Respondent proffered character evidence from individuals who have
worked with Respondent in professional choirs outside of the school setting. These
individuals, who have known Respondent for approximately 20 years, and have seen
Respondent interact with adult choirs, and at least one non-school children’s choir,
described Respondent as demanding, generous, cooperative, and a good listener.
They have not seen Respondent lose her temper, or yell or scream when frustrated.
They further described Respondent as a nice person who is very knowledgeable and
professional about music and music instruction.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District has the burden of proof to prove its allegations by a

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

2(a). Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) states, in part, that
“no permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or more of the following
causes . . . (1) [i]mmoral . . . conduct. [¶] (5). Evident unfitness for service.”

2(b).

“Immoral conduct,” means conduct that is hostile to the public welfare

and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. It can be conduct
that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, or conduct showing moral indifference to the
opinions of respectable members of the community or as an inconsiderate attitude
toward good order and the public welfare.” (Board of Education v. Weiland (1960)
179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

2(c). Evident unfitness for service “means ‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or
inadequacies.’” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on
Professional Competence (Zuber) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “‘Evident
unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable
merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the
employing school district.” (Ibid.)

3.

In analyzing the relevant Education Code provisions in teacher

dismissal matters, the State Supreme Court noted that even where cause for discipline
is found to exist, the Commission on Professional Competence is vested with
discretion to decide the appropriateness of a given sanction, including dismissal.
(Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 219-223.) The
California Supreme Court reasoned that even where cause for discipline is found to
exist, “a commission on professional competence is empowered to exercise its

13

collective wisdom and discretion to determine that dismissal is not appropriate in a
given case.” (Fontana Unified School District v. Burman, supra, 45 Cal.3d. at 222)

4.

It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a
witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”
(Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also
“reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and
combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony
of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of the selected material.” (Stevens
v. Parke Davis & Co., supra, 9 Cal.3d at 67-68 [quoting Neverov v. Caldwell (1958)
161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767].) Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a
witness although not contradicted. (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon (1971) 3
Cal.3d 875, 890.)

5(a). Respondent did not engage in immoral conduct, nor is she evidently

unfit for service, as analyzed in Legal Conclusions 5(b) through 5(n), and 7.

5(b). Respondent’s outburst of “shut up” was a poor choice of words, but did

not constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate that Respondent is unfit for service.

5(c). Despite the assertions by J.S., it was not established by a

preponderance of the evidence that Respondent grabbed J.S.’s wrist. The evidence
established that Respondent grabbed Callaway’s wrist during their meeting, but
Respondent denied grabbing J.S.’s wrist in that meeting. The totality of the evidence
did not establish Respondent’s touching of J.S. None of Respondent’s interactions
with J.S. constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate that Respondent is unfit for
service. The evidence did not establish that Respondent threatened J.S. or J.S.’s
father with pursuing criminal charges or other litigation during the telephone call
between J.S.’s father and Respondent.

5(d). Respondent should not have touched E.C., but the touching did not rise

to the level that dismissal would be an appropriate consequence. Both E.C. and
Respondent described the touching as a shove at one point; but at other points, both
E.C. and Respondent asserted that Respondent’s touching was not a shove. The
evidence established that the touching was a mild push meant to encourage E.C. to
move out of Respondent’s chair and office. The touching was not violent or harmful.
Respondent’s touching of E.C. did not constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate that
Respondent is unfit for service. As to the additional allegation involving E.C., the
evidence did not establish that Respondent grabbed E.C.’s wrist at any time.

5(e). Respondent’s interactions with A.S. were entirely appropriate and
failed to constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate that Respondent is evidently unfit
for service. A.S. violated school policy by having her cellular telephone switched on
and on her lap in class. Respondent took appropriate actions, including having A.S.
stand in the corner of the classroom, and choosing to escort A.S. to the school’s

14

administrative offices. A.S.’s assertions that she felt picked on and did not feel safe
in Respondent’s class after the incident were illogical, given that A.S. violated school
policy and that Respondent took steps in accordance with the policy. Additionally,
having Khurgel take over the class for the time it took for Respondent to escort A.S.
to the administrative office was not improper and did not unreasonably require
Khurgel to perform job duties outside of the scope of her own job description.

5(f). Commission Member Petersen departs from the majority and concludes

that it was inappropriate for Respondent to have left Khurgel in charge of the class
while she escorted A.S. to the school’s administrative office.

5(g).

In her testimony regarding A.S, Callaway failed to reconcile her
opinion sanctioning A.S.’s telephone in class with her concession, upon cross-
examination, that, pursuant to the school policy, Respondent took proper steps to
confiscate the telephone. Considering the school policy against having cellular
telephones in class and Callaway’s position as an assistant principal, Callaway’s
opinion demonstrated a bias against Respondent. Callaway did not assert that she had
momentarily forgotten the policy. There was no evidence that the policy was new or
had recently been amended. As the assistant principal, it was illogical for Callaway to
approve of a student action that blatantly violated school policy. Such a position
demonstrated that Callaway sought to cast Respondent in a negative light. Her
opinions and other testimony as to A.S. and her testimony overall were therefore
given less weight.

5(h). Respondent’s suggestion that K.M. speak to a counselor about an IEP

assessment if she seeks the accommodation of extra time for assignments was not
established to be retaliatory. As K.M. was a senior student with no history of
requiring special education services, Respondent’s suggestion was uncalled for and
demonstrated insensitivity toward K.M. and her family. However, K.M. and her
family incorrectly presumed that all special education students with IEPs have mental
retardation or are otherwise intellectually slow. This is not true.6 While K.M.’s
inaccurate understanding of special education led her to feel offended by
Respondent’s suggestion, the evidence did not establish that Respondent intended to
offend K.M. Therefore, it cannot be concluded that Respondent’s suggestion was
objectively offensive to K.M., that Respondent intended to retaliate against K.M. for

6 Pursuant to Government Code section 11425.50, the ALJ may use his
“experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge” “in evaluating
evidence.” The ALJ hears matters involving the Lanterman Developmental
Disabilities Services Act (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 4500 et seq.), and has mediated a
significant number of special education matters for numerous school districts
throughout California. Consequently, the ALJ has experience and knowledge
regarding the eligibility requirements of special education services, the development
of IEPs, and the manifestations of mental retardation, among other developmental
disabilities.

15

the overall complaints against Respondent, or that Respondent intended to
emotionally abuse K.M. K.M.’s assertion that she was fearful of Respondent was not
believable and appears to be an exaggeration that merits no credit. Respondent’s
interactions with K.M., K.M.’s mother, and K.M.’s sister do not constitute immoral
conduct or demonstrate that Respondent is unfit for service.

5(i). Respondent’s failure to initially give her students grades for the winter

concert was a reasonable position, given she was not present at the concert and did
not observe the students’ performances. Such a position by Respondent was not
retaliatory in nature, does not constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate an evident
unfitness for service.

5(j). Respondent’s disclosure of her personal health information to female

students was not the most fitting disclosure, far from optimal; but it was received
differently by different students. Not everyone was offended. Furthermore, the
subject matter, within the context of students asking about Respondent’s impending
temporary absence, did not constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate an evident
unfitness for service.

5(k). The academic quality of the final examination and crossword puzzle

were appropriate for Respondent’s students. While the final examination’s
appearance was sloppy, the sloppy presentation did not constitute immoral conduct or
demonstrate Respondent’s evident unfitness for service.

5(l). Respondent’s advertisement for voice lessons and payment for choir
dresses placed in the syllabus were established to be the result of Respondent’s lack
of knowledge about the rules at Segerstrom. Respondent immediately complied with
the rules, upon notice by school administration. These actions by Respondent did not
constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate Respondent’s evident unfitness for
service.

5(m). Respondent’s disputes with Khurgel appear to have stemmed from

Respondent’s curt and disrespectful demeanor and both Respondent’s and Khurgel’s
misunderstandings. These interactions, however, did not constitute immoral conduct,
did not demonstrate Respondent’s evident unfitness for service, and did not
objectively create a hostile work environment for Khurgel.

5(n). Similarly, Respondent’s interactions with Garcia, considering
especially that Garcia failed to ever address his concerns directly with Respondent,
did not objectively constitute a hostile work environment for Garcia. The disputes
between Garcia and Respondent were much more akin to personality clashes that
were likely exacerbated by Respondent’s demeanor. Respondent’s interactions with
Garcia did not constitute immoral conduct or demonstrate Respondent’s evident
unfitness for service.

16

6.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education, (1969), 1 Cal.3d 214, the

California Supreme Court held that for purposes of teacher dismissal, conduct
characterized as “immoral,” “unprofessional,” or “involving moral turpitude” must be
limited to conduct indicating that a teacher is “unfit to teach”; otherwise, these terms
would be unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. (Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed.,
supra, 1 Cal.3d at 229.) The Morrison Court listed factors relevant to determining
whether a teacher's conduct indicates unfitness to teach:

[T]he likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected

students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the
proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the type of teaching
certificate held by the party involved, the extenuating or aggravating
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood
of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, and the extent to which
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon
the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.

(Id. at 229-230.)

7(a). These Morrison factors are analyzed below considering each factor in

the same order that each is presented in the preceding paragraph.

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow
teachers

7(b). Respondent’s conduct did not adversely affect students and fellow

teachers in any substantial way, as set forth in Legal Conclusion 5.

The degree of such adversity anticipated

7(c). The degree of such adversity anticipated is of no consequence here,

where Respondent’s conduct did not adversely affect students or teachers in any
significant way.

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct

7(d). The alleged and actual acts by Respondent are relatively recent.

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved

7(e). Respondent holds teaching credentials and was employed to teach

choral.

17

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct

7(f). There was a consensus among the students and teachers that

Respondent had a difficult personality, was curt, rude, and generally insensitive. This
was established by the evidence. These traits aggravated the personality clashes and
disputes in which Respondent found herself. Additionally, Respondent failed to
consider how students might, for example, receive information relating to her
personal health, how a student would react to her suggesting that she inquire about
special education accommodations, and whether she should place hands on a student
to move him out of her chair and office. These actions demonstrate that Respondent
failed to prudently assess her actions before engaging in them. Similarly, with
Khrugel, Respondent failed to consistently address her in a respectful manner when
there was a difference of opinion or dispute between them. None of these actions or
any others alleged by SAUSD rose to the level of dismissal; however, these
aggravating factors should serve to counsel Respondent that she must consider her
actions carefully, think about how her actions may be perceived, and that she should
never place hands on a student, no matter how physically benign the intention.

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct

7(g). Respondent’s own negative personality traits, as discussed in Legal
Conclusion 7(f) merit some responsibility for SAUSD’s action against her. As the
numerous complaints against Respondent were lodged by students and teachers alike,
it was reasonable for SAUSD to question whether Respondent was at fault for at least
some of the allegations, even if ultimately, the evidence in the record failed to so
establish.

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct

7(h).

In approximately 20 years of teaching within SAUSD, Respondent has

no history of discipline with the District. Additionally, there was no evidence that
Respondent was recalcitrant regarding the actions complained about by SAUSD.
Thus, and after experiencing this proceeding, it is reasonable to conclude that there is
a low likelihood that Respondent will engage in similar conduct in the future.

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect
upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers

7(i). As no disciplinary action is to be imposed against Respondent, an

analysis of the extent to which such action may inflict a chilling effect on teachers’
constitutional rights is unnecessary.

8.

Analysis of the Morrison factors further establish that there is

insufficient evidence to conclude that Respondent is unfit to teach.

18

9.

Cause for dismissal does not exist under Education Code section

44932, subdivisions (a)(1), for immoral conduct, pursuant to Factual Findings 1-52,
and Legal Conclusions 1-8.

10.

Cause for dismissal does not exist under Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(5) for evident unfitness for service, pursuant to Factual
Findings 1-52, and Legal Conclusions 1-8.

11.

Education Code section 44939 states in part:

Upon the filing of written charges . . . or upon a written
statement of charges . . . charging a permanent employee of the district
with . . . willful refusal to perform regular assignments without
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of
the employing school district . . . the governing board may, if it deems
such action necessary, immediately suspend the employee from his
duties and give notice to him of his suspension, and that 30 days after
service of the notice, he will be dismissed, unless he demands a
hearing.

12.

For the reasons set forth in Legal Conclusions 1-11, pursuant to Factual

Findings 1-52, there is no evidence that Respondent willfully refused to perform her
regular teaching assignment without reasonable cause between September 2009, and
January 2010.

13.

Cause for dismissal does not exist under Education Code section

44939, for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause,
pursuant to Factual Findings 1-52, and Legal Conclusions 1-12.

19

ORDER

DISSENT

The Accusation and Statement of Charges against Respondent Nancy Beach in
OAH case number 2010030667 are overruled. The Santa Ana Unified School District
shall not dismiss Respondent Nancy Beach from employment.

Date: _______________

_____________________________
Edward Chavez, Commission Member

Date: _______________

________________________________
Daniel Juárez, Commission Member

Commission Member Petersen respectfully dissents from the majority.

Commission Member Petersen joins in all of the factual findings and legal
conclusions herein, except as noted throughout the Decision. Commission Member
Petersen would conclude that Respondent physically grabbed student J.S. as alleged,
emotionally abused and intimidated students and SAUSD employees, retaliated
against students and teachers for her suspension and the complaints lodged against
her, and created a hostile classroom environment for students and a hostile work
environment for Tanya Khurgel. For these reasons, Commission Member Petersen
would sustain SAUSD’s Accusation and Statement of Charges, and dismiss
Respondent from employment with the Santa Ana Unified School District.

Date: _______________

________________________________
Robert Petersen, Commission Member

20

