BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Immediate  Suspension 
and  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2010120065 

LEONARD  ISENBERG  (EN  583396),  a 
permanent  certificated  employee, 

DECISION 

  

Respondent. 

  

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 

in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  March  4,  May  8-10,  May  28-31,  July  17-19,  and  July  25-26, 
2013.  The  Commission  consists  of  Teresa  Velasco,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education 
(retired);  Teresa  Brown,  Torrance  Unified  School  District;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge 
Eric  Sawyer,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Michele  M.  Goldsmith,  Esq.,  Bergman  Dacey  Goldsmith,  represented  Complainant 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Ronald  C.  Lapekas,  Esq.,  represented  Leonard  Isenberg  (Respondent),  who  was 

present  on  each  day  of  hearing, 

  ‘The  record  was  closed  and  the  case  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of 

the  hearing  on  July  26,  2013.  The  Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California, 

2. 
District. 

At  all  times  relevant  Respondent  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

3. 

On  or  about  October  26,  2010,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  in  her  official  capacity  as 
the  District’s  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  filed  with  the  Board  a  Statement  of  Charges 
against  Respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for  Respondent’s  immediate 
suspension  without  pay  and  termination  of  his  employment  with  the  District.

  

4. 

By  a  letter  dated  November  10,  2010,  Respondent  was  advised  by  Ms. 

Ekchian  that  the  Statement  of  Charges  had  been  filed  with  the  Board,  and  that  during  a 
closed  session  of  a  Board  meeting  held  on  November  9,  2010,  the  Board  decided  to  dismiss 
Respondent  within  30  days,  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  was  also  advised  that 
he  had  been  suspended  without  pay,  effective  immediately.  Respondent  requested  a  hearing. 

5. 

On  or  about  December  7,  2010,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation  and  Statement 
of  Charges  with  OAH  and  served  the  same  on  Respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice 
of  Defense,  which  contained  a  request  for  the  hearing  that  ensued.  Respondent  was  timely 
provided  with  notice  of  the  hearing  before  the  Commission.  The  parties  subsequently 
executed  a  written  stipulation  waiving  the  statutory  requirement  that  the  hearing  be  held 
within  60  days  from  Respondent’s  request  for  a  hearing. 

6. 

On  or  after  August  18,  2011,  Respondent  filed  a  “First  Amended  Notice  of 

Defense,”  which  asserted  a  number  of  affirmative  defenses,  including  that  the  District’s 
adverse  actions  against  him  were  in  retaliation  for  his  whistleblowing  and  exercising  his 
constitutional  right  to  communicate  about  District  affairs  with  a  newspaper  reporter. 

Respondent's  Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  presently  holds  a  clear  single  subject  teaching  credential  in  Social 

Studies,  which  authorizes  him  to  teach  social  studies  in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including 
preschool,  and  in  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults;  as  well  as  a  clear  crosscultural, 
language  and  academic  development  (CLAD)  certificate,  which,  when  held  in  conjunction 
with  a  prerequisite  credential  or  permit  specified  in  the  Education  Code,  authorizes 
Respondent  to  provide  specified  services  to  limited-English-proficient  pupils.  . 

  8. 

Respondent  began  his  career  with  the  District  in  1987  as  a  substitute  and  long- 
term  substitute  teacher.  He  left  the  District  in  1989  to  pursue  other  teaching  opportunities  and 
career  interests.  He  returned  to  the  District in  1996  and  has  remained  there  through  the 
present. 

9. 

Pertinent  to  the  charges  in  the  Accusation,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  the 

Central  High  School  (CHS)  in  May  of  2005.  CHS  is  an  option  school,  featuring  alternative 
and  non-traditional  high  school  classes  for  students  behind  in  their  credits,  at-risk  for 
dropping  out  of  school,  or  who  have  been  expelled  from  their  prior  high  schools.  CHS  has  28 
campuses  throughout  the  City  of  Los  Angeles.  In  July  2007,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  a 
newly  opened  campus  of  CHS  known  as  Miracle  Mile.  Because  student  enrollment  at 
Miracle  Mile  remained  perpetually  low,  half  of  the  campus  was  closed  in  June  2009,  and 
Respondent  was  reassigned  to  teach  social  studies  at  three  different  campuses  within  CHS: 
Highland  Park  for  two  days  a  week,  East  Los  Angeles  Occupational  Center  (ELAOC)  for 
two  days  a  week,  and  the  United  American  Indian  Involvement  one  day  a  week.  In  October 
2009,  Respondent  worked  exclusively  at  ELAOC  after  administrators  became  concerned 
over  possible  threats  against  him  by  students  at  the  Highland  Park  site.  Respondent  had  a 
number  of  Hispanic  students  in  his  classes.

The  Events  of 2009 

10. 

In  July  2009,  over  the  course  of  several  days,  Respondent,  while  teaching  at 

CHS,  directed  the  following  remarks  toward  students  during  class  time: 

A.  “You  are  losers;” 
B.  “You  are  nothing;” 
C.  “You  will  be  nothing  to  our  society;” 
D.  “You  will  be  low  paying  job  seekers;”  and 
E.  “The  reason  you  Mexicans  get  in  trouble  is  because  you  don’t  know  the 

law.  I  know  the  law.  You  should  be  like  me.” 

It  was  unnecessary  for  Respondent  to  mention  race  or  ethnicity  in  teaching  the  topics  in 
question,  or  to  make  negative  comments  like  that  to  his  students.  Respondent’s  class  was 
comprised  of  high-risk  students;  it  would  have  been  enough  to  simply  mention  that  fact. 
Respondent  was  new  to  his  class  and  did  not  know  his  students  well.  While  it  is  probably 
never  appropriate  to  make  the  above-described  comments  in  class,  Respondent  most 
certainly  should  not  have  made  them  when  he  did  not  fully  understand  or  know  his  audience, 
or  vice  versa.  Many  of  the  students  found  the  comments  dispataging  and  hurtful,  which 
undercut  their  trust  in  and  respect  for  Respondent,  and  impeded  his  ability  to  teach  them. 

  

11. 

In  July  2009,  Respondent  discussed  students’  reading  levels,  confidential 

information  about  their  families  and  their  parents’  immigration  status  during  class-time  with 
other  students  present.  As  mentioned  above,  Respondent  did  not  understand  his  audience  or 
the  detrimental  impact  those  comments  would  have  on  this  class.  Respondent  may  have 
made  the  comments  in  order  to  trigger  class  discussion,  but  pointing  out  that  information  in 
front  of  other  students  was  improper.  Those  comments  hurt  some  students’  feelings  and 
  undermined  Respondent’s  authority  to  teach.  Respondent  was  not  sensitive  to  how  those 
comments  could  affect  his  students. 

12. 

“In  July  2009,  Respondent  told  students,  “It’s  a  good  thing  we  educate 

Mexicans  so  we  can  have  someone  to  do  manual  labor,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  Respondent 
did  not  mean  to  disparage  his  students.  He  meant  the  comment  to  be  provocative  or  ironic. 
However,  as  was  the  situation  described  above,  by  mentioning  race  and  ethnicity  to  make  his 
point,  Respondent  ultimately  upset  and  offended  many  of  his  students.  Moreover,  in  making 
that  comment,  Respondent  did  not  add  any  other  context  or  information  to  allow  the  students 
to  compare  the  situation  or  make  sense  of  what  he  was  saying.  Thus,  this  ended  up  not  being 
a  valid  or  productive  teaching  moment. 

13. 

On  or  about  August  10,  2009,  Respondent  discussed,  during  instructional  time, 

written  statements  that  some  students  had  submitted  to  CHS.  Assistant  Principal  Rene 
Martinez.  Those  written  statements  previously  had  been  obtained  by  Mr.  Martinez  in 
response  to  complaints  made  to  Respondent’s  supervisors  about  some  or  all  of  Respondent’s 
aforementioned  comments  in  class.  In  response,  Respondent  told  students  that  other  teachers 
and  administrators  were  “out  to  get  me  fired.”  He  therefore  told  students  to  write  good  things

  

about  him  and  requested  some  students  to  re-write  statements  and  submit  them  to  Mr. 
Martinez.  Respondent  over-stepped  his  authority  with  his  students  in  doing  this.  Although 
Respondent  felt  attacked  by  his  supervisors  at  this  time,  it  did  not  give  him  license  to  involve 
his  students  in  his  own  personnel  matters.  The  students  knew  that  Respondent  had  power 
over  them,  in  terms  of  grades  or  their  graduating.  Respondent  improperly  used  his  influence 
on  students  to  essentially  force  them  to  do  something  they  were  uncomfortable  doing.  Given 
that  undue  influence,  there  was  no  assurance  that  the  information  provided  by  the  students 
would  be  accurate  or  valuable;  the  students  may  have  written  favorable  information  simply 
to  gain  favor  with  Respondent.  Thus,  this  project  was  flawed  from  the  beginning. 

14. 

Onor  about  September  23,  2009,  Respondent  decided  to  remove  Jesse  from 

his  classroom  because  Jesse  was  misbehaving.  Respondent  had  the  right  under  the  Education 
Code  to  temporarily  remove  a  student  from  his  classroom  without  seeking  permission  from 
administrators.  The  CHS  campus  where  he  was  teaching  at  the  time  was  smail  and  there  was 
no  other  place  to  put  Jesse,  without  disrupting  the  classroom  of  another  teacher.  So  removing 
Jesse  from  his  classroom  was  ultimately  the  same  as  excusing  Jesse  from  school.  This 
problem  was  created  by  the  District.  In  this  sense,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent 
tried  to  formally  suspend  Jesse  from  school  without  administrative  authorization.  However, 
the  problem  was  that  Respondent  did  not  contact  Jesse’s  home  or  otherwise  make  sure  he 
would  be  safe  after  leaving  Respondent’s  classroom,  and  therefore  the  campus.  That  was  not 
proper. 

. 

15. 

On  November  2,  2009,  Respondent  met  with  CHS  Principal  Janet  Seary  and 

Assistant  Principal  Martinez  in  a  small  office  to  discuss  the  events  described  above.  It  was  a 
counseling  conference.  Respondent  had  a  colleague  with  him  to  take  notes.  It  was  not 
established  that  during  the  meeting  Respondent  asked  Mr.  Martinez,  “You  have  anything  to 
say?”  or  that  he  angrily  called  him. a  “pendejo  idiota.”  Mr.  Martinez  testified  that  even 

Respondent  make  that  comment,  it  is  curious  why  he,  as  an  administrator,  would  not  have 
immediately  stopped  the  discussion  and  asked  Respondent  to  clarify  what  he  meant  or 
confirm  what  he  said.  Mr.  Martinez  did  not  do  that.  He  said  nothing,  and  waited  until  after 
the  meéting  to  mention  this  to  Principal  Seary.  In  addition,  Respondent’s  colleague  credibly 
testified  that  he  heard  no  such  comment,  even  though  they  were  all  seated  very  close  to  each 
other  in  a  small  room. 

16. 

On  November  3,  2009,  Respondent,  during  a  faculty  meeting,  ignored 

Principal  Seary’s  request  to  wait  until  after  the  faculty  meeting  to  obtain  signatures  on  a 
petition  and  continued  circulating  said  petition  to  teachers.  At  meetings  such  as  this,  teachers 
commonly  pass  out  items.  However,  once  Principal  Seary  told  Respondent  to  refrain  from 
circulating  his  petition,  he  should  have  stopped.  Instead,  Respondent  continued.  By  this  time, 
Respondent  had  no  respect  for  Principal  Seary,  and  he  showed  his  lack  of  respect  for  her  by 
ignoring  her  request.  Respondent’s  testimony  that  he  did  not  continue  to  circulate  the  petition 
was  not  credible,  and  was  refuted  by  the  credible  testimony  of  several  other  teachers  present 
at  the  meeting.

  though  he  was  not  fluent  in  Spanish,  he  knew  what  that  phrase  meant:  If  he  in  fact  heard 

17. 

During  that  same  faculty  meeting  on  November  3,  2009,  Respondent  answered 

Principal  Seary’s  question  as  to  why  he  was  continuing  to  circulate  the  petition  during  the 
faculty  meeting  by  stating,  “Come  on  Janet,  I  don’t  have  to  listen  to  you.  Go  ahead  and  write 
me  up.”  Respondent’s  antics  during  faculty  meetings  bdthered  some  fellow  teachers, 
‘annoyed  others,  and  had  no  impact  on  the  rest. 

The  Events  of Early  2010 

18. 

On  January  28,  2010,  Respondent  confronted  Principal  Seary  about  an  issue 

pertaining  to  Respondent’s  private  website  while  in  her  office  area,  in  front  of  staff.  Principal 
Seary  told  him  that  the  discussion  should  not  be  in  the  presence  of  others,  but  Respondent 
continued,  in  a  rude  and  confrontational  manner. 

19. 

On  February  2,  2010,  in  spite  of  being  told  by  Principal  Seary  that  it  was 

inappropriate  to  discuss  his  personal  website  at  a  faculty  meeting  that  was  being  held  at  that 
time,  Respondent  disrupted  the  meeting  by  continuing  to  do  so.  Some  of  the  teachers  present 
were  annoyed  by  Respondent’s  antics. 

20. 

On  February  3,  2010,  at  a  time  when  Respondent  was  being  observed  by 

Assistant  Principal  Martinez,  Respondent  stopped  teaching  and  instead  began  to  confront  Mr. 
Martinez  about  a  student  who  was  misbehaving.  Respondent  demanded  that  the  matter  be 
handled  immediately.  In  spite  of  Mr.  Martinez’s  directive  to  continue  with  the  lesson, 
Respondent  refused. 

21. 

On  February  3,  2010,  Respondent  began  to  mock  and  provoke  Assistant 

Principal  Martinez  in  the  presence  of  students.  Respondent  did  so  by  using  the  same  tone  and 
words  used  by  Mr.  Martinez  when  communicating  with  him.  In  addition,  Respondent  began 
  to  mockingly  use  Mr.  Martinez’s  name  in  the  sentences  that  were  being  presented  as  part  of 
the  lesson. 

The  Events  of February  4,  2010 

22. 

On  February  4,  2010,  Respondent  downloaded  a  page  from  his  personal 

website  which  described  the  incident  Respondent  had  with  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  on 
the  previous  day,  and  he  circulated  this  page  among  the  students  in  his  classroom. 
Respondent  asked  students  to  read  the  material  and  write  comments  about  it.  This  material 
was  not  part  of  the  prescribed  curriculum,  and  it  is  not  clear  that  Respondent  was  using  this 
material  to  teach  a  lesson  or  tie-in  to  a  particular  part  of  the  curriculum.  Instead,  Respondent 
was  trying  to  circumvent  previous  directives  by  his  supervisors  to  not  involve  his  students  in 
his  personnel  matters.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  told  his  students  that,  unless 
they  participated  in  the  exercise,  they  would  receive  a  fail  and  he  would  contact  their  parents. 
In  fact,  many  of  the  students  simply  refused  to  do  the  assignment.  However,  Respondent’s 
goal  was  to  obtain  a  few  favorable  statements  from  students  he  liked  or  whom  he  believed 
liked  him,  in  order  to  secure  evidence  for  his  use  in  the  now  festering  personnel  actions  in 
which  he  was  embroiled. 

  

i 
i 
{ 
| 
i i 
{ i 

 

  

      

  

23. 

Principal  Seary  was  advised  of  these  events  later  that  morning.  This  was  the 

last  straw  for  her.  She  decided  to  pull  Respondent  from  his  classroom.  Her  decision  was 
approved  by  her  supervisor,  Administrative  Coordinator  Janice  Davis.  Principal  Seary  went 
to  Respondent’s  classroom  to  serve  him  with  the  written  pull  notice.  Upon  her  arrival, 
Principal  Seary  directed  Respondent  to  stop  soliciting  student  statements  about  the  page 
downloaded  from  his  website.  Respondent  refused  to  comply.  Principal  Seary  collected  the 
materials  Respondent  gave  the  students  and  whatever  statements  they  wrote. 

24. 

Respondent,  after  being  directed  by  Principal  Seary  not  to  involve  his  students 

in  the  incident  between  him  and  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  from  the  previous  day, 
undermined  the  authority  of  the  principal  by  indicating  to  the  students  (by  winking  to  them 
as  he  spoke)  not  to  follow  Principal  Seary’s  directive. 

25. 

After  Principal  Seary  served  Respondent  with  the  written  pull  notice  removing 

him  from  the  classroom,  she  asked  Respondent  to  give  her  the  District-issued  computer.  that 
was  in  the  classroom,  an  HP  laptop.  Respondent  unreasonably  refused  to  comply  with 
Principal  Seary’s  directive  to  turn  in  the  District’s  computer. 

26. 

Principal  Seary  had  asked  a  District  police  officer  to  join  her  when  she  decided 

to  serve  the  pull  notice  on  Respondent.  After  Respondent  refused  to  return  the  HP  computer 
present  in  the  classroom,  Principal  Seary  enlisted  the  aid  of  the  police  officer.  Respondent 
got  into  an  argument  with  the  police  officer  and  did  not  cooperate  with  him.  In  the  process, 
Respondent  was  rude,  disrespectful  and  belligerent  to  the  police  officer,  in  the  presence  of 
his  students.  Fearing  for  his  safety,  and  in  order  to  maintain  the  peace,  the  police  officer 
handcuffed  Respondent  and  advised  him  that  he  would  be  arrested  if  he  continued  to  refuse 
to  return  District  property.  The  police  officer  also  called  for  back-up  because  the  situation 
was  becoming  precarious  given  Respondent’s  irrational  behavior,  It  was  only  upon  the 

27. 

After  Respondent  was  directed  to  report  to  the  Local  District  6  Office,  he 

began  to  yell  at  Principal  Seary,  and  said  words  to  the  effect  of,  “You  are a  liar!;”  “You  said 
you  wanted  war!;”  and  “I  am  not  afraid  of  being  arrested!”  These  comments  were  made  in 
front  of  the  two  police  officers. 

Material  Found  on  Respondent’s  Computer  &  His  Blogging  Activity 

28. 

Due  to  Respondent’s  bizarre  response  to  the  directive  that  he  return  the 

District-issued  HP  computer,  Janice  Davis  became  suspicious  that  there  was  something  on 
that  computer  Respondent  was  hiding.  Ms.  Davis  instructed  Principal  Seary  to  make  sure  that 
Respondent  returned  the  other  District  computer  issued  to  Respondent,  a  Macbook;  and  that 
both  computers  be  searched  for  inappropriate  content.  The  HP  computer  was  searched  by 
forensic  computer  experts  and  no  inappropriate  content  was  found.

  

of  this  happened  in  front  of  Respondent’s  students 

  

29. 

_  However,  a  forensic  search  of  Respondent’s  Macbook  computer  revealed  that 
he  had  used  it  to  download  and  access  inappropriate  and  pornographic  material  in  violation 
of  the  District’s  Acceptable  Use  Policy.  The  Macbook  computer  was  issued  new  to 
Respondent.  No  other  teacher  had  access  to  it.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  took  the 
computer  home  with  him  fairly  soon  after  he  received  it  and  it  remained  there  until  he  was 
relieved  of  his  duties.  No  evidence  suggests  the  computer  was  left  unattended  in  his 
classroom  or  was  otherwise  accessed  by  students  or  other  faculty.  Thus,  Respondent  was  the 
only  person  who  had  access  to  the  computer.  Respondent  provided  no  explanation  for  how 
the  material  got  on  his  computer.  Moreover,  some  of  the  material  was  accessed  proximate  to 
when  the  District’s  website  had  been  accessed,  indicating  the  person  using  the  computer  at 
Respondent’s  home  when  accessing  the  material  knew  how  to  get  into  the  District’s  internal 
computer  system.  Under  these  circumstances,  Respondent’s  testimony  was  unpersuasive  that 
he  had  no  idea  how  that  material  got  on  the  computer. 

30. 

‘It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  personal  real  estate  business 

with  the  use  of  a  District-issued  computer  during  work  hours. 

31. 

Respondent  engaged  in  work  pertaining  to  his  personal  website  during  work 

hours. 

32. 

On  January  11,  2010,  Respondent  posted  on  his  website  school  documents 
containing  students’  classroom  locations,  names  of  their  teachers,  and  student  test  scores 
without  the  appropriate  authorization,  in  violation  of  District  policy. 

33. 

On  January  11,  2010,  Respondent  videotaped  and  posted  on  his  website  an 

interview  with  a  former  CHS  student,  Javier,  who  at  the  time  of  the  interview  was  a  minor. 
The  contents  of  the  interview  were  not  established,  so  it-was  not  established  whether  the 
  interview  divulged  confidential  pupil  records  that  would  have  required  Respondent  to 
provide  the  District  with  the  required  parental  consent  form. 

34. 

On  July  29,  2009,  Respondent  was.  directed  never  to  discuss  student 

confidential  information,  including  reading  levels,  family  relationships  or  status  in  a  manner 
that  breaches  confidentiality.  Respondent  thereafter  violated  that  directive.  For  example, 
Respondent  disclosed  student  personal  information,  particularly  their  identities  and  test 
scores,  to  Los  Angeles  Times  reporter  Mitchell  Landsberg.  On  several  other  occasions, 
Respondent  included  Mr.  Landsberg  as  a  “blind  cc”  on  many  of  his  e-mails  to  Principal 
Seary  which  contained  such  confidential  information.  Principal  Seary  was  initially  unaware 
that  Mr.  Landsberg  was  receiving  that  information.  At  one  point,  Respondent  provided  Mr. 
Landsberg  with  a  password  that  allowed  him  unfettered  access  through  a  computer  to 
confidential  student  information.  It  was  not  established  whether  Mr.  Landsberg  accessed  that 
information.  However,  Respondent  testified  that  he  knew  at  the  time  that  providing  that 
confidential  information  to  Mr.  Landsberg  was  in  violation  of  District  policy,  but  he  felt  he 
had  the  right  to  do  it  because  he  was  coniplaining  about  District  activities  he  felt  were 
improper  or  illegal.

35. 

As  the  above-described  events  were  unfolding,  Respondent  was  issued 

counseling  memoranda;  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  dated  November  2,  2009;  a  Notice 
of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  dated  December  14,  2009;  a  Below  Standard  Stull  Evaluation  dated 
May  11,  2010;  and  two  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  dated  June  3,  2010.  Principal  Seary 
and  the  District  used  progressive  discipline  in  responding  to  Respondent’s  conduct 
described  above.  Despite  this  counseling,  Respondent  failed  to  attain  and  sustain  an 
acceptable  level  of  conduct.  In  fact,  Respondent  believed  he  was  being  attacked  and  he 
completely  disregarded  the  counseling  he  was  offered.  Instead,  he  became  more  enraged 
over  time,  less  cooperative,  and  more  disruptive.  His  misbehavior  and  misconduct  simply 
escalated. 

Findings  Related  to  Respondent's  Affirmative  Defenses  of Retaliation 

36. 

Not  long  after  Respondent  returned  to  service  with  the  District  in  1996,  he  was 

assigned  to  a  school  in  Pacific  Palisades  which  was,  or  was  in  the  process  of  becoming,  a 
charter  school.  He  was  there  several  years.  Respondent  testified  that  he  left  that  assignment 
at  his  request.  Thereafter,  Respondent  worked  at  a  regular  school  in  West  Los  Angeles,  and 
then  another  charter  school.  In  his  deposition,  Respondent  testified  that  he  requested  a 
transfer  to  the  second  charter  school.  Given  Respondent’s  temperament  and  teaching  style, 
working  at  a  charter  school  was  probably  a  more  comfortable  environment  for  him. 

37. 

Respondent  transferred  to  CHS  in  2005.  He  essentially  taught  at  a  different 

campus  each  school  year  through  2007. 

38, 

In  July  2007,  Respondent  requested  Principal  Seary  for a  letter  of 

recommendation.  Principal  Seary  obliged,  and  she  wrote  a  one-page  letter,  concluding,  “Mr. 
Isenberg  is  an  extremely  capable  and  professional  educator.  I  highly  recommend  him  and 
would  be  happy  to  answer  any  questions  regarding  him.” 

39. 

Principal  Seary  received  a  complaint  about  Respondent  sometime  in  2007  for 

yelling  at  a  student.  She  informally  counseled  him.  In  connection  with  a  classroom 
observation  of  Respondent  in  2007,  Principal  Seary  counseled  him  on  student  classroom 
behavior.  During  the  2008-2009  school  year,  Principal  Seary  counseled  Respondent  after  she 
received  a  complaint  from  a  parent  that  he  was  rude  to  her  during  a  parent-teacher  meeting, 
During  the  same  time  frame,  CHS  Assistant  Principal  Janine  Antoine  became  involved  in 
mediating'a  dispute  between  Respondent  and  another  teacher,  Gary  Larkin.  Some  students 
told  Principal  Seary  they  preferred  being  assigned  to  Mr.  Larkin  over  Respondent.  Around 
this  time,  Respondent  also  became  involved  in  a-dust-up  with  Ms.  Antoine  when  he  failed  to 
follow  her  directive  to  not  fail  students.  The  District  had,  and  still  has,  a  policy  of  not  giving 
failing  marks  to  students  as  their  final  grade. 

Hf 

Mf

40. 

Respondent  received  no  formal  discipline  from  the  District  before  July  2009, 

and  no  evidence  was  presented  of  any  written  counseling  from  November  2006  through  July 
2009.  However,  as  discussed  above,  Respondent  had  received  some  informal  counseling  and 
guidance  in  response  to  behaviors  that  would  echo  more  prominently  in  and  after  July  2009, 
such  as  inappropriate  comments  to  students  and  a  parent,  activity  which  annoyed  fellow 
teachers,  and  a  willingness  to  ignore  or  refuse  supervisor  directives.  Therefore,  Respondent’s 
career  with  the  District  was  not  as  uneventful  as  he  indicates  before  July  2009. 

41. 

Not  long  after  Respondent  transferred  to  the  Miracle  Mile  campus  in 

September  2007,  he  advised  Principal  Seary  that  he.thought  the  District  was  paying  above 
market  rental  rate  for  the  property.  In  April  2008,  Respondent  contacted  Mr.  Landsberg  of 
the  Times,  and  advised  him  of  the  same  opinion.  Respondent  also  advised  Mr.  Landsberg 
that  the  District  was  using  an  improper  and  expensive  telephone/computer  line,  had  too  many 
teachers  for  too  few  students,  and  essentially  that  the  District  was  wasting  money  in  its 
operation  of  the  Miracle  Mile  campus.  Throughout  2008  and  2009,  Respondent  reiterated 
these  concerns  to  high-ranking  District  administrators,  including  an  official  in  the 
Superintendent’s  office.  Respondent  also  testified  that  he  reported  his  concerns  about 
financial  waste  to  the  District  Office  of  the  Inspector  General  (OIG),  but  he  could  not 
remember  when. 

42. 

Respondent  also  became  concerned  that  the  District  was  engaging  in  social 

promotion,  i.c.,  it  was  graduating  students  who  were  reading  and  writing  at  elementary  grade 
levels.  Respondent  derived  this  concern  mostly  from  the  performance  of  graduating  students 
on  the  District’s  STAR  test.  The  data  Respondent  reviewed  showed  many  graduating 
students  had  performed  poorly  on  the  STAR  test,  with  scores  at  elementary  grade  levels. 
However,  the  STAR  test  was  not  one  that  students  took  seriously.  Many  students  gave  little 
or  no  effort  in  taking  the  test,  and  the  results  were  therefore  not  an  accurate  gauge  of  their 
  ability.  In  making  graduation  determinations,  the  District  instead  relied  on  the  results  of  the 
CAHSEE  test,  which  was  a  high-stakes  test.  Because  students  could  not  graduate  unless  they 
passed  the  CAHSEE  test,  students  tried  hard  on  the  test  and  the  results  were  therefore  an 
accurate  gauge  of  their  potential  and  performance. 

43. 

Before  July  2009,  Respondent  shared  his  social  promotion  concerns  with 

Principal  Seary,  Assistant  Principals  Antoine  and  Martinez,  and  several  high-ranking  District 
officials.  Beginning  in  late  June  2009,  Respondent  contacted  Mr.  Landsberg  of  the  Times 
and  shared  the  same  concern  with  him  on  several  occasions.  It  was  during  those  contacts  that 
Respondent  improperly  shared  confidential  student  information  with  Mr.  Landsberg  in 
violation  of  District  policy.  In  August  2009,  Respondent  filed  a  written  complaint  with  OIG 
about  his  social  promotion  concern.  After  Respondent  engaged  in  his  misconduct  from  July 
through  November  2009  described  above,  and  received  counseling  and  discipline  from 
Principal  Seary,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  whistleblower  complaint  with  OIG,  alleging 
that  those  steps  were  taken  against  him  by  the  District  in  retaliation  for  his  whistleblowing. 

  

 

  

44, 

Although  we  do  not  doubt  the  sincerity  of  Respondent’s  concerns  or  that  he 

lodged  the  aforementioned  complaints  in  the  good  faith  belief  they  were  true,  we  find  that,  in 
large  part,  Respondent  was  naive  and  immature  in  coming  to  his  conclusions.  For  example, 
the  District  established  that  the  teacher  staffing  at  Miracle  Mile  was  necessary  because  the 
District  could  not  have  foreseen  the  exact  number  of  students  who  would  enroll  at  the  new 
school  site,  and  there  had  to  be  a  special  education  teacher  at  the  site  in  case  any  enrollees 
needed  those  services.  In  terms  of  the  lease  rate  paid  by  the  District,  Respondent  failed  to 
account  for  the  other  benefits  the  District  received  from  the  landlord,  such  as  parking, 
maintenance  and  other  services  not  made  available  to  the  prior  tenant.  Respondent  failed  to 
establish  that  the  telephone/computer  line  used  by  the  District  was  improper  or  excessively 
costly.  In  terms  of  Respondent’s  social  promotion  concerns,  Respondent  should  have  known 
as  a  teacher  with  many  years  experience  that  the  STAR  test  was  not  an  accurate  reflection  of 
students’  abilities,  and  yet  there  is  no  evidence  indicating  that  he  undertook  any  effort  to 
correlate  the  same  students’  performance  on  the  CAHSEE.  Thus,  neither  of  his  complaints 
had  merit.  The  fact  that  neither  Mr.  Landsberg  nor  the  OIG  took  any  affirmative  action  in 
response  .to  them  is  not  surprising.’ 

45. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  took  any  particular  personnel  action 

against  Respondent  because  he  made  his  complaints  about  financial  impropriety  concerning 
the  Miracle  Mile  campus.  The  amount  of  money  involved  was  microscopic  compared  to  the 
staggering  annual  budget  of  the  Disirict.  In  this  respect,  Respondent’s  complaint  can  be 
viewed  as  a  gnat  to  the  District’s  elephant. 

46. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  took  any  action  against  Respondent 

because  of  his  complaints  of  social  promotion.  We  are  well  aware  of  the  District’s  low 
overall  graduation  rate  compared  to  other  school  districts  in  this  state.  The  District  is  well 
known  for  that  problem.  Moreover,  there  is  no  prestige  connected  to  graduation  rates  for 
  ‘continuing schools.  The  District  administrators  who  learned  the  gist  of  Respondent's 
complaint  knew  the  difference  between  the  STAR  and  CAHSEE  tests,  and  they  quickly 
knew  Respondent  was  wrong.  Under  these  circumstances,  Respondent’s  complaints  were  not 
serious  enough  to  be  taken  seriously  by  Respondent’s  supervisors  or  high-ranking  District 
administrators,  and  certainly  not  of  merit  or  substance  to  cause  those  employees  to  retaliate 
against  Respondent. 

'  By  this  we  do  not  intend  to  convey  an  endorsement  for  the  way  in  which  the  OIG  | 
operated.  Although  Respondent’s  complaints  were  not  meritorious,  they  were  not  seriously 
investigated  either.  At  one  point,  the  OIG  referred  aspects  of  Respondent’s  social  promotion 
complaint  to  his  direct  supervisors  for  investigation,  which  undermined  the  independence 
and  neutrality  of  the  investigation,  and  was  unfair  to  Respondent.  We  agree  with  many  of 
Respondent’s  complaints  about  that  process  utilized  by  the  OIG  in  investigating  his 
complaint. 

10 

  

 

47. 

Teaching  in  an  alternate  school  like  CHS  was  probably  not  a  good  fit  for 

Respondent’s  temperament  and  teaching  style.  He  obviously  had  a  cultural  clash  with  certain 
types  of  students  and  their  parents;  he  was  not  patient  with  the  students  or  respectful  of  their 
situations;  and  he  was  insensitive  to  how  some  of  his  comments  in  class  could  be  hurtful.  At 
first,  he  moved  around  schools  and  did  not  spend  much  time  at  one  particular  campus. 
However,  he  spent  just  enough  time  at  those  campuses  to  trigger  the  need  for  the  informal 
counseling  outlined  above  in  Factual  Findings  39-40.  After  the  threat  had  been  made  against 
him  at  Highland  Park  which  required  his  transfer,  Respondent  worked  solely  at  ELAOC.  He 
obviously  did  not  get  along  with  the  students,  and  his  conduct  upset  students  and  parents, 
which  led  to  complaints.  Principal  Seary  had  to  respond  to  the  complaints,  which  increased 
the  focus  on  Respondent’s  conduct.  At  this  point,  the  glare  from  Respondent’s 
temperamental  defects  and  teaching  deficiencies  became  more  intense  and  attracted  the 
further  attention  of  his  supervisors.  Respondent  thereafter  refused  to  heed  to  Principal 
Seary’s  counseling  and  directives,  and  at  some  point  Respondent  simply  decided  to  “declare 
wat”  against  Principal  Seary  and  the  District.  He  became  belligerent,  insubordinate  and 
intransigent. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof  on  the  Accusation 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

With  regard  to  the  Accusation,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this 

matter,  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the 
evidence  means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is 
more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co,  (1990)  226 
  Cal.App.3d  314,  325.) 

Cause  for  Immediate  Suspension  and/or  Termination 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a),  and 
44939,  are  established.  In  addition,  a  governing  board  may  immediately  suspend  a 
certificated  employee  without  pay  pursuant  to  section  44939  upon  the  filing  of  a  statement  of 
charges  alleging  immoral  conduct  and/or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments 
without  reasonable  cause. 

3A. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939. 

?  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  noted  otherwise. 

1

  

  

 

3B. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

3C. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  accessed  and  downloaded  pornographic  material  on 

his  District-issued  Macbook  computer  in  violation  of  District  policy.  His  use  of  District 
property  for  such  purposes  was  shameless  conduct  showing  complete  moral  indifference  to 
the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community.  Respondent  also  made  disparaging 
comments  about  students  in  their  presence,  some  of  which  were  ethnic  in  nature  and  hurtful 
to  them.  Respondent  also  published  personal  information  about  students’  test  scores  and 
made  public  comments  that  those  students  were  not  worthy  of  having  graduated  from  the 
District,  even  though  they  were.  Respondent’s  conduct  regarding  the  involved  students  was 
willful,  flagrant  and  a  shameless  showing  of  moral  indifference  to  their  feelings,  as  well  as  a 
demonstration  of  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  those  students  in  particular  and  the  public 
welfare  in  general,  at  the  sake  of  promoting  his  own  agenda.  (Factual  Findings  10-12,  29,  32 
and  34.) 

4A, 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

engaged  in  unsatisfactory  performance  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(4). 

4B. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature-intended-to  enact-completely 
duplicative statutes-(in-re-Maes (2010) 185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

4C. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance, 
and  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establish  guidelines  for  how  school  districts 
should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for 
discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to  his 
employing  school  district. 

12 

4D. 

However,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to 

teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not 
dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and 
perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v. 
Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Therefore,  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or 
capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated  employee  has  performed 
unsatisfactorily. 

4E. 

In  this  case,  it  was  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  unsatisfactory 

performance  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4).  His  improper 
statements  to  and  about  students  in  the  classroom  was  an  unsatisfactory  way  of  teaching 
District  curriculum.  (Factual  Findings  10-12.)  During  an  observation  of  his  classroom 
teaching  by  Assistant  Principal  Martinez,  Respondent  abandoned  teaching  the  District 
curriculum  to  engage  in  a  confrontation  with  Mr.  Martinez.  (Factual  Findings  20-22.)  On  two 
occasions,  Respondent  subjected  his  students  to  his  own  personnel  conflicts  with  the  District 
by  asking  them  to  do  an  assignment  unrelated  to  District  curriculum.  (Factual  Findings  13 
and  22.)  Finally,  Respondent  ignored  his  students  and  engaged  in  work  pertaining  to  his  own 
personal  website  while  in  the  classroom  during  work  hours.  (Factual  Finding  31.) 

SA. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  is 

evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

  

5B. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “’Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
  presumably not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (fd.) 

5C.  —  In  this  case,  Respondent  made  inappropriate  comments  to  and  about  students, 

and  was  insensitive  to  how  his  comments  were  hurtful  and  would  have  denigrated  the 
students’  self-esteem.  He  was  directed  to  not  engage  in  certain  conduct  by  his  supervisors 
and  yet  he  continually  ignored  their  directives  and  continued  to  engage  in  the  same  conduct. 
Respondent  demonstrated  he  was  unwilling  to,  and  incapable  of,  listening  to  counseling  from 
his  supervisors.  In  some  instances,  Respondent’s  behavior  was  so  out-of-proportion  to  the 
underlying  events  as  to  demonstrate  that  he  has  an  anger  management  problem.  Respondent 
did  not  show  flexibility  in  dealing  with  the  students  in  his  unique  classroom  assignment.  He 
basically  insisted  that  students  “do  it  my  way.”  These  events  demonstrate  that  Respondent 
has  a  temperamental  defect  that  prevents  him  from  being  able  to  effectively  teach.  (Factual 
Findings  10-13,  16-27,  29,  31-32,  and  34.) 

13

6. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 
The  established  misconduct  demonstrates  specific  instances  when  Respondent  acted 
unprofessionally,  except  for  the  incident  involving  the  classroom  suspension  of  Jesse,  which 
was  not  proper  but  was  not  unprofessional.  (Factual  Findings  10-13,  16-29,  31-32,  and  34.) 

7A, 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  Board  of  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

7B. 

Cases  interpreting  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  require  a  “showing  of 

intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

7C. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  was  intentionally  and  continually  insubordinate  to  his 

supervisors,  mainly  Principal  Seary  and  Assistant  Principal  Martinez.  He  refused  to  follow 
their  directives  and  District  policy,  and  he  mocked  or  scorned  them  in  front  of  students 
and/or  colleagues.  (Factual  Findings  16-27  and  33.)  By  repeatedly  accessing  and 
downloading  pornographic  material  on  his  District-issued  computer  in  violation  of  the 
District’s  Acceptable  Use  Policy,  Respondent  similarly  persistently  and  intentionally  violated 
District  policy.  (Factual  Finding  29.) 

8. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44939.  Though 
Respondent’s  conduct  in  many  instances  was  insubordinate,  we  do  not  find  that  he  willfully 

-tefused-to-perform-aregular-assignment. 

  

9. 

The  District  established  that  it  had  good  cause  to  immediately  suspend 

Respondent  for  acts  of  immorality  pursuant  to  section  44939.  The  District  did  not  establish 
that  it  had  good  cause  to  immediately  suspend  Respondent  for  refusing  to  perform  a  regular 
assignment  pursuant  to  section  44939.  (Legal  Conclusion  3,  Factual  Findings  10-12,  29,  32 
and  34.) 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

10. 

In  reaching  the  above,  we  also  conclude  that  Respondent’s  misconduct  relates  to 

his  fitness  to  teach,  within  the  meaning  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1 
Cal.3d  214.  The  Morrison  analysis  does  not  apply  to  cause  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory 
performance  (/d.,  at  pp.  227-230),  and  we  have  not  found  cause  for  dismissal  for  failing  to 
perform  a  regular  assignment.  However,  with  regard  to  the  remaining  causes  for  dismissal, 
we  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and  compared  them  to  the  facts 
established  above.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 
satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 

14 

  

 

Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established, 
but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.)  In  this  case,  we  find  as  follows: 

(A) 

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 

  

teachers.  Respondent’s  misconduct  adversely  affected  students  and  fellow  teachers.  Many 
students  felt  uncomfortable  in  Respondent’s  classroom;  some  students  were  emotionally 
harmed  by  Respondent’s  comments.  Several  teachers  were  annoyed  or  felt  uncomfortable  in 
faculty  meetings  due  to  Respondent’s  antics.  Respondent  consumed  a  great  deal  of  his 
supervisors’  time  trying  to  manage  him. 

(B) 

‘The  degree  of  such  adversity.  The  adversity  against  fellow  teachers  was 
moderate;  some  were  bothered  by  Respondent’s  conduct,  some  were  simply  annoyed.  A  few 
students  were  seriously  affected  by  Respondent’s  conduct. 

~ 

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The  misconduct  is 

more  proximate  than  remote,  in  that  it  occurred  two  to  three  years  ago. 

(D) 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  This  factor 

applies  because  Respondent  has  a  CLAD  Certificate,  which  emphasizes  tolerance  and 
sensitivity  to  cross-cultural  differences.  Respondent  displayed  neither  in  dealing  with  his 
students. 

(E) 

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

surrounding  the  conduct.  Neither  aggravating  nor  extenuating  circumstances  were  proven. 

The  praiseworthiness  or-blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
  : 

(F) 

the  conduct.  This  factor  has  mixed  application.  Initially,  Respondent’s  motive  was  to 
improve  education  at  the  District.  That  was  a  laudable  goal.  However,  in  promoting  his 
agenda,  Respondent  became  involved  in  a  personnel  clash  with  the  District  and  his 
supervisors,  into  which  he  dragged  students  and  colleagues,  which  negatively  affected  them. 
That  conduct  is  blameworthy. 

(G) 

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  It  is  highly 

likely  that  Respondent  will  engage  in  the  same  activity  if  put  back  in  a  District  classroom. 

(H) 

‘The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  We  do  not  foresee  this 
happening,  for  the  reasons  discussed  below  regarding  Respondent’s  affirmative  defenses. 

15 

  

t 

j 
i ‘ 
| 

  
|

Respondent's  Whistleblowing  Affirmative  Defense 

11A. 

Respondent  contends  his  termination  was  in  retaliation  for  his  whistleblowing 

activity,  which  consisted  of  his  complaint  to  school  authorities  about  what  he  viewed  as 
improper  social  promotion  done  in  violation  of  District  policy  (students  were  graduated  who 
did  not  have  ability  to  promote  based  on  examination  results),  and  his  complaints  about  what 
he  viewed  as  economically  wasteful  actions  of  the  District  (including  excessive  rents, 
telephone/computer  lines,  and  too  many  teachers  assigned)  at  the  Miracle  Mile  campus. 

11B. 

Pursuant  to  section  44114,  subdivision  (e),  a  teacher  who  has  been  retaliated 

against  for  statutorily  protected  “whistleblowing”  may  assert  that  as  an  affirmative  defense  in 
an  administrative  hearing  regarding  adverse  action  by  an  employing  school  district. 

11C. 

Section  44114,  subdivision  (ec),  places  on  Respondent  the  initial  burden  of 

proving  “by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  an  activity  protected  by  this  article  was  a 
contributing  factor  in  the  alleged  retaliation.” 

11D. 

To  constitute  an  activity  protected  under  section  44114,  Respondent  must 

demonstrate  that  he  had  a  reasonable  and  good  faith  belief  that  an  improper  governmental 
activity  occurred.  A  “protected  disclosure”  is  defined  by  section  44112,  subdivision  (e),  as  “a 
good  faith  communication  that  discloses  or  demonstrates  an  intention  to  disclose”  an 
“¢mproper  governmental  activity,”  which  section  44112,  subdivision  (c),  defines  as  an 
“activity  [that]  violates  a  state  or  federal  law  or  regulation,”  or  “is  economically  wasteful  or 
involves  gross  misconduct,  incompetency,  or  inefficiency.” 

I1E. 

If  Respondent  meets  his  burden  of  establishing  the  elements  described  above, 

the  burden  shifts  to  the  District  to  demonstrate  by  clear  and  convincing  evidence  that  the 
  “adverse  action  would  have  occurred  for  legitimate,  independent  reasons,  even  if  Respondent 
had  not  engaged  in  the  protected  activity.  (§  44114,  subd.  (e).)  Proof  by  clear  and  convincing 
evidence  is  greater  than  preponderance  of  evidence,  but  does  not  require  proof  beyond  a 
reasonable  doubt. 

12A. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  failed  to  meet  his  initial  burden  of  establishing  that  he 

was  retaliated  against  by  the  District.  Respondent  had  a  good  faith  belief  that  he  was 
reporting  improper  governmental  activity.  It  is  clear  that  he  reported  his  concerns  to  the 
appropriate  recipients  for  purposes  of  section  44114.  We  are  not  sure  his  beliefs  were 
reasonable.  Even  assuming  that  point  for  argument  sake,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  District  took  any  action  against  him  because  he  was  a 
whistleblower.  Respondent’s  social  promotion  complaints  were  utterly  lacking  in  merit;  his 
financial  waste  complaints  were  trivial.  The  District  had  no  motivation  or  incentive  to  take 
action  against  anyone  who  lodged  such  complaints.  More  importantly,  each  act  of  counseling 
and  discipline  taken  by  the  District  was  directly  connected  to  a  complaint  from a  student, 
parent,  or  fellow  teacher,  as  well  as  Respondent’s  underlying  misconduct.  Instead  of 
diffusing  the  situation  by  following  his  supervisors’  directives  and  counseling,  Respondent 
ignored  them.  He  became  increasingly  insubordinate  and  essentially  declared  war  on  his 

16 

  

  
 

supervisors,  leaving  them  no  choice  but  to  continue  with  progressive  discipline.  until 
termination  was  the  last  resort. 

12B. 

Respondent’s  affirmative  defense  is  built  upon  his  foundational  argument  that 
he  had  not  been  subjected  to  formal  discipline  before  he  began  his  whistleblowing.  That  fact 
is  true.  But  we  find  that  was  coincidental.  First,  it  must  be  remembered  that  Respondent 
received  informal  discipline  before  the  events  in  question,  which  stemmed  from  conduct  that 
was  similar,  but  less  severe,  than  the  misconduct  proven  in  this  case.  Also,  Respondent  spent 
much  of  his  time  before  2009  at  charter  schools.  We  believe  Respondent  was  more 
comfortable  teaching  in  that  environment  than  at  the  urban  alternate  high  school  setting  with 
students  from  mixed  cultural  backgrounds.  Once  he  started  at  CHS,  Respondent  initially 
moved  around  campuses  and  did  not  spend  enough  time  at  one  particular  site  to  become 
incendiary.  As  he  spent  increasing  time  at  ELAOC,  Respondent’s  problems  intensified. 
Given  his  temperament  and  teaching  style,  Respondent  was  not  a  good  fit  for  the  students  at 
ELAOC.  As  complaints  began  arising  from  Respondent’s  culture  clash  with  his  students,  the 
glare  from  his  temperamental  defects  and  deficiencies  intensified  and  caused  more  scrutiny 
from  his  supervisors. 

12C. 

Respondent  argues  the  favorable  letter  Principal  Seary  wrote  for  him  in  2007 

is  indicative  of  her  true  feelings  for  Respondent,  which  were  later  only  tarnished  by  his 
whistleblowing.  By  the  time  she  wrote  her  letter  in  2007,  Principal  Seary  probably  believed 
most  of  what  she  wrote.  She  had  only  engaged  in  informal  counseling  of  Respondent  by 
then.  She  probably  would  have  written  the  same  letter  after  Respondent  began  his 
whistleblowing.  She  certainly  would  not  have  written  that  letter  once  Respondent  started 
engaging  in  his  misconduct  and  declared  war  against  her.  Thus,  the  letter  Principal  Seary 
wrote  is  of  no  moment. 

: 

13A. 

Respondent  contends  that  his  termination  was  also  in  retaliation  for  exercising 

his  right  to  communicate  with  members  of  the  press,  a  right  secured  under  the  First 
Amendment  of  the  United  States  Constitution  and  Article  I  of  the  California  Constitution. 
Specifically,  Respondent  contends  his  communications  with  the  reporter  of  the  Los  Angeles 
Times  concerning  social  promotion  constitutes  such  activity. 

13B. 

In  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Education  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  the  California  Supreme 

Court  held  that  if  the  reason  for  a  school  district’s  dismissal  of  a  teacher  was  not  the  cause 
stated  in  an  accusation  but  rather  was  official  dissatisfaction  with  the  teacher’s  exercise  of 
constitutional  rights,  the  termination  should  be  set  aside,  unless  it  is  further  determined  that 
the  consequent  limitation  on  these  rights  is  justified  by  a  compelling  public  interest.  If  it  is 
found  that  the  reason  for  dismissal  was  the  cause  stated  in  the  accusation  and  was  not  official 
dissatisfaction  with  the  teacher’s  exercise  of  constitutional  rights,  the  termination  should  be 
upheld.  However,  if  it  is  found  that  the  reason  for  dismissal  was  both  the  cause  stated  in  the 
accusation  and  official  dissatisfaction  with  the  teacher’s  exercise  of  constitutional  rights,  it 

17

    

  

    Respondent’s  First  Amendment  Retaliation  Defense 

should  be  determined  whether,  absent  the  exercise  of  constitutional  rights,  the  school  district 
would  still  have  dismissed  the  teacher.  (fd.,  at  pp.  592-593.) 

13C. 

In  order  to  establish  such  an  affirmative  defense,  Respondent  must  establish 
that:  (1)  he  spoke  on  a  matter  of  public  concern;  (2)  he  spoke  as  a  private  citizen  and  not  a 
public  employee;  (3)  an  adverse  employment  action  was  taken  against  him;  and  (4)  the 
protected  speech  was  a  substantial  or  motivating  factor  in  the  adverse  action.  (Eng  v.  Cooley 
(9th  Cir.  2009)  552  F.3d  1062,  1070-1071.) 

13D. 

Since  the  party  asserting  an  affirmative  defense  bears  the  burden  of  proof 

(Evid.  Code,  §  500),  Respondent  has  the  burden  of  establishing  his  affirmative  defense  that 
the  District’s  decision  to  fire  him  was  the  result  of  retaliation  for  his  exercising  a 
constitutional  right.  Here,  Respondent  agrees  he  bears  this  burden,  and  that  he  must  do  so  by 
a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

13E. 

The  parties  agree  that  if  Respondent  establishes  the  elements  of  retaliation  for 

exercising  a  constitutional  right,  the  burden  shifts  to  the  District,  which  may  overcome 
Respondent’s  affirmative  defense  by  showing  either:  (1)  that  the  District’s  administrative 
interests  outweigh  Respondent’s  constitutional  rights;  or  (2)  that  the  same  adverse 
employment  action  would  have  been  taken  against  him  even  in  the  absence  of  the  protected 
speech.  (Eng  v.  Cooley  (9th  Cir.  2009)  552  F.3d  1062,  1072.)  The  District  would  have  the 
burden-of  proving  the  same  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Shimoyama  vy.  Board  of 
Education  (1981)  120  Cal.App.3d  517,  524.) 

14A. 

This  issue  is  complicated  somewhat  by  the  fact  that  in  some  of  Respondent’s 

communications  to  Mr.  Landsberg  of  the  Times,  he  divulged  confidential  student 

____  information,  protected  by  federal  law  and  by  District  policies  that  prohibit  disclosure  of  that 
information.  While  Respondent  contends  some  of  the  actions  taken  against  him  by  the 
District  were  directly  related  to  his  communications  with  Mr.  Landsberg,  the  District 
contends  that  it  may  discipline  a  teacher  for  disclosing  confidential  information  that  has  such 
protection. 

  

14B. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  was  privileged  to  disclose  such  information,  and 

is  exempt  from  discipline,  due  to  the  protections  that  reporters  enjoy  under  the  law.  While 
reporters  do  have  certain  legal  protection,  such  does  not  extend  by  extrapolation  to  those  who 
share  information  with  them.  For  example,  Respondent  cites  to  Article  I,  section  2, 
subdivision  (a)  of  the  California  Constitution,  which  provides,  “Every  person  may  freely 
speak,  write  and  publish  his  or  her  sentiments  on  all  subjects,  being  responsible  for  the  abuse 
of  this  right.”  Thus,  it  is  clear  that  while  a  member  of  the  press,  or.a  private  party,  may  speak 
or  write  as  they  wish,  they  are  subsequently  accountable  for  abuse  of  this  right. 

18

i   

| 

i 

i 

i 
| 

  

14C. 

Respondent  also  cites  to  Evidence  Code  section  1070,  also  known  as  the 

“Newsman  Privilege,”  which  simply  protects  members  of  the  media  from  being  found  in 
contempt  for  refusing  to  disclose  a  source  of  information,  or  for  refusing  to  divulge  any 
unpublished  information.  There  is  nothing  in  this  statute  which  affords  any  protection  to  the 
source  of  the  information  provided  to  a  media  member. 

15. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  established  that  he  spoke  to  a  member  of  the  press  on 

a  matter  of  public  concern,  that  he  did  so  as  a  private  citizen,  and  that  an  adverse 
employment  action  was  taken  against  him.  However,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  by  a 
pteponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  was  retaliated  against  for  exercising  a  constitutional 
right,  i.e.,  that  his  protected  speech  was  a  substantial  or  motivating  factor  in  the  District’s 
decision  to  terminate  and/or  immediately  suspend  him.  We  reach  this  conclusion  for  the 
same  reasons  we  reject  Respondent’s  whistleblower  affirmative  defense.  Although  the 
District  based  its  discipline,  in  part,  on  Respondent  sharing  confidential  student  information 
with  Mr.  Landsberg,  the  District  was  entitled  to  do  so  because  Respondent  violated  District 
policy,  federal  law,  and  prior  supervisor  directives  to  not  do  so.  None  of  the  law  cited  by 
Respondent  gave  him  liberty  to  share  that  information  with  the  public,  nor  did  it  immunize 
him  from  the  repercussions  of  doing  so.  The  District  would  have  taken  the  same  personnel 
actions  against  Respondent  had  he  never  communicated  with  Mr.  Landsberg. 

Disposition 

16A. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach  ...,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal  4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

  

16B. 

In  this  case,  the  District  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  serious 

misconduct,  which  provides  numerous  legal  grounds  to  discipline  him.  Progressive  discipline 
was  used,  but  was  not  successful.  Respondent  failed  to  prove  his  affirmative  defenses,  and  he 
has  presented  no  mitigation,  rehabilitation  or  a  scintilla  of  remorse  for  his  actions.  Under 
these  circumstances,  similar  misconduct  would  be  likely  should  Respondent  be  placed  back 
in  a  District  classroom.  Termination  is  therefore  warranted.  We  agree  unanimously.  (Factual 
Findings  1-47,  Legal  Conclusions  1-15.) 

Hl 

Hf 

Hf 

Hi 

  

19

  

ORDER 

The  immediate  suspension  without  pay  of  Respondent  Leonard  Isenberg  is  affirmed. 

Leonard  Isenberg  is  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District. 

DATED:  October  15,  2013 

    SA 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  
 

  

20 

T  concur. 

DATED:  _  10  lo2 

fe  Ul  AQ-C_-O- 
Teresa  Velasco,  Commissioner 

 

21 

  

|  ponour, 

DATED:  2 he 

wb} 

   
     

issioner 

‘Teresa,  Brown,  Com 

 

