BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LAKESIDE, CALIFORNIA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

PATRICK WELCH, a Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2010031179

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional

Competence (the commission), at Lakeside, California on June 14, 15 and 16, 2010.

The Commission members who heard this matter were Administrative Law Judge (ALJ)

Roy W. Hewitt, Judi Heitz, and Barbara Wooley.

Christopher D. Keeler, Esq. and Leslie A. Reed, Esq. of Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost

LLP represented the Lakeside Union School District (the district).

Patrick Welch (respondent) was present throughout the hearing and was represented by

Fern M. Steiner, Esq. of Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted on June 16,

2010.

The commission members deliberated on June 16, 2010 and reached a decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

At all relevant times, respondent was acting in the capacity of a certificated
employee of the district employed in the position of a Science Teacher teaching 7th and 8th
Grade students at Tierra del Sol Middle School.1 Respondent was employed by the district
for approximately nine years prior to being placed on administrative leave during October of
2009.

1

Respondent also taught computer skills to 6th grade students on occasion.

1

2.

On February 12, 2010, the district’s Superintendent served a Notice of Intent

to Immediately Suspend Without Pay, Intent to Dismiss, and Statement of Charges on
respondent. That same date respondent was suspended without pay.

3.

On February 19, 2010, respondent timely filed his Request for Hearing and

Notice of Special Defenses.

4.

On March 3, 2010, the district’s Superintendent filed an Accusation against
respondent alleging two causes for termination: Immoral Conduct, pursuant to Education
Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1); and, Evident Unfitness, pursuant to Education Code
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). The instant hearing before the commission ensued.

5.

Respondent believes that he was and is serving the best interests of his

students who are “at risk,” due to lack of father figures in their family environment, by being
their “academic father.” He also believes that physical touching of students (e.g. hugging,
patting on the back or shoulder, etc.) is beneficial to both the emotional well being and the
educational progress of his students. However, as the hearing progressed it became clear that
respondent has not grasped the concept of student/teacher boundaries. In his efforts to be a
good “father” and friend to the students he was supposed to teach, respondent himself
became a kid again. In this Peter Pan type state respondent crossed the boundaries of sound
teaching and engaged in conduct that led to the present dismissal action. That conduct is
described in Findings 6 through 23, below.2

6.

During the 2008-2009 School Year, respondent frequently took pictures of a

7th grade female student (A.F.) in class. A.F. was sometimes uncomfortable with respondent
taking pictures of her.

7.

During the 2008-2009 School Year, respondent’s actions caused a 7th grade
female student (P.L.) to believe that he was looking down her blouse during a science lab.
That same school year, respondent allowed P.L. to take a make-up test. During the make-up
test, respondent took pictures of P.L. and his actions made P.L. uncomfortable and led her to
believe that respondent had taken pictures “down her shirt/blouse.”

Respondent typically allowed his female student aides to lie down on tables

and listen to ipods after class.

During the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent took pictures of C.L., a female

8th grade student, while she was lying on a table listening to an ipod.

10.

Respondent took pictures of female students’ backs while they were writing on

the whiteboard during class. Often, the students did not know their pictures were being
taken.

8.

9.

2

The Factual Findings track to order of the allegations contained in the Dismissal Accusation (Exh. 3).
2

11.

Respondent took pictures of female students’ backs while they stood on chairs

and wrote on the whiteboard during class. Often, the students did not know their pictures
were being taken.

12.

During the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent asked C.L., who was now in
the 8th grade, to sit on his lap. Respondent then took pictures of her while she sat on his lap.
Additionally, respondent had a small stuffed animal (a tiger) displayed in the classroom that
he named after C.L.

13.

During the 2009-2010 School Year, on one occasion, respondent asked C.L. to
show him her naval/”belly button” ring. When the 8th grade female student lifted her blouse
and exposed her abdominal area respondent took a picture of her torso and naval.

14.

Respondent frequently acted in an unduly intimate manner toward female

students, often causing them to feel uncomfortable.

15.

Respondent frequently hugged female students and if they did not give him a

hug when expected (usually at the beginning and end of the class while the students were
entering and leaving the classroom), respondent requested a hug by stating something to the
effect of, “where are you going − Where’s my hug?” 

16.

After school hours respondent allowed female student assistants to stay in the

classroom with him and allowed them to lie on tables.

17.

Sometimes, when female students requested a drink of water, respondent stood

behind them and poured water from a small water bottle into their mouths like a “waterfall”
as they leaned their heads back and opened their mouths. On one occasion during the 2009-
2010 School Year, respondent lightly pulled on a female student’s hair to get her to lean her
head back so he could “waterfall” the water into her open mouth.

18.

On one occasion during the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent overheard one

student call another student a “dildo.” Respondent then mentioned something to one of the
8th grade female student’s (A.O.) about the word. A.O. recalled that respondent said
something to the effect of, “You want a dildo for your birthday, don’t you?”

19.

On one occasion during the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent hugged A.O.
and in the process pushed her head against his crotch area. Respondent then said something
about wanting to make his wife jealous.

20.

On one occasion during the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent traced with

his finger the rhinestone logo on the buttocks area of A.O.’s sweat pants and told her he had
a similar image tattooed on his upper right arm.

21.

On one occasion during the 2009-2010 School Year, respondent saw some

writing on the exposed, upper portion, of A.O.’s chest. Respondent pointed to the writing,
touched the area of A.O.’s chest with his finger and asked A.O., “What is this?”

3

22. When respondent became aware of the investigation that ultimately led to the

charges that form the bases of the instant proceedings, he approached one of the complaining
female students (D.S.) and told her to stop spreading rumors. Respondent then threatened
D.S. by stating something to the effect of, “How would you like it if I said you were sleeping
with Mr. Shields [a teacher]?”

23.

During respondent’s employment with the district, both before and during the

incidents that form the bases for the instant action, other teachers and at least one
administrator, warned respondent about the potential consequences of his lack of
professionalism during certain interactions with female students. In fact, on one occasion,
respondent himself counseled a female teacher about the potential dangers of being alone in a
classroom with students of the opposite sex. Nonetheless, respondent continued to act in
disregard of the warnings. Instead, it appears that over time, his conduct evolved to the point
where he inappropriately touched female students. The commission members are well aware
of how the resulting publicity created an avalanche of further allegations against respondent.
Once the publicity started, it is only natural that students who initially felt uneasy about
respondent’s conduct came to believe that respondent’s conduct toward them was driven by
some hidden agenda/sexual motivation. Consequently, the commission members found that
some of the allegations could reasonably have been based on misperceptions. Therefore,
except as specifically found in Findings 6 through 22, above, the remaining allegations of the
Accusation were not deemed proven by a preponderance of the evidence.

24.

Respondent’s actions, as described in Findings 6 through 22, above, are

examples that demonstrate his failure to appreciate the sanctity of student/teacher boundaries.
Two of the commission member found that respondent’s most egregious transgressions –
excessive hugging, suggestive comments, “waterfalling” water into female students’ mouths,
touching a female student’s buttocks while tracing a logo on her clothing and touching some
writing on her chest, having female students sit on his lap, having a student lift her blouse so
he could photograph her belly button ring, and having students lie about on table tops –
constituted immoral conduct within the meaning of Education Code section 44932,
subdivision (a)(1). Those two commission members also found that respondent’s boundary
violations with female students evidenced a present evident unfitness to teach in the district
within the meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The Accusation filed against respondent alleges two causes for termination:
The first cause is “Immoral Conduct [Educ. Code, § 44932(a)(1)];” and the second cause is
“Evident Unfitness [Educ. Code, § 44932(a)(5)].”

2.

By vote of 2 to 1, the commission members found and concluded that

respondent’s conduct as described in Findings 6 through 22, constituted immoral conduct
individually and in the aggregate and that respondent’s conduct as described in Findings 6
through 22, constituted evident unfitness to teach in the district, especially in view of

4

respondent’s knowledge of the consequences of his actions and his persistent boundary
violations in the face of that knowledge. Consequently, respondent’s termination was
warranted pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (a)(5).

3.

The commission members considered the findings in their entirety and the

factors set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (the Morrison
factors) in assessing respondent’s fitness to teach. The commission members agreed by vote
of 2 to 1 that respondent’s conduct over time reveals that he has a character flaw that makes
him unfit to teach within the meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1)
and (a)(5). Respondent has not been able to recognize and adhere to proper student/teacher
boundaries. He has been warned numerous times in the past about the possible consequences
of his boundary violations and has, to date, exhibited that he is incapable of modifying his
behavior over time and there is little or no doubt that without proper counseling, his
inappropriate conduct will continue. There were no extenuating circumstances justifying
respondent’s misconduct. The allegations against respondent and respondent’s inappropriate
interactions with female students were widely known among parents, students, faculty and
the general public. Respondent’s conduct impaired the relationships among students and
teachers and disrupted the educational environment/process. There were no valid “motives”
for respondent’s conduct which is why the two commission members concluded that his
conduct resulted from some type of character flaw. Finally, respondent’s conduct was
frequent, escalating in severity, and recent. The district was left with no choice but to
dismiss respondent. Respondent’s immediate dismissal was necessary to protect the health
and safety of the students, faculty, staff, administrators and respondent.
///
///
///

ORDER

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ORDER is hereby made:

Respondent’s dismissal is upheld.

DATED: July _____, 2010

_____________________
ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings Teacher
Commission Member

__________________________
JUDI HEITZ
Curriculum Specialist

Commission Member

5

Dissent of Barbara J. Wooley

I dissent to the Commission’s conclusion that cause exists for the dismissal of Patrick

Welch within the meaning of Education Code Section 44932(a)(1) “Immoral Conduct” and
(a)(5) “Evident Unfitness to teach.”

Factual Findings:

Factual Finding 5:

I concur with the Factual Findings 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 21 and 24.

While I agree with Finding 5 in most part; I disagree with the characterization of
Patrick Welch in that he ‘became a kid again. In this Peter Pan type state respondent crossed
the boundaries of sound teaching and engaged in conduct that led to the present dismissal
action.” I did not read or hear any evidence to support the idea that Welch did not behave as
an adult. While I agree that Welch pushed the boundary in an effort to build and maintain
strong relationships with students, I do not believe that Welch “crossed the boundaries of
sound teaching.” All witnesses testified that Welch was a good teacher and that students
learned in his classes.

Factual Findings 6 & 7:

I agree with the finding that Patrick Welch took pictures of 7th grade student (A.F), I
do not agree with the characterization that he “frequently” took pictures nor do I believe that,
in retrospect, A.F. was uncomfortable with the photographs. The evidence does not show
that there are any more photos of A.F. than of other students. In a similar vein, I do not
believe that student (P.L.) believed that Welch “looked down her blouse during a science
lab” last year, nor that Welch’s taking pictures made P.L. uncomfortable at any time. P.L.
states in her written statement (dated 10/23/09): “Last year in worm dissections I thought he
looked down my shirt. But then people said that I could be overreacting. That he could of
been looking at the worm. I calmed down and thought about it.” The photo taken of P.L.
during the dissection lab clearly depicts a student involved in a science activity, taken from a
standing position. Furthermore, I find it hard to believe that A.F. and P.L. were so
uncomfortable in 7th grade that, at the end of their 7th grade year, they would write in
Welch’s yearbook and on whiteboards: “you are the bombest teacher! I hope you teach my
class next year! (Heart) Alicia” and “I love you! I will miss you over the summer (heart)
always Paige.”

Factual Finding 8 & 16:

While I agree with the fact that Welch “allowed his female student aides to lie down
on tables and listen to ipods after class”, I disagree with the connotation that “female student
aides” or females in general were purposefully selected and given special permission to lie
on tables. All students were welcome in his classroom after school, as proven by the photo
of (M.S.). Nor do I feel that allowing students to lie down on tables is beyond the scope of
normal behavior.

6

Factual Finding 12:

Factual Finding 13:

I agree with the finding that Welch had a small stuffed animal and named it after C.L.

I fail to see how that is beyond the scope of normal behavior. From the testimony, I did not
find that it was proven that Welch asked C.L. to sit on her lap or whether C.L. took it upon
herself to “plop” in his lap, as Welch testified.

I did not find it proven that the respondent “asked C.L. to show him her naval/”belly

button” ring.” I find it more than likely that C.L. proudly announced that she had a “belly
button” ring and then, without provocation, lifted her blouse to show Welch, as Welch
testified. Welch explained that he has a history of photographing new jewelry and other
student achievements. Taking a picture of the new decoration would be expected by C.L.

I find finding 14 too vague to be meaningful. I do not feel that it was proved that the

respondent “frequently acted in an unduly intimate manner.”

I agree that it was proven that the respondent “frequently hugged female students,” I

think is important to note that he did not single out female students, he also hugged, high-
fived and fist-bumped male students. It was charged that Welch would sometimes request a
hug “by stating something to the effect of, “where are you going − Where’s my hug?””  
Welch explained that he knew his students well and that if a student did not behave normally
(i.e. hugged or high-fived as usual) then he would know that there was something wrong
with the student and would probe a little deeper to see what was wrong. An example Welch
gave was a boy who did not behave normally; when pressed by Welch, the boy told Welch
that his father had died the previous day. No other teacher had ascertained this fact.

Finding 14:

Finding 15:

Finding 17:

It was proven that the respondent “stood behind them (girls) and poured water from a

small water bottle into their mouths like a “waterfall.” I disagree with the characterization
that Welch did this “frequently.” I found his explanation that after recess or PE, students
often want to go get a drink of water during class. Frequently, when one student is allowed
to go get a drink of water, many other students request to leave the room to get a drink of
water. Welch’s method for avoiding a mass exodus out of his classroom for students who do
not have their own water bottles is to use his own bottle of water to share water, without
sharing germs, with several students. There was also testimony that a PE teacher had used
the same method.

Findings 18, 19 & 20:

While the accusations stated in these findings are the most serious, I find that they are

also the least believable. First, on 10/28/09 A.O. made a statement to Officer Jason Rouse

7

regarding an incident on 10/13 or 10/14. A.O. stated “Mr. Welch pointed to a design on
A.O.’s sweatpants band that was slightly above her buttocks in the center of the small of her
back, and asked “What’s that?” Mr. Welch’s finger made contact with the waist band of her
pants when he pointed at the design.” Later, Detective K. Jones interviewed A.O. During
this statement, A.O. stated that she “was wearing some sweatpants which has a symbol of a
heart with wings on them. A.O. said this symbol was located on her “butt.” Welch lifted her
shirt and asked what was on her butt. A.O. said Welch touched her butt and she “twitched.”
A.O. asked Welch what he was doing. Welch said he had the same symbol tattooed on his
arm. Welch lifted his sleeve and showed A.O. the tattoo. Later, during the hearing (8
months later), A.O. testified that Welch told her to turn around so he could see the
sweatpants with the heart with wings. She pulled up her shirt and he traced it with his
fingers on her butt. He then showed her his tattoo on his arm. There is a big difference
between A.O.’s original statement and the statements made later. Additionally, in response
to Findings 18 and 19, A.O. did not say anything about these accusations in her original
statement. Detective Jones pointed out that “upon reviewing A.O.’s statement with
Detective Rouse, there was nothing mentioned about the “dildo” comment, hugging close to
the crotch, or asking her to be flirtatious with him.” I believe A.O.’s original statement,
made within days of the alleged incident, and do not believe the later more elaborate and out-
of-character accusations made against the respondent up to 8 months later.

Finding 22:

It was proven that Welch “stated something to the effect of, “How would you like it if

I said you were sleeping with Mr. Shields [a teacher]?”” However, I firmly believe that
Welch had not “threatened” D.S. Middle school students often have a hard time empathizing
with others. It sometimes becomes necessary for a teacher to point out to a student when
what they are saying or what they are doing can be interpreted differently than what the
student really means. I believe that Welch was literally pointing out to D.S. rumors are
hurtful and that D.S. would find it hurtful if someone spread rumors about her. I do not
believe that Welch was threatening that he would spread a rumor if D.S. did not stop. In my
teaching, I have found that I often have to ask a student to rephrase a statement they have
made because, while I knew what they meant, the way they said it was inappropriate or rude.
These are called “teachable moments.” The instruction provided during some of these
“teachable moments” is much more valuable than some of the content curriculum that
teachers are required to teach.

Finding 23:

I concur that it was proven that “other teachers and at least one administrator, warned

respondent about the potential consequences of his lack of professionalism during certain
interactions with female students.” However, Welch was never formally verbally
reprimanded, written up, or put on any kind of improvement plan. Each person who testified
that they “warned” Welch made it very clear that they did not believe that he was doing
anything criminal or immoral, instead they were warning him that his actions might be
“misconstrued.” Each person’s testimony showed that they were giving Welch advice.
Much as we are given advice by our dentists to floss every day or our doctors to exercise and

8

cut back on salt. Each teacher who testified also stated that they too hugged students even
though they knew that it could be misconstrued.

I disagree with the finding that “it appears that over time, his conduct evolved to the
point where he inappropriately touched female students.” As I stated in Finding 20, I do not
believe that the respondent “traced it (the heart with wings) with his fingers on her butt.” If
this incident did not occur as the finding states, then the idea that Welch has “evolved to a
point where he inappropriately touched female students” is unsubstantiated. And, in my
opinion, if this incident cannot be substantiated, then the accusation of “immoral conduct”
(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)) is unproven.

Legal Conclusions:

Cause for dismissal is found when there is a preponderance of evidence to support the
accusations. I feel that the vast majority of the allegations brought by the district were petty,
irrelevant and/or unsubstantiated. Of the original 30 charges brought by the district, the
Commission agreed to immediately disallow 18 of them. One such accusation made by the
district was that Welch had a lot of photos of students on his wall and implied that this was
somehow immoral. A year earlier, the Principal (McDuffie) praised Welch in his Teacher
Evaluation (11/6/08) for the same thing: “Mr. Welch has various science related posters and
personal pictures (Washington D.C, etc.) on the walls that make the classroom interesting
and student-centered.” Other accusations included the charge that Welch only had female
teacher assistants and that he only gave snacks to female student; both of which were proven
untrue.

The vast majority of the evidence was provided by written police reports or student

notes and verbal testimony. Not only were there contradictions from one student’s to another
student’s stories, there were also contradictions between an individual student’s story from
the original police statement(s) to their testimony 8 months later.

The investigation into Patrick Welch began with a single incident in his classroom

regarding a photo that may or may not have been taken. The testimony surrounding this
incident was contradictory. According to the police report (K. Jones), “Detective Rouse told
me (T.C.’s) recollection of the incident was slightly different from (D.S.’s) recollection.
According to (T.C.), she told Detective Rouse, D.S. took the camera off of Welch’s desk
without his knowledge . . . . Detective Rouse then interviewed D.S. and was told she never
took the camera off his desk, but observed the photos as they were being taken in the view
finder.” Later in the report, K. Jones writes “D.S. asked Welch if she could see his camera
because she wanted to take a picture of her and T.C. Welch gave her the camera and she
reviewed the photographs. D.S. said that she saw one picture of T.C. on the camera.” At one
point, D.S. said she saw three photos of T.C., then she said she saw two photos of T.C., then
she said she saw one photo of T.C. Jones also pointed out contradictions in T.C.’s story too:
“T.C. described the picture of C.L. as showing the back of her thighs to the top of her
buttocks. The rest of C.L’s body was not visible in the picture.” However, “upon reviewing
Rouse’s statement of T.C., she told him the picture of C.L. was of her entire body while she
was erasing a chalkboard. This seems to contradict with what T.C. told me during the
interview.” I already went into the contradictions in A.O.’s story in Findings 18-20.

9

Because of all of the contradictions in the students’ statements and testimony, I do not

find that there is a preponderance of evidence to support the accusation of “immoral
conduct.” I believe that it is more likely that the girls became angry with the respondent and
wanted to get back at him for some real or imagined slight, as would not be out of character
for adolescent girls. Both D.S. and T.C. reported that the respondent told them that he “liked
(M.S.) better” than them. A written statement by another student, K.G. provides a reason
why T.C. might be angry: “T.C. was passing out tests but Mr. Welch got mad because she
passed out the wrong test. T got yelled at and she got mad.” D.S. has at least two reasons to
want to fabricate a story against the respondent. First, if his testimony is to be believed,
Welch scolded D.S. for spreading rumors, angering D.S. Second, D.S.’s mother is suing the
district. It was brought up during the cross-examination of the Principal that D.S.’s mother
said that it would be better for her suit if the hearing went against Mr. Welch. An email
(exhibit RRR) dated 10/24/09 from a mother of an uninvolved student states that her son was
told that “the girl that turned him in “hates” him and would do anything to get rid of him.”

I further disagree with the conclusion of “Evident Unfitness.” A ruling of “Evident
Unfitness to Teach” requires that the respondent has an innate character flaw that cannot be
remediated that makes him unfit to teach. The two commissioners who determined the
“unfitness” of Mr. Welch both agreed, as stated in Legal Conclusion #3, that with
counseling, he could go back into the classroom. The implication of that position is that the
respondent does not possess an innate character flaw that cannot be changed. Furthermore,
while he was advised that his actions may be “misconstrued,” Welch was never formally
disciplined, either verbally or in writing. Having never been given more than advice by his
co-workers and Principal, Welch was never given the impetus to modify his behavior. I
believe that had Welch been formally instructed to change specific behaviors, he would have.
I further believe that he now knows where to draw the line and that he will do so in the
future. In addition, all prosecution and defense witnesses agreed on one thing; Mr. Welch
was a very good teacher and his students learned a lot in his classroom. I do not believe that
Welch should be considered “unfit to teach.” I do concur that some of his behaviors could be
misinterpreted and/or mischaracterized and that Welch needs to modify those behaviors. I
also believe that he is capable of modifying such behaviors.

DATED: ___________

_________________________
BARBARA WOOLEY
State Council Representative
Cupertino Education Assocation
Commission Member

10

