BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

DEBBY HAZELWOOD,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2010020487

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in

Santa Ana, California, on October 4-6, 2010. The Commission consisted of Barbara
Christensen, Catherine Fong, and Administrative Law Judge Amy C. Lahr, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the Santa Ana Unified School District

(District). Carlos R. Perez, of Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Debby Hazelwood
(Respondent). The parties submitted the matter for decision on October 6, 2010.

District employed Respondent as a middle school teacher. District alleged that
Respondent demonstrated immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service, based on two
incidents with students. The first incident involved Respondent accidentally pulling a student’s
hair; the second incident involved Respondent inadvertently placing her hands on a student’s
chest. Respondent disputed the District’s characterization of the events, claiming that the
incidents were accidental and justified.

District failed to establish that Respondent demonstrated immoral conduct and evident

unfitness for service. Respondent presented justifiable explanations for her conduct.
Accordingly, District’s Accusation and Statement of Charges are dismissed, as explained
below.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Jane Russo, District Superintendent, made and filed the Accusation and

Statement of Charges in her official capacity.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of District. Her most recent

position was that of English teacher at Spurgeon Intermediate School. Respondent holds a
clear single subject credential.

3.

The District filed the Accusation and Statement of Charges on January 19,

2010. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense and requested an administrative hearing.

Hair-pulling Incident

4.

On March 12, 2008, Respondent kept her students five minutes after dismissal

as a punishment for misbehaving in class. N.G., a District female student, but not in
Respondent’s class, knocked on Respondent’s door. N.G. wanted to know whether her
friend remained in Respondent’s class. Instead of opening the unlocked door, N.G. began to
pound and kick the door, causing a great disturbance. Respondent initially tried to ignore the
banging, however, the knocking became too disruptive. Respondent opened the door to see
who was banging on it. Respondent taught in a detached bungalow, and the door opened
outward. As she opened the door, Respondent saw N.G. run away and duck underneath the
railing of the entry way. Respondent placed her hands on the rail and accidentally caught
N.G’s hair.

5.

Respondent instructed N.G. to go into her classroom, where Respondent wrote

N.G. a referral because she disrupted the class. Respondent then accompanied N.G. to the
office with the referral form. At no time did N.G. indicate to Respondent that she had been
hurt.

6.

Lillian Soto, Principal, and Chad Hammitt, Executive Director of Human

Resources, testified regarding their investigation into the matter. The evidence showed that
District’s investigation was not complete; for example, it did not ask Respondent to write a
statement regarding the hair-pulling incident. Respondent chose to write a statement of her
own volition. Respondent told District administrators that she accidentally pulled N.G.’s
hair, as N.G. jumped under the railing and her hair got trapped. District cited no evidence to
the contrary in its Letter of Reprimand dated April 4, 2008, and suspended Respondent for
three days.

7.

Student N.G. testified at the hearing, and her testimony was not persuasive to

show that Respondent purposefully pulled her hair. N.G. never saw Respondent touch her
hair. N.G. felt her hair pulled from behind, but she did not see exactly what happened
because she faced away from Respondent. N.G. stated that she felt her hair pulled for less
than four seconds. N.G. stated that Respondent did not touch her anywhere else.

8.

District did not show that Respondent purposefully or maliciously pulled

N.G.’s hair; the student’s hair was accidentally pulled. District did not present any
eyewitnesses to the hair-pulling incident. No other direct evidence was received regarding
the incident.1

1

District submitted two student statements which were received, over timely objection,

as administrative hearsay. As such, the statements contained within are not sufficient to
support a finding by themselves. (See Government Code Section 11513, subdivision (d).)
District also presented one written statement, from a teacher-on-special-assignment,

2

9.

District failed to establish that Respondent demonstrated immoral conduct,

evident unfitness for service, and willful refusal to protect students, with regard to the hair-
pulling incident.

Physical Contact Incident

10.

Students M.C. and M.B. arrived late to Respondent’s class on December 1,

2009. Respondent required the students to sign the “tardy book.” Student M.C. carried a gift
bag which contained a birthday present that another student gave her. M.B. wanted to play a
prank on M.C., and decided to hide the gift bag. M.B. walked behind Respondent’s desk,
where she was seated, and placed the gift bag on the floor between Respondent’s filing
cabinet and desk drawer. The area was a small, crowded space where no student had ever
entered before. Respondent’s desk drawer was open, and it contained her purse and other
personal belongings. Respondent did not initially see M.B. go behind her desk. Respondent
was startled when she saw a shadow out of the corner of her eye. For a moment, Respondent
thought that someone might be trying to steal her purse. She quickly turned in her chair,
raised her hands up, and began to stand. As she stood up, M.B. came from the small space
behind her desk, and Respondent’s hands made contact with M.B.’s chest area. Respondent
told M.B. that she thought he was trying to steal her purse, and M.B. denied that was his
intent.

11.

M.B. testified that Respondent grabbed him by the neck and pushed him. He

also stated that Respondent’s hands made contact with his body for less than ten seconds, and
that she didn’t push him hard. M.B. admitted that Respondent was surprised when he went
behind her desk. He acknowledged that it was a bad idea to stand behind Respondent’ chair.
When asked how tall he was, M.B. gave a range from five-feet, six-inches, to five-feet, eight-
inches. M.B. appeared taller and larger than Respondent. M.B. stated that he did not want to
press charges against Respondent for the incident; he held no ill feelings toward Respondent.

M.B. also acknowledged that he had a history of poor behavior in school. His grades

were primarily failing. He had a criminal record. Respondent was aware of these
circumstances, and had reason to be wary of M.B. M.B. admitted that he was already in a lot
of trouble, and he did not want to get in trouble because of this incident. After the incident
occurred, Respondent immediately called the office and told M.B. to wait until security
arrived. M.B. did not follow Respondent’s instruction, but instead walked out of class with
M.C. Together, they went to the office to report their version of what had occurred. M.B.
and M.C. discussed the incident with each other. M.C. testified at the hearing. She stated
that Respondent placed her hands near M.B.’s neck for about four seconds. M.C. also had
behavioral issues in school, and failing grades.

Margaret Mayes, which was received as administrative hearsay. Essentially, she saw
Respondent grab the student by the hair as the student went through the railing. Ms. Mayes’s
statement does not indicate that Respondent acted with malice.

3

12. M.G. was another student in Respondent’s class on the date of the incident.
He recalled that M.B. went behind Respondent’s desk, and that when Respondent turned
around, she placed her hands on his chest and pushed him away. According to M.G.,
Respondent did not have her hands on M.B.’s neck, but rather her hands were flat open,
against his chest below his shoulders. Respondent did not appear angry, but rather
“precautious.” M.G. testified that M.B. was a “troublemaker,” that he was rude to
Respondent, that he wouldn’t pay attention, and would fall asleep in class. M.C. was also a
troublemaker, but not to the same extent as M.B.

M.G.’s testimony is credited over M.B. and M.C.’s testimony, because M.G. was a
In addition, other written

disinterested witness with no motive to influence his testimony.
student statements corroborated M.G.’s testimony that Respondent pushed M.B. in the chest
area. For example, R.D.’s statement indicates that Respondent “hit [M.B.] on his chest.”

13.

Felipe Zamudio, Assistant Principal at Spurgeon Elementary School, testified

at the hearing. He was absent on the day of the incident, and did not speak to M.B. about
what had occurred. Mr. Zamudio was familiar with M.B.’s previous disciplinary issues,
which included insubordination, not following teacher’s instructions, truancy, classroom
disruptions, and uniform violations. M.B. was in danger of failing, and Mr. Zamudio placed
him in strategic classes to provide him with additional support. M.B. needed a lot of
redirecting; M.B. had received approximately 9-12 referrals from the beginning of the 2009
school year through the incident date in December. M.B. had also been suspended at least
twice for continuous insubordination in the classroom.

Respondent explained to Mr. Zamudio that she had problems with M.B. In response,
Mr. Zamudio told Respondent “not to put up with his negative behavior”; and to refer M.B.
to the office. Mr. Zamudio had observed Respondent teach on several occasions; he was
pleased with her performance, and thought that she was professional.

14.

Samuel Perla was an administrator at Spurgeon Elementary School during the

2009-2010 school year. He acknowledged that M.B. and M.C. had a history of disruptive
behavior, and that M.B. had to be re-directed and monitored. M.B. and M.C. went to Mr.
Perla’s office on December 1, 2009, after they had left Respondent’s class. Mr. Perla did not
personally observe the incident between Respondent and M.B. Mr. Perla listened to M.B.
and M.C.’s version of the story, and had them write statements. Thereafter, Mr. Perla
decided to suspend M.B. because he left Respondent’s class without permission, and M.B.
had been warned earlier in the day to be on his best behavior.

15. Ms. Soto learned of the incident from Mr. Perla. Ms. Soto called the campus

police because she thought that a possible theft had occurred. She did not discuss the
incident with M.B. because he was suspended. When the campus police officer arrived, he
took statements from M.B. and M.C. The officer also questioned Respondent.

16.

District failed to thoroughly investigate this incident before reaching their

conclusions regarding Respondent’s actions. The evidence shows that Respondent had good

4

reason to be startled by M.B.’s presence behind her desk, an area off-limits to students,
where no student had ever gone before. Although Respondent touched M.B., she did not act
maliciously, but rather because she was startled and instinctively protecting herself and her
belongings. District did not properly consider Respondent’s version of what had occurred.
District relied primarily on M.B. and M.C.’s stories, which were less credible than other
available evidence.

Yelling and Name-calling

17.

The District alleged that “[d]uring the process of reviewing the student
statements, it was discovered that [Respondent] repeatedly yelled at the students and
demeaned them [,] calling the students ‘stupid’ throughout the 2009-2010 academic year.”
The evidence did not support this contention. Moreover, District presented no evidence that
Respondent yelled at students or called them “stupid.”

Character Evidence

18.

Respondent began teaching at District in 2002. She is a dedicated teacher who
spends countless hours at home and after school working on the curriculum and other school-
related activities. She cares about the students and their academic success. Respondent
recognizes that District students face difficult challenges. She is also aware that her time
with students is precious, and she does her best to maximize it; for example, Respondent uses
classroom management strategies such as placing student handouts at the door, in order to
reduce talking and other disruptions. Respondent was sincerely remorseful about both the
hair-pulling and physical contact incidents with students.

19.

Respondent presented two character witnesses, John McGuiness and Tammy

Manske. Both witnesses worked at Spurgeon Intermediate School with Respondent. As
established by the testimony of Mr. McGuiness, Respondent’s demeanor was mild-mannered
and nice; she never showed anger or frustration. Respondent was a strong staff member who
was very well-liked; a team player who was well-regarded. Mr. McGuiness taught M.B. and
found that he was difficult to have in class; for example, he would throw objects and cause
constant disruption. Mr. McGuiness opined that M.B.’s behavior thwarted instruction and
interfered with other student’s learning process. Regarding the physical contact incident, the
staff was upset that Respondent was disciplined because they thought M.B. was the problem,
not Respondent. Mr. McGuiness is a union representative, and after the incident,
Respondent approached him right away to explain what happened. Mr. McGuiness could not
understand why District Administration had called the police without talking to Respondent
first. The police would not allow him to represent Respondent during questioning.

20. Ms. Manske and Respondent collaborated to work on their curriculum. They

also worked closely on numerous trainings and development for the “Pathways Project,”
which is designed to help English language learners develop writing and reading skills, to put
them on a pathway to college. Ms. Manske had numerous opportunities to observe
Respondent in the classroom, and she found her to be very professional, supportive,

5

extremely organized, and actively engaged in teaching. Ms. Manske thought that
Respondent’s demeanor was kind and friendly toward the students. Respondent made extra
efforts beyond expectations; for example, she was willing to go to staff development
meetings. As established by Ms. Manske’s testimony, Respondent is a consummate
professional, and a joy to work with. Ms. Manske has never seen Respondent raise her voice
or lose control. With regard to the hair-pulling incident, Ms. Manske observed N.G.’s
friends joke that they were going to get a teacher fired, and their attitude appalled her.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Cause does not exist to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the

District under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), (immoral conduct) based on
Factual Findings 1 through 17, and Legal Conclusions 3 through 6.

2.

Cause does not exist to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the

District under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), (evident unfitness for
service) based on Factual Findings 1 through 17, and Legal Conclusions 3 through 6.

3.

“Immoral conduct” has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it can
be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward
good order and the public welfare. (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School
District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

4.

“Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for service be attributable

to a defect in temperament . . .” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on
Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445.) Such temperamental defect
“connotes a fixed character trait, not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails
to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Id. at 1444).

5.

Even where immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service are established, it

must also be established that such immoral conduct or evident unfitness renders Respondent
unfit to teach. Such determination unfitness requires an analysis based on criteria set forth in
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. In Morrison, the Supreme Court
of California held that the determination of whether a person is fit to teach must be based on
an objective and analytical approach, consisting of a review of the teacher’s conduct and an
assessment of a variety of specific factors including: (1) the likelihood of recurrence of the
questioned conduct; (2) the presence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances; (3) the
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected
students or fellow teachers; (5) the disruption of the education process; (6) the motive
underlying the conduct; and (7) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.

6

6.

District did not establish that Respondent demonstrated immoral conduct.

Regarding the hair-pulling incident; Respondent’s actions were accidental. With regard to
the physical contact incident, Respondent felt intimidated in that moment, and acted to
protect herself. Nor did District did not show that Respondent possesses a temperamental
defect that would render her unfit to teach.

An analysis of the Morrison factors supports these conclusions: first, District did not
show that Respondent’s conduct adversely affected students; the only exception being N.G.,
whose hair was pulled, but this was an isolated incident. Moreover, the fact that N.G.’s
friends joked about getting Respondent fired shows that students were not adversely affected.
The fact that N.G. had been disturbing Respondent’s class by pounding on the door for
several minutes, even though the door was unlocked, was an extenuating circumstance that
weighs in Respondent’s favor. District also did not demonstrate that M.B., who was
involved in the physical contact incident, was adversely affected. The evidence showed that
M.B. was more concerned about getting in trouble himself, rather than the fact that
Respondent made physical contact with him. This is underscored by the fact that M.B. did
not press charges against Respondent, and that he stated that he held nothing against her. The
fact that M.B. had a history of discipline problems, that he was physically larger than her,
and that he snuck behind her desk, and caught Respondent off-guard, show extenuating
circumstances that justify Respondent’s conduct. District did not show that Respondent had
an untoward motive with regard to both incidents. With regard to the proximity of the
incidents, they occurred within two years of each other, but were isolated instances in
Respondent’s eight-year teaching career. Respondent demonstrated sincere remorse, and the
likelihood of a similar incident reoccurring is negligible. In sum, the Morrison factors as
applied in this case do not support Respondent’s dismissal.

7

ORDER

The Accusation and Statement of Charges are dismissed.

DATED:

DATED:

DATED:

AMY C. LAHR
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

BARBARA CHRISTENSEN
Commission Member

CATHERINE FONG
Commission Member

8

