BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

LUIS ZAYAS,

Case No. 2010041042

This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence, Los
Angeles County Superintendent of Schools, State of California, in Los Angeles, California, on
September 29, 30, October 1, 4, and 5, 2010. The Commission consists of the following
members:

Respondent.

DECISION

Nancy Beezy Micon, Chairperson
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

Bernadine Hollingsworth, Member
Selected by the Governing Board

Daniel Leonard, Member
Selected by Respondent

Aaron O’Donnell, of the law firm Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,
represented the Los Angeles County Superintendent of Schools and the Los Angeles County
Office of Education (LACOE).

Deborah Eshaghian, of the law firm Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented Luis

Zayas (Respondent), who was also present.

The District seeks to dismiss Respondent on the grounds of immoral conduct,
dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey school
laws. Respondent disputes the factual allegations and denies that grounds for dismissal exist.

///

To maintain confidentiality, this decision identifies students by their first name and
first initial of student’s surname. Further, it is ordered that all documents in the record
containing student names shall be placed under seal, and shall be opened for public
inspection only pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing, and argument was heard.
The Commission deliberated on October 6, 2010. The matter was then submitted for
decision. After consideration of the entire record, the Commission unanimously makes the
following factual findings and legal conclusions:

Jurisdictional Findings

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of LACOE.

2.

On February 14, 2010, LACOE gave notice to Respondent pursuant

to
Education Code1 sections 44934 and 44936 of its intent to dismiss him. At the same time,
LACOE served Respondent with notice of immediate suspension pursuant to section 44939.
Respondent thereafter made a timely request for hearing.

3.

On April 19, 2010, LACOE filed an Accusation seeking Respondent's dismissal.

On April 20, 2010, Respondent filed a Notice of Defense.

4.

On April 20, 2010, the parties stipulated to waive the 60-day time limit set forth
in section 44944, and to waive statutory time limits for discovery. The parties agreed to the
formal commencement of the hearing on September 29, 2010.

5.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Respondent’s Background and Hiring by LACOE

6.

Respondent received a Bachelor of Science degree, in business and human
relations, from the University of San Francisco (USF). He then completed training at USF to
qualify for a teacher credential, and obtained a bi-lingual lifetime certification.

///

specified.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise

2

7.

Respondent began his teaching career in 1989. He worked briefly as a
substitute teacher before his employment by LACOE in October 1989. In 1992, Respondent
was transferred to work as a juvenile court instructor at Challenger Memorial Youth Center
(Challenger), a school operated by Los Angeles County. In June 2008, Respondent’s primary
assignment was to teach mathematics and science to juvenile wards at Challenger.

8.

Respondent has not taught since June 17, 2008, the day of the incident at issue in
this matter.
Initially, Respondent was absent due to a scheduled surgery. On June 25, 2008,
Respondent was notified by LACOE that he was being moved from his classroom teaching
assignment, effective on the date he returned from his medical release to return to work,
pending LACOE’s investigation into the incident.

9.

Respondent has no record of formal discipline with LACOE.

10.

Respondent attended training courses offered by LACOE and the Los Angeles
County Probation Department on verbal and physical de-escalation techniques and strategies.

11.

In August 2006, Respondent was directed to refrain from the use of profanity in
his classroom, and from intimidation tactics toward his students. Respondent was given a
“Conference Summary” following a meeting to discuss complaints the administrators had
received about Respondent’s classroom decorum. LACOE directed Respondent to comply
with three points made during the meeting:

1.

2.

3.

There should be no use of profanity by the teacher in class.

There should be no intimidation tactics used in class.

Mr. Zayas must follow the protocol and discuss the class
problems with school Administration first.

12.

In 2005 or 2006, Respondent was specifically instructed to refrain from writing
gang names and then crossing them out on the board in his classroom due to problems this
practice could cause between students in rival gangs. Respondent was advised that this type of
conduct agitates the students, who feel disrespected by it. At hearing, Respondent admitted that
he had been instructed not to cross out gang names. Respondent contended that he stopped the
practice in 2005, after employees at the Probation Department told him it could cause gang
related conflicts between students. Respondent denied that he engaged in this conduct after
being sensitized to the possible ramifications in 2005.

///

///

3

B.

13.

Student S

B., who attended Respondent’s class for a few weeks around
June 17, 2008, established that Respondent crossed out gang names in his classroom in 2008.
the other students in the classroom felt Respondent’s conduct
S
concerning the cross out of the gang names was “messed up and mean.” S
B’s testimony
was credible. He was called as a witness by Respondent. He was not a student at Challenger
before 2008. Thus, his identification of the date of the conduct is reliable.

testified that

14.

Respondent admitted that, in the past, he used the term “sewer rat” when
speaking in his classroom. The term is a derogatory term for a particular gang. Respondent
claimed he was not aware of the derogatory nature of the term, and that he stopped using it
when he became aware of how it could be perceived.

15.

Respondent admitted that he refers to some of his students as being “retarded.”
At the hearing, Respondent used words to the effect: “If you act retarded, I will call you
retarded.” Respondent did not believe it was wrong to use the term.

16.

Respondent’s performance evaluations at Challenger were all satisfactory.
However, in his performance evaluation for the 2005 to 2006 school year, Respondent wrote,
in a section for teacher comments: “Students come with emotional problems labeled as Special
Ed when the problem is behavioral and not academic.” In his performance evaluation for the
2006 to 2007 school year, Respondent wrote: “Some students with learning disabilities –
majority pretending to be low readers/low in math . . . .” (Emphasis in original.) Respondent’s
comments in his performance evaluations indicate intolerance for children who had been found
by the school system to have learning disabilities.

The June 17, 2008 Incident

17.

On June 17, 2008, Respondent was working in his usual assignment as a
classroom instructor of juvenile wards attending school at Challenger. When class began, one
of the students threw a book in the direction of another student. The book did not strike the
In response, Respondent directed all of his students to go outside the classroom.
student.
Respondent followed the students outside, approached one of the students, J R, 2 whom he
believed had thrown the book, and a loud verbal exchange ensued between Respondent and J
R. Respondent, while arguing with J R., stuck his finger in close proximity to J R’s face in
a manner that was threatening and provocative.
J R responded by moving Respondent’s
hand away from his (J R’s) face. Respondent continued to point his finger at or near J R’s
face, and J
R. continued to brush Respondent’s hand away from his face. On the
approximately third time that J R. moved Respondent’s hand away from his face, Respondent

2 Either initials, or the first name and first initial of a student’s surname have been

used to protect the students’ privacy.

4

threw a punch, which hit J R. squarely in the face. J R. responded by striking Respondent.
The altercation was broken up by probation deputies, who had been approaching the area. The
approximately five deputies who were nearby when the incident took place were within five to
sixty feet of the altercation. While J R. was restrained by a deputy, Respondent approached
and yelled at J R., at least twice: “I know where you live.” One of the deputies directed
Respondent to leave the area. Respondent left. J R. was taken to be seen by a nurse at the
special handling unit (SHU) of the facility.3

18.

Sharrieff Meyers (Meyers), a Deputy Probation Officer II for the Los Angeles
County Probation Department, was a witness to the incident. Meyers testified at the hearing.
He observed Respondent’s class of approximately 15 students outside their classroom soon
after the beginning of the school day. According to Meyers, the students were loud and not
controlled. Meyers saw Respondent arguing with one of the students. The student had one arm
in a cast in a sling. Respondent’s face was red and he was pointing his finger in the student’s
face in a scolding manner. Meyers began moving to the area of the verbal confrontation. When
Meyers was approximately five feet away from Respondent and the student, Meyers saw
Respondent,
in response to the student moving Respondent’s hand away from his (the
student’s) face, punch the student in the face with a closed fist. The student immediately
reacted by striking Respondent quickly three times. Meyers testified that seeing Respondent
punch the student in the face was “surreal.” He was shocked by Respondent’s conduct.
Meyers’s testimony was supported by a written report, entitled "Probation Department Physical
Intervention Report," which Meyers completed immediately following the June 2008 incident.

19. Written statements were also taken from the students in Respondent’s class
immediately following the June 2008 incident. While there were some differences in the
students’ accounts, the written statements corroborated that Respondent was the aggressor in
the altercation, and that he punched student J R.

20.

J R. was subpoenaed to attend the hearing as a witness. J R., however, was
an uncooperative witness. He denied any recollection of the incident, and claimed he could not
recall writing a statement. According to J R., he never saw the document, which contained
his written statement, before the hearing. J R.’s testimony and written statement are found
not to be reliable evidence. The June 17, 2008 incident, however, was established through the
testimony of other witnesses, including Respondent, and the written statements from other
students and probation officers who witnessed the incident.

///

3 The nurse who saw J R. following the incident on June 17, 2008, reported that the

minor “denies injury” but that she observed some laceration, bruising, and swelling.

5

21.

Student A

M., who witnessed the June 2008 altercation, testified at the
M. was a credible witness. He described Respondent as having been an
hearing. A
excellent teacher. He admitted that he was the student who threw the book in Respondent’s
classroom the morning of the incident because he found the student (S
B.) annoying.
M., although reluctant to testify, acknowledged that he wrote a statement in response to a
A
M. re-read his written statement, which he
request to write what he saw. At hearing, A
described as an accurate statement of what happened. It states:

[T]he teacher had his finger in the minors [sic] face so the minor
told the teacher to get his finger away from his face and the
teacher didn’t so the minor slapped his hand away and the teacher
put his hand in his face again so the minor slapped it again . . . the
teacher litery [sic] socked the minor in his mouth so the minor
took flight and started bombing4 on him.

22.

Student S

B., the student toward whom the book was thrown in the
B., however, corroborated
classroom, was called as a witness by Respondent.
Respondent’s misconduct. S
B. established that Respondent started the fight. He also saw
Respondent hit J R. with his fist, and heard Respondent tell J R.: “Don’t forget, I know
where you live. I’m going to go to your house and tell your family what you did.”

S

Respondent’s Conduct After the June 2008 Incident (Dishonesty)

23.

Immediately following the altercation, Respondent wrote a “Behavior Report”
concerning the conduct of J R. Respondent’s statement was false, and attempted to place
blame for the altercation on the student. By making the statement, Respondent was attempting
to shield himself from the potential discipline arising out of the incident. Respondent described
the incident, as follows:

On the above date and time [8:58 a.m. on June 17, 2008], this
teacher observed [J R.] physically attack young Black Student,
S
)
F. by throwing the book belonging to the student (T
was doing his
who sits in front of him, at S
. . . . . S
’s arm go down as
work at this moment. I just happen to see J
the book flew across. I immediately put the class out to sort out
who was not near where the book came from. When I tried
sorting the group out and pointed at some students to form a
I
separate line, J

slapped my hand (me the teacher) down.

4 A
Respondent.

M. explained that the word “bombing” refers to student J R. “swinging” at

6

ignored it. He then slapped at my hand hard, when I moved it and
turned to call RTC Staff, he then attacked me with his right closed
fist thus striking me several times in the head and face area. He
was then restrained . . . .

24.

Respondent made contradictory statements about what happened. For example,
the day following the incident, Respondent, accompanied by Patti Claude (Claude), his union
representative, attended a meeting with administrators from the Challenger school and from the
Probation Department. At that time, according to an e-mail sent after the meeting by
Respondent’s union representative, Respondent admitted putting his finger in the student’s face.
Respondent denied hitting the student. According to Claude’s e-mail, Respondent claimed that
it was possible he hit the student by accident, and apologized if that happened. Claude wrote:
“We all agreed that Luis needs to avoid getting himself in this kind of position in the future
(like putting his finger in someone’s face), and that that behavior was what prompted the fight
between student and teacher.” Respondent was copied on the e-mail from Claude, and did not
respond to correct the contents of the e-mail. Thus, at or near the time of the incident,
Respondent admitted that his action of pointing his finger in the personal space of the student is
what provoked the fight. At hearing and during the investigative interview, Respondent denied
that he ever pointed his finger in the student’s face. However, Claude testified at the hearing.
She was credible in her confirmation that Respondent, during the meeting with administrators
the day following the incident, admitted that he pointed his finger in the face of the student.
According to Claude: “Getting in anyone’s body space is not a good thing to do.” Claude
expressed that Respondent was a “fool” to get in someone else’s body space.

25.

Respondent’s dishonesty continued when he was investigated by LACOE.

In
January 2009, while being interviewed by the LACOE investigator, Respondent asserted that
he had been “attacked” by student J R. Respondent denied that he ever put his finger in J
R.’s face. Respondent admitted only that, after J R. was restrained, Respondent made the
statement (“maybe twice’): “I know where you live.” Respondent asserted the statement was
“stupid” and a reference to the fact that lawyers were going to sue the student. Thus, even in
his admission about making the statement, Respondent continued to falsely deny his culpability.

26.

Respondent’s dishonest conduct continued at the hearing. At the hearing,
Respondent continued to assert that he had been attacked by student J R., and that he did not
point his finger in J
R.’s face. Respondent claimed he could not retreat from the
confrontation.

27.

Respondent’s account of the incident, in the Behavior Report, at the interview,
and at the hearing, was untruthful.
In lying about the incident, Respondent engaged in
dishonest conduct. The repeated lies demonstrate an intent to deceive. The failure to correct
the false statements also indicates a lack of integrity.

7

Evidence Presented in Mitigation

28.

Ann Thart, a LACOE instructor currently assigned to teach at Camp
Mendenhall, was a co-worker with Respondent for approximately 15 years. She described
Respondent as a calm and patient person who maintained high professional standards. Thart
believes Respondent is truthful. Thart never observed Respondent engage in any inappropriate
conduct toward a student.

29. Mark Lewis, the president of the Los Angeles County Educational Association,
who was a teacher for more than 35 years, has known Respondent for approximately 15 years.
Lewis testified at the hearing. He described Respondent as an honest person who pays attention
to his religious values. According to Lewis, Respondent has a reputation as a diligent teacher
who is non-violent by nature.

30.

Diane Jones, a resource teacher for LACOE, submitted a letter of support, dated
September 24, 2010, for Respondent. Jones has known Respondent for approximately 10 years
as a colleague. Jones has observed Respondent in his classroom, and believes he is an effective
teacher with a great sense of humor. She never observed Respondent being inappropriate with
a student, or touching a student inappropriately. Jones describes Respondent as being caring.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

Evident Unfitness for Service

1.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “evident unfitness for service.” Evident unfitness for service under this provision is
established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” Woodland Joint
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th
1429, 1444. If the teacher is found unfit for service, “the next step is to determine whether the
in
‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’;
temperament.” (Id. at p. 1445.)

i.e., whether the offensive conduct

is caused by a defect

As a threshold matter, Courts require evaluation of a teacher's alleged misconduct in
terms of its impact on fitness for service utilizing the following criteria first enunciated by the
Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (Morrison):
the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the
degree of such adversity anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the
type of teaching certificate held by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of
the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned
conduct; and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling

8

effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. The
determination of fitness for service required by Morrison is a factual one.

Respondent’s conduct toward J R. indicates unfitness to teach under the Morrison
factors. The conduct involved a student during school hours. The student was adversely
affected and the degree of adversity was significant. The student was injured, and he was
placed in a special handling unit. Other students observing or hearing about the altercation, and
other teachers at Challenger, were also adversely impacted as the conduct could diminish a
student’s regard for teachers at the school. The conduct occurred approximately 2 years before
the hearing. Respondent holds a teaching certificate that is appropriate for the type of courses
he was teaching at Challenger. In aggravation, the circumstances surrounding the incident
establish that Respondent was responsible for causing the altercation. He engaged the student,
and did not walk away when the situation escalated. Respondent was, in fact, responsible for
escalating the encounter. Although a board policy exists on the topic, a teacher does not need a
written policy to know that it is unacceptable to use corporal punishment against a student.
There were no mitigating circumstances.

Respondent’s dishonesty,

in and of itself, demonstrates unfitness to teach under
Morrison. His conduct adversely affected students and other teachers because it inhibited the
District’s investigation of the matter. The degree of adversity is significant. He attempted to
place blame upon a student in custody. His motives were blameworthy, as he sought to shield
his own misconduct. Respondent has expressed no remorse for his conduct, and does not
accept responsibility for the incident.

The analysis of the Morrison factors demonstrates Respondent’s present unfitness for
service. Respondent’s unfitness is evident, and is caused by his temperament. Respondent’s
disciplinary history shows that he was admonished for his use of intimidation tactics in 2005 or
2006. He claimed he stopped engaging in those tactics. Yet, in 2008, Respondent was still
crossing out gang names, even though he knew the practice led to problems for the students.
Even his choice of language, such as the use of the word “retarded,” and the views he expressed
in his performance evaluations concerning students with learning disabilities, indicates a
temperamental defect. Respondent’s existing deficiencies are the result of “temperamental
defects or inadequacies.”

Accordingly, as set forth in factual finding number 6 through 30, cause for dismissal has

been established pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

Immoral Conduct

2.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “immoral or unprofessional conduct.” Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct,
measured by the Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach. Board of Education v.

9

Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697 (Jack M.); Perez v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-74. The term “immoral conduct” as a basis for
dismissal of teachers has long been included in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), in its
predecessors, and in other provisions pertaining to teachers employed in community college
districts. The term was first discussed in the context of teacher dismissal in Board of Education
v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808 (Weiland), and the court’s definition in that case has
often been cited by other courts. (See, e.g.: Palo Verde v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967
(Hensey).) The Weiland Court stated:

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of
the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency,
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral
depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful,
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)

Further, whether conduct is immoral must also be analyzed in terms of the teacher's

fitness for service under the Morrison factors. (Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d at pp. 696-697.)

Courts have found immoral conduct where a teacher stated that

the district
superintendent spent too much time “licking up the Board” as he simulated licking of the wall
in an up and down manner (Hensey, supra); where a teacher knocked a sheriff deputy down
with his car after the deputy discovered a partially naked female student in the car (Board of
Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820); where a teacher performed oral copulation
in a doorless toilet stall in a public restroom in a department store during business hours
(Governing Board v. Metcalf (1974) 36 Cal.App.3d 546); and where a teacher purchased and
received goods known to be stolen (Pittsburg Unified School District v. Commission of
Professional Competence (1983) 146 Cal.App.3d 964).

Respondent engaged in immoral and unprofessional conduct in that his conduct was
willful and showed an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. The
student hit by Respondent was a juvenile prisoner at Challenger. Respondent created an
encounter that could easily have been avoided. Probation officers were nearby but, rather than
In doing so, Respondent
seek help from them, Respondent decided to confront the student.
pointed his finger in the face of the student, a provocative gesture that escalated the likelihood
of a physical encounter. Then, without provocation, Respondent inflicted corporal punishment
upon the student. Respondent did not require prior notice to know that he cannot strike a
student. He was angry, and willfully acted upon his anger. Respondent’s conduct was flagrant
and shameless, showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the
community.

10

Respondent had received notice that he was not

that was
intimidating, and that he needed to follow protocol in discussing any class problems with
administrators. The June 2008 incident is serious enough, and Respondent’s conduct during the
incident and after it, displays such a lack of a moral compass, that dismissal is warranted based
solely on this incident. Respondent inflicted corporal punishment upon a student. He failed to
take responsibility for the conduct, and lied about it.

to engage in conduct

Accordingly, as set forth in factual finding numbers 6 through 27, cause exists to

discharge Respondent for immoral and unprofessional conduct.

Dishonesty

3.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
the court stated in Hogg v. Real Estate

for “dishonesty.” In an often-cited definition,
Commissioner (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717:

“Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad faith. As defined in the dictionaries
and in judicial decisions, it means fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness. [Citations.] As put
by the court in Alsup v. State, 91 Tex. Cr. 224, ‘dishonesty denotes an absence of integrity; a
disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray.’ ”

In Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn 12, the
Supreme Court
the Morrison factors to the determination of
“dishonesty.” As the Court noted: “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest fib to the
most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, and
not every falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” (Ibid).

required application of

Respondent’s repeated lies concerning the incident, in his Behavior Report, during the
investigation, and at the hearing, demonstrate lack of integrity and intent to deceive and thus
constitutes dishonest conduct, by reason of factual finding numbers 17 through 27. This
dishonesty establishes unfitness to teach under Morrison. Cause for dismissal, therefore, has
been established pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(3).

Persistent Violation of Rules

4.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education
or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.”

A violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be established by reference to
the Morrison factors. If unfitness to teach is shown, then the District must further establish that

11

Respondent’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and
(San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on Professional
continuing.”
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183; Governing Board of the Oakdale Union High
School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82 (Seaman).) Isolated incidents or
incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered
“persistent.” (See, e.g.: Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174
Cal.App.3d 317; Seaman, supra).

LACOE Board Policies and Division Handbook

LACOE Board Policy number 4029 prohibits acts or threats of violence by employees.

LACOE Board Policy number 4130 prohibits the use of corporal punishment in
maintaining pupil discipline: “No LACOE employee shall inflict, or cause to be inflicted,
corporal punishment upon a student.
‘Corporal punishment’ means the willful infliction of
physical pain on a student.”

LACOE Board Policy number 7310 prohibits discrimination and harassment in LACOE

programs on the basis of race, gender, national origin, and disability.

LACOE Board Policy number 7400 and 7410 address student conduct and
consequences. Concerning responses to student misconduct, the policy states: “LACOE staff
members will address student misconduct with a clearly established, progressive line of
discipline.”

The LACOE Juvenile Court & Community Schools Division Handbook for 2008
contains guidelines for staff – student relationships. The Handbook states that “detained pupils
are composed of a highly selective population whose potential for unpredictable behavior
represent a constant reality for which all staff members should be aware.” It advises that staff
should “[a]void challenging or being challenged by pupils – always attempt to defuse or de-
escalate a situation.” In addition, staff are instructed to “[p]ractice composure in the presence
of hostile behavior” and “[c]all for help before things get out of hand.”

Respondent knew that he could not engage in corporal punishment of a student. He
knew it was inappropriate to cross out gang names on his board. Yet, he engaged in this
conduct. He also addressed his students in an inappropriate manner when he used the term
“retarded.” Respondent violated LACOE board policy number 4130, 7410, and directives in
the LACOE division handbook. Cause for discipline under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7),
has been established.

///

12

5.

All evidence presented in mitigation and rehabilitation has been considered.

LACOE’s dismissal of Respondent is upheld in light of the allegations established.

Respondent Luis Zayas shall be dismissed from his employment with the Los Angeles

ORDER

County Office of Education.

DATED: January 11, 2011

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

_____________________________________
NANCY BEEZY MICON, Chairperson
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

_____________________________________
BERNADINE HOLLINGSWORTH, Member

____________________________________
DANIEL LEONARD, Member

13

