BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
SWEETWATER UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

OAH No. 2010060781

PATRICK CRONIN,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

On October 25, 2010, a Commission on Professional Competence heard this matter in

San Diego, California. The Commission included James Ahler, Connie Pruett, and Saul
Watson.

Daniel R. Shinoff, Attorney at Law, and Jeanne Blumenfeld, Attorney at Law,

represented Complainant, Dr. Jesus M. Gandara, Superintendent, Sweetwater Union High
School District, San Diego County, State of California.

Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent, Patrick Cronin, a

permanent employee of the Sweetwater Union High School District, who was present
throughout the administrative hearing.

On October 25, 2010, the matter was submitted.

PRELMINARY STATEMENT

Well before December 2009, the Sweetwater Union High School District employed

Patrick Cronin as a teacher at Eastlake High School. Mr. Cronin was a mandated child abuse
reporter by reason of his employment.

On Thursday, December 10, 2009, a former student of Mr. Cronin’s who was still in

high school sent a text message and attachment to Mr. Cronin’s cell phone. Mr. Cronin
opened the attachment, started to watch the video that was attached, quickly realized that it
was pornographic, and immediately ended the video. The video’s poor quality prevented Mr.
Cronin from recognizing the age or the identity of the female depicted. Later that day, the
former student asked Mr. Cronin if he recognized the female in the video. Mr. Cronin was

1

upset by what had occurred, interrupted the student, and told him that sending such a
message could get him fired. Mr. Cronin did not report the incident on December 10.

On Friday, December 11, student Jane Doe came to Mr. Cronin’s classroom in tears.

She told Mr. Cronin that she was the person depicted in the video that he had received; in
fact, she had taken the video herself with her cell phone, after which she distributed the video
to several high school classmates. Mr. Cronin told Jane Doe that he had to report the matter.
Jane Doe begged him not to. Mr. Cronin offered Jane Doe a hall pass to enable her to remain
away from the classroom for the remainder of the class period so she could compose herself.
Jane Doe accepted the hall pass and walked about campus unsupervised for the remainder of
the period. Jane Doe returned to the classroom at the end of the period and appeared calm.
In retrospect, Mr. Cronin recognized that giving Jane Doe the hall pass and not immediately
reporting what he knew was an error in judgment and a huge mistake.

On Monday, December 14, Mr. Cronin attempted to convince Jane Doe that they

should jointly report the matter. Jane Doe again begged Mr. Cronin to take no action. Jane
Doe was quite collected at the time. Mr. Cronin decided that he should try to convince Jane
Doe that it was in her best interest to join him in reporting the matter, believing that Jane Doe
would accept any outcome following their report as being support rather than punishment.
Mr. Cronin did not report the matter on December 15, but he resolved to report the matter
after finals were over, whether or not Jane Doe agreed to accompany him. In retrospect, Mr.
Cronin recognized that this, too, was an error in judgment and that he should have reported
the matter immediately after he learned Jane Doe was depicted in the video.

On Tuesday, December 15, a parent anonymously informed a staff member at
Eastlake High School that Jane Doe was depicted in a pornographic video being circulated
among Eastlake High School students and that the video had been sent to Mr. Cronin.
Eastlake High School authorities immediately launched an investigation that included an
interview with Mr. Cronin, who cooperated and was forthright in explaining what he knew
and what had occurred. The Assistant Superintendent attending the interview placed Mr.
Cronin on administrative leave at the conclusion of the interview. Several months later, an
Accusation was filed seeking Mr. Cronin’s termination of employment.

The Accusation in this matter alleged that Mr. Cronin engaged in immoral conduct by
failing to immediately report that Jane Doe was depicted in the pornographic video, and that
doing so was his duty as a mandated child abuse reporter; the Accusation also alleged that
Mr. Cronin’s conduct established his evident unfitness for service; finally, the Accusation
alleged that Mr. Cronin engaged in persistent violations of school laws and regulations.

In the disciplinary hearing that followed the filing of the Accusation, Mr. Cronin

admitted that he failed to promptly report his receipt of the pornographic video and that he
failed to immediately report that Jane Doe was depicted in that video as soon as he learned of
that.
In addition to admitting his wrongdoing, Mr. Cronin presented much credible evidence
in explanation, mitigation and rehabilitation.

2

Based on all of the evidence and based upon the application of relevant Morrison

factors, the Commission on Professional Competence concludes that Patrick Cronin is
currently fit to serve as a high school teacher and that the Accusation should be dismissed.

Respondent’s Employment with the District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Patrick Cronin (Respondent or Mr. Cronin) is a permanent certificated

employee of the Sweetwater Union High School District. The District has employed Mr.
Cronin as a high school teacher since 2000. Mr. Cronin has served the District as an athletic
coach since 1994. Mr. Cronin most recently taught AP World History at Eastlake High
School, where he also coached football and track.

2.

Mr. Cronin’s SEA Bargaining Unit Evaluation dated March 10, 2009,

contained a satisfactory evaluation. No aspect of Mr. Cronin’s performance was found to be
unsatisfactory or to require improvement. The evaluator observed that Mr. Cronin was
dedicated to becoming the best teacher possible, that he constantly reflected on his practice,
that he attended workshops and clinics to improve the delivery of instruction, and that he was
a committed member of the department who also served as an assistant football coach and a
track coach. The evaluator commended Mr. Cronin for his connection with his students and
for his dedication to the Eastlake High School Social Science program.

Mr. Cronin received similar glowing evaluations on March 9, 2007, and on March 14,
2005. In the comments that accompanied those assessments, the evaluators commented upon
Mr. Cronin’s ability to engage all students in learning, his clearly articulated lesson plans,
and his use of multiple instructional strategies to include all students in the learning process.
Mr. Cronin’s classroom was friendly and supportive. The evaluators noted that Mr. Cronin
valued and respected the input of each student. Students knew what was expected, and Mr.
Cronin’s classroom was free of behavioral problems.

The Events Occurring in December 2009

3.

Early December 2009 was a very stressful and exciting time for Mr. Cronin.

His wife had recently given birth to their first child,

. Winter Finals were impending. And, the Eastlake High School Wolves

varsity football team, for whom Mr. Cronin served as an assistant coach, was scheduled to
play in the C.I.F. finals at Qualcomm Stadium on Friday, December 11.

4.

On Thursday, December 10, Student B, a 12th grade male student, sent a text
message to Mr. Cronin’s cell phone. An attachment accompanied the message. Mr. Cronin
was riding in a private vehicle to Qualcomm Stadium with another coach when he received

3

the message. Mr. Cronin opened the attachment, which was a grainy video that depicted a
woman masturbating. The message and attachment was sent by Student B, a former student
who was currently on the varsity football team. Mr. Cronin immediately realized that the
video content was inappropriate, and he promptly closed the video and ended the message.
Mr. Cronin did not know that the video depicted Jane Doe, a 15-year-old female student at
Eastlake High School.1 Mr. Cronin deleted the message and video within a half hour of
receiving it. Mr. Cronin did not let anyone else look at the video and he did not forward it to
anyone else before deleting it. He did not mention the video to anyone with whom he was
riding or to anyone else.2

When Mr. Cronin arrived at Qualcomm Stadium, Student B accosted Mr. Cronin and

laughingly asked him if he had received the video and whether he recognized the female.
Mr. Cronin was very upset. Before Student B could finish his statement, Mr. Cronin told
Student B that sending the video “could cost me my job.” While Student B possessed and
transmitted pornography, it did not occur to Mr. Cronin that he should notify someone about
Student B’s misconduct. From the little he saw, Mr. Cronin did not know that the video
involved child pornography. Mr. Cronin had no reason to notify anyone that Jane Doe was
in the video on December 10 because he was unaware at that time that she was, in fact,
depicted in the video.

5.

On Friday, December 11, Mr. Cronin observed that Jane Doe was crying

heavily when she approached his classroom, even though she did not appear to be in extreme
distress. Mr. Cronin had seen teenage girls crying on campus in the past. As Mr. Cronin was
asking Jane Doe what was wrong, it occurred to him that her condition might be related to
the video and his having seen a part of the video. Mr. Cronin asked Jane Doe if her crying
was related to the video that Student B had forwarded. Jane Doe confirmed that was the
reason she was crying. The class period was about to start. Mr. Cronin told Jane Doe that he
would speak with her further outside the classroom, after class began. Jane Doe agreed.

After class began, and outside the classroom, Mr. Cronin told Jane Doe, “We need to
tell somebody about this.” Jane Doe said, “No,” and continued crying. Mr. Cronin believed
that Jane Doe needed to collect her thoughts, so he asked her if she wanted a hall pass to

1

2

Jane Doe was a 15-year-old female student who was enrolled in Mr. Cronin’s AP
History class. Jane Doe made a video with her cell phone that depicted her masturbating
with the aid of a sex toy. Jane Doe distributed this video to several classmates. Student B
ultimately came into possession of this video. While the Accusation alleged that Jane Doe
“made several pornographic videos of herself” and “sent the videos to other students at
Eastlake as early as September, 2009,” there was no direct evidence that established those
factual matters. Nevertheless, the parties argued this matter as if those allegations had been
established.

Counsel stipulated that Mr. Cronin did not create, produce, present, sell, disseminate,

distribute, exhibit or transmit the pornographic video to anyone, and that he did not
encourage anyone else to engage in those or similar activities.

4

remain away from the classroom while class was in session. Jane Doe thought that was a
good idea. Mr. Cronin gave her a hall pass for the period.

Mr. Cronin believed that Jane Doe walked about the campus, unsupervised, for the

remainder of class period, although no evidence established what Jane Doe actually did after
she was given the pass.

6.

The District argued that it was unreasonable for Mr. Cronin to have given Jane

Doe the hall pass because doing so allowed an emotionally distraught teenager to walk
unsupervised about campus for nearly an hour and there was a risk that she might harm
herself. The District further argued that permitting Jane Doe to walk about campus created
an unreasonable risk of harm in that Jane Doe might become a target of harassment or abuse
by others. These arguments were sound.

7.

Jane Doe returned to Mr. Cronin’s classroom towards the end of the class

period. Jane Doe was “composed and doing well” when she returned. Mr. Cronin’s lack of
judgment in giving Jane Doe the hall pass was not overcome by Jane Doe’s safe return to the
classroom. Mr. Cronin did not report what he knew after Jane Doe returned.

8.

The school day ended and Eastlake High School won the C.I.F. football

championship that evening. Mr. Cronin was excited about the championship, but his
jubilation over the team’s victory was accompanied by the stress of having to deal with his

. Mr. Cronin
likely did not spend his weekend developing strategies to deal with Jane Doe’s problems.

9.

On Monday, December 14, Mr. Cronin asked Jane Doe, “What do you want

me to do?” Mr. Cronin was certain by then that he had the duty to report what had happened
and what he knew, but Mr. Cronin hoped that he might be able to convince Jane Doe that she
needed to join him in reporting the matter. Mr. Cronin believed that if he and Jane Doe
reported the matter together, Jane Doe would be more likely to accept the consequences of
the report as being in the nature of support rather than punishment. Jane Doe again begged
Mr. Cronin to not report the matter. Mr. Cronin thought about it, and he ultimately agreed to
put off making a report for a few days in the hope that he and Jane Doe could discuss the
matter further and so they could reach the agreement to report the matter together when
finals were over.

10.

On Monday, December 14, Mr. Cronin did not believe the situation involved
“child abuse” that required him to make an immediate report. Nevertheless, he believed that
it was necessary from him to disclose what he knew to school administrators, and he planned
to do so following finals, whether Jane Doe agreed to report it with him or not.

11.

On Tuesday morning, December 15, a parent anonymously telephoned

Eastlake High School and told Alexandra Lachman, a psychology intern, that an Eastlake
High School football player had sent a text message and an attachment containing child
pornography to other students and to Mr. Cronin. The anonymous caller stated that the
female student depicted in the video had not received any attention or counseling. Ms.

5

Lachman immediately told her supervisor what she had been told and the supervisor, in turn,
immediately notified administrators. Ms. Lachman somehow determined that Jane Doe was
the person purportedly depicted in the video. Ms. Lachman, who was also a mandated child
abuse reporter in her capacity as a psychology intern, did not notify law enforcement or child
protective services that she had suspicion to believe that a female student at Eastlake High
School was depicted in a child pornography video.

Assistant Principal Thomas Gray immediately spoke with Mr. Cronin Tuesday after

being notified of the situation. Assistant Principal Gray asked Mr. Cronin if he had received
an inappropriate text message involving Jane Doe, to which Mr. Cronin responded, “Yes.”
The conversation lasted no more than 20 seconds. Assistant Principal Gray reported Mr.
Cronin’s response to Principal Mary Lawlor, even though he had not determined when Mr.
Cronin gained this knowledge. Assistant Principal Gray notified the police about the matter,
but Assistant Principal Gray did not file a report with child protective services. Assistant
Principal Gray was also a mandated reporter.

After speaking with Assistant Principal Gray, Principal Lawlor believed that Mr.
Cronin was under an immediage duty to report the inappropriate text and video as soon as he
received it. She was concerned because the video may have circulated among high school
students for another three or four days after Mr. Cronin’s receipt of it, because a parent had
brought the problem to Eastlake High School’s attention rather than Mr. Cronin, and because
of the emotional damage to Jane Doe a consequence of the possible widespread distribution
of the video. Principal Lawlor immediately set up a meeting to further discuss the matter
with Mr. Cronin.

12.

A meeting was held later that day. Assistant Superintendent Rita Sierra

Beyers, Principal Lawlor, teacher representatives John McFadden and Lee Price, and Mr.
Cronin attended the meeting. The meeting lasted 40 to 45 minutes. Assistant Superintendent
Sierra Beyers kept notes of what Mr. Cronin said during the interview. Mr. Cronin related
what had occurred in a manner that was entirely consistent with those matters set forth in
Factual Findings 3-5 and 7-10. Mr. Cronin told those present that he was uncertain if “child
abuse” was involved and he said that he thought he had a week to report what had happened.
Mr. Cronin was extremely remorseful.

The Aftermath

13.

Assistant Superintendent Sierra Byers placed Mr. Cronin on administrative

leave at the conclusion of the December 15, 2009, meeting. Assistant Superintendent Sierra
Byers did not speak with Mr. Cronin again before she recommended that Mr. Cronin be
dismissed from employment.

Assistant Superintendent Sierra Byers testified that she was concerned that Mr.

Cronin did not immediately report the matter to child protective services on Friday,
December 10, when he found out that Jane Doe was depicted in the video, that Mr. Cronin
should not have given Jane Doe a hall pass because that permitted Jane Doe to walk about
the campus unsupervised, that Jane Doe should have been referred to a psychologist, and that

6

the distribution of the video might create a hostile school environment and constitute sexual
harassment. Assistant Superintendent Sierra Byers testified that the excitement of being in
the C.I.F. finals and winning the football game did not excuse Mr. Cronin from reporting
what he knew to the proper authorities.

Assistant Superintendent Sierra Byers assumed that Assistant Principal Gray reported

the matter to child protective services; she did not report the matter to child protective
services herself. Child protective services never interviewed Assistant Superintendent Sierra
Byers, who was uncertain if that agency ever took any action. Assistant Superintendent
Sierra Byers knew that law enforcement conducted an investigation, and she knew that
criminal charges were not filed against Mr. Cronin or anyone else following the criminal
investigation. Assistant Superintendent Byers testified that several teachers, several parents
and many students supported Mr. Cronin at the Governing Board’s meeting related to the
Jane Doe incident.

Jane Doe and Student B were given three-day suspensions.

14.

15.

Following the Christmas break, Principal Lawlor held a meeting with Jane

Doe and her mother to discuss the possibility of Jane Doe attending another high school for
the remainder of the school year. Jane Doe and her mother rejected the offer. Jane Doe
returned to Eastlake High School and finished the school year there.

16.

Following the Christmas break, Principal Lawlor held a staff meeting to

review child protective service reporting responsibilities with high school staff. There was a
discussion about the cell phone incident involving Mr. Cronin. There was some confusion
among the teachers about the relationship between child abuse and the circulation of child
pornography when the pornographic material was created and initially distributed by the
person who was depicted. Principal Lawlor instructed staff, “If in doubt, report.”

17.

Leroy Price, Jr., an AP Physics teacher and a varsity football coach, was

driving the vehicle in which Mr. Cronin was a passenger on December 10. Mr. Cronin never
mentioned receiving a text with a pornographic attachment. Mr. Price agreed that a teacher
must exercise sound judgment and be vigilant about student safety when exercising his or her
professional responsibilities.

18.

Chula Vista Police Officer Juan Vasquez investigated the matter giving rise to
this hearing. He obtained Mr. Cronin’s statement and confirmed that Mr. Cronin had deleted
the video from his cell phone. Some of the students Officer Vasquez interviewed still had
the Jane Doe video on their cell phones.

Following his investigation, Officer Vasquez prepared a miscellaneous police report

to document what he learned during his investigation, but the Chula Vista Police Department
did not refer the matter to the San Diego District Attorney’s Office or request that criminal
charges be filed. Officer Vasquez testified that his investigation produced no evidence
establishing that Mr. Cronin had the intent to engage in any criminal wrongdoing.

7

19.

In October 2000, when the District hired Mr. Cronin as a substitute teacher,

Mr. Cronin signed a document entitled “Notice to Employees and Acknowledgment of
Receipt Regarding Child Abuse Laws.” That notice summarized the provisions of Penal
Code section 11166 and specifically advised Mr. Cronin that he was required to immediately
report any instance of known or suspected child abuse to a child protective agency and to file
In addition to defining child abuse, the
a written report within 36 hours of his initial contact.
notice defined “sexual exploitation” to include child pornography. The District did not
establish the nature or extent of further child abuse reporting training provided to Mr. Cronin
or other teachers besides the requirement that each teacher sign the acknowledgment.

It was not established that an incident similar to that involving Jane Doe occurred

within the District before December 2009, or that the District provided training by which a
teacher in Mr. Cronin’s position would know what to do if he or she was presented with a
situation similar to that involving Jane Doe.

Without the need to analyze a teacher’s legal obligations, if any, under the Child
Abuse and Neglect Reporting Act, it is clear that Mr. Cronin was under a duty to notify
administrators of the incident within a reasonable period of time after he learned that the
pornographic video involved a student, the sooner the better.

The Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting, Obscene Matter, Sexual Exploitation

20.

The Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Act: The Child Abuse and Neglect

Reporting Act is set forth at Penal Code section 11164 et seq. The intent and purpose of the
Act is to protect children from abuse and neglect.3 The following information regarding the
Act appears in 2 Witkin, California Criminal Law 3d (2000), Sex Crimes, § 156, p. 450, and
in the primary authority cited there.

The Act requires mandated reporters (including teachers and school administrators)

who have personal knowledge or reasonably suspect child abuse to report that abuse to a
police or sheriff's department (excluding a school district police department), to a county
probation department if designated by the county to receive such reports, or to the county
welfare department. An initial report must be made immediately or as soon as is possible by
telephone, and a follow-up written report must be sent, faxed, or electronically transmitted
within 36 hours. When a mandated reporter knows or reasonably suspects that a child is
suffering from or is at substantial risk of suffering serious emotional damage (as evidenced
by severe anxiety, depression, withdrawal, or untoward aggressive behavior toward self or
others), a report is authorized but is not required. If child abuse suspected as a result of the
infliction of mental or emotional abuse, a report is authorized but is not required. The Act
does not require that voluntary, consensual sexual conduct between minors under age 14 be

3

The term “child abuse or neglect” includes nonaccidental physical injury or death

inflicted on a child by another person, sexual abuse, neglect, the willful harming or injuring
of a child or endangering the person or health of a child, and unlawful corporal punishment
or injury, but the term does not include an affray between minors or injury caused by a peace
officer’s use of reasonable and necessary force within the scope of his or her employment.

8

reported if the reporting professional concludes that such conduct does not bear indicia of
abuse. (Planned Parenthood Affiliates v. Van de Kamp (1986) 181 CA3d 245, 282.)

A mandated reporter who fails to report an incident of known or reasonably suspected

child abuse or neglect is punishable by up to six months’ confinement in a county jail or a
fine of $1,000, or both.

21.

Obscene Matter: “Obscene matter” is defined as “matter, taken as a whole, that

to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient
interest, that, taken as a whole, depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive
way, and that, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.”
(Pen. Code, § 311, subd. (a).) The Jane Doe video involved obscene matter. It was unlawful
for an individual knowingly possess or control in any manner any film, videotape, or any
other computer-generated image that involves a person under the age of 18 years engaging in
or simulating sexual conduct (Pen. Code, § 311.11.) Mr. Cronin did not knowingly possess
or control the Jane Doe video, which was sent to him by Student B without invitation and
which he promptly deleted.

22.

Sexual Explotation: “Sexual exploitation” includes preparing, selling or

distributing materials depicting a minor engaged in obscene acts. Any person who
knowingly promotes, aids, or assists, employs, uses, persuades, induces, or coerces a child,
or any person responsible for a child’s welfare, or who knowingly permits or encourages a
child to either pose or model alone for purposes of preparing a film or other pictorial
depiction, involving obscene sexual conduct is guilty of sexual exploitation. (Pen. Code, §
11165.1, subd. (c).) Mr. Cronin did not engage in sexual exploitation.

The District’s Regulations and Board Policy

23.

The District’s Administrative Regulation 5145.7 prohibits sexual harassment,
which includes displaying sexually suggestive objects, drawings or photographs. Mr. Cronin
did not violate this regulation because he did not display sexually suggestive photographs or
other materials.

24.

Board Policy 514.4 requires certificated personnel to make reports as required

under the Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Act. It was not established that Mr. Cronin
violated Board Policy 514.4. It was not established that the Jane Doe video involved a
willful injury inflicted upon Jane Doe by another person, or that anyone other than Jane Doe
was responsible for the video. If Mr. Cronin had determined that Jane Doe was at risk for
suffering serious emotional damage, and that was not established, then a report was
authorized but was not required. Even if Mr. Cronin were found to have violated the Act
under the circumstances, the violation was not intentional and there was but one violation.

25.

The Commission concludes, based on Mr. Cronin’s sincere and credible

testimony, that Mr. Cronin likely would have reported the incident involving Jane Doe after
finals were over and before going on the Winter break. The Commission rejects the assertion

9

that Mr. Cronin would not have made any report had the matter had he not been confronted
by the District.

The Contentions

26.

The District argued that Mr. Cronin was a mandated reporter and that he
“failed to report the receipt from a student football player, of a disturbing sex video of a
fifteen-year-old female Eastlake student for a period of six days until he was confronted by
the District, even though he had many opportunities to do so.” The District argued that Mr.
Cronin “not only failed to stop the potential danger to a vulnerable fifteen-year-old female
student, but he increased the risk of harm to her when he let her walk around the school
without supervision.” The District characterized Mr. Cronin’s conduct as “unacceptable and
egregious,” and the District concluded that this conduct established that Mr. Cronin was unfit
to teach. The District argued that Mr. Cronin’s conduct had an adverse effect on students,
that Mr. Cronin failed to safeguard his students, that Mr. Cronin violated state law and
District policy, that Mr. Cronin’s wrongdoing was recent, that there is a likelihood of
recurrence, and that aggravating circumstances surrounded his conduct.

27.

Respondent’s counsel observed that Mr. Cronin did not seek the pornographic
video, that he had nothing to do with its preparation or distribution, and that he shut off and
deleted the video when he realized it contained inappropriate content. Counsel argued that
Mr. Cronin’s admitted wrongdoing in failing to immediately notify the District of what he
knew when he learned that Jane Doe was depicted in the video did not demonstrate an
evident unfitness for service (which requires a showing of unfitness based upon of a
temperamental defect or inadequacy), that there was no more than a single violation of state
law and district policy arising out of Mr. Cronin’s failure to report what he knew, and that no
evidence established his immoral conduct. With regard to Mr. Cronin’s fitness to teach,
respondent’s counsel argued that even though the wrongdoing was recent, there was no
likelihood of its recurrence, there many extenuating circumstances surrounded his conduct,
the notoriety related to the wrongdoing was the inevitable result of the District’s
investigation and disciplinary action, and that nothing that Mr. Cronin did (or failed to do)
disrupted the educational process for Jane Doe, other students, or other teachers.

Evaluation

28. Mr. Cronin was a respected teacher at Eastlake High School before the
incident involving Jane Doe. Mr. Cronin dedicated himself to being the best teacher
possible. He attended workshops and clinics to improve his instructional skills, engaged all
students in the learning process, and was highly sensitive to student needs.

Early December 2009 was a difficult time for Mr. Cronin – he was a new father,

Cronin, through no fault of his own, became the recipient of a pornographic video that was
sent by a former student. Mr. Cronin did not ask for the video and he did not promote, aid or
assist in its production. He turned off the video as soon as he began to view it, recognizing

Mr.

10

that the video contained inappropriate content. He deleted the video within 30 minutes.
When he learned Jane Doe, a 15-year-old-student, was the subject of the video, he did not
report the matter immediately and he permitted her to remain on campus, unsupervised for
about an hour. When he saw Jane Doe after the class period, she did not appear to be in
distress; Mr. Cronin honored her wish to not report the matter at the time, knowing that the
matter had to be reported ultimately and hoping that he could persuade Jane Doe to report the
matter with him. On the following school day, Mr. Cronin again did not report the matter,
but he planned to report it after finals. The District learned of the video before Mr. Cronin
could report it to the District.

Mr. Cronin – as a professional educator – committed an error of judgment by not

promptly reporting his receipt of pornographic material from a former high school student,
by not immediately reporting the incident when he found out that Jane Doe was the subject
of the video, and by giving Jane Doe a hall pass and permitting her to walk about campus for
about an hour unsupervised. A substantial amount of mitigating evidence explained and
surrounded this misconduct.

Mr. Cronin is not unfit for service, and his misconduct was not the result a

temperamental defect or character flaw. Mr. Cronin expressed sincere remorse for his
wrongdoing, and it is virtually certain that the same or similar kind of misconduct will not be
repeated.

Based upon the application of the Morrison factors, the Commission concludes that
Mr. Cronin did not engage in immoral conduct, that he is not evidently unfit for service as a
result of an irremediable temperamental defect, and that he did not engage in any—much less
a persistent—violation or refusal to obey applicable laws and regulations.

The Commission concludes that Mr. Cronin is fit to teach and that the Accusation

should be dismissed.

Jurisdictional Matters

29.

The Commission on Professional Competence in this matter included James

Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, Connie Pruett, who
holds a single subject teaching credential and teaches U.S. History, Government and
Economics with the Moreno Valley Unified School District, and Saul Watson, who holds a
single subject teaching credential and is on assignment with the Oceanside Unified School
District. Ms. Pruett and Mr. Watson each had more than five years teaching experience in
the last ten years, neither was employed by the Sweetwater Union High School District, and
neither was related to Patrick Cronin.

The parties stipulated that all jurisdictional requirements were met. The matter was

submitted on October 25, 2010.

11

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Burden and Standard of Proof

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of
the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d
1035, 1039-1040.) A party required to prove something by a preponderance of the evidence
need prove only that it is more likely to be true than not true. This simply means that the
evidence on one side outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than the evidence on the
other side, not necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in its effect on those to
whom it is addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing
force than that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171
Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Due Process under the Education Code

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal
hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) When a school board recommends
dismissal for cause, a Commission on Professional Competence may only vote for or against
the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing
probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

Hearings to determine if permanent public school teachers should be dismissed are

held before a Commission - a three-member administrative tribunal consisting of one
credentialed teacher chosen by the school board, a second credentialed teacher chosen by the
teacher facing dismissal, and an administrative law judge of the Office of Administrative
Hearings who serves as chairperson and a voting member of the commission and who is
responsible for assuring that the legal rights of the parties are protected at the hearing. The
Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final decision of the district’s governing board.
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.) The
Commission has broad discretion to determine the issues before it, including whether
dismissal is the appropriate sanction. (Ibid., at p. 343.)

Relevant Statutory Authority

3.

Education Code section 44932 provides in part:

“(a) No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or more of the
following causes:

(1) Immoral . . . conduct.

(5) Evident unfitness for service.

. . .

12

. . .

(7) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the
government of the public schools by the State Board of
Education or by the governing board of the school district
employing him or her. . . .

Immoral Conduct

4.

Education Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) lists “immoral conduct” as a

causes for dismissal. Immoral conduct is not considered in the abstract, but must be
considered within the context in which the Legislature considered it; more specifically, the
term refers to conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school community. Its objective
is to protect students from corruption. This is a proper exercise of the power of a state to
abridge personal liberty and to protect larger interests. But reasonableness must be the
governing criterion. Thus, the phrase “immoral conduct” as used the Education Code denotes
immoral conduct that renders the teacher unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.)

Since the term “immoral conduct” is vague and broad, whether conduct demonstrates

an unfitness to teach must be measured against seven criteria (1) the likelihood that the
conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of adversity
anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching
certificate held by the employee involved; (5) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances,
if any; (6) the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to
which the imposition of disciplinary action may have an adverse impact or chilling effect on
the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. (Governing Board of ABC
Unified School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 383.)

“Immoral conduct” as used in Education Code section 44932 is not confined to

unacceptable sexual behavior. It includes an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and
the public welfare. It is sometimes synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of
unfairness. (Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

The determinative test in teacher discharge cases is whether the person is fit to teach.

The terms “immoral” or “unprofessional conduct” are too vague and must be applied to a
specific occupation and given context by reference to fitness for the performance of that
occupation. A fitness hearing must consider not only the conduct in issue, but also (1) the
likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating
circumstances, if any; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers
and students relationships; (5) disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or
remoteness in time of conduct. “Fitness to teach” is probably a question of ultimate fact.
(Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d
555, 560-561.)

13

Evident Unfitness for Service

5.

“Evident unfitness for service” is not synonymous with “unprofessional

conduct,” and the term means clearly not fit for teaching, ordinarily by reason of
temperamental defects or inadequacies; it connotes fixed character trait, presumably not
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet expectations of school
district. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Evident unfitness” includes in its definition “unsuitable
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. In reaching a
conclusion if grounds exist to dismiss a certificated employee on the basis of evident
unfitness for service, not all Morrison factors need be examined, only the pertinent ones.
(Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.)

Persistent Violation or Refusal to Obey School Laws or Regulations

6.

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent;
continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly
repeated.” And in the judicial decisions the word has been interpreted to mean “continuing
or constant.” (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.)4 And, it appears that the Morrison factors should be applied in
determining whether a permanent certificated employee’s persistent violation or refusal to
obey laws and regulations supports the employee’s termination. (San Dieguito Union High
School Dist. v. Commission On Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176,
1182.)

The Morrison Factors

7.

Mr. Cronin admittedly engaged in conduct that fell below the standard of care

reasonably expected of a public high school teacher in several respects. First, Mr. Cronin
failed to promptly report to proper authorities that a former student, who still attended

4

Ms. Seaman, a teacher, applied for a voluntary leave of absence, which was denied,

and failed to return to the Fair Oaks School for the commencement of the school year in
violation of the governing board’s regulations. On the issue of whether Mrs. Seaman’s
violation was persistent the district that each day that Ms. Seaman was absent was a separate
violation of the board’s regulations, the violation met the “persistent” requirement. The
appellate court concluded: The argument is specious. This is not a case where it is
reasonable to say that Mrs. Seaman’s absence, by its very duration, amounted to a ‘persistent
violation of the governing board's rules. [Citation.] Nor can it fairly be said from the
evidence presented that the teacher was motivated by an attitude of continuous
insubordination. Mrs. Seaman had been employed by the district for a period of eight years,
and there is no evidence in the record to prove that she ever violated a school law or a
regulation of the governing board prior to the incident in question. (Governing Board of the
Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman, supra., at pp. 81-82.)

14

Eastlake High School, sent him a pornographic video. Second, Mr. Cronin failed to
immediately report to his supervisors that Jane Doe, one of his high school students, was the
subject of the self-made pornographic video after he learned of that. Third, Mr. Cronin
provided Jane Doe with a hall pass and permitted her to travel unsupervised about the
Eastlake High School campus after he learned that she was the subject of the pornographic
video and when Jane Doe was emotionally upset. These matters were undisputed.

Mr. Cronin’s misconduct could have resulted in a wider distribution of the Jane Doe

video and it could have resulted in some risk of injury to Jane Doe, although the evidence
offered to support the possibility of those dangers was speculative and relatively minor given
what Mr. Cronin knew and actually observed. Mr. Cronin’s failure to timely report what he
knew to some extent cast his school and the District in a poor light since timely reporting
was required and was not provided. Mr. Cronin’s misconduct posed virtually no risk of harm
to other teachers. The District did not establish that any student-teacher relationships were
impaired. Mr. Cronin’s misconduct did not disrupt the educational process. Mr. Cronin’s
wrongdoing was relatively recent, occurring within the past year. The extent of adverse
publicity or notoriety, beyond the telephone call placed by an anonymous parent, was not
established. It appears that the District and Mr. Cronin wisely kept the matter as quiet as
possible. Imposing discipline in this matter would not impact any teacher’s constitutional
right. The suggestion that Mr. Cronin did not report his receipt of the pornographic video
from Student B on the basis that Student B was on the varsity football team was unfounded.
Mr. Cronin was sensitive to Jane Doe’s situation and he did not want to cause her harm, and
his instinct to protect Jane Doe clouded his judgment on the need to report what he knew.
The uncertainty surrounding the need to report the matter to child protective services, if at
all, was a mitigating factor, as was Mr. Cronin’s obvious lack of experience and training to
enable him to know how he should proceed in this highly unique set of circumstances. Mr.
Cronin’s personal situation – including the recent birth of his daughter,

– certainly explained why the matter involving Jane

Doe occupied less than his full attention. The excitement of the varsity football team being
in the C.I.F. finals was also a distraction. The factors in explanation and mitigation far
outweighed any factor in aggravation. Given all that has occurred and given Mr. Cronin’s
credible testimony on the issue, it is without doubt that Mr. Cronin will not engage in the
same or similar misconduct in the future.

Based upon the application of the Morrison factors, the Commission concludes that
Mr. Cronin did not engage in immoral conduct, that he is not evidently unfit for service as a
result of an irremediable temperamental defect, and that he did not engage in a persistent
violation or refusal to obey applicable laws and regulations.

Based upon the application of the Morrison factors, it is concluded that Mr. Cronin is

currently fit to teach.

15

Cause Exists to Dismiss the Accusation

8.

A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that cause exists under

Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(5) or (a)(7), to dismiss Patrick Cronin
from his employment with the Sweetwater Union High School District. Mr. Cronin is fit to
teach.

This conclusion is based on the Factual Findings and the Legal Conclusions herein.

DISPOSITION

The Accusation and Statement of Charges are dismissed. Patrick Cronin shall retain

his permanent employment with the Sweetwater Union High School District.

DATED: ___________

DATED: ___________

DATED: ___________

_____________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge

_____________________________
CONNIE PRUETT
Moreno Valley Unified School District

_____________________________
SAUL WATSON
Oceanside Unified School District

16

