BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
OF THE STOCKTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SAN JOAQUIN
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Amended Accusation
Against:

HUBERT CRAFT,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2010090117

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence
(Commission) of the Stockton Unified School District in Stockton, California, on
December 6, 8, 9, and 10, 2010. Commission members were Kelly Maxwell, Kathy
Miracle, and Dian M. Vorters, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of
Administrative Hearings.

Ronald J. Scholar, Attorney at Law,1 represented Stockton Unified School
District (District). The District’s Interim Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources
Department, Ronnie Small, was present.

Eric D. Rouen, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondent Hubert Craft, who

was present.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted

for decision on December 10, 2010.

1 Ronald J. Scholar, Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann & Girard, 400 Capitol

Mall, 27th Floor, Sacramento, California 95814.

2 Eric D. Rouen, Driscoll & Associates, 801 South Ham Lane, Suite H, Lodi,

California 95242.

ISSUES

1

Did the District prove by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent
should be dismissed from his position as an elementary school teacher based upon
evident unfitness for service and/or persistent violation of or refusal to obey school
laws of the state or reasonable regulations of the school and/or district governing
board under Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(5) and/or (a)(7)?

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters

1.

Respondent received his bachelor of arts degree in 1974 and his clear

credential in 1977. Prior to employment with the District, he worked for school
districts in Cupertino, Emeryville, and San Jose. Respondent has been employed as a
certificated teacher in the District since 1985. He was initially assigned to Garfield
Elementary where he taught sixth grade for four years. He was assigned to El Dorado
Elementary (El Dorado) in 1991. El Dorado contains grades kindergarten through
eighth. Respondent has taught grades one through four at El Dorado over the past ten
years.

2.

Effective May 12, 2009, respondent was placed on paid administrative
leave, pending further action by the District’s Governing Board (Board) regarding his
continued employment as a teacher at El Dorado. Respondent was advised by letter
that he would be on “paid work status” pending the outcome of the District’s
investigation.

3.

The District filed an original Statement of Charges with the Board on
September 22, 2009. The District filed an Amended Statement of Charges with the
Board on June 22, 2010. The Statement of Charges asserted that respondent should
be dismissed for the reasons identified. The District further amended the Amended
Statement of Charges pursuant to an October 21, 2010 pre-hearing conference order.
This Second Amended Statement of Charges was filed at hearing on December 6,
2010. The Second Amended Statement of Charges detailed specific acts/omissions
by respondent occurring in 2008 and 2009, in support of his dismissal on grounds of
evident unfitness for service and/or persistent violation of or refusal to obey school
laws or district regulations. At hearing, the District moved to dismiss paragraph
seven of the Second Amended Statement of Charges to conform to proof.3 Paragraph
seven was dismissed without objection.

3 Paragraph seven alleged misconduct occurring on August 9, 2007, at the

home of one of respondent’s students. No evidence regarding this incident was
produced at hearing.

2

4.

On September 22, 2009, the Board passed Resolution No. 09-11,

Resolution of the Board of Education of the Stockton Unified School District Relating
to the Intention to Dismiss Hubert Craft (Resolution). The Resolution authorized the
Board to give notice to respondent of the District’s intent to dismiss him upon stated
grounds.

5.

On September 30, 2009, Assistant Superintendent and Interim

Superintendent Steve Vaczovsky signed the District’s Amended Notice of Intention to
Dismiss respondent. Respondent was served with Notice on this same date. He
timely filed his demand for hearing.

6.

On December 8, 2009, Interim Superintendent Vaczovsky filed a

written Accusation against respondent, based upon and incorporating the Statement of
Charges, which requested that the Commission dismiss respondent. On June 22,
2010, the District served respondent with its Notice of Amended Accusation,
Statement to Respondent, and Notice of Defense form.

7.

Respondent timely filed his Notice of Defense and the matter was set

for hearing.

Statement of Charges

8.

The Statement of Charges alleged that four specific incidents of

misconduct constituted evident unfitness for service and persistent violation of or
refusal to obey school laws and/or reasonable regulations of the Governing Board.
The specific acts/omissions are set forth below.

9.

On May 11, 2009, respondent slapped the hand of a male nine-year-old

student, in the presence of his classmates. The boy ran from the room and was
pursued by respondent. They went to the principal’s office and reported the matter.

10.

On February 28, 2008, respondent grabbed a male student by the back
of the neck, walked him to his desk, and physically forced the boy to sit in his chair.

11.

In April 2009, respondent made statements regarding two students’

medical and hygienic issues within earshot of other students and staff. The statements
caused the children to be humiliated and embarrassed. One condition related to a
child with encopresis and the other to a child with head lice.

12.

In August 2008, respondent engaged in acts of sexual harassment with
a female employee at the school. The acts involved him placing his arm around her
shoulder and introducing her to his class as his wife, making her uncomfortable.

3

13.

The Statement of Charges further alleged that the District had

previously directed respondent to comply with the plan of improvement outlined in an
October 14, 1993 Notice of Deficiencies.4

14.

The Notice of Deficiencies recommended that respondent participate in

professional development and follow behavioral guidelines for improvement as
follows:

1.

2.

3.

4.

You are to refrain from all nonessential physical contact
with students.

You are to refrain from using any physical consequences
to discipline students.

You shall maintain a calm outward demeanor at all times
and shall not address staff or students in a harsh or angry
tone of voice.

Whenever it may be necessary to correct a student’s
behavior, you shall avoid doing so in the presence of
other students, or do so in a manner so as to avoid
embarrassment to the student.

February 2008 Incident with T. H.

15.

The District alleged that on or about February 28, 2008, respondent
used physical force to discipline T.H., when respondent grabbed the back of T.H.’s
neck, ushered him to his chair, and pushed him down into his seat. Respondent
admitted directing T.H. to his seat, but denied any intent to punish or hurt T.H.

16.

T.H. testified at hearing. He is currently 12 years of age and attends

sixth grade in the District. At the time of the incident, he was a third grade student in
respondent’s class, and the school day was almost at an end. He had twice previously
missed his bus ride home and was anxious to be packed and ready to leave when the
dismissal bell rang. As such, he went to stand at the door while other students were
still seated. T.H. admitted that respondent asked him to sit down and he did not
comply. Respondent approached T.H. and according to T.H., “He grabbed my
shoulder and squeezed and pushed me down in my chair.” T.H. stated that it hurt and
qualified the pain as “medium.” He stated that his back hit the back of the chair as he

4 The 1993 plan of improvement was admitted as “evidence of records
regularly kept by the governing board concerning the employee” relevant to notice of
appropriate conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (a)(5).) The 1993 Notice of
Deficiencies was not used by the Commission to establish knowledge of school rules
and appropriate conduct, as other more recent evidence of notice was presented.

4

was forced down. T.H. began crying at this point and cried until he got home. He
stated that he cried because “it hurt.” He also stated that he was angry at respondent
at the time. He told his sister what happened at the bus stop and his mother when he
got home. He recalled that his mother inspected his back at home and noted a scrape.

17.

Cresha H., T.H.’s mother, testified at hearing. T.H. told his mother that

night that he got up without permission, respondent told him to sit down, and he did
not. Respondent then grabbed his shoulder and pushed her son into his chair,
scraping his back in the process. Cresha H. is a nurse. She observed what she
described as a “superficial scratch” that was “already healing.” She said that T.H.
was “teary eyed that night” and seemed “scared.” He had nightmares that went on for
two to three weeks. He told his mom he was “scared of big people now,” and that he
did not like it when “big people are over me and mad.” In response to his emotional
distress, Cresha H. took T.H. for mental health counseling. His problems cleared up
after three weeks.

18.

The next day, T.H.’s parents met with the Assistant Principal Bernard

Flores. Both parents were very upset. Mr. Flores spoke to all members of the family,
completed an Emergency Site Incident Report, and forwarded it to the District office.
He also called Stockton Unified School District (SUSD) Police. Officer Nida
interviewed parties and made a report. Cresha H. believes that these interviews also
contributed to T.H.’s emotional distress. Mr. Flores testified that he took the matter
seriously. However, after forwarding the incident report to the District office, there is
no evidence that the District took further action with respondent.

19.

Cresha H. complimented respondent’s teaching abilities and stated that

he had improved her son’s hand-writing and math aptitude. They had no problems
with respondent prior to this incident which she explained is “why we were shocked.”
She stated that she and her husband “have to think about safety first” and that T.H.’s
academics could not continue if he did not feel safe. For that reason, the family
subsequently transferred T.H. to another school within the District.

18.

Fellow student Ta’Veone T. testified at hearing. He stated that

respondent “grabbed [T.H.’s] neck, was walking with him and put him into his seat.”
Ta’Veone demonstrated the distance traveled as approximately eight to nine feet
between where respondent first grabbed T.H. and his desk. He recalled that T.H. was
crying and mad. After this incident, T.H. was the last student in the line and last to
leave the classroom.

19.

Respondent testified that prior to hearing T.H.’s testimony, he did not

recall that he had put his hands on the child. He subsequently recalled that after
asking T.H. to sit down two to three times, T.H. remained standing. Respondent
stated that he walked over to T.H., put his “hand on his back and guided him towards
his seat.” Respondent demonstrated the encounter by placing his right hand on his
attorney’s right shoulder. He estimated that on a scale of force from one (minimal) to

5

ten (maximum), he used between five and six. He noticed that T.H. was upset
because he saw tears in his eyes. Respondent asked T.H. why he was crying and the
child told him that respondent had “hurt his back.” Respondent did not respond
because he did not see any way that he could have hurt the child’s back.

May 2009 Incident with Carlos G.

20.

The District alleged that on or about May 11, 2009, respondent used

physical force to discipline Carlos G., when respondent slapped the child’s hand in an
attempt to re-direct him. Respondent admitted “tapping” Carlos G. on the hand, but
denied any intent to hurt him.

21.

Carlos G. testified at hearing. He is currently 10 years of age and

attends fifth grade in the District. At the time of the incident, he was a third grade
student in respondent’s class. He recalled that there was a red binder on his desk.
Respondent had placed on Carlos G.’s desktop two binders in an upright position with
the backs overlapping to form a visual barrier. Respondent used binder clips to hold
the back sides of the binders together.

Carlos G. stated that he was trying to look over the top of the binder and slid it
around, in an effort to view a projector image on the opposite wall. Respondent came
around to Carlos’ side and hit him on the hand. Carlos G. stated that his hand stung
for about five seconds. Respondent apologized after hitting him and offered him
some stickers. But, Carlos G. ran out of the room through the door leading to a
playground. After attempting to flee over a fence, Carlos G. ran back through the
classroom and ultimately to the principal’s office. During this time, respondent and
Carlos G.’s sister, Sylvia, were in pursuit.

22.

Respondent testified that on the day of the incident, Carlos G. had been
causing disruption. Carlos G. normally sat in a four-desk cluster. By math period, at
approximately 1:00 p.m., respondent had isolated him at a desk by himself. Also,
respondent placed upright binders in front of Carlos G. and asked him to put his head
down and rest for the day. Respondent stated that Carlos G. continued to be
disruptive by making sucking noises with his mouth and making facial expressions to
get other children’s attention. Respondent was teaching from a centrally located
computer desk station. Several times he walked over to ask Carlos G. to stop making
noise. After respondent walked back to his computer desk, Carlos G. would resume
the noise behind respondent’s back. Respondent believes that Carlos G. had not taken
his “medication” that morning. Respondent did not know what medication Carlos G.
was taking, but knew the child was administered medication at school.

After respondent returned to his computer station, he heard clicking. Carlos
G. was opening and closing the binder clips. Respondent told him to “knock it off.”
Respondent stated that he walked over to Carlos G, saw his hands were on top of the
desk, and reached over and tapped him on the hand. He estimated his use of force as

6

a four or five. After he tapped Carlos G., he noted that the child was upset, so
respondent apologized to him. He saw that Carlos G. was “tearing up” so he told him
he was sorry and asked him if he wanted some stickers. Respondent stated he was
trying to calm him down. When respondent went to get the stickers, Carlos G. left the
classroom.

Respondent pursued Carlos G. outside and inside for approximately five to ten
minutes. At some point, respondent saw Carlos G.’s sister Sylvia outside of the office
and enlisted her assistance on finding Carlos G. Sylvia was in eighth grade at the
time. They ultimately ended up in the principal’s office. After giving a statement to
the Assistant Principal, Eileen Blough, respondent was placed on administrative
leave. He has been on paid leave since the Spring of 2009.

Respondent realizes that his action was not appropriate. He stated that as an
alternative, he could have radioed the office for help as he normally did. In the past,
he has also requested assistance from one of the neighboring teachers. On this day,
however, all of the neighboring pods had substitute teachers.

23.

Assistant Principal Eileen Blough is familiar with Carlos G. because he

often comes to the office to talk to her. She stated that he is usually aloof and
nonchalant. This time, he was upset, breathing heavily, and crying. She asked him to
calm down and tell her what was wrong. She recalled that Carlos G. excitedly stated,
“[Respondent] just hit me!” Respondent was present and responded, “I did not hit
you I tapped you.” Carlos then said, “No, you didn’t you slapped me… hard!”
Respondent then replied, “Well, you weren’t behaving correctly so I slapped you.”
Ms. Blough recalled that respondent used the word “tapped” the first time and
“slapped” the second time.

After that, Ms. Blough went to report the incident to Principal Teresa Oden.

Ms. Oden directed her to contact the SUSD Police and to have respondent and Carlos
G. write statements. Ms. Blough also wrote a site incident report. The statements
were given to police and forwarded to the District Director of Elementary Education.

Communication of Sensitive/Confidential Information

24.

The District alleged that in April 2009, respondent made inappropriate

statements about the sensitive medical condition of two students in the presence of
other students. Respondent stated he was simply trying to get support for his
students. He denied that his comments were disparaging or loud enough for the class
to overhear.

25.

Assistant Principal Blough and Mary Jo Cowan, the school nurse,

testified about respondent’s inappropriate communications. Ms. Cowan explained
that a student, V.M., had encopresis, a medical condition involving involuntary bowel
movements. The child was seen at the school’s health center often as he had daily

7

episodes. He required cleansing and a change of clothes. Respondent made several
referrals to the health center for information and recommendations.

Ms. Cowan testified that on an occasion in April 2009, she was walking by his
classroom or pod when respondent called her over and told her to take the child with
her “because he smells.” She was standing outside of the classroom and assumed that
students inside heard the comment. She stated that respondent engaged in this type of
communication about V.M. in the presence of other students “on more than one
occasion.” On another occasion, the child brought a book bag that smelled strongly
of cat urine. Respondent told Ms. Cowan to “take him out of here, he stinks.”
Respondent also stopped by the health center on numerous occasions to discuss
V.M.’s referrals when other students and adults were present. On another occasion,
respondent spoke openly about a student’s head lice. Ms. Cowan told respondent that
she would not discuss the issues “right now.”

Ms. Cowan sent an e-mail to Ms. Blough on April 28, 2009, to report

respondent’s conduct which she believed was inappropriate and insensitive. She
stated, “The emotional impact on a student with this condition can be devastating [.]
[P]ublic discussion is not appropriate and [sic] lead to low self esteem issues and
creates barriers to social and academic development.” She added that she had
“repeatedly discussed” her concerns with respondent and he continued the same
behavior.

26. Ms. Blough testified that on April 15, 2009, as she was walking by
respondent’s classroom pod, he came out with V.M. to discuss the problem. Ms.
Blough observed that V.M. was “extremely uncomfortable,” as he kept looking
around to see if anyone was walking by and kept “shushing” respondent. Ms. Blough
told respondent they could discuss the matter later if he would come to her office.
Respondent said that he was going to send the child with a health notice that said,
“Had an accident.” Respondent said the smell was “horrible” and that he was
frustrated at V.M.’s repeated accidents.

The discussion took place two to three feet outside of respondent’s classroom
opening. There are three pods of classrooms that open into a common atrium. None
of the classrooms have doors. Ms. Blough recalled that respondent was not yelling
but was not talking softly either. She felt that if the students inside were listening,
they could have overheard.

V.M. had told Ms. Blough in her office that he did not like to talk about his
problem in front of other kids and he was embarrassed. After the incident on April
15, 2009, Ms. Blough discussed the incident with respondent telling him “let’s be a
little bit more discreet.” She explained to respondent that open discussion of the
matter made V.M. uncomfortable.

8

27.

Respondent testified that he often sent the child with a referral for

assistance after an episode. Sometimes V.M. would return with soiled clothes in a
bag and the smell would permeate the classroom. Respondent stated that he worked
with the children not to tease V.M. but the problem was a distraction to the class. He
also felt that the encopresis posed a health risk. He arranged for the custodian to
disinfect V.M.’s chair to get rid of the odor. Respondent stated that one day, he
forgot and the next day, the “stench was so bad” he had to place the chair outside after
wiping it.

Respondent admitted to stopping Ms. Blough outside of his classroom to

discuss V.M.’s odor. He stated he was in the middle of the pod area at the time. He
did not believe he was loud enough that the class overheard the discussion. He
recalled that Ms. Cowan spoke to him one time in her office about V.M. After that,
he stopped discussing the matter with her. He also recalled discussing the matter with
Jennifer Bonzi, the school counselor. She came to his classroom to discuss
confidentiality. Respondent recalled that he went into the pod area with her, he saw a
student peeking around the opening and he asked the child to go back. Ms. Bonzi told
him that discussing confidential information could affect him as a credentialed
teacher.

Sexual Harassment Allegation

28.

Razan Retiz (aka Fikrat) was a school based therapist at El Dorado

from August to December 2008. It was necessary for her to pull children out of class
to provide individual counseling sessions. She testified that on several occasions she
felt “uncomfortable” when she went to respondent’s class. On one occasion, inside
his classroom, he put his arm around her so that the right side of her body was
touching his left side. He then stated, “Class, this is my new wife. Have you met my
wife?” Ms. Retiz stated that the contact was unwanted.

Subsequently, while Ms. Retiz was sitting in Ms. Bonzi’s office, respondent

entered. He put his arm around Ms. Retiz and told Ms. Bonzi that Ms. Retiz had
previously come into his class and introduced herself as his wife. He stated that Ms.
Retiz had “teased” him. Respondent admitted at hearing that he made this untrue
statement, apparently in jest. Ms. Bonzi told respondent that he was “stepping over
sexual harassment boundaries and asked him to stop.” Respondent “laughed it off”
and walked out of the office.

On numerous occasions, Ms. Retiz felt that respondent was inappropriately
seeking her out. He would see her and try to talk to her about issues not relevant to
her job. He would deliberately seek her out when she was in her office or in
meetings. Ms. Retiz told respondent that the issues he was coming to her with were
not her concern. She did not tell him that he made her uncomfortable. Ms. Retiz
stated that respondent never propositioned her or asked her out on a date or to dinner.

9

Ms. Retiz wrote a letter to Ms. Oden, dated September 18, 2008. She outlined

the above two instances of what she characterized as “unwanted sexual advances.”
She submitted the letter to her employer at Valley Community Counseling Services,
with whom the District contracted for services. The letter was not forwarded to Ms.
Oden until December 2008. Ms. Oden received the letter on December 11, 2008, and
immediately spoke to respondent. Respondent subsequently apologized directly to
Ms. Retiz for his conduct. Ms. Retiz avoided respondent after that. After December
2008, Ms. Retiz was laid off and had no further contact with respondent at El Dorado.

29.

Respondent admitted at hearing to twice putting his arm around Ms.

Retiz’s shoulder. He stated he was just kidding around. They were standing either on
the threshold or inside of his classroom. Respondent did not recall at hearing if Ms.
Bonzi told him his behavior was inappropriate. He stated that she could have. He
could not explain why he would have laughed in response to such advice. Had he
known that his conduct made Ms. Retiz uncomfortable, he would have apologized at
that time. The first he heard of it was when Ms. Oden spoke to him in December
2008.

Teacher Evaluation

30.

Respondent submitted his Final Evaluation dated April 21, 2008. Ms.
Flores completed the evaluation. Under the Stull Act (Ed. Code, § 44600 et seq.), the
governing board of a school district must establish a uniform system of evaluation
and assessment of the performance of its certificated employees. Education Code
section 44662, subdivision (b), provides that school districts must evaluate and assess
the certificated employee’s performance as it reasonably relates to: (1) the progress of
pupils toward academic standards, (2) the instructional techniques and strategies used
by the employee, (3) the employee’s adherence to curricular objectives, and (4) the
establishment and maintenance of a suitable learning environment, within the scope
of the employee’s responsibilities.

As a general rule, permanent certificated employees must be evaluated by a
district “at least every other year.” (Ed. Code, § 44664, subd. (a)(1).) A permanent
certificated employee who has received an “unsatisfactory evaluation” must be
annually evaluated by his school district, and the district must provide the employee
with recommendations as to areas of improvement in performance, “until the
employee achieves a positive evaluation or is separated from the district.” (Ed. Code,
§ 44664, subd. (b).)

31.

Respondent received satisfactory scores in this evaluation. The

evaluation does not mention or reference any of the conduct alleged in the Statement
of Charges. It is noted that two of the alleged incidents occurred after April 21, 2008.
Also, according to Mr. Flores, the teacher is only evaluated on criteria selected at the
start of the school year by the teacher and the evaluator. Hence, discipline issues not
identified at the start of the school year would not be addressed at all.

10

Even so, Ms. Flores noted in the Final Evaluation Summary that,

“[Respondent] will need to use appropriate consequences and time limit for
behavioral issues.” Mr. Flores testified that he wrote this comment to address
respondent’s use of time-out periods. Mr. Flores had observed respondent use the
common area outside of the classroom for time-outs. He stated that some of the
children were sitting out there for more than 15 minutes. In Mr. Flores’ opinion, that
was excessive. Mr. Flores told respondent that he needed to keep children in the
classroom.

School Policy

32.

By accepting employment in the District, respondent agreed to abide by

the Board policies and the California Education Code. At the beginning of each
school year, he signed a Letter of Understanding, agreeing to these terms.

33.

Interim Assistant Superintendent Ronnie Small testified about the

District’s policy on corporal punishment. Board Policy AR 5144, approved by the
Board on November 9, 1999, sets forth guidelines for teachers and administrators
pertaining to student discipline. Section eight of this policy states, “Corporal
punishment shall not be used as a disciplinary measure against any student. Corporal
punishment includes the willful infliction of, or willfully causing the infliction of,
physical pain on any student. (Ed. Code, § 49001.)”

34.

Board Policy AR 4119.11 et seq., approved by the Board on June 28,
2005, sets forth guidelines for district employees on sexual harassment of personnel.
Sexual harassment and retaliatory behavior against employees or complainants is
prohibited. All complaints and allegations must immediately be reported to a
supervisor, principal, district administrator, or superintendent.

Pursuant to Board policy, prohibited sexual harassment includes unwelcome

sexual advances, unwanted requests for sexual favors or other unwanted verbal, visual
or physical conduct of a sexual nature made against another person of the same or
opposite gender, in the work or educational setting when “… (3) The conduct has the
purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the other individual’s work
performance, creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment; or
adversely affecting the other individual’s evaluation, advancement, assigned duties, or
any other condition of employment or career development.”

Actions that might constitute sexual harassment include, but are not limited to,
“… (3) Unwelcome physical conduct such as massaging, grabbing, fondling, stroking
or brushing the body; touching an individual’s body or clothes in a sexual way;
cornering, blocking, leaning over or impeding normal movements.”

11

35.

In addition to Board Policies, each school disseminates a staff

handbook with rules and procedures. Ms. Oden testified about relevant provisions in
the El Dorado Staff Handbook for 2008-2009 (Handbook). The staff handbook is
made available to teachers each year on the day before school starts, at an orientation
meeting. The handbook reiterates the District’s policies toward sexual harassment
and student discipline. Forms and rules for issuance of citations, “green slips” to
administration, noticing parents of detention and disobedience, and logging parent
contacts are included. Forms include the hall pass to be used by students who may
not be out of class without approval. Also included is a Referral Form for use in
sending students to the office, school nurse, or counselor. This form has spaces for
the teacher’s referral reasons including bathroom use, head lice, inattentiveness, and
learning problems. Respondent testified that he had used the Referral Form.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

A school district which seeks to dismiss a permanent certificated

employee from its employment bears the burden of proof and the standard of proof is
by a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035; Bevli v. Brisco (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d
986.)

2.

Section 44932, subdivision (a), provides in pertinent part that no

permanent employee shall be dismissed by a school district except for one or more of
the following causes, including for evident unfitness for service, and/or persistent
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education
or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her. (Ed. Code, §
44932, subd. (a)(5), (7).)

3.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the
California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching
profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant
danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected
by his actions as a teacher.” The Morrison court recommended seven criteria be
considered relevant in determining whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he or
she is not fit to teach:

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or
fellow teachers,

a.

b.

c.

The degree of such adversity anticipated,

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct,

12

d.

e.

f.

g.

h.

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved,

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the
conduct,

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in
the conduct,

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, and

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or
chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or
other teachers.

(Id. at pp. 229-230.)

4.

Evident unfitness for service means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or
inadequacies … [The term] connotes a fixed character trait; presumably not
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the
expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified school
District v. Commission of Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429.)

5.

In order for a teacher to be terminated under Education Code section

44932, subdivision (a)(7), for violations of law or rules, the violations must be
“persistent” or motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination. (Gov. Bd. of
Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81.)

6.

The use of corporal punishment upon children by public school

employees is prohibited by law. (Ed. Code, § 49000.) “No person employed by or
engaged in a public school shall inflict, or cause to be inflicted corporal punishment
upon a pupil.” (Ed. Code, § 49001, subd. (b).) The Education Code defines corporal
punishment to mean “the willful infliction of, or willfully causing the infliction of
physical pain on a pupil.” (Ed. Code, § 49001, subd. (a).)

Cause for Dismissal

7.

Respondent engaged in corporal punishment of two students in

violation of the law and school policy. Additionally, his conduct in handling the
sensitive medical problems of his students was highly inappropriate and detrimental
to their emotional and academic well-being. Pursuant to Legal Conclusions 10 and
11, respondent’s conduct constitutes “evident unfitness for service” within the
meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

13

8.

Respondent violations of school policy on corporal punishment

occurred during two separate school years. His insensitive comments about the
medical conditions of his students occurred repeatedly. Pursuant to Legal
Conclusions 10 and 11, respondent’s knowing and willful violation of the school
policy constitutes “persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the
state or reasonable regulations” of the District within the meaning of section 44932,
subdivision (a)(7).

9.

During the 2007/2008 and 2008/2009 school years, respondent engaged

in separate acts of corporal punishment on students. In February 2008, respondent
caused T.H. physical and emotional harm by his actions as described in Factual
Findings 15 through 19. In May 2009, respondent caused Carlos G. physical pain and
emotional harm by his actions as described in Factual Findings 20 through 23. At the
start of each school year, respondent was present at a teacher orientation where
District policies were reviewed.

Further, respondent has been employed by the District since 1985, has been

present at yearly orientations, and should be well versed on school policy. He
nevertheless engaged in knowing and willful physical discipline amounting to
corporal punishment. Additionally, his actions during two consecutive school years
amount to persistent violation of school laws, district rules, and regulations within the
meaning of the Education Code.

10.

Respondent engaged in a pattern of addressing the sensitive medical

condition of his students in a careless and public manner. His approach affected V.M.
detrimentally as set forth in Factual Findings 24 through 27. The Handbook provided
to respondent at the start of the school year contains a Referral Form that is to be used
to send students for care. Respondent admitted previously using the Referral Form.
Out of frustration, he sometimes chose more direct and inappropriate means of
obtaining assistance. V.M.’s situation was admittedly trying and called for patience.
However, the substance and manner of respondent’s repeated comments was
indefensible.

11.

There is insufficient evidence that respondent engaged in sexual

harassment towards a school employee. His actions as stated in Factual Findings 28
through 29, do not rise to the level prohibited by school policy. After Ms. Oden
informed him that his interactions were perceived as inappropriate, he apologized and
his conduct appears to have ceased.

12.

The Commission has considered the Morrison factors in light of the
record as a whole. When these factors are analyzed, respondent’s conduct poses a
significant danger of harm to students, school employees, or others who might be
affected by his actions as a teacher. Based on the facts and circumstances of each
incident, the District established that respondent is “unfit” to teach and that his
conduct amounted to a persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or

14

reasonable regulations. The misconduct as set forth in Legal Conclusions 7 through
10, is supported by the evidence and is serious enough to support dismissal. (Fontana
Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 219.)

13.

Consequently, the District sustained its burden of proving, by a

preponderance of the evidence, the allegations set forth in the Second Amended
Statement of Charges. Respondent shall be dismissed as an elementary school
teacher from the Stockton Unified School District, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(5), and (a)(7), and 44944, subdivision (c)(1)(A).

ORDER

Hubert Craft, respondent, is dismissed as a permanent certificated employee of

the Stockton Unified School District.

DATED: __________________

DATED: __________________

DATED: __________________

______________________________
KELLY MAXWELL, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

________________________________
KATHY MIRACLE, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

________________________________
DIAN M. VORTERS, Chair
Commission on Professional Competence

15

