BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE EAST WHITTIER CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

MATT PLAISTED,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2010050308

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in

Whittier, California, on November 1-3, 2010, and held deliberations on Monday, November
8, 2010. The Commission consisted of Russell Ford, Leslie Ternosky, and Administrative
Law Judge Amy C. Lahr, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, who
presided.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the East Whittier City School District

(District). Kent Morizawa, of Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Matt Plaisted
(Respondent).

District employed Respondent as a middle school teacher. District alleged that
Respondent demonstrated unprofessional and immoral conduct, willful refusal to perform
regular assignments without reasonable cause, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and
persistent violation of or refusal to obey school law, based on twelve allegations. Respondent
did not dispute the factual allegations. He argued that there was no ill-intent in his actions, and
thus his conduct was not immoral, and he did not display evident unfitness for service.

Based on the evidence presented, the Commission determined that District established

the majority of its allegations in the Accusation and Statement of Charges. Accordingly,
Respondent’s dismissal is upheld, as explained below.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Joe Gillentine, District Superintendent, made and filed the Accusation and

Statement of Charges in his official capacity.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of District. His most recent

position was teaching Language Arts and Social Studies at Granada Middle School.
Respondent holds a clear single subject credential.

3.

The District filed the Accusation and Statement of Charges on April 19, 2010.

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense and requested an administrative hearing.

Respondent’s Unauthorized Cell Phone Searches

4.

At all relevant times, District’s policy regarding cell phones was that students

can use their cell phones in designated areas only. Should a student violate that policy,
teachers may confiscate the student’s cell phone; however, teachers are not authorized to
search; i.e., view, the cell phone contents. Only an administrator may view the cell phone
contents, under certain circumstances. District instructed teachers to bring confiscated cell
phones to the administrative office, to allow administrators to decide the appropriate next
step.

5.

District informed teachers of the cell phone policy in multiple ways: it

provided a handbook which set forth the policy; and it provided instruction at the beginning
of the school year.

6.

In January 2009, Respondent twice violated the District’s policy by viewing

the contents of a student’s cell phone.

a.

Respondent confiscated a student’s cell phone and looked at a text
message. Respondent saw that the message contained foul language, and he directed the
student to send the text message to his mother.

b.

Respondent confiscated student J.F.’s cell phone, and looked through

photos and text messages. Respondent disapproved of one particular photo, and he sent a
text message to the student’s mother, which attached the picture from J.F.’s phone.
Respondent also used J.F.’s phone to send a text message to another student, D.R., who
appeared in the photo. Respondent told D.R. that he was going to tell her parents about the
incident, and that she would get into trouble. J.F. and her mother, Lyn Bruno, testified at the
hearing. They were upset by Respondent’s conduct.

7.

Respondent admitted his conduct to Assistant Principal Virginia Serratos. Ms.

Serratos reminded Respondent that teachers are not allowed to look through a student’s cell
phone contents. She directed Respondent to never look through a student’s cell phone again.
Shortly thereafter, Respondent met with Assistant Superintendent Mary Branca, and
Principal Drew Passalacqua. They gave him a directive to comply with District’s policies.

8.

In March 2009, Respondent violated the District’s cell phone search policy
again. He confiscated D.C.’s phone, and looked through the phone contents. Respondent
saw what he believed were disturbing photos: one of a gun in the student’s mouth, and
another of a naked person in a bathroom. Instead of informing District administration about
the situation, Respondent contacted school counselor Elizabeth Moreno, and asked her to
figure out who were the persons in the photos. Respondent asked Ms. Moreno not to tell
school administrators that Respondent had given her the cell phone.

2

9.

When confronted by District administrators, Respondent initially lied about

searching through D.C.’s cell phone. He later admitted his actions, and apologized.

10.

Respondent was dishonest by lying to administrators, and by asking Ms.

Moreno to lie to administrators.

11.

In March 2009, District issued a letter of reprimand to Respondent for his

actions. In response, Respondent wrote an apology letter.

Respondent’s Inappropriate Comments and Actions

a.

12.

In November 2008, Respondent met with student J.I., his mother, B.I.,
and Assistant Principal Serratos. During the meeting, Respondent suggested that J.I. should
change his appearance, and he offered to take J.I. to get a haircut. Afterward, Assistant
Principal Serratos told Respondent that it was not appropriate for him to take J.I. for a
haircut. Respondent ignored this instruction, and subsequently took J.I. for a haircut.

him to clean up his appearance. J.I.’s mother did not object to Respondent’s actions.

Respondent thought he was helping J.I.’s self esteem, by encouraging

Respondent disobeyed Assistant Principal Serrato’s instruction not to

b.

c.

take J.I. for a haircut.

13.

From July through December 2009, Respondent acted inappropriately on

numerous occasions. The evidence established that in July 2009, Respondent told a student
to “stop flirting with me.” This comment had sexual overtones and was inappropriate.
Respondent’s explanation that he used the phrase as progressive discipline to warn the
student that he was “flirting with danger” did not negate his conduct.1

14.

In September 2009, Respondent commented during a geography lesson that

“there were a lot of rice bowls” in Japan, and “a lot of burritos” in Mexico City. District
administrators informed Respondent that his comments could be viewed as offensive.2

15.

In October 2009, Respondent witnessed a special education student, with

autism, having a breakdown at school. Though not the Respondent’s student, he took it upon
himself to take photographs of the student during that incident. Respondent took
photographs of the student during the incident. Respondent claimed that he took the

1 District also alleged that Respondent also told the student to “shut up”; however, it

presented no direct evidence to establish this fact.

2 Commission members Ford and Ternosky determined that Respondent’s comments

were innocuous, likely an attempt to use humor that fell short. ALJ Lahr dissented, and
found that Respondent’s comments were inappropriate and serve as grounds for discipline.

3

photographs as evidence, but had no credible explanation as to why he needed evidence of
the incident. He was not instructed to memorialize the incident and had no involvement with
the student. As established by the testimony of school administrators, Respondent’s conduct
only served to exacerbate the incident; the student was upset by Respondent’s actions.

16.

a.

The following day, Respondent photocopied and distributed

inappropriate pictures of a colleague, Nick Damico. Respondent superimposed Mr.
Damico’s school photograph over models’ faces in sexually explicit advertisements.
Respondent then used the school photocopy machine to make numerous copies, and he
distributed them in other teacher’s mailboxes. Respondent also placed the advertisements in
the staff lounge, which students accessed, in plain sight of students. District immediately
issued Respondent a Letter of Reprimand and a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct.

b.

As established by the testimony of Mr. Damico and District

administrators, Respondent’s conduct was inappropriate and unprofessional. Mr. Damico
felt concerned about the incident, in part because he had not yet acquired a tenured position
with the District. Respondent meant to joke with Mr. Damico, and he apologized for his
conduct.

Unproven Allegations

a.

17.

District alleged that Respondent committed willful refusal to perform
his job duties, or evident unfitness for service, by his conduct at an individualized education
plan (IEP) meeting for student J.C. The evidence did not support this contention. Although
Respondent disclosed the student’s identity outside of the meeting, he had J.C.’s mother’s
permission to do so, because it reduced bullying that J.C. experienced.

b.

During the IEP meeting, Respondent questioned J.C.’s mother
regarding her motives for volunteering at school. The manner in which he posed his
questions purposefully provided her with a platform to speak during the IEP meeting.
Respondent’s conduct was perhaps unorthodox, but did not indicate refusal to perform his
job duties or unfitness.

c.

Respondent also addressed at the IEP meeting the fact that J.C. had

made sexual comments to another student. J.C.’s mother had been aware of these comments
previously; and in any event, an IEP meeting is an acceptable forum to candidly discuss
issues about the student.

18.

District alleged that Respondent demonstrated willful refusal to perform his

job duties and evident unfitness for service during the 2006-2007 school year. Specifically,
District pointed to Respondent’s 2006-2007 Certificated Employee Evaluation which stated
that Respondent “has engaged in behavior, [and] expressed comments and/or criticisms
which are destructive of students’ self esteem.” Other than Respondent’s 2006-2007
evaluation, which by itself did not provide enough evidence to sustain the charge, District did
not provide any examples of Respondent’s alleged destructive behaviors. In addition,

4

Respondent’s evaluations in the following years did not indicate that any such problem
existed. District did not sustain its burden with respect to this allegation.

19.

District also alleged that Respondent demonstrated willful refusal to perform

his job duties, unprofessional conduct, and evident unfitness for service by failing to
cooperate with the District’s English Learner program team. District did not show that
Respondent failed to cooperate or otherwise acted unprofessionally or unfit. The evidence
showed that a professional discussion took place and Respondent ultimately complied with
the group consensus.

20.

District did not establish that Respondent failed to adhere to the sixth grade

social studies curriculum or failed to keep a record of students’ grades. The evidence
showed that Respondent timely submitted his grades.

Character Evidence

21.

Respondent has been employed as a teacher in the District since 2002. He

loves being a teacher and wants to continue in the profession. Respondent acknowledged the
seriousness of his conduct, and is willing to make amends.

22.

Respondent presented two character witnesses, John Weir and Bonnie

Hernandez. Respondent leads the boy scouts group in which Mr. Weir’s son is involved.
Ms. Hernandez is also a teacher, and Respondent taught her son. They had high praise for
Respondent and his teaching abilities.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), (immoral or unprofessional
conduct), based on Factual Findings 1 through 13 and 15-16, and Legal Conclusions 1
through 11.

2.

Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), (evident unfitness for service),
based on Factual Findings 1 through 13 and 15-16, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 11.

3.

Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), (dishonesty), based on Factual
Findings 8 through 10, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 11.

4.

Cause exists to dismiss Respondent as a certificated employee of the District

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), (persistent violation or refusal to
obey school laws), based on Factual Findings 1 through 13 and 15-16, and Legal
Conclusions 1 through 11.

5

5.

“Immoral conduct” has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it can
be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward
good order and the public welfare. (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School
District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

6.

“Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for service be attributable

to a defect in temperament . . .” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on
Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445.) Such temperamental defect
“connotes a fixed character trait, not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails
to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Id. at 1444.)

7.

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a), has been construed as constituting unfitness to teach. (Perez v. Commission
On Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

8.

Even where unprofessional or immoral conduct, or evident unfitness for

service are established, it must also be established that such immoral conduct or evident
unfitness renders Respondent unfit to teach. Such determination unfitness requires an
analysis based on criteria set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d
214. In Morrison, the Supreme Court of California held that the determination of whether a
person is fit to teach must be based on an objective and analytical approach, consisting of a
review of the teacher’s conduct and an assessment of a variety of specific factors including:
(1) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the presence of extenuating or
aggravating circumstances; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) the likelihood that
the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (5) the disruption of the education
process; (6) the motive underlying the conduct; and (7) the proximity or remoteness in time
of the conduct.

9.

As applied to this case, the Morrison factors suggest the following
conclusions: first, Respondent’s conduct reflected poor judgment on multiple occasions, and
demonstrated the likelihood he would disregard District policy as he sees fit. Based on the
evidence presented, it is likely that Respondent would engage in similar conduct. Next, no
extenuating circumstances existed that would explain Respondent’s actions. Respondent has
tried to justify his repeated violations of District’s cell phone policy by stating that he has
good instincts and intuition about student problems; however, the evidence showed that his
actions have resulted in student harm. Respondent has rationalized his other behaviors by
labeling himself as a dedicated teacher. With regard to the inappropriate photos of Mr.
Damico, Respondent acknowledged that his actions were inappropriate. The evidence
showed that Respondent’s many instances of misconduct affected students and their parents,
as well as his colleagues. Finally, Respondent’s misconduct was very recent, having
occurred in 2008 and 2009. In sum, the Morrison factors as applied in this case support
Respondent’s dismissal.

6

10.

Although District did not prove every allegation, it proved the majority of

allegations in the Accusation and Statement of Charges. The proven allegations were
sufficient to establish that multiple causes existed to support Respondent’s dismissal.

11.

Lastly, Respondent’s argument that he was deprived of due process by the

District “re-characterization” of Respondent’s conduct as something more than
unprofessional; i.e., immoral, is without merit. District did not “re-characterize”
Respondent’s conduct; it alleged in the Statement of Charges that Respondent’s conduct was
both immoral and unprofessional. In that regard, District gave Respondent proper notice of
his unprofessional conduct as required by the Education Code.

ORDER

The determination of the Governing Board of the East Whittier City School District to

dismiss Respondent Matt Plaisted as a permanent employee of the District is affirmed.

Respondent Matt Plaisted is dismissed from his position as a certificated employee of

the East Whittier City School District.

DATED:

DATED:

DATED:

AMY C. LAHR
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

RUSSELL FORD
Commission Member

LESLIE TERNOSKY
Commission Member

7

