BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Suspension of:

DAREN ENGSTROM,

Respondent.

_____________________________________
In the Matter of the Suspension and Dismissal
of:

DAREN ENGSTROM,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2010100088

OAH No. 2011010187

DECISION

The above-captioned consolidated matters came on regularly for hearing before

the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) at McFarland, California on
September 12-16 and 19, 2011. The Commission consisted of the following members: Val
E. Donaire, Hueneme School District; Roberta Parnell, Delano Union School District; and
Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, who
presided.

McFarland Unified School District (District) was represented by GCR, LLP, by

Chaka C. Okadigbo, Attorney at Law.

Daren Engstrom (Respondent) was present and was represented by Tuttle &

McCloskey, by Ernest H. Tuttle, III, Esq.

Oral and documentary evidence was received on September 12-16 and 19, 2011.
The record was held open to allow the parties to submit written closing briefs by 12 noon on
October 5, 2011. Each party timely submitted a written closing brief. The District's closing
brief was marked for identification as Exhibit 71. Respondent's closing brief was marked for
identification as Exhibit 526. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for
decision on October 5, 2011.

In this case, the District seeks a three-day suspension against Respondent and

termination of his employment as a permanent teacher, based on charges that Respondent
failed and refused to teach the District-approved curriculum in accordance with the lesson

plans prepared by his grade-level chair, despite being told by his principal that he was
required to do so.

After due consideration of the entire record herein, the Commission makes the

following factual findings, conclusions of law, and order:

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Governing Board of the District is the duly elected, qualified and acting

governing board of the District, organized and existing and operating pursuant to the
provisions of the California Education Code and other laws of the State of California.

2.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

3.

By letter dated September 15, 2010, the District's Assistant Superintendent,
Kim McManaman (McManaman) notified Respondent that the Governing Board voted to
immediately suspend him without pay for three days, with the suspension to be served on
September 16, 20, and 24, 2010. The letter included an Accusation dated September 15,
2010, which set forth the grounds for the three-day suspension. Respondent timely
submitted a notice of defense by which he requested a hearing to contest this Accusation.

Respondent served the three-day suspension on September 16, 20, and 24,

2010.

4.

5.

On November 15, 2010, the District placed Respondent on paid administrative

leave. Also on this date, McManaman notified Respondent, in writing, that she would be
recommending to the Governing Board that he be immediately suspended without pay and
dismissed from employment.

6.

By letter dated November 24, 2010, McManaman notified Respondent that the

Governing Board voted to immediately suspend him without pay effective November 24,
2010, and to dismiss him from employment with the District. The letter included an
Accusation dated November 23, 2010, which set forth the grounds for immediate suspension
and for dismissal. Respondent timely submitted a notice of defense by which he requested a
hearing to contest this Accusation. One of the grounds for dismissal alleged in the
Accusation is for unprofessional conduct, which is based on the notice of unprofessional
conduct that the District served on Respondent on September 3, 2010, pursuant to Education
Code section 44938.

7.

Respondent has been on unpaid administrative leave from the District since

November 24, 2010.

2

Respondent waived the 60-day deadline under Education Code section 44944,

subdivision (a), for commencing the hearing in this matter.

8.

9.

All jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Respondent's Background

10.

Respondent has been employed by the District as a teacher since 1997. He has

taught at the District's two elementary schools, Kern Avenue Elementary School (Kern
Avenue) and Browning Road Elementary School (Browning Road). Respondent started his
teaching career at Kern Avenue, where he taught third, fourth, and fifth grade. For the past
six years, Respondent has been a teacher at Browning Road. He taught fourth grade from
2006 to 2009. He taught third grade for the 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years.

11.

Prior to the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent received positive performance

evaluations. He did many volunteer activities for his students on his own time and
sometimes at his own expense, including yearbook activities and accompanying students to
summer camp.

12. Maria Gonzalez-Salgado (Salgado) has been the principal of Browning Road

for the past four years.

13.

On November 12, 2009, Salgado conducted a formal classroom observation of

Respondent's classroom during a language arts lesson. On the Classroom Observation
Checklist, Salgado gave Respondent a rating of excellent for having the daily plan posted, 70
percent of students on task, and maintaining student interest. She rated him as good in the
areas of feeling tone of classroom, room appears safe and orderly, student work is displayed,
students know and follow procedures, students involved in the learning process, student
engagement strategies used, children accept responsibilities, enthusiasm for teaching the
lesson, quality of instructional delivery, use of motivational factors, appropriate variety of
activities, student monitoring, and respectful attitude toward students. Salgado gave
Respondent a rating of acceptable in the areas of appropriate teaching aids, clearly defined
discipline procedures, classroom management evident, clearly presented directions, and
quality of lesson plans. The areas of lesson objective posted, checking for understanding
observed, and higher thinking skills used were rated as unobserved.

14.

On May 4, 2010, Salgado conducted another formal classroom observation of

Respondent's classroom, this time during a math lesson. On the Classroom Observation
Checklist, Salgado gave Respondent a rating of good in all areas, except that she rated
Respondent as acceptable in the areas of appropriate teaching aids, children accept
responsibilities, quality of lesson plans, use of motivational factors, appropriate variety of
activities, and higher thinking skills used.

3

15.

Salgado prepared an Evaluation of Teaching Performance dated June 3, 2010,
which was Respondent's annual evaluation for the 2009-2010 school year. Respondent was
evaluated in the six California standards for the teaching profession. For Standard I
(engaging and supporting all students in learning), Respondent was rated as needs
improvement in all five areas of this standard. For Standard II (creating and maintaining
effective environments for student learning), in six areas, Respondent received five ratings of
satisfactory-meets standards and one rating of unsatisfactory-does not meet standards. For
Standard III (understanding and organizing subject matter), in five areas, Respondent
received four ratings of unsatisfactory-does not meet standards and one rating of needs
improvement. For Standard IV (planning instruction and designing learning experiences for
all students), in five areas, Respondent received one rating of satisfactory, three ratings of
needs improvement, and one rating of unsatisfactory-does not meet standards. For Standard
V (assessing student learning), in five areas, Respondent received one rating of satisfactory-
meets standards and four ratings of needs improvement. For Standard VI (developing as a
professional educator), in five areas, Respondent received one rating of satisfactory-meets
standards, one rating of needs improvement, and three ratings of unsatisfactory-does not
meet standards.

16.

Specifically, Respondent received ratings of unsatisfactory-does not meet

standards in the areas of using instructional time effectively, demonstrating knowledge of
subject matter content, organizing curriculum to support student understanding, developing
student understanding through instructional strategies, using materials, resources, and
technologies, developing and sequencing instructional activities and materials, reflecting on
teaching practice, establishing professional goals, and working with colleagues to improve
professional practice.

17.

As a result of the unsatisfactory ratings in this evaluation, Respondent was

required to participate in the Peer Assistance Review (PAR) program for the ensuing 2010-
2011 school year. PAR is a peer assistance program where exemplary teachers are assigned
to mentor other teachers in need of development in subject matter knowledge, teaching
strategies, or both. This was the first time Respondent was referred to the PAR program.

18.

Salgado gave the Evaluation of Teaching Performance to Respondent on June

3, 2010, the last day of the 2009-2010 school year. Salgado's practice is to give teacher
evaluations on the last day of school rather than 30 days before the end of the school year as
required under the Education Code. Salgado testified she does this because of her concern
that if a teacher receives an evaluation stating that they need improvement, then the teacher's
performance may deteriorate in the last 30 days of the school year because of the evaluation.
In this case, Respondent was allowed to submit a written response to this evaluation after the
school year ended.

4

Browning Road School

19.

The District has determined that the fundamental learning needs of its students

are in the areas of reading, mathematics, and the acquisition of English for English-learner
students.

20.

Browning Road is designated by the California Department of Education

(CDE) as a program improvement school. Generally, a school may be designated a program
improvement school based on low family incomes and low academic achievement by its
students.1 Browning Road has been a program improvement school for at least five years.
It was a program improvement school in the 2010-2011 school year.

21.

As a program improvement school, Browning Road is required to implement

the nine essential components of program improvement developed by the CDE. The nine
essential components include, but are not limited to: (1) use of State Board of Education
adopted or standards-aligned English/reading/language arts and mathematics instructional
materials and documenting their daily use in every classroom with materials for every
student; (2) adherence to instructional minutes for English/reading/language arts and
mathematics, and monitoring compliance with instructional time for the adopted core
programs for reading/language arts, reading intervention, and core mathematics; and (3)
preparation and distribution of a district/schoolwide pacing schedule for each grade level for
the reading/language arts and mathematics program "in order for all teachers to know when
and in what sequence each lesson is expected to be taught to ensure content coverage."
[Exhibit 51.] 2

22.

The District requires Browning Road to implement the nine essential

components of program improvement by, among other things, "provid[ing] and monitor[ing]
daily, the full implementation of the reading and language arts program, including
instructional time requirements . . . for reading intervention at K-12 for all students,
including . . . English Learners (EL), through monitoring class schedules, lesson plans, and
classroom observations." School site administrators (e.g., principals) are required to visit
"classrooms on a daily basis to monitor schedules, lesson plans, and make classroom
observations." With regard to English Language Development (ELD), the District requires
that "at least 45 minutes daily of [ELD] is provided to EL's in grades 1-12 . . . using ELD
materials approved by CDE."

23.

For the 2010-2011 school year, the District adopted a new reading/language

arts curriculum called Treasures. A three-day training in Treasures was held during the

1 See, Education Code sections 54633, 54635, and 54483.

2 Exhibit 51 is the District's plan for implementing the nine components of program

improvement. Although this plan is dated 2007-2008, the testimony of Assistant
Superintendent McManaman established that this is the plan followed by the District in the
2010-2011 school year.

5

summer of 2010. Respondent was unable to attend this training due to a previously
scheduled vacation. However, over the summer, he spent 20 hours reviewing the teacher's
manuals and other materials for Treasures. Based his review of the materials, Respondent
felt he was prepared to teach the Treasures curriculum in the upcoming school year.

24.

The Treasures program includes an ELD component that is tied to the English
Language Arts (ELA) part of the curriculum. The ELD component teaches strategies that EL
students will need for the ELA curriculum. Browning Road divides its EL students into four
groups based on abilities. Students are assigned a homeroom teacher to receive math and
ELA instruction. During the ELD time block, the ELD students go to another teacher's
classroom for ELD instruction. The third grade teachers are assigned to teach one group of
ELD students. After ELD, the students return to their homeroom teacher's classroom.

August Events

25.

The first day of the 2010-2011 school year was August 11, 2010. Myriam
Maldonado (Maldonado) was the grade-level chair for the third grade at Browning Road.
Maldonado held grade level meetings for the third grade on August 9, 13, 16, 20, and 25,
2010. The grade-level meetings provided a forum for Browning Road's third grade teachers
to collaborate and express and discuss their classroom or curriculum related concerns.
Respondent was present at the grade-level meetings in August. He did not express concerns
or raise any issue about teaching the Treasures curriculum during any of the August grade-
level meetings.

26.

At the August 9, 2010, meeting, it was agreed that Maldonado would prepare
the weekly lesson plans for the third grade and distribute them to the teachers by email and a
hardcopy in the teachers' mailboxes. Per Salgado's directive, the lesson plans were to be
distributed on Friday. It was agreed that the lesson plan would attach a copy of the week-at-
a-glance page from the Treasures Teacher's Manual which detailed the specific pages to be
taught during class instead of Maldonado retyping the same information into the lesson plan.
The lesson plans sent by email would not have a copy of the week-at-a-glance page, which
would be attached to the hardcopy placed in the teacher's mailbox. Respondent requested to
receive the lesson plans only by email. Maldonado provided the lesson plans to all third
grade teachers, including Respondent, by email and hardcopy. Respondent's request to
receive the lesson plans on Wednesday instead of Friday was denied.

27.

In general, the lesson plans prepared by Maldonado contained minimal

information, with more detailed information about the day's lessons contained in the week-at-
a-glance and other pages attached to the lesson plans. The Commission noted some of the
lesson plans had minor discrepancies. For example, the lesson plan for the second week of
school showed incorrect days of the month (August 11-13 instead of August 16-20). The
lesson plans for August also showed a time block designated for RTI, even though RTI was
not scheduled to be taught until September 14, 2010. According to Maldonado, RTI was
included on the lesson plans even before it was scheduled to be taught to alert the teachers
that RTI would be taught in the time block in the future.

6

28.

According to the lesson plans, the first 10 days of the school year were to be

spent teaching Start Smart. Start Smart introduced various strategies and skills to the
students that they would use as they work through the Treasures curriculum during the
course of the school year. The teaching of Start Smart was discussed at the grade-level
meeting on August 9, 2010.

29.

The second week of the school year started on August 16, 2010. On that date,
Salgado did a walk-through of all third grade classrooms, including Respondent's classroom.
According to the lesson plan for August 16, 2010, the teachers were to be teaching "Start
Smart Day 3." Salgado saw that all third grade teachers were teaching the same strategy
from Start Smart except for Respondent. Respondent was introducing the first story of the
Treasures ELA curriculum to his students. Salgado saw that the students had the Treasures
books open in front of them.

30.

On August 17, 2010, Salgado met with Respondent and Sonia Bangi (Bangi),
a representative of the McFarland Teachers Association. The purpose of the meeting was to
discuss Salgado's observation of Respondent's classroom the previous day. During the
meeting, Salgado reminded Respondent that the lesson plans and pacing were determined
over the summer, the ELD portion of the program frontloaded the lessons in the core
curriculum, and it was important to stay with the lesson plan for Respondent's grade level.
Salgado directed Respondent to follow the lesson plan and teach Start Smart. Respondent
indicated to Salgado that he would teach lessons to his students as soon as possible and he
would follow the pacing guide. According to Respondent, the pacing guide or pacing
calendar is a schedule of the subjects that must be covered each week so that students
understand the subject matter by the time the benchmark tests are given. Respondent's
statement to Salgado that he would following the pacing guide, after she directed him to
follow the lesson plans, demonstrated defiance and insubordination.

31.

On August 27, 2010, Salgado conducted a walk-through of Respondent's

classroom. According to the lesson plan for this day, the lesson for the Reading Language
Arts time block was "Unit 1 Opener." In Respondent's classroom, Salgado saw the students
working with construction paper, glue and glitter. The students told Salgado that Respondent
gave them time for free art. Respondent told Salgado that he was teaching the students the
concept of "setting" in a story. Salgado saw the art work was of various unrelated subjects;
some students wrote in glitter "Mom," "Dad," or "Mr. Engstrom," while others made pictures
of various objects, like hearts and stars. Salgado saw nothing in the artwork indicating a
relation to the concept of the setting of a story. Respondent explained to Salgado that the
artwork was to teach "setting" by having the children create artwork to make their classroom
setting more interesting and enjoyable. Respondent's explanation was dishonest. If
Respondent was teaching the students about "setting,", then the student’s artwork should
have reflected places or settings where stories take place. It did not. Further, in light of the
meeting with Salgado on August 17, 2010, Respondent’s explanation appears to be an
attempt to hide the fact that he was not following the lesson plan as he was directed to do.

7

32.

Violeta Alvarez (Alvarez) is a third grade teacher at Browning Road. On

August 30, 2010, some of Alvarez's students returned to her classroom after attending ELD
class with Respondent. According to the lesson plan for this day, the lesson for the Reading
Language Arts time block was "Unit 1, Lesson 1, Day 1." This lesson involved a story called
Tina's Try-Out Day. When Alvarez began teaching the Tina's Try-Out Day story to her
students, some of the students told her they had already read the story in Respondent's ELD
class. When Alvarez took out the story the students should have been reading in the ELD
time block for August 30, 2010, the students indicated they had not read that story.
According to the lesson plans, Tina's Try-Out Day was not scheduled to be taught until
August 30, 2010.

33.

On August 31, 2010, Salgado held a meeting with all third grade teachers.

Respondent was present at the meeting, along with Sonia Bangi. During this meeting,
Respondent denied teaching the Tina's Try-Out story to his students. The August 30, 2010
incident with Alvarez's students was discussed. The teaching of Start Smart was also
discussed. Respondent stated that he taught Start Smart in five days; the lesson plan
indicates Start Smart was to be taught over 10 days. It was also discussed at this meeting
that ELD was supposed to frontload strategies for the reading program. Respondent said he
was doing what he felt was best for his students. Other teachers raised concern with
Respondent about following the sequence of the lesson plans. During this meeting,
Respondent was defensive and confrontational rather than collaborative. He persisted in his
disagreement with the lesson plans.

34.

Board Policy 4100 requires each District certificated employee to be

accountable for the duties assigned to him or her. Board Policy 4119.21 requires each
District certificated employee to advance the goals of the District's educational program.
Respondent's failure and refusal to follow the lesson plans and pacing established for his
grade level demonstrated a lack of accountability for his assigned duties, and did not advance
the District's educational program, as required under Board Policy 4100 and 4119.21,
respectively.

September to November Events

35.

On September 3, 2010, McManaman sent Respondent a 45-day notice of

unprofessional conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44938. The 45-day notice of
unprofessional conduct set forth the August 2010 incidents described above as the basis for
the notice. The 45-day notice directed Respondent to, among things, "follow the directives
given by your Principal," "follow the lesson plan and pacing, in its entirety, developed by
your grade level staff, as written," and "[t]each all lessons in [2010-20113], including English
Language Development lessons, in accordance with the lesson plans and pacing established
for your grade level at your school."

3 The 45-day notice erroneously referenced the 2009-2010 school year instead of the

2010-2011 school year.

8

36.

The FRISK method is a system of progressive discipline, which starts with
oral warnings, and then progresses to written warnings, letters of reprimand, followed by
more serious consequences. Salgado prepared a FRISK letter dated September 2, 2010,
which documented the incidents from August 2010. However, she did not send the letter to
Respondent because she felt it would not have any effect on Respondent, as nothing
happened in response to the oral warnings and directives she gave him previously.

37.

Respondent's failure to teach according to the lesson plans continued in the

month of September 2010.

38.

On September 2, 2010, Salgado was in Respondent's classroom during the

ELA time block. Salgado had her Treasures Teacher's Edition with her. She was unable to
find the lesson the children were working on in the Teacher's Edition. When she asked
Respondent to find the lesson in the Teacher's Edition, he pointed to a page that did not
correspond to the lesson plan for this day. When Salgado walked through the other third
grade classrooms, she saw those teachers were all teaching the same lesson. Respondent was
teaching a different lesson. Salgado also saw that vocabulary words on the board in
Respondent's classroom did not match the vocabulary in the Teacher's Edition for that week.
Respondent testified that he used the Teacher's Edition and made notes and lessons based on
that review. This testimony was not persuasive. If Respondent was creating lessons based
on the Teacher's Edition, then the lessons and vocabulary should have matched or been fairly
close to the Teacher's Edition. Even though he did not have the Teacher's Edition book open,
if Respondent was following the Teacher's Edition, his lesson should have matched. They
did not.

39.

Respondent did not have his students write in their daily journals each

morning after recess, as called for in the lesson plans. On September 14, 2010, Salgado was
present in Respondent's classroom during the journal writing time block, from 9 to 9:15 a.m.
Salgado did not observe any journal writing by the students during this time. Teachers were
given no discretion as to when to teach journal writing. Respondent testified that he taught
journal writing during the reading time block on the lesson plan. He contends he was told
that lessons in the reading time block could be moved around. This explanation does not
excuse Respondent from teaching journal writing during the 15-minute block required by the
lesson plans. On the lesson plans, journal writing was clearly within its own separate time
block, as compared to reading language arts, which occupied two time blocks, from 10:10 to
11:25 a.m. and 12:05 to 1:00 p.m. Teachers had some flexibility in the order they taught the
reading language arts lessons during those two time blocks.

40.

Respondent failed to teach the ELD curriculum from the Treasures program

during his ELD classes. On September 16, 2010, Respondent was serving the first day of his
three-day suspension and was not present in his classroom. A substitute teacher was
teaching Respondent's class. Salgado was present to observe the ELD block of this day. The
lesson plan for the ELD time block for September 16, 2010, indicated the lesson was Unit 1,
Lesson 3, Day 2. The substitute could not locate the ELD workbooks in the classroom.
Salgado asked the students about their ELD workbooks. Only half of the class had ELD

9

workbooks. Salgado found several brand new ELD workbooks with no work completed in
them. As of September 16, 2010, the ELD workbooks should not have been blank if the
ELD lessons were taught according to the lesson plans. Respondent's testimony that he was
unaware of the existence of the ELD workbooks was not persuasive. He should have seen
that some students had ELD workbooks when they came to his classroom, which should
have prompted him to ask about workbooks for his ELD class.

41.

Respondent taught a math test ahead of the schedule set by the lesson plans.
For the week of September 20-24, 2011, Maldonado's homeroom class was displaced from
its classroom due to flooding and was combined with Respondent's homeroom class.
Respondent was absent during this week. Maldonado and a substitute teacher taught the
students in the combined classes. The lesson plan for September 24, 2011, called for Excel
Math Test 4 to be given during the Math time block. When Maldonado attempted to give the
test to the students, Respondent's students indicated they had already taken the test.
Maldonado found that those students knew the picture on the back of the story to be read for
Excel Math Test 4. Under the circumstances, Maldonado decided to move on to another
activity and the class did not do Excel Math Test 4 that day.

42.

Respondent did not consistently use the assigned Treasures ancillary materials

but instead used materials from other sources not approved by the District for use in his
class. On some occasions, he used materials that were not appropriate for third grade level
students. Respondent did not use Treasures ancillary curriculum materials. Salgado found
such materials in Respondent's classroom not being used. Salgado collected worksheets
from a student in Respondent's classroom in early November. The worksheets were not
appropriate third grade level work. Respondent supplanted, not supplemented, the Treasures
materials.

43.

It was not established by a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent

failed to teach the Standards Plus curriculum described in the lesson plans. Standards Plus
Language Arts is a supplemental curriculum that is standards-based, where the teacher gives
direct instruction on a specific standard. The lesson plans called for Standards Plus
Language Arts to be taught on November 1 - 5, 8, 9, and 10, 2010. Salgado collected a
Standards Plus Language Arts workbook from one student in Respondent's classroom. The
pages in the workbook corresponding to Standards Plus lessons called for on the lesson plans
for November 1-10, 2010 were blank. The Commission finds that the blank pages in this
single workbook is insufficient to establish that Respondent failed to teach the Standards
Plus curriculum. Other reasons might explain the blank pages in the workbook, such as the
student being absent or out of the classroom at the time and/or days that Standards Plus was
scheduled to be taught.

Other Matters

44.

Respondent testified that the lesson plans prepared by Maldonado were not

clear and he was confused as to what was required to be taught. He does not feel his actions
were insubordinate. He feels he did what he thought was in the best interest of his students.

10

He pointed out that students in his classroom performed comparable to or better than students
in other classrooms on benchmark tests. Principal Salgado did a formal observation of his
classroom on October 14, 2010, and gave him ratings of good and acceptable on the
Classroom Observation Checklist. He denied teaching ELA stories ahead of schedule; he
contends that he taught “aspects” of stories but did not teach the stories. He feels he taught
the Treasures curriculum the best he could, even though he did not receive the three-day
Treasures training over the summer.

45.

Respondent further points out that, after approximately September 3, 2010, no

one from his school or the District took the initiative to discuss with him that he was not
following the lesson plans or that he was not properly teaching the curriculum. He noted that
Salgado did not give him feedback during walk throughs to alert him of any problems with
his teaching. Three other teachers from Browning Road, not third grade teachers, testified
that principal Salgado did not give feedback to teachers when she did classroom walk
throughs. There was no evidence that Respondent himself contacted principal Salgado,
grade-level chair Maldonado, his PAR coach Bangi, or others to clarify or confirm that he
was teaching the curriculum properly and according to the lesson plans.

46.

Bangi was assigned as Respondent's PAR coach in September 2010. Bangi
did not see positive results happening in the communication between Respondent and his
grade-level, although Respondent described the communications to her as being positive.
Bangi's impression was that Maldonado and Alvarez tried to communicate the need to follow
lesson plans to Respondent but were unsuccessful in getting him to do so. According to
Bangi, Maldonado and Alvarez knew how the lessons were tied from one class to another
and that students switched classrooms and teachers. Bangi’s impression was that
Respondent had difficulty in seeing how those related and that he should not teach ahead of
the schedule. Bangi testified that Maldonado and Alvarez were communicating clearly but
Respondent's understanding was not sufficient. In her written report dated September 30,
2010, Bangi suggested that Respondent should visit other classroom teachers to learn more
effective strategies regarding direct instruction, another teacher should model a reading
lesson with a focus on direct instruction for him, and Respondent should attend an outside
conference, or one by the District, on direct instruction. No evidence was presented that
Bangi's suggestions were implemented for Respondent.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to

Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 9.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof is

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

11

Three-Day Suspension

3.

Education Code section 44932 sets forth the grounds for the dismissal and

suspension of permanent certificated employees. Subdivision (a) sets forth the grounds for
dismissal. Subdivision (b) governs suspensions and authorizes an employee's suspension
without pay for a specific period of time only on grounds of unprofessional conduct
"pursuant to the procedures specified in [Education Code] Sections 44933, 44939, 44935,
44936, 44937, 44943, and 44944." Under Education Code section 44933, "[a] permanent
employee may be dismissed or suspended on grounds of unprofessional conduct consisting
of acts or omissions other than those specified in Section 44932, but any such charge shall
specify instances of behavior deemed to constitute unprofessional conduct."

4.

The Accusation filed on September 15, 2010 seeks a three-day suspension

without pay against Respondent on grounds of willful refusal to obey reasonable regulations,
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, and dishonesty.
Respondent contends that the Accusation is improper because Education Code section 44932
provides that the suspension of a permanent teacher “may be based only on a charge of
unprofessional conduct.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (b).) It is true that unprofessional
conduct is the only ground for suspension provided in section 44932. However, under
section 44933, a suspension may be based on unprofessional conduct consisting of acts or
omissions not specified as a ground for dismissal under section 44932, subdivision (a), if the
charges “specify instances of behavior deemed to constitute unprofessional conduct.” In this
case, the Accusation filed on September 15, 2010, specifies instances of behavior that may
be deemed to constitute unprofessional conduct. The Commission construed the Accusation
as seeking a three-day suspension for unprofessional conduct based on Respondent’s conduct
on August 16, 17, 27, and 30, 2010, specified in the Accusation.

5.

It is the unanimous decision of the Commission that cause existed to suspend

Respondent for three-days without pay, for unprofessional conduct, pursuant to Education
Code section 44932, subdivision (b).

6.

"Unprofessional conduct" may be defined as conduct which violates the rules

or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a
profession in good standing. (Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)
Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct by failing to teach the District-approved
curriculum according to the lesson plans for his grade level, refusing to follow the lesson
plans after being directed by his principal to do so and instead indicating he would follow the
pacing guide or pacing calendar, being dishonest with principal Salgado in explaining the
free art incident on August 27, 2010, and failing to collaborate with the other third grade
teachers. (Factual Findings 25-34.) This conduct was unbecoming of a member of the
teaching profession in good standing and was unprofessional conduct under Education Code
section 44932, subdivision (b).

12

Immediate Suspension and Dismissal

7.

Evidence Code section 44932, provides, in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or more of the
following causes:

(1) [U]nprofessional conduct.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(5) Evident unfitness for service.

(7) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the . . . reasonable
regulations prescribed . . . by the governing board of the school
district employing him or her.

8.

Under Education Code section 44939, a permanent employee may be

immediately suspended on grounds of, among other things, "willful refusal to perform
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and
regulations of the employing school district."

9.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for the

immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent, pursuant to Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(1), for unprofessional conduct. Respondent's conduct (as established
in Factual Findings 25-34 and 35-42), taken as a whole, was unprofessional conduct
unbecoming of a member of the teaching profession in good standing. Further, as discussed
in Legal Conclusion 15, below, Respondent's conduct demonstrated an unfitness to teach.
(Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

10.

It was not established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for
the immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent, pursuant to Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(5), for evident unfitness for service. Evident unfitness for service
means "clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of
tempermental defects or inadequacies. Unlike unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for
service connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of
notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district."
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The Commission concludes that Respondent’s refusal and failure
to teach according to the lesson plans was not due to a defect in temperament or an
unremediable fixed character trait.

13

11.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for the

immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent, pursuant to Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(7), for persistent refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed by
the District.

12.

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), the violation of the
school district's regulations or rules must be either "persistent" or "motivated by an attitude
of continuous insubordination." (Governing Bd. of Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman
(1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81.) "The word 'persistent' is defined by lexicographers as
'refusing to relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition … stubborn; persevering
… constantly repeated.' And in the judicial decisions of this, as well as other states, the word
has been interpreted to mean 'continuing or constant.'" (Seaman, supra, 28 Cal.App.3d at p.
82.) Respondent's failure and refusal to teach the District-approved Treasures curriculum
according to the lesson plans, despite being admonished on multiple occasions he was
required to do so, was persistent and demonstrated an attitude of continuous insubordination.

13.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists for the

immediate suspension and dismissal of Respondent, pursuant to Education Code section
44939, for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.

14.

There are no cases that interpret the meaning of this part of Education Code

section 44939. However, cases interpreting section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), which
provides cause for discipline for insubordination, require a "showing of intentional and
continual refusal to cooperate." (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) The charge of
insubordination is viewed as analogous to the charge of willful refusal to perform regular
assignments. In this case, Respondent willfully refused to perform regular assignments
without reasonable cause, by failing and refusing to teach the District-approved curriculum
in accordance with the lesson plans. Respondent's conduct was willful because it continued
even after he was warned and directed to follow the lesson plans.

15.

In reaching the above, the Commission concluded that Respondent's conduct

demonstrates an unfitness to teach within the meaning of Morrison v. State Board of
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. The Commission considered all the factors suggested in
Morrison and compared them to the facts established above. However, it is settled that not
all "Morrison factors" need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. (Governing
Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) Moreover, the
Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can
be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland, supra, 2
Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.) The Commission applied the Morrison analysis to the accumulated
facts established collectively.

(A)

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or

fellow teachers. This factor applies against Respondent. His failure and refusal to teach the
District-approved curriculum and follow the lesson plans for his grade-level adversely

14

affected students and his fellow teachers. By not teaching according to the lesson plans,
other teachers had to adjust their teaching. The students did not receive the benefit of
learning skills and strategies taught in early lessons that would be used in later lessons.
Students who were taught lessons ahead of schedule by Respondent had an advantage over
other students who did not get such information ahead of time.

(B)

The degree of such adversity anticipated. The adversity under the

circumstances was serious, in that Respondent's failure to teach according to the lesson plans
impacted not only the students in his classroom, but the students and teachers in other
classrooms.

(C)

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The misconduct is

proximate, having occurred during the 2010-2011 school year.

(D)
is not applicable.

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. This factor

(E)

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the
conduct. The Commission considered principal Salgado's practice of not giving feedback to
teachers during walk-throughs of their classrooms, of giving performance evaluations on the
last day of school rather than 30 days prior, and the fact she did not give Respondent any
further specific warnings regarding his performance after September 3, 2010. The
Commission is concerned that Respondent was not given an ample chance to correct his
deficiencies, as principal Salgado gave him no feedback or further directions after September
3, 2010, and she did not send him the FRISK letter she prepared. Despite these concerns,
however, the Commission concludes that Salgado's conduct does not extenuate Respondent's
conduct at issue. Respondent's task was simply to teach the District-approved curriculum
according to the lesson plans prepared by his grade-level chair. Respondent, as a teacher
with 13 years of experience, had the capability to carry out that simple task. Nothing
principal Salgado did or did not do justified Respondent's failure and refusal to carry out that
task. The Commission also considered Respondent's explanations for his conduct (as
established in Factual Findings 44 and 45) and found they were insufficient to establish
extenuating circumstances for his failure and refusal to teach according to the lesson plans.

(F)

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in

the conduct. The Commission considered that Respondent is blameworthy for his conduct in
this case. Respondent was defiant and insubordinate in response to directives from principal
Salgado. Respondent did not collaborate or consult with his grade-level colleagues or grade-
level chair to confirm he was teaching according to the lesson plans or that he was teaching
the correct lessons. He knew that he was under scrutiny about following lesson plans. He
could have simply confirmed with another third grade teacher the lesson he would teach for
the day if he was, as he testified, unsure about what was required under the lesson plans. In
addition, when confronted by his fellow third grade teachers about the importance of
teaching according to the lesson plans, Respondent was defensive and defiant.

15

(G)

The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. The

Commission concludes that there is a likelihood that Respondent's conduct will recur in the
future. Despite being given written and oral warnings about following the lesson plans,
Respondent failed to do so. Respondent, by his testimony, did not express remorse or accept
responsibility for his conduct.

(H)

The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon

the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. This factor is not
applicable.

16.

It is the majority decision of the Commission, based on the above Factual

Findings and Legal Conclusions, that cause exists to dismiss Respondent from employment
with the District, for unprofessional conduct and for persistent refusal to obey reasonable
regulations prescribed by the District, pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision
(a)(1) and (7). Further, it is the majority decision of the Commission, based on the above
Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions, that the District established cause to immediately
suspend Respondent, for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable
cause, pursuant to Education Code section 44939.

17.

"The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes

unfitness to teach . . . and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction."
(California Teachers Assoc. v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.)
Following lesson plans and teaching the District-approved curriculum was an integral part of
Respondent’s teaching duties at Browning Road. Carrying out these duties was particularly
important given Browning Road’s program improvement status, and because the Treasures
curriculum was being used in the District for the first time in the 2010-2011 school year.
The totality of the incidents established in Factual Findings 25-34 and 35-42 demonstrate
Respondent's failure and refusal to follow the lesson plans for his grade level. The majority
decision of the Commission is that the totality of those incidents establishes Respondent's
unfitness to teach and establishes grounds for his dismissal from employment with the
District.

//

//

//

//

//

//

16

WHEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:

ORDER

Respondent Daren Engstrom is terminated from his employment as a permanent

certificated employee of the McFarland Unified School District.

DATED: December ___, 2011

DATED: December ___, 2011

DATED: December ___, 2011

___________________________
VAL E. DONAIRE
Member
Commission on Professional Competence

___________________________
ROBERTA PARNELL
Member
Commission on Professional Competence

___________________________
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER
Administrative Law Judge, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

17

