 

BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE OF  
THE SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

      
 
     OAH No. 2010090401 
 
 

 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
ROBERT CHAVEZ, 
 
                                             Respondent.         
 
 

 

 

 
 
October 25, 2010, at Los Angeles, California. 
 
 
(District), telephonically. 
 
 
 

 

ISSUE 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO DISMISS 

Administrative Law Judge Ralph B. Dash heard Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss on 

  Richard A. Brady, Attorney at Law, represented Santa Ana Unified School District 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented Robert Chavez (Respondent). 

For purposes of teacher dismissal cases under Education Code Section 44944, when 

does the 60-day time-period to commence the hearing begin to run. 
 

CONCLUSION 

 
 
The 60-day period commences to run from the date the teacher first demands a 
hearing after being served with a notice of intent to dismiss; not at some later point such as 
60 days after a Notice of Defense is filed pursuant to Government Code Section 11506.  In 
this matter, the hearing was not commenced within 60 days from Respondent’s demand for a 
hearing, and the Accusation must be dismissed. 
 

BACKGROUND 

The District served Respondent with a Notice of Intention to Dismiss/Notice of Intent 

 
 
to Suspend, together with a Statement of Charges, on July 2, 2010.  The Statement of 
Charges set forth in detail the facts upon which the dismissal was sought, together with 
citations to the Education Code regarding the District’s legal authority to effect the dismissal.  
The Statement of Charges was signed by Jane A. Russo, District Superintendent. 
Respondent, through his counsel, demanded a hearing on July 12, 2010.  The Superintendent 
filed the Statement of Charges with the governing board on August 24, 2010.  The District 
filed an Accusation with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), pursuant to the 

Administrative Procedure Act (Government Code section 11500, et seq.) (APA), on 
September 13, 2010.  The Statement of Charges was attached as Exhibit A to the Accusation.  
The Accusation itself contained no statement of facts nor did it cite any legal authority.  The 
Accusation was based entirely on the Statement of Charges.  Also attached to the Accusation 
was a “Notice of Accusation” dated September 9, 2010, addressed to Respondent.  On 
September 14, 2010, Respondent served the District with an APA Notice of Defense in 
which he renewed his request for a hearing and objected to the Accusation.  Trial is 
scheduled to commence on November 9, 2010. 
 

CONTENTIONS 

Respondent contends that because the hearing on the Accusation did not commence 

 
 
within 60 days of his initial demand for hearing on July 12, 2010, this matter must be 
dismissed.  The District contends that the 60 day period does not begin to run until the Notice 
of Defense was filed because, although the Superintendent signed and served the Statement 
of Charges on July 2, 2010, the governing board of the District did not approve them until 
August 24, 2010.  Thus, the District contends, the dismissal proceedings were not “initiated” 
until that date, and no time limits can begin running until thereafter. 
 

ANALYSIS 

 
It is a fundamental rule of statutory construction that the intent of the enacting 

Where a statute contains both general and special provisions, effect should be given to 

A statute must be construed in view of its general purpose, scope and object, so that 

 
authority should be determined so as to give effect to the purpose of the law.  (Chavez v. 
Civil Service Commission (1978) 86 Cal. App. 3d 324 at 330.)  If possible, effect should be 
given to the enacted provision as a whole so that no part of it will be useless or meaningless.  
 
 
mere literal construction of a provision will not prevail if it is opposed to the intention of the 
Legislature.  A literal construction that will lead to absurd consequences should be avoided.  
(See generally 58 Cal. Jur. 3d, Section 99 at pages 466-7.) 
 
 
both if possible but, in the event of irreconcilable conflict, a general provision is ordinarily 
controlled by a special provision.  (See, Code Civ. Proc. §1859.  See also In re Ricardo A. 
(1995) 32 Cal. App. 4th 1190.)  
 
 
those laws in mind at the time it enacts a new statute.  (See, Schmidt v. Southern California 
Rapid Transit District (1993) 14 Cal. App. 4th 23.  See also, People v. McGuire (1993) 14 
Cal. App. 4th 687.) 
 
 
In determining legislative intent, one must look first to the words of the statute 
themselves, giving to the language its usual, ordinary import and according significance, if 
possible, to every word, phrase, and sentence in pursuance of the legislative purpose.  A 
construction making some words surplusage is to be avoided.  The words of the statute must 

The Legislature is deemed to be aware of statutes already in existence and to have 

 

2 

be construed in context, keeping in mind the statutory purpose.  Statutes must be construed 
so as to give a reasonable and common sense construction that is consistent with the apparent 
purpose and intention of the lawmakers, that is practical rather than technical, and that leads 
to wise policy rather than mischief or absurdity.  (People v. Turner (1993) 15 Cal. App. 4th 
1690.) 
 
 
The quest for legislative intent in statutory construction is not unbounded.  There can 
be no intent in a statute not expressed in its words, and there could be no intent on the part of 
the framers of such a statute which does not find expression in their words.  The meaning of 
a statute is to be sought in the language used by the Legislature.  Words may not be inserted 
in a statute under the guise of interpretation.  (City of Sacramento v. Public Employee's 
Retirement System (1994) 22 Cal. App. 4th 786.) 
 
 
carry out the overriding legislative purpose as gleaned from a reading of the entire act.  A 
construction that makes sense of an apparent inconsistency is to be preferred.  (Viking 
Insurance Co. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. (1993) 17 Cal. App. 4th 540.) 
 
 
same class of persons or things.  In the construction of a particular statute, or in the 
interpretation of any of its provisions, all acts relating to the same subject, or having the same 
general purpose, should be read in connection with it, as together constituting one law. (Isobe 
v. Unemployment Ins. Appeals Bd. (1974) 12 Cal. 3d 584, 590.) 
 
 

Wherever possible, potentially conflicting provisions should be reconciled in order to 

Statutes in pari materia are those which relate to the same person or thing, or to the 

As the Supreme Court noted in Meijia v. Reed (2003) 31 Cal.4th 657 at 663: 
 
Under well-established rules of statutory construction, we must ascertain the 
intent of the drafters so as to effectuate the purpose of the law. [Citation.] 
Because the statutory language is generally the most reliable indicator of 
legislative intent, we first examine the words themselves, giving them their 
usual and ordinary meaning and construing them in context.” (Esberg v. Union 
Oil Co. (2002) 28 Cal.4th 262, 268 [121 Cal. Rptr. 2d 203, 47 P.3d 1069].) 
“[E]very statute should be construed with reference to the whole system of law 
of which it is a part, so that all may be harmonized and have effect.” (Moore v. 
Panish (1982) 32 Cal.3d 535, 541 [186 Cal. Rptr. 475, 652 P.2d 32].) “Where 
as here two codes are to be construed, they ‘must be regarded as blending into 
each other and forming a single statute.’ [Citation.] Accordingly, they ‘must be 
read together and so construed as to give effect, when possible, to all the 
provisions thereof.’ [Citation.]” (Tripp v. Swoap (1976) 17 Cal.3d 671, 679 
[131 Cal. Rptr. 789, 552 P.2d 749].) 
 
When the plain meaning of the statutory text is insufficient to resolve the 
question of its interpretation, the courts may turn to rules or maxims of 
construction “which serve as aids in the sense that they express familiar 
insights about conventional language usage.” (2A Singer, Statutes and 

 

3 

Statutory Construction (6th ed. 2000) p. 107.) Courts also look to the 
legislative history of the enactment. “Both the legislative history of the statute 
and the wider historical circumstances of its enactment may be considered in 
ascertaining the legislative intent.” (Dyna-Med, Inc. v. Fair Employment & 
Housing Com. (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1379, 1387 [241 Cal. Rptr. 67, 743 P.2d 
1323].) Finally, the court may consider the impact of an interpretation on 
public policy, for “[w]here uncertainty exists consideration should be given to 
the consequences that will flow from a particular interpretation. 

With the foregoing in mind, the statutes in question are next examined.  Elementary 

and secondary school teacher dismissal actions are governed by the California Education 
Code, Title 2, Division 3, Part 25, Chapter 4, Article 3 (Resignations, Dismissals and Leaves 
of Absence).   
 

Education Code section 44934 states, in pertinent part: 
 

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified by the person filing 
them, with the governing board of the school district, or upon a written statement 
of charges formulated by the governing board, charging that there exists cause, as 
specified in Section 44932 or 44933, for the dismissal or suspension of a 
permanent employee of the district, the governing board may, upon majority vote, 
except as provided in this article if it deems the action necessary, give notice to 
the permanent employee of its intention to dismiss or suspend him or her at the 
expiration of 30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless the employee 
demands a hearing as provided in this article. Suspension proceedings may be 
initiated pursuant to this section only if the governing board has not adopted a 
collective bargaining agreement pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 3543.2 of 
the Government Code. Any written statement of charges of unprofessional 
conduct or unsatisfactory performance shall specify instances of behavior and the 
acts or omissions constituting the charge so that the teacher will be able to prepare 
his or her defense. It shall, where applicable, state the statutes and rules which the 
teacher is alleged to have violated, but it shall also set forth the facts relevant to 
each occasion of alleged unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance.  

 
Before dismissing a teacher, the district must notify the teacher: 

 
The notice of dismissal or suspension in a proceeding initiated pursuant to 
Section 44934 shall not be given between May 15th and September 15th in 
any year. It shall be in writing and be served upon the employee personally or 
by United States registered mail addressed to him at his last known address. A 
copy of the charges filed, containing the information required by Section 

 

 

4 

11503 of the Government Code,1 together with a copy of the provisions of 
this article, shall be attached to the notice.2 

 
Any written statement of charges of unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory 
performance shall specify instances of behavior and the acts or omissions 
constituting the charge so that the teacher will be able to prepare his or her 
defense. It shall, where applicable, state the statutes and rules which the 
teacher is alleged to have violated, but it shall also set forth the facts relevant 
to each occasion of alleged unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory 
performance.3 
 

After receiving the notice, the teacher may request a hearing.    
 

When any employee who has been served with notice pursuant to Section 
44934 of the governing board's intention to dismiss or suspend him or her 
demands a hearing, the governing board shall have the option either (a) to 
rescind its action, or (b) schedule a hearing on the matter.4 

 

If the teacher demands a hearing and the board does not rescind its notice of intention to 
dismiss, the hearing must “commence” within 60 days of the date of that demand. 
 

In a dismissal or suspension proceeding initiated pursuant to Section 44934, if 
a hearing is requested by the employee, the hearing shall be commenced 
within 60 days from the date of the employee's demand for a hearing. 5 

The hearing uses the APA for its structure: 

The hearing shall be initiated, conducted, and a decision made in accordance 
with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of 
Title 2 of the Government Code.6 

 

Powers v. Commission on Professional Competence (1984) 157 Cal. App. 3d 560  

and Wilmot v. Commission on Professional Competence (1998) 64 Cal. App. 4th 1130, hold 

                                                
1  Emphasis added.  Note, the code section requires the information required of an 11503 Accusation to be 
contained in the notice; there is no requirement that a formal Accusation be filed.  
 
2  Education Code § 44936.  (Service of notice and attachments.) 
 
3  Education Code § 44934.  (Written statement of charges and notice of intent to dismiss or suspend employee.) 
 
4  Education Code § 44943.  (Action of governing board after demand for hearing.) 
 
5  Education Code § 44944, subdivision (a).   
 
6  Education Code § 44944, subdivision (a).   

 

5 

that commencing the hearing purely to establish jurisdiction is acceptable, as is stipulating to 
the “necessary ceremonial” (Powers, supra at 569). 7  A teacher might not agree to such a 
stipulation and demand the hearing commence within the 60-day timeline, but OAH has the 
authority to open a hearing and then grant a continuance for the substantive taking of 
evidence.  Governing Board of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District v. Felt 
(1976) 55 Cal. App. 3d 156, implies that missing the 60 day timeline may be excused due to 
the tribunal’s needs, but not counsel’s delay or misunderstanding. 
 

The statutory requirements of an Accusation filed under Government Code Section 

11503 are virtually identical to the requirements for a written statement of charges under 
Education section 44934.  As noted above, if the board’s intention to dismiss is accompanied 
by a “written statement of charges,” it must reference the statutes or regulations alleged to 
have been violated together with specific factual allegations supporting the charges. 
 
Similarly, Government Code Section 11503 provides, in part, as follows: 
 

The accusation shall be a written statement of charges which shall set forth in 
ordinary and concise language the acts or omissions with which the respondent 
is charged, to the end that the respondent will be able to prepare his defense.  It 
shall specify the statutes and rules which the respondent is alleged to have 
violated, but shall not consist merely of charges phrased in the language of 
such statutes and rules. 

 

A properly prepared statement of charges under Education Code section 44934 
effectively functions as the Accusation in an APA hearing, but need not be the actual 
Accusation filed under Government Code Section 11503.  The following recitation from 
Wilmot (supra at pages 1140-1142) gives very strong support to the determination that the 60 
period runs from the date of the initial demand for hearing, not from a date post-filing of the 
Accusation: 
 
Section 44944, subdivision (a), states in part that ". . . if a hearing is requested 
by employee, the hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of 
the employee's demand for a hearing." Appellant's first argument is that this 
60-day time period "is jurisdictional" and that "if the hearing is not conducted 
by a Commission within 60 days from the date of the employee's demand, the 
Commission has no jurisdiction to conduct the hearing . . . ." Although 
appellant's argument is not clearly articulated, he appears to contend that under 
no circumstance can the hearing take place more than 60 days after the 
employee has demanded the hearing unless the commission has begun to take 
evidence within 60 days of the employee's demand for a hearing. Appellant is 
mistaken.  

                                                
 
7  Wilmot v. Commission on Professional Competence (1998) 64 Cal. App. 4th 1130, 1139-1148; (''the parties may 
'stipulate that the necessary ceremonial has been observed' and may thereby satisfy the 60-day requirement'').  

 

6 

 
The Education Code prescribes a detailed procedure to be followed when a 
school district desires to dismiss an employee.  Section 44932 states that "[n]o 
permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or more of the 
following causes . . . ." Among the causes listed are dishonesty (subd. (a)(3)) 
and evident unfitness for service (subd. (a)(5)). The dismissal process begins 
in the manner described in section 44934. As pertinent here, that section states 
"upon a written statement of charges formulated by the governing board, 
charging that there exists cause, as specified in Section 44932 . . ., for the 
dismissal . . . of a permanent employee of the district, the governing board 
may,  upon majority vote . . . give notice to the permanent employee of its 
intention to dismiss him or her at the expiration of 30 days from the date of 
service of the notice, unless the employee demands a hearing as provided in 
this article."  The section 44934 notice of intention to dismiss "shall be in 
writing and be served upon the employee personally or by United States 
registered mail addressed to him at his last known address." (§ 44936.) Certain 
other written information "shall be attached to" the notice of intent to dismiss. 
(§ 44936.) This includes a "copy of the charges filed, containing the 
information required by Section 11503 of the Government Code." (§ 44936.)  
Section 11503 of the Government Code is one provision of the legislation 
more commonly known as the Administrative Procedures Act ( Gov. Code, § 
11500 et seq.). It describes the required content of a charging document known 
as an "accusation." The "information required by Section 11503 of the 
Government Code" (§ 44936) includes "a written statement of charges which 
shall set forth in ordinary and concise language the acts or omissions with 
which the respondent is charged, to the end that the respondent will be able to 
prepare his defense." ( Gov. Code, § 11503.) There must also be a 
specification of "the statutes and rules which the respondent is alleged to have 
violated," but this information "shall not consist merely of charges phrased in 
the language of such statutes and rules." ( Gov. Code, § 11503.)  If the 
employee does not demand a hearing within 30 days of being served with the 
notice of intent to dismiss, the school district may dismiss the employee at the 
end of the 30-day period. ( Ed. Code, § 44937.) If the employee demands a 
hearing, ". . . the governing board shall have the option either (a) to rescind its 
action, or (b) schedule a hearing on the matter." (§ 44943.) As we have already 
noted, ". . . if a hearing is requested by the employee, the hearing shall be 
commenced within 60 days from the date of the employee's demand for a 
hearing." (§ 44944, subd. (a).) "The hearing shall be initiated, conducted, and a 
decision made in accordance with" Government Code section 11500 et seq. 
(the Administrative Procedures Act). (Ibid.) . . . . . appellant's hearing 
"commenced within 60 days" within the meaning of section 44944, 
subdivision (a). The procedural facts pertinent to this issue have never been in 
dispute. They are as follows. On May 10, 1993, the district's board of 
trustees adopted a written statement of charges alleging that cause existed 
for appellant's dismissal. On May 12 appellant was personally served with 

 

7 

a notice of intent to dismiss. On May 14 appellant demanded a hearing. 
An accusation was filed on July 7 and was served on appellant's legal 
representative at that time, Attorney Richard J. Papst. On July 7 Mr. Papst, on 
behalf of appellant, and Attorney Frank J. Fekete, on behalf of the district, 
entered into a stipulation stating that "[t]he hearing in this matter shall 
commence on July 9, 1993 before an Administrative Law Judge of the Office 
of Administrative Hearings," that "[t]he hearing shall be opened for 
jurisdictional purposes only on that date and no appearance by the parties or 
their counsel is required," that "[t]he hearing shall be reconvened on 
September 7, 1993," that "[t]he jurisdiction of Commission to proceed is 
established as of July 9, 1993," and that "[t]he parties agree that the terms of 
this Stipulation satisfy the jurisdictional and other requirements of Education 
Code Section 44944." …….Even if we assume that the administrative 
agency's jurisdiction would end if no hearing was "commenced" within 60 
days of an employee's request for a hearing and if no continuance was 
granted (§ 44944, subd. (a)), the agency unquestionably had jurisdiction 
to commence the hearing "within 60 days from the date of the employee's 
demand for a hearing." (§ 44944, subd. (a).) Here, appellant made his 
request on May 14 and thus the hearing had to "be commenced" not later 
than July 13 ("within 60 days"). (§ 44944, subd. (a).) It commenced on 
July 9, within the 60 day period. It is true that no evidence was presented on 
July 9 and that appellant was not present on that date, but that is what he 
agreed to. The agreement was not an agreement to confer jurisdiction by 
consent, but rather was an agreement to exercise the jurisdiction which existed 
by virtue of section 44944. (emphasis added)  

 
There was no question in either the court’s mind or the minds of counsel that the 60 day 
period ran from the time the first demand for hearing was made, and not some point later in 
the proceedings.8   

 
Education Code section 44944 was enacted in 1976, with a complete reorganization 

of the Education Code.  The new section 44944 did not have any new provisions enacted, but 
was rather a reordering and restructuring of previous provisions. 
 
Derivation of current Education Code sections: 
 

The Education Code of 1959 was a reorganization of the entire code.  The Statutes of 

1959 (Chapter 2, from SB 2) created Article 5 – Resignation, Dismissal and Leaves of 
Absence (13401-13469, in single whole number increments): 

 
13403 covered grounds for dismissal. 
13404 was the filing of written charges to give notice of the intention to dismiss. 

                                                
8  In that case, trial was not completed until almost one year after the original notice of intent to dismiss was served. 

 

8 

13405 was the bar on giving notice between May 15th through September 15th of any 
year. 
13406 was the waiver of hearing. 
13410 covered the mailing of notice. 
13412 was the employee’s right to demand a hearing. 
13413 was the filing of a complaint.  The district could either rescind the notice or file 
a complaint within 30 days of the employee’s demand for a hearing. 
13414 was the employee’s answer or time to file a demurrer, due within 10 days of 
the service of the complaint. 
13415 was the procedure for demurrers. 
13416 was the setting for trial, after the answer to the complaint had been filed.   

 
After giving notice to dismiss, and an employee’s demand for hearing, the district could file 
a complaint within 30 days.  The employee had 10 days to respond.  After that, either party 
could, with 5 days’ notice to the other side, request that the matter be set for hearing. 
 
1959 Statutes: 
 

When any employee who has been served with notice of the governing 
board’s intention to dismiss him demands a hearing, the governing board shall 
have the option either (a) to rescind its action, or (b) to file a complaint in the 
superior court of the county in which the school district or the major part 
thereof is located, setting forth the charges against the employee and asking 
that the court inquire into the charges and determine if the charges are true, 
and if true, whether or not they constitute sufficient grounds for the dismissal 
of the employee, under the provisions of this code, and for judgment pursuant 
to its findings (former section 13412). 

If the board elects to file a complaint, the complaint shall be filed within 30 
days from the date of the employee’s demand for hearing.  If the complaint is 
not filed within such period the board’s action shall be deemed to be rescinded 
and all charges dismissed (former section 13413). 

The employee within 10 days after service upon him of the summons 

and a copy of the complaint may demur to the complaint or may file an 
answer, to which the governing board may demur.  If the employee fails to 
answer or demur within the 10-day period, or any extension thereof, made by 
stipulation or order of the court, his default shall be entered and judgment shall 
be entered by the court declaring the right of the governing board to dismiss 
the employee (former section 13414). 

Both the complaint and the answer shall be verified.  Demurrers to the 
complaint or answer may be upon any of the grounds specified in the Code of 
Civil Procedure for demurrer to a complaint or answer, and procedure on the 
demurrer shall be the same as in any civil proceeding (former section 13415). 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

When the employee has filed his answer to the complaint, either party 
may, upon five days’ notice to the other, move the court to set the matter for 
trial.  The proceeding shall be set for trial at the earliest possible date and shall 
take precedence over all other cases, except older matters of the same 
character and matters to which special precedence is given by law (former 
section 13416). 
 

Amendments: 
 

In 1971, Chapter 361 (AB 293, Stull & Ryan) section 13413 was repealed and added 

as part of John Stull’s Competent Teacher Protection Act.  It represented “the first major 
changes to our tenure procedures since their inception in 1931.” 9  Hearings were removed 
from Superior Court to OAH to reduce civil court congestion, delay, and expense.  The Stull 
Act provided, in part: 
 

. . . . [H]earing to be commenced within 60 days of the employee’s demand for 
hearing, according to the APA, and the Commission shall have all the power 
granted to an agency therein. 

In 1972, Chapter 1013 (AB 1153) modified only section 13413, reinserting the 

discovery provisions that had been applicable in superior court, even though the hearing 
itself was administrative.  This bill, authored by Assemblyman Maddy, was not connected to 
the Education Committee, but instead was reviewed only in the Judiciary Committees of the 
Assembly and Senate.  It was suggested by the California Teachers Association to “restore” 
the broad discovery rights for teachers as had been provided previous to the 1971 Stull bill.  
It added to the last sentence above, on the commission’s powers: 

 . . . except that the right of discovery of the parties shall not be limited to 
those matters set forth in Section 11507.6 of the Government Code but shall 
include the rights and duties of any party in a civil action brought in a superior 
court.  In all cases, discovery shall be completed prior to one week before the 
date set for hearing. 

In 1974, Chapter 856 (AB 4092, Berman) again modified only section 13413.  The 

Senate Committee on Education Staff Analysis indicated that the rights and duties of the 
parties are akin to a civil action.  The bill’s change provided that all of the remedies of 
section 2034 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be available when discovery is denied by 
either party and prohibits application of specified time limits so as to deny discovery rights. 
To enforce this prohibition, the bill authorized the superior court to suspend such hearings, 
upon motion of the party seeking discovery.  The bill added the following language, to the 
above: 

                                                
9  Speech to Professional Educators of Los Angeles, March 27, 1971, and added to the Assembly Education 
Committee files of AB 293. 

 

 

10 

If the right of discovery granted under the preceding paragraph is denied 
by either the employee or the governing board, all the remedies in Section 2034 
of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be available to the party seeking discovery 
and the court of proper jurisdiction, to entertain his motion, shall be the superior 
court of the county in which the hearing will be held. 

The time periods in this section and of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 
11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and of 
Article 3 (commencing with Section 2016) of Chapter 3 of Title 3 of Part 5 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure shall not be applied so as to deny discovery in a 
hearing conducted pursuant to this section. 

The superior court of the county in which the hearing will be held may, upon 
motion of the party seeking discovery, suspend the hearing so as to comply 
with the requirement of the preceding paragraph. 

In 1975, Chapter 1216 (SB 777, Stull & Greene) amended sections 13405, 13410, 

13413, 13485, and 13486, and repealed and added section 13487.  The intent of the bill was 
to modify the hearing procedure so that the hearing date would be established after 
consultation with the employee and the governing board or its representative, so that 
discovery would be completed 7 calendar days prior to the set hearing date, and that a 
continuance extends the statutory limit for commencement of the hearing (60 days) but the 
extension cannot include time attributable to an unlawful refusal by either party to allow 
discovery.   
 

In the enrolled bill memorandum to the Governor, Senator Stull noted that one of the 

principal amendments to the current law was that the notice of dismissal and statement of 
charges is required to be, in substance, an Accusation within the meaning of the APA, 
thereby guaranteeing employees that they woul be fully informed of the specific charges 
being made by the district.   
 

DISCUSSION 

 
The overriding intent of the statutory scheme, based on its language and its prior 
history, is to give a school district the right to quickly and unilaterally dismiss a teacher, 
while at the same time preserving the teacher’s right to a fast and fair hearing on the merits.  
That scheme would be frustrated if the 60-day period was considered to run from any point 
in time than other than the initial demand for hearing.  There is no time limit set forth in the 
Education Code as to when an Accusation must be filed.  If the 60 day period were to run 
only after the Accusation was filed and a Notice of Defense and Demand for Hearing was 
made, there would be no guarantee of this right to a speedy trial.  In fact, it would place in 
the hands of the school district, and not the teacher, the time frame in which the trial must be 
held.  A plain reading of the statute shows that it is the teacher who must demand a hearing 

 

 

11 

30 days after being served with a notice of intent to dismiss to avoid being summarily 
dismissed (Education Code section 44937).   

 
Once the demand for a hearing is made, the district then has the option of either 
rescinding its action, or scheduling a hearing (Education Code section 44943).  This section 
would make no sense if the statutes were to be construed as requiring a hearing 60 days from 
the filing of the Notice of Defense.  The teacher has already demanded a hearing; it is now 
up to the district to decide whether to rescind its notice or to go ahead with the proceedings.  
If it chooses the latter, it must then file an Accusation under Government Code Section 
11503 in order to schedule a hearing.  Reading this statute in any other manner would have 
the anomalous result of requiring the district to file an Accusation then, only after a Notice of 
Defense is filed, determine whether to proceed or not.  Surely the Legislature did not mean to 
further congest the OAH calendar by requiring meaningless filings.   

 
It is the teacher who is given the right to a trial within 60 days after demanding a 
hearing.  There is a de facto statute of limitations (4 years from the filing of the notice of 
intent to dismiss) which forms the time frame from which a teacher’s conduct may be 
examined.  The longer the start of the hearing is delayed, the longer both sides will find 
increased difficulty in providing evidence in support of their respective positions.  
Theoretically, given the District’s reading of the statutes, filing of the Accusation could be 
postponed indefinitely, a result clearly not intended by the Legislature.  The entire statutory 
scheme is one that is based on the need for a prompt resolution of the proceedings.  
Permitting the start of the hearing to be unilaterally delayed by the District (by delaying the 
filing of the Government Code Section 11503 Accusation) is totally contrary to the grant of 
the right to a prompt resolution of accusatory allegations. 

 
Also of note is the continued use of the word “demand” in the statutory scheme.  It is 

It is of no moment that the governing board of the District had not formally approved 

the demand for hearing which sets everything in motion and from which all rights spring.   
These rights, as noted above, accrue well before any pleadings are filed with OAH, including 
the right to rescind the notice of intent to dismiss.  Thus, the use of the word “demand” in 
Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a), can only mean the original demand for 
hearing. 
 
 
the Statement of Charges before they were served on Respondent.  It ratified the 
Superintendent’s conduct when, on August 24, 2010, it adopted her recommendation that 
Respondent should be dismissed based on the Statement of Charges the Superintendent filed 
with it, the same charges the Superintendent had served on Respondent on July 2, 2010.  
After its adoption of the Statement of Charges, the District gave none of the notices required 
by Education Code sections 44934 or 44944, because the Superintendent had already given 
those notices on July 2, 2010.  To uphold the notion that the governing board did not have to 
give the notices required by the Education Code, but rather was required only to give the 
notices required by the Administrative Procedure Act, would mean the procedures set forth 

 

12 

in the Administrative Procedure Act supersede the requirements of the Education Code, an 
outcome the Legislature clearly did not intend.10  
 

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ORDER is hereby made: 

 
 
Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss the Accusation is granted. 

 
 
Date:_______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
RALPH B. DASH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

                                                
10  At the hearing of this matter, counsel for the District conceded the APA did not supersede the provisions of the 
Education Code. 

 

13 

