BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

OAH No. 2011060543

LEE BLACKWELL,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION

On January 23, 2012, a Commission on Professional Competence heard this matter in
Los Angeles, California. The Commission included Michael A. Scarlett, Susan Mercer, and
Israel Avila.

Sandra J. Garcia, Attorney at Law, represented Complainant, Nancy Nichols-Nolasco,

Director of Human Resources, Lynwood Unified School District (District). Richard J.
Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent, Lee Blackwell (Respondent), a
permanent employee of the Lynwood Unified School District, who was present throughout
the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted for
Decision on January 23, 2012. The Commission on Professional Competence finds as
follows:

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Nancy Nichols-Nolasco, Director of Human Resources for the District, made

and filed Accusation and Statement of Charges, the First Amended Accusation, and the
Second Amended Accusation in her official capacity. The Commission proceeded on the
Second Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges.

2.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. His most

recent position with the District was as a Math and Geometry teacher at Lynwood High
School. He started teaching at the District in October 2005. Prior to his employment at the
District, Respondent was a substitute teacher at the Los Angeles Unified School district for
two years. Respondent also was employed as an engineer at General Dynamics, McDonnell
Douglas, Lockheed and General Electric for approximately 16 years before becoming a

1

teacher. Respondent has a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics and a Masters degree in
Math and Engineering.

3.

The Statement of Charges was filed on April 6, 2011, and recommended that

Respondent be suspended for a period of 20 days pursuant to Education Code sections
44932, subdivisions (a)(1)(immoral or unprofessional conduct).

4.

On April 6, 2011, the District provided Respondent a Notice of Disciplinary
Action providing Respondent a copy of the Statement of Charges and advising him that the
District intended to recommend to the District’s Governing Board that Respondent be
suspended for his alleged actions. On May 24, 2011, Respondent, through his attorney,
submitted a request for hearing, and denied the allegations contained in the Statement of
Charges.

5.

On June 9, 2011, the District issued its Accusation against Respondent
alleging that on November 1, 2010, after assisting a female student, L.Q., with a math
problem, Respondent “slapped L.Q. on her buttocks.” The District’s accusation alleged that
Respondent’s conduct evidenced unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(5). The District sought to suspend Respondent from his permanent
teaching position for a period of twenty (20) days. On June 15, 2011, Respondent submitted
his Notice of Defense. On January 10, 2012, the District issued its First Amended
Accusation with the same allegations against Respondent, but reducing the suspension
sought from twenty days to five days. On January 20, 2012, the District issued its Second
Amended Accusation again with the same allegations, but reducing the suspension sought
from five days to two days.

6.

All jurisdictional requirements have been met to proceed to hearing.

November 1, 2010 Incident

7.

On November 1, 2010, during Respondent’s third period Algebra class he was

reviewing math quizzes with his students. Respondent called each student to his desk in
front of the class to discuss their performance on the quizzes. Respondent called L.Q. to his
desk to discuss her last math quiz and to assist her with problems she had gotten wrong on
the quiz. L.Q. was seated in a chair next to Respondent’s desk. After concluding his review
session, L.Q. testified that she got up to return to her seat when Respondent “slapped” her on
the buttocks. L.Q. was stunned and turned and asked Respondent “Did you slap my ass?”
L.Q. stated that Respondent started laughing and said he was “joking” and that “I meant to
pinch it.” L.Q. did not see whether Respondent was looking at her when she felt the slap on
her buttocks. L.Q. returned to her seat and was “shocked” and “nervous” after the incident.

8.

Respondent stated that he inadvertently “patted” Respondent on her butt and
that his intent was to pat L.Q. on her back to congratulate her for improving her math grade.
According to Respondent, L.Q. had been having difficulty on past math examinations and

2

quizzes. L.Q. had also failed Algebra I with a different teacher and was retaking the class
with Respondent. Respondent was reviewing quizzes with L.Q. and going over some of the
problems. He was discussing L.Q.’s quiz grades while reviewing her past examinations on
his computer. Respondent testified that L.Q. had made significant improvement and that
when he completed his review with L.Q., he attempted to pat her on the back to give her
encouragement. L.Q. confirmed that Respondent told her that her grade had improved from
a “F” to a “C” when he was going over her quizzes. Respondent stated that because he was
still looking at the computer screen and making notes, he did not notice that L.Q. had stood
up from her chair and started to return to her desk. He stated that he “patted” her on her
buttocks inadvertently, while intending to give her a pat on the back. He was extremely
embarrassed after realizing what had occurred. Respondent testified that he apologized to
L.Q. after the incident, but his apology did not appear in a written statement he prepared a
few days later on November 4, 2010.

9.

After class, L.Q. went to the principal’s office to report the incident. She

stated that she was unable to enter the office because she did not have a “pass” to allow her
to be out of class. Later that day, during sixth period, L.Q. informed William Lee, the Dean
of Discipline/Security, that Respondent had had slapped her on the buttocks during his third
period class. Lee requested that L.Q. prepare a written statement, after which L.Q. submitted
a written “Complaint-Initial Report of Incident” form detailing her version of the incident.
L.Q.’s statement indicated that Respondent “slapped my ass” and that she asked him “did
you slap my ass? To that question L.Q. stated that Respondent said “I meant to pinch it.”
Mr. Lee notified the Assistant Principal of the school, Mrs. Wilson. L.Q.’s written statement
differs somewhat from her testimony at hearing in that she did not state in the written
statement that Respondent laughed and joked when he slapped or patted her on the buttocks.

10.

Thereafter, that same afternoon, Mr. Lee, Mrs. Wilson, L.Q., and B.A.,

another student believed to have witnessed the incident in Respondent’s third period class, all
met in Carlos Zaragoza’s office, the Principal of Lynwood High School. Mr. Zaragoza
interviewed both students about the incident. L.Q. essentially conveyed to Mr. Zaragoza the
same version of the incident she had told Lee, except that she told Mr. Zaragoza that when
she asked Respondent “did you slap me in the ass?” Respondent replied “My bad, I meant to
pinch you” (Emphasis added).

11.

B.A. told Mr. Zaragoza that she saw the incident but did not hear the verbal
exchange between Respondent and L.Q. However, in B.A.’s written statement provided to
Mr. Lee prior to her interview, B.A. stated that she saw Respondent “slapped her [L.Q.] ass,”
and L.Q. said “what the fuck.” B.A.’s written statement also indicated that Respondent said
“Oh my bad I meant to pinch you,” when replying to L.Q., suggesting that B.A. did hear the
verbal exchange between Respondent and L.Q. At hearing B.A. testified that she could not
hear Respondent’s discussion with L.Q. regarding her quiz, but she did hear the exchange
between L.Q. and Respondent after the incident. B.A. testified that Respondent told L.Q. “I
meant to pinch you,” which was slightly different from her recollection in her written
statement. B.A. also testified that when Respondent slapped L.Q. on the “butt,” he was not
looking at his computer. But B.A. recalled that Respondent was working on his
computer/laptop when he was reviewing each student’s quiz. B.A. testified that after the

3

incident several other students were saying “what the hell a teacher is not suppose to do
that,” suggesting that other students may have witnessed the incident. However, Mr.
Zaragoza’s incident report indicated that only one student, B.A., witnessed the incident.
B.A. was seated approximately five rows back from the front of the class where Respondent
was reviewing quizzes.

12.

The next day, on November 2, 2010, Mr. Zaragoza interviewed Respondent
about the incident. Respondent had not contacted Mr. Zaragoza about the incident prior to
their meeting the next day. Respondent told Zaragoza that he had “patted” L.Q. on the
buttocks, but stated that it was a “congratulatory pat” and not sexual in nature. He did not
recall whether he had made the comment “My bad I meant to pinch you” to L.Q, but stated
that he may have made the comment. Respondent testified at hearing that he told Principal
Zaragoza that he may have made a comment about “pinching baby fat.” In a written
statement about the incident prepared by Respondent on November 4, 2010, Respondent
attempted to clarify the circumstances surrounding the “pinching” comment. Respondent
initially believed he was being accused of pinching L.Q. as well as patting her buttocks. In
his written statement prepared two days later, Respondent denied pinching L.Q. and
suggested that the “pinching” comment or reference may have resulted when another student
who was sitting close to his desk made a comment about L.Q.’s buttocks size.

13.

It is not clear from the record whether the student’s purported remarks about
L.Q. were in response to the incident that occurred or whether the student was just teasing
L.Q. unrelated to the incident. According to Respondent’s written statement, Respondent
made a comment “maybe pinching baby fat and that she [L.Q.] should stop eating so much
junk food” in response to the student’s comment. Respondent testified that he made this
comment in an attempt to diffuse the situation, because L.Q. was already upset about his
patting her on the butt and the student was making a comment about the size of L.Q.’s butt.
Respondent stated that he believed L.Q. may have overheard him responding to the other
student’s comment and misinterpreted what he was saying. It is not clear why Respondent
believed his comment would have placated or diffused the situation and his explanation at
hearing was equally confusing. L.Q. testified that she did not hear another student making a
comment about her size, but that the other students were laughing after the incident occurred.

14.

There is no dispute that Respondent touched L.Q. on her buttocks and that

L.Q. was shocked, surprised and offended by Respondent’s actions. Respondent admitted he
“patted” L.Q.’s butt, but insisted that his action was inadvertent and intended to give L.Q. a
congratulatory pat on her shoulders for improving her math grade. Respondent credibly
testified that he was still looking at his computer screen when his discussion with L.Q.
concluded and that he did not see her stand up to go back to her desk. He thought L.Q. was
still seated when he attempted to pat on her back. L.Q. had her back to Respondent did not
see whether Respondent intentionally touched her buttocks. Understandably L.Q. was upset
and embarrassed. However, beyond these facts the evidence did not establish that
Respondent intentionally touched L.Q. in a sexually harassing manner.

15.

The only other witness to the incident, B.A., was not consistent in her

recollection of the events and exhibited some bias in her testimony towards Respondent. In

4

her written statement, B.A. said that she heard L.Q. say “what the fuck” after being touched
on the buttocks by Respondent. However, this statement is not consistent with L.Q.’s own
testimony that L.Q. said “did you slap my ass?” after being touched b Respondent. B.A.’s
recollection of what Respondent said to L.Q. was also exactly what was reported by L.Q. as
Respondent’s statement after the incident. Further B.A. told Mr. Zaragoza that she did not
hear the verbal exchange between Respondent and L.Q. when interviewed by Zaragoza.
B.A. testified that she actually saw Respondent “slap” L.Q.’s buttocks and that he was not
looking at the computer when the incident occurred. B.A. was seated at least five rows back
from the front of the class and was apparently far enough away that she either could not hear
the verbal exchange between L.Q. and Respondent or she was unable to hear the exchange
clearly. Again, L.Q. confirmed that Respondent was working on his computer when
reviewing quizzes with the students, including L.Q.

16.

Another example of B.A.’s inconsistent recollection was her testimony that the

students in the class were saying “what the hell a teacher is not supposed to do that”,
referring to Respondent’s touching of L.Q.’s buttocks. However, no other student in
Respondent’s classroom came forward to state that they witnessed this incident and L.Q.
testified that she did not hear any comments made by other students, only recalling that the
students were “laughing.” Additionally, Respondent was reviewing each student’s quiz and
grades individually, calling the students to the front one at a time. While working
individually with each student at the front of the class, the other students conceivably were
not focused on Respondent and engaged in other activities. This would explain why no other
student witnessed the incident. It is more likely that B.A. was distracted and engaged in
other activities as well when this incident occurred, which may also explain her inconsistent
recollection of the incident.

17.

B.A.’s unequivocal testimony that Respondent intentionally “slapped” L.Q.’s

buttocks is not convincing given B.A.’s inconsistencies in her recollection of the events.
Additionally, B.A.’s testimony evidenced bias towards Respondent. She testified that she
had observed inappropriate conduct by Respondent with other students, such as calling them
“bitches, stupid, and dumb asses.” However, B.A. never reported such incidents and there is
no other evidence in the record to support these assertions. Respondent denied ever making
such comments about other students. B.A. and L.Q. were admittedly school friends and
B.A.’s attempt to help or support L.Q. appears to have influenced B.A.’s testimony.

18.

Respondent’s testimony was credible, although his explanation and

recollection of the “pinching” comment was tortured and confusing. Respondent initially
stated to Principal Zaragoza that he did not recall making the comment, but then attempted to
explain or give context to his comment by suggesting L.Q. misheard or misinterpreted a
statement he was making to another student. The obvious problem with Respondent’s
explanation of course is that he should not have been making any reference, or responding to
any statement by another student about the size of L.Q.’s butt. His assertion that this was an
attempt to diffuse the situation was not convincing. But given the circumstances surrounding
the incident, i.e., Respondent’s inadvertent touching of a female student’s buttocks, it is not
inconceivable that during his very embarrassing realization that he had inadvertently touched

5

the student, Respondent was unable to clearly recall what was actually said in the seconds
after the incident.

19.

All other aspects of Respondent’s testimony were corroborated and credible.

He was reviewing quizzes and grades with L.Q. and expressed to her that her grade had
improved. He was working on his computer while reviewing L.Q.’s past quizzes and grades.
Respondent credibly testified that his intent was to give L.Q. a “congratulatory pat” on her
back while she remain seated in the chair next to his desk. However, unbeknownst to
Respondent due to his attention being on his computer screen, L.Q. had stood up to return to
her desk as they were finishing the review session. Respondent’s inadvertent touching of
L.Q.’s but was neither intended nor sexual in nature. There is no evidence that Respondent
has ever made any inappropriate statements or unwelcomed overtures of a sexual nature
towards to L.Q. or any other student. Given the absence of credible and persuasive evidence
to the contrary, Respondent’s conduct as established by the preponderance of the evidence,
does not support imposition of discipline, i.e., suspension by the District.

20.

Finally, there are no prior or current allegations of unprofessional or immoral
conduct by Respondent cited by the District. Respondent’s teacher evaluations indicate that
he has met or exceeded District standards and there apparently have been no prior student or
parent complainant regarding his instruction and conduct, and the District has not sought
prior disciplinary action against Respondent. By all accounts Respondent has been a
responsible, conscientious, competent teacher who enjoys teaching students and appears to
be well qualified to perform his duties.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Burden and Standard of Proof

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of
the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d
1035, 1039-1040.) Proof by a preponderance of the evidence requires a showing that it is
more likely than not to be true. In other words, the evidence is more convincing than that
which is offered in opposition. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009)
171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal
hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) When a school board recommends
dismissal for cause, a Commission on Professional Competence may only vote for or against
the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing
probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).) The
Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final decision of the district’s governing board.
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.) A
Commission has broad discretion to determine the issues before it, including whether
dismissal is the appropriate sanction. (Ibid., at p. 343.)

6

3.

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) provides the District may
suspend or dismiss a permanent employee for “evident unfitness for service.” Education
Code sections 200, 201, and 230 prohibit sexual harassment by a District employee.

4.

“Evident unfitness for service” is not synonymous with “unprofessional

conduct,” and the term means clearly not fit for teaching, ordinarily by reason of
temperamental defects or inadequacies; it connotes fixed character trait, presumably not
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet expectations of the
school district. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Evident unfitness” includes in its
definition “unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or
inadequacies.” To terminate the teacher on grounds of immoral conduct, unprofessional
conduct, or evident unfitness for service, it must also be established that the conduct renders
the teacher unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-
230.) Thus a determination of evident unfitness requires an analysis based on criteria set
forth in Morrison.1 In reaching a conclusion that grounds exist to dismiss a certificated
employee on the basis of evident unfitness for service, not all Morrison factors need be
examined, only the pertinent ones. (Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369,
384.)

Evident Unfitness for Service

5.

The District did not establish the existence of a fixed character defect or a

temperamental inadequacy. The single inadvertent incident that occurred on November 1,
2010, does not establish Respondent’s evident unfitness, as defined by the statute and
applicable case law, including under the factors established in Morrison. Respondent
credibly testified that he mistakenly and inadvertently patted or touched L.Q. on the buttocks
when he was attempting to give her a congratulatory pat on the back for improving her grade
in his Algebra I class. The investigation of the incident by the Mr. Zaragoza, the Principal at
Lynwood High School, revealed that L.Q. did not actually see Respondent when the incident
occurred and only one other student in the entire class purportedly witnessed Respondent
intentionally “slapping” L.Q.on the buttocks. However, B.A.’s testimony was found to be
inconsistent and biased. Respondent’s untended inadvertent touching of the female student,
although unfortunate, does not rise to the level of sexual harassment or evident unfitness for
service as alleged by the District. To the contrary, the evidence showed that Respondent was

1 In Morrison, the Supreme Court of California held that the determination of whether
a person is fit to teach must be based on an objective and analytical approach, consisting of a
review of the teacher’s conduct and an assessment of a variety of specific factors including:
(1) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the presence of extenuating or
aggravating circumstances; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) the likelihood that
the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (5) the disruption of the education
process; (6) the motive underlying the conduct; and (7) the proximity or remoteness in time
of the conduct.

7

a responsible, conscientious, and competent teacher. Based upon the totality of the evidence
offered at hearing, the Commission unanimously concludes that the District failed to show by
a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent evidently unfit to serve as a certificated
teacher with the District.

7.

Accordingly, cause does not exists pursuant to Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a)(5), to suspend Respondent from his permanent teacher position with the
District for a period of two days, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 20, and Legal
Conclusions 1 through 6.

ORDER

The determination of the Governing Board of the Lynwood Unified School District

seeking to suspend Respondent Lee Blackwell for two days pursuant to Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(5) is not upheld. Accordingly, the Second Amended Accusation and
Statement of Charges are hereby dismissed.

DATED: May 18, 2012

DATED: ___________

DATED: ___________

_____________________________
MICHAEL A. SCARLETT
Administrative Law Judge,
Office of Administrative Hearings,

_____________________________
SUSAN MERCER
Commission Member

_____________________________
ISRAEL AVILA
Commission Member

8

