APR-10-2013  WED  02:15  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

01/19 

— 

BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
SAN  FRANCISCO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
CITY  AND  COUNTY  OF  SAN  FRANCISCO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

MICHAEL  8.  JUNCKER,  a  certificated 
‘ 
teacher, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2011061199 

DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  David  L.  Benjamin  served  as  the  chairperson  of  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Patricia  Hlinka  and  Tom  Rust  served  as  members 
of  the  commission.  The  matter  was  heard  in  Oakland,  California,  on  August  23-26,  29-31, 
September  1-2,  and  October  17-18,  2011, 

Laura  J.  Schulkind  and  Alison  C.  Neufeld,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Liebert  Cassidy 
Whitmore,  represented  complainant  Roger  Buschmann,  Chief  Administrative  Officer  of  the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District. 

Peder  J.  V.  Thoreen,  Attorney  at  Law,  Altshuler  Berzon  LLP,  represented  respondent 

Michael  §,  Juncker,  who  was  present. 

The  record  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  October  18,  2011. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1, 

On  April  27,  2011,  complainant  Roger  Buschmann,  Chief  Administrative 

Officer  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  (SFUSD),  issued  a  statement  of  charges 
against  Michael  S,  Juncker  (respondent),  a  certificated  employee  of  the  district.  On  June  9, 
2011,  complainant  issued  an  accusation  against  respondent.  Respondent  filed  a  notice  of 
defense.  On  or  about  August  15,  2011,  complainant  issued  a  first  amended  accusation  and, 
on  August  25,  2011,  he  issued  a  second  amended  accusation.  The  second  amended 
accusation’  was  withdrawn  at  hearing  and  the  matter  was  heard  on  the  first  amended 
accusation.

APR-10-2013  WED  02:15  PM 

FAK  NO, 

P, 

02/19 

C 

eee! 

. 

The  first  amended  accusation  alleges  that  there  is  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  based 
on  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  persistent  violation  of,  or 
refusal  to  obey,  school  laws  and  regulations,  With  respect  to  dishonesty,  the  accusation 
alleges  that  respondent  was  dishonest  on  his  application  to  the  district  concerning  his 
criminal  and  employment  history;  that  he  was  dishonest  on  his  application  to  the  California 
Commtission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  concerning  his  criminal  history;  and  that  he  was 
dishonest  with  CAO  Buschmann  concerning  a  domestic  violence  incident  that  occurred  in 
July  2010,  The  allegations  of  evident  unfitness  and  persistent  violations  of  laws  and 
regulations  concem  respondent's  conduct  in  the  classroom,  where  it  is  alleged  that  he  yelled 
at  students  and  improperly  used  physical  contact  with  students  to  manage  their  behavior. 
The  accusation  does  not  expressly  identify  the  alleged  conduct  that  complainant  believes  is 
immoral. 

Respondent's  professional  background 

2, 

Respondent  is 

a  37-year-old  elementary  school  teacher.  He  received  his 

undergraduate  degree  from  Youngstown  State  University  in  Ohio  in  1996,  and  a  master’s 
degree  in  early  childhood  education  from  the  same  institution  in  2001.  Respondent  began  his 
teaching  career  in  a  parochial  school  in  Ohio,  where  he  taught  fifth  grade  from  1996  to  1998. 
He  was  also  a  fifth  prade  teacher  for  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools,  a  public  school  district 
in  Geneva,  Ohio,  from  1998  to  March  2003.  Respondent  then  taught  fifth  grade  from  July 
2003  to  June  2006  in  North  Carolina.  He  was  hired  by  SFUSD  for  the  2006-2007  school 
year  as  a  second  grade  teacher  at  Drew  Elementary  School.  Respondent  later  transferred  to 
Garfield  Elementary  School,  where  he  taught  first  grade  until  he  was  placed  on  leave  on 
October  13,  2010.  He  has  not  returned  to  the  classroom  since  then. 

Respondent's  criminal  and  employment  history 

3. 

On  October  19,  2001,  in  Ashtabula  Municipal  Court  in  the  State  of  Ohio, 
respondent  was  convicted  on  his  plea  of  no  contest  of  a  violation  of  Ohio  Revised  Code 
section  2917.11,  subdivision  (A)(3)  (disorderly  conduct). 

4, 

The  facts  and  circumstances  leading  to  this  conviction  are  that,  on  numerous 
occasions  while  commuting  to  work  in  Geneva,  respondent  would  pull  up  next  to  cars  with 
male  drivers  and  no  passengers  and  solicit  sexual  encounters.  Respondent  had  a  one-hour 
commiute  from  his  home  to  Geneva  along  infrequently-traveled  rural  roads.  Using  the 
passing  lane,  respondent  would  pull  up  next  to  the  other  vehicle  and  try  to  make  eye  contact 
with  the  driver.  Ifthe  other  driver  sped  up  or  slowed  down,  respondent  would  do  the  same; 
he  would  stay  with  the  other  car  for  as  little  as  two  minutes  or  as  long  as  one-half  hour.  If 
respondent  felt  that  the  other  driver  was  interested  in  his  advances,  he  would  make  gestures 
simulating  sex  acts  to  make  his  intentions  clear.  On  occasion,  respondent  and  the  other 
driver  would  pull  over  and  have  a  sexual  encounter.  Respondent's  conviction  followed 
numerous  complaints  to  the  Ohio  State  Highway  Patrol  by  other  drivers.  An  Ohio  state 
trooper  warned  respondent  three  times  to  stop  his  driving  behavior,  which  other  drivers 
found  threatening  and  intimidating,  but  respondent  did  not  change  his  behavior.

APR-10-2013  WED  02:16  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

03/19 

5. 

On  January  29,  2002,  a  criminal  complaint  was  issued  against  respondent  for 

the  crime  of  “aggravated  menacing.”  The  complaint  alleged  that,  since  his  conviction  in 
October  2001,  respondent  had  harassed  another  driver.  In  January  2002,  law  enforcement 
officers  wert  to  the  school  where  respondent  was  teaching  and  arrested  him, 

6. 

After  respondent’s  arrest,  the  superintendent  removed  him  from  the  classroom 
and  placed  him  on  home  assignment;  the  superintendent’s  notice  to  respondent  informed  him 
that  he  was  being  reassigned  “pending  disposition  of  charges,”  which  respondent  understood 
to  mean  the  criminal  charges  against  him.  Respondent  was  informed  by  the  superintendent 
that  the  reassignment  was  not  disciplinary  in  nature,  During  the  time  that  he  was  on  home 
assignment,  from  January  2002  to  March  2003,  respondent  did  not  teach, 

7, 

Respondent’s  criminal  prosecutions  were  the  subject  of  extensive  print  and 

radio  publicity  in  Ashtabula  County.  Newspaper  articles  noted  respondent’s  status  as  a 
public  school  teacher  with  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools.’  Two  radio  stations  made  public 
service  announcements  which  described  respondent  and  his  vehicle,  and  urged  members  of 
the  public  to  contact  law  enforcement  officers  if  they  saw  him.  For  respondent,  who  had 
himself  attended  school  in  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools  District,  and  who  had  family 
members  who  worked  for  the  district,  it  was  a  time  of  public  humiliation. 

&. 

On  September  3,  2002,  in  Ashtabula  County  Court,  State  of  Ohio,  respondent 

was  convicted  upon  his  plea  of  no  contest  of  a  violation  of  Ohio  Revised  Code  section 
4511.20  (reckless  operation  of  a  motor  vehicle),  a  misdemeanor,  with  a  panalty  enhancement 
because  it  was  the  second  such  offense  within  one  year.  Respondent  was  placed  on 
supervised  probation  for  two  years  on  conditions  that  he  serve  30  days  in  jail,  with  28  days 
suspended;  pay  a  fine  of  $250,  costs  and  other  fees;  continue  counseling  and  prescribed 
medications;  and  perform  40  hours  of  community  service. 

9, 

On  December  31,  2002,  respondent  signed  a  separation  agreement  with  the 
Geneva  Area  City  Schools  in  which  he  agreed  to  resign  effective  March  4,  2003,  and  the 
district  agreed  to  pay  him  his  salary  and  benefits  through  the  end  of  the  school  year. 
Respondent  submitted  his  resignation  on  December  31,  and  the  district  then  approved  the 
separation  agreement,  The  Geneva  Area  City  Schools  never  brought  formal  disciplinary 
charges  against  respondent. 

Respondent's  application  to  SFUSD 

On  July  12,  2006,  respondent  signed  and  electronically  submitted  an 

employment  application  to  SFUSD.  By  signing  the  application,  respondent  certified  that 

10. 

'  The  newspapers  characterized  respondent’s  cases  as  “road  tage”  incidents  in  which 
respondent  threatened  other  drivers  with  obscene  gestures;  the  articles  were  silent  concerning 
respondent’s  solicitation  of  sex,

APR-10-2013  WED  02:16  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

04/19 

I  have  made  true,  correct  and  complete  answers  and  statements 
on  this  application  in  the  knowledge  that  they  may  be  relied 
upon  in  considering  my  application,  and  I  understand  that  any 
omission  or  falsely  answered  statement  by  me  on  this 
application  ...  will  be  sufficient  grounds  for  failure  to  employ 
or  for  my  discharge  should  I  become  employed  with  the  school 
district.... 

11. 

Question  1  on  the  application  under  the  heading  “Legal  Information”  asks: 

Have  you  even  been  convicted  of  a  felony  or  misdemeanor,  or 
do  you  currently  have  a  felony  or  misdemeanor  charge  pending? 
Convictions  include  a  plea  of  guilty,  nolo  contendere  (no 
contest)  and/or  a  finding  of  guilty  by  a  judge  or  ajury.  (Note: 
Exclude  convictions  for  marijuana-related  offenses  for  [sic] 
more  than  two  years  old.)  {Original  emphasis.] 

Respondent  answered  “yes.”  The  application  directs  applicants  to  explain  all  “yes”  answers. 
Respondent  wrote: 

Disorderly  Conduct  —  About  five  years  ago.  I  was  driving  to 
[sic]  close  to  other  cars  and  the  other  driver  accused  me  of  an 
obsense  jesture  [sic]. 
how  other  drivers  might  feel  about  my  driving  so  I  entered  a 
plea  of  no  contest.  I’m  now  much  more  aware  of  other  drivers 
[sie]  needs. 

I  was  following  too  close  and  not  aware  of 

12. 

Respondent’s  explanation  is  misleading  and  false.  His  explanation  states,  in 
essence,  that  he  was  an  inconsiderate  driver.  What  it  does  not  state  is  that  the  conduct  that 
led  to  his  conviction  was  predatory,  intimidating  and  dangerous,  or  that  he  purposely 
engaged  in  that  conduct  to  solicit  sex.  Respondent’s  explanation  assures  the  district  that  he 
corrected  his  behavior  after  his  conviction,  which  is  not  true. 

13. 

Respondent  reviewed  his  answer  to  question  1  at  hearing  and  testified  that  he 

believes  what  he  wrote  is  true, 

14. 

Onhis  application,  respondent  did  not  disclose  his  September  2002  conviction 

for  reckless  operation  of  a  motor  vehicle. 

15. 

The  application  has  a  section  entitled  “Record  of  Work  Experience,”  in  which 

the  applicant  is  asked  to  give  detailed  information  about  his  or  her  past  employment. 
Respondent  wrote  that  from  August  1,  1998,  to  March  1,  2003,  he  worked  for  the  Geneva 
Area  City  Schools  and  that  his  “Reason  For  Leaving”  was  “Moved  to  North  Carolina.”

APR-10-2013  WED  02:16  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

06/19 

16. 

Respondent's  explanation  is  false  and  misleading.  It  is  true  that,  after 

resigning  from  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools,  respondent  moved  to  North  Carolina  where 
his  wife  was  then  working.  It  is  not  true,  however,  that  respondent's  reason  for  leaving  his 
employment  was  to  move  to  North  Carolina.  Respondent  left  Geneva  Area  City  Schools 
after  he  had  been  removed  from  the  classroom,  suffered  a  second  criminal  conviction,  and 
exposed  himself  and  the  district  to  extensive  negative  publicity  that  made  his  continued 
employment  as  a  fifth  grade  teacher  untenable.  There  is  no  evidence  that,  when  the 
2002-2003  school  year  began,  respondent  intended  to  leave  mid-year  and  move  to  North 
Carolina. 

17. 

At  hearing,  respondent  reviewed  his  answer  and  testified  that  he  believes  what 

he  wrote  is  “absolutely  true.” 

18. 

The  application  asks,  “Have  you  ever  been  dismissed,  retired,  resigned  from, 
non-re-elected  [sic],  suspended  withouth  [sic]  pay,  or  otherwise  left  employment  because  of 
allegations  of  misconduct  or  while  allegations  of  misconduct  were  pending?”  Applicant 
answered  “no,” 

19, 

 Respondent’s  answer  is  false.  Respondent  resigned  from  the  Geneva  Area 

City  Schools  pursuant  to  a  separation  agreement  because  of  the  allegations  of  criminal 
misconduct  that  were  brought  against  him  January  2002,  and  his  subsequent  criminal 
conviction  in  September  2002.  The  evidence  does  not  establish  any  other  reason  for 
respondent's  resignation  in  December  2002.  Respondent  testified  that  he  answered  “no”  to 
the  question  because,  when  he  chose  to  resign  in  December  2002,  there  were  no  district 
allegations  of  misconduct  against  him.  The  question,  however,  is  broader  than  the  narrow 
meaning  that  respondent  gives  it. 
of  misconduct,  and  it  is  plain  that  respondent  did  so. 

It  asks  whether  he  left  employment  because  of  allegations 

20. 

Under  the  heading  “Credential  Information,”  the  SFUSD  application  asks  the 

applicant  to  state  his  or  her  “Total  years  of  professional  experience  in  your  credential  or 
license.”  Respondent  answered,  “Ten.”  Respondent’s  answer  is  false  as  it  included 
approximately  14  months  at  Geneva  Area  City  Schools  when  he  had  been  removed  from  the 
classroom  and  placed  on  home  assignment. 

21, 

Angie  Sagastume  is  the  Executive  Director  of  Certificated  Recruitment  and 
Staffing  for  SFUSD.  She  has  held  that  position  for  15  years.  Sagastume  testified  that  if 
respondent  had  accurately  disclosed  the  circumstances  leading  to  his  first  conviction,  he 
would  not  have  advanced  to  the  eligibility  list  because  the  facts  leading  to  the  conviction 
show  reckless  behavior  and  a  lack  of judgment.  She  testified  further  that  if  respondent  had 
accurately  disclosed  the  circumstances  under  which  his  employment  with  Geneva  Area  City 
Schools  ended,  his  application  would  not  have  been  advanced  to  the  eligibility  list.  The 
district  enjoys  a  robust  pool  of  qualified  applicants,  and  it  would  not  have  moved  forward  the 
application  of  someone  who  left  employment  because  of  allegations  of  misconduct, 
Sagastume’s  testimony  on  these  points  was  uncontradicted  and  persuasive.

APR-10-2013  WED  02:16  PM 

FAX  NO. 

P, 

06/19 

i 
| 

- 

. 

C 
“me! 

22, 

Respondent  argues  that  none  of  the  false  statements  he  made  in  his 

employment  application  can  be  used  to  discipline  him  because  he  filed  his  application  more 
than  four  years  before  the  district  filed  its  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss  him,  and  therefore  the 
application  is  time-barred  by  Education  Code  section  44944. 
tespondent’s  dishonest  answers  on  his  application  preclude  him  from  relying  on  section 
44944.  As  explained  in  Legal  Conclusions  2-4,  resolution  of  this  legal  issue  turns  on 
whether  the  district  was  ignorant  of  the  true  facts  at  the  time  it  hired  respondent. 

The  district  asserts  that 

23. 

As  to  resporident’s  failure  to  disclose  his  September  2002  conviction,  the 

district  failed  to  establish  that  it  was  unaware  of  that  conviction  when  it  hired  him.  Before 
respondent  was  hired,  the  district  requested  a  criminal  background  check  of  respondent 
through  Live  $can  Service,  and  it  received  a  Live  Sean  report.  The  results  of  that  report, 
however,  are  not  known;  district  does  not  retain  the  Live  Scan  reports  (it  is  not  allowed  to), 
and  Sagastume  has  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  the  report.  Sagastume  testified 
that  it  is  the  district’s  practice  to  compare  the  Live  Scan  results  with  the  matters  stated  on  the 
application.  If  the  district  discovers  that  the  applicant  has  a  criminal  conviction  that  he  or 
she  did  not  report,  the  applicant  is  automatically  disqualified  as  the  district  considers 
non-disclosure  to  be  falsification.  In  this  case,  however,  Sagastume  does  not  know  what  the 
Live  Scan  report  said,  and  does  not  know  whether  district  employees  followed  the  practice  of 
comparing  the  report  to  respondent’s  application.  The  district  failed  to  show  that  it  was 
unaware  of  respondent’s  second  criminal  conviction  when  it  hired  him. 

24, 

As  to  the  remaining  false  and  misleading  statements  on  respondent's 

application,  the  evidence  established  that  the  district  was  unaware  of  the  circumstances 
leading  to  respondent's  first  conviction  and  unaware  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
respondent  left  employment  with  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools.  The  district  did  not 
investigate  those  matters  and  did  not  learn  of  them  until  after  it  placed  respondent  on  leave  in 
October  2010.  The  district  relies  on  applicants  to  respond  truthfully  and  accurately  to  the 
questions  on  the  employment  application.  In  2006,  the  district  received  about  1,000 
applications.  The  district  does  not  have  the  resources  to  investigate  the  truth  of  all  the 
statements  made  by  an  applicant  on  his  or  her  application. 

Respondent's  application  to  CTC 

25. 

On  January  2.9,  2010,  respondent  signed  an  application  to  the  California 

Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC)  for  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  with 
CLAD.  By  signing  the  application,  respondent  certified  under  penalty  of  perjury  that  all  of 
the  statements  in  the  application  are  true  and  correct. 

26. 

Question  3  on  the  application  asks  “Professional  Fitness  Questions.”  The 

applicant  is  instructed  that  ifhe  or  she  answers  “yes”  to  any  question,  “a  full  explanation  is 
required  ....  You  must  disclose  all  criminal  convictions  (misdemeanors  and/or felonies) 
including  convictions  based  on  a  plea  of  no  contest.  You  must  disclose  a  conviction  no 
matter  how  much  time  has  passed  even  if  the  case  has  been  dismissed  pursuant  to  Penal  Code 
Section  1203.4.  You  may  omit  misdemeanor  marijuana-related  convictions  that  occurred

APR-10-2013  WED  02:17  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

07/19 

more  than  two  years  prior  to  this  application...  . 
information  requested  is  considered  falsification  of  your  application  and  is  grounds  for  denial 
of  your  application  and/or  disciplinary  action  against  your  credential.” 

[4]  Warning:  Failure  to  disclose  any 

27, 

Question  3b  asks, 

Have  you  ever  been  convicted,  including  a  conviction  based  on 
a  plea  of  no  contest,  of  any  felony  or  misdemeanor  in  California 
or  any  other  place?  You  must  disclose  your  conviction  even  if 
the  case  was  dismissed  pursuant  to  Penal  Code  Section  1203.4, 
You  may  omit  misdemeanor  marijuana-related  convictions  .... 
[{]  Ifthe  answer  is  yes,  you  must  submit  a  full  explanation.... 

Respondent  answered  “yes,”  and  submitted  the  following  explanation: 

With  regret  and  remorse,  I  start  my  explanation  of  my  bad 
driving  habit  that  led  to  a  plea  of  no  contest  and  conviction  of a 
misdemeanor  [sic]:  Disorderly  Conduct  on  October  29,  2001, 

Every  day  J  made  a  two  hour  round  trip  commute  to  work.  The 
highway  that  I  traveled  was  very  rural  and  traffic  was  light. 
developed  a  habit  of  driving  next  to  or  just  behind  any  of  the 
sparse  vehicles  that  I  would  encounter.  I  had  a  problem 
controlling  my  speed  so,  |  thought  staying  with  the  other 
vehicles  would  help  me  avoid  speeding  tickets  and  stay  alert. 

I 

Afier  doing,  so  for  several  months  the  highway  patrol  had 
received  some  complaints.  They  decided  on  October  17th  to 
cite  me  with  a  disorderly  conduct.  I  quickly  came  to  the 
realization  that  the  other  drivers  may  have  perceived  my  driving 
as  dangerous  and  I  plead  [sc]  no  contest  in  court  on  October 
29th.  I  was  accused  of  obscene  gestures  so  my  legal  adviser 
said  to  plead  no  contest.  I  agreed  to  poor  driving  but  not  to 
making  obscene  gestures,  My  intent  was  never  anger,  just  daily 
travel, 

After  months  of  driving  this  way  there  were  many  complaints 
brought  to  my  attention  and  I  quickly  resolved  to  become  a 
more  carefiil,  courteous,  and  alert  driver.  As  embarrassing  as 
this  mistake  was,  having  to  list  it  on  all  my  applications  for  the 
rest  of  my  life  reminds  me  to  be  as  professional  and  perceptive 
in  my  vehicle  as  1  am  in  my  classroom. 

28, 

Respondent’s  explanation  of  the  circumstances  leading  to  his  October  2001 

conviction  is  misleading  and  false,  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Finding  12.

APR-10-2013  WED  02:17  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

08/19 

c 

C 

ae 

29, 

At  hearing,  respondent  reviewed  his  answer  to  question  3b  and  testified  that  it 

is  “an  accurate  statement  of  the  events  leading  to  my  conviction,” 

30. 

On  his  application  to  CTC,  respondent  did  not  disclose  his  September  2002 

conviction  for  reckless  operation  of  a  motor  vehicle. 

31. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  understood  CTC  would  do  a  full  background 
investigation,  and  no  one  from  CTC  ever  told  him  that  his  application  was  incomplete. 

32. 

Respondent  also  testified  that  he  did  not  disclose  his  second  conviction  to  CTC 

because  he  thought  it  was  a  traffic  violation,  or  perhaps  an  infraction,  not  a  misdemeanor. 
Respondent’s  explanation  is  not  persuasive.  The  application  form  does  not  state  that  “traffic 
violations”  need  not  be  disclosed,  Respondent  disclosed  his  first  conviction,  even  though  the 
circumstances  leading  to  that  conviction  were  the  same  as  the  circumstances  leading  to  his 
second  conviction.  Having  falsely  informed  the  CTC that, after  his  first  conviction,  he 
“quickly  resolved  to  become  a  more  careful,  courteous,  and  alert  driver,”  respondent  could 
not  acknowledge  that  he  suffered  a  second  conviction  for  the  same  conduct  a  year  later, 
Respondent's  failure  to  disclose  his  second  conviction  was  intentional, 

Domestic  violence  incident  in  July  2010 

33. 

On  July  10,  2010,  respondent  had  an  argument  with  his  roommate  at  the  time, 

Jonathan  Silvaggio.  Respondent  and  Silvaggio  were  in  the  apartment  they  shared in  San 
Francisco  when  Silvaggio  accused  respondent  of  stealing  Ativan  pills  from  him.  Angry 
words  were  exchanged.  Silvaggio  went  out  to  the  patio  and  sat  down,  and  respondent 
followed  and  stepped  on  Silvaggio’s  foot.  The  two  of  them  exchanged  punches.  According 
to  Silvaggio,  respondent  grabbed  the  three-pronged  metal  burner  from  the  barbeque  and  hit 
him  on  the  head  with  it;  respondent  claims  that  they  fell  over  and  Silvaggio  hit  his  head  on 
the  burner.  They  separated  and  respondent  went  into  the  kitchen.  Silvaggio  became  fearful 
that  respondent  was  seeking  a  weapon,  left  the  apartment  and  called  911,  The  police  officer 
who  responded  noted  that § jilvaggio  was  bleeding  from  a  wound  to  the  head  that  looked  like 
a “gouge.” Respondent  was  arrested.  Silvaggio  obtained  a  temporary  restraining  order 
against  respondent. 

34. 

Notice  of  respondent’s  arrest  was  sent  to  SFUSD.  On  August  13,  2010, 

district  CAO  Buschmann  called  respondent  to  find  out  about  the  circumstances  of  his  arrest. 
Respondent  told  Buschmann  that  he  had  gotten  into  a  “scuffle”  with  his  roommate. 
Buschmann  asked  him  if  there  was  a  weapon  involved,  and  respondent  said  “no.” 

35. 

On  August  6,  2010,  respondent  appeared  in  court,  represented  by  counsel,  to 
oppose  Silvaggio’s  “Request  for  Orders  to  Stop  Harassment.”  Two  days  before  the  hearing, 
of  August  4,  respondent  filed  with  the  court  a  declaration  in  opposition  to  Silvaggio’s 
request.  In  his  declaration,  which  he  signed  under  penalty  of  perjury,  respondent  stated:

APR-10-2013  WED  02:17  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

09/19 

Based  on  what  I  know  of  the  Plaintiff  and  his  history,  I  believe 
he  is  unstable  and  has  a  pattern  of  turning  himself  into  a  victim 
whenever  he  is  attacked,  I  deny  the  allegations  made  by  the 
Plaintiff  and  wish  the  court  to  know  that  I  have  no  history  of 
violence  or  any  sort  of  criminal  record. 

Respondent’s  declaration  that  he  has  no  criminal  record  is  false. 

36. 

Asked  at  hearing  to  review  this  portion  of  his  declaration,  respondent  initially 

stated,  “This  is  true.”  Later  in  his  testimony,  respondent  stated  that  he  did  not  draft  the 
declaration  and  that  he  signed  it  without  reading  it. 

37. 

 Itis  determined  that  Silvaggio’s  account  of  the  event  is  more  persuasive  than 

respondent's.  Silvaggio  has  no  motive  to  lie,  and  the  wound  observed  by  the  responding 
police  officer  is  consistent  with  the blow  Silvaggio  described.  Respondent’s  credibility,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  poor.  Hle  was  not  truthful  on  his  application  to  SFUSD,  on  his  credential 
application  to  CTC,  or  in  his  August  4,  2010  declaration  to  the  court.  It  is  concluded, 
therefore,  that  respondent  was  not  truthful  with  CAO  Buschmann,  when  he  assured 
Buschmann  that  there  was  no  weapon  inyolved  in  his  fight  with  Silvaggio. 

Yelling  at  students 

38. 

Ina  memorandum  to  respondent  on  November  10,  2009,  Karen  Law,  at  that 

time  the  principal  of  Garfield  Elementary  School,  informed  respondent  that  she  had  received 
a  complaint  from  a  parent  that  respondent  was  “yelling  angrily  at  students  at  the  bottom  of 
the  hill  at  dismissal  time.”  Law  went  on  to  write,  “[s]ince  I  have  had  to  address  the  issue  of 
yelling  with  you  in  the  past,  |  would like  to  remind  you  to  please  be  more  cognizant  of  this 
tendency,  and  make  every  effort  to  speak  to  students  in  a  firm,  but  calm  and  collected  tone  of 
voice  at  all  times.” 

39, 

 Athearing,  respondent  denied  that  he  was  yelling  angrily  at  the  students.  He 

testified  that  he  spoke  loudly  because  he’  felt  the  situation  was  unsafe:  the  students  were 
being  unruly  and  roughhonsing  on  a  steep  hill.  According  to  respondent,  the  teacher  who 
was  supposed  to  be  supervising  the  students  had  “given  up”  and  the  principal  “was  not 
supporting  me.”  Respondent  feels  that  the  principal  was  partly  to  blame  for  the  students’ 
behavior. 

40. 

Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  2009-2010  school  year,  Student  #13,  a  student 

in  respondent’s  first  grade  class,  told  his  mother  that  he  did  not  want  to  go  to  school.  This 
was  unusual  for  Student  #13,  who  had  enjoyed  kindergarten.  His  mother  spent  four  days  in 
respondent's  classroom,  Student  #13’s  mother  testified  that  there  “seemed  to  be  a  lot  of 
yelling  at  children,”  and  that  it  was  so  loud  it  “jolted  the  students  out  of  what  they  were 
doing.”  If  respondent  was  reading  a  book  and  a  child  was  not  looking  directly  at  him, 
respondent  yelled  at  the  student  to  look  at  him.  Student  #13’s  mother  tried,  unsuccessfully, 
to  secure  a  transfer  for  her  child  to  another  school. 

I 

9

APR-10-2013  WED  02:17  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

10/19 

C 

41. 

On  January  27,  2010,  Principal  Law  gave  respondent  a  “Letter  of  Verbal 

inappropriate  tone  of  voice  toward  students.  In 

Warning”  concerning  yelling  and  using  an 
the  letter,  Law  described  two  incidents. 

Incident  #1:  While  working 
Friday,  I  heard  you  yelling  a 
lobby.  My  office  and  the  lot 
went  outside  to  look,  You  w 
traffic  while  students  transiti 

at  my  desk  around  12:50  p.m.  on 
ngrily  at  a  student  in  the  2nd  floor 
by  are  separated  by  two  walls.  I 
ere  standing  in  the  lobby  directing 
oned  to  their  club  activities. 

Incident  #2;  Around  1:35  p.n 
your  classroom.  I  left  my  off 
As I  walked  towards  your  cla 
agitated  tone,  “Sit  down.  Sit 
most  of  the  students  were  sitt 
room,  One  student  was  in  th 
were  picking  up  some  materi 
Upon  my  entering  the  room, 
you  continued  giving  directia 

n.  I  heard  you  shouting  again,  in 
fice  again  to  see  what  was  going  on. 
assroom,  I  heard  you  yelling  in  an 
”  As  TI  entered  your  classroom, 
ing  on  the  floor  at  one  corner  of  the 
&  process  of joining  them.  You 
als  from  somejdesk-tops  nearby. 
you  softened  your  tone  of  voice  as 
ns  to  students: 

The  letter  went  on  to  warn  respondent  that 
formal  disciplinary  action. 

ontinuing  such  conduct  could  subject  him  to 

I 

Respondent  remembers  the  incidents 
incident,  respondent  testified  that  he  was  ca 
hallway,  Regarding  the  second  incident,  re 
Law  come  into  the  room,  that  his  voice  got 
more  organized. 

Law  described  in  her  letter.  Regarding  the  first 
rrecting  students  who  were  running  in  the 
spondent  testilied  that  he  never  saw  Principal 
ess  loud  as  the  students  sat  down  and  became 

42. 

Valerie  Chan,  is  a  special  edu 
the  2009-2010  and  2010-2011  school  years, 
respondent’s.  (There  were  four  classrooms 
respondent  was  in  room  204  and  Chan  was 
Chan  noticed  respondent’s  loud  voice  and 
loud  voice  for  little  kids.”  She  could  hear  ré 
heard  him  say,  “Stop,”  and,  “Did  you  hear  v 
voice,  “direct”  and  “loud”  and  “sharp.”  Chs 
the  students  were  “making  him  yell.” 

k 

cation  teacher  at  Garfield  Elementary  School.  In 
Chan’s  classroom  was  in  the  same  pod  as 
that  each  opened  into  a  common  work  area; 
nroom  202,  with  room  203  between  them.) 
as  concerned  about  it.  She  felt  it  was  “such  a 
-spondent’s  voice  for  about  half  the  day.  Chan 
hat  I  said?”  There  was  a  “fierceness”  to  his 
in  heard  respondent  use  words  to  the  effect  that 

Chan  spoke  to  Elias  Barlow  about  he 
pod.  In  his  declaration,  Barlow  writes  that  v 
heard  respondent  yelling  at  his  students.  To 
expressed  anger  and  frustration.  Barlow  hea 
me  yell”  and  “You  are  making  me  upset.” 

r  concerns.  Barlow's  classroom  was  in  the  same 
hen  he  was  in  the  common  area,  he  regularly 
Barlow,  respondent  was  yelling  in  a  manner  that 
urd  respondent  use  phrases  like  “You  are  making 

  

10

APR-10-2013  WED  02:17  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

11/19 

43. 

Ana  De  Arce  took  over  as  principal  at  Garfield  Elementary  School  for  the 

2010-2011  school  year,  In  an  interview  with  De  Arce  in  January  2011,  respondent  denied 
that  he  yelled  at  students.  He  told  De  Arce  that  he  had  a  loud  voice.  Respondent’s  testimony 
at  hearing  was  to  the  same  effect:  he  has  a  “loud  assertive  voice”  that  he  used  on  a  daily 
basis,  but  he  did  not  yell  at  students.  The  observations  of  respondent’s  former  principal, 
fellow  teachers,  and  a  parent,  however,  are  more  persyasive  than  respondent’s  testimony. 

44. 

De  Arce  has  been  with  SFUSD  for  about  10  years.  She  has  a  master’s  degree 
in  education,  De  Arce  has  taught  third  grade,  fourth  grade  and  fifth  grade,  and  she  has  been 
a  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  coach.  As  a  PAR  coach,  De  Arce’s  job  was  to  observe 
classtoom  teachers  and  analyze  their  classroom  methods  in  light  of  the  California  Standards 
for  the  Teaching  Profession,  and  to  help  them  use  more  effective  teaching  methods. 

De  Arce  testified  that  yelling  at  students  is  inconsistent  with  the  California  Standards 

and  it  ig  not  an  appropriate  classroom  management  technique.  Yelling  at  students  detracts 
from  the  creation  of  a  safé  learning  environment,  which  is  a  fundamental  goal  of  classroom 
teaching.  Students  who  are  yelled  at  become  antagonistic  and  less  willing  to  participate  in 
class.  De  Arce  acknowledged  that  a  classroom  teacher  must  present  himself  or  herself  with 
De 
authority,  but  the  teacher  must  also  create  an  environment  of  trust,  caring  and  safety. 
Arce  stated  that  it  is  not  appropriate  for  a  teacher  to  tell  students  that  “they  are  making  you 
yell.”  Statements  like  that  are  harmful  because  they  create  guilt  and  frustration  in  the 
students,  and  also  undermine  the  teacher  by  showing  the  students  how  they  can  hurt  the 
teacher  and  make  him  or  her  mad.  As a  principal,  De  Arce  is  concerned  that  respondent  did 
not  recognize  his  tone  of  voice  or  the  content  of  his  message.  De  Arce’s  testimony  on  these 
points  was  persuasive, 

Physical  contact  with  students 

45. 

Onor  shortly  before  October  12,  2010,  Student  #5  went  to  Principal  De  Arce’s 

office  for  ice,  He  had  a  bump  on  his  head  and  he  told  De  Arce  that  he  had  fallen  out  of  his 
chair  during  a  birthday  party  for  Student  #17,  The  next  day,  De  Arce  received  a  call  from 
Student  #5’s  mother,  in  which  the  mother  stated  that  she  had  heard  that  respondent  had 
pushed  Student  #5  out  of  his  chair.  De  Arce  began  an  investigation. 

46. 

On  October  13,  De  Arce  interviewed  five  students  in  respondent’s  class, 

Student  #5,  Student  #2,  Student  #21,  Student  #15,  and  Student  #18.  De  Arce  brought  all  five 
students  into  the  waiting  room  outside  her  office,  interviewed  each  child  separately,  and  took 
each  student  directly  back  to  the  classroom  after  each  interview.  When  she  had  finished  all 
of  the  interviews,  De  Arce  was  satisfied  that,  Child  #5  had  fallen  out  of  his  chair  and  hit  his 
head  because  he  was  playing  on  the  chair,  not  because  respondent  had  pushed  him. 

47. 

Inthe  course  of  her  interviews,  however,  De  Arce  found  that  the  students 
reported  instances  of  respondent  yelling  at  them  or  having  physical  contact  with  them. 
Student  #5  reported  thar  respondent  “screams,”  that  he  “squeezed  his  shoulder  hard,”  and 
that  respondent  “sat  him  down  hard.”  Student  #2  reported  that  if  students  are  not  behaving 

ll

APR-10-2013  WED  02:18  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

12/19 

C 

CO 

respondent  “put  them  in  [a]  chair.”  Student  #21  reported  that  Student  #18  got  “put”  in  her 
chair  because  she  played  around,  and  that  respondent  “tapped  students”  with  a  stick.  Student 
#15  reported  that  respondent  used  a  ruler  to  hit  Student  #5  on  the  head.  And  Student  #18 
reported  that  respondent  kicked  students’  chairs  when  they  did  not  sit  close  enough  to  their 
desks;  that  he  takes  students  by  the  arm  and  “puts”  them  in  the  chair;  and  that  he  has  a  big 
yardstick  and  taps  kids  in  the  head  with  the  stick,  and  that  some  students  had  cried  in  the 
class.  De  Arce  is  obligated!  to  refer  complaints  such  as  these  to  the  executive  director  of 
Human  Resources.  De  Arce  therefore  faxed  the  notes  of  her  interviews  to  Executive 
Director  Joanne  Hepperly.  Hepperly  told  De  Arce  that  respondent  would  be  put  on 
administrative  leave  with  pay  the  following  day,  October  14,  while  the  matter  was 
investigated. 

48. 

Respondent  was  placed  on  administrative  leave  beginning  October  14,  2010, 

and  has  not  been  allowed  to  return  to  work  since  that  date. 

49. 

De  Arce  interviewed  the  remaining  students  in  respondent’s  class  on  October 

14,  15,  and  18,  and  heard  complaints  consistent  with  those  of  the  five  students  she 
interviewed  on  October  13. 

50. 

In  an  interview  with  De  Arce  and  Hepperly  in  January  2011,  in  his  subsequent 
deposition,  and  in  his  testimony  at  hearing,  respondent  admitted  to  much  of  the  conduct  that 
the  students  reported  to  De  Arce,  but  he  states  that  the  students  mischaracterized  or 
misunderstood  it? 

As  respondent  describes  his  classroom  management  style,  he  has  a  very  authoritative 

presence  and  he  is  a  “tactile”  teacher.  If  he  is  sitting  on  the  rug  with  the  students  reading 
them  a  story,  and  one  of  the  students  is  not  paying  attention,  he  will  use  a  pointer  with  a 
plastic  tip  or  a  yardstick  to  gently  tap  the  student  on  the  head  or  shoulder  to  “redirect”  the 
student  and  get  the  student  to  “focus.”  Ifa  student  is  standing  in  line  and  not  facing  forward, 
respondent  will  turn  the  student’s  head  to  face  forward,  Respondent  teaches  students  to  have 
their  chairs  up  against  the  desk;  if  the  student  is  slouching  with  the  chair  out,  he  will  use  his 
foot  to  push  the  chair  in. 
If  a  student  gets  up  to  get  a  pencil  when  he  or  she  should  be  sitting 
down,  respondent  will  “lead”  or  “guide”  the  student  back  to  his  or  her  seat  by  “grabbing”  the 
student  by  the  hand,  or  by  putting  his  hand  on  the  student's  biceps  or  shoulder  and  applying 
“a  little  pressure,”  as  a  “nonverbal  redirection,”  Respondent  used  these  “tactile”  methods  on 
a  daily  basis.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year,  he  holds  “training  sessions”  in  which  he  instructs 
students  to  recognize  his  “physical  cues.”  Respondent  warns  parents  at  back-to-schoal  night 
that  “I’m a  tactile  teacher.  ‘Your  kids  will  talk  about  me  touching  them  and  yes,  I’m  going  to 
be  touching  them.”  He  gives  the  parents  his  cell  phone  number  so  that  they  can  call  him  with 
any  concerns. 

?  The  first  amended  accusation  includes  numerous  allegations  of  specific  acts  of 

misconduct  as  reported  by  particular  students.  No  students,  however,  were  called  to  testify, 
and  their  hearsay  statements  are  insufficient  to  support  a  finding  on  the  specific  incidents  of 
misconduct  that  they  reparted.

APR-10-2013  WED  02:18  PM 

FAK  NO, 

P, 

13/19 

ee! 

51. 

In  addition  to  the  behaviors  respondent  acknowledges,  one  parent  observed 

respondent  “flick”  a  student  in  the  head.  Special  education  teacher  Chan  observed  a  situation 
in  which  one  of  respondent’s  students  was  not  sitting  back  in  the  chair;  respondent  put  a  ruler 
between  the  student’s  back  and  the  chair  and  then  tapped  the  student  and  the  chair  with  the 
ruler  to  illustrate  the  gap. 

§2. 

Respondent  testified  that  his  classroom  management  techniques  are  based  on 
the  theory  of  assertive  discipline  promoted  by  author  and  teacher  Lee  Canter.  Respondent 
states  that  he  establishes  a  clear  set  of  rules  around  a  philosophy  of  rewards  for  correct 
behavior  and  consequences  for  incorrect  behavior.  He  believes,  based  on  Canter,  that  the 
teacher  must  take  charge  of  the  classroom  and  maintain  an  “interruption-free”  learning 
environment,  where  there  is  no  excuse  for  disrupting  learning.  Respondent  acknowledges 
Lee  Canter  does  not  specifically  mention  the  tactile  classroom  management  techniques  that 
Tespondent  employed. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  never  practiced  corporal  punishment,  never  intentionally 

hurt  a  child  and,  although  he  may  “tap”  a  child  with  the  pointer  or  a  yardstick,  he  would 
never  hit  a  student  with  an  object  or  his  hand. 

53. 

Respondent  acknowledges  that  there  were  students  2010-2011  class  who  cried 
when  they  were  disciplined,  and  that  the  class  as  a  whole  cried  more  than  other  classes  he  has 
taught.  Respondent  is  not  sure  why  this  class  cried  more  than  others;  he  was  going  to  raise 
the  issue  with  parents  during  parent-teacher  conferences,  but  he  was  put  on  leave  before 
those  conferences  could  be  held. 

54. 

In  Principal  De  Arce’s  opinion,  there  is  no  acceptable  classroom  management 
technique  that  permits  a  teacher  to  use  a  pointer  or  a  stick  to  refocus  a  student,  and  it  is  never 
acceptable  for  a  teacher  to  touch  a  student  with  a  pointer  or  a  stick,  The  district  teaches 
students  never  to  hit  with  sticks:  using  a  stick  to  touch  a  student  in  class  is  modeling  the  very 
behavior  that  students  are  told  is  prohibited.  When a  teacher  uses  a  stick  to  touch  students, 
the  implied  and  unacceptable  message  is  that  a  stick  can  be  used  to  salve  problems.  And 
using,  a  stick  can  be  perceived  by  young  students  as  scary,  particularly  when  used  by  an  adult 
the  size  of  respondent  (six  feet,  two  inches  and  235  pounds  in  Fall  2010).  Using  a  stick 
undermines  the  district’s  goal  of  creating  a  safe  classroom  environment  by  making  students 
feel  afraid,  or  not  safe,  or  not  competent,  and  undermines  their  self-esteem,  De  Arce 
believes  that  respondent  touched  students  with  the  stick  and  that  they  cried  because  it  was 
scary  for  them. 

{t  is  not  acceptable  classroom  management,  in  De  Arce’s  opinion,  for  a  teacher  to  use 
his  foot  to  “scootch”  in  «  student's  chair  while  the  student  is  seated.  This  could  be  perceived 
as  kicking,  and  students  are  taught  not  to  kick;  it  is  modeling  behavior  that  students  are 
taught  to  avoid. 

De  Arce’s  opinions  on  these  matters  are  persuasive. 

13

APR-10-2013  WED  02:18  PM 

FAK  NO, 

P, 

14/19 

C 

Set 

55. 

In  January  2011,  when  resp 
termination,  he  volunteered  to  enter  PAR 
In  De  Arce’s  opinion,  however,  responden 
successful  in  PAR,  De  Arce  testified,  a  tea 
fidelity.”  In  her  view,  respondent's  dishor 
employment  history,  his  tendency  to  blam 
acknowledge  that  he  yells  at  students,  and 
impact  on  the  students,  make  him  a  poor  ¢ 
matters  is  persuasive. 

ondent  learned  that  the  district  intended  to  seek  his 
fo  improve  his  classroom  management  techniques. 
t  is  not  a  good  candidate  forPAR.,  To  be 
cher  must  “own  every  part  of  his  behavior  with 
nesty  regarding  his  criminal  history  and 
e  the  students  for  making  him  yell,  his  refusal  to 
his  lack  of  awareness  of  his  own  conduct  and  its 
andidate  for  PAR.  De  Arce’s  opinion  on  these 

  

Adherence  to  district  rules  and  reg 

ulations 

56. 

SFUSD  Board  of  Education! 
the  Teaching  Profession,”  which  states  in 
reasonable  efforts  to  protect  the  student  ff 
safety.”  Board  of  Education  Policy  No.  P 
with  all  people  ina...  respectful...  way, 
that  “all  individuals  are  treated  with  respec 
P  6123  states  that  the  teacher  shall  “[m]air 
the  group  and  the  individual  student,”  and 
environment.”  Respondent  violated  these 
pointer  or  a  stick,  by  using  his  foot  to  push 
them  that  they  were  responsible  for  makin 

Policy  No.  P  4420  adopts  the  “Code  of  Ethics  of 
elevant  part  that  a  teacher  “[s|hall  make 
im  conditions  harmful  to  learning  or  to  health  and 
4430  states  that  all  district  employees  shall  “deal 

Board  of  Education  Policy  No.  P  6000  provides 

t  and  dignity.”  Board  of  Education  Policy  No. 
tain  discipline  conducive  to  the  well-being  of  both 
shall  [maintain  a  healthful  classroom 
rules  and  regulations  by  tapping  students  with  a 
their  chairs  in,  by  yelling  at  them,  and  by  telling 
a  him  yell. 

Principle  II  of  the  Code  of  Ethics 

o 
the  Teaching  Profession  states  that  an  educator 
“[sjhall  not  in  any  application  for  a  a 
onal  position  deliberately  make  a  false  statement 
1 
competency  or  qualifications”  and  “[s]hall  not 
or  fail  to  disclose  a  material  fact  related  to 
+ 
misrepresent  his...  professional  qualifications,”  Respondent  violated  these  rules  and 
regulations  by  making  false  and  misleadi f 
facts,  on  his  applications  to  SFUSD  and  the  CTC,  and  by  his  false  statement  to  CAO 
Buschmann  that  he  had  not  used  a  weapon]  in  his  fight  with  Silvaggio. 

statements,  and  by  failing  to  disclose  material 

LEGAL 

ONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  standard  of  proof  appli 

d  to  this  matter  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Equitable  estoppel 

2. 

A  threshold  issue  is  whethe 
by  virtue  of  the  false  statements  on  his  20 
length  of  time  between  the  date  he  filed  the 
statement  of  issues. 

respondent  can  be  subject  to  disciplinary  action 
6  application  for  employment,  because  of  the 
application  and  the  date  the  district  filed  its 

Under  Education  Code  section  44944 

or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters 

,  Subdivision  (a),  “[n]o  testimony  shall  be  given 
hich  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the 

14

APR-10-2013  WED  02:18  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

16/19 

date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice  [of  intention  to  dismiss].”  Respondent  argues  that  no 
discipline  can  be  brought  based  upon  his  application  to  SFUSD,  because  the  application  was 
submitted  on  July  12,  2006,  more  than  four  years  before  the  district  filed  its  notice  of 
intention  to  dismiss  on  April  27,  2011.  The  district,  on  the  other  hand,  argues  that 
respondent  is  equitably  estopped  from  asserting  the  four-year  ban  because  of  the  dishonest 
answers  on  his  application, 

In  Atwater  Elementary  School  District  v.  California  Department  af  General  Services 

(2007)  41  Cal,4th  227,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  four-year  ban  is  not 
absolute,  but  may  be  subject  to  the  doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel.  The  doctrine  is  founded 
on  the  principle  that  “no  man  [may]  profit  from  his  own  wrongdoing  in  a  court  of  justice.” 
(Ud.  at  p.  232,  quoting  from  Lantzp  v.  Centex  Homes  (2003)  31  Cal.  4th  363,383.)  Four 
elements  must  be  present  to  invoke  equitable  estoppel:  “(1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be 
apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he  must  intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act 
that  the  party  asserting  the  estoppel  had  a  right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  (3)  the  other 
party  must  be  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  the  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to 
his  injury.”  (Crumpler  v.  Board  af Administration  (1973)  32  Cal.App.3d  567,  581.)  All  four 
elements  must  be  present  to  establish  estoppel.  (Johnson  v.  Johnson  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d 
(Ibid.)  The  burden  is  on  the  party 
326,  330.)  If  any  element  is  missing,  no  estoppel  exists. 
asserting  estoppel,  in  this  case  the  district,  to  prove  each  of  these  elements.  (Pacifie  Finance 
Corporation  v,  Hendley  (1932)  119  Cal.App.  697,  702.) 

3. 

The  district  failed  to  establish  that  it  was  ignorant  of  respondent’s  second 

conviction  when  it  hired  him  in  2006.  (Finding  23.)  Equitable  estoppel  does  not  prohibit 
respondent  from  asserting  the  four-year  ban  regarding  his  failure  to  disclose  the  September 
2002  conviction  on  his  application  to  SFUSD,  and  the  district  may  not  take  disciplinary 
action  against  him  based  on  that  conduct.  The  point  is  largely  academic,  however,  as 
respondent  failed  to  disclose  the  same  conviction  on  his  2010  application  to  the  CTC,  which 
is  well  within  the  four-year  period,  and  which  is  also  alleged  as  cause  for  discipline. 

4, 

The  district  did  establish  that,  at  the  time  it  hired  respondent  it  was  ignorant  of 

the  true  facts  leading  to  his  first  conviction  and  ignorant  of  the  facts  surrounding 
respondent’s  separation  from  employment  with  the  Geneva  Area  City  Schools.  (Finding  24.) 
At  the  time  respondent  submitted  his  application,  the  district  relied  on  applicants  to  truthfully 
report  the  facts  leading  to  a  criminal  conviction,  their  reasons  for  leaving  prior  employment, 
and  their  teaching  history;  in  light  of  the  volume  of  applications  the  district  received,  the 
district  did  not  have  the  resources  to  investigate  these  matters.  Respondent,  on  the  other 
hand,  knew  the  true  facts;  he  intended  that  the  district  rely  on  his  false  and  misleading 
statements;  and  the  district  relied  on  respondent’s  false  and  misleading  statements  to  its 
injury.  Had  respondent  answered  the  questions  truthfully,  the  district  would  not  have  hired 
hin,  It  would  be  contrary  to  principles  of  fairness  to  allow  respondent  to  profit  from  his 
dishonesty.  Respondent  is  estopped  to  invoke  the  four-year  ban  as  to  the  matters  set  forth  in 
Findings  10-12,  15-16,  and  18-20. 

15

APR-10-2013  WED  02:19  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

16/19 

Grounds  for  dismissal  asserted  by  complainant 

5. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  a  permanent  employee  may  be 

dismissed  for  “[i]mmoral  conduct”  (subd.  (a)(1)),  “[d]ishonesty,”  (subd.  (a)(3)),  “Le]vident 
unfitness  for  service”  (subd.  (a)(5)),  and  “[pJersistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him...  .”  (subd.  (a)(7)). 

Application  of the  Morrison  factors 

6. 

Before  the  commission  can  decide  whether  there  is  cause  to  dismiss 

respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  or  evidence  unfitness  for  service,  it  must  decide 
whether  his  conduct  demonstrates  that  he  is  unfit  to  teach  under  the  eight  factors  established 
by  the  California  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1 Cal.3d 
214,  229-230.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1445;  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman 
(1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220,  fn.  12.)  The  factors  are:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  respondent's 
conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  any 
expected  adversity;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of 
teaching  certificate  held  by  respondent;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if 
any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  conduct;  and  (8)  the  extent  to 
which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  respondent  or  other  teachers.  Only  the  pertinent  factors  must  be 
addressed.  (West  Valley  —  Mission  Community  College  District  v.  Conception  (1993)  16 
Cal_App.4th  1766,  1777.)  The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  all  of  the  charges  in  the 
aggregate.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  supra,  2  Cal. App.4th  at  1456-1457.) 

Adverse  effect  on  students  and  teachers.  It  is  highly  likely  that  respondent’s  conduct 

in  the  classroom  adversely  affected  his  first  grade  students  by  modeling  inappropriate 
behavior,  by  scaring  them,  by  diminishing  their  willingness  to  participate  in  class,  and  by 
failing  to  provide  them  with  a  safe  classroom  environment,  Respondent's  yelling  was 
sufficiently  disturbing  that  it  distracted  two  other  teachers  in  his  pod  and  caused  them  to  be 
concerned  for  his  students. 

Degree  of  adversity,  Failing  to  provide  students  with  a  classroom  environment  in 

which  they  feel  safe  and  are  encouraged  to  participate  is  a  serious  adverse  effect  of 
respondent’s  conduct. 

Proximity  in  time.  Respondent’s  unacceptable  classroom  conduct  continued  up  to  the 
time  he  was  placed  on  leave,  and  instances  of  dishonesty  occurred  just  months  before  he  was 
placed  on  leave. 

16

APR-10-2013  WED  02:19  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

17/19 

Type  of  teaching  certificate,  Respondent  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  who  teaches 

by  himself  in  a  self-contained  classroom.  A  teacher  whose  classroom  management  style  is 
based  on  touching  students,  and  who  cannot  be  trusted  to  accurately  perceive  or  honestly 
report  his  conduct,  presents  a  danger  to  elementary  school  students. 

Extenuating/agpravating  circumstances.  In  two  of  the  incidents  in  which  respondent 

yelled  at  students,  there  are  extenuating  circumstances.  In  one  incident  the  students  were 
roughhousing  on  a  steep  hill  and  respondent  perceived  a  safety  risk,  and  in  another  incident 
he  yelled  at  students  who  were  transitioning  in  the  hall  from  their  classrooms  to  club 
activities.  No  extenuating  circumstances,  however,  justify  or  excuse  respondent’s  yelling  in 
the  classroom,  or  telling  his  students  that  they  were  making  him  yell..  While  respondent 
claims  that  his  tactile  classroom  management  techniques  are  based  on  the  teachings  of  Lee 
Canter,  Canter  in  fact  does  not  advocate  those  techniques.  There  are  no  extenuating 
circumstances  that  diminish  the  seriousness  of  respondent’s  multiple  instances  of  dishonesty. 

Praiseworthiness/blameworthiness  of  respondent’s  conduct.  It  is  praiseworthy  that 
respondent  wants  to  create  a  classroom  environment  in  which  there  are  no  interruptions  in 
the  educational  process.  Respondent’s  classroom  management  techniques,  however,  which 
appear  to  be  entirely  his  own  invention,  are  his  responsibility  and  they  are  blameworihy,  not 
praiseworthy.  Yelling  at  students,  and  blaming  students  for  making  him  yell,  is  entirely 
blameworthy.  There  is  nothing  praiseworthy  about  respondent’s  dishonesty,  for  which  he  is 
entirely  to  blame. 

Likelihood  of  recurrence.  It  is  recognized  that  respondent  volunteered  to  participate 

  

in  PAR,  suggesting  that  he  would  be  open  to  changing  his  classroom  management 
techniques.  The  evidence  to  the  contrary,  however,  is  more  persuasive,  Respondent  sees and 
describes  himself  as  a  tactile  teacher  and  defends  his  conduct.  He  does  not  recognize  or 
admit  that  he  yells  at  students  and,  to  the  extent  he  acknowledges  raising  his  voice,  he  blames 
the  students  for  making  him  do  so.  There  is  a  component  of  anger  in  his  yelling,  which 
suggests  that  what  he  characterizes  as  a  management  technique  may  also  be  an  expression  of 
anger,  and  therefore  difficult  for  him  to  control.  It  is  concluded  that  respondent's  yelling  at 
students,  and  his  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students,  is  highly  likely  to  recur. 

It  is  also  highly  likely  that  instances  of  dishonesty  will  recur,  Respondent  has  been 

repeatedly  dishonest  for  the  purpose  of  advancing  and  maintaining  his  employment  as  a 
classroom  teacher.  In  almost  every  instance,  respondent  defends  his  dishonest  statements  as 
truthful  and  accurate. 

It  is  concluded  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

Immoral  conduct 

7, 

Immoral  conduct  is  conduct  that  is  “hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public 
. 

and  contrary  to  good  morals”  and  “includes  conduct  . 
opinions  of  respectable  rnembers  of  the  community,  and  [conduct  showing  an]  inconsiderate 

.  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 

17

  

___  APR-10-2013  WED  02:19  PM 

P. 

18/19 

C 

tee 

| 

FAX  NO. 

C 

attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960) 
197  Cal.App.2d  808,  811,  citing  Orloffv.  Los  Angeles  Turf  Club  (1951)  36  Cal.2d  734,  740.) 
Dishonesty  for  personal  gain,  such  as  that  demonstrated  by  respondent,  is  immoral  conduct. 
(See  Golde  v.  Fox  (1979)  98  Cal  App.3d  167,  185.)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
immoral  conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  the 
matters  stated  in  Findings  10-12,  15-16,  18-20,  25-30,  and  32-37,  and  Legal  Conclusion  8. 

Dishonesty 

8. 

The  evidence  established  multiple  instances  of  dishonesty  by  respondent. 
Respondent's  dishonesty  includes  false  statements  and  material  omissions  in  documents 
where  he  certified  that  his  statements  were  true.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
dishonesty  under  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3),  by  reason  of  the 
matters  stated  in  Findings  10-12,  15-16,  18-20,  25-30,  and  32-37. 

"  Evident  unfitness  ta  teach 

9, 

Under  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1442-1443,  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  cannot 
be  based  upon  the  Morrisem  factors  alone;  it  must  also  be  shown  that  the  teacher’s  conduct  is 
the  result  of  a  “defect  in  temperament.”  Woodland  interprets  the  phrase  “evident  unfitness 
for  service”  to  mean 

“clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,”  “evident  unfitness  for  service” 
connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(Ibid.) 

Respondent  yells  at  his  first  grade  students,  he  insists  upon  an  inappropriate,  tactile- 

style  of  classroom  management,  and  he  is  not  truthful.  That  these  traits  are  not  remediable  is 
demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  when  a  false  statement  is  called  to  his  attention,  he  does  not 
admit  or  does  not  recognize  that  it  is  false,  and  when  inappropriate  conduct  is  called  to  his 
attention,  he  denies  that  he  engaged  in  the  conduct  or  defends  his  conduct  as  proper.  Cause 
exists  to  dismiss  respondent  due  to  evident  unfitness  for  service  under  Education  Code 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  by  reason  of  the  matters  stated  in  Findings  10-12,  15-16, 
18-20,  25-30,  and  32-56,  and  Legal  Conclusions  7  and  8. 

18

APR-10-2013  WED  02:19  PM 

FAX  NO, 

P, 

19/19 

Persistent  violation  of school  rules  or  laws 

10. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  school  rules  or 
laws  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  by  reason  of  the  matters  set 
forth  in  Finding  56. 

Appropriate  disciplinary  action 

11. 

|  Cause  to  dismiss  respondent  having  been  established,  the  remaining  issue  is 

whether  dismissal is  the  appropriate  level  of  discipline.  There  is  no  question  but  that 
dismissal is  appropriate.  Respondent  has  demonstrated  that  he is  not  truthful,  and  that  he 
cannot  be  trusted  to  maintain  a  learning  environment  in  which  elementary  school  students 
can  feel  safe. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Michael  §,  Juncker  is  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a certificated 

employee  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District. 

DATED: 

Dtsch 

4.2017 

Patan  re  LL  hoe 

PATRICIA HLINKA 
Commission  Member 

. 

D7 Sr 

TOM  RUST 

_  Commission  Member 

DATED:  JJenuee  12,  261% 

DATED: 

Samsauy  16,2012 

16,2012 

DAVID  BENJAMIN 
Chair,  Commission  on  oh oesstonal  Competence 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

.  19

