BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
MORENO VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2011061262

RICHARD BRIGHT,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

On July 5, 2012, a Commission on Professional Competence heard this matter in
Moreno Valley, California. The Commission included James Ahler, Oscar A. Felix, and
Hank Montelongo.

Christopher D. Keeler, Attorney at Law, represented complainant, Henry Voros,
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, Moreno Valley Unified School District,
Riverside County, State of California.

Respondent, Richard Bright, briefly appeared on his own behalf to argue his motion

for a continuance, and then left the proceeding when that motion was denied.

On July 5, 2012, the matter was submitted.

PRELMINARY STATEMENT

The Moreno Valley Unified School District employed Richard Bright as a school

counselor at Vista Heights Middle School.

A preponderance of the evidence established that in December 2010, Mr. Bright

obtained a $250 check payable to Eric Jackson, forged Eric Jackson’s signature on the back
of the check, deposited the check into his bank account, and thereafter told other school
employees that he maintained possession of the check when, in fact, he had deposited the
check into his own account.

A dismissal accusation charged Mr. Bright with dishonesty and immoral conduct and

requested that Mr. Brigit’s termination from employment with the district be affirmed.

1

Based on a preponderance of the evidence and the application of relevant Morrison
factors, the Commission on Professional Competence concludes that Mr. Bright engaged in
dishonesty and immoral conduct, that Mr. Bright is unfit to serve as a school counselor or as
a teacher, and that his employment with the Moreno Valley Unified School District should
be terminated.

Respondent’s Employment with the District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

At all times relevant to this matter, the Moreno Valley Unified School District
(the district) employed Richard Bright as a school counselor at Vista Heights Middle School
(VHMS). By reason of his employment, Mr. Bright held a pupil personnel services (PPS)
credential.

The Forgery Incident

2.

In the 2010-2011 school year, Kim Williams, a 6th grade teacher, was VHMS’

faculty advisor for Club Live, a student organization that was responsible for providing
entertainment for Red Ribbon Week. Ms. Williams wanted to have a band perform at the
Red Ribbon assembly. Mr. Bright learned of Club Live’s need for a band and told Ms.
Williams that he would arrange for a performer.

Mr. Bright contacted Eric Jackson, who agreed to provide a band to perform for one

hour at the Red Ribbon Week assembly. Mr. Jackson later met with Ms. Williams. Mr.
Jackson and Ms. Williams agreed upon a fee of $500 for the performance, which was to last
an hour and was to include musicians in addition to Mr. Jackson.

On October 28, 2010, Mr. Jackson performed at the Red Ribbon assembly by himself.

He lip-synched to a CD. He did not provide a band. The performance was substandard and
Ms. Williams was very unhappy. She decided that Mr. Jackson was not entitled to receive
payment of the $500 to which they had agreed, but that it would be appropriate for Mr.
Jackson to receive a lesser fee of $250. She discussed the matter with Mr. Bright, who told
Ms. Williams that he would let Mr. Jackson know that the $500 fee for the performance had
been reduced. Ms. Williams thereafter obtained approval for the issuance of a $250 check
from the district in Mr. Jackson’s name.

On November 23, 2010, after receiving appropriate documentation, Deborah
Bowman, an accountant with the district, prepared a $250 check that was made payable to
Eric Jackson. Ms. Bowman provided the check to VHMS for delivery to Mr. Jackson. Mr.
Bright came into possession of the $250 check.

On January 14, 2011, Mr. Jackson contacted Ms. Williams and told her that he had
not been paid and that Ms. Bowman had told him that a check had been issued in his name.
Ms. Williams was surprised. She called Mr. Bright to find out what he knew about the

2

matter. Mr. Bright said he still maintained possession of the $250 check. This statement was
untrue. In fact, Mr. Bright had forged Mr. Jackson’s signature on the back of the check and
he had deposited the forged check into his bank account at School First Federal Credit Union
on December 13, 2010.

On January 18, 2011, Mark Hasson, VHMS’ Principal learned that Mr. Jackson had
not been paid and that the district’s check written in Mr. Jackson’s name had been cashed.
Principal Hasson conducted an investigation in which he contacted various district
employees, the district’s accounting office, the Bank of America, the district’s human
relations office, School First Federal Credit Union, and law enforcement.

3.

On January 21, 2011, Principal Hasson received an email from email address
jackson@yahoo.com” in which the email’s author represented that he never spoke

“
with Mr. Bright about a check and never possessed a check. The email also stated, “I have
been offered the $250 cash by Mr. Bright through a mutual friend twice. I turned it down.”

While the hearsay matters in the email were not established as true, the statements

helped Principal Hasson in pursuing the investigation.

4.

Detective Manolo Milian investigated on behalf of the Riverside County

Sheriff’s Office. Detective Milian reviewed the December 13, 2010, surveillance tape at the
School First Federal Credit Union ATM machine where the forged check was deposited into
Mr. Bright’s account and identified Mr. Bright as the person who deposited the check.

Detective Milian interviewed Mr. Jackson, obtained specimens of Mr. Jackson’s
signature, and concluded that the signature on the back of the $250 check payable to Mr.
Jackson was not Mr. Jackson’s signature and that “it was not even close.”

5.

Ms. Williams testified that in mid-November 2010, Mr. Bright told her that he

spoke with Mr. Jackson’s grandmother at a dinner party, that the grandmother told him that
Mr. Jackson badly needed money, and that Mr. Bright withdrew $400 in cash from an ATM
machine and gave it to the grandmother. Ms. Williams testified that when she asked Mr.
Bright how he planned to get his money back, Mr. Bright said he would have Mr. Jackson
cash the check for his performance and get the money back from Mr. Jackson.

In January 2011, when Ms. Williams learned that Mr. Jackson had not been paid for
the performance, she asked Mr. Bright if he received any money back from the grandmother
or Mr. Jackson. Mr. Bright said “No,” and told her that he would speak with Mr. Jackson.
Later that day Mr. Bright told Ms. Williams that he was going to obtain a statement from the
grandmother that verified her receipt of $400 in cash from Mr. Bright. Mr. Bright told Ms.
Williams on January 14, 2011, that he had not had time to deliver the check to Mr. Jackson.

6.

On January 23, 2011, Mr. Bright left a document on Ms. Williams’ desk while

she was teaching a middle school class. The document was entitled “Payment” and it bore
the purported signatures of Eric Jackson and Richard Bright. The document stated:

3

I, Eric Jackson, have received payment of $500 in (cash)
as full and complete payment for my performance at the
Red Ribbon Week Rally at Vista Heights Middle School
that took place on Thursday, October 23, 23010. I no
longer hold Mr. Bright responsible for any confusion
brought forth as a result of late payment and this letter
puts Mr. Bright in good standing. No further payment to
me is expected by any other party involved including but
not limited to Vista Heights Middle School and related
School District. I received cash.

This letter is to clear Mr. Bright of any negligence or
wrongdoing, but this letter is not an admission of guilt on
my part. Payment was made on 1/23/2010 by Mr.
Richard Bright only as a result of a special arrangement
made between Mr. Bright and myself. As of 1/23/2010, I
don’t wish to continue any further business with Mr.
Bright or Vista Heights Middle School staff due to the
confusion surrounding my performance and payment.
But I do sincerely appreciate the opportunity to be a part
of an event that was apparently dear to the staff and
students’ hearts and I am truly grateful to share that day
with you. [Various grammatical errors and misspellings
were corrected to assist in reviewing this document.]

7.

Ms. Williams felt betrayed. She no longer trusts Mr. Bright. He deposited a
forged check into his account and lied to her about it. As a result of the forgery and deposit
of the forged check, Mr. Bright made Ms. Williams appear irresponsible, and the heightened
scrutiny she has been under since then is disturbing and undeserved.

Principal Hasson testified that Mr. Bright’s misconduct represents a huge concern to
the middle school and to the district outside of its criminal ramifications. In his position as
school counselor, Mr. Bright exercised a tremendous amount of autonomy. He was the
district’s point person in dealing with students on highly sensitive matters, such as matters
involving conflict resolution and child abuse, and the district reasonably expects Mr. Bright
to exercise good judgment and to be truthful in all his affairs. He lied about what he did to a
colleague and frustrated an investigation. His misconduct has brought his judgment,
honesty, and willingness to comply with school regulations and procedures into question.

Assistant Superintendent Voros believed that Mr. Bright acted in a dishonest manner

causing the district to lack confidence in Mr. Bright’s ability to carry out his professional
responsibilities. In order to benefit himself, Mr. Bright improperly mixed a personal matter
with his professional position and responsibilities. Mr. Bright never explained himself and
offered no evidence in mitigation or rehabilitation.

4

The District’s Response

8.

The matter of the forged check ultimately came to Assistant Superintendent

Voros’ attention. In February 2011, Mr. Bright was placed on paid administrative leave
pending further investigation. The personnel matter was complicated by law enforcement’s
investigation, which prevented Assistant Superintendent Voros from immediately
interviewing Mr. Bright.

By letter dated April 1, 2011, Assistant Superintendent Voros directed Mr. Bright to

appear at his office on April 11, 2011, to discuss Mr. Bright’s “alleged misconduct.” Mr.
Voros advised Mr. Bright that he was entitled to be accompanied by a representative of his
choosing.

Mr. Bright appeared on April 11, 2011, as directed. He was accompanied by an

“advocate” who was unknown to Assistant Superintendent Voros. The advocate was not a
union representative and was not an attorney. The advocate told Assistant Superintendent
Voros that Mr. Bright would not discuss the incident unless Assistant Superintendent Voros
guaranteed that there would not be a criminal prosecution. Assistant Superintendent Voros’
told the advocate and Mr. Bright that he could not speak for the District Attorney’s Office.
Mr. Bright and the advocate left the office.

By letter dated May 6, 2011, which was personally delivered upon Mr. Bright,

Assistant Superintendent Voros advised Mr. Bright that the district’s options included an
immediate suspension and a dismissal action. Assistant Superintendent Voros advised that
before he made a final decision, he wanted to meet with Mr. Bright and hear his side of the
story. Assistant Superintendent recommended that Mr. Bright take the opportunity to discuss
the matter. Mr. Voros scheduled a pre-disciplinary (Skelly) hearing for May 9, 2011. Mr.
Bright was invited to attend that hearing and to be represented.

Mr. Bright attended the meeting on May 9, 2011. He was accompanied by Ann
Adler, a California Teachers Association (CTA) representative. Ms. Adler advised Assistant
Superintendent Voros that Mr. Bright would not respond to any questions and that the matter
was going to be referred to Attorney Ronald G. Skipper.

On May 10, 2011, the district’s governing board directed Assistant Superintendent
Voros to proceed with the notice of immediate suspension and dismissal. By letter dated
May 11, 2011, Assistant Superintendent Voros advised Mr. Bright of the board’s decision.

Jurisdictional Matters

9.

On May 11, 2011, the district served Mr. Bright with a notice of intent to
immediately suspend and to dismiss and a statement of charges. On June 2, 2011, Mr.
Bright, through Ronald G. Skipper, his (then) attorney, demanded a hearing.

5

On June 15, 2011, Assistant Superintendent Voros signed a Dismissal Accusation.

The accusation and other required documents were served on Mr. Bright and his attorney. A
notice of defense dated June 27, 2011, was filed.

On June 28, 2011, the parties, through counsel, signed a stipulation waiving the

requirement that a hearing be commenced within 60 days of the demand for a hearing and
agreed to continue the hearing to a mutually convenient date.

A two-day hearing was set to commence on November 8, 2011. That hearing date

was continued by stipulation to January 19-20, 2012. The parties thereafter agreed to
continue the two-day hearing to commence on July 5, 2012.

Mr. Bright terminated Mr. Skipper’s services in January 2012.

On June 18, 2012, complainant filed a motion to continue the hearing on the grounds

that complainant’s appointee was unavailable, because Mr. Bright’s appointee to the
commission did not possess a pupil personnel services credential, because Mr. Bright was
unrepresented, and because Mr. Bright was not communicating with complainant’s counsel.

On June 25, 2012, complainant withdrew its motion for a continuance and waived its

objection to respondent’s appointee’s credentialed status. Complainant asserted that the
withdrawal of Mr. Skipper as counsel was a matter for respondent to address.

On June 26, 2012, Administrative Law Judge Robert Walker retrieved a voice mail
message (VMM) from respondent in which respondent sought a continuance. ALJ Walker
directed respondent to make arrangements for a conference call to discuss the grounds for the
request for continuance. Complainant’s counsel was notified of the request for a continuance
and the need to convene a telephonic conference. However, respondent failed to cooperate in
convening a telephone conference call. ALJ Walker immediately issued an order “denying
respondent’s motion for a continuance.”

On July 2, 2012, respondent left a VMM with ALJ Walker in which he claimed

confusion regarding ALJ Walker’s order.

Presiding Administrative Law Judge Alan Alvord reassigned the hearing to

Administrative Law Judge James Ahler. The reassignment was duly posted on the Office of
Administrative Hearings website.

In the early morning hours of July 5, 2012, Mr. Bright sent a fax to ALJ Walker (with

a copy to counsel for complainant) advising that he would not appear at the hearing set for
July 5, 2012, because he presumed the matter had been continued, because he had not
received ALJ Walker’s VMM, because he was awaiting a response from CTA concerning
CTA’s replacement of Attorney Skipper, because Mr. Skipper had not provided him with any
discovery, and that there was confusion and misunderstandings. A June 25, 2012, letter from
CTA denying respondent’s request for legal and financial assistance was attached, as was
respondent’s letter to Mr. Skipper dated May 30, 2012, in which respondent acknowledged

6

that he was no longer represented by Mr. Skipper and in which he made various demands.
At 8:00 a.m. on July 5, 2012, ALJ Ahler received these documents.

At 10:00 a.m. on July 5, 2012, the matter was called to order. All members of the
Commission were present, as was complainant’s counsel. Mr. Bright was not present and
was not represented. ALJ Ahler telephoned Mr. Bright and advised him that his motion for a
continuance would be considered that morning. Mr. Bright, who answered the phone,
accepted the opportunity to appear and argue the motion for a continuance.

The motion to continue was argued at 11:15 a.m. before ALJ Ahler outside the
presence of the other panel members. Mr. Bright argued that he never intended to represent
himself and that he was seeking a continuance to obtain counsel. Counsel for complainant
argued that Mr. Bright had not had counsel since mid-January 2012, that five months was
more than enough time to retain counsel, that complainant’s witnesses had been subpoenaed
and were prepared to testify, and that respondent had not established good cause to support
the motion for a continuance.

ALJ Ahler found that respondent had not established good cause and denied the

motion for a continuance.1

After the motion for a continuance was denied, Mr. Bright announced that he did not
plan to proceed by representing himself. The administrative law judge advised Mr. Bright of

1

Government Code section 11524, subdivision (a), provides: “The agency may

grant continuances. When an administrative law judge of the Office of Administrative
Hearings has been assigned to the hearing, no continuance may be granted except by him or
her or by the administrative law judge in charge of the appropriate regional office of the
Office of Administrative Hearings, for good cause shown.” This provision vests an
administrative law judge with authority to grant a continuance upon a showing of good
cause. In exercising the power to grant continuances, an administrative law judge must be
guided by the same principles applicable to continuances generally in adjudicative settings.
In this respect the litany must be that continuances be granted sparingly, nay grudgingly, and
then only on a proper and adequate showing of good cause. In general, a continuance for a
short and certain time is less objectionable than a continuance for a long and uncertain time,
and obviously there must be a substantial showing of necessity to support a continuance into
the indefinite future. (Arnett v. Office of Admin. Hearings (1996) 49 Cal.App.4th 332, 342-
343.)

A trial court properly denied a party’s motion for a continuance where there was no

noticed motion; the matter was raised on the date set for trial; the motion was not made
promptly upon the necessity for the continuance being ascertained; there was no showing
concerning when the attorney of record for the moving party had indicated to his client a
wish to withdraw; there was no showing whether defendant used due diligence to obtain a
new attorney; and that the case had been pending for a considerable period of time and the
party opposing the continuance was ready to proceed. (County of San Bernardino v. Doria
Mining & Engineering Corp. (1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 776, 783.)

7

his right to see and hear all of the evidence that complainant might present, that he had the
opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and to object to evidence, and that he had the right to
produce testimony and other evidence and argument on his own behalf. The administrative
law judge advised Mr. Bright that if he were to leave, the hearing would proceed in his
absence, and the administrative law judge recommended that Mr. Bright stay and participate.
Mr. Bright declined that invitation and left the hearing room.

Thereafter, complainant gave an opening statement; sworn testimony was received;

documentary evidence was produced; official notice was taken; a closing argument was
given; the record was closed; the matter was submitted; and the commission met in executive
session to reach a decision.

Evaluation

10.

The district employed Mr. Bright as a school counselor at VHMS, a position
that required Mr. Bright to exercise good judgment and be trustworthy. Mr. Bright forged
Eric Jackson’s signature on the back of a check and on December 13, 2010, Mr. Bright
deposited the forged check into his account at School First Federal Credit Union. When Mr.
Bright was asked by a colleague if he still possessed the $250 check, he falsely represented
that he still possessed that check. Mr. Bright offered explanations and documentation to Ms.
Williams in an effort to show that some type of financial arrangement existed between Mr.
Bright, Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Jackson’s grandmother, presumably to avoid the consequences
of his wrongdoing. No one but Mr. Bright could explain what actually occurred, and Mr.
Bright failed to offer any explanation to Assistant Superintendent Voros and declined to offer
an explanation during this proceeding.

Mr. Bright’s misconduct adversely significantly affected his colleagues, supervisor,

and administrators. The misconduct was recent and Mr. Bright’s refusal to provide any
explanation for his misconduct is continuing. Mr. Bright holds a PPS credential, which
requires the credential holder to interact with students, parents, teachers, and others, and to
exercise good judgment and honesty in all of his dealings. The circumstances established in
this matter were aggravating; if there were extenuating or mitigating circumstances, Mr.
Bright had the burden of establishing those matters. Mr. Bright forged and cashed a check
made out to another person to benefit himself. The misconduct involved several different
acts, the forgery, the cashing of the check, the lying about the check to Ms. Williams, the
production of a document designed to absolve Mr. Bright of any wrongdoing, and the refusal
to cooperate with the district concerning the matter. No rehabilitation was established and in
the absence of such a showing, it cannot be conclude that there is no likelihood of
reoccurrence. Disciplinary action will not have an adverse impact or chilling effect upon Mr.
Bright’s constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of other teachers.

A preponderance of the evidence established that Mr. Bright engaged in immoral
conduct and dishonesty by forging the signature of another on a check, by depositing the
forged check into his account, and by misrepresenting to a colleague what had occurred. Mr.
Bright’s misconduct established that he is unfit to continue providing service with the
district. The termination of his employment is affirmed.

8

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Burden and Standard of Proof

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of
the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d
1035, 1039-1040.)

A party required to prove something by a preponderance of the evidence need prove

only that it is more likely to be true than not true. This simply means that the evidence on
one side outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than the evidence on the other side. In
other words, the term “preponderance” refers to evidence that has more convincing force
than that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171
Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Due Process under the Education Code

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal
hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) When a school board recommends
dismissal for cause, a Commission on Professional Competence may only vote for or against
the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing
probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

Hearings to determine if a permanent public school teacher should be dismissed are

held before a Commission - a three-member administrative tribunal consisting of one
credentialed teacher chosen by the school board, a second credentialed teacher chosen by the
teacher facing dismissal, and an administrative law judge of the Office of Administrative
Hearings who serves as chairperson and a voting member of the commission and who is
responsible for assuring that the legal rights of the parties are protected at the hearing. The
Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final decision of the district’s governing board.
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.)

A Commission has broad discretion to determine the issues before it, including

whether dismissal is the appropriate sanction. (Ibid., at p. 343.)

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may only
vote for or against it. The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by
imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

Relevant Statutory Authority

3.

Education Code section 44932 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for
one or more of the following causes:

9

(1) Immoral . . . conduct.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(3) Dishonesty. . . .

Immoral Conduct

4.

Education Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) lists “immoral conduct” as a

cause for dismissal. Immoral conduct is not considered in the abstract, but must be
considered within the context in which the Legislature considered it; more specifically, the
term refers to conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school community. Its objective
is to protect students from corruption. The phrase “immoral conduct” as used the Education
Code denotes immoral conduct that renders the teacher unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.)

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare

of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude or indicative of corruption.
The definition of immoral conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed responsibilities and limitations
on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings. (San Diego Unified
School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454,
1466.)

Dishonesty

5.

The term “dishonesty” seems incapable of exact definition or precise
limitation because of the infinite variety of circumstances that affect relationships and affairs
of mankind in our society. (Wayne v. Bureau of Private Investigators and Adjusters, Dept. of
Professional and Vocational Standards (1962) 201 Cal.App.2d 427, 436-437.)

“Dishonesty” necessarily includes the element of bad faith, which means fraud,

deception, betrayal, faithlessness. The term denotes an absence of integrity. (Chodur v.
Edmonds (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 565, 572-573.) Dishonest conduct may range from the
smallest fib to the most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or
unprofessional conduct, and not every falsehood will constitute “dishonesty” as a ground for
discipline. (Bassett Unified School Dist. v. Commission On Professional Competence (1988)
201 Cal.App.3d 1444, 1454.)

Forgery inherently involves dishonesty and readiness to lie, and thus involves moral

turpitude. (People v. Flanagan (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 764, 771,)

10

The Morrison Factors

6.

In determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates unfitness to teach,

a board may consider such matters as the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely
affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity anticipated, the proximity
or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching certificate held by the party
involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; the
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood
of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may
inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher
involved or other teachers. These factors are relevant to the extent that they assist in
determining a teacher's fitness to teach, i.e., in determining whether the teacher's future
classroom performance and overall impact on his students are likely to meet the board's
standards. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1960) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229.)

Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed. (Broney v. California Com.

on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.)

7.

The Commission applied the Morrison factors in Factual Finding 10.

Cause Exists to Affirm Mr. Bright’s Dismissal from Employment

8.

The Commission of Professional Competence unanimously finds by a

preponderance of the evidence that cause exists under Education Code section 44932,
subdivisions (a)(1) and (a)(3), to dismiss Richard Bright from his employment with the
Moreno Valley Unified School District. In the 2010-2011 school year, Mr. Bright, a middle
school counselor, came into possession of a check made payable to Eric Jackson; he forged
Mr. Jackson’s signature on the back of that check; he deposited the forged check into his
own account; and he told a colleague that he still possessed the check when, in fact, he had
deposited it. Mr. Bright engaged in immoral conduct and dishonesty substantially related to
the qualifications, functions and duties of a school district employee. Mr. Bright is unfit to
continue providing service with the district. The termination of his employment is affirmed.

Authorization for ALJ to Sign Unanimous Commission Decision

9.

The Commission members have agreed that Administrative Law Judge James

Ahler may sign this Decision on behalf of Commission members Oscar A. Felix, Assistant
Principal, Oceanside Unified School District, and Hank Montelongo, Language Arts
Teacher/SAEA Intermediate Segment Director, Santa Ana Unified School District

11

DISPOSITION

Richard Bright shall be dismissed from his employment with the Moreno Valley

Unified School District.

DATED: July 30, 2012

_____________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge,
Office of Administrative Hearings
On behalf of the Commission on Professional Competence

12

