BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
AND THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

JOSE MARTINEZ (EN 536399)
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2011110670

DECISION

This matter was heard on March 5, 7, 8, and 30, June 15, and October 8, 2012, in Los
Angeles, California, before the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission). The
Commission consisted of Gelane Cameron, Virginia Escobar, and Howard W. Cohen,
Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California,
who presided.

The Los Angeles Unified School District (District) was represented by Jefferey E.

Stockley, Attorney at Law with Liebert Cassidy Whitmore.

Jose Martinez (respondent) appeared and was represented by Richard J. Schwab,

Attorney at Law with Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and argument was heard. The record

was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on October 8, 2012.

The Commission on Professional Competence considered the matter in executive

session. After due consideration of the entire record herein, the Commission makes the
following factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Accusation and Statement of Charges were brought by Vivian Ekchian in

her official capacity as Chief Human Resources Officer for the District.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, presently on

unpaid leave status.

2.

3.

On November 1, 2011, the District gave notice to respondent of the

Accusation and Statement of Charges that had been filed with the District Board of
Education (Board) and of the Board’s intention to dismiss respondent. The District also
provided respondent with notice of immediate suspension under section 44939. Respondent
thereafter requested a hearing.

The District’s Charges Against Respondent

4.

In the Accusation and Statement of Charges against respondent, the District

alleges that it has cause to immediately suspend and dismiss respondent from his
employment as a permanent certificated employee of the District for:

Unprofessional conduct, under Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a)(1);1

a.

b.

c.

Immoral conduct, under sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939;

Evident unfitness for service, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5);

d.

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by the State Board of
Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him, under section
44932, subdivision (a)(7); and

e.

Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable

cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,
under section 44939.

5.

The District alleges that between October 1, 2009, and December 18, 2009,
L.,2 on her buttocks, in her vaginal area,

respondent touched six-year-old student, C
and on her leg inside her pants or over her clothing on multiple occasions while in the
classroom.

6.

The District alleges that between September 14, 2009, and December 18,

2009, respondent used physical contact as a means of reward or to acknowledge or guide his
students, touching or patting them on the head, hand, or back.

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise specified.

2 To maintain confidentiality, this decision identifies students and their parents by

their first name and the first initial of their surname.

2

7.

The District alleges that between October 1, 2009, and December 18, 2009,

respondent remained alone in a classroom with the student, C

L.

The 2009-2010 School Year

8.

In the 2009-2010 school year, respondent taught first grade at Wilshire Park

Elementary School (Wilshire Park). Respondent has worked for the District in various
capacities for 30 years, first as a student aide, then as a teaching assistant while he attended
college. For the last 17 years, since 1995, respondent has worked for the District as an
elementary school teacher, teaching K-3 as well as special education classes. He has a
master’s degree in education, and has a multiple subject credential and a cross-cultural
language and development (CLAD) credential. No evidence was submitted of a prior history
of discipline against respondent.

9.

On the morning of January 12, 2010, C

L., a six-year-old girl who was

one of respondent’s first grade students, told respondent that another student was bothering
her at morning recess. In the presence of his teaching assistant, Tywanya Hill, respondent
spoke to both girls, found that each had been at fault, had them apologize to each other, and
told them to be friendly and respectful to each other.

10.

At lunchtime on the same day, C

L. went to the principal’s office. She

was crying and said that she wanted the school staff to call her mother to take her home
because respondent had been talking to her in a loud voice. Isabel Defaee, an administrative
L. C
assistant, tried to calm C
testified at hearing that C
L. had separation anxiety in kindergarten and in first grade;
she would cry and scream excessively and cling to her mother and her aunt. She would also
cry and scream while in class almost daily, which, Defaee said, was unusual for a first
grader.

C., was called. Defaee

’s mother, T

11. While waiting for T

C. to arrive, Enrique Franco, who has been the

principal at Wilshire Park since 2006, went to respondent’s classroom to discuss C
L.
Respondent described his conversation with C
had been crying and rubbing her eyes since recess ended at 10:30 a.m., though respondent
had told her there was no need to cry and that everything had been resolved.

L. and told Franco that C

L.

12.

T

C. arrived at the principal’s office; she was very angry. Franco

explained, with Defaee’s assistance, that respondent had not done anything to warrant T
C.’s anger and that both girls had been corrected, not just C
other children were having trouble adjusting to being back in school after winter vacation.
T
Respondent said that he had not shouted at C
crying, that everything was fine. T
C

C. remained upset, and respondent was brought in to discuss what had happened.
L., and that he had told her to stop

L. to the classroom of another teacher, Julie Medina.

C. was still not satisfied. Franco offered to transfer

L. He also explained that

13.

On January 14, 2010, T

C. telephoned Franco and told him that C

L. did not want to go to school. Franco again offered to transfer her to Medina’s classroom.

3

C. requested a transfer to Helen Kang’s classroom instead, because C

T
would be able to hear respondent’s voice in Medina’s classroom, which was adjacent to and
shared a door with respondent’s classroom. Kang had been C
teacher. Franco offered the services of the school’s psychologist. T
that C
L. said that respondent had removed a child’s shoe, had sent children to the
classroom next door to discipline them, had told a child he would be sent home, and had
instructed the class to kiss one of the students. Franco agreed to transfer C
Kang’s classroom and to investigate.

C. then told Franco

L.’s kindergarten

L. to

L.

14.

Franco questioned respondent about C

L.’s allegations. Respondent’s
explanations, credibly repeated in testimony at the hearing, satisfactorily demonstrated that
respondent had not engaged in misconduct with respect to those incidents. Franco directed
respondent to contact the parents of the students involved and to explain the circumstances.

15.

On January 20, 2010, C

L. arrived in Kang’s class, accompanied by her

aunt. She was crying, but eventually calmed down. In the afternoon, just before class was
L. came to the principal’s office, crying and saying she wanted to go
dismissed, C
home.

16.

On January 21, 2010, Franco and Kang met with T

C. and counseled her

about the difficulties that some children have getting accustomed to being in school and
requesting her support.

17.

18.

C

T

L. did not return to Wilshire Park.

C. testified that she was sometimes late bringing her daughter to

school, and was frequently late picking her up after school. She testified that sometimes
when she was late picking up her daughter after school, she would find the classroom door
closed and her daughter in the classroom alone with respondent. She testified that in late
2009 and early 2010, C
and did not want to go to school. She said that respondent had yelled at C
backstage during the Christmas play in December 2009. She testified that, after C
had been transferred to Kang’s classroom, C
her buttocks. T
department, which she did.

L.
L. told her that respondent had touched
C. called the District. The District told her to file a claim with the police

L.’s behavior changed; she seemed fearful, had nightmares,

L.

19.

C

L. testified at hearing. Her mother was allowed to accompany her

while she was on the witness stand, by stipulation of counsel; she was crying and was unable
to testify under those conditions. When her aunt replaced her mother on the stand later in the
day, C
L. composed herself and testified competently. She testified that respondent
had touched her from behind, under her underwear, once after school, in December 2009,
that he had never touched her anywhere else that she did not like, and that he never touched
her leg, pulled her hair, pushed her legs apart, or swung a chair at her. She testified that
respondent lifted her blouse once, up to her stomach; she was wearing something under the
blouse. She testified that that respondent had tried to staple her hand and that he had tried to
push a bookshelf into her. She believes she told the police and Morrow the same thing. She

4

testified that she was never in the classroom alone with respondent, and that when
respondent touched her buttocks and her “private area,” there were other children in the
classroom but they did not observe it. She testified at first that respondent did not have an
aide named Ms. Hagedorn in his classroom; subsequently she remembered Ms. Hagedorn,
but denied that she was ever in the classroom after school. She testified that she did not
remember an aide named Ms. Hill, and that she does not remember any adults other than
respondent being in the classroom after school. She acknowledged that the door between
respondent’s classroom and Medina’s classroom was open sometimes. She testified that
respondent on one occasion opened the door to the girls’ restroom, looking for her; he did
not approach the stalls. She testified that respondent was a mean teacher and that she did not
like him, and that Franco was also mean.

20.

Officer Munir Manjra, a Los Angeles Police Department officer assigned to
C. and C

L. came to his desk on
L. said her teacher had grabbed her buttocks once; she then

the Wilshire Police Station, testified that T
February 2, 2010. C
changed that to twice. C
clothing, and that the incident took place in mid-December 2009. C
respondent touched her anywhere else.

L. never said she was touched on her skin, only over her
L. denied that

21.

C., who told her of C

Officer Melissa Lynch, a Los Angeles Police Department investigator since
L.’s charges. She interviewed Franco, who told her
L. about respondent except after her dispute with
L. being interviewed on February 5, 2010; C

November 2006, investigated C
he had had no complaints from C
another child. Lynch observed C
L.’s version of events was, for the most part, consistent with her testimony at hearing. Lynch
L.’s nightmares and of the discussions with
interviewed T
Franco. She interviewed respondent, who denied inappropriately touching C
L. or any
student; he said he did pat children on the head or back, but never on the buttocks. He
described the incident between C
cried frequently. He also said that other adults were with him in the classroom all day and
after school. Lynch interviewed respondent’s aides, Tywanya Hill, Teresa Hagedorn, and
Ms. Kim; all of them told her that they never saw respondent act inappropriately with any
child. There was no physical evidence of sexual abuse. The District Attorney’s office and the
City Attorney’s office declined to prosecute the matter. Lynch testified that the District
Attorney’s office does not frequently decline to prosecute child sexual abuse matters.

L. and the other student, and said that C

L.

22.

Dr. Jeff Sugar, a child psychiatrist on the faculty at USC, testified as an expert
witness for the District. Dr. Sugar testified that no definitive conclusions can be drawn about
whether abuse actually occurred merely from the fact that a child delays reporting or
incrementally reports alleged abuse.

23.

Rosa Morrow works at the Stuart House, a program of the Rape Treatment

Center at UCLA-Santa Monica Medical Center, where she provides therapy to children
alleging sexual abuse. She has a master’s degree in marriage and family therapy and is a
licensed marriage and family therapist. Morrow became Catheryn L.’s therapist after a
referral from law enforcement. Morrow saw Catheryn L. for 17 weekly sessions in 2010;

5

L. also missed about six sessions. C

C
L. presented with fear and anxiety
about going to school, temper tantrums, and nightmares, but improved during treatment,
especially after she changed schools. C
L. told Morrow that respondent had pulled
her legs apart and touched her vaginal area, and that he had pulled her hair; she did not say
that respondent had tried to staple her hand or push a shelf at her. C
L. told her she
was happy because she now had a female teacher. Morrow last treated C
January 2011, when she determined that C
did not perform any psychological testing on C
L. experienced separation anxiety at school prior to
She did not know whether C
having respondent as her teacher, and conceded that it would be important to know that
information in diagnosing and treating C
L.’s
symptoms were consistent with those of other children she had treated for sexual abuse, she
also testified that frequent crying and temper tantrums could be symptoms of separation
anxiety.

L. in about
L.’s symptoms had been alleviated. She
L., nor did she refer her for testing.

L. Although she testified that C

24.

In May 2011, Detective Ray Jordan of the Los Angeles Schools Police

Department investigated this matter for the Investigations Unit of the District’s Employee
Relations Section. Jordan reviewed the records of other investigators and interviewed
respondent, Franco, other Wilshire Park teachers, and respondent’s classroom aides, among
others. Franco said he was shocked by the allegations, that respondent had not had any prior
discipline problems and is a great teacher, and that C
frequently screamed and cried; when she did, her mother always took her side. Respondent
denied all allegations of wrongdoing. His aides said there was almost always another adult in
the classroom with respondent; all spoke highly of respondent, said he was a fun teacher and
well-liked, and said they had never seen him act inappropriately. Jordan noted that detectives
had interviewed 19 of respondent’s first grade students. All of them spoke highly of
respondent, and all denied that respondent ever touched anyone inappropriately; when
students would hug respondent, he would say “that’s enough” and they would let him go.

L. could be a “handful” and

25. Mary Catherine Campbell, who supervises 30 elementary school principals for
the District, was involved in the decision to seek to terminate respondent’s employment. She
reviewed the investigative documents, discussed the matter with District administration
members, and proceeded toward dismissal in order, she testified, to protect student safety.
She interviewed Franco, who had a high opinion of respondent. She did not interview any
students or classroom aides, and does not remember interviewing respondent.

Respondent testified that he never inappropriately touched C

L.’s buttocks, legs, or vaginal area, that he never tried to staple her

26.
never touched C
hand or push a bookshelf toward her, and that he never went into the girls’ bathroom. He
never tried to spread C
students inappropriately, but patted them on the head or back in order to acknowledge them.
He testified that he was never alone with students in his classroom, and that at least one of
his classroom aides, including his sister, Maria Teresa Hagedorn, was present before, during,
and after class. His was the classroom closest to the administration office. His doors were
always unlocked and open. There was an unobstructed view into his classroom through four

L.’s legs, or pull her hair. He testified that he never touched

L., that he

6

large windows. Julie Medina taught in the adjacent classroom; she would often enter
respondent’s classroom through a connecting door that remained ajar to discuss the day’s
lesson, before and after class. Other teachers entered his classroom almost daily. School
administrators would enter his classroom unannounced, and parent would visit as well.

27.

Respondent testified that after the altercation between C
other girl, he learned that they had each hit the other. He had them both apologize, but
C
L. was upset about having to apologize and kept sobbing and rubbing her eyes until
lunchtime. That afternoon, Franco called respondent into the office to discuss the matter with
T
respondent’s explanation of the morning’s events; she wanted C
respondent’s classroom because, she said, respondent was mean and spoke to the children in
a loud voice.

C. was very distraught and would not accept
L. moved out of

C. Respondent testified that T

L. and the

28.

In all essential details, respondent’s version of the events at issue was

corroborated credibly by Franco, other teachers, and classroom aides.

29.

Helen Kang taught C

L. in kindergarten, and in first grade after

L. transferred out of respondent’s class. Kang testified that C

L. cried a lot
L. displayed separation anxiety in kindergarten, especially at the start of

C
in class. C
class and at dismissal when her mother was late picking her up from school. She also
displayed separation anxiety in first grade, and became more defiant toward adults. Kang
testified that she never observed respondent acting inappropriately with any student, and that
respondent’s students always looked happy. She testified that when school ends at 2:24 p.m.,
teachers, including respondent, leave their doors open and drop in on each other to chat.

30.

Franco testified that it is “almost impossible” not to touch a child in K-2, that
it helps the children feel that they are in a safe environment. It is appropriate for a teacher in
those grades to pat a student on the shoulder or head; children often approach and hug
teachers, and teachers appropriately pat them on the shoulder and thank them. Franco never
saw respondent display excessive affection for a student or touch a student inappropriately,
and he never heard that anyone else ever observed respondent acting inappropriately. He
instructed respondent in school policies and the code of conduct. In evaluating respondent,
Franco found that he always met or exceeded expectations and that he is an outstanding
teacher. There were never any complaints about respondent’s behavior with students, and he
never saw respondent act toward students in any way that caused him concern. The District
directed Franco to issue the disciplinary notices to respondent in this matter; it was not
Franco’s decision. Franco would visit respondent’s classroom unannounced “quite
frequently;” the classroom was right near the main office. Franco looked into respondent’s
classroom daily, before, during, and after class, and he never saw respondent alone with any
children. There was always an adult aide, or a special education aide, or a volunteer, or some
combination of those, in the room with respondent. And the door connecting respondent’s
classroom and Medina’s classroom was never locked and was often open.

7

31.

Tywanya Hill was a special education assistant in respondent’s first-grade

classroom during the 2009-2010 school year. She worked in respondent’s classroom from
8:00 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. and from 1:30 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. on Monday through Wednesday, and
from 8:00 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. on Thursdays and Fridays. Hill remained in the classroom
during recess. Whenever she left the classroom, other classroom aides were still present, and
parents and administrators frequently entered the classroom. Hill witnessed the altercation
L. kick the other girl, told the girls
between C
not to fight, and described the incident to respondent. When T
C. came in to discuss the
incident, Hill heard her yelling at respondent, despite respondent explaining that her daughter
had kicked the other girl. Hill never saw respondent act inappropriately with any student; to
her knowledge, respondent was never alone with any student.

L. and the other girl. She saw C

32.

Julie Medina, a first grade teacher at Wilshire Park during the 2009-2010

school year, taught in the classroom next door to respondent’s. There was a connecting door
between the classrooms, which was frequently open, especially before and after school.
Medina frequently entered respondent’s classroom unannounced, and respondent entered
hers. She visited respondent’s room before school, and almost every day after school, to
collaborate on lesson plans. She never saw respondent alone in a classroom with a student,
and never saw him behave inappropriately toward any student. There were always adult aides
in respondent’s classroom. Even at the Christmas play in December 2009, respondent was
never alone with any student; he was in front of the stage directing the children as they
performed.

33.

Susan Youn-Joung Kim, a second grade teacher at Wilshire Park during the

2009-2010 school year, testified that C
L. was in her class for second grade and never
told her she was afraid of respondent. Kim occasionally would enter respondent’s classroom
to chat; he always had his door open. She never saw respondent alone with any student, or
act suspiciously, or touch students inappropriately.

34. Maria Teresa Hagedorn is respondent’s sister. During the 2009-2010 school

year, she worked as a volunteer aide in respondent’s classroom, preparing the classroom
before class began, preparing and reviewing homework, and helping to ensure that the
children in class behaved well and received assistance from respondent as needed. She lives
with respondent in his house and contributes to household expenses from the widow’s
pension she receives. She does not drive; respondent drove her to and from school each day.
Once or twice per month on Fridays she would have a morning doctor’s appointment; she
would go to the appointment from school by bus, and then return to school the same way
about two hours later. Hagedorn testified that before class, other adults would enter the
classroom, including first grade teachers consulting with respondent, the principal, parents,
and classroom observers. During class, classroom aides Tywanya Hill and Ms. King were
usually present. After school, parents would pick up their children; if a parent was late, the
child could phone home. Hagedorn testified that she was in the classroom every day, during
and after class; respondent was never alone with any student. She testified that, after school,
Medina would come into the classroom to consult with respondent, and parents, teachers,
administrators, and custodial staff would enter unannounced after class. Hagedorn testified

8

that she never saw respondent touch C
vaginal area, inside or outside of her clothing. She never saw respondent spread C
L.’s legs, or pull her hair, or try to staple her hand or push a bookshelf at her or swing a chair
at her. If she had seen any of those things, she testified, she would not have allowed it. She
said that she is a mother and grandmother first, and was adamant that she would have
stopped respondent. Even though he is her brother, she said, she would not lie for him.

L. on her leg, on her buttocks, or around her

35.

Based on ample testimony and documentary evidence, respondent’s reputation

among his colleagues, aides, and administration is that he is an excellent teacher, highly
moral, of great integrity, efficient, dedicated, responsible, patient, and caring toward his
students.

36.

C

L.’s version of the events of the 2009-2010 school year was

uncorroborated and was internally inconsistent. She admitted that there were other children
in the classroom when the touching allegedly occurred, as respondent was helping them learn
to read. She neglected to mention or could not remember that Hagedorn was also present in
the classroom every afternoon, helping with the children and waiting for her brother to drive
L. about respondent pulling
her home. The statements Morrow said were made by C
her hair and spreading her legs were not supported by C
L.’s testimony at hearing,
L. never mentioned to Morrow that respondent tried to staple her hand and
and C
shove a bookshelf at her. C
L. told Manjra that respondent had only touched her over
her clothing; she said respondent had touched her once, then twice, and then at hearing said it
was only once.

37.

The District introduced no evidence to show that a psychiatrist or psychologist

L. The District did not sufficiently establish that the cause of

examined or treated C
C
L.’s symptoms, or the alleviation of those symptoms, related in any way to any
improper acts by respondent. Morrow, who is not a psychologist, did not produce notes of
her therapy sessions with C
L. rather
suddenly. Morrow conceded that it would have been important to know of symptoms of
separation anxiety occurring before the alleged acts; there was ample testimony at hearing of
such symptoms.

L., and stopped her sessions with C

T

38.

C. appeared overprotective and her testimony was self-serving and
lacked credibility. Her testimony about respondent screaming at the Christmas play was
contradicted by other witnesses. She often dropped her daughter off late and picked her up
late. She said respondent’s classroom door was closed and the school was empty right after
school, and that C
consistently testified that the classroom door was open after school and that many people
L.
were present for quite some time after class ended. They also testified, and C
testified, that respondent was never alone with C
C.
appeared to be too quick to side with her daughter and blame others for her daughter’s
frequent crying, screaming, temper tantrums, and fights with other children, and she
appeared to react poorly when respondent mildly challenged her during the meeting with

L. was alone in the classroom with respondent. But other witnesses

L. in the classroom. T

9

Franco. C
than her mother, while testifying.

L. behaved markedly differently when accompanied by her aunt, rather

39.

The District’s evidence did not demonstrate that respondent had the

opportunity to engage in the acts alleged. Franco and all of the teachers and aides who
testified said that the doors to respondent’s classroom were open, that people were frequently
walking in and out, both from the hallway and from the adjacent classroom, and that aides
were always present. The District did not establish that respondent was ever alone in the
classroom with C
L. herself, contradicted that allegation in testimony.

L. Every witness with access to the classroom, including C

40.

The District did establish that respondent used physical contact as a means of
reward or to acknowledge or guide his students, touching or patting them on the head, hand,
or back. But during the relevant time period such contact was age-appropriate and was in
accordance with the school’s Code of Conduct With Students. (Ex. 9.)

Jurisdiction

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter under section

44944. (Factual Findings 1 through 3.)

Burden of Proof

2.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, since it is seeking to

dismiss respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The standard of proof is
preponderance of the evidence. (Gardiner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040.)

Causes for Dismissal

3.

Cause does not exist for respondent’s dismissal under Education Code section

44932, subdivision (a)(1), for unprofessional conduct, by reason of Factual Findings 4
through 40.

4.

Cause does not exist for respondent’s dismissal under Education Code sections

44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, for immoral conduct, by reason of Factual Findings 4
through 40.

5.

Cause does not exist for respondent’s dismissal under Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(5), for evident unfitness for service, as set forth in Findings 4 through
40.

10

6.

Cause does not exist for respondent’s dismissal under Education Code section
44932, subdivision (a)(7), for persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the
state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by the State
Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him, by
reason of Factual Findings 4 through 40.

7.

Cause does not exist for respondent’s dismissal under Education Code section

44939 for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, by reason of
Factual Findings 4 through 40.

8.

The District did not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that

respondent engaged in conduct indicating his unfitness to teach and justifying his immediate
suspension and termination of his employment with the District. (Factual Findings 4 through
40.)

9.

It has been established that “[t]he Commission has broad discretion in

determining what constitutes unfitness to teach and immoral conduct, and whether dismissal
or suspension is the appropriate sanction. [Citation] ‘[A] disciplinary discharge often
involves complex facts and may require a sensitive evaluation of the nature and seriousness
of the misconduct and whether it warrants the grave sanction of dismissal.’ [Citation].”
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.)

10.

As set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, a

teacher’s conduct cannot be abstractly characterized as “immoral,” or “unprofessional,” thus
warranting discipline, “unless that conduct indicates that [respondent] is unfit to teach.” (Id.
at p. 229.) Morrison, supra, enumerated criteria for the trier of fact to analyze in determining
whether a teacher is unfit to teach. Because the District did not establish that respondent
committed any of the alleged improper acts, the Morrison factors are not applicable here.

//

//

//

11

ORDER

The determination of the Board of Education of the Los Angeles Unified School
District to dismiss respondent Jose Martinez as a permanent employee of the District is
reversed. The Accusation and the Statement of Charges, OAH Case No. 2011110670, filed
and issued by complainant Vivian Ekchian, Chief Human Resources Officer, on behalf of the
Board of Education of the Los Angeles Unified School District, and against respondent Jose
Martinez, is dismissed. Respondent Jose Martinez is not terminated or dismissed as a
permanent certificated employee of the Los Angeles Unified School District.

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
AND OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS,
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

DATED: January __, 2013 ________________________________

HOWARD W. COHEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above:

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

DATED: January __, 2013

________________________________
GELANE CAMERON
Commission Member

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above:

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE

DATED: January __, 2013

_________________________________
VIRGINIA ESCOBAR
Commission Member

12

