BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE McFARLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

GERALD HOWZE,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2011020866

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in
Mcfarland, California, on March 5 and 6, 2012. The Commission consisted of Marjorie
Sepulveda, Patricia Caillier, and Administrative Law Judge Ralph B. Dash, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided.

Chaka C. Okadigbo, Attorney at Law, represented the McFarland Unified School

District (District).

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Attorney at Law, represented Gerald Howze (Respondent).

The parties submitted the matter for decision on March 6, 2012.

District employed Respondent as a high school English teacher. District alleged that
Respondent demonstrated willful refusal to obey reasonable regulations (Education Code1
section 44932, subdivision (a)(7)), willful refusal to perform regular assignments without
reasonable cause (section 44939), and dishonesty (44932, subdivision (a)(3)) based on a single
incident regarding his involvement in the completion of an assignment given to a student in
another English class. The District suspended Respondent without pay for 25 days.
Respondent disputed the District’s characterization of the events and seeks a determination that
his conduct did not warrant the suspension.

As more fully set forth below, District failed to establish that Respondent’s conduct
justified the suspension. Accordingly, District’s Accusation and Statement of Charges are
dismissed.

//

//

1

All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

In making the below Findings, the Commission weighed the testimony of all

witnesses and documents. The Commission followed the guidance of the California
Supreme Court in arriving at these Findings. In Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9
Cal.3d 51, the court noted that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness
and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” Id. at 67. The
trier of fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly
contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the
testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected available material.”
Id. at 67-68.2

2.

The District is a California public school district. Respondent was employed
by the District, teaching English and other classes, for 28 years. He retired at the end of the
2010-2011 school year. At all times mentioned below, Respondent held a valid teaching
credential.

3.

Respondent had a reputation for helping students with their schoolwork and
other “life issues.” On October 28, 2010, Respondent was teaching English at McFarland
) who Respondent
High School. During Respondent’s class that morning, a student (D
knew from teaching him during summer school, came into his classroom “in a panic.” At the
time, D
was in a panic because Ms. Guzman
had given her class an essay assignment which was due the next day. D
“writer’s block,” had not even started on the assignment. He asked Respondent to help him.

’s English teacher was Ada Guzman. D

, who had

4.

Respondent told D

to come back during sixth period (Respondent was free

that period, which was the last period of the day) and they would discuss the matter. D
returned to Respondent’s classroom at the appointed time and talked with Respondent about
his assignment. Respondent agreed to help D
“model” the writing of the essay. That is, Respondent would “tease out” the various themes,

and felt the best way to do it was to

2

In this matter, the Commission evaluated the credibility of the witnesses

pursuant to the factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780: the demeanor and manner of
the witness while testifying, the character of the testimony, the capacity to perceive at the
time the events occurred, the character of the witness for honesty, the existence of bias or
other motive, other statements of the witness which are consistent or inconsistent with the
testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the witness testified, and the attitude
of the witness toward the proceeding in which the testimony has been given. The manner
and demeanor of a witness while testifying are the two most important factors a trier of fact
considers when judging credibility. The mannerisms, tone of voice, eye contact, facial
expressions and body language are all considered, but are difficult to describe in such a way
that the reader truly understands what causes the trier of fact to believe or disbelieve a
witness.

2

ideas and theses from the student, and would show him step-by-step how the essay was to be
constructed and written.

5.

Before beginning this process, Respondent wanted to get Ms. Guzman’s

regarding the essay assignment. Ms. Guzman did not raise any objection.

consent, so he spoke with her about it. The conversation took place in the school library and
was overheard by the librarian, Beverly Meier. Respondent explained his involvement with
D
, spent at least two hours with him on October 28,
Respondent, in his “modeling” with D
for approximately one-half hour on the morning
2010. Respondent also worked with D
of October 29, 2010 (before school began), and then again during Respondent’s fifth period
class that day. Each time D
did so with a hall pass he obtained from Ms. Guzman.

visited Respondent’s classroom during the school day, he

6.

Respondent finished with D

during that fifth period class, then had his
turned the essay in to Ms. Guzman at the end of

class review and critique the essay. D
that school day. Although D
Respondent had worked with him on the essay, he did not do so, but rather attempted to pass
the essay off as his own work. The essay clearly was not the work of a student who had to
take a remedial English class the preceding summer.

knew he was supposed to remind Ms. Guzman that

7.

Respondent went well beyond the accepted practice of “modeling” and

contributed much of his own work to the essay. Some of the ideas conveyed in the essay
may have come from D
typed the essay, used his own language to convey those ideas.

, in collaboration with Respondent, but Respondent, who actually

8.

Immediately upon receiving the essay from D

, Ms. Guzman “rushed” to

the office of the interim principal, Shirley Oesch. Ms. Guzman was almost frantic and
waived the essay in front of Ms. Oesch, telling her that Respondent had written an essay for
one of her students. Ms. Guzman told Ms. Oesch she knew Respondent had helped D
write the essay because both D
realize the extent he helped” writing it.3

and Respondent had so informed her, but she “did not

9.

Ms. Guzman told Ms. Oesch that she was “shocked at the [breach] of ethics
and morals” Respondent displayed by writing a paper for a student. Ms. Oesch, who had
been interim principal only since the beginning of that school year, asked Ms. Guzman to

3

This statement was not credible. According to Ms. Guzman’s testimony,

corroborated by a memorandum Ms. Oesch wrote (Exhibit 10) based on what Ms. Guzman
told her, Respondent told Ms. Guzman, well before D
written the essay for D
involvement with D
same day realized that Respondent had, in fact, told her of the extent of his involvement. Her
“realization” came to her before D
why she simply did not return the essay to D

. Ms. Guzman testified that after Respondent informed her of his

, she could not assimilate what Respondent told her, but later the

turned in the essay. Ms. Guzman never explained

and give him no credit therefore.

turned the essay in, that he had

3

document what she had told her and Ms. Guzman did so in a brief email she sent the
following Tuesday.

10.

The following Thursday, Ms. Oesch spoke with Respondent and informed him
had been suspended for one day for plagiarism. Respondent was “nonplussed” at

that D
this news and informed Ms. Oesch that Ms. Guzman knew he was writing the paper for
D
and she had not objected to it. In a memorandum Ms. Oesch sent to Kim
McManaman, the Assistant Superintendent of Administrative Services, on November 13,
2010 (part of Exhibit 11), Ms. Oesch confirmed that Ms. Guzman said Respondent had in
fact told her, before D
. The only
discrepancy was that Respondent said he spoke with Ms. Guzman on Thursday, October 28,
2010, but Ms. Guzman stated the conversation took place on Friday morning, October 29,
2010. However, that dispute does not affect the decision herein as all parties agreed
Respondent spoke with Ms. Guzman about his involvement before the student handed in his
assignment. Both Respondent and Ms. Guzman told Ms. Oesch the conversation had taken
place in the library near the Librarian. For reasons she did not explain, Ms. Oesch did not
ask Ms. Meier, the Librarian, anything at all about the conversation she had overheard
between Ms. Guzman and Respondent.

turned in the essay, that he had written it for D

11.

In a memorandum she wrote on December 9, 2010 (part of Exhibit 8), Ms.

Meier stated, in part, “While in the Library, I overheard [Respondent] talking to Ms. Guzman
about this assignment. As I remember it, [Respondent] mentioned his writing of the essay,
and I did not hear Ms. Guzman object.” In addition, Ms. Meier noted in that memorandum
that Respondent told her he was helping a student write a “report” by “doing the actual
modeling.” Both in a statement she wrote on December 1, 2010, and in her testimony, Ms.
Guzman admitted that Respondent told her, in advance of D
’s turning in the essay, that
. It was established beyond any doubt that Respondent in
he had written the essay for D
no way attempted to hide his involvement with D

.

12.

On the day following his discussion with Ms. Oesch, Respondent wrote a letter

and her acquiescence in his plan. His letter states, in part: “I remember telling

(Exhibit 5) to Ms. Guzman in which he reconfirmed that had spoken with her about his
helping D
you that I typed the essay for D
felt it was OK with you. We were not trying to ‘hide’ or ‘cheat’ on an essay. . . . I really felt
you knew and understood it was ‘my model of an essay’ in the sense that I typed it for D
and explained and demonstrated to him how to put an essay together.”

and helped him extensively on organizing the essay. I

13.

The discipline of teachers is part of Ms. McManaman’s duties. She confirmed
it is the District’s policy to use “progressive discipline” with teachers. That is, in an ordinary
case, discipline would begin with an oral reprimand, then move on to a written reprimand,
then if necessary a second written reprimand, then a suspension shorter than 25 days, then a
longer suspension if necessary, and finally, dismissal.

14. Ms. McManaman conducted an “investigation” of the incident involving
. She testified that her investigation included speaking with Ms.

Respondent and D

4

Oesch and reading Ms. Oesch’s summary of events (prepared and delivered on November
13, 2010) and Ms. Guzman’s statement, which was prepared on December 1, 2010.
However, as Ms. McManaman issued the Notice of Proposed Immediate Suspension
(Notice) on November 24, 2011 (Exhibit 17), she could not have read Ms. Guzman’s
statement prior to issuing the Notice. Thus, Ms. McManaman’s “investigation” consisted of
her reading Ms. Oesch’s summary. She did not speak with Respondent prior to issuing the
Notice, nor did she speak with Ms. Guzman, Ms. Meier or D
spoken with them, it is likely she would have realized that Respondent had been open about
his involvement with D
appropriate admonishment regarding his over-zealousness in coming to a student’s aid, rather
than being suspended for it.

. It is also likely that Respondent would have received the

beforehand. Had she

15.

In the Notice, Ms. McManaman told Respondent that she would be

recommending to the Governing Board that he be suspended for 25 working days. The
Notice stated that the proposed suspension was for “dishonesty,” “refusal to obey”
regulations promulgated by the Governing Board, and for his “willful refusal to perform
regular assignments without reasonable cause.” The Notice stated that, although Respondent
had written “all or a substantial portion of an essay paper for D
or reasonably should have known that [D
work for course credit.” Perhaps had Ms. McManaman spoken to Respondent, or Ms.
Guzman, or Ms. Meier, or even D
(or reasonably should have known) that Ms. Guzman was well aware of Respondent’s
participation in the writing of the essay before D
not have actually passed-off the paper as his own.

, before she issued the Notice, she would have known

] was going to turn the paper in as his own

turned in the work and that D

H.,” Respondent “knew

could

16.

The Accusation, based on the information contained in the Notice, alleges
three separate but inter-related grounds for discipline. The First Cause for Suspension is
Respondent’s alleged violation of Board Policy (BP). BP 5131, referenced in the
Accusation, deals with student conduct. In particular, item 7 of this policy prohibits a
student from committing plagiarism, and requires District employees to “provide appropriate
supervision to enforce” this standard of conduct. BP 5151.9 requires staff (including
Respondent) to create and maintain “a positive school climate that encourages honesty.” The
Accusation alleges that not only did Respondent fail to report D
actually participated in that fraud in violation of the regulations.

’s “academic fraud,” he

17.

The Second Cause for Suspension alleges that Respondent “willfully refused
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” by “knowingly assisting a student
in cheating.” This allegation is not otherwise explained, defined or described in the pleading.
The Third Cause for Discipline alleges that Respondent “engaged in dishonesty by
knowingly assisting a student in cheating on an academic assignment.”

18.

In his 28 years with the District, Respondent has never received a negative
performance evaluation. No one from the District who was involved in this disciplinary
process felt it would have been appropriate to reprimand Respondent, but rather they felt that
his conduct was so dishonest and “outrageous” that it warranted immediate suspension.

5

While his conduct may have gone beyond the bounds of “helping a student,” the evidence
established that Respondent never attempted to hide his involvement with David’s
assignment, which was fully known to Ms. Guzman before David handed in his paper. Thus
he did not deceive, or attempt to deceive, anyone. Nor could Respondent have reasonably
believed that David would attempt to “palm-off” the essay as his own. From Respondent’s
perspective, David’s teacher was fully aware of Respondent’s involvement in its writing so
she could not reasonably believe that the work was David’s.

LEGAL CONCLUSONS

1.

2.

A permanent District employee may be dismissed for cause only after a

dismissal hearing. (Sections 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

Under section 44944, subdivision (b), the dismissal hearing must be

conducted by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence. Two members of
the Commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the respondent and one by the
district, and the third member of the Commission must be an administrative law judge from
the Office of Administrative Hearings.

3.

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may

only vote for or against it. Likewise, when suspension is recommended, the Commission
may only vote for or against suspension. The Commission may not dispose of a charge of
dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Section 44944, subdivision
(c)(1)(3).)

4.

The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, if he or she is to prevail

on a particular fact, to establish by evidence a requisite degree of belief or conviction
concerning such fact. (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d
1121, 1128.)

5.

The customary degree of proof for noncriminal cases is the preponderance-of-

the-evidence standard. It requires a party to convince the trier of fact that the existence of a
fact sought to be proved is more probable than its nonexistence. The standard of proof in a
teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence. (Ibid.; Gardner v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.)

6.

Education Code section 44932 provides in part:

(a)

No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or more of

the following causes:

[¶] . . . [¶]

6

(3)

Dishonesty.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(7)

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the
State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing
him or her . . . ”

7.

Section 44932, subdivision (b) provides that a district may suspend a
permanent employee without pay for a specific period of time if it follows the same
procedures as for dismissal of a permanent employee.

8.

Section 44939 provides in part:

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified by the person
filing them with the governing board of a school district, or upon a written
statement of charges formulated by the governing board, charging a permanent
employee of the district with immoral conduct, . . . with willful refusal to
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, . . . the
governing board may, if it deems such action necessary, immediately suspend
the employee from his duties and give notice to him of his suspension, and that
30 days after service of the notice, he will be dismissed, unless he demands a
hearing.

9.

Although the Accusation alleges three bases for Respondent’s suspension, the
essence of the allegations is that Respondent’s conduct, as set forth in Findings 3 through 7,
involved dishonesty. The word “dishonesty” has been defined as “not honest, lying,
cheating, etc.” (Webster’s New World Dictionary of American English, Third College
Edition, 1988.) In Midway School District v. Griffeath (1946) 29 Cal. 2d 13, 18, the
California Supreme Court held: “An approved definition of dishonesty connotes a
disposition to deceive.” As used in the Accusation, “dishonesty” is used as a synonym for
“deceit” which “implies an intent to make someone believe what is not true, as by giving a
false appearance, using fraud, etc.” (Webster’s, supra.) In Paulino v. Civil Service
Commission (1985) 175 Cal.App.3d 962, 972, the appellate court held: “Dishonesty is not an
isolated act; it is more a continuing trait of character.”

10.

No evidence was presented that Respondent has dishonesty as “a continuing

trait” of his character. Overzealousness in helping a student does not equate with dishonesty.
Nor does it equate with Respondent violating school regulations prohibiting student
plagiarism or his duty to promote honesty as a school virtue. In short, the District simply

7

failed to establish that Respondent should have been suspended for the acts alleged in the
Accusation.

11.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the
California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching
profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger
of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions
as a teacher.” The court concluded that a teacher’s conduct cannot abstractly be
characterized as “immoral,” “unprofessional,” or “involving moral turpitude” unless the
conduct indicated that a teacher is unfit to teach. (Id. at p. 229.) The court set forth
guidelines to aid in determining whether the conduct in question indicated this unfitness.
However, as it has been determined that the conduct did not occur as alleged, it is not
necessary to discuss the “Morrison factors” as they relate to that conduct.

ORDER

The Accusation and Statement of Charges are dismissed.

DATED:

DATED:

DATED:

RALPH B. DASH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

MARJORIE SEPULVDA
Commission Member

PATRICIA CAILLIER
Commission Member

8

