. 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

GLORIA  HSI  (EN  272969)  a  permanent 
certificated  employee, 

OAH  No.  2011060146 

7 

: 

  

Respondent. 

 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  October  8-18,  2012,  and  May  13-21,  2013, 
The  Commission  consists  of  Arthur  Eddy,  Timothy  D.  Moore,  and  Administrative  Law 
Judge  Erlinda  G.  Shrenger,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California, 

Meredith  G,  Karasch,  Attorney  at  Law,  Liebert  Cassidy  Whtimore,  represented 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Rosemary  Ward,  Attorney at Law,  represented Gloria Hsi  (Respondent), who  was 

present  each  day  of  the  hearing.  Richard  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  associated  in  as  co- 
counsel  for  Respondent  and  appeared  on  some  of  the  hearing  days. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  and  argument  was  heard,!  The  case 

was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  on  May  21,  2013.  The 
Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session, 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

lL. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  On  or  about  June  2, 

2011,  the  District  filed  and  served  on  Respondent  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges, 

  

'  The  ALJ  took  custody  of  medical  records  Respondent  produced  during  the  hearing 

in  May  2013,  pursuant  to  the  District's  Notice  to  Appear  and  Produce  Documents  under  Code 
of  Civil  Procedure  section  1987.  Those  records  were  not  offered  or  marked  during  the 
hearing,  The  ALJ  returned  the  medical  records  to  Respondent's  counsel  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  hearing  on  May  21,  2013. 

which  contained  charges  1  through  4  relating  to  an  incident  on  September  17,  2010  involving 
student  Cynthia‘  F.  Respondent  had  be  en  given  a Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  a  Notice 
of  Suspension  on  January  18,  2011  for  thé  incident  with  Cynthia  F.  Respondent  filed  a 
Notice  of  Defense  which  contained  a  request for  a  hearing  to  contest  the  charges  i  in  the 
Accusation. 

2. 

On  or  Sbdtit'August 10,  2012,  the  District  filed  and  served  on Respondent  an 

Amended  Accusation  and: Statement  of  Charges, whieh  doatainéd  the fo 
original Accusation and additional  charges  5 through 22.  Respondent  filed'a  Notice  of 
“Defense  which  contained  a  request  fora  hearing  to‘contest  the  chargés.in  the  Amended 
Amerided  Accusation  by 

Accusation.  At  the  hearing  i in  May,  the  District  amend 
adding  charge  23  and  making  a  few miftor  ‘cottections”  “As  a inatter  of  law,  the  new  charge, 
charge  23,  was  deeined coiitroverted.  (Gov.  Code,  8  14507. ) 

   

© 

   
By  order  of ‘the  ‘Administrative  L 
    
  
  
parts: 

chatges.t  thtdugh  4° was  taken  0 on  October  8- 

a Tadge,  the  hearing  on  the  Amended 

Accusation  was  held'in  two 

Evidence 

3. 

 

     

   

on  1985  to 

jed:by  the  District 

   

Elementary for  one  yedr..  She  taught  as 
Hoover  Elementary  until  2004, 

tp 
we 

$'( 

id 

  

to thitd  prade)  at 

6. 

In  approximately  2004,  the  District  removed  Respondent-from  her  classroom 

   
‘6thiée'as’ 

at  Hoover  Elementary  and  commenced  disciplinary  action  to  terminaté  hét  employment. . 
While  that  prior  disciplinary action  was  pendirig,  Respondent  w was assigned  to  the Local 
District’ 
spend  Her  Work  day  at  the  Hocal  District  4:  office tntiet  of  reporting’  to  her’school  site.  The 
Local  District  4  office  was,  at  that  time,  located in  the  Harbor  Building.  The  prior 
disciplinary  a  action  anid  the Disttier's S  appeals’ wer’  finally  concluded  i i  March  2009. 

    

(ony 

2."The  amendments  are  shown  by  the  ALJ's  interlineations  on  the  Amended 

Accusation  (Exh.  75), 

  

  

 

Respondent  remained  employed  by  the  District.  Respondent  was  a  housed  employee  at  the 
Harbor  Building  from  approximately  2004  until  January  2010. 

° 

7. 

The  District  assigned  Respondent  to  Franklin  High  School  as  a  special  day 
class  teacher  starting  in  January  2010.  Respondent  taught  at  Franklin  High  School  for  the 
2010  spring  semester  (February  to  June  2010).  She  returned  to  this  assignment  for  the  2010 
fall  semester,  which  began  on  September  13,  2010.*  Respondent  was  removed  from  her 
classroom  at  Franklin  High  School  after  the  first  week  of  the  fall  semester,  Effective 
September  20,  2010,  Respondent  was  assigned  as  a  housed  employee  to  the  Local  District  4 
office,  which  was  now  located  on  the  eleventh  floor  of  the  District's  headquarters  office  on 
Beaudry  Avenue.  Respondent  was  a  housed  employee  from  September  2010  until 
approximately  August  2012, 

: 

8. 

The  Amended  Accusation  seeks  to  have  Respondent  dismissed  from  her 
employment  with  the  District,  based  on  allegations  related  to  Respondent's  conduct  at 
Franklin  High  School  during  the  2010  spring  and  fall  semesters,  and  at  thé  Local  District  4 
office  during  the  most  recent  period  she  was  a  housed  employee. 

2010  Spring  Semester 

9. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2010  spring  semester,  Respondent  exhibited 
problems  with  classroom  management  by  routinely  and  inappropriately  sending  students  to 
the  Dean's  office,  as  follows: 

(A)  Respondent  sent  students  to  the  Dean's  office  for  minor  behaviors  or 

disruptions,  such  as  talking  out  of  turn,  not  following  her  instructions,  not  listening  to  her, 
using  electronic  devices  during  class,  and  not  removing  baseball  caps.  Referrals  to  the 
Dean's  office  for  these  types  of  minor  behaviors  was  inappropriate,  as  these  were  the  types  of 
minor  student  behaviors  that  teachers  were  expected  to  handle  themselves.  Franklin  High 
School  followed  the  district-wide  policy  of  progressive  discipline.  Progressive  discipline;  in 
general,  means  that  a  teacher  will  use  the  least  severe  discipline  first  (e.g.,  verbal  warning) 
and  move  in  steps  to  progressively  more  severe  discipline  if  the  student's  misbehavior 
continues  (e.g.,  sending  student  to  Dean's  office,  suspension;  or  expulsion).  '  Progressive 

*  The  students  in  Respondent's  special  day  classes  for  both  semesters  at  Franklin  High 

School  were  students  with  specific  learning  disabilities,  although  the  nature  of  the  learning 
disability  for  each  student  was  not  specified  by  the  evidence.  Under  special  education  law,  a 
specific  learning  disability  is  defined  as  "a  disorder  in  one  or  more  of  the  basic  psychological 
processes  involved  in  understanding  or  in  using  language,  spoken  or  written,  which  may 
manifest  itself  in  the  imperfect  ability  to  listen,  think,  speak,  read,  write,  spell,  or  perform 
mathematical  calculations."  (Educ.  Code,  §  56337,  subd.  (a).) 
problem  that  is  primarily  the  result  of  visual,  hearing,  or  motor  disabilities,  intellectual 
disabilities,  or  emotional  disturbance.  (fd) 

It  does  not  include  a  learning 

discipline  appliés  to  spétial  education  students  as,  allowed  by  their  IEP.*  Sending  a student 
to  the  Dean's  office is  generally  appropriate  for serious  or  severe  student  behavior  which  the 
teacher  cannot  handle  or remedy  alone, and  only’ after  lesser  disciplinary  steps  have  failed. 

complained  A 
for  no  reason or'a 

*  Hepiekled  in! 
the  Dean's 

f 

  

Klin’ High  School  had 

computer  support 

     

several  resources  to  addréss  Classroom  managemént and  ‘student  ehavior issues,  such  as  the 
learning  center,  on-lifie  training  for  lesson  planning,  and  the  COS ‘.  program,  which  evaluates 
a  student's issues  from  a  team 
claiti is  tot  credible)  ds  thie  evidence 
résdurces  becatise'tt 
established  that  the  resdurces:were  pub  icized.  to  teachiéts  at various’ ‘meéetitigs,  professional 
developirent  days;  and  written  bulletins?  Despite  the  supports  given  and  available  at  the 
school; “Respondent's problei  with  inappropriately  referring  students: to the  Dean's  office  did 
not:  improve. 

srspective.  Respondent  claimed  she  was  unaware  of  the 
‘Offeied- te  hef-  Such 

  

: 

“TEP  statids  for  individualized  education  program.  Tt is  the  document  that  identifies 
the  special  6ducation  needs  of  the  student  and  the  set'vices and #  Supports  to  bé  provided  to  the 
student  to  address  those  needs. 

  

 

11. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2010  spring semester  Respondent  failed  to 

read  the  IEPs  of some  of  her  students.  Respondent  testified,  "I  don't  teach  by  reading  the 
TEP."  She  testified  that  she  does  not  trust  the  information  contained in  an  IEP  written  by 
someone  else.  Her  practice  is  to  get  to  know  the  student  first  so  she  car  determine  if  the 
information in  the  student's  IEP is  true.  The  IEPs  were  onthe  Welligent  computer  system, 
which  the  District  began  using  in  2002.  Special  education  teachers  aecess  the  IEPs  for  each 
of  the  students in  his  or  her  caseload  through  the  internet  using  an  access  code  issued  to  each 
teacher.  Once  a  student  enrolls  in  high  school,  the  schoo!  and  the  student's  teacher  has 
immediate  access  to  the  student's  JEP  through  the  Welligent  system,  24  hours  a  day,  A. 
record  of  Respondent's  training  history  with  the  District  established  that  she  completed  an 
introductory  Welligent  course  on  March  22,  2010.  Despite  having  completed  that  course, 
Respondent  continued  to  have  difficulty  accessing  IEPs  on  the  Welligent  system.  She  was 
unable  to  input  IEPs  into  the  Welligent  system  without  assistance.  At  the  hearing  in  May, 
Respondent  testified  she  was  currently  taking  a  basic  computer  class  but  was  unable  to 
remember  what  she  was  learning  i in  the  class  or  even  when  the  class  started. 

12. 

—  It  was alleged,  but  not  established  by  sufficient  evidence,  that  during  the  2010 

spring  semester,  on  one  occasion,  Respondent  lost  her  temper  and  pushed  a  desk,  hitting  a 
student. 

, 

2010  Fall  Semester 

13. 

It  was  established  that,  on  September  17,  2010,  during  fourth period,  the 
following  incident  occurred in  Respondent's classroom:  Student  CIF.  was.a  ninth 
— 
grader in  the  class.  Chad a  large  purse  that  would  not  fit  on  the  small  shelf  under  the 
seat  of  the  chair  attached  to  her  desk.” 
because  it  was  a  Coach  purse.  When  class  started,  the  purse  was  on  her  desk,  along  with  her 
book.  Respondent  told  Cito  put  the  purse  under  her  chair.  il  tried  but  the  purse 
would  not  fit,  and  she  told  Respondent  it  would  not  fit.  Narcisse  testified  it  was  apparent - 
from  the  size  of  the  purse  that  it  was  too  big  to  fit  under  the  chair,  Cia  put  the  purse 
back  ontop  of  her  desk. 

mi  testified  that  Respondent  had  a  mad  look  on  her  face. 

il  did  not  want  to  put  the  purse  on  the  floor 

   

mm  thought  Respondent  was  coming  towards  her  to  get  the  purse. 
purse  to  prevent  Respondent  from  taking  it..  Respondent  approached  C 

rabbed  the 
's  desk  and  took 
's  book  from  her  desk.  Teaching  assistant  Narcisse  testified  that  Respondent  walked 
the  book  to  the  back  of  the  classroom  and  dropped  the  book  on  the  floor  near  the  table  where 
Narcisse  worked,  The  book  made  a  loud  noise  when  dropped.  According  to  Narcisse, 
Respondent  then  told  eC  in  a  very  loud  and  angry  voice  to  sit  in  the  back  with  her  book. 

    

  

>  The  student  desks  are  depicted  in  photographs  (Exhibit  44)  to  be  typical  student 

desks  made  of  light  weight  steel  tube  construction.  The  writing  surface  of  the  desk is  held  up 
by  two  legs in  the  front  and  by  the  two  legs  of  the  attached  chair.  The  chair  appears  to  be 
made  of.plastic.  ‘The  right  side  of  the  writing  surface  extehds  back  towards  the  chair  to  form 
an.  arm  rest  which  closes  off  the  right  side  of  the  chair.  There is  small  wire  shelf  under  the 
chair  for  storage. 

  

  

  

G
e

 
e
t
e

 
T
R

 
e
e

 
e
e
b

 
e
G

 
S
S

 
e
e
e
r
f

  

 
e
S

 
e
a
t
‘

 

  

17. 

F Following  the 

inotdent  with  ii:.  Respondent  was ss assigned  to  the  Local 
District 4 aflige  : as'a  hotised: ertiployee  « effective  September  20,  2010. “Respondent  remained 
a  housed H  etployee from  September  2¢ 20, 2010, until approximately  August  2012. 

1 8.  All  housed  einplayees  for  Local  District  4  were  required  to.  report  to  the  Local 
District  4 office  according  to  thé  Work  schedule  of  their  school  sité:.  The  housed  employees 
were  expected  to  remain  in  the  area  designated  for  housed  employees  or  their  entire  work 
day,  except  for  their  designated  lunch  and  break  times.  Respondent's  hours  were  from  7:43 

i 

a.m.  to  2:56  p.m,,  with  a  break  from  9:58  a.m.  to  10:13  a.m.  and  lunch  from  12:17  p.m.  to 
12:52  p.m, 

19. 

The  assigned  location  for  all  housed  employees  was  a  rectangular  shaped  room 

on  the  eleventh  floor.®  The  room  had  counters  and  chairs  along  three  walls  of  the  room. 
There  was  a  large  glass  window  on  one  side  of  the  room. 

20.  _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  charge  9,  that  Respondent  used  a  Local 

District  4  copier  for  personal  copying,  in  violation  of  directives  given  to  her  that  housed 
employees  were  prohibited  from  using  equipment  designated  for  District  staff.  Paperwork 
with  Respondent's  name  was  found  on  a  District  copy  machine.’  It  was  further  established 
that  on  June  6,  2011,  Diekmann  conferenced  Respondent  and  instructed  her  in  writing  not  to 
use  equipment  designated  for  District  staff, 

21. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  was  not  in  her  assigned  location  according 
to  her  schedule,  in  violation  of  the  directives  given  to  her,  on  November  23,  2011,  at  11:00 
a.m.  and  within  the  next  hour,  as  alleged  in  charge  10,  and  on  December  6,  2011,  at  1:58 
p.m.  ahd  at  2:10  p.m,,  as  alleged  in  charge  12. 

22, 

It  was  further  established,  as  alleged  in  charge  10,  that  on  November  23,  2011, 
when  Respondent  was  absent  from  her  assigned  location  at  11:00  a.m.,  the  site  administrator 
Maureen  Diekmann  personally  checked  the  assigned  location  fouir  times  within  the  next  hour 
but  Respondent  still  had  not  returned.  When  Respondent  did  return  to  the  room,  she  told 
Diekmann.  that  she  had  been  in  the  room,  the  entire  time  doing  exercises.on.the  floor... 
Respondent  then  walked  away  from  Diekmann  in  the  middle  of  the  conversation.  When 
Diekmann  asked  where  she  was  going,  Respondent  stated  in  an  insubordinate  tone,  "Tam 
.  going  to  the  restroom;  do  you  want  to  come  with  mé?"  The  Commission  finds  Respondent's 
statement  and  conduct  towards  Diekmann,  her  site  administrator,  to  be  unprofessional  and 
insubordinate.  Further,  the  Commission  finds  that  Respondent  lied  when  she  told  Diekmann 
that  she  had  been  in  the  room  doing  exercises  on  the  floor.  Photographs  of  the  room  (Exhibit 
78)  undermine  Respondent's  claim,  Had  Respondent  been  in  the  room  as  she claimed, 
Diekmann  would  not  have  failed  to  see  her. 

23. 

On  or  about  December  13;  2011,  Respondent  was  informed  in  writing  that  she 
This 

was  required  to  sign  in  and  signi  out  when  arriving  at  or  leaving  her  assigned  location. 
requirement  was  effective  starting  on  December  15,  2011,  and  applied  to  all  housed 
employees  for  Local  District  4. 

It  was  alleged,  but  not  established  by  sufficient  evidence, 

6  The  “assigned  location"  is  marked  as  “Housed  Bay"  on  a  diagram  of  the  eleventh 

floor,  which  was  admitted  as  Exhibit  76-2.  Photographs  of  the  room  were  admitted  as 
Exhibit  78. 

. 

*  Charge  9  alleges  that  thé  violation  occurred  on  or  about  June  6,  2011.  However, 

Diekmann's  memo  regarding  the  violation  (Exhibit  61)  indicates  that  Respondent's 
paperwork  was  found  on  the.  copy  machine  on  May  20,  2011. 

7 

  

 

that  during  the  period  December  13  through  December  19,  2011,  Respondent  signed  in  and 
signed  out  only  twice. 

24,0. 

Tewas  established that  Resporident  was  not in  het  assigned.  location  according 

to  her  schedtile  and  without ‘first  having  sigtied  j in  and  signed  out,  in  violation  6f  the 
(12, 

ani. atid  10:32  am,  Avalleged  i  charge 

8:02 

at 

 

  

énitiel  § saw  Respondent ati ving  at! ‘Local  District  4at 8: ‘20  aims,  even 

2011, Disiriét  pe 
though Respondent  was scheduled 

id 

to  atrivé  at  7:43  a.m. 
* 

29: 

If was  alleged,  but  not established  by's sufficient evidence,  that  on  January  9, 

2012, District  personnel  observed  Respondent  setting  up  food  at  the  welcome  counter  in  the 
foyer,  violating  directives  given  to  Respondent  multiple  times  not  to  use  areas  or  equipment 
: 
designated  for  District  staff. 

  

Respondent's  Deposition  of April  13,  2012 

30. 

was  dishonest  when  she 

Tt  was  established  that  during  her  deposition  on  April  13,  2012,  Respondent 
produced  for  the  first  time  a  calendar  containing  a  notation  in  her 

-  writing  that  student 

F,  was  not  present  in  her  class  on  September  17,  2010. 

31. 

It  was  established  that -  during  her  deposition  on  April  13,  2012,  Respondent 
F.  was  not  present  in  her  class  on 

was  dishonest  when  she  testified  under  oath  that 
September  17,  2010, 

    

32. 

At  no  time 

prior  to  her  deposition  on  April  13,  2012,  did  Respondent  make  any 
claim  that  student  C 
F,  was  absent  on  September  17,  2010,  or  that  the  incident  — 
happened  the  day  before,  on  September  16th.  All  documentation  and  reports  show  the 
incident  occurring  on  September  17,  2010. 
does  not  show  her  being  marked  absent  for  fourth  period  on  that  date,  The  Commission 
finds  that  Respondent's  paper  calendar  for  the  month  of  September  2010,  presented  for  the  first 
time  at  her  deposition,  is  not  a  credible  document.  It  appears  to  the  Commission  that  Respondent 
fabricated  the  notation  on  the  calendar  to  support  her  claim  that  C 
September  17th,  which  claim  the  Commission  finds  to  be  unsupported  by  the  evidence  and  not 
credible. 

s  attendance  record  for  September  17th 

F.  was  absent  on 

C 

Respondent's  Contentions 

_ 

33. 

.  Respondent denied  she  committed  the  acts and violations alleged in the. 

She  contended  generally  that  the  District's  actions  regarding  her. 

Amended. Accusation. 
assignment  at  Franklin  High  School  and  as  a  housed  employee  at  the  Local  District  4  office 
were  intended  to  harass  her  and  cause  her  to  resign  from  her  employment  with  the  District. 
Respondent  contended  that  her  treatment  by  the  District  was  retaliation  for  the  favorable 
result  she  obtained 

in  the  District's  prior  disciplinary  action.’ 

34, 

. 

(A)  The  Commniission  finds  unpersuasive  Respondent's  claim  that  the  District's 

actions  were  intended  to  harass  her_and  cause  her  to  resign.  This  disciplinary  action  was 
initiated  due  to  the  incident  with  C 
F.,  which  was  caused  by  Respondent's  conduct. 
The  original  Accusation contained  four  charges,  all  of  which  were  based  on  that  incident. 
Further,  her  assignment  to  a  high  school  position  was  not  harassment  or  retaliatory.  The 
District  could  properly  assign  Respondent  to  Franklin  High  School,  as  she  held  a  special 
education  credential  that  authorized  her  to  teach  in  grades  K-12.  She  was  placed  at  Franklin 
because  there  was  an  opening  at  the  school.  During  the  spring  semester,  Franklin 
administrators  and  deans  provided  supports  when  Respondent  appeared  to  have  problems  in. 

_ 

  

®  Evidence  of  the  charges  and  allegations  in  the  prior  disciplinary  action  was 

excluded.  Those  charges  related  to  matters  beyond  the  four-year  period  under  Education 
Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

  

  

  

| 

  

| 

 

' 
7 
| 

the  classroom.  Respondent's  claim  that  she  was  given  "problem  students"  was  not 
established iby  the  evidence. 
   
Pee  @)’ rhe  | 

finds,  hidivevel  that] Reg  oindeit's assi  ament  at  Franklin 
High Schodl  was the’ wrong  placement for het ‘Resporident  had no’ ‘prior  experiénce  teaching 
in  high  school.  In  the  Six. yeats  preceding  the  assignment,  Respondent  a  a  housed 
    

nist 

gt 

p 

. 

tod 

A 

}  ntaty school, 

ient's $ only  e wxperients:  is ‘subi s Somat  ifferent Than ts teaching | in high 

 

  

  
special  day class iriclided’ Algebra I, ‘Geometty,  U.S?  History,  English;and  Biology. 

9  For  the  2010 spring  seiiestet, the ‘Subjects  Respond  i  was’ t  dived  to  teach  i  in  her 

   

  

'°  This  finding is  based  on the  experience  of  the  two  teacher  members  of  the 
Commission,  one  of whotn'is  currently  a  special  education  teachét  and  the  other  a  special 
education  teachér who  retired  last year.  As thembers  of the’ Commission,  their  experience, 
technical  competence,  and  specialized knowledge  may  be  uséd in evaluating  evidence, . 
(Gov.  Code,  §  11425.50,  subd.  (c.) 

| 

10 

  

~ 

(B)  Respondent  testified  about  her  history  of  back  problems  and  back  pain, 
She  filed  workers'  compensation  claims  during  the  2010  spring  semester  at  Franklin  High 
School  for  injuries  she  claimed  occurred  in  mid-March  2010  when  she  fell  down  the  stairs 
and  injured  her  right  arm,  neck  and  back.  She  also  filed  workers'  compensation  claims  for 
injuries  she  claimed  to  have  suffered  in  three  incidents  in  Apri]  2010,  when  she  tried  to  get  _ 
away  from  a  student  who  cornered  her,  when  she  held  the  door  of  her  classroom  closed  to 
prevent  a  student  from  leaving,  and  when  she  had  to  move  to  avoid  being  hit  by  a  white 
board  that  was  coming  towards  her. 

(C)  Respondent  presented  the  expert  witness  testimony  of  William  Simpson, 

M.D.,  to  support her  claim  that  she  was  unable  to  tilt  im:  desk,  Dr,  Simpson is  an 
orthopedic  surgeon.  He  first  met  Respondent  on  September  26,  2012.  Dr.  Simpson  opined 
that,  in  September  2010,  Respondent  did  not  have  “sufficient  functional  capacity"  to  displace 
or  overturn  a  school  desk,  or  a  school  desk  with  a  student  and  book  pack  occupying  the  desk. 
Dr.  Simpson's  opinion  was  based  on  his  review  of  Respondent's  medical  records  and 
information  about  the  il  F,  incident  reported  to  him  by  Respondent.  According  to  Dr, 
Simpson,  Respondent  had  chronic  conditions  with  her  neck,  lower  back,  right  shoulder,  and 
both  knees  that  limited  or  restricted  her  movement,  and  would  make  it  extremely  difficult 
and  improbable  for  Respondent,  who  was  a  77  year  old,  110  pound,  frail  female,  to  displace 
or  overturn  a  desk  occupied  by  a  student  and  book  pack. 

Oo 

(D)  Dr.  Simpson's  opinion  that  Respondent  lacked  "sufficient functional 

capacity 

to  displace  or  uit  Seren! s  desk  was 3  given  little weight. 

The  factual  bases  for  Dr. 

.  Thus,  his” 

was  a  17-year-old 

met  Respondent ‘until  September  2012,  two  years  after  the incident  ‘with  Cc 
opinions about  Respondent's  capabilities  two  years  earlier in  September  2010  are 
speculative.  Dr.  Simpson's  opinion  was  based  on  his  belief  that  CH 
female  student,  weighing130  pounds,  sitting  at  a  desk  weighing  41  pounds,  with  a  book  pack 
weighing  nine  pounds.  Dr.  Simpson  assumed  the  desk  and  book  pack  together  weighed  50 
pounds.  Dr.  Simpson  did  not  examine  C 
old  and  weighed  120  pounds.  Respondent  did  not  provide  him  with  information  about 
In  forming  his  opinion,  Dr.  Simpson  used  the  "average  weight"  of a 
CHM  physical  size. 
student  desk  and  “average  weight"  of a  17-year-old  student,  which  he  claimed  he  researched 
on  the  internet.  However,  at  this  hearing,  Dr,  Simpson  could  not  identify  all  of  the  websites. 
he  used  to  reach  his  opinion,  and  it  was  shown  that  one  of  the  websites  he  identified 
displayed  the  message,  “Coming  Soon!"  Dr.  Simpson  did  not  know  any  of  the  specifications 
of  the  student  desks  in  Respondent's  classroom.  He  did  not  personally  examine  the  desks  or 
weigh  a  desk,  or  view  any  photos  of  the  desk. 
purse/book  pack  weighed  nine  pounds,  based  on  his  personal  experience  with  his  own 
children  and  their  book  packs. 

,  who  at  the  time  of  the  incident  was  14  years 

Dr.  Simpson  assumed  that  C 

'S 

oo 

~ 

Other  F indings  | 

36. 

The  Commission  finds  that  Respondent  would  be  a  detriment  to students  if  she 

is  returned  to  the  classroom,  for  the  following  reasons: 

11 

  

  

 

(A)  Resjiohdent's  tenipérament calises  her  difficulty  swith  t managing  students in 

het  classtodm:  At  Franklin; she had dif  culty  getting  students  to comply  with’ simple 

 

     1 tte  School  and  the 

BODY  Respondent's  crédibility suk  ered as  a Festi 

of  her’  § sometimes  inconsistent, 
incoherent,  and  confusing  statements.  During questioning  by  thé District's  counsel,  she 
appeared  to  have  selective  memory  and  selective  ability  to  comprehend  what  appeared  to  be 
straightforward  questions. 

eae  ed 

  

12 

Morrison  Factors 

40, 

Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an  examination 
must  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  Respondent  in  question  is  unfit  to 
teach.  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  | 
Cal.3d  214,  229.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  factors  that  may  be  examined  to  determine 
fitness  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  and,  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the 
conduct.  Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  extenuating  or 
ageravating  circumstances;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct;  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in  question  will  recur;  and,  the  extent  that  discipline 
will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved,  or 
other  teachers, 

41. 

(A)  Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the  degree  thereof:  — 
There  was  adverse  consequences  for  students  in  Respondent's  classes.  Tilting  ci:  desk 
and  causing  her  to  fall  out  of  her  chair  caused  her  humiliation,  if  not  actual  injury. 
Inappropriately  sending  students  to  the  Dean's office  or  out  of  the  classroom  caused  students 
to  lose  instructional  time.  Respondent's  inability  to  properly  manage  a  student's 
misbehaviors in  her  classroom  has  adverse  consequences  on  the  teacher in  the  student's  next 
class,  and  on the  overall  credibility  ot all  teachers  at  the  school  with  students: 

| 

(B)  Proximity  in time:  Respondent's  conduct  1 is  recent,  having  occurred in  the 

period  201 Ot to 0  2012. 

©)1 Type  of certificate  held  by  t the  teacher:  Respondent's  credential  authorizes 

her  to  teach  specia!  education  students,  who  are  typically  the  most  vulnerable  students  on  a 
school campus.  Respondent’ s  conduct is  not  consistent  with  pr otecting  the  interests  of  those 
students, 

(D)  Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances:  An  extenuating  factor  in  this 
case  is  that  Respondent's  placement  at  Franklin  High  School  was  wrong  and  not  one  where 
she  was  likely  to  succeed,  given  her  lack  of  high  school  teach  experience,  This  factor  does 
not  excuse  Respondent's  conduct.  Respondent  failed  in  her  responsibility,  as  a  teacher,  to 
take  steps  and.  prepare  herself  for  the  assignment. 

(E)  Likelihood  the  conduct  in  question  will  recur;  Respondent's  conduct  at 
issue  is  likely  to  recur.  By  temperament,  she  is  inflexible  and  resistant  to  change.  She  has 
not  acknowledged  responsibility  for  any  of  her  conduct  at  Franklin  High  School  or  at  the 
Local  District  4  office. 

(F)  Chilling  Effect  on  Constitutional  Rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of  either 

Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated  for  her  conduct 
described  in  this  decision. 

. 

13 

  

 

42, 

Under  all  of  the  circumstances,  Respondent's  conduct  establishes  that  she  is 

unfit  to  teach in  the  District, within  the  meaning  of  the  Morrision decision,  and  she  should  be 
terminated. as  a  teacher. , 

Bebe 

*  LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

  

immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  (subd.  (a)(1));  piste dar  ee  ciwatisfactory 
performance  (subd,  (a)4)y. evident  unfitness,  for Servise  (sub,  (ay(5)); and | persistent    
employing.  school  district (s ibd. ‘(a\(7)).  3 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44939  sets  forth  the  grounds  for  the  immediate 

suspension  of  a  permanent  employee,.which  include  but  are  not  limited  to  willful  refusal  to 
-  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause. 

14

  

  

i 
| | 

7. 

"Unprofessional  conduct"  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules 

or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a 
profession  in  good  standing."  (Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

/ 

8. 

"Dishonesty"  has  been  defined  as  conduct  that  "connotes  a  disposition  to 

deceive"  and  "necessarily  includes  the  element  of  bad  faith.”  It  means  "fraud,  deception, 
betrayal,  faithlessness,"  and  "denotes  an  absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive 
or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray."  (Midway  School  District  v.  Griffith  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  13.) 

9. 

"Unsatisfactory  performance”  was  substituted  for  the  term  "incompetency" 

pursuant  to  a  1995  amendment  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 
Incompetency,  as  a  ground  for  teacher  dismissal,  "is  a  plain  word  and  means  not  competent. 
Competent,  in  turn,  means  properly  or  well  qualified;  capable-adequate  for  the  purpose, 
suitable;  sufficient."  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149 
Cal.App.3d  1167,  1175  (citation  omitted).)  In  Perez,  the  court  noted  that  "the  teacher 
members  of  the  Commission  have  the  professional  experience  and  skill  meaningfully  to 
assess  teacher  competence."  (/d.) 

10. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  "clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  tempermental  defects  or  inadequacies, 
Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district."  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  . 

11, 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  of  the 
school  district's  regulations  or  rules  must  be  either  "persistent"  or  "motivated  by  an  attitude 
of  continuous  insubordination."  (Governing  Bd.  of  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman 
(1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81.)  "The  word  'persistent'  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as 
‘refusing  to  relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  ...  stubborn;  persevering 
..  constantly  repeated.’  And  in  the  judicial  decisions  of  this,  as  well  as  other  states,  the  word 
has  been  interpreted  to  mean  'continuing  or  constant.'"  (Seaman,  supra,  28  Cal.App.3d  at  p. 
82.) 

12. 

The  term  "immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  - 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

if 

Ht 

15 

  

   

Grounds for  Dismissal 

13. 

Code  section  44939, for 
       

°  Caiise  doés  not  exist  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  pursuant  to  Education 
tabi  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 

iif  I refusal Lt 

 

employee, “based  on  Factual Findings  9-11;  13-1 
. 
Conclusion.  10, 

setuak ‘Piiditigs  40-42;  SHORT “Tes  Settled  that  otal  "Morrison 
Morrison  as'sét  forth in 
factors"  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Bod¥d  of ABC 
School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis 
need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the 
accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  "When  the  camel's  back is  broken  we  need  not 
-weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which  one  could  have  done  the  deed."  (  Woodland,  supra, 
2.  Cal: App.4th  at  p.  1457.) 

16 

21. 

~"The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 
unfitness  to  teach...  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction." 
(California Teachers  Assoc,  v,  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.  4th  327,  343-344.  )  The 
unanimous  decision  of  the  Commission is  that  Respondent's  dismissal is  the  appropriate 
sanction. 

. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Gloria  Hsi  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  August  JG ,  2013 

DATED:  August,  2013 

DATED:  August,  2013 

ihe) Edge 

Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

TIMOTHY  D.  MOORE 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

17 

  

i 
5 
j 
j

  

21. 

"The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach  ...  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction." 
(California  Teachers  Assoc.  v.  State  of California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.)  The 
unanimous  decision  of  the  Commission  is  that  Respondent's  dismissal  is  the  appropriate 
sanction. 

: 

ORDER 

Respondent  Gloria  Hsi  is hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  August  ___,  2013 

DATED:  August  “7 ,  2013 

. 

Ca  » Wore 

5 

ARTHUR  EDDY 
Member 
Commission,  on  Professional  Competence 

wis  MOORE 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

- 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 

~  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DATED:  August,  2013 

17 

  

| 

|

  

21, 

"The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach  ...  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction." 
(California  Teachers  Assoc.  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.)  The 
unanimous  decision  of  the  Commission  is  that  Respondent's  dismissal  is  the  appropriate 
sanction. 

‘ 

: 

ORDER 

Respondent  Gloria  Hsi  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

; 
certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  Schoo!  District. 

DATED:  August,  2013 

 

DATED:  August,  2013 

DATED:  August  46,  2013 

ARTHUR  EDDY 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

TIMOTHY  D.  MOORE 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

~ 

4 

1 

, 

X 

ERLINDA  G,  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

17 

