BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

CHRISTOPHER ONTIVEROS,
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

OAH Case No. 2011110601

DECISION

On December 3-7, and 10-13, 2012, and July 18, 19, and 22-25, 2013, Daniel Juárez,

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this matter,
together with Commission Members Joseph McEachron and James Vaughan, at Anaheim,
California.

Stutz Artiano Shinoff & Holtz, and Daniel R. Shinoff, Esq., Gil Abed, Esq., and

Jeanne Blumenfeld, Esq., represented Complainant Anaheim Union High School District
(AUHSD).

Dale M. Fiola, Esq., represented Christopher Ontiveros (Respondent). Respondent

was present on each day of hearing.

The record was left open until October 14, 2013, for the parties to file closing and

reply briefs. The parties filed briefs timely; they were marked for identification.

The parties submitted the matter for decision on October 14, 2013.

STATEMENT OF THE CASE

AUHSD seeks the dismissal of Respondent, contending he engaged in immoral or

unprofessional conduct, displayed evident unfitness for service, and persistently violated or
refused to obey school laws and regulations. More specifically, AUHSD contended that,
among other things, Respondent sexually communicated, interacted, and touched a minor
female student in a sexual manner, sent her sexually explicit and otherwise inappropriate text
messages and electronic mail (email) messages, and posed in inappropriate photographs with
the student.

1

Respondent denied inappropriate contact with the student. He argued that the student

used a digital technology commonly available on the internet to make the improper text
messages falsely appear to have originated from Respondent’s cellular telephone. He denied
all of the other allegations pled by AUHSD.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent, certificated employee of AUHSD. He holds a

clear single subject credential with authorizations in social science and English.

2.

At all times relevant to the issues herein, Respondent was a teacher at Oxford
Academy (OA). OA is a college preparatory school, within AUHSD, from grades seven to
12. OA is a well regarded and academically rigorous school.

3.

AUHSD has employed Respondent as a teacher since August 2000. He has

been married for approximately 19 years. He has five daughters.

Pre-Hearing Procedural History

4.

On September 22, 2011, before a properly noticed meeting, Complainant

Russell Lee-Sung, Superintendent of Human Resources, filed the Statement of Charges with
the Governing Board of AUHSD (Board).

On September 23, 2011, the Board served Respondent with a Notice of

Intention to Dismiss and a Statement of Charges.

On October 7, 2011, Respondent requested an administrative hearing.

On a date undetermined by the evidence, AUHSD filed the Accusation and

Statement of Charges. AUHSD filed the First Amended Accusation on March 29, 2012, and
the Second Amended Accusation on or about September 20, 2012. Respondent was deemed
to have controverted the allegations and charges in the amended pleadings, in accordance
with Government Code section 11507.

8.

The parties met all jurisdictional requirements.

5.

6.

7.

Jane Doe

9.

Jane Doe1 came to the United States at age six from South Korea. She lived in

her family home with her mother, father, and two younger siblings. Since seventh grade,
Doe attended OA. Doe received good grades at OA. In the 2008-2009 school year, Doe was

1 The pseudonym, “Jane Doe,” is used to preserve the student’s privacy.

2

a high school junior. In that year, Doe was a student in Respondent’s advanced placement
(AP) United States History class, known by its acronym, “APUSH.”

10.

In her junior year, Doe was 16 years old in the fall semester, and 17 years old
in the spring semester. During that school year, Doe was experiencing personal, social, and
academic stress. Among other things, Doe felt that her parents were unaffectionate with her,
she had no friends at school, she and her family were having immigration problems, she
feared she would not be able to enter college, and she was experiencing conflict with her
mother regarding her mother’s religion. Further, Doe was actively experiencing bulimia.
Doe had a history of bulimia, dating back to middle school. Doe had a reduced class
schedule at OA due to her health problems.

Respondent and Doe

11.

During her junior year, Doe developed an intensive, personal relationship with

Respondent. Respondent and Doe began speaking outside of the APUSH class and the
discussions ranged from class-related topics to personal, non-class related topics. Doe
eventually placed her trust in Respondent as her confidant and mentor.

12.

In January 2009, Doe disclosed to Respondent that she believed her parents
did not love her and further related to him those problems described in Factual Finding 10.
Thereafter, Respondent became more attentive to her. Respondent offered to help her by,
among other things, researching helpful information about eating disorders, summer
programs, and colleges. Respondent also prepared food at his home and brought it to her at
school. As Respondent and Doe continued to talk and interact, their relationship became
more personal and intimate. Respondent showed intense interest in Doe’s personal needs.
During this time, Doe continued to experience significant personal and emotional problems.

13.

In an email, dated February 9, 2009, from Doe to Respondent, Doe stated that

things were better at home and that she was going to begin seeing a psychiatrist and engaging
in therapy sessions. Doe’s personal problems, however, continued and she related these
continuing problems to Respondent during their personal conversations.

14.

In early 2009, Doe and Respondent began to develop romantic feelings for

each other. They flirted with each other.

Respondent’s RV

15.

In February 2009, in response to Doe confiding in Respondent that she was

having trouble studying and dealing with her bulimia, Respondent suggested to Doe that she
move into his recreational vehicle (RV). Indeed, one of Doe’s health care providers
suggested a change in environment for her. Respondent owned an RV that he kept parked on
his home property.

3

16.

Doe related Respondent’s offer to her parents. Doe’s mother saw the potential

arrangement as an offer to assist Doe with her studies during a time when Doe was having
serious health problems and conflict at home with her parents. Doe’s mother also had
concerns with the arrangement, but she trusted Respondent and believed the situation would
serve Doe’s educational and health needs. During Doe’s mother’s testimony at hearing, it
became clear that, due at least in part to their cultural background, Doe’s parents hold
teachers in high regard and consequently, Doe’s mother placed significant trust and faith in
Respondent as Doe’s teacher.

17.

In March 2009, Respondent and his wife met with Doe and Doe’s mother to

discuss his proposal that Doe stay in his RV.

18.

Respondent and his wife drafted documents related to Doe’s stay in the RV.
Doe’s mother signed a document, dated April 29, 2009, prepared by Respondent, entitled,
“Expectations for staying with the Ontiveros.’” That document listed the following
expectations, “1) there will be a “trial stay” first to discover if this is a step in the right
direction for [Jane]; 2) if the trial is promising, we will continue with more stays; 3) if and
when it does not work out, either for [Jane], her parents, or the Ontiveros’, we may reduce
the stays, or discontinue; 4) regular overnight stays with parents will continue weekly; 5)
[Jane’s] parents will continue to arrange for her medical care including transportation to and
from appointments; 6) [Jane] may accompany the Ontiveros’ on our errands and family
activities (children’s classes after school); 7) [Jane] will have privacy and evening time to
complete schoolwork; 8) Ontiveros’ will transport to and from school; 9) [Jane] will call her
parents frequently to relate her whereabouts.”

19.

Doe and Doe’s parents signed a “Liability Release Form,” dated April 29,
2009, releasing Respondent and his wife from liability for personal injuries and damages
“occasioned by, or in connection with auto transportation to and from their residence and at
any other time.”

20. Much later during her stay in the RV, on May 4, 2009, Doe’s parents signed a

form that authorized Respondent and his wife to consent to Doe’s medical treatment, if
needed, until Doe turned 18 years old. Doe turned 18 in December 2009.

21.

In March 2009, Doe’s mother met with Kathy Scott (Scott), OA’s principal.

Doe’s mother inquired with Scott about Respondent. Scott was surprised by the RV
proposal; she thought it was a poor idea. The evidence failed to establish the specific
discussion between Scott and Doe’s mother. In response to questions and comments by
Doe’s mother, Scott told Doe’s mother that Respondent was a good teacher and that
Respondent and his wife were “good people.”

22.

Thereafter, Scott spoke with Respondent and Respondent’s wife and conveyed

her opinion that the RV proposal was not a good idea. Respondent became defensive in the
meeting, telling Scott the proposal was their idea and their private business. Scott notified

4

others in administration and determined that the arrangement was a “gray area.” She did not
feel she could stop the arrangement.

23.

Respondent contested Scott’s testimony, but his assertions, that she was being
untruthful, were without support. Scott testified credibly; there was no evidence to support a
finding that Scott was untruthful, other than Respondent’s assertions. Additionally, in light
of the finding that Respondent lacked credibility overall (see Factual Finding 173), his attack
on Scott’s truthfulness was unpersuasive. The majority of Scott’s assertions were credited.

Doe’s Use of Respondent’s Classroom

24.

In March 2009, Scott became aware that Doe was using Respondent’s

computer alone in his classroom with Respondent’s knowledge and permission. On March
26, 2009, at 11:19 p.m., via email, Doe asked Respondent for permission to use his
classroom during the fifth to seventh periods. At 11:37 p.m., in a responsive email,
Respondent wrote, “Room 106 is yours anytime.” Room 106 was Respondent’s classroom.
Scott told Doe that using Respondent’s classroom alone was not appropriate and she directed
Doe to use the school’s resources at the school’s library or counseling office. When Scott
talked to Respondent about Doe’s use of his classroom, Respondent defended Doe’s use of it,
saying that she was working on various academic program applications. Respondent
continued to allow Doe to use his classroom when no one was in it. He also began spending
time with her alone in it.

25.

In his classroom, with no one else present, Respondent and Doe watched

movies including, “West Side Story,” and “Moulin Rouge.” AUHSD argued that
Respondent did so to plant the notion of prohibited love in Doe’s mind. The evidence did
not establish that particular intention. However, it was nonetheless concerning that
Respondent found it appropriate to view movies with Doe in his classroom alone.

26.

In his classroom, Respondent kept a medicine ball (a heavy ball meant for

exercise). He used it for various classroom activities. On at least one occasion, Respondent
used the medicine ball with Doe, teaching Doe how to exercise with it. Respondent taught
Doe to do sit-ups while holding the medicine ball. The evidence did not establish how each
of them was positioned during this exercise. On April 26, 2009, at 8:54 p.m., Respondent
sent Doe an email (in response to Doe’s email of April 25, 2009) entitled, “latest draft of
Questbridge.” The message read, “Hi there! I hope this moves us along, word count is
263ish. imagining medicine balling, [signed] Mr. O.” (Italics added.)

27.

On April 26, 2009, at 3:45 a.m., Respondent sent Doe an email message,

entitled, “delightful image.” The message read, “strange, but can’t seem to get an image of a
medicine ball out of my head. :) amazing.”

28.

Respondent denied any improper intention by these two emails. He explained

that the first email (Factual Finding 26) was simply referencing the fact that he had shown
her how to exercise with the medicine ball. Respondent asserted that the second email

5

(Factual Finding 27) was not sexual, but only a reference to Doe getting stronger.
Respondent’s explanations of these emails were unpersuasive. The emails were improperly
intimate, had sexual undertones, and intended to convey Respondent’s sexual interest in Doe.

Doe in Respondent’s RV

29.

Doe moved into Respondent’s RV on April 29, 2009. She stayed in the RV

three to four days per week and would return to her family home the remainder of each week.
The evidence did not establish the actual days of her stay. At hearing, the parties referenced
nine days as the total days that Doe spent the night in the RV. Doe’s stay was at least nine
days. Respondent kept handwritten notes on Doe’s general schedule and activities while she
stayed in the RV. Those notes show activities from April 29, 2009, to May 28, 2009, but not
on consecutive days.

30.

At hearing, Doe conceded that, at first, while she stayed in the RV,

Respondent was helpful to her studies and her academics improved. Doe further conceded
that she found the time in the RV helpful to her emotionally by providing her with time away
from her parents at a time when she was experiencing significant conflict with them.

31.

Doe would occasionally study inside Respondent’s house with Respondent

present and assisting her. When they did so, Respondent’s wife and children were not
present. Doe would otherwise study in the RV.

32.

Respondent would drive to school with Doe and his wife on a regular basis.

Respondent’s wife was also a teacher at OA.

33.

Respondent took it upon himself to cook for Doe often. At times, Doe would

eat with Respondent and Respondent’s family. Respondent prepared Doe’s school lunch.

34.

At various times, including well before Doe’s stay in the RV (in late 2008),

Respondent would write to Doe on “Post-It” adhesive notes. During the time of her stay in
the RV, Respondent would leave such notes for Doe on her school desk, in her lunch that he
would prepare, and in the RV. Doe also wrote notes to Respondent, but it was not until
Respondent began leaving them for Doe in the RV that they became romantic and sexual. At
that point, the notes made Doe feel uncomfortable.

35.

On a date undetermined by the evidence but during Doe’s stay in the RV,

Respondent gave Doe pajamas and a blanket. Upon seeing Doe wear those gifted pajamas,
Respondent commented that fact to her. Thereafter, Respondent left one note on top of
Doe’s pajamas within the RV in a drawer Doe used exclusively during her stay. It read, “i
miss you sooo bad u don’t even know wear me for warmth for smiles for style forever.”

36.

Respondent left Doe a second handwritten note on a card together with

flowers. The evidence did not establish whether Respondent gave Doe the flowers and card
while she stayed in the RV or afterward. The card read, in part, “cry without weeping talk

6

without speaking she brings me white golden pearls stolen from the sea hanging on you’re all
that’s left to hold on to I can lose myself you, I can’t live without. there is too much to say to
make reasons too many reasons why it’s you. Truly Yours.”

37.

At hearing, Respondent asserted that the notes were “love notes” intended for,

and given to, his wife. According to Respondent, it was his custom to send her such notes
and he did so frequently throughout their marriage. He denied sending the notes described in
Factual Findings 35 and 36 to Doe. Respondent accused Doe of taking his wife’s notes and
falsely asserting that he gave them to Doe. Respondent’s assertions were not believable.
(See Factual Finding 173.) He failed to offer any other similar “love notes” to show his
asserted custom. If such notes were his custom and practice, it appears reasonable that he
would have been able to find at least one or two such notes that he or his wife would have
kept over their 19 years of marriage. Respondent’s assertion was not corroborated by, for
example, his wife’s testimony or by a written declaration from her. Respondent’s wife did
not testify at hearing.

38. While staying in the RV, Respondent assisted Doe in exercising. Among other
things, he showed Doe how to weightlift. The next day, at school, Respondent left her a note
on her classroom chair wherein, according to Doe’s testimony, he stated he was “hard,”
“horny,” and “aroused.” Doe told him she felt uncomfortable with his note. Around that
time, she made the decision to leave the RV. Doe left the RV at the end of May or very early
June 2009.

39.

Via email, Doe thanked Respondent and Respondent’s wife for inviting her to
stay in the RV. In her email, dated June 29, 2009, at 10:58 p.m., Doe wrote, “I just wanted to
share with you my improved blood test results! I improved by about 14% in blood count,
and am almost at normal range (= I cannot thank you enough for helping me in my road to
recover; your kindness and generosity is incomparable to any others – golden and admirable.
I hope you the best of this summer vacation!”

40.

Doe explained that, although she felt uncomfortable by Respondent’s

sexualized note after their weightlifting session, since Respondent had apologized to her for
the note, she believed similar actions would not reoccur. She felt comfortable ignoring
Respondent’s sexual note.

41.

Doe wrote a thank you note to Respondent’s wife that read, “Thank you for

letting me use your resources & everything else, Mrs. Ontiveros! (aka supermom!).”

42.

After Doe left the RV, Respondent became slightly detached from her. She
conceded at hearing that Respondent continued to be helpful to her in school with regard to
her eating disorder and her immigration concerns.

43. Within a few weeks of moving out of the RV, Doe and Respondent became

romantic with each other again. Respondent and Doe began to act more boldly in expressing
their attraction to each other.

7

Photographs

44.

At the end of Doe’s 11th grade school year, on June 16, 2009, Doe and

Respondent remained inside Respondent’s classroom alone. They posed together while Doe
took photographs of them using her cellular telephone.2 The eight photographs described in
Factual Findings 46-53 show poses that convey sexuality and intimacy between Respondent
and Doe that one would generally see in photographs between a husband and wife or a
boyfriend and girlfriend. They convey a lack of physical boundary and propriety that should
exist between a student and a teacher.

45.

The photographs are numbered solely for reference within this Decision. They

are as follows:

46.

Photograph 1 shows Doe’s buttocks area and Respondent’s crotch area, with

Doe’s and Respondent’s hips touching and with Doe and Respondent wearing jeans. The
picture is framed lengthwise from just above the waist to mid-thigh and widthwise to the
outer edges of their outer hips.

47.

Photograph 2 contains a similar pose and framing, with Respondent’s buttocks

area and Doe’s crotch area facing the camera.

48.

Photograph 3 shows Respondent standing behind Doe with the front of Doe’s

torso facing the camera and with Respondent’s arms around Doe’s waist and his left hand
loosely holding his right forearm. He is, in essence, hugging her around the waist from
behind her. The picture is framed lengthwise from just below Doe’s neck to her upper thigh.
Respondent’s face and body are not visible. Respondent admitted at hearing that it is he who
is standing behind Doe with his arms around her.

49.

Photograph 4 shows Respondent standing behind Doe with each of his thumbs
in her front pant pockets and the remainder of his hands loosely on Doe’s upper front thighs
over her front pant pockets. The picture is framed lengthwise from just above Doe’s waist to
her mid-to-low thighs.

50.

Photograph 5 shows Respondent standing in front of Doe, facing Doe, with
each of his thumbs in her rear pant pockets and the remainder of his hands touching Doe’s
buttocks over her rear pant pockets. The picture is framed lengthwise from Doe’s mid-back
to the bottom of her buttocks.

51.

Photograph 6 shows Respondent’s and Doe’s hands touching with their pinky
fingers intertwined. The picture is framed lengthwise from their wrists to approximately an
inch above the top of their hands and widthwise just beyond the outer sides of their hands.

2 All references to “telephone” mean cellular telephone.

8

52.

Photograph 7 shows Respondent sitting in a reclined position. He is wearing
jeans and the photograph encompasses his right leg from the mid-calf to his waist. His torso
is not visible. Doe’s right leg is resting on Respondent’s thigh; her calf is resting on
Respondent’s upper thigh. Her calf is very close, just a few inches, from Respondent’s
crotch. Doe is wearing jeans. The photograph shows only Doe’s right foot to her upper
thigh; the rest of her body is not visible.

53.

Photograph 8 shows Respondent’s and Doe’s feet exposed (no socks or shoes)

with Doe’s foot over Respondent’s foot. It does not appear that they are touching, but they
are, at most, less than one inch apart. They are wearing jeans. The picture is framed to
include their feet and legs up to their mid-calves and the rest of the picture encompasses the
floor.

54.

There are several pictures that show Respondent’s and Doe’s faces close

together, possibly touching although the pictures could not establish that they were indeed
touching. Those pictures, while odd and cause for concern, were not inappropriate in the
same intimate manner as the others already described.

55.

The framing of the pictures is noted herein because Respondent asserted at

hearing that he did not know how Doe was framing the pictures. He expected the pictures to
show more of each person and he argued that if they had, the pictures would not appear
inappropriate. Respondent asserted that, at the time, he believed the pictures were framed
with a wider background, capturing more of their bodies and the surrounding environment.
According to Respondent, the photographs look inappropriate based on their close-up
framing. Respondent argued that Doe suggested all of the poses and he felt compelled to
pose as such. Respondent asserted at hearing that none of the photographs had any intimate
or sexual nature, and that even as framed, the photographs were not inappropriate. Later in
his testimony, however, Respondent asserted that the pose in photograph 5 made him feel
uncomfortable.

56.

Respondent’s arguments and assertions as to the photographs were unavailing.
First, had Doe suggested all of the poses, it is not believable that Respondent, being the adult
and teacher, could not have refused the pose or stopped Doe from taking the photographs.
There is no evidence that the photographs were taken hastily, that is, without Respondent
having time to react to the pose. None of the photographs are blurry and, given the poses, it
is undeniable that Respondent held each pose for more than a brief moment. He had time to
reject each pose, but instead, he willingly held each pose. Second, no wider angle or greater
framing would remove or lessen the inappropriate nature of these photographs, particularly
those where his arms are around her waist (photograph 3), where his hands are resting on her
buttocks (photograph 5), and where his thumbs are in her front pant pockets (photograph 4).

The Trip to U.S.C.

57.

On June 30, 2009, Respondent drove Doe to the University of Southern

California (USC) to visit the campus. Respondent did not ask Doe’s mother or father for

9

permission. Doe told her mother that other students were going on the trip although she
knew that was untrue. Doe’s mother would not have sanctioned the trip had she known that
Respondent and Doe were going alone. Doe informed Respondent that she did not tell her
parents the truth about the trip. Respondent did not inform Doe’s parents himself, nor did he
advise Doe to disclose the truth to her parents.

58.

Respondent saw nothing inappropriate about taking Doe to USC alone without

informing Doe’s parents.

59.

On the day of the trip, Respondent did not pick up Doe at her home. Instead,

Respondent picked her up in his automobile at a local park (Oak Knoll Park) parking lot,
away from her home.

60.

During the trip to USC, Respondent also drove Doe to the Los Alamitos

racetrack and allowed Doe to drive his automobile in the parking lot even though Doe did not
have a driver’s license.

61.

On their return, Respondent took Doe to the OA campus to allow her to work

on a computer in his classroom. School was not in session and no one was in the room
occupied by Doe and Respondent. While Doe typed on the computer, Respondent massaged
Doe’s neck, kissed her left ear, neck, and face, and then turned her around and kissed her on
the lips. Thereafter, according to Doe’s testimony, Respondent and Doe left the classroom
separately and Doe walked home. According to Respondent’s testimony, he dropped her off
at Oak Knoll Park because Doe asked him to do so.

62.

At hearing, Respondent asserted that, because Doe requested it, he saw no
problem with picking her up away from her family home. Respondent also asserted that
during the trip to USC, he had a conversation with Doe, conveying the fact that he was solely
her teacher and nothing more. Respondent explained that he felt the need to tell her this
because the pose in photograph 5 made him feel uncomfortable. Respondent’s assertion that
he had this particular conversation with Doe is not believable in light of Factual Finding 61.

63.

Respondent asserted at hearing that he did not think he needed to inform Doe’s

parents about the trip because he had a release form for her RV stay. Later in his testimony,
Respondent asserted that he did not tell Doe’s mother about the trip because he thought she
already knew about it. These inconsistent statements provided further evidence of the
unreliability of Respondent’s testimony on this point and added to the finding that
Respondent lacked credibility overall. (See Factual Finding 173.)

Other Trips

64.

In September or October 2009, Respondent took Doe on trips with him alone.

Respondent took Doe to the Cerritos Mall, Downtown Disney, Seal Beach, and the Queen
Mary. Respondent and Doe were intimate with each other during these trips. While at
Downtown Disney, Respondent told Doe that he loved her. He kissed her. They held hands

10

and Respondent touched Doe’s body, particularly her shoulder, arms, and legs. While at Seal
Beach, Respondent and Doe walked on the Seal Beach pier. They became intimate in
Respondent’s car. Respondent and Doe kissed and Respondent slid his hand into her
underpants and stroked her vaginal area, and inserted his finger into her vagina. In October
2009, Respondent took Doe to the Queen Mary in Long Beach, California. Among other
things, Respondent told Doe not to go far away to college. While at the Queen Mary,
Respondent kissed Doe and, while in his car, Respondent inserted his finger into Doe’s
vagina. On at least one of these trips, Respondent told Doe he was willing to risk everything
for her. She was confused by his actions and expressed feelings of hesitation and confusion
to Respondent. Still, Doe was a willing participant in the intimate activity that took place on
each of these trips.

65.

On October 8, 2009, at 11:58 p.m., Respondent sent Doe the following text

message: “Did meditate? I did, at the pier.” Respondent meant the Seal Beach pier.

66.

At hearing, Respondent denied ever taking Doe on any trip to the places in

Factual Finding 64. He asserted that Doe was lying and “delusional.” On this and all issues
in dispute between Doe’s and Respondent’s testimonies, Doe was believable and Respondent
was not believable. (See Factual Findings 173 & 174.)

Doe’s Senior Year

67.

In the 2009-2010 academic year, Doe’s senior year, Doe was eventually

assigned to Respondent’s cluster class. A cluster class is roughly equivalent to a traditional
homeroom class. Doe felt awkward in Respondent’s cluster class, but they quickly resumed
their intimate relationship. By the end of September, Doe was staying after school in
Respondent’s classroom, continuing to spend significant time with him beyond what other
students would spend with Respondent. Doe would regularly stay in Respondent’s
classroom, even while he would take a lunchtime jog, a semi-regular occurrence for him.

Respondent’s Assistance and Allowances re: Doe’s School Work

68.

During the 2008-2009 school year, Respondent would not penalize Doe’s
homework assignments when she failed to turn them in or when she turned them in late.

69.

During the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 school years, Respondent assisted Doe

with classwork. During the 2008-2009 school year, Respondent corrected, proofread,
reworded, and restructured Doe’s homework assignments and applications related to summer
programs and college solicitations. For example, on March 26 and 27, 2009, Respondent
edited and suggested changes to Doe’s essay in her AP Language and Composition class.
During the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent assisted Doe with summer programs and
college applications. The email correspondence between Doe and Respondent on these types
of matters was voluminous.

11

Emails between Respondent and Doe

70.

Respondent sent Doe emails throughout Doe’s junior and senior years at OA.
Many of the emails contained flirtatious comments and intimate and inappropriate symbols
and wording drafted by each and sent to each other. Factual Findings 71, 72, 75, and 76 are
examples of such emails.

71.

On September 21, 2009, at 3:34 p.m., Doe emailed Respondent a document

entitled, “[Jane]Essay.doc.” The email was entitled, “Biography in need of trimming.” Her
message read, “1000--> 800 words pleaseeee. [Jane]” In her sign off, Doe repeated the final
letter of her first name two times.

72.

On September 23, 2009, at 4:01 p.m., Doe sent Respondent an email message
entitled, “essay needs title.” The only text in the email message was, “[Jane]” with the final
letter of her first name repeated two times and followed by the symbol, “<3.” Respondent
responded to Doe’s email by sending her an email on September 24, 2009, at 1:21 a.m.
Respondent gave Doe three suggested essay titles, “painting the art of culture,” “painting a
culture of community,” and “tracing a culture of memories.” Respondent followed these
suggested titles with the following message, “imy squirrel <3.”

73.

The reference to “squirrel” was a private joke between Doe and Respondent; it

was an apparent term of endearment.

74.

“The letters “imy” mean, “I miss you.” The symbol “<3” represents a heart on

its side and means, “I love you” or “love.” At hearing, Respondent defended his use of
“imy” and the “<3” symbol as an appropriate, in his words, “expression of love” because “I
love my students.” He explained that he knew his intention in using these letters and
symbols and, in his view, it was not inappropriate. Respondent further asserted that in the
instances where Doe would send an email with the “<3” symbol to him, he was not
concerned that her use of it was inappropriate or that he should have taken action to curtail
such use by her.

75.

On September 29, 2009, at 1:07 a.m., Respondent sent Doe an email entitled,

“apology draft.” The email message read, “<3.” Respondent attached a document to the
email that was a letter written to a Mr. Wittman and set forth an apology for having cheated
at school on an undetermined date. Doe explained at hearing that she cheated on a pre-
calculus quiz in the 11th grade in the class of her teacher, Mr. Wittman. Doe conceded that
Respondent was helpful to her in drafting the apology.

76.

On September 30, 2009, at 10:15 p.m., Respondent attached another document
entitled, “apology2.doc” to an email he sent to Doe and himself. The attachment was similar
to the earlier September 29th email.

77.

The record contains numerous (greater than 50) emails between Doe and
Respondent during Doe’s junior and senior years, wherein Respondent assisted Doe, as

12

described in Factual Findings 71-76, and where he used the “<3” symbol in his message.
Doe similarly sent Respondent requests for assistance and also used the “<3” symbol in her
emails to Respondent.

Evidence of Parental Abuse against Doe

78.

AUHSD alleged that Respondent failed to report the suspected abuse of Doe

when she disclosed to him that she had had an altercation with her father and suffered a
scratch to her upper chest on a date undetermined by the evidence. The evidence was
insufficient to find that Respondent’s actions or lack of actions warranted dismissal.

Text Messages

79.

Respondent and Doe exchanged inappropriate, sexual, and otherwise intimate
text messages on their cellular telephones. Many were sent at inappropriate times, well after
school or business hours.

80.

Respondent sent the following text messages to Doe:

81.

On September 22, 2009, at 1:04 a.m., “Essay is dwn to 842, imy; and I don’t

think we should trim any more, ily; I’m ready for . . . food, ur next paper . . . Korean BBQ, a
kiss . . .”

82.

On September 22, 2009, at 1:18 a.m., “Doubt and hesitancy r good; I trust

those emotions in u and need to be a gentleman, in conversation in teasing in post its in
eating and sharing there is imperceptable [sic] baby steps.”

83.

On September 22, 1:58 a.m., “I’m going to kiss u while u sleep darling:) u

won’t know; ur sooo smart and delightful; I love our chemistry! u make me laff even jst the
thought of ur squirrels or something; I can’t wait to see u, to long and ache such sweet pain;
there is no release, none but that makes me want u more; I’m so glad u came back today I
could cry.”

84.

On September 22, 2009, at 2:11 a.m., “Me neither! So we r agreed :) we

snuggle daily and steal glances, kisses, touch and smell; I run and imagine us together; I pass
oaknoll and recall ur white shorts; sooo unfair! My pjs, u working out, I ache again hshs.”
“U make my desk area smell heavenly! Intoxicating.” This message references Oak Knoll
Park, where Respondent picked up Doe to take her to USC.

85.

On September 22, 2009, at 2:22 a.m., “”Let’s sleep together tonight, shalli
climb through ur window? Will u let me in? I’ll quickly undress and disappear into you
<3.”

86.

On September 22, 2009, at 2:32 a.m., “I’m going to ache all night now! Not

letting me in! Ur making me so hard but ily and the teasing.”

13

87.

On September 22, 2009, at 2:38 a.m., “Ohhh u r so bad! Soo good I can’t

stand it, imagining ur form, ur curves, ur smiles lips hips ahhhhhh.”

88.

On September 25, 2009, at 1:19 a.m., “Also the stealth; the risk keep me

restrained when my heart insists I thrust and moan; it is not us yet; we can be more sooo
much more :) If I may be so bold, to ask u to wear an article that allows easy access in . . . I
have something rather intimate for u, but it will have to be quick . . . .”

89.

On September 28, 2009, at 3:36 a.m., “May I sleep with u? Pleasuring u all

night? Rubbing quickly, kissing long, fffing.”

90.

On October 2, 2009, at 12:29 a.m., “Today, I wanted to tear ur hot shorts off!
I felt ur silk panties and slowed, wanting to run ur wetness against the material; when u stay
in motorhome I’l.”

91.

On October 3, 2009, at 5:14 p.m. and 5:15 p.m., “Ok if I can’t hear u where

does that leave me? Can i see upnday at 1:30ish? I’m in meetings until 2 p.m.; I would
leave my room unlocked for u whenever u need it; maybe I could help u with math or
something?? I really miss u.” Regarding this text message, the evidence demonstrated some
inconsistency, but that inconsistency was not fatal to the finding that Respondent sent the
text message. Respondent’s telephone bill shows that he sent two text messages at 5:14 p.m.
Doe’s telephone, however, contains the first part of the text message up to the first two letters
of the word, “need,” and shows it received at 5:15 p.m. Doe’s telephone shows that the
remainder of the message was received at 5:14 p.m., a minute sooner. That could not have
occurred. However, the inconsistency can reasonably be explained as a glitch in the
telephone clock. The numerous other text messages in the record firmly established that
Respondent sent all of the text messages in evidence.

92.

On October 7, 2009, at 5:59 p.m., “I am worried about causing u emotional

turmoil, that’s the last thing I want to do; like u need that! Instead, I like the idea of
cocreating with u a partnership based on mutual admiration, explosive passion, deep honesty,
and intellectual parity; I promise to tell u everything; I had to process today, rather than
keeping a secret, I sought to corral my emotions a bit, I didn’t understand them myself; oh
[Jane], I wish I could speak with u on the phon.”

93.

On October 9, 2009, at 2:32 a.m., “I wish . . . I wish I could wake u up

tomorrow with kisses and caresses and love divine, probing ur sweet skin along ur neck,
spreading ur legs mmmmm.”

94.

On October 9, 2009, at 3:06 a.m., “I want to write it on your skin with my

tongue to make you moan softly; touch my chest, feel me I like proving it, even if it’s hard
and secret, we know. I love you [Jane]; can you hear me say that? Now, to you? I wish it
translated to Korean :).”

14

95.

On October 9, 2009, at 1:15 p.m., “Maybe there’s post it’s for u in 106.” This
message supported the finding of Respondent’s use of Post-It notes and his leaving them for
Doe.

96.

On October 9, 2009, at 4:06 p.m., “My knees r hurting <3.”

On October 11, 2009, at 10:00 p.m., “Imyyyyyy.”

97.

98.

The text messages set forth ante, are a small percentage of the numerous

messages Respondent sent to Doe. These text messages, among many others in evidence, are
inappropriate, containing sexual and intimate references. Several of the messages
demonstrated that Respondent was involved in a sexual relationship with Doe. These
messages are solely Respondent’s correspondences to Doe. The evidence did not contain
Doe’s messages to Respondent for the reasons set forth in Factual Finding 99.

99.

During the time of these text messages and earlier, Doe’s mother suspected

that Doe and Respondent were engaging in an inappropriate relationship. Doe’s mother
began checking Doe’s cellular telephone. She found the inappropriate text messages
between Respondent and Doe. In October 2009, Doe’s mother went to OA and informed
Scott of the inappropriate text messages, describing them to Scott as the type of messages
that should only be between a husband and wife. Doe’s mother informed Scott that she did
not want anyone to get into trouble, but just wanted the text messages to stop. Thereafter,
Scott called Doe into her office to speak with her. Doe was aware of the purpose of the
meeting. While waiting to speak with Scott and realizing Scott might ask Doe for her
cellular telephone, Doe erased her entire “Sent” box, deleting all graphic messages Doe sent
to Respondent. She also erased most of the messages sent to her by Respondent. At hearing,
Doe explained that she consciously did not erase all of the messages she received from
Respondent so as not to raise greater suspicion about her deletions. That is, she believed that
if she erased only some of the messages, it would look less obvious that she had erased any.

100. Respondent denied sending Doe the text messages; he denied sending her any
inappropriate text messages ever. The text messages in Factual Findings 81-97 and all other
text messages herein attributed to Respondent were found in Doe’s cellular telephone. The
text messages in the record were not found in Respondent’s cellular telephone. Although he
denied deleting any messages from his telephone, Respondent’s denial and his explanation
for the text messages on Doe’s telephone were not believable. Furthermore, the evidence
established that Respondent actually suggested to Doe that she text. On March 21, 2009, at
7:42 p.m., Respondent sent Doe an email entitled “RE: Questbridge.” Respondent’s
message read in pertinent part, “We’ve just got to get you texting. it is better than air!” This
supports the finding that, contrary to Respondent’s assertions, Respondent did text Doe.

101. To account for the messages from him on Doe’s telephone, Respondent argued

that the messages must have been “spoofed.” Spoofing is where a person uses an internet
site to create a text message that falsely appears to originate from a particular telephone
sender. With spoofing, a person can make a text message falsely appear to originate from a

15

telephone number that did not send the text message. Respondent argued that Doe spoofed
the messages to herself, making the messages appear to originate from him.

102. Respondent speculated that when he would jog during lunchtime at OA, and

Doe would remain in his classroom, Doe accessed Respondent’s cellular telephone and
computer, and used this time to send messages to herself. He further speculated that she
could have used the time that she spent in the RV to access his telephone and computer as
well.

103. However, had Doe used Respondent’s cellular telephone herself, the sent
messages would be visible on his telephone and he would have eventually seen the messages
in his “Sent Box.” Logically, if he had not sent them but, at some later point, seen the
inappropriate nature of the messages therein, he would have, at the least, brought those
messages to Doe’s and Scott’s attention. He did not.

104. Respondent argued that Doe was computer-savvy and could have spoofed the

messages at any time.

105. The evidence did not support Respondent’s arguments or assertions. There

was no evidence that Doe spoofed the text messages at issue in this matter or that she sent the
messages to herself while surreptitiously accessing Respondent’s cellular telephone or
computer.

106. Respondent made other arguments as to why he could not have texted the

messages in evidence. None of those arguments were persuasive. In all instances, he
proffered arguments with no supportive evidence.

107.

For example, on October 8, 2009, at 7:08 a.m., Respondent texted Doe the
following: “At per. [period] 8, I’m taking suburban to office parking across from library;
I’m running in to change clothes in the mens room at the east end; passenger door will be
unlocked jst in case; have a wonderful day!” At hearing, Respondent argued he could not
have sent that message because, on that date, he and his wife were running multiple errands
and they had each taken a different automobile to do so. On that day, argued Respondent, his
father-in-law had taken his Suburban vehicle, while Respondent drove his Mustang.
Respondent explained that the Suburban had the child seats needed to transport his children,
and (presumably) his father-in-law was transporting them. However, Respondent provided
no evidence to support this argument, other than his testimony. Respondent did not offer the
testimony of his father-in-law or another family member to corroborate his assertion.
Respondent’s assertion alone was insufficient evidence.

108. The forensic digital data expert testimony offered by both parties in this case is

more specifically set forth post, however, on this issue of spoofing, the expert testimony
established that a spoofed message would not show in the telephone’s “dynamic dictionary.”
The dynamic dictionary is a part of the telephone’s digital memory that is a compilation of

16

the main words and lettering keyed into the device. It is essentially the telephone’s button-
pressing history, save for some conjunctions, prepositions, and other small words and letters.

109. Respondent physically keyed the particular text messages set forth in Factual

Findings 81-97 into his cellular telephone and sent them to Doe. The contents of the
dynamic dictionary in Respondent’s cellular telephone tracked, that is, was patently similar
to the text messages in Doe’s telephone. The following examples (Factual Findings 110-
114) support this finding, in conjunction with the expert testimony discussed in greater
detail, post.

110. On September 22, 2009, at 1:28 a.m., Respondent texted to Doe, “I think of u
constantly, see u everywhere, steal a session with photoalbum, write bad post its, constantly;
I fell when I stole extra long stares at u as u left 106 late after class allthose times last year; I
stumbled forever at apush nights watching u stretch and reposition itself on the red couch; u
grabbed my hand in the onion feast and my heart leapt . . . I can go on and on . . . may I
please hold u? May I explore and kiss each lip tenderly? Ache from longing :).”

111. The dynamic dictionary within Respondent’s telephone contained the
following: “think of constantly see everywhere steal session with write bad post its
constantly fell when stole extra long stares at as left late after class times last year stumbled
forever at nights watching stretch and reposition itself on the red couch grabbed my hand in
the onion feast and my heart leapt can go on and on may please hold may explore and kiss
each lip tenderly ache from longing.”

112. With regard to the “onion feast” reference in Factual Finding 111, Respondent
and Doe both corroborated the fact that, at some point while Doe was staying in the RV, they
ate raw onions together, during a particularly jovial and personal time together.

113. On October 8, 2009, at 3:07 p.m., Respondent texted to Doe, “Touching,

loving u.” The dynamic dictionary within Respondent’s telephone contained the following:
“Touching, loving u.”

114. On October 9, 2009, at 3:44 a.m., Respondent texted to Doe, “I want to kiss

you everywhere with ur legs spread wide for me.” The dynamic dictionary within
Respondent’s telephone contained the following: “want to kiss everywhere with legs spread
wide for me.”

115. Doe was in Respondent’s cellular telephone’s contact list.

116. The expert testimony at hearing established that spoofed text messages would

not appear on the false sender’s telephone bill because when spoofing, the spoofer is not
using the telephone’s carrier company.

117. All of the text messages in evidence, and the messages set forth in Factual

Findings 81-97 were contained in Respondent’s paid telephone bills.

17

118. Respondent’s telephone bill that covered his usage from September 2, 2009,
through October 1, 2009, addressed to Respondent, contained, among other things, a listing
of each text message sent and received during the billing period. The listing included the
telephone number to which each message was sent, or the telephone number from which a
message was received, the date and time it was sent, and whether the text was incoming or
outgoing. During this billing period, Respondent sent or received 896 text messages. The
bill required a payment of $200.21. The text messages Respondent sent during this billing
period to Doe, including those highlighted in this Decision, are noted in the telephone bill,
clearly showing Doe’s cellular telephone number and the time and date each message was
sent. Saliently, on September 22, 2009, from 12:34 a.m. to 7:05 p.m., Respondent’s bill
shows 46 text messages sent and received between Respondent and Doe. This bill contains
about 14 pages of delineated text messages, listing 64 instances of sending or receiving text
messages per page. Throughout these 14 pages, Doe’s telephone number is the most
prevalent number and is easily identified on each page. Respondent and/or his wife paid the
bill. Respondent did not challenge the bill or the text messages attributed to his telephone to
the telephone company.

119. Respondent’s telephone bill that covered his usage from October 2, 2009,

through November 1, 2009, addressed to Respondent, contained 569 text messages. It
included the messages to Doe during this billing period, noting again her telephone number
and the dates and times of the messages. This bill required a payment of $257.83.
Respondent and/or his wife paid the bill. Again, he did not challenge the bill or the text
messages attributed to his telephone to the telephone company.

120. At hearing, Respondent admitted that the telephone bills in the record were his

telephone bills for his cellular telephone. He explained that he did not contest the existence
of the voluminous text messages on the bills because he did not remember ever seeing the
bills. He did not remember paying the bills, although it was clear the bills were paid. He
further asserted that it might have been his wife who paid the bills. He asserted that he only
saw the bills months later as part of discovery in this matter.

121. Respondent’s assertions that he never saw his telephone bills were not

believable. Even if it were true that his wife paid the bills and Respondent had not seen
them, one would reasonably expect that his wife would have raised the issue upon seeing the
times and volume of text messages to a (Doe’s) particular telephone number. It is highly
unlikely that Respondent’s wife would have overlooked the numerous messages sent in the
early morning (nighttime) hours to one particular telephone number.

122. Respondent also telephoned Doe. On October 7, 2009, at 6:28 p.m., a
Wednesday, Respondent had an 89-minute telephone call with Doe, a call that Respondent
initiated. This telephone call is captured on Respondent’s telephone bill. When questioned
on cross-examination regarding this call, Respondent first said he did not recall it.
Thereafter, while still being examined, he said he thought he had had a long telephone call
with Doe, saying specifically, “I think so.” His response appeared disingenuous, as he failed

18

to credibly explain why he had such a long call with a student in the evening and appeared
strained to accept that the call took place, despite the telephone record.

123. To further support the findings that Respondent texted Doe and that on

October 7, 2009, he telephoned her, the record contained a text message from Respondent
that foreshadowed the 89-minute telephone call of that same date. At 6:13 p.m., on October
7, 2009, Respondent texted Doe the following message, “May I call u soon love; I love u and
want to be coherent.” (Italics added.) This text message was sent 15 minutes before the
telephone call in Factual Finding 122. (See also Factual Finding 92, ante, where Respondent
texted Doe on October 7, 2009, at 5:59 p.m., stating among other things, “. . . oh [Jane], I
wish I could speak with u on the phon.”)

Expert Opinion re: Cellular Telephone Contents

124. Both parties offered expert testimony on the extraction of the digital contents

of Doe’s and Respondent’s cellular telephones. Both experts were competent to opine as
they did.

125. AUHSD offered the testimony of Glenn Finley (Finley). Finley is a Detective
with the Westminster Police Department, currently working as a Digital Forensic Examiner
assigned to the High Tech Crime Unit of the Orange County District Attorney’s Office. He
is a certified digital forensic examiner. Finley has been a California peace officer for over 18
years and he has over seven years experience as a computer forensic examiner. Finley’s
training and certifications make him competent to opine as an expert in digital forensics and
particularly here, as to the contents of Respondent’s and Doe’s cellular telephones.

126.

Finley inspected Doe’s and Respondent’s cellular telephones. He found

photographs but no text messages on Doe’s telephone. Finley used the SecureView,
Cellebrite, and Encase software programs. Each of these programs is a competent tool with
which to extract digital data from cellular telephones. Nothing in the record supported a
finding that Finley misused the programs, mishandled the telephones, or did anything to
compromise the extracted data.

127.

In his “Report of Examination,” dated November 6, 2009, to the Cypress
Police Department, Finley explained his examination process and findings. He obtained
Respondent’s and Doe’s cellular telephones on October 21, 2009. Finley was unable to
extract text messages from Doe’s telephone; he manually located each text message on the
telephone and took photographs of each individual message. That is, he took a picture of
each screen image on Doe’s telephone. Finley found and photographed a total of 97
messages from Respondent, identified on Doe’s telephone as, “Chris Ontiv.” The messages
ranged in dates from September 21, 2009, at 10:23 p.m., to October 12, 2009, at 1:54 a.m.
Finley described many of the messages as referencing “romantic love and sexual desire.”
Finley wrote, “Some of these text messages were also located on the suspect’s
[Respondent’s] phone.” Finley extracted the photographs described in Factual Findings 46-
53 from Doe’s telephone.

19

128. As to Respondent’s telephone, Finley found some text and email messages that
he noted in his report as follows, “Several text artifacts, either originating as SMS or E-mail,
were recovered. Many of the artifacts match text messages sent to the victim’s [Doe’s]
phone from the suspect’s phone. Many of the messages expressed feelings of love,
admiration, concern and sexual desire.” Finley highlighted examples from Respondent’s
dynamic dictionary. Finley wrote, “This example illustrates how the Dynamic Dictionary in
the IPhone strips a text message of what it considers erroneous or unnecessary entries. It
appears that the Dynamic Dictionary removes some abbreviated substitutes for words such as
(e.g. ‘ur’ = your; ‘U’ = you; I = I). It may also remove some conjunctions such as ‘at’ and
‘not.’”

129. As an example, Finley found words accumulated within Respondent’s
telephone’s dynamic dictionary and compared it to the text messages found on Doe’s
telephone. The wording was consistent and matched.

130.

Finley found explicit and obscene wording found in Respondent’s telephone’s
dynamic dictionary. Pursuant to Finley’s findings, the evidence established that Respondent
texted the following message to Doe: “let’s me be candid naughty where exactly can my
hands my tongue explore to make ache may taste soft pussy is it o.k. to such and finger ass
stroking gorgeous and tearing at silk panties ass makes me devour can’t stand it watching
especially cleavage wanna suck and kiss and lick nipple while my finger looks for hole stole
looks today at ass across the room during cluster always do that was jealous of the desk
wanna moan too taste wet cum today.”

131.

In an effort to show how the dynamic dictionary removes “small” words,

Finley added letters and words that the dynamic dictionary did not retain and highlighted
them in red ink in his report. The following quotation is from Finley’s report with the added
words, letters, and punctuation marks bolded. In a few instances, as noted in the inserted
footnotes, Finley added certain punctuation signs and letters, but failed to type them in red
ink. Finley reiterated with his insertions: “let’s me be candid and naughty.[3] where exactly
can my hands and my tongue explore to make u ache. may I taste ur soft pussy? Is[4] it
o.k. to such and finger ur ass stroking u gorgeous and tearing at silk panties ass makes me
devour u. I can’t stand it watching u especially ur cleavage.[5] I wanna suck and kiss and
lick ur nipple while my finger looks for a hole. I stole looks today at ur ass across the room
during cluster6. I always do that. I was jealous of the desk. I wanna moan too. taste ur wet
cum today.”

3 Finley added this period, but failed to type it in red.

4 Finley failed to note that the “I” in “Is” was lower case in the dynamic dictionary

and that he had made the letter upper case in this example.

5 Finley added this period, but failed to type it in red.

20

132. Respondent keyed the words in Factual Finding 130 into his cellular
telephone. Although the evidence did not specifically establish the recipient of this text
message, it is noted that Respondent mentions “silk panties,” like he did in the text message
to Doe set forth in Factual Finding 30. Additionally, Respondent’s message states he looked
at the message recipient’s buttocks “across the room during cluster,” a reference to his
cluster classroom in Doe’s senior year.

133. Respondent offered the expert testimony of Mark J. Eskridge (Eskridge).

Eskridge is a digital forensic investigator and a license private investigator. From 1996 to
2010, Eskridge was a criminal investigator for the Orange County District Attorney’s Office,
assigned to the computer forensic laboratory since 1999. From 1987 to 1996, Eskridge was a
police officer and detective for the Fountain Valley Police Department.

134. Eskridge has a Bachelor of Arts degree in criminal justice from California

State University, Fullerton.

135.

In his recitation of the facts provided to him by Respondent’s counsel,

Eskridge wrote in his declaration, dated January 18, 2012, “[Doe] claims that the SMS text
messages came from [Respondent’s] IPhone, but [Respondent] denies sending those SMS
text messages and such SMS text messages were not found on his IPhone. This raises an
issue of “spoofing.” Eskridge goes on to declare that spoofing was an available technology
in 2009, when the text messages at issue in this matter were created and sent. Eskridge
further declared that in spoofing, the name and telephone number of a sender of a text
message can be falsified using any of several internet websites that facilitate the sending of
such messages.

136. Eskridge conceded at hearing that Finley did a competent job in investigating

Doe’s and Respondent’s telephones and he described Finley as an excellent investigator.

137. Eskridge opined that the dynamic dictionary of a telephone is reliable as to

what is being “captured,” that is, keyed, but that not much is known about it. He conceded
that as to the contents of Respondent’s dynamic dictionary, he could not dispute that the
content was created by user input. Nevertheless, Eskridge was concerned that there was no
time reference attached to the contents of the dynamic dictionary. Eskridge explained that
the contents of the dynamic dictionary could include years of user input.

138. Eskridge opined that one cannot conclusively assert that a text message is not
spoofed. Saliently, Eskridge could not state with any certainty whether spoofing was likely
in this matter. He did not inspect Respondent’s or Doe’s cellular telephones. Eskridge’s
testimony did not establish that the text messages from Respondent to Doe set forth in this
Decision and that are otherwise part of the record herein were spoofed by Doe or anyone
else.

6 Finley highlighted these underscored words with the computer’s yellow

highlighting feature.

21

In Respondent’s Classroom After Hours

139.

In her senior year, Respondent continued spending significant time with Doe
and spending the school lunchtime together in Respondent’s classroom. On September 18,
2009, at 7:50 p.m., Doe sent Respondent an email entitled, “biographical essay draft.” It
read, “Hi (: Sorry for sending late. Mr. Hoshi came into 106 and began to lecture me
because I was there still . . . I hope this doesn’t cause you troubleee =/ Tyyyyyyyyyyy <3
[Jane Doe]. Thereafter, Doe continued to use Respondent’s classroom alone and with
Respondent but without other students present and with Respondent’s permission and
encouragement.

140.

In October 2009, during Doe’s senior year, on a school day around 4:00 p.m.,
Doe’s mother went to OA looking for Doe. Doe’s mother went to Respondent’s classroom
and tried to open the classroom door. It was locked. Seconds later, Respondent unlocked
and opened the door. Respondent and Doe were inside the classroom alone. To Doe’s
mother, a very credible witness, Respondent looked surprised. Doe appeared odd. Doe’s
mother did not report the incident to the principal, but she suspected that Respondent and
Doe were engaged in inappropriate intimate behavior inside the classroom.

141. The evidence at hearing established that in October 2009, while in

Respondent’s classroom after school and alone with Doe, Respondent and Doe engaged in
sexual acts. Respondent performed oral sex on Doe. Respondent rubbed and otherwise
touched Doe’s vaginal area. Respondent inserted his fingers into Doe’s vagina. Respondent
and Doe engaged in sexual conduct of this nature on more than one occasion in Respondent’s
classroom after hours. Whenever they did so, Respondent would lock the classroom door.

142. Respondent denied any such actions. He explained that, at approximately 4:00

p.m., on the day in question, Respondent was about to leave the classroom and had already
locked the door when Doe came by and asked him if she could stay in the classroom for a
few minutes. He allowed her to stay. She sat, placed her head on the desk, and said she just
needed a few minutes. After about five minutes, Doe’s mother knocked and Respondent
opened the door and he let her in. Doe and her mother spoke to each other in Korean for a
moment and they left together. Respondent asserted that he did not talk to Doe or touch her
during the five minutes that she was in his classroom alone with him. Respondent’s
assertions and explanation were not believable.

The District’s Report of Child Abuse

143. On October 13, 2009, Scott filed a Suspected Child Abuse Report with the

Orange County Child Abuse Registry, stating that she was concerned that there was an
inappropriate relationship between Respondent and Doe. Scott also reported the text
messages to the Cypress Police Department.

22

Doe’s Hospitalization

2009.

144. AUHSD placed Respondent on administrative leave, effective October 14,

145.

From October 16, to October 19, 2009, Doe was hospitalized at the University

of California, at Irvine Medical Center on an involuntary psychiatric hold as a danger to
herself.

Respondent’s Criminal Acquittal

146.

In June 2011, the Orange County District Attorney prosecuted Respondent for
the following alleged acts against Doe: three counts of sexual penetration by a foreign object
on a victim under 18, oral copulation of a person under 18, luring a child with the intent to
commit specified crimes, and touching the intimate part of another person (People v.
Ontiveros, Orange County Superior Court case number 09WF2599). After a trial by jury, the
jury acquitted Respondent of all charges.

147. AUHSD argued that the criminal acquittal is irrelevant to the instant matter.

Respondent argued that this Commission must defer to Respondent’s criminal acquittal and,
in similar fashion to the criminal court outcome, dismiss the Second Amended Accusation in
this matter.

148. The Commission considered the acquittal, but Respondent’s ultimate argument

was unavailing. The criminal matter is a separate venue with different allegations and a
significantly different standard of proof. Saliently, it need not assess the evidence in the
record beyond a reasonable doubt.7 This Commission is not asked to determine whether
Respondent committed sexual acts on Doe, for example. Instead, this Commission is asked
to determine whether Respondent engaged in immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, is
evidently unfit for service, and whether he persistently violated or refused to obey school
laws, regulations, or Board rules, and to assess the evidence by a preponderance of the
evidence. These distinctions make the criminal matter and the jury’s decision of little value
in the disposition of the instant matter.

149. Respondent’s acquittal was considered but given minimal, indeed nominal

weight in light of the distinctions discussed ante.

150. After being notified that Respondent was charged with criminal charges,

AUHSD placed Respondent on unpaid mandatory leave, effective January 6, 2010. After
being notified that Respondent was acquitted of all criminal charges, AUHSD paid

7 At various times throughout the proceeding, Respondent argued as if the standard

of proof here were beyond a reasonable doubt, as in a criminal trial. For example, he
attempted to place doubt in the finding that he texted Doe. In this case, where the standard of
proof is a preponderance of the evidence, those attempts failed in every respect.

23

Respondent for the period of unpaid leave (January 6, 2010, to June 16, 2011). AUHSD
changed Respondent’s status to paid administrative leave, effective August 25, 2011.

Respondent’s Character Witnesses

151. Respondent offered two character witnesses.

152. Ann Powell-Cordon (Powell-Cordon) testified on Respondent’s behalf.
Powell-Cordon began working for AHUSD in 1968 as a language teacher. She is a founding
teacher at OA, beginning there in 1998. Powell-Cordon believes Respondent is an excellent
teacher with great integrity. She has never heard a complaint against him. She supported
Respondent during his criminal prosecution by attending the trial. She was relieved that he
was acquitted.

153. Doe was in Powell-Cordon’s seventh grade Spanish class. She confirmed

seeing Doe vomit almost daily due to her eating disorder. She described Doe as a good girl,
who was generally honest with her.

154. The veracity of Powell-Cordon’s character testimony was diminished by other
facts elicited during her testimony. First, she conceded that she did not get along with Scott,
particularly with regard to the administration’s termination of the French program and its
block schedule. Powell-Cordon believes Scott was behind the termination of her French
class and that Scott did so intentionally. Powell-Cordon went on to admit that she was upset
by the fact that OA added Mandarin, presumably to take the place of the French class.
Powell-Cordon was offended that the administration told her there were not enough students
who wanted to take French. Additionally, when referring to Doe’s mother, she conceded that
she described her as a bad person. Powell-Cordon asserted that she harbors “feelings”
against Jehovah’s Witnesses as to how they deal with health issues (Doe’s mother is a
Jehovah’s Witness). She believes Doe’s religion played a role in her wanting to run away
from her family. Powell-Cordon conceded that she believes and is still harboring “feelings”
that the school administration forced her out of OA because she was a highly paid employee
with long tenure. Pursuant to these findings, Powell-Cordon was deemed to be biased
against the AUHSD administration and her opinion of Respondent, while credited, was given
less than full weight.

155.

Powell-Cordon reviewed all of the photographs in evidence, including those

described in Factual Findings 46-53. She stated that she found none of the photographs
inappropriate.

156. As to the text messages in evidence, after reviewing their contents, Powell-

Cordon stated that she simply could not believe Respondent would say those words.

157.

Powell-Cordon’s testimony, as described in Factual Findings 154-155,

demonstrated a bias in favor of Respondent and a lack of willingness to assess the evidence
in an objective manner.

24

158. Bruce Stevens (Stevens) testified on Respondent’s behalf. He has taught at

OA since 1998. He teaches physics and AP physics at OA. Stevens believes Respondent is
a good, intelligent teacher with a good reputation at OA.

159.

Stevens conceded that he had many conflicts with Scott. He described Scott as
a micro-manager and explained how Scott stopped him from organizing a school hiking club.
He conceded, however, that Scott explained that she halted the club’s formation because it
was a “liability issue” for the school.

160. Doe was in Stevens’ eighth grade since class and 12th grade AP physics class.
Stevens described Doe as doing well in his classes, and as a subdued person and a “loner” as
a senior. Stevens had heard rumors of Doe having a prescription drug problem and that Doe
had been kicked out of her family home. The evidence failed to establish either of these
rumors.

161. Like Cordon-Powell, and Respondent, Stevens opined that all of the
photographs in evidence were appropriate. When pressed on cross-examination, Stevens
opined some of the photographs could have the appearance of impropriety, but he would not
say definitively that any of them were inappropriate. Stevens also showed a bias against Doe
and in favor of Respondent when he opined as to one particular photograph. In a photograph
where Doe was standing side-by-side with a female teacher—a completely appropriate
pose—Stevens’ only substantive comment was that it showed Doe wearing a non-school
approved top. Stevens stated that Doe’s top was “revealing” and not in accordance with
school dress code. Quizzically, the top Stevens was referring to was the same top Doe was
wearing in photograph 3 (Factual Finding 48). While the top could be fairly described as
somewhat revealing, it is not reasonable that the photograph Stevens highlighted would
render his comment about its revealing nature because in that particular photograph, Doe’s
chest was not exposed at all. However, in photograph 3, Doe’s chest is much more exposed
and Respondent’s arms are around her waist, yet that photograph did not cause Stevens
concern; indeed, he asserted that photograph was not inappropriate.

162.

Stevens was a more credible character witness than Powell-Cordon, but given

the inconsistency noted in Factual Finding 161, his testimony was given less than full weight.

Respondent’s Other Arguments

163. Respondent attempted to impeach Scott by noting that Respondent and his

wife were vocal opponents to Scott’s change in the school bell schedule. Respondent also
asserted that Scott was opposed to Respondent’s buddy walk activities. The buddy walk was
a charity event for persons with Down syndrome, a condition that affects family members in
Respondent’s family.

164. Neither Respondent’s arguments nor the evidence impeached Scott’s
testimony. There was no evidence that Scott took particular action against Respondent for
his opposition to the bell schedule change, an opposition that included other OA teachers.

25

That particular circumstance appeared to be more of a typical disagreement within the
regular business of OA. As to the buddy walk, Scott credibly explained at hearing that she
took action to stop the solicitation of students for the buddy walk because to participate in
that event, students were required to pay and not all students could afford it. Furthermore,
Scott noted that some teachers were giving extra credit to students who would pay and
participate in the buddy walk and she felt the need to stop that action for the same reason.
Those explanations were reasonable.

165. At hearing, Respondent argued that the trip to USC was out of this

Commission’s jurisdiction because the trip occurred during the summer when school was not
in session and because the trip was off-campus. This argument failed. The fact that their
contact occurred when school was not in session and off-campus is not dispositive of this
Commission’s jurisdiction. If Respondent’s argument were accepted, a teacher could engage
in inappropriate activities with a student, warranting dismissal, yet evade dismissal by solely
doing so off-campus and during school breaks. This Commission’s jurisdiction undoubtedly
includes such alleged acts because they are the acts of a teacher.

166. Respondent argued that the Second AmendedAccusation was biased against

Respondent in that it failed to include exculpatory evidence in Respondent’s favor. This
argument failed. There is no requirement for the Accusation in these dismissal matters to
include such evidence.

167. Respondent argued that there was nothing wrong with Respondent and Doe

being alone in his classroom because there was no written AUHSD policy prohibiting
teachers and students from being in classrooms alone. Respondent’s argument is misplaced.
The alleged impropriety was not the fact that a teacher and student were alone in the
classroom, although allowing such a circumstance is, at best, an example of Respondent’s
extremely poor judgment. The improprieties were his sexual and intimate acts on Doe while
in the classroom, as set forth in Factual Findings 141.

168. With regard to Doe, Respondent made several attempts to impeach her that

were unsuccessful. Respondent intimated that Doe was mentally unstable and came from a
chaotic, even violent family background. At the same time, Respondent attempted to show
Doe to be manipulative by, for example, arguing that she spoofed the text messages in
evidence. Respondent also argued that Doe’s allegations were motivated by financial
interest in that Doe had filed a complaint for damages and personal injury against AUHSD
and Respondent in September 2010. Respondent then attempted to show Doe to be a
problem student pointing to her school disciplinary history. Her disciplinary history was not
significant. Doe suffered dress code violations while at AUHSD, including when on January
16, 2008, Doe wore a plaid vest with a striped sweater, and on October 3, 2009, when Doe
wore striped black shorts. In the eighth grade, on September 23, 2005, Doe was found by
school staff lighting a cigarette after a school dance. For that act, AUHSD suspended Doe
from school for two days. In December 2008, Doe cheated on a quiz denoted in her record
as, “academic honesty quizzes in Wittman,” and was required to do AUHSD’s Saturday
Work/Study Program in January 2009. The records further established that Doe was tardy to

26

class at various times and suffered resultant instances of detention. While worthy of some
consideration, these acts failed to impeach Doe’s testimony in this matter. Some of the acts,
such as her history of detention and dress code violations constituted, at best, specious
attempts at impeachment.

169. Respondent also attempted to impeach Doe by describing her as dressing

inappropriately; that is for example, wearing very short shorts and revealing tops, including
during the time she stayed in the RV. While she stayed in the RV, Respondent explained
that he and his wife had to speak to Doe about wearing more appropriate clothing. At
another part of the hearing, Respondent offered evidence that Doe wore thigh high stockings
with shorts for a senior class luau at OA. These attempts by Respondent were not well taken.
In essence, these attempts offered the long-ago discredited argument that the girl “brought it
upon herself” by the way she dressed. This argument failed.

170. Respondent also asserted that Doe came from an abusive home. To support
that assertion, Respondent presented evidence that, at some point early in her relationship
with Respondent, Doe told him that her parents would disconnect the lights in the family
home. This was not accurate. Doe’s mother credibly explained that she and her husband
were greatly concerned that Doe was studying too hard and long while dealing with her
bulimia. In an effort to force Doe to rest and sleep, they would turn off the electricity in her
room and tell her to sleep even if her homework was not completed. While not an ideal
manner of support, Respondent’s description of Doe’s parents as abusive was nonetheless
exaggerated. Doe’s mother conceded that, as strict parents holding to their Korean cultural
norms, Doe’s father had spanked Doe at times, but there was no evidence that any parental
physical contact was abusive. There was evidence presented that Doe suffered scratches on
her upper chest in September 2009. Doe emailed a photograph of those scratches to
Respondent on September 29, 2009, at 6:35 p.m. In response, Respondent offered her
antibiotic ointment and words of empathy. The evidence established that Doe obtained these
scratches during an argument with her father, but the evidence did not establish that he
inflicted the scratches on her purposely or with any intention to harm or abuse her. At
hearing, Doe emotionally acknowledged that her parents were busy, working hard, and did
not have time to spend with her during a vulnerable, confusing time for her and while
battling bulimia. For purposes of this proceeding, the evidence did not establish that Doe’s
family home was an abusive or broken home.

Respondent’s Reputation as a Teacher and his Overall Credibility at Hearing

171. Respondent offered evidence of commendations for his teaching and academic
pursuits from 1998 to approximately 2006. This evidence was considered as to his work as a
teacher but it carried little weight to support any findings favorable as to Respondent’s
character, integrity, or honesty.

172. The evidence did establish that Respondent is a well-regarded teacher. By all
accounts, he has excellent teaching skills and has always been supportive of his students and
of OA. He was and is affable. He was outwardly respectful of the proceedings throughout

27

the hearing. Respondent was supported daily at hearing by the presence of several members
of his extended family who regularly showed him outward and appropriate signs of support
and affection. On several days of hearing, a number of students and presumably friends were
also present in the hearing room. He is well liked by many.

173. However, the evidence in the record, together with Respondent’s arguments at

hearing, led the Commission to find that Respondent was dishonest at hearing and severely
lacking in credibility. His arguments were unbelievable and, in several instances, they
bordered on the ludicrous. He provided no evidence of spoofing, offering only evidence that
spoofing could have occurred. He testified that none of the photographs in Factual Findings
46-53 were inappropriate between a teacher and a student, an opinion that was hard to
believe. He further argued that Doe essentially forced him into the poses in each
photograph—an absurd assertion, given the evidence. His explanations regarding the
inappropriate emails and his telephone bills were dubious He put forth evidence of Doe’s
use of revealing clothing and attempted to impeach her, in large part, by evidence that she
suffered mild school infractions like detention and dress code violations. In a word, most of
Respondent’s arguments were specious. When considered together, the evidence and
Respondent’s arguments, including his denials in the face of overwhelming evidence against
him, support a finding that Respondent was dishonest and not credible at hearing.

The Overall Credibility of Doe and Doe’s Mother at Hearing

174.

In contrast, Doe and Doe’s mother were credible witnesses. Throughout her

direct examination and a significantly long and vigorous cross-examination, Doe testified
clearly, with no hesitation, and provided consistent assertions and explanations. She spoke in
a forthright manner. Although she became emotional and did not hide her disdain for
Respondent; she nevertheless, at various times, gave testimony that was favorable to
Respondent. For example, she conceded that he was helpful to her while she stayed in his
RV. She admitted that Respondent was helpful to her by making her lunch and by helping
her with her studies.

175. Although Doe was generally credible, the evidence also established that she

was a willing participant in her sexual contact with Respondent. She was responsive to
Respondent’s inappropriate contact. Doe wanted to flirt with Respondent. She wanted to be
intimate with him. It appears likely she believed she was falling in love with him. Even so,
as Respondent was the adult and teacher, and Doe was a minor student for the majority of the
teacher-student relationship, her willingness and responsiveness are of no consequence.
Respondent should have kept a professional distance from Doe given that she was a student.
The fact that Doe was undoubtedly vulnerable, suffered from bulimia, had family conflict,
and was responsive to Respondent should have more obviously prompted Respondent to
maintain such distance.

176. Doe’s mother was also credible. Like her daughter, she endured a long and
vigorous cross-examination and nevertheless responded to the questions without hesitation
and consistent with the other supportive evidence. Doe’s mother was respectful of the

28

proceedings and presented with a forthright demeanor. She conceded unfavorable facts such
as that her husband spanked Doe. Her description of the time she attempted to enter
Respondent’s locked classroom was believable. Although her agreement to allow Doe to
live in Respondent’s RV was puzzling and raised concern as to her parental judgment, it is
somewhat explainable when one considers that Doe’s parents originate from a different
culture that holds teachers in high regard and thus places significant trust in them.

AUHSD Policies and Administrative Regulations

177. AUHSD Policy number 8708 is entitled, “Sexual Harassment, Students”
(Policy 8708). Policy 8708 states that, “the district [AUHSD] prohibits the unlawful sexual
harassment of any student by any employee, student, or other person at school or at any
school related activity.” Policy 8708 defines prohibited sexual harassment as, including but
not being limited to, “unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other
verbal, visual or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: [¶] . . . [¶] [t]he conduct has the
purpose or effect of having a negative impact on the individual’s academic performance, or
of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive educational environment.” The policy also
defines conduct prohibited as, “[g]raphic verbal comments about an individual’s body,
overly personal conversations, or pressure for sexual activity,” “[s]exual jokes, notes, stories,
drawings, pictures, gestures, graffiti, or sexually explicit emails,” and “[t]ouching an
individual’s body or clothes in a sexual way, massaging, grabbing, fondling, stroking, or
brushing the body.”

178. Respondent violated Policy 8708 by his inappropriate emails, text messages,

and notes to Doe and his sexual contact with her.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District has the burden of proof to prove its allegations by a

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

2.

Education Code section 44932 states in part:

(a)

No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or

more of the following causes:

(1)

Immoral or unprofessional conduct.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(5)

Evident unfitness for service.

29

(7)

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the

state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the governing board of the
school district employing him or her.

3.

“Immoral conduct,” means conduct that is hostile to the public welfare and
contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of
corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. It can be conduct that is willful,
flagrant, or shameless, or conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable
members of the community or as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public
welfare. (Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

4.

“Evident unfitness for service,” means that the unfitness for service be

attributable to a defect or inadequacy in temperament, presumably not remediable merely on
receipt of notice that the teacher’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing
school district. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (Zuber) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.)

5.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education, (1969), 1 Cal.3d 214, the California

Supreme Court held that for purposes of teacher dismissal, conduct characterized as
“immoral,” “unprofessional,” or “involving moral turpitude” must be limited to conduct
indicating that a teacher is “unfit to teach”; otherwise, these terms would be
unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. (Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed., supra, at 229.) The
Morrison Court listed factors relevant to determining whether a teacher's conduct indicates
unfitness to teach:

[T]he likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students

or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the proximity or
remoteness in time of the conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the
party involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any,
surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the
motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the recurrence of the
questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher
involved or other teachers.

(Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed., supra, at 229-230.)

6.

Based on the Morrison factors, and all of the evidence in the record, dismissal

is warranted. Respondent’s conduct adversely affected Doe and all students and teachers
who blindly supported Respondent. The degree of adversity is extremely great. It has been
between approximately four years since Respondent’s acts against Doe, but he has been on
leave since that time. Respondent’s certification currently authorizes him to teach, among
others, female high school and OA students. There were no significant extenuating
circumstances in Respondent’s favor. In aggravation, Respondent’s arguments were
specious and he failed to admit any responsibility for his misconduct. There was no

30

praiseworthiness associated with the motives behind his acts with Doe. In contrast,
Respondent was solely responsible for his conduct. As he failed to accept responsibility for
his actions and fully denied all of the allegations against him, the likelihood that he would
repeat similar offenses against other students is great.8 Respondent had a full evidentiary
hearing with legal counsel. He was able to exercise his constitutional rights throughout the
hearing. Thus, there is no adverse impact or chilling effect upon his rights or the rights of
other teachers by the Order post.

7.

Doe was emotionally and physically vulnerable and impressionable and

Respondent took advantage of his position of trust as a teacher to have a sexual relationship
with her. His actions pursuing Doe and his sexual contact with her were shocking to the
conscience and severely violated the trust that Doe and her mother placed in Respondent as
her teacher. Respondent’s notes, emails, and text messages to Doe, his posed photographs
with her, his trips with her to USC and the other non-school-related recreational locations,
his improper allowances regarding her school work, and his sexual contact with her
constituted immoral conduct and unprofessional conduct. He persistently violated AUHSD’s
Policy 8708. Consequently, Respondent is evidently unfit for service as a teacher at
AUHSD. AUHSD’s proposed termination of Respondent is warranted and reasonable.

8.

Cause exists to terminate Respondent’s employment, pursuant to Education
Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(5), and (a)(7), for immoral and unprofessional
conduct, evident unfitness for service, and the persistent violation of school policy, pursuant
to Factual Findings 1-178, and Legal Conclusions 1-7.

8 Commission Member McEachron joined in all of the factual findings and legal

conclusions herein except that he did not join in the conclusion that the likelihood
Respondent would repeat similar offenses against other students is great.

31

ORDER

The Anaheim Union High School District’s dismissal of Respondent Christopher

Ontiveros is sustained.

Date: _______________

________________________________
Daniel Juárez,
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings,
Commission Member

Date: _______________

________________________________
Joseph McEachron,
Commission Member

Date: _______________

_____________________________
James Vaughan,
Commission Member

32

