i 

  

i 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

.  OAH  Case  No.  2011110720 

SONDRA  SHORTER,  A  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  heard  the  above-captioned  matter  in 

Los  Angeles  on  November  29  and  30,  and  December  3  through  7,  and  27,  2012.  The 
Commission  members  were  Kevin  White,  Teresa  Velasco,  and  Joseph  D.  Montoya, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH).  .It  should  be 
noted  that  on  November  28,  2012,  Respondent  moved  to  continue  the  hearing,  which  was 
denied  by  the  Presiding  Judge  of  the  Los  Angeles  branch  of  OAH.  That  order  was 
communicated  by  phone  to  the  parties,  and  given  the  shortness  of  time  was  not  reduced  to 
writing,  but  noted  on  the  record  during  the  hearing,  and  is  confirmed.  herein. 

During  the  hearing  on  this  matter,  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District) 

was  represented  by  Fagen,  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  L.  Carlos  Villegas  and  Martha  I. 
Casillas.  Respondent  Sondra  Shorter  (Respondent  or  Shorter)  represented  herself.  She  was 
assisted  by  Letia  Shorter. 

At  the  end  of  testimony  and  argument  on  December  27,  2012,  the  record  was  held 

open  so  that  the  parties  could  offer  further  documentary  evidence.  The  District  submitted  its 
Citations  to  the  Deposition  of  Respondent,  which  was  placed  in  that  format  to  save  time 
during  the  closing  arguments.  That  document  will  be  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  46. 

On  December  28,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  document  identified  as  a  student 

referral  slip,  marked  as  Exhibit  CC,  attached  to  a  declaration  executed  by  Respondent. 
Submission  of  that  document—the  referral  slip--was  timely. 

On  January  3,  2013,  2012,  the  District  submitted  its  Rebuttal  and  Opposition  to 

Respondent’s  Exhibit  CC.  That  document  is  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  47. 

' 

At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  the  ALJ  was  under  the  impression  that  Letia  Shorter's 
name  was  Gina  Clark.  That  misapprehension  had  arisen  at  an  earlier  pre-hearing  conference, 
when  she  was  so  identified,  and  she  did  not  clear  the  matter  up  until  the  court  reporter  at  the 
hearing  enquired  about  her  identity.  It  also  appears  that  she  assisted  Respondent  at  her 
deposition  under  the  name  Gina  Clark.

 

{ 

( 

The  objection  is  overruled,  and  Exhibit  CC—only  the  referral  slip—will  be  received. 

On  January  9,  2013,  Respondent  filed  written  objections  to  the  District's  citations  to 

the  Respondent's  deposition,  which  will  be  identified  as  Exhibit  DD.  The  District  submitted 
a  response  to  those  objections,  dated  January  10,  but  not  received  by  the  ALJ  until  January 
14,  2013.  That  document  will  be  identified  as  Exhibit  48.  Although  after  the  submission 
date,  both  documents  have  been  considered  so  as  to  have  a  more  complete  record,  there 
being  no  significant  prejudice  to  the  parties.  The  Respondent's  objections  to  the  deposition 
are  overruled,  and  the  deposition  has  been  considered  in  this  decision.” 

The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  on  January  16,  2013,  in  light  of  the 

objections  to  the  deposition,  the  reply  thereto,  and  the  chance  that  Respondent  might  submit 
a  rebuttal,  something  that  could  be  expected  in  light  of  the  parties'  strenuous  efforts. 

The  Commission  hereby  makes  it  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order. 

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

Respondent  Shorter  is  a  permanent  teacher  employed  by  the  District,  and  she  was 

assigned  to  Markham  Middle  School  (Markham)  from  2001  until  October  15,  2009,  when 
she  was  re-assigned.  The  District  alleged  that  Respondent  demonstrated  immoral  conduct 
(Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),  evident  unfitness  for  service 
(section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),and  willful  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7))°  These  allegations  were  based  on  allegations  of  misconduct  in  the 
classroom  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  during  September  and  October  2009.  Further,  the 
District  alleged  that  Respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  after  she  was  transferred  from 
Markham  to  the  offices  of  The  Partnership  for  Los  Angeles  Schools  (PLAS),  where  she  was 
assigned  for  nearly  two  years  before  this  proceeding  was  initiated. 

Respondent  denied  the  charges,  at  times  asserting  that  the  claims  were  the  product  of  a 
conspiracy  by  students,  co-workers,  and  District  administrators  to  remove  an  experienced  and 
highly-paid  teacher  from  the  ranks,  which  would  then  allow  younger  teachers  to  remain  in  the 
employ  of  the  District. 

As  detailed  below,  a  substantial  number  of  the  District’s  factual  allegations  have  been 

proven,  establishing  that  Respondent  has  demonstrated  evident  unfitness  to  teach,  and  that 
under  all  of  the  circumstances,  she  should  be  dismissed  from  her  permanent  position.  The 

?' 
line  numbers. 

Citations  to  the  deposition  shall  be  to  the  page  or  page  numbers,  a  colon,  and  the 

> 

All  statutory  citations  shall  be  to  the  Education  Code.  The  District  had  also  alleged 

unprofessional  conduct  (§44932,  subd.  (a)(1))  as  a  ground  for  termination,  but  that  charge 
was  dismissed  pursuant  to  a  pre-trial  motion. 

 

4 

{ 

findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order  that  follow  were  unanimously  adopted  by  the 
Commission, 

The  Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District  executed  the 

Second  Amended  Accusation,  and  prior  iterations  of  that  Accusation  while  acting  in  her 
official  capacity. 

2.  The  District  commenced  this  proceeding  in  December  2011,  when  it  issued  an 

Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent.  Respondent  filed  a  timely  request 
for  hearing,  and  later,  a  notice  of  defense,  disputing  the  claims  against  her.  Thereafter,  on 
September  28,  2012,  the  District  filed  its  First  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  Charges. 
Those  new  allegations  were  deemed  controverted  as  a  matter  of  law.  (Govt.  Code,  §  11507.) 
The  Second  Amended  Accusation  (S.A.A.)  was  filed  on  December  7,  2012,  adding  one 
charge,  paragraph  22,  to  conform  to  proof  adduced  during  the  hearing.  All  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

3.  Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  She  holds  an 

Early  Childhood  credential,  and  an  Elementary  Education  credential,  each  being  a  Life 
Credential.  She  also  holds  a  Preliminary  Education  Administration/Staff  Development 
Credential.’ 

4,  Respondent  was assigned  to  Markham  in  approximately  2001.  At  the  times 

relevant  to  this  matter,  she  was  teaching  sixth  grade  students. 

Findings  on  the  Factual  Allegations  Made  Against  Respondent 

5..  Paragraph  number  1  of  the  S.A.A.°  alleged  that  on  October  15,  2009,  Respondent 
pushed  a  child,  A.M.,  out  of  her  classroom,  in  front  of  students  and  parents.  However,  that 
allegation  was  not  established  by  the  evidence.  The  evidence  established  that  the  child  in 
question  had  previously  been  sent  from  the  classroom  to  the  office,  and  she  was  to  be  sent 
from  the  office  to  another  room  to  work  on  an  assignment.  However,  she  returned  to 
Respondent’s  classroom,  accompanied  by  her  aunt;  her  parents  were  not  present,  and  no 
other  parents  were  present  either.  The  child  and  her  aunt  were  unhappy  that  the  child’s 
assignment  was  different  than  the  one  then  being  worked  on  by  the  rest  of  the  class. 
Respondent  made  clear  that  A.M.  had  to  leave  the  classroom.  In  the  course  of  the  incident, 
she  may  have  touched  the  child’s  backpack,  while  the  child  was  wearing  it,  but  any  such 

This  is  based  on  Respondent’s  resume,  Exhibit  B. 

* 

> 

unless  otherwise  noted. 

For  the  balance  of  this  decision,  references  to  the  allegations  are  to  the  S.A.A. 

( 

( 

contact  was  incidental  and  of  minimal  if  any  force,  and  in  all  the  circumstances  was  not 
inappropriate. 

6. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  2,  that  on  October  15,  2009, 

Respondent  yelled  at  student  A.M.,  “get  out  of  my  classroom!” 

7. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  3,  that  Respondent,  on  October  15, 

2009,  walked  over  to  the  desk  of  a  student  named  Juan  and  yelled  at  him,  as  there  was  no 
direct  evidence  on  this  point. 

8. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  4,  that  on  October  14,  2009, 

Respondent  spanked  two  boys  on  the  buttocks. 

9. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  5,  that  at  some  time  during  the 
week  of  October  4  through  8,  2009,  Respondent  said  to  student  A.N.,  “fuck  your  mother,”  or 
substantially  similar  words.  This  finding  is  supported  by  the  testimony  of  student  A.N.,  and 
by  the  testimony  of  students  A.R.  and  N.R,  as  well  as  by  Exhibits  4  and  6. 

(B)  Respondent  testified  that  while  she  was  at  the  front  of  the  class,  working 

at  the  board,  a  student  said  “fuck  you,”  or  words  to  that  effect,  and  that  in  response  she  asked 
the  students  if  it  would  be  right  to  say  that  about  their  mother.  That  version  of  events  finds 
slight  corroboration  in  Exhibit  5.  However,  the  Commission  credits  the  testimony  of  A.N., 
who  was  an  especially  compelling  witness,  and  of  the  other  students,  as  well  as  Exhibits  4 
and  6.  The  Commission  further  finds  that  even  if  Respondent’s  version  of  events  was 
accepted,  it  would  establish  inappropriate  behavior  on  her  part,  as  her  statements  could  be 
readily  misconstrued  by  students  who  had  just  begun  the  sixth  grade. 

10. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  6,  that  during  the  week  of  October  4 

through  8,  2009,  Respondent  acted  inappropriately  when  she  leaned  down,  put  her  face  close 
to  that  of  student  A.M.,  and  yelled,  “get  out  of  my  classroom!” 

11. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  7,  that  on  or  about  September  4,  2008, 
Respondent  engaged  in  an  argument  with  her  co-worker,  Manual  Alvarez,  in  the  presence  of 
children  in  Respondent’s  class.  Essentially,  Respondent  believed  that  Mr.  Alvarez,  who  was 
then  distributing  new  lap  top  computers,  had  deliberately  avoided  giving  her  one  of  those 
devices.  She  therefore  confronted  him,  from  the  open  doorway  of  her  classroom  and  while 
he  was  outside  that  room,  asking  if  he  had  forgotten  her,  and  she  threatened  to  report  him  to 
the  administration.  During  this  interchange,  Respondent’s  demeanor  was  confrontational, 
loud,  and  she  appeared  upset.  Her  statements  to  him  on  that  occasion  were  unprofessional 
and  harassing,  especially  because  she  acted  that  way  in  the  presence  of  her  students.  Mr. 
Martinez  perceived  her  statements  as  harassing,  and  he  complained  to  Markham 
administrators  about  the  incident.  In  a  memorandum  describing  the  incident,  and  prior 
problems  with  Respondent,  he  asked  that  she  stop  threatening  him,  and  he  asked  for 
mediation.

 

i 

i 

12. 

(A)  The  material  allegations  of  Paragraphs  8,  9,  10  were  established.  These 

parts  of  the  §.A.A.  pertain  to  Respondent’s  interaction  with  the  Markham  Attendance  Office 
Clerk,  Maribel  De  La  Cruz,  and  the  following  are  the  facts  of  that  matter. 

(B)  On  October  22,  2008,  at  approximately  10:13  a.m.,  the  mother  of  one  of 

Respondent’s  students  came  to  the  school  to  pick  up  that  student  to  take  him  to  a  medical 
appointment.  Ms.  De  La  Cruz  called  Respondent  and  asked  her  to  send  the  boy  to  the  office. 
Approximately  20  minutes  later,  the  student  had  not  come  to  the  attendance  office,  so  Ms.  De 
La  Cruz  called  Respondent  again,  asking  after  the  child.  Respondent  at  that  point  insisted 
the  boy  would  not  be  released  until  he  had  completed  some  work  he  was  doing,  but  Ms.  De 
La  Cruz  pointed  out  that  the  student’s  parent  was  upset  by  the  delay,  and  so  Respondent 
relented  and  sent  the  child  to  the  office  as  previously  requested. 

(C)  Later  during  October  22,  2008,  Respondent  went  to  the  Attendance 

Office  at  Markham,  and  spoke  to  De  La  Cruz,  accusing  the  latter  of  threatening  Respondent’s 
life  over  the  telephone.  De  La  Cruz  did  not  make  such a  threat. 

(D)  On  several  occasions  over  several  weeks,  Respondent  came  to  the 
Attendance  Office,  and  stood  near  De  La  Cruz,  staring  at  her  without  saying  anything. 
However,  her  manner  was  such  that  De  La  Cruz  was  concerned  for  her  own  welfare,  and 
took  the  matter  to  her  supervisors. 

13. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  is  alleged  in  Paragraph  11,  that  Respondent  engaged 

in  an  angry  and  unprofessional  confrontation  with  Mr.  Alvarez,  in  her  classroom,  while 
students  were  present.  Alvarez  came  to  Respondent's  classroom  on  November  21,  2008,  to 
inventory  computer  equipment  there.  She  told  him  she  was  having  trouble  logging  into  the 
computer-based  attendance  system,  and  he  assisted  her.  When  she  could  not  input 
information  into  the  system,  he  offered  some  information  about  why  that  was  happening, 
though  he  was  notin  a  position  to  remedy  the  problem, 

(B)  Respondent  began  complaining  to  Alvarez  about  the  fact  she  did  not  have 

a  laptop  computer  like  other  teachers  had,  and  about  how  she  had  seniority.over  other 
teachers,  and  stated  that  one  teacher  had  a  laptop  and  that  he  had  been  in  high  school  when 
Respondent  started  teaching.  Alvarez  told  her  the  teacher  she  mentioned  did  not  have  a 
laptop.  Respondent  was  getting  louder  and  louder  while  complaining,  and  said  she  would  go 
to  the  newspapers,  and  make  it  public  that  she  did  not  have  a  laptop  computer.  Her 
statements  to  Alvarez  included  personal  attacks  upon  him,  in  the  presence  of  her  students. 

(C)  Based  on  all  the  evidence  pertaining  to  this  incident,  it  was  established 
that  Respondent  acted  in  an  inappropriate,  angry,  and  temperamental  manner  with  another 
teacher,  in  the  presence  of  students. 

14. 

(A)  Asalleged  in  Paragraph  12,  it  was  established  that  on  November  21, 
2008,  Respondent  became  embroiled  in  a  dispute  with  one  of  the  school  counselors,  Ms. 
Gandy,  regarding  the  placement  of  a  student,  G.O.,  in  Respondent’s  class.  That  dispute 
played  out  before  the  student,  G.O.,  and  before  the  other  students  in  Respondent’s  class  in  a 

{ 

4 

manner  that,  it  is  reasonably  inferred,  caused  embarrassment  and  humiliation  to  G.O.,  and’ 
possibly  other  students. 

(B)  The  student  in  question,  G.O.,  had  at  one  point  been  assigned  to 

Respondent’s  class.  She  did  not  want  G.O.  back  in  her  class,  in  part  because  he  was  a  special 
education  student  who,  in  her  opinion,  was  not  able  to  keep  up  with  the  class,  and  in  part 
because  she  deemed  his  behavior  to  be  a  distraction  for  the  other  students,  especially  one  of 
the  girls,  as  Respondent  perceived  that  G.O.  had  a  crush  on  the  girl. 

(C)  On  November  21,  2008,  Ms.  Gandy  took  G.O.  to  Respondent’s 

classroom,  because  Respondent  would  not  have  him  in  the  class.  When  Ms.  Gandy  did  so, 
Respondent  argued  with  her,  stating  words  to  the  effect  that  G.O.  was  not  going  to  be  in  her 
class,  that  he  was  a  special  education  student  and  she  was  teaching  magnet  students  and  that 
a  special  education  student  did  not  belong  in  her  class.  She  stated  the  boy  just  wanted  to  sit 
near  the  girl  who  was  allegedly  the  object  of  his  affections  so  he  could  make  eyes  at  her,  and 
that  he  did  not  do  any  work. 

(D)  The  conversation  described  above  took  place  before  the  entire  sixth  grade 
class  that  Respondent  was  then  teaching,  as  well  as  in  G.O.'s  presence.  It  is  inappropriate  to 
discuss  one  student  in  this  way  in  front  of  any  other  students,  and  it  was  improper  to  discuss 
the  boy's  status  as  a  special  education  student  in  the  presence  of  other  students.  It  was  also 
improper  for  Respondent  to  talk  in  such  a  negative  manner  about  G.O.  when  he  was  standing 
there  with  Respondent.® 

15. 

In  November  2008,  Respondent  sent  a  student,  A.B.,  from  her  class.  Respondent 

described  him,  during  the  hearing,  as  a  bully.  While  he  was  out  of  the  classroom,  she 
allowed  the  other  students  in  the  class  to  write  letters  to  him  that  were  negative.  When  he 
returned,  she  allowed  the  other  students  to  share  those  letters  with  A.B.  During  the  hearing 
Respondent  attempted  to  justify  this  as  a  means  of  changing  A.B,’s  bullying  behavior,  but 
that  explanation  is  not  accepted  by  the  Commission.  Instead,  it  is  found  that  the  conduct  was 
improper. 

16:  The  allegations  of  Paragraph  14  are  sustained,  in  that  it  was  established  that  on 

numerous  occasions  during  the  2008-2009  school  year,  Respondent  angrily  struck  her 
student’s  desks  with  a  long  stick,  either  a  yardstick  or  a  broom  handle.  She  did  so  in a 

®  Respondent,  during  her  August  2012  deposition,  confirmed  parts  of  the  story  of  the 
dispute  with  Ms.  Gandy.  Hence,  she  testified  that  G.O.  liked  one  of  the  girls  in  the  class,  and 
had  been  taken  out  of  the  class,  but  wanted  to  get  back  in  the  class  because  of  the  girl. 
(Depo.,  p.  48:  14-23.)  She  did  recall  “discussing  the  student  with  Ms,  Gandy  during  class 
time.  (Id.,  pp.  48:  24  to  49:  1-11.)  Thereafter,  Respondent  demonstrated  a  lack  of  recall,  or 
argued  with  counsel  about  whether  she  had  to  answer  questions  about  the  incident,  (See  pp. 
But,  during  the  hearing,  she  admitted  that  the  discussion  about  the  boy's  return  to 
49-57.) 
the  class  took  place  at  the  doorway  to  her  classroom.

 

q 

\ 

manner  that  startled  and  frightened  the  students,  making  them  apprehensive  that  they  would 
be  struck  by  the  stick,  because  it  landed  near  their  hands. 

17.  In  December  2008  Respondent  was  involved  in  an  argument  with  student  V.A. 

The  child  wanted  the  class  to  go  to  the  computer  lab,  but  Respondent  told  the  student  that  the 
lab  was  closed  that  day.  The  student  disputed  this,  as  V.A.  had  seen  the  lab  was  empty,  and 
Respondent  tried  to  explain  that  notwithstanding  that  fact,  Respondent  had  been  told  the  lab 
was  unavailable.  V.A.  was  upset,  and  turned  suddenly  to  leave  the  classroom,  and 
Respondent  reached  out  to  stop  her  from  leaving.  In  doing  so,  Respondent's  hand  became 
entangled  in  the  girl’s  long  hair,  which  had  swung  as  the  child  turned  suddenly.  It  was  not 
established  that  Respondent  set  out  to  pull  V.A.'s  hair,  nor  did  she  firmly  grab  that  child's 
hair. 

18.  The  allegations  of  Paragraph  16,  subparts  (a)  to(g),  and  (i)  were  established. 

Thus,  it  was  proven  that  during  the  2008-2009  school  year  Respondent  verbally  abused  and 
bullied  students  in  her  classroom,  and  she  did  so  repeatedly.  Such  improper  behavior 
included,  but  was  not  limited  to:  yelling  at  students  to  get  out  of  her  class;  telling  them  to 
shut  up;  sending  the  students  outside  the  classroom  without  proper  notices;  assigning  work 
without  proper  instructions;  criticizing  students  for  their  poor  reading  skills;  arguing  with  co- 
workers  in  front  of  students;  lecturing  the  students  regarding  her  religious  views;  and 
assigning  excessive  standards  to  copy. 

19.  The  allegations  of  Paragraph  17  are  sustained,  in  that  it  was  established  that  on 

numerous  occasions  during  September  and  October  2009,  Respondent  angrily  struck 
student’s  desks  witha  long  stick,  such  as  a  yardstick.  She  did  so  in  a  manner  that  startled 
and  frightened  the  students,  and  made  them  apprehensive  that  they  would  be  struck  by  the 
stick,  because  it  landed  near  their  hands. 

20. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  18,  that  Respondent  detained 

students  during  the  lunch  period  causing  them  to  be  unable  to  eat  lunch.  Nor  were  the  other 
allegations  of  that  paragraph  established,  to  the  effect  that  she  taunted  students. 

21.  The  allegations  of  Paragraph  19,  subparts  (a)  to  (g),  (i),  and  (1),  were  established. 

Hence,  it  was  proven  that  during  September  and  October  2009,  Respondent  repeatedly 
verbally  abused  and  bullied  students  in  her  classroom,  through  behavior  that  included,  but 
was  not  limited  to:  yelling  at  students  to  get  out  of  her  classroom,  or  words  to  that  effect; 
telling  them  to  shut  up;  calling  them  stupid;  yelling  at  students  to  “sit  your  butt  down”  or 
words  to  that  effect;  sending  the  students  outside  the  classroom  without  proper  notices; 
assigning  work  without  proper  instructions;  assigning  excessive  standards  to  copy;  cursing  in 
front  of  students;  and  punishing  the  entire  class  when  a  single  student  misbehaved. 

22. 

(A)  As  alleged  in  Paragraph  20,  after  being  removed  from  Markham  on 

October  15,  2009,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  the  PLAS  offices.  During  that  time,  and  until 
November  2011,  she  was  being  paid  her  full  salary,  but was  obligated  to  do  very  little  at  the 
PLAS  offices  in  return  for  her  salary.  The  evidence  establishes  that  she  had  to  report  on 
time,  and  could  read  while  at  the  PLAS  office.  She  had  to  account  for  her  presence  there,  by 

 

( 

{ 

signing  in  and  out.  She  was  entitled  to  use  her  sick  time  and  vacation  time  as  otherwise 
warranted;  i.e.,  to  use  sick  time  if  she  was  ill,  and  if  she  had  sick  time  in  her  account. 

(B)  While  Respondent  was  assigned  to  the  PLAS  offices,  she  at  times  became 

embroiled  in  confrontations  or  arguments  with  her  supervisors.  During  some  of  those 
confrontations  she  pointed  her  finger  at  Ms.  Bradford,  then  Senior  Director  of  Human 
Resources,  telling  her  in  a  loud  voice  that  she  (Bradford)  was  rude,  or  the  devil,  or  words  to 
that  effect.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  failed  to  arrive  to  work  on  time, 
or  that  she  failed  to  meet  with  Mr.  Ervin. 

23. 

(A)  Onor  about  August  30,  2012,  Respondent  telephoned  the  offices  of  the 

City  Year  organization,  which  is  a  non-profit  firm  which  had  previously  placed  volunteers  in 
Markham,  and  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  She  spoke  to  Mr.  Jeff  Hitchcock,  a  senior 
manager  of  that  firm.  Respondent  demanded  contact  information  for  two  volunteers  that  had 
been  placed  by  City  Year  and  who  had  served  in  her  classroom  in  October  2009.  She  wanted 
the  contact  information  because  the  two  volunteers  had  previously  provided  written 
statements  to  the  District,  and  declarations  to  the  District’s  counsel.  At  the  time,  Respondent 
was  aware  that  the  District  wanted  to  offer  the  declarations  and  statements  of  the  two 
volunteers  in  evidence. 

(B)  Mr.  Hitchcock  told  Respondent  that  he  could  not  release  any  information 

to  her,  and  Respondent  became  angry  and  agitated.  She  told  him  the  two  volunteers  were  not 
good,  and  that  they  had  wrongfully  accused  her  of  pushing  a  student.  She  threatened  to  sue 
City  Year,  and  said  something  about  bringing  out  “the  guns”  or  “the  big  guns.”  While  it 
appears  that  she  was  trying  to  imply  that  she  would  get  top  notch  attorneys  on  the  matter,  her 
statements  and  the  manner  in  which  she  made  them  caused  concern  at  the  City  Year 
organization,  such  that  they  filed  a  police  report  about  the  incident. 

24, 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Paragraph  22,  that  Respondent  struck  student 
M.T.  on  the  wrist  with  a  yardstick,  nor  was  it  established  that  she  refused  to  allow  him  to  see 
the  nurse. 

Other  Findings  Necessary  for  Resolution  of  the  Case 

25.  The  previous  factual  findings  are  specific  to  the  allegations  of  the  case. 
However,  other  findings  relevant  to  resolution  of  this  matter  follow,  as  in  some  cases  they 
supplement  and  explain  the  findings  above. 

26. 

(A)  Factual  Findings  18  and  21  were  more  than  supported  by  the  testimony  in 

this  case,  and  by  some  of  the  student  statements.  At  the  hearing  virtually  every  student 
testified  that  Respondent  routinely  yelled  at  the  students  in  a  very  loud  voice.  Plainly,  a 
teacher  may  have  to  raise  his  or  her  voice  to  obtain  order  and  attention  from  a  group  of  sixth 
gtaders.  However,  the  weight  of  the  evidence  was  that  such  conduct  by  Respondent  was 
excessive.  Respondent  asserts  that  as  the  school  year  would  wind  on,  she  had  less 
misconduct  from  the  children,  and  less  need  for  yelling,  writing  standards,  and  so  forth,  but 
that  is  not  borne  out  by  the  other  testimony.  As  one  student,  N.R.,  credibly  put  it, 

{ 

1 

Respondent  was  always  grumpy  and  in  a  bad  mood,  yelling  almost  every  day,  and  that  while 
the  days  would  usually  start  on  a  quieter  note,  things  were  crazy  as  the  day  wore  on.  From 
that  student's  perspective,  the  "craziness"  very  much  flowed  from  Respondent.  According  to 
that  young  man,  Respondent’s  yelling  at  the  students  occurred  from  all  parts  of  the  room,  as 
well  as  in  their  faces. 

(B)  The  numerous  student  witnesses  testified  to  Respondent  striking 

the  desks  with  a  stick,  in  a  loud  manner  which  had  a  threatening  dimension.  This  testimony 
is  corroborated  by  Respondent's  admission,  during  her  deposition,  that  she  had  sometimes 
used  a  broom  handle  to  hit  the  desks,  that  it  was  loud,  and  that  the  students  did  not  like  it. 
(Depo.  p.  111:  3-25.) 

27.  The  evidence  establishes  that  Respondent  could  not  modulate  her  behavior,  and 

that  she  could  not  control  her  temper  on  many  occasions  during  her  last  two  years  at 
Markham.  Numerous  students  testified  to  such  negative  behaviors,  which  are  generally 
cataloged  in  Factual  Findings  6,  9,  10,  15,  16,  18,  19,  and  21.  Likewise,  there  was 
substantial  evidence  of  Respondent's  inability  to  work  with  other  teachers  or  supervisors 
without  conflict,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  11,  12,  13,  14,  and  22.  Her  temperamental 
nature  emerged  during  her  telephone  conversation  with  Mr.  Hitchcock,  described  in  Factual 
Finding  23;  she  became  enraged  when  he  told  her,  in  effect,  that  he  could  not  just  hand  over 
personal  information  of  a  third  party  to  someone  calling  on  the  phone.  Rather  than 
ascertaining  where  a  subpoena  might  be  served,  so  as  to  acquire  the  information  through  due 
process,  Respondent  threatened  litigation  in  a  way  that  could  be  construed  asa  threat  of 
violence. 

28.  Complainant  established  that  Respondent  could  not  modulate  her  behavior  while 

at  PLAS.  While  Respondent  may  have  been  frustrated  to  be  out  of  her  classroom,  and  in 
some  administrative  limbo,  at  bottom  she  simply  had  to  come  to  the  office,  pass  the  time,  and 
draw  her  regular  paycheck.  Such  soft  duty  should  not  have  motivated  her  angry  outbursts, 
regardless  of  the  attitude  she  perceived  from  management  at  PLAS. 

29,  During  the  hearing,  Respondent  exhibited  problems  with  self-control,  often 
engaging  in  confrontational  behavior  with  District  counsel  ahd  witnesses.  She’  also  exhibited 
aneed  to  “have  the  last  word.”  On  numerous  occasions  she  talked  over  others,  raising  her 
voice  as  she  did  so  in  an  effort  to  get  her  point  across,  at  the  expense  of  the  other  person. 
She  exhibited  such  behavior  despite  more  than  one.  admonishment  to  avoid  that  behavior.  In 
making  this  finding,  the  Commission  recognizes  that  the  proceeding  had  to  be  stressful  for 
Respondent,  who  is  not  an  attorney,  but  with  that  thought  in  mind  the  Commission  was 
nonetheless  forced,  on  a  unanimous  basis,  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  if  she  could  not  control 
herself  during  the  hearing,  then  she  likely  was  unable  to  control  herself  in  less  formal 
circumstances,  such  as  when  she  was  passing  the  time  at  PLAS,  or  when  interfacing  with 
staff  and  students  at  Markham. 

30.  Respondent  tends  to  be  inflexible,  another  aspect  of  her  temperament.  During  the 
hearing  she  stated  that  “this  is  who  I  am”  and  “this  is  my  personality”  and  other  words  to  that 
effect.  That  does  not  make  her  a  bad  person,  but  it  appeared  as  an  excuse  for  some  of  her

( 

i 

deleterious  behavior,  and  it  indicated  that  she  does  not  believe  she  can  (or  should)  change  her 
ways  for  the  better.  From  her  statements,  it  was  clear  that  who  she  is  is  who  she  is  going  to 
be.  For  her  to  point  out  that  she  is  passionate  about  teaching  does  no  more  than  prove  that 
her  passion,  unbridled  (and  from  her  point  of  view  not  needing  a  bridle),  led  to  improper 
conduct  in  the  classroom  and  at  the  sites  where  she  was  assigned  from  2008  until  2011,  that 
her passion  will  lead  to  improper  conduct  if  she  returns  to  the  classroom. 

Credibility 

31.  Mr.  Alvarez,  Ms.  De  La  Cruz,  and  Mr.  Martinez  were  all  credible  in  their 
testimony,  both  in  terms  of  demeanor,  and  consistency  of  the  content.  All  answered 
questions  put  to  them  without  hint  of  prevarication,  despite  a  sometimes  trying  manner  of 
cross-examination  by  Respondent. 

32.  Respondent’s  credibility  suffered  as  a  result  of  her  demeanor  during  the  hearing, 

but  it  also  suffered  as  a  result  of  her  sometimes  inconsistent  statements,  which  included  some 
vatiance  between  her  testimony  during  the  hearing,  and  her  deposition  testimony.  The 
deposition  contains  more  than  one  passage  where  Respondent's  memory  appeared  selective, 
and  she  was  also  combative  with  counsel.’  That  does  not  mean  that  all  of  her  testimony  was 
disregarded,  as  some  was  accepted.  However,  her  overall  credibility  was  diminished  as 
opposed  to  Mr.  Alvaraz,  Ms.  De  La  Cruz,  Mr.  Martinez,  and  many  of  the  students  who 
testified. 

33.  Ms.  Bradshaw's  credibility  suffered  in  that  she  testified  to  involvement  in  a 
meeting  between  Mr.  Hernandez  and  Respondent  in  February  2011,  described  below  in 
connection  with  the  February  2011  conference  memo,  which  meeting  did  not  take  place. 
However,  she  was  not  wholly  discredited  regarding  her  interactions  with  Respondent,  which 
she  described  as  sometimes  negative,  and  other  times  as  positive. 

The  False  Conference  Memo 

34. 

In  the  course  of  the  hearing,  the  District  offered,  as  Exhibit  18,  a  document  that 

purported  to  be  a  memorandum  of  a  conference  between  Mr.  Martinez,  who  took  over  as 
Markham's  principal  after  Respondent  was  transferred  out,  Respondent,  and  others.  After  the 
document  was  received  in  evidence,  it  was  established  as  pure  fiction,  as  a  false  document. 

35.  The  conference  memo  was  prepared  on  PLAS  letterhead,  is  dated  February  18, 

2011,  purports  to  be  from  Paul  Hernandez,  and  references  “summary  of  conference  of 
February  18,  2011.”  It  states  that  the  participants  in  the  conference,  which  was  purportedly 
held  at  Mr.  Martinez’  office,  which  would  be  at  Markham,  were  Respondent,  “Phyllis 
Bradford,  Director  of  Human  Resources,  Sergio  Franco,  Staff  Relations,  UTLA 
representative  and  Paul  Hernandez.”  (Ex.  18,  p.  1.) 

The  memo  goes  on  to  describe 

7 

One  such  example  is  cited  in  footnote  6.  Another  can  be  found  at  pages  58-70, 

where  Respondent  demonstrates  a  selective  memory  regarding  the  incidents  with  Mr. 
Alvarez. 

10 

  

i 
: 

| 

|

   

1 

{ 

discussions  of  events  from  October  15,  2009,  including  Respondent's  denial  of  the  charges, 
and  the  document  purports  to  describe  “assistance  and  guidance”  that  was  provided  to 
Respondent—numbered  1  through  8.  Five  directives  allegedly  made  to  Respondent  were 
memorialized  as  well. 

36. 

In  the  course  of  the  hearing  Mr.  Ervin  stated  he  did  not  know  about  the 

document,  and  he  testified  that  Mr.  Franco  and/or  Ms.  Bradford  would.  Ms.  Bradford 
recalled  the  meeting  that  is  described  in  the  memo,  but  did  not  recall  the  memo.  She  thought 
that  the  meeting  had  taken  place  at  the  PLAS  offices.  Mr.  Franco  did  not  testify. 

37. 

(A)  Mr.  Hernandez  was  called  by  Respondent  as  a  witness.  He  recalled 

meeting  Respondent  on  one  occasion,  in  April  2011,  when  he  was  required  to  come  to  the 
PLAS  offices  to  give  some  papers  to  her.  He  was  required  to  do  so  because  he  was  then  the 
principal  at  Markham;  the  principal  who  had  supervised  Respondent  at  Markham  had  left  the 
site  before  2011.  Mr.  Hernandez  testified  that  he  received  the  papers  from  Mr.  Franco  when 
he  got  to  the  PLAS  offices,  and  he  attested  to  serving  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  (NUA) 
on  Respondent,  a  copy  of  which  was  received  in  evidence  as  Exhibit  19.  He  also  served  a 
notice  of  suspension  of  Respondent  on  that  date.  The  February  18,  2011  memo  was  part  of 
the  papers  he  received  from  Mr.  Franco  and  served  on  Respondent.  He  also  recalled  meeting 
Respondent's  union  representative  at  that  April  26,  2011  meeting,  and  testified  it  was  the 
only  time  he  met  that  person,  Ms.  Parr. 

(B)  Mr.  Hernandez  was  clear  that  he  did  not  meet  with  Respondent  (or  the 

others  identified  in  the  memo)  on  February  18,  2011,  or  on  any  other  date  besides  April  26, 
2011.  He  was  clear  that  he  did  not  write  Exhibit  18,  and  that  he  did  not  know  who  did.  Mr. 
Hernandez  was  very  credible  in  this  testimony  (and  the  rest  of  his  testimony)  in  terms  of  his 
demeanor  and  the  content  of  the  testimony.  He  was  firm,  direct,  answering  questions 
without  hint  of  prevarication,  regardless  of  whose  interests  were  affected  by  the  answers  he 
gave.  His  testimony  on  this  point  is  accepted  by  the  Commission  and  forms  the  basis  for  the 
finding  that  the  purported  memo  constitutes  a  falsehood. 

(C)  There  is  other  evidence  that  corroborates  Mr.  Hernandez!  testimony.  The 
memo  states  the  meeting  took  place  at  his  office,  implying  the  Markham  site;  Hernandez  did 
not  work  at  the  PLAS  offices.  The  memo  is  on  the  PLAS  letterhead,  not  on  the  school  site's 
letterhead.  The  memo  does  not  identify  Respondent's  union  representative  by  name,  as 
might  be  expected.  Hernandez  testified  to  meeting  her  on  one  occasion;  she  signed  the  NUA 
on  April  26,  acknowledging  it. 

® 

He  gave  other  testimony  that  did  not  help  Respondent's  case,  such  as  when  he 
explained  why  the  use  of  standards  was  not  a  sound  teaching  or  discipline  strategy.  He 
acknowledged  that  junior  high  students  were  not  always  truthful  when  they  complained 
about  teachers.  His  testimony  about  the  problems  at  the  Markham  site,  with  violence,  gangs, 
and  drugs  was  forthright;  he  did  not  try  to  paper  over  the  problems  there  in  the  way  that  Mr. 
Ervin  had. 

11 

{ 

i 

38.  The  NUA  states,  on  its  first  page,  that  “the  following  steps  were  taken  to  help  this 

employee  improve:  ...-SEE  ATTACHED-.”  (Ex.  19;  capitalized  in  original.)  The  second 
page  of  Exhibit  19  then  states,  in  part: 

“1,  Paul  Hernandez,  Principal  of  Markham  MS,  held  a  conference 
with,  Ms.  Sondra  Shorter,  6th  grade  teacher  at  Markham  MS,  during 
which  he  provided  her  with  assistance  and  guidance  on  or  about  the 
following  dates:  A.  February  18,  2011.”  (Punctuation  in  original.) 

The  importation  of  the  false  conference  memo  into  the  NUA  compromised  the 

integrity  of  that  latter  document. 

39. 

It  may  be  inferred  that  someone  at  the  District  or  PLAS,  or  both,  perceived  that  if 
they  did  not  document  counseling  Respondent,  they  would  not  be  able  to  proceed  on  a  claim 
of  unprofessional  conduct,  and  hence  a  meeting  about  the  2009  events  was  concocted,  as  the 
other  conference  referred  to  in  the  NUA  had  occurred  in  2006.  (See  Ex.  19,  p..2.) 

40.  Given  that  the  unprofessional  conduct  claim  was  dismissed  pretrial,  the  receipt  of 

this  document  is  not  fatal  to  the  District's  case,  although  the  District,  as  an  institution,  is 
discredited  by  it. 

The  Morrison  Factors 

41.  Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an  examination 

must  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  Respondent  in  question  is 
unfit  to  teach.  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  Siate  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  factors  that  may  be  examined 
to  determine  fitness  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  and,  the  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of  certificate  held  by 
the  teacher;  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances;  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in 
question  will  recur;  and,  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on 
the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved,  or  other  teachers. 

42, 

(A)  Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the  degree  thereof: 
There  were  adverse  consequences  for  students  in  Respondent’s  class.  Frightening  children 
by  regularly  striking  a  desk  with  a  broom  handle  caused  adverse  consequences. 
Embarrassing  a  special  education  student  in  front  of  other  children  is  plainly  adverse  to  that 
child.  Arguing  with  other  teachers  and  staff  in  front  of  students  engendered  disrespect  for 
teachers  and  school  administrators,  which  is  also  detrimental  to  students.  It  is  detrimental  to 
other  teachers  and  staff  as  well. 

(B)  Proximity  in  time:  This  conduct  occurred  in  the  period  2008  to  2009. 

Thus,  a  significant  amount  of  time  has  passed. 

12

\ 

: 

(C)  Type  of  certificate  held  by  Respondent:  Respondent  holds  three  teaching 

credentials,  including  two  life  credentials  pertaining  to  teaching  children,  one  an  Early 
Childhood  credential,  and  the  other  an  Elementary  Education  credential.  She  also  holds  a 
Preliminary  Education  Administration/Staff  Development  Credential.  With  credentials  of 
these  types,  she  should  be  aware  that  her  conduct  has  not  been  appropriate. 
credentials  of  this  type  she  is  more  likely  to  be  exposed  to  younger  student,  who  would  be 
more  likely  to  be  effected,  in  a  negative  way,  by  Respondent's  misbehavior. 

And,  with 

(D)  Likelihood  of  recurrence:  The  conduct  in  question  was  ongoing  during 

much  of  one  school  year,  2008-2009,  and  in  the  fall  semester  of  the  2009  school  year.  And, 
she  demonstrated  a  poor  temperament  while  assigned  to  the  PLAS  offices.  As  summed  up  in 
Factual  Findings  27  through  30,  Respondent  does  not  believe  she  needs  to  change,  and  by 
her  own  statements  indicates  that  she  cannot  do  so. 
record,  and  the  inferences  reasonably  drawn  from  it,  Respondent’s  misconduct  conduct  is 
likely  to  recur. 

It  must  be  said,  that  based  on  the  entire 

(E)  Implication  of  constitutional  rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of  either  the 

Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated  for  her  conduct 
described  in  this  decision. 

(F)  Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances:  In  aggravation,  Respondent’s 

actions  occurred  over  a  period  of  months,  and  she  knew,  or  should  have  known,  that  her 
conduct  was  inappropriate.  And,  she  refused  to  modulate  her  behavior  despite  indications 
that  it  was  inappropriate. 

43.  Under  all  the  circumstances,  Respondent’s  ongoing  conduct  establishes  that  she 
is  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Morrison  decision,  and  she  should 
be  terminated  as  a  teacher. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Conclusions  Generally  Applicable  To  All  Claims: 

1.  The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Education 

Cede  section  44944,  and  Factual  Findings  1  and  2. 

2.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 

properly  means  “‘cleatly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 
reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,” 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Compeience  (1992)  2  Cal  App.4th  1429,  at  1444.) 

13

i 

i 

3.  “Immoral  conduct,”  of  which  Respondent  has  been  accused,  is  not  confined  to 

sexual  matters.  It  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that 
is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland);  San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

A. 

In  order  for  a  teacher  to  be  terminated  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for 

persistent  disobedience  of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  it  must  be  established  that  there 
has  been  continuous  and  constant  refusal  to  obey,  or  behavior  motivated  by  an  attitude  of 
continuing  insubordination;  a  single  instance  of  disobedience  is  insufficient.  (Governing  Bd. 
of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 

5.  Even  where  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  or  refusal  to  follow 

rules  and  regulations  are  established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  conduct  renders  the 
Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 
230;  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  208;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (Zuber)  (1992)  4  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445;  See  Bourland 
¥.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

_ 

6. 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
v,  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving.a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence”,  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

, 

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  That  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in 
support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.  (Hutchinson  v. 
Contractors’  State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal-App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v. 
Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.295,  304.) 

14 

| 
i

  

f 

{ 

Legal  Conclusions  Pertaining  to  the  Specific  Allegations  of  the  Accusation: 

7. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  Respondent  has  demonstrated  evident  unfitness  to 
teach,  based  on  Factual  Findings  6,  9  through  16,  18,  19,  21  through  23,  and  25  through  32, 
and  Legal  Conclusion  2.  Respondent's  temperamental  defects  were  summed  up  in  the 
numerous  findings,  above.  It  is  also  observed  that  Respondent  tended  to  treat  her  classroom 
as  her  territory,  where  only  her  writ  ran,  and  not  necessarily  the  District's.  Hence,  she  would 
yell  at  children  to  “get  out  of  my  classroom.”  While  it  is  proper  for  a  teacher  to  have  control 
of  the  classroom,  to  attempt  to  maintain  it  in  the  manner  she  did  was  inappropriate, 
unprofessional,  and  indicative  of  an  inadequate  temperament. 

(B)  If  Respondent’s  interactions  with  some  staff  outside  the  classroom 

establish  a  poor  temperament,  such  confrontations  in  front  of  students  highlights  her  poor 
temperament.  The  most  egregious  example  may  be  Respondent's  argument  with  Ms.  Gundy 
about  the  enrollment  of  student  G.O.  in  the  classroom.  (Factual  Finding  14.)  To  have  such  a 
loud  argument  with  a  counselor,  where  a  student’s  special  education  needs  are  bandied  about 
in  front  of  the  student  in  question  was  bad  enough;  to  do  so  in  the  view  and  hearing  of  that 
student’s  would-be  classmates  is  wholly  inappropriate,  and  shows  an  inability  to  engage  in 
self-control.  Respondent's  public  berating  of  Mr.  Alvarez  similarly  established  a 
temperamental  defect. 

(C)  When  the  entire  record  is  considered,  it  has  been  established  that 

Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to  teach  within  the  meaning  of  the  Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  District  case,  cited  in  Legal  Conclusion  2,  above. 

8. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  or  that 

she  engaged  in  repeated  refusal  to  comply  with  applicable  rules,  regulations,  and  directives, 
based  on  all  the  foregoing. 

9,  Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  it  must  be  concluded  that  Respondent's  conduct 

and  temperament  render  her  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  based  on  Factual  Findings  41 
through  43. 

it 

15

ORDER 

    
   

Respondent  Sondra  Shorter  shall  be  terminated  as  a, 

Angeles Unified  School  District,  forthwith. 
‘A 

o 

MPA  May  Ab,  2013 

esl iy 

f 

. 
i 

a5 
May  #9,  2013 

el 
pfe  Mba, 2013 
Gyr 

 

Smee 

     

Teresa  Valesco 

16 

