BEFORE THE COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the First Amended
Accusation Against Anthony Heard, Jr., A
Certificated Employee

CASE NUMBER 2011110787

Respondent.

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter on

October 1-4 and 8, 2012, in Costa Mesa. The Commission consisted of Commission
Members Tim Strand, Joseph Klepadlo, and Administrative Law Judge Chris Ruiz (ALJ),
Office of Administrative Hearings, presiding.

Eric Bathen and Jordan Meyer, Esqs., represented Thelma Melendez de Santa Ana,

Ph.D., Superintendent of the Santa Ana Unified School District (District).

Jules Miller, Esq., represented Anthony Heard, Jr. (Respondent or Heard) who was

present on each day of hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received, argument heard, and the matter was

submitted on October 8, 2012. The Commission began its deliberations in executive
session October 8, 2012, and concluded on the same day. After due consideration, the
Commission makes the following factual findings and legal conclusions.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. Thelma Melendez de Santa Ana, Ph.D. (Complainant), Superintendent, Santa Ana

Unified School District, made the First Amended Accusation in her official capacity.

2. On October 5, 2009, the District served Respondent, by certified and regular mail,
with a Notice of Intention to Dismiss, together with a copy of relevant California
Education Code sections. Thereafter, Respondent was served with an Accusation and
a First Amended Accusation, the latter of which was filed on January 19, 2012.

3. Thereafter, Respondent filed a Notice of Defense which requested a hearing.

4. The First Amended Accusation and First Amended Statement of Charges alleged the
following causes for Respondent’s dismissal: (1) evident unfitness for service; (2)

immoral conduct; and (3) willful refusal to perform regular assignments without
reasonable cause, as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the employing school
district. (Cal. Ed. Code §§ 44932, subd.(a) and 44939. The First Amended Statement
of Charges contained 33 charging paragraphs which are discussed immediately
below.

5. Heard was employed by the District as a certificated employee, and specifically as a Classroom

Teacher, subject to the rules and regulations applicable to certificated employees serving as
classroom teachers, including without limitation District Board Policy 4117 entitled "Classroom
Teacher - Job Description.”. It was established that Respondent generally performed as a high
quality teacher with respect to the overall instruction of his students.

6.

It was alleged, but not established, that in March 2008, Ignacio Muniz (Mr. Muniz), assistant
principal, noticed that students were left unsupervised in Heard's classroom during the lunch
period while Heard was eating lunch outside of his classroom.

7.

It was alleged, but not established, that on March 22, 2008, students were left unsupervised in
Heard's classroom.

8. On April 22, 2008. Heard arrived to work approximately one and one-half hours late and he

failed to contact the school to inform the administration of his tardiness. Claudia Flint (Ms. Flint),
assistant principal, went to Heard's classroom to let the students into the classroom and to teach
his class. Heard violated his duties as Classroom Teacher in not having lesson plans available in
the event he was absent. Ms. Flint could not locate a lesson plan despite her efforts to locate such
lesson plans. Later that same day, Ms. Flint met with Heard and discussed his tardiness and the
lack of a lesson plan. Heard told Ms. Flint that he was late to school because he overslept. At that
meeting, Ms. Flint directed Heard that, among other things: (1) if he were tardy in the future,
he must contact the office immediately and (2) he must leave a lesson plan available
for a substitute teacher.

9. On May 16, 2008, Heard was again absent from school in the morning, but he did not

leave a lesson plan, in violation of his duties as Classroom Teacher. He also failed to obey
the clear directives issued to him by Ms. Flint on April 22, 2008.

10. On May 16, 2008, the morning that Heard was absent from school, Heard sent four text
who was a student in his morning

messages during school hours to student A A
class. Heard asked A A
substitute teacher what video to show the class. This was a violation by Heard his duties
and of the prior directive issued by Ms. Flint. Rather than calling the office staff at the
school and asking them to locate the lesson plans and communicate with the substitute
teacher, Heard improperly texted a student.

to look for Heard's lesson plans and to inform the

11. On May 19, 2008, Ms. Flint again met with Heard and directed him to not communicate
with students through their cell phones as it was a clear violation of school policy. The

2

students are required to have their cell phones off during school hours. Ms. Flint directed
Heard to keep his interaction with students strictly professional at all times and further
directed Heard to follow the District’s field trip procedures anytime he met with students
away from the classroom.

12. On May 22, 2008, there was a fight between students R

R

and J

A

A

A

's punching

in the eye. Heard instructed J

in Heard’s classroom. The fight culminated with R

R
to inform the nurse that he

had
in the eye. Heard's instruction to a student to deceive the school

A
J
sustained the injury by poking himself in the eye, when in fact R
punched J
nurse was inappropriate and it jeopardized the health and safety of student J
A
the school that require incidents where a student attempts to injure or injures another
student to be reported to an administrator. This was the second time within a week in
which Heard improperly involved a student in hiding information from the District
administration.

. Heard’s conduct also interfered with the discipline policies and procedures of

R

13. It was alleged, but not established, that on May 27, 2008, Ms. Flint was informed by a
District teacher that she had repeatedly seen Heard touching the hands, arms and
shoulders of female students while he spoke to them during lunch on the school grounds.

14. It was alleged, but not established, that on May 28, 2008, Ms. Flint she saw Heard rub a

female student's hair during lunch and put his hands on several female students'
shoulders.

15. On May 30, 2008, Ms. Flint met with Heard and discussed Heard's misconduct related to
. Ms. Flint directed Heard
the fight between students R
to immediately report all incidents involving student safety to the administrative office.
On May 30, 2008, Ms. Flint prepared a “Summary of Conference.” Included in that
document were directives to Heard which stated: "be on time to school" and "report
your absences in a timely manner and leave detailed substitute plans."

and J

A

R

16. On or about May 30, 2008, Heard prepared an incident report for the District in

which he stated his position regarding the incident of May 22, 2008.

17. On or about June 17, 2008, Heard again failed to send a student to the office to see a

nurse after the student injured himself in Heard's classroom. Student M
injured himself in Heard's classroom when he tried to cross the room by jumping
over desks and tripped, falling on his face and thereby sustaining injuries to his nose
and forehead. Heard did not report the incident to the administrative offices or to
M
time of the injury. Heard's conduct violated the directive received in Summary of
Conference dated May 30, 2008, wherein he was directed to immediately report all
incidents involving student safety to the administrative office. Heard did not send

's parents. Heard did not send M

to the school nurse at the

A

A

A

3

the student to the nurse because the student did not want to go to the school nurse.
However, Heard should have insisted or notified his supervisor.

18. On or about June 19, 2008, Heard delivered an incident report as to the occurrence

on June 17, 2003.

19. On June 19, 2008, Ms. Flint met with Heard and gave Heard a verbal reprimand for

his inappropriate conduct related to student M
Flint issued a Summary of Verbal Reprimand to Heard regarding the incident.

and on June 30, 2008, Ms.

A

20. During October 2008 through December 2008, Heard continued his pattern of arriving
at school late without a valid explanation and after having been warned about this
conduct.

21. On October 24, 2008, Heard again arrived late to school, at approximately 9:20 a.m.,
fifteen minutes after his second period class began and one hour and ten minutes after
his teacher’s duty day began. Heard informed Jan Schwarz (Ms Schwarz), office
manager, that he was late because he overslept. Heard's conduct again violated his
duties as a classroom teacher, the verbal warning he received in April 22, 2008, and
the written directive he received on May 30, 2008.

22. On December 5, 2008, Heard again arrived late to school, at approximately 9:05
a.m., as his second period class was starting, and fifty-five minutes after his
teacher’s duty day began. Heard informed Ms. Schwarz that he was late again
because he overslept. Heard's conduct again violated his duties as classroom
teacher, the verbal warning he received in April 22, 2008, and the written directive
he received on May 30, 2008.

23. On or around December 8.2008, Ms. Flint met with Heard and gave him a verbal

reprimand. On December 9, 2008, Ms. Flint issued a Letter of Reprimand to Heard
regarding his continued tardiness.

24. In January 2009, Heard emotionally abused and verbally harassed students in one of
his classes and sought to transfer those students that reported his abuse and harassing
behavior. On January 16, 2009, Heard called student D
"'retarded" and
“stupid." Heard said that student D
scratching his butt." Heard told the class that D
small brain of his" and the "best thing [D
Furthermore, Heard called students "stinky”-and said that "they pick their boogers."
Finally, one female student in class reported that Heard made her feel uncomfortable in
class because Heard "stare[d] at her in class a lot." Some students prepared statements
evidencing the inappropriate conduct by Heard. In mitigation, Heard was also
G
occasionally complimentary to D

needs to "stop picking his nose and

] could do in class is just sleep."

needs to "start using that

G

G

G

.

4

25. On or about February 20, 2009, Heard demonstrated evident unfitness for service and he
willfully refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed
by the rules and regulations of the District when he transported female students to the
Segerstrom High School track in his personal vehicle without appropriate parental
permission. Heard transported approximately four female students in his personal vehicle
to the Segerstrom High School track and had two additional female students meet the
group at the track without obtaining prior approval from an administrator to conduct a
separate practice or to transport students to another school. Heard did not file the
requisite paperwork necessary for taking students on a field trip. Heard's conduct
violated District Board Policies for transporting students and conducting field trips with
students, and also violated the directive he received in the Summary Conference held on
May 30, 2008. Heard's conduct exposed himself and the District to liability and showed
poor judgment because Heard had been instructed on multiple occasions to follow
District rules and policies.

26. On February 24. 2009, the District issued Heard a Letter of Reprimand and Notice
of Suspension without pay for the period of February 24, 2009, through February
26, 2009. The District’s Letter of Reprimand directed Heard, among other things,
as follows:

 You are not to take any retaliatory action towards any student who

provided a statement related to this investigation.

 You are not to contact the students and seek to intimidate them into

defending you for your reprehensible behavior.

 You are further hereby direct to not discuss the issues addressed in the
Reprimand with other District staff (with the exception of your SAEA
representatives) or students, or retaliate in any way against any of the students or
staff mentioned or who signed statements related to the investigation.

27. On March 2, 2009, after having received the February 24, 2009 Letter of

Reprimand and Notice of Suspension without pay, Heard sent an email to Kathy Brandt
(Ms. Brandt), a District counselor, requesting her to transfer student D
and other students that had provided witness statements to the administration in
connection with the investigation of Heard. Heard asked for confidential health
information about student D
still need all the information you have on D
as well as the name of the
medication he is on, why he is taking it, and any of his behavioral transgressions this
school year."

when he stated in his email to Ms. Brandt, "I

G

G

G

5

28. On or about March 5, 2009, Heard wrote a letter to Ms. Hinshaw discussing,

G

. One of his

among other things, the incident with D
statements in his letter was, "I know that I have rubbed some people the
wrong way. The thing is I don't really care. I don't care about the perception
of most people." This statement by Heard was quite revealing. While Heard
was good at instructing his students, he was not willing to follow the
instructions of his supervisors, despite multiple warnings. At the hearing,
Heard apologized for his conduct on multiple occasions and promised he
would change in the future if given an opportunity to do so. However, the
District has already given Heard multiple opportunities to change his
conduct and he failed to do so.

29. On March 26, 2009, the District issued Heard a Letter of Reprimand and Notice
of Suspension without pay, for the period of March 27, 2009, through April 2,
2009.

30. On April 13, 2009, the District sent Heard a letter stating the period of

suspension from March 27, 2009, through April 2, 2009, but mistakenly stated it
was a three-day suspension.

31. On April 30, 2009, the District sent Heard a letter stating the period of

suspension from March 27, 2009, through April 2, 2009, correctly stating that
it was a five-day suspension.

32. On September 22, 2009, the District issued a memorandum to Heard as a

reminder that his preliminary credential was going to expire on September 30,
2009.

33. On September 30, 2009, Heard's California Preliminary Teaching Credential
expired. The Preliminary Credential authorized Heard to teach in the District
for up to five years while he was completing the requirements for his CLEAR
Credential. During the five years Heard taught using his Preliminary Teaching
Credential, he did not timely obtain an appropriate California CLEAR Teaching
Credential or, in the alternative, Heard did not obtain an extension from the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) to extend his time to
complete the requirements for his CLEAR Credential and thereby extend his
Preliminary Teaching Credential for an additional year. As such, as of October
1, 2009, Heard failed to maintain the appropriate, necessary, and required
credential that allowed and enabled him to perform the essential functions of his
job. The State of California requires teachers to maintain an appropriate
teaching credential in order to teach in a public school. Heard did not take the

6

steps necessary to maintain the appropriate teaching credential necessary to
maintain his teaching position and perform the essential functions of his job. As
of October 1, 2009, Heard no longer had a credential to teach in the State of
California. The District is responsible for ensuring that its teachers have the
appropriate credentials necessary to meet the needs of all students who attend
school in the District. Because of Heard's failure to complete the CTC
requirements to earn a CLEAR Teaching Credential, or take the necessary steps
to obtain an emergency extension of his Preliminary Credential, he was unable
to comply with the terms of his teaching contract with the District and was
further unable to meet the educational needs of the District and the District's
students and therefore unfit to teach in a District classroom. The District was
notified of the expiration of Heard's Preliminary Credential and thereafter the
District notified Heard that his credential had expired.

34. Ultimately, Heard was able to obtain his CLEAR Teaching Credential, either

on October 24, 2009, or November 5, 2009. His credential was “back dated” to
October 1, 2009, but it was established that Heard was without a credential for
at least approximately three weeks in October 2009.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. The standard of proof in this proceeding is preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner
v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-
1039.)

2. The grounds for the dismissal of a teacher in this state are enumerated in Education
Code section 44932, subdivision (a). In this case, the District relies only on the
following grounds: (1) evident unfitness for service; (2) immoral conduct; and (3)
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed
by the rules and regulations of the employing school district. (Cal. Ed. Code §§
44932, subd. (a) and 44939.)1

3.

It is the conclusion of the Commission that Respondent engaged in willful refusal to
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the rules and
regulations of the employing school district and is evidently unfit for service.
Respondent’s conduct did not rise to the level of “immoral conduct” and therefore
that charge was not established.

4. The term “immoral conduct” is a basis for dismissal of teachers included in section
44932, subdivision (a)(1). The term was first discussed in the context of a teacher

1 All further statutory references are to the California Education Code unless otherwise
stated.

7

dismissal in Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, and the
court’s definition in that case has often been cited by other courts. (See, e.g.: Palo
Verde v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967.)

5. The Weiland Court stated: The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which
is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality
has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude,
or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members
of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public
welfare. (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.) Courts have found immoral
conduct where a teacher stated that the district superintendent spent too much time
“licking up the Board” as he simulated licking of the wall in an up and down manner
(Hensey, supra); where a teacher knocked a sheriff deputy down with his car after the
deputy discovered a partially naked female student in the car (Board of Trustees v.
Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820); where a teacher performed oral copulation in a
doorless toilet stall in a public restroom in a department store during business hours
(Governing Board v. Metcalf (1974) 36 Cal.App.3d 546); and where a teacher purchased
and received goods known to be stolen (Pittsburg Unified School District v. Commission
of Professional Competence (1983) 146 Cal.App.3d 964.) It is the conclusion of the
Commission that Respondent’s conduct did not rise to the level of immoral conduct.

6. Respondent’s conduct was reviewed and analyzed as measured by the Morrison2
factors. (Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 C.3d 691, 696-697; Perez v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-
74.)“Evident unfitness for service" means clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.
(Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Evident unfitness for service” connotes a fixed
character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district." (Id.)

7. Respondent’s conduct was clearly not remediated merely on receipt of notice that his
conduct failed to meet the expectations of the employing school district. Heard was
repeatedly given warnings regarding being on time to school. Nevertheless, he
thereafter continued to come to work late and only offered the excuse that he had
“overslept.” It should be expected that a professional would, after repeated warnings,
figure out a solution to oversleeping, such as the use of multiple alarm clocks, etc.
Heard also did not want to follow the District’s rules and his own written statement
revealed that he was not concerned with following the rules or how he was perceived
by others. For example, after being specifically told to follow the District’s protocol
regarding the transporting of students, Respondent nevertheless chose to do things his
own way, including using a permission slip that he had created and which was not

2 Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.

8

approved by the District. Heard transported students without District approved
permission slips. He also failed to report injuries of students, told a student to be
dishonest with the school nurse, and attempted to use a student to communicate with
his substitute teacher, rather than calling the District administrators, as he had
previously been specifically ordered to do. The District warned Heard on numerous
occasions and yet Heard did not change his attitude. Then, with all of these warnings
having been given, Heard allowed his credential to expire which mandated that the
District no longer allow him to teach.

8.

It is the conclusion of the Commission that Respondent engaged in conduct which
evidenced Respondent’s willful refusal to perform regular assignments without
reasonable cause.

9. Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), may be based on violation of

school "rules," such as failure to timely submit lesson plans. (San Diego Union High
School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d
1176, 1180-1181.)

10. It is the conclusion of the Commission that Respondent's conduct as set forth in
Findings 1-34 was such as to render him unfit to teach, within the meaning of
Morrison, supra. The Commission specifically considered all criteria described by
Morrison and compared them to the facts established above. However, it is settled
that not all “Morrison factors” need be present to trigger application. (Governing
Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the
Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, but
rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland
Joint Unified School District, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1457.) The Commission is of
the view that some of Morrison factors apply to Respondents conduct as follows:

The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow teachers.

Respondent’s poor judgment in allowing his credential to expire could be a negative
influence on other teachers. In other words, if the District made an exception for
Heard to somehow not be terminated because he did not have a credential, other
teachers might be able to ask for the same accommodation.

The degree of such adversity.

Respondent’s verbal berating of his student D
not appear to have long-lasting impact on D

G

G

was unwarranted, but did

who testified at hearing.

9

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.

The charges that serve as cause for discipline occurred in 2008 and 2009 and are
somewhat remote in time. The conduct is remote in time as compared to the date of
this Decision. However, the acts took place during Respondent’s last two years while
on a District campus. Respondent's misconduct was thus proximate to when he last
taught in a classroom.

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved.

The type of teaching certificate is not a relevant factor.

The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the
conduct.

Respondent offered explanations or denials for his misconduct. On numerous
occasions he said, “I am sorry,” but this apology was during the hearing, and after he
had received numerous warnings.

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct.

Respondent has been a teacher 10 years and Respondent was given a number of
chances to change his conduct and he failed to do so.

The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct.

Respondent was given a number of chances to change his conduct and he chose to not
do so. His own conduct established, on multiple occasions, that he is likely to
continue a pattern of misconduct. Respondent’s own conduct demonstrated he
apparently does not have the ability to change the character traits at issue.

The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon the
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.

The parties presented no direct constitutional arguments.

11. This Commission has the discretion to determine that dismissal is not appropriate

even though cause for discipline exists. (Fontana Unified School District v. Burman
(1988) 45 Cal.3d 208.) Having considered all of the evidence and the Morrison
factors, it is the decision of the Commission that dismissal of Respondent is
appropriate.

10

ORDER

The First Amended Accusation against Respondent ANTHONY HEARD, JR., is
sustained. Respondent ANTHONY HEARD, JR. is dismissed as a certificated employee of
the Santa Ana Unified School District.

DATED: _________________

______________________________
Tim Strand, Commission Member

DATED: _________________

______________________________
Joseph Klepadlo, Commission Member

DATED: _________________

______________________________
Chris Ruiz, Commission Member,
Administrative Law Judge

11

