BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  and 
Statement  of  Charges  Against: 

DAVID  ARNOLD, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

DECISION 

OAH  No.  2012050786 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Los 
Angeles  on  June  17  —  19  and  24  —  28,  2013,  under  the  authority  of  Education  Code  sections 
44932  and  44939.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the  following  panel  members: 
Timothy  Buttle,  teacher,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education;  Karen  G.  Rapien,  teacher, 
Fullerton  Union  High  School  District;  and  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

Complainant  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles 
Unified  School  District  was  represented  by  Carolos  Villegas,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondent 
David  Arnold  was  present  throughout  the  hearing  and  represented  by  Rosty  Gore,  Attorney 
at  Law. 

Prior  to  the  evidentiary  hearing,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  determined  that  the 

two  other  panel  members  were  qualified  to  serve  on  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  then  held  a  hearing  on  the  parties’  motions  in 
limine  and  made  rulings  as  reflected  in  the  record. 
witnesses  and  exhibits  in  support  of  her  case-in-chief  and  respondent  presented  evidence  for 
his  case-in-chief.  Respondent  testified  and  was  subjected  to  questions  on  cross-examination. 
Complainant  recalled  a  witness  to  testify  on  rebuttal.  On  conclusion  of  the  evidentiary  phase 
of  the  hearing,  the  parties  presented  oral  argument. 

Thereafter,  complainant  presented 

Oral,  documentary,  and  stipulated  evidence  having  been  received  and  oral  arguments 

heard,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  submitted  this  matter  for  decision  on 
June  28,  2013,  deliberated  and  considered  the  evidence in  closed  session,  and  finds  as 

follows:  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that,  on  April  20,  2012,  the 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  was  made  and  filed  by  complainant  Vivian  K.  Ekchian 
in  her  official  capacity  as  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District,  State  of  California  (District).  With  administrative  offices  located  at  333  South 
Beaudry  Avenue  in  Los  Angeles,  the  District  is  one  of  the  largest  comprehensive  school 
districts  in  the  nation.  One  of  the  schools  in  the  District  is  Bell  High  School  located  in  the 
City  of  Bell. 

2. 

At  all  times  relevant  herein,  David  Arnold  (respondent)  has  been  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  District.  On  undetermined  dates  from  1991  through  1994  and 
from  July  1995  through  August  18,  2010,  he  was  assigned  to  teach  biology  and  science  at 
Bell  High  School. 

3, 

(A)  Respondent  grew  up  in  a  family  in  which  both  parents  were  teachers  and 

school  principals  for  the  District.  His  grandparents  were  also  teachers  and  principals.  He 
attended  school  in  the  District.  In  junior  high  school,  he  received  speech  and  language 
services  for  stuttering.  In  1995,  respondent  graduated  from  Narbonne  High  School  which 
was  a  magnet  school  for  mathematics  and  science  and  where  he  also  participated  on  the 
basketball  and  track  teams.  Respondent  then  matriculated  to  Morehouse  College  in  Atlanta 
where  he  attained  a  bachelor  of  arts  degree  in  interdisciplinary  studies  with  an  emphasis  in 
biology  in  1991, 

(B)  During  the  summer  breaks  from  college,  respondent  pursued  interests  in 

both  the  teaching  and  medical  fields.  From  1987  through  1989,  respondent  was  an 
instructional  aide  at  the  Jordan-Locke  Community  Adult  School  where  he  supervised  a 
summer  youth  program  and  tutored  students.  In  the  summers  of  1989  and  1991,  he 
volunteered  at  Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center  where  he  conducted  preliminary  screenings  of 
patients.  In  the  summer  of  1989,  he  was  a  phlebotomist  at  the  Veterans’  Administration 
Hospital  in  West  Los  Angeles.  In  1991,  he  was  a  teacher’s  assistant  at  the  Maxine  Waters 
Employment  Preparation  Center  where  his  duties  included  tutoring  of  students. 

(C)  After  graduating  from  college,  respondent  returned  to  Los  Angeles.  In 

~ 

November  1991,  he  accepted  a  teaching  position  with  the  District  under  a  provisional 
contract  and  began  teaching  at  Bell  High  School.  In  1992,  he  was  a  mentor  teacher  for  the 
Teach  for  America  program.  After  three  years  of  teaching,  respondent  left  his  teaching  job 
near  the  beginning  of  the  1994-1995  school  year  and  entered  the  pre-medical  studies 
program  at  California  State  University  Fullerton  with  the  goal  of  fulfilling  what  he  thought 
was  his  dream  of  becoming  a  physician.  Over  the  next  eight  months  or  so,  he  took  pre- 
medical  courses,  sat  for  the  Medical  College  Admission  Test,  and  applied  to  medical  school. 
However,  respondent  had  second  thoughts  about  medical  school  when  he  realized  that  he 
missed  teaching.  He  did  not  complete  the  pre-medical  studies  program  or  the  application 

process  for  medical  school  and,  instead,  was  able  to  return  to  his  teaching  position  at  Bell  

High  School.  The  same  principal  was  still  at  Bell  High  School  and  welcomed  respondent 
back  for  the  1995-1996  school  year. 

(D)  In  July  1995,  respondent  resumed  teaching  at  Bell  High  School  under  a 
probationary  contract.  He  completed  coursework  for  his  teaching  credential  at  California 
State  University  Dominguez  Hills  and  then  attained  his  single  subject  clear  credential  in  life 
science  in  or  about  1995.  In  July  1997,  he  became  a  permanent  certificated  employee  with 
the  District.  Respondent  has  been  a  credentialed  teacher  for  the  District  for  approximately 
17  years. 

4, 

(A)  From  in  or  about  July  1995  through  August  18,  2010,  respondent  taught 
the  following  subjects  at  Bell  High  School:  biology,  advanced  placement  biology,  life  and 
physical  science,  integrated  coordinated  science,  and  life  skills.  He  received  awards  for  his 
teaching.  In  1997,  he  was  nominated  by  a  student  for  a  teacher  recognition  award.  In 
December  2001,  the  principal  at  Bell  High  School  commended  respondent  for  his  efforts, 
fine  work,  and  dedication  to  the  students.  In  August  2009,  he  received  an  Excellence  Award 
for  the  performance  of  his  students  on  the  California  Standards  Tests. 

| 

(B)  While  teaching  at  Bell  High  School,  respondent  was  involved  with  the 
educational  activities  of  his  students  outside  of  the  classroom.  Twice  every  school  year, 
respondent  took  students  on  field  trips  to  expose  them  to  different  venues  for  science.  For 
example,  he  has  taken  students  to  museums  and  to  the  biology  department  at  UCLA.  In  the 
2009-2010  school  year,  respondent  arranged  for  a  student  field  trip  to  a  laboratory  and  he  and 
other  teachers  escorted  and  supervised  students  on  a  day  trip  to  Catalina  Island.  He  also 
helped  with  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  the  high  school’s  annual  Eco-Gallery,  year- 
end  parties,  and  the  school  website,  by  periodically  taking  and/or  uploading  photographs  of 
his  students  engaged  in  classroom  and  school  activities.  He  obtained  permission  of  the 
parents  for  taking  and  using  their  students’  photographs.  Respondent  has  been  a  faculty 
sponsor  for  students’  club  activities  and  a  teacher  for  after-school  tutoring  sessions  and 
Saturday  school. 

5. 

For  the  school  years  from  1995-1996  through  2007-2008,  respondent  received 

satisfactory  performance  evaluations.  He  met  and  satisfied  all  areas  of  evaluation  for  the 
annual  performance  evaluations  of  instructional  personnel,  including  the  areas  of  planning 
and  designing  instruction,  classroom  performance,  and  general  professional  skills.  Over  the 
years,  respondent  developed  a  reputation  at  Bell  High  School  as a  strict  and  well-prepared 
teacher  who  was  fair  and  capable  of  motivating  his  students  to  learn  the  subject  matter.  Prior 
to  August  2010,  he  did  not  have  any  disciplinary  history  as  a  teacher  or  certificated  employee 
of  the  District. 

6. 

In  addition  to  his  teaching  duties,  respondent  was  a  coach  for  athletic  teams  at 

Bell  High  School.  In  1993,  he  was  a  volunteer  coach  for  the  track  team  in  the  field  events. 
Beginning  in  or  about  1994  and  continuing  until  2006,  respondent  was  an  assistant  coach  for 
the  track  team.  In  or  about  2006,  the  head  track  coach  decided  that  he  was  going  to  retire  in 
four  years  and  selected  respondent  to  succeed  him  as  the  head  track  coach.  The  track  teams

  

  

were  comprised  of  both  male  and  female  student  athletes.  In  1997,  respondent  began 
coaching  boys’  basketball  and  was  appointed  the  coach  of  the  freshman  and  sophomore 
team.  As  a  track  and  basketball  coach,  he  was  required  to  be  present  on  the  track  field  and  in 
the  gymnasium  on  the  high  school  campus.  Respondent  has  not  received  any  complaints 
about  his  performance  or  conduct  as  an  athletics  coach. 

7. 

(A)  With  respect  to  his  daily  teaching  schedule,  respondent  taught  biology  in 
periods  1,  3,  and  4  and  integrated  coordinated  science  to  ninth  grade  students  in  period  2.  He 
had  conferences  in  period  5  and  coached  sports  teams  in  period  6  and  after  school.  His 
classes  were  evenly  divided  between  male  and  female  students.  He  had  approximately  30  or 
more  students  in  each  of  his  classes. 

(B)  As  a  biology  teacher,  respondent  taught  in  a  classroom  which  had  a  long 

laboratory  counter.  The  laboratory  counter  was  built  contiguously  along  and  wrapped 
around  two  walls  and  had  eight  extensions  or  peninsula  counter  tops.  These  extensions 
protruded  into  the  classroom  space  and  were  the  laboratory  table  tops  that  respondent  and  the 
students  used  to  conduct  experiments  and  laboratory  exercises.  The  laboratory  counter  and 
table  tops  had  sinks  and  faucets.  There  were  glass  beakers  and  test  tubes  and  other 
laboratory  supplies  and  instruments  available  for  the  students.  Between  the  laboratory  table 
tops,  there  were  five-foot  wide  aisles  where  the  students  stood  while  conducting  the 
laboratory  assignments.  In  the  middle  of  the  classroom,  there  were  desks  and  chairs  for  the 
students.  The  desks  were  designed  so  that  four  desks  could  be  put  together  into  a  pod  for 
four  students.  Respondent  arranged  the  desks  so  that  there  were  approximately  eight  pods  of 
student  desks  in  the  classroom.  The  pods  were  approximately  three  feet  apart.  Due  to  the 
large  number  of  students  in  his  classes,  there  were  also  single  desks  placed  in  the  aisles 
between  the  counter  table  tops.  With  this  number  of  desks,  student  chairs,  and  laboratory 
table  tops,  the  classroom  when  occupied  with  students  was  crowded  and  there  was  little  room 
to  move  around  the  classroom. 

8. 

(A)  While  giving  instruction  to  his  students,  respondent  used  white  boards  on 
which  he  wrote  information  and  assignments  with  felt  pens  as  well  as  an  overhead  screen  in 
the  middle  of  the  classroom  that  he  pulled  down  for  Power  Point  presentations.  He  used  a 
laptop  computer  and  audio-visual  equipment  issued  by  the  District  to  project  information  and 
data  onto  the  screen  so  that  the  students  could  view  the  information  and  the  visual  aids. 
When  he  gave  lectures  and  Power  Point  presentations,  respondent  had  a  custom  or  practice 
of  standing  and  walking  around  his  classroom.  He  circulated  among  the  students,  who  were 
sitting  during  his  lectures,  to  make  sure  that  they  were  paying  attention  and  listening  to  him 
and  not  talking  with  their  peers.  When  he  gave  assignments  and  laboratory  exercises  for 
students  to  complete  in  class,  he  likewise  circulated  around  the  classroom  to  answer  any 
questions,  provide  additional  instruction,  and  ensure  that  students  were  doing  their  own 
work, 

(B)  Respondent  found  it  difficult  to  walk  around  the  classroom  due  to  the 

number  of  students  and  the  congregation  of  desks  and  chairs,  and  the  small  spaces  between 
the  desk  pods  and  laboratory  counter  and  tabletops.  In  addition,  the  classroom  was  cluttered

  

with  students’  backpacks.  Many  students  kept  their  backpacks  at  their  desks  and  wore  or 
carried  them  to  the  laboratory  counters  to  prevent  the  loss  of  personal  items.  Respondent 
also  had  a  custom  or  practice  of  looking  around  the  classroom  and  at  students  when  he  took 
attendance  and  while  students  were  doing  assignments  at  their  desks.  He  constantly 
-surveiled  the  students  to  make  sure  that  they  were  not  using  any  electronic  devices  or 
earphones  to  listen  to  music,  had  their  required  books  and  materials,  were  on  task,  and  doing 
their  assignments. 
On  occasion,  he  had  to  take  electronic  devices  from  students  to  make 
sure  they  were  paying  attention  and  doing  their  work  but  returned  the  personal  property  to 
the  students  after  class. 

9. 

(A)  For  most  of  his  teaching  career,  respondent  has  had  a  teaching  style  that 
was  strict,  firm,  and  relatively  impersonal.  As  exhibited  during  the  hearing  in  this  matter, 
respondent  tended  to  be  somewhat  aloof  and  impassive. 

(B)  For  several  years  prior  to  the 2010-2011  school  year,  respondent  was  one 

of  approximately  15  teachers  in  the  “Humanitas”  small  learning  community  (SLC)  at  Bell 
High  School.  The  purpose  of  a  SLC  is  to  provide  a  more  individualized  and  personalized 
learning  environment  for  students  by  dividing  a  large  school,  such  as  Bell  High  School,  into 
smaller  groups  of  students.  One  of  the  tenets  or  attributes  of  a  SLC  is  personalization.  Ina 
Policy  Bulletin  for  Characteristics  and  Attributes  of  Small  School  Learning  Communities, 
the  District  has  defined  personalization  as  the  “demonstration  of  sustained  and  mutually 
respectful  personal  relationships  where  every  student  is  well  known  by  a  group  of  educators 
who  advise  and  advocate  for  them  and  work  closely  with  them  and  their  families  over  time.” 
In  a  SLC,  a  teacher  is  supposed  to  get  to  know  his  students,  show  concern  for  them,  and  help 
them  to  succeed.  In  practical  terms,  teachers  in  a  SLC  are  required  to  meet  with  individual 
students  in  student  intervention  meetings  to  discuss  the  student’s  academic,  disciplinary,  or 
emotional  issues. 

(C)  In  or  about  the  2008-2009  school  year,  respondent  participated  in 

professional  development  training  at  an  accreditation  meeting  of  the  Western  Association  of 
Schools  and  Colleges  where  he  learned  specific  strategies  for  implementing  personalization 
in  the  classroom.  He  and  other  teachers  were  advised  to  greet  students,  to  ask  them  about 
their  weekends,  and  to  compliment  their  outfits  or  how  they  were  dressed.  At  the  end  of  the 
2009-2010  school  year,  respondent  had  occasion  to  laugh  during  class.  A  student  remarked 
that  it  was  the  first  time  that  she  had  seen  respondent  laugh.  Respondent  realized  that  he 
could  be  more  personable  in  the  classroom  or  to  students  and  vowed  to  implement  more 
personalization  strategies  in  the  classroom  in  the  next  school  year. 

(D)  Respondent,  however,  has  a  slight  handicap  when  speaking  to  students  or 

lecturing  in  the  classroom.  He  stutters  when  speaking  or  lecturing.  His  stuttering  was 
apparent  when  he  testified  in  the  hearing  and  corroborated  by  other  witnesses.  He  is  careful 
in  choosing  his  words  and  pauses  or  hesitates  before  speaking  to  minimize  his  stuttering. 
Once  he  begins  speaking,  respondent’s  stuttering  is  not  pronounced  or  disabling  although  he 
will  stammer  occasionally.  Respondent’s  stuttering  did  not  affect  his  testimony  or 
apparently  his  teaching  performance.  Yet,  while  pausing  before  he  begins  to  speak,

  

respondent  will  blink  or  look  forward  for  a  second  or  two  to  control  his  stuttering.  Some 
students  thought  respondent’s  stuttering  or  his  mannerism  for  controlling  or  coping  with  the 
speech  impediment  was a little  strange  and  made  fun  of  him  while  in  the  company  of  their 
peers.  His  attempts  to  be  more  personable  when  combined  with  his  strict  teaching  style  and 
mannerisms  for  controlling  his  stuttering  very  likely  made  respondent  appear  to  be  weird  and 
socially  awkward  to  some  students. 

| 

2010-2011  School  Year 

10. 

(A)  The  2010-2011  school  year  began  at  Bell  High  School  on  or  about  July  1, 

2010.  Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  three  periods  of  biology.  The  students  in  these 
three  periods  were,  for  the  most  part,  were  tenth  graders  starting  their  second  year  of  high 
school.  Since  it  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  school  year,  there  were  more  than  30  students  in 
each  of  respondent’s  biology  classes. 

: 

(B)  On  the  first  day  of  school,  respondent  allowed  the  students  in  the  first 

period  biology  class  to  select  their  seats  for  the  semester  as  a  reward  or  incentive  for  being 
required  to  come  to  school  so  early  each  day.  Students,  both  boys  and  girls,  chose  to  sit  with 
or  near  their  friends.  For  his  other  classes,  respondent  assigned  seats  to  the  students  for  the 
semester. 

11. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010, 
respondent  exhibited  or  engaged  in  favoritism  towards  the  female  students  in  his  classes  or 
gave  female  students  more  privileges  or  benefits  than  the  male  students. 

(B)  Complainant  presented  student  witnesses  who  testified,  in  part,  that 
respondent  treated  the  female  students  in  his  classes  better  than  the  male  students.  For 
example,  student  Leslie  R  indicated  respondent  was  nicer  to  the  girls;  she  and  student  Dm 
F  stated  respondent let  girls  sit  together  with  friends  in  class.  Student  NMR  testified  that 
respondent  favored  the  female  students  by  letting  them  sit  where  they  wanted.  Student 
   
  
LE Z  testified  respondent  gave  hall  passes  to  girls.  Both  Nj  R  and 
that  respondent  gave  them  higher  grades  because  they  were  girls.  Student 
she  noticed  respondent  allowed  female  students  to  do  more  things  in  his  class,  such  as  go  to 
the  restroom  and  sit  with  friends.  Student  1 
stated  girls  were  chosen  as  teacher’s  aides 
more  often  than  boys.  DD 
with  things.”  She  said  she  received  an  “A”  in  respondent’s  class  and  never  studied.  Student 
   

C  stated  respondent  allowed  the  female  students  to  “get  away 

O  testified  respondent  was  nicer  to  the  girls  and  spoke  to  them  more  often.  Student 
R  claimed  respondent  took  photographs  only  of  the  girls  after  asking  them  to  pose  and 

Z  claimed 
said 

_ 

gave  academic  credit  to  girls  even  when  they  did  not  complete  assignments.  . 

(C)  However,  the  weight  of  the  probative  evidence  demonstrated  that 

respondent  did  not  give  more  privileges  to  the  female  students  in  his  classes  or  treat  them  in 
a  manner  that  was  more  favorable  than  the  way  he  treated  the  male  students.  Respondent 
did  not  allow  only  female  students  to  select  their  seats  in  his  classes.  As  stated  above,  on  the

  

  

school  so  early 
F,  and 

required  to 
each  day.  Like  other  pupils  in  first  period  biology, 
C,  ia 
      
R,  who  were  all  friends,  chose  to  sit  together  at  the  same  pod  of  four 

first  day  of  school  in  July  2010,  respondent  allowed  all  pupils  in  his  first  period  biology 
class,  including  the  boys,  to  choose  their  seats  as  a  reward  or  incentive  for  being 
come  to 
R, 
desks.  Respondent  did  not  let  students  in  his  other  classes  choose  their  seats.  Respondent 
had  teacher’s  aides  but  did  not  choose  only  female  students  to  be  his  aides.  When  he  asked 
students  whether  anyone  wanted  to  act  as  a  teacher’s  aide,  the  female  students  volunteered 
more  often  than  their  male  counterparts.  Respondent  did  not  give  more  hall  passes  to  girls 
than  boys.  All  students  in  his  classes  were  allowed  to  have  two  hall  passes  for  the  semester. 
Respondent  found  that  the  female  students  asked  to  visit  the  restroom  more  frequently  than 
the  male  students,  due  to  feminine  health  reasons.  Respondent  let  the  female  students  go  to 
the  restroom  as  needed.  Moreover,  respondent  did  not  take  photographs  only  of  the  female 
students.  He  took  photographs  of  both  boys  and  girls  while  they  were  all  engaged  in 
academic  activities  and  he  submitted  the  photographs  to  school  personnel  for  the  Eco- 
Gallery,  school  exhibits,  and  the  school  website.  When  he  took  photographs,  respondent  did 
not  focus  solely  on  the  girls  or  ask  them  to  pose. 

(D)  Respondent  did  not  give  higher  grades  to  girls  just  because  of  their  gender 

and  did  not  let  girls  to  do  less  work  than  the  boys  or  to  skip  doing  work  for  the  same  grade. 
None  of  the  students  who  complained  about  respondent  favoring  girls  in  grading  were  aware 
of  how  respondent  graded  their  assignments  or  tests  or  how  he  assigned  grades  to  them.  In 
the  first  week  of  August  2010,  he  provided  the  students’  grades  for  the  first  progress  report 
of  the  2010  fall  semester  and  held  parent  conferences  on  or  about  August  12,2010. 
corroborated  by  student  HR.  respondent  posted  lesson  plans  and  bonus  grading  points 
on  the  board  in  his  classroom.  As  corroborated  by  teacher  Jessica  Esparza  nee  Rivera, 
respondent  also  posted  the  students’  grades  in  his  classroom. 
respondent’s  classes  knew  or  should  have  known  their  grades  in  his  class  on  an  ongoing 
basis  prior  to  any  progress  report  and  knew  or  should  have  known  the  effect  that  their 
performance  on  certain  assignments  would  have  on  their  overall  grades.  Respondent  treated 
and  graded  both  the  female  and  male  students  in  his  classes  in  the  same  fair  manner  and 
assessed  grades  based  solely  on  their  academic  performance.  — 

In  other  words,  the  students  in 

As 

August  16,  2010 

12. 

(A)  Seven  weeks  into  the  2010-2011  school  year,  on  or  about  August  16, 

2010,  respondent  gathered  the  students  in  his  first  period  biology  class  around  a  table  to  view 
a  diagram  or  chart  that  he  had  laid  out  for  them.  Student 
inadvertently 
sister 
school  years.  Her  sister  told »  fe  before  the  school  year  that  respondent  was  a  “perv,” 
which  was  short  for  pervert. 

C  stood  in  front  of  the  table, 
blocking  the  view  of  other  students.  DIJC  was a  tenth  grader,  whose  older 
and  her  sister’s  friends  had  been  students  in  respondent’s  class  in  prior 

   

| 

(B)  Because DIIc  was  standing  in  front  of  the  diagram  on  the  table, 

respondent  placed  a  hand  on  her  waist  at  her  beltline  and  moved  her  to  one  side  of  the  table.

  

  

  

  

» 
turned  around,  thinking  another  student  was  pushing  her.  A  male  student  gestured 
and/or  said  that  it  was  not  him.  When  she  realized  that  it  was  respondent  who  had  moved 
her,  Dia 
C’became  upset  and  mad.  She  thought  respondent  was  going  to  try  to  move  her 
again  in  the  same  manner  and  put  up  her  hand  to  signal  stop,  left  the  group  of  students 
around  the  table,  and  went  back  to  sit  at  her  desk. 

(C)  At  her  desk,  » 

C  used  her  cellular  telephone  and  called  or  sent  a  text 

message  to  her  sister  to  tell  her  about  this  incident.  Her  sister  encouraged  her  to  file  a 
complaint  with  the  school  principal  or  authorities  at  Bell  High  School. 

13. 

(A)  On  August  16,  2010,  Dic’s 

| 
and  spoke  with  Assistant  Principal  David  Arenas.  S 
principal  that,  when  she  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  class  in  a  prior  school  year,  respondent 
“repeatedly  touched  her  shoulders  and  watched  her  in  a  way  that  made  her  feel  that  he  was 
‘checking  her  out.’”  SR Iso  stated  that  her  sister  DJ  C  was  the  subject  of  similar 
behavior  in  respondent’s  class  in  the  current  school  year. 

est <<  Bell  High  School 

reported  to  the  assistant 

(B)  On  August  16,  2010,  Assistant  Principal  Arenas  summoned  DIc  to  his 

office  at  Bell  High  School.  The  administrator  met  with  the  student  and  had  her  write  a 
statement  in  her  own  handwriting.  D 
in  respondent’s  classroom.  | 

C  described  the  incident  that  had  occurred  that  day 

| 

| 

(C)  In  her  written  statement, 
involved  another  student  and  Be  whe  sexual  abuse.  D 
inappropriately  touched 
that  respondent  walked  behind 
privates”  on  her  buttocks. 
D 
involving  two  other  students. 

   

7 

R  when  she  was  bending  over a table;  the  student  reported 

R,  placed  his  hand  on  her  back,  and  rubbed  “his 
C  also  told  the  assistant  principal  about  alleged  incidents 

C  referred  to  another  alleged  incident  that 

C  wrote  that  respondent  had 

| 

14, 

(A)  Following  the  receipt  of  DIIc’s  statement,  Assistant  Principal  Arenas 
summoned  students  [R,  DIF,  and  NIEBBBR,  all  of  whom  were  enrolled  in 
| 
respondent’s  first  period  biology  class  with  DIJC.  All  four  female  students  were  friends 
and  sat  together  at  the  same  pod  of  desks  in  respondent’s  class.  After  speaking  with  D 
the  assistant  principal  interviewed  the  three  other  girls  and  asked  them  to  write  statements. 

   

C, 

(B)  School  administrators  then  asked  the  City  of  Bell  Police  Department  to 
conduct  a  criminal  investigation.  On  August  16  and  17,  2010,  police  officers  interviewed 

  

'  In  November  and  December  2012,  students  who  had  given  written  statements  to  the 

assistant  principal  were  questioned  or  interviewed  by  an  investigator  hired  by  respondent’s 
counsel  and  asked  to  write  additional  statements. 
evidence,  the  Commission  deemed  those  additional  statements  as  unreliable  due  to  what  the 
Commission  perceived  as  dishonest  or  unethical  tactics  by  the  investigator  to  gain  access  to 
the  students  in  their  homes  and  obtain  their  statements.  As  such,  the  Commission  did  not 
make  any  findings  from  those  interviews. 

While  those  statements  were  admitted  into 

   

  

  

  

  

  

  

respondent,  the  four  female  students  referenced  above,  and  a  number  of  other  students  from 
respondent’s  four  periods  of  classes.  Four  additional  students  submitted  written  statements. 
The  Bell  Police  Department  presented  its  investigative  report  to  the  Los  Angeles  County 
District  Attorney’s  office  and  requested  the  filing  of  criminal  charges  against  respondent. 
The  criminal  case  was  rejected  and  the  police  investigation  was  closed. 

(C)  On  August  18,  2010,  the  District  removed  respondent  from  the  classroom 
and  replaced  him  with  a  temporary  teacher.  Respondent  was  assigned  to  a  District  office  and 
placed  on  paid  administrative  leave.  On  September  30,  2010,  after  the  police  investigation 
. 
was  closed,  the  District  assigned  its  Employee  Relations  Investigative  Unit  (IU)  to  conduct 
an  administrative  investigation  into  the  students’  allegations  of  respondent’s  misconduct.  On 
October  7,  2010,  IU  investigators  interviewed  the  four  female  students,  D 
DIF ,  and NER.  On  October  8,  2010,  an  IU  investigator  obtained  the  Gateway  laptop 
computer  that  was  issued  to  and  used  by  respondent.  On  October  12,  2010,  a  forensic 
analysis  or  scan  was  completed  upon  the  laptop  computer.  The  forensic  scan  revealed  that 
inappropriate  images  had  been  saved  on  the  laptop  computer. 

C,  LR. 

(D)  On  January  12,  2011,  IU  investigators  interviewed  respondent.  He  told 
the  investigators  that  he  did  not  recall  ever  having  knowingly  or  intentionally  touched  any 
students,  When  asked  whether  it  was  ever  appropriate  to  touch  students,  he  stated  that  it  was 
appropriate  when  he  needed  to  get  students’  attention  and  they  were  not  responding  to  him. 
Respondent  denied  giving  preferential  treatment  to  any  students  with  respect  to  grades  or 
assignments.  He  denied  the  four  female  students’  allegation  that  he  did  school  work  or 
assignments  for  them.  When  asked  whether  he  constantly  asked  female  students  about  what 
they  did  over  the  weekend,  respondent  replied  that  he  asked  all  of  his  students  about  their 
weekends  and  sometimes  used  the  query  as  a  greeting  to  an  entire  class.  When  informed  that 
pornographic  images  were  found  on  his  laptop  computer,  respondent  replied  that  he  did  not 
know  about  the  images  or  how  the  images  were  placed  there.  He  denied  having  ever  viewed 
pornographic  images  on  any  internet  websites  on  the  laptop  computer. 

(E)  On  January  28,  2011,  IU  investigators  interviewed  two  additional  students 

    
who  were  enrolled  in  respondent’s  classes.  The  investigators  tried  several  times  to  contact 
C’s  sister  Su:  were  unable  to  do  so.  On  February  17,  2011,  the  lead  IU 
investigator  completed  the  District’s  administrative  investigation  and  prepared  a  report. 

  

15. 

On  December  15,  2011,  the  District  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of 
Certificated  Employee  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  to  respondent  in 
connection  with  his  alleged  conduct  in  the  classroom  during  the  first  two  months  of  the 
2010-2011  school  year.  On  April  12,  2012,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation  and  Statement 
of  Charges  to  respondent  who  then  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  request  a  hearing.  In  or 
about  April  2012,  the  District  placed  respondent  on  unpaid  administrative  leave.  This  matter 
ensued. 

Jurisdiction  exists  in  this  matter. 

   

Student  Oc 

16. 

(A)  On  or  about  August  16,  2010,  while  DJC  and  other  students  stood 
around  a  classroom  table  on  which  respondent  had  placed  a  diagram  or  chart  for  them  to 
view,  respondent  placed  his  hand  on 
side.  Respondent  moved  » 
the  view  of  other  students. 

©  because  she  was  standing  in  front  of  the  table  and  blocking 

C’s  waist  or  at  her  beltline  and  moved  her  to  the 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  placed  both  of  his  hands  on  Da 

C  by  her  waist  as  she 
C’s  waist.  Nor  was  it  established  that  respondent  grabbed 
claimed  in  her  written  statement.  On  direct  examination, 
C  testified  that  respondent 
put  a  hand  on  her  back  to  move  her.  On  cross  examination,  DagMMJC  said  she  felt  a  hand  on 
the  left  side_of  her  back.  As  such,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent  used  one  hand 
to  move 
respondent  had  “grabbed”  her  by  the  waist  was  not  supported  by  the  evidence. 

C  from  the  front  of  the  table.  The  student’s  original  complaint  that 

     

(C)  It  also  was  not  established  that  respondent  attempted  to  place  his  hands  on 

DE  c’s  waist  a  second  time  to  physically  move  her  or  that  D 
respondent  from  touching  her  again.  Rather, 
respondent  had  moved  her  by  putting  his  hand  on  her  waist  and  she  thought  respondent  was 
going  to  try  to  move  her  again.  She  put  up  her  hand  to  stop  what  she  thought  was  going  to  be 
respondent’s  next  action.  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  tried  to  move 
the  student  a  second  time. 

C  became  upset  after  realizing  that 

C  blocked  or  stopped 

C. 

17. 

In  her  written  statement,  student 

It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  from  July  1,  2010,  through 
C  from  “head  to  toe”  while  biting  his  lip. 

probative  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  respondent  ever  bit  his  lip  while 

August  31,  2010,  respondent  looked  at 
Insufficient 
looking  at 
R  stated  respondent  “was  biting 
his  lip”  when  he  looked  at  another  girl  who  was  wearing  shorts.  However,  NER  did  not 
identify  the  other  girl  or  identify  the  other  girl  as 
respondent  did  not  bite  his  lip  or  wink.  Student  J 
respondent  bite  his  lip  while  looking  at  students  in  her  class.  According  to  student  LZ, 
respondent  did  not  bite  his  lip  while  looking  at  students.  Student  HL  testified  that,  on 
one  occasion  while  standing  in  the  classroom,  she  saw  respondent  lick  his  lips  while  staring 
at  someone  but  she  did  not  testify  that  respondent  bit  his  lip  and  she  did  not  identify  that 
person  or  student.  As  such,  the  evidence  on  this  allegation  was  indefinite  and  not 
convincing. 

C.  Student  KAMA  testified  that 
M  did  not  recall  having  ever  seen 

   

Student  .  |  R 

18. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  occasion  during  the  period  from  July  1, 

2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  and  in  the  presence  of DEE,  respondent  passed  behind 
R  in  class,  placed  his  hands  on  her  back,  and  twisted  his  body  so  that  his  genital  area 

rubbed  up  or  against  LER’  buttocks.  Nor  was  it  established,  as »  ©  recounted  in  her 

  

  

  

10

     

  

  

  

written  statement,  that,  during  this  same  incident,  respondent  rubbed  his  “privates”  on  mz 
R’s  “bottom”  or  buttocks  while 
R  was  bending  over  a  table.  These  allegations,  which 
were  based  on DI  c’s  written  statement,  were  not  supported  by  the  evidence  and  were 
largely  untrue. 

(B)  On  an  undetermined  date  in  the  first  two  months  of  the  2010-2011  school 

year,  respondent  assigned  a  laboratory  exercise  to  his  first  period  biology  class.  LR  and 
other  students  stood  at  and  around  laboratory  table  tops  to  conduct  the  exercise.  In  order  to 
observe  the  students  while  they  performed  the  exercise  and  provide  instruction  or  guidance, 
respondent  walked  around  the  classroom.  He  had  to  maneuver  around  and  between  the 
students,  the  pods  of  desks,  and  laboratory  counters  or  table  tops  to  make  his  observations. 
As  he  passed  the  countertop  where  LR  was  working 
sideways  to  walk  through  a  narrow  space  between 
opposite  countertop.  To  make  sure  that  he  did  not  touch  LR  with  his  body  or  that  L 
R  did  not  back  up  against  him  while  he  passed  behind  her,  respondent  put  his  hand  on  her 
back  for  one  second,  gave  a  verbal  cue,  and  quickly  walked  sideways  through  the  space. 
Other  than  his  hand  on  the  student’s  back,  no  part  of  respondent’s  body  came  into  contact 
with 

on  the  exercise,  respondent  turned 
R  and  another  student  or  the 

or  her  buttocks. 

(C) 

mm  R  corroborated  that  respondent  passed  behind  her  in  class  while  she 

  

  

R  looked  uncomfortable. 

F  saw  respondent  touch  .  |  R  on  the  back  during  the 

was  bending  over  the  table  top  and  looking  at  liquid  in  a  glass  container  and  touched  her  in 
the  center  of  her  back.  She  did  not  testify  that  respondent  touched  her  buttocks  with  his 
crotch  or  genital  area. 
laboratory  exercise  and  noticed  that  L 
there  was  room  for  respondent  to  pass  by  LR  without  having  to  touch  her  back  but  also 
admitted  that  she  saw  the  incident  at  a  90  degree  angle.  She  also  did  not  have  a  direct  or 
unobstructed  view  of  the  incident.  In  addition,  according  to  DI[C’s  testimony,  there  was 
very  little  room  behind  LR  when  respondent  walked  through  the  space  behind  her  and 
put  his  hand  on  her  back.  DiJC  confirmed  that  respondent  walked  through  the  space 
quickly  and  did  not  linger  behind  LJR.  Other  than DE 
c’s  written  statement,  no 
evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  respondent  rubbed  his  genital  area  or  crotch  against 
LBB R,  committed  any  act  of  sexual  abuse,  or  exhibited  any  sexual  or  inappropriate  intent 
when  he  walked  behind  the  student. 

F  added  that 

  

19, 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  undetermined  dates  between  July  1,  2010, 
and  August  31,  2010,  respondent  entered  the  gymnasium  after  school  and  watched  student 

R  from  across  the  gymnasium  while  she  practiced  with  the  girls’  volleyball  team. 

(B)  During  early  part  of  the  fall  semester  of  the  2010-2011  school  year, 

im 
R  was  a  student-athlete  on  the  girls’  junior  varsity  volleyball  team.  The  girls’  junior  varsity 
volleyball  team  held  its  practices  on  the  second  floor  of  the  gymnasium  three  times  weekly 
during  sixth  period  and  after  school.  Respondent  was  the  coach  of  the  freshman  and 
sophomore  boys’  basketball  team  and  held  basketball  practices  in  the  gymnasium  during 
sixth  period  and  after  school.  He  was  required  to  walk  through  that  portion  of  the 
gymnasium  where  the  girls’  volleyball  team  practiced  to  go  to  the  boys’  physical  education 

 

  

  

  

office  and  retrieve  and  return  the  basketballs  for  his  team’s  practices.  Whenever  he  entered 
the  second  floor  of  the  gymnasium,  respondent  opened  a  door  that  made  a  distinctive  noise 
which  drew  the  attention  of  the  coach  of  the  girls’  junior  varsity  volleyball  team. 
Respondent  walked  by  the  volleyball  practice  court  on  his  way  to  the  boys’  physical 
education  office  at  least  three  times  weekly.  He  looked  at  the  volleyball  practice  to  make 
sure  that  he  did  not  get  hit  by  one  of  the  volleyballs  being  used  by  the  players.  Respondent 
did  not  watch  or  look  at  _ 
R  or  any  other  female  student-athlete  while  walking  through 
the  gymnasium.  He  did  not  stop  to  watch  the  volleyball  practice  or  to  watch  or  look  at  L 
R  while  she  practiced  volleyball.  The  junior  varsity  volleyball  coach  did  not  see  respondent 
looking  at  his  players  or  at  IR  and  did  not  see  respondent  act  in  any  inappropriate 
manner  in  the  gymnasium. 

   

~ 

(C)  In  her  written  statement,  LI 

R  indicated  that,  three  or  four  times  during 

volleyball  practice,  respondent  would  give  her  “a  very  weird  look”  and  would  not  stop 
looking  at  her  until  he  was  out  of  the  gymnasium.  When  she  testified  at  the  hearing,  LR 
could  recall  only  one  occasion  that  respondent  looked  at  her  in  the  gymnasium  during 
volleyball  practice.  She  indicated  that  respondent  came  into  the  gymnasium  carrying 
basketball  equipment  and  that  he  did  not  stop  and  stare  at  her  and  did  not  smile  or  smirk  at 
her.  When  weighed  against  other  substantive  evidence,  including  the  testimony 
respondent  and  the  volleyball  coach,  the  written  statements  and  testimony  by 

R  and 

of 

C  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  watched  LR  from  across  the  gymnasium  or 

looked  at  her  for  an  inappropriate  reason. 

| 

  

20. 

‘It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  during  the  period  from 
July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  passed  NER  and  touched  her  on  the 
waist,  making 
allegation. 
her  waist.  She  testified,  in  fact,  that  respondent  did  not  touch  her. 

R  did  not  mention  in  her  written  statement  that  respondent  had  touched  - 

her  feel  uncomfortable.  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  on  this 

21. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  made a fist  or  fists  with  his  hand  or  hands  and  then 
touched  student DE  r  on  the  side  of  her  body  with  his  fist  or  fists. 

B)  The  evidence  on  this  allegation  was  not  persuasive.  In  her  written 

statement,  -  F  wrote  that,  “[i}n  the  beginning  of  class”,  which  was  presumably  on 
August  16  when  she  made  her  statement,  respondent  “made  a  fist  and  touched  [her]  side  w/o 
saying  anything.”  When  she  testified  on  direct  examination,  DF  stated  that,  in  fact, 
respondent  did  not  touch  the  side  of  her  body.  On  cross  examination,  she  said  respondent 
touched  her  back  once.  In  other  words, 

F  provided  testimony  that  contradicted  and  did 

Student  Nga 

R 

Student oa  F 

12

  

not  support  her  written  statement.  When  questioned  again  on  re-cross  examination,  DEF 
testified  that  respondent  made a fist,  touched  her  mid-back  from  one  side  to  the  other  with 
his knuckles,  and,  while  doing  so,  opened  his  hand  to  touch  her  back  with  his  fingertips. 

F’s  testimony  about  this  alleged  incident  was  not  believable,  for  it  was  not  clear  how 

she  could  have  possibly  seen  or  felt  respondent  opening  or  closing  his  hand  and  touching  her 
back  with  his  knuckles  and  fingertips  when  these  purported  acts  occurred  behind  her. 

(C)  In  addition,  DIF  exhibited  a  tendency  to  embellish  her  narratives.  For 
example,  in  her  written  statement,  she  alleged  that,  during  a  laboratory  exercise,  respondent 
“put  his  hand  and  slid  it  through  my  friend  DiPs  back.”  However,  Dir  then  admitted 
that  she  did  not  actually  see  respondent  touch 
C,  DEc’s  waist,  or  any  other  girls.  - 
While  she  was  certainly  an  intelligent  and  charming  student,  like  her  peers,  DIF  was  not 
a  credible  witness. 

     

22. 

It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  looked  at 
F  up  and  down,  resulting  in  her  feeling 
weird  and  not  wanting  to  be  looked  at  in  that  manner.  In  her  written  statement  on  August  16, 
2010,  Dr  stated  that,  during  first  period  biology  class  that  day,  respondent  looked  at  her 
testified  that  respondent  did  not  look  at 
and  her  friends  “weird  as  usual.”  However, .  Ee 
her  in  class  and,  if  he  did,  she  did  not  notice  him  looking  at  her. 
F  did  not  provide  any 
statement  or  testimony  that  respondent  looked  at  her  up  and  down. 

(23. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 
through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  repeatedly  brushed  up  against  DIF  or  touched  her 
hips,  back,  and  shoulders. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  leered  or  looked  down Di  F’s  shirt. 

| 

| 

(C)  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  on  these  allegations.  It  was  not  clear 

what  report  or  evidence  that  the  District  may  have  relied  upon  to  make  these  allegations. 

Student  VV 

24.  | Onone  or  more  occasions  from  on  or  about  July  1,  2010,  through  August  18, 
2010,  respondent  touched  student  VI  V  on  her  upper  back  and  shoulders  during  fourth 
period  biology  class.  Respondent  touched  VV  on  her  upper  back  and  shoulders  four 
or  five  times  in  the  classroom.  He  touched  her  in  a  gentle  way  but  not  in  a  sexual  way.  He 
did  not  trace  or  run  his  fingers  across  her  back.  Nevertheless,  VV  was  made  to  feel 
uncomfortable  in  class  by  respondent  touching  her  upper  back  and  shoulders.  She  tried  to 
avoid  him  by  moving  closer  to  her  desk. 

13  

    

  

   

Student  kK,  | 

25. 

(A)  From  on  or  about  July  1,  2010,  through  August  18,  2010,  during  fourth 

period  biology  class,  as  touched  student  a,  on  her  upper  back  and  shoulders. 
He  touched  or  patted 
shoulders  on  two  or  three  occasions. 
when  respondent  touched  her  on  the  upper  back  and  shoulders.  She  tried  to  avoid  respondent 
during  class  by  not  asking  questions  and  moving  in  her  seat  away  from  him  when  he  walked 
by  her  desk. 

on  her  upper  back  on  two  or  three  occasions  and  on  her 

A  was  made  to  feel  uncomfortable  in  class: 

26. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  passed  his  fingers  across 
right  when  he  walked  passed  [sic]  her.” 

A’s  back  “from  left  to 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  grabbed 

’s  shoulder  and  gave  her  looks. 

(C)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  grabbed 
amount  of  time  and  leered  at  her. 

*s  shoulder  for  an  unnecessary 

| 

(D)  In  her  written  statement  given  on  or  about  August  16,  2010, Ka 

wrote  that  “it  was  twice  that  [she]  felt  that  [respondent]  made  [her]  feel  sexually 
uncomfortable.”  The  student  indicated  respondent  “would  pass  his  fingers  gently  across 
[her]  back  from  {her]  left  shoulder  to  [her]  right  shoulder  or  visa  [sic]  versa,  whichever  way 
he  was  passing  by.”  She  added  that,  a  couple  of  weeks  later,  respondent  “would  grab  onto 
[her]  shoulder  for  an  unnecessary  amount  of  time.”  In  other  words, Ka  reported  to  the 
assistant  principal  on  August  16,  2010,  that  respondent  touched  her  twice.  When  she 
testified  at  the  hearing,  i  said  that  respondent  “slid”  his  fingers  across  her  back  on 
two  to  three  occasions  and  grabbed  her  shoulder  on  two  to  three  occasions.  She  added  that, 
on  one  of  those  occasions,  respondent  kept  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  massaged  it. 
Regarding  the  looks  that  respondent  purportedly  gave  her, Kea  testified  that  respondent 
did  not  look  at  her  in  an  inappropriate  manner.  Rather,  she  stated  that  respondent  looked  at 
her  once  when  she  was  leaving  his  class  and  smiled  at  her.  She  characterized  his  look  as 
flirtatious.  In  testifying  in  this  matter, 
A  thus  embellished  the  statements  that  she 
gave  in  her  written  report,  which  had  the  effect  of  diminishing  the  reliability  of  both  her 
written  report  and  testimony.  Moreover,  no  evidence  was  [a's back  to  corroborate  that 
respondent  slid  or  passed  his  fingers  across  student 
her  shoulder.  In  fact,  the  student’s  best  friend, 
with  her,  testified  only  that  respondent  touched  KIA’  back. 

A’s  back  or  grabbed  or  massaged 
V,  who  sat  at  the  same  pod  of  desks 

    

_ 

   

14

     

  
  
  

  

Student  TAR 

27. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010, 

through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  inappropriately  touched  female  students  in  the  presence 
of  the  male  student THR.  a  male  student. 

   

B)  In  the  written  statement  that  he  gave  to  the  assistant  principal  on  August 
[R]  was  wearing  short’s  [sic]  and 
R  stated,  “[O]ne  time  [his]  friend 
17,  2010, 
  
‘she  had  like  a  cut  so  the  teacher  [respondent]  saw  and  he  touche 
like  going  up  and  she 
felt  uncomfortable.  Well  he  is  a  perv[.]” 
occasion  when 
  
testified  that  respondent  asked,  “What  is  that?”  and  then  touched 
“whole  hand,  kind  of.”  TR  added  that 
the  effect  that,  “Oh  my  God,  he  touched  my  leg!”  THR  testified  respondent  touched 

of  her  thigh.  THR 
  
R’s  thigh  with  his 
R  “freaked  out”  and  stated  something  to 

   
  
    
During  the  hearing,  THR  testified  about  the 

was  wearing  shorts  and  had  a  cut  on  the  top 

  

  

R’s  thigh  without 

not  corroborated  by 

pointing  out  the  cut  on  her  thigh.  The  complaint  by 
R  or  any  other  student  and  was  therefore  not  credible. 

R  was 

(C)  KR  was  first  called  as  a  witness  during  complainant’s  case-in-chief 
and  prior  to  TAR  being  called  as  a  witness.  Initially,  she  testified  that  respondent  brought 
his  body  a  bit  too  close  to  other  girls  during  her  third  period  biology  class  but  she  did  not 
recall  respondent  touching  any  girls  in  class.  She  did  not  testify  that  respondent  had  touched 
R  was  not  asked  about  a  cut  on  her  thigh  or  the  alleged  incident 
her  in  any  way. 
referenced  by  T##MMR  in  his  written  statement  and  testimony.  Later,  during  the  rebuttal 
phase  of  the  hearing,  KR  was  called  again  to  testify. 

     

(D)  With  respect  to  this  alleged  incident,  KJ R  came  to  school  on  an 

undetermined  date  wearing  shorts  and  had  a  three  inch  cut  on  her  left  upper  thigh.  She  had 
cut  her  leg  shaving  the  night  before.  The  cut  was  visible  on  her  oe  ee  had  noticed 
the  cut  or  scab  during  the  nutrition  period  just  before  biology  class. 
rebuttal  that,  while  she  was  sitting  at  her  desk,  respondent  noticed  her  cut  while  he  was 
walking  around  the  classroom.  She  testified  that,  from  two  or  two  and  one-half  feet  away, 
respondent  pointed  out  her  cut  with  an  index  finger,  asked  about  it,  and  placed  his  finger 
within  “one  centimeter”  of  her  thigh.  She  testified  she  was  made  to  feel  uncomfortable 
because  respondent  had  intruded  into  her  private  space.  At  no  time  prior  to  her  testimony  did 

R  testified  on 

R  report  to  school  authorities  that  respondent  had  touched  her  leg  or  thigh. 

of  K§JR  and,  in  fact, 

(E)  The  allegation  by  THR  that  respondent 

ee 
thigh  or  leg 
R  ostensibly  denied 
was  not  corroborated  by  the  testimony 
that  the  incident  occurred.  First, 
R  did  not  testify  about  this  incident  when  she  was 
first  called  as  a  witness.  She  explained  that  she  did  not  testify  about  the  incident  earlier  in 
the  hearing  because  she  was  not  asked  about  it  and  it  was  not  brought  to  her  attention.  She 
added,  however,  she  did  not  recall  the  incident  when  she  first  testified  during  the  hearing. 
R  testified  that  it  was  upsetting  to  her  that  she  could  not  recall  the  incident 
Second, 
but  indicated  she  was  trying  to  forget  about  it.  Third,  and  most  importantly,  KR 
admitted  she  would  have  gotten  upset  if  respondent  had  touched  her.  She  acknowledged  that 

  

  

  

15

  

  

  

_ 

she  would  have  reported  him  and  would  have  been  able  to  recall  the  incident  if,  in  fact, 
respondent  had  touched  her  leg.  Based  on  her  overall  testimony  and  that  she  could  not  recall 
the  incident,  the  testimony  proffered  by  KA  failed  to  show  that  respondent  touched  her 
_  onher  thigh.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  suggested  that  respondent  did  point  out KER’s 

cut  on  her  thigh  in  class,  embarrassing  her  in  front  of  her  peers. 

28. 

(A)  1  R  also  testified  that  respondent  came  close  to  girls  in  class  and 

touched  girls’  shoulders  as  he  walked  around  the  classroom  and  passed  out  papers. 
Although  he  did  not  mention  any  such  incidents  in  his  written  statement,  which  was  written 
much  closer  in  time  to  when  he  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  class,  T 
comported  with  the  testimony  of  other  students  who  said  respondent  touched  their  shoulders 
and  back.  However,  it  was  not  established  by THR’  s  testimony  that  respondent’s  conduct 
in  touching  students’  shoulders  was  inappropriate  under  the  circumstances. 

R’s  testimony 

(B)  In  his  written  statement,  THR  also  claimed  that  respondent  stood  behind 

im 

     

R’s  allegation  about  respondent 

iu  while  she  was  seated  at  her  desk  and  looked  down  her  tank-top  shirt  at  her 
M  and  respondent  was  four  inches 

student 
breasts.  TR  testified  that  he  sat  five  feet  from  J 
behind  and  to  her  side  when  he  looked  down  her  shirt. 
looking  down  the  student’s  shirt  was  not  believable.  If  respondent  had  stood  only  four 
inches  from  her,  im  M  presumably  would  have  noticed  her  teacher  that  close  to  her. 
However, 
down  her  shirt  in  class.  No  other  student  witnessed  this  alleged  incident.  TR 
acknowledged  that  respondent  frequently  walked  around  the  classroom,  observed  students’ 
   
work  on  their  assignments,  and  offered  his  assistance  to  them.  Because  THR  was  the  onl 
student  who  purportedly  observed  this  incident  and  it  was  not  clearly  established  how  T 
R  could  have  known  what  respondent  was  looking  at  when  or  if  he  stood  behind 
the  evidence  was  not  persuasive  in  showing  that  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate 
conduct  by  looking  down  the  student’s  shirt. 

M  did  not  complain  about  respondent  standing  very  close  to  her  or  looking 

mi  M, 

(C)  As  a  witness, THR  tended  to  embellish  or  exaggerate  his  testimony.  | 

He 

He  testified  that  respondent  looked  at  female  students  in  a  “naughty  way”  and  as  if  “he 
wanted  them.”  He  stated  respondent  told  girls  that  they  looked  “gorgeous”  and  “pretty.” 
asserted  that  respondent  took  photographs  only  of 
girls  in  the  class  and  asked  the  girls  to 
“pose”  and  to  “put  their  hands  on  their  hips.”  TR  stated  he  watched  out  for KBR 
and  other  girls  in  respondent’s  class  because  he  was  worried  that  something  “bad”  would 
happen  to  them  and  they  would  be  “molested”  by  respondent.  He  claimed  that  he  and  “all  of 
us”  students  went  to  the  counselor’s  office  to  request  that  they  be  transferred  from 
respondent’s  class  to  another  class.  However,  no  other  evidence  or  testimony  by  other 
students  corroborated TH  R’s  bold  assertions.  No  students  complained  that  respondent 
looked  at  them  in  a  sexually  desirous  manner  or  complimented  them  as  being  gorgeous  or 
pretty.  The  photographs  taken  by  respondent  in  his  classroom  depicted  both  male  and  female  - 
students  engaged  in  classroom  or  laboratory  work  and  none  of  the  girls  in  the  photographs 
were  shown  to  be  posing  with  their  hands  on  their  hips.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show 
that  any  students  requested  the  transfers  from  any  counselor.  TH  R’s  tendency  to 

   

  

16 

embellish  his  testimony  or  complaints  diminished  to  a  significant  degree  the  credibility  of 
both  his  written  statement  and  oral  testimony. 

District’s  Sexual  Abuse  and  Sexual  Harassment  Policies 

29. 

(A)  Under  its  Employee-to-Student  Sexual  Abuse  and  Related  Discipline 

Policy,  the  District  has  proclaimed  its  commitment  to  maintaining  a  learning  environment 
that  is  free  from  sexual  abuse  of  students.  Allegations  of  sexual  abuse  must  be  reported  in 
accordance  with  applicable  law  and  District  policies  regarding  the  reporting  of  suspected 
child  abuse  and  responding  to  allegations  of  sexual  harassment  of  students.  The  District  is 
committed  to  ensuring  that  allegations  of  sexual  abuse  of  students  are  dealt  with  promptly 
and  effectively.  Upon  receipt  of  any  information  requiring  mandatory  suspected  child  abuse 
reporting  for  allegations  of  sexual  abuse,  employees  must  file  a  report  of  suspected  child 
abuse  with  the  local  law  enforcement  agency. 
appropriate  administrative  action,  the  policy  suggests  that  the  reporting  employee 
immediately  notify  the  site  administrator  or  the  Local  District  of  the  inappropriate  conduct. 

To  ensure  the  child’s  protection  and 

(B)  After  the  Local  District  Superintendent  has  received  information  of  an 

alleged  sexual  abuse  report  that  has  been  filed  with  an  appropriate  child  protective  agency, 
the  Sexual  Abuse  Policy  provides  that  the  Local  District  Superintendent  or  his  or  her 
designee,  with  the  assistance  of  Employee  Relations,  is  responsible  for  following  up  with  the 
appropriate  law  enforcement  agency  to  determine  how  the  matter  is  being  handled.  Once a 
law  enforcement  agency  is  investigating  the  matter,  the  Local  District  Superintendent  must 
exercise  discretion  as  to  whether  the  employee  under  investigation  should  be  removed  from 
the  school  site  and  the  site  administrator  is  required  to  immediately  commence  an 
administrative  investigation  into  the  inappropriate  conduct  unless  informed  otherwise  by  the 
law  enforcement  agency.  If  the  law  enforcement  investigation  is  concluded  without  the 
filing  of  criminal  charges,  Employee  Relations  and/or  Human  Resources  must  consider 
whether  to  recommend  appropriate  disciplinary  action  in  consultation  with  the  Office  of 
General  Counsel. 

30. 

(A)  Under  its  Sexual  Harassment  Policy,  the  District  has  proclaimed  its 

commitment  to  maintaining  a  working  and  learning  environment  that  is  free  from  sexual 
harassment.  Sexual  harassment  of  or  by  employees  or  students  is  a  form  of  sexual 
discrimination  in  that  it  constitutes  differential  treatment  on  the  basis  of  sex,  or  actual  or 
perceived  sexual  orientation  or  gender.  Sexual  discrimination  is  a  violation  of  federal  and 
state  law  and a  violation  of  the  Sexual  Harassment  Policy.  The  District  considers  sexual 
harassment  to  be  a  major  offense,  which  can  result  in  disciplinary  action  to  the  offending 
employee,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  termination  from  employment. 

(B)  The  following  guidelines  apply  under  the  District’s  Sexual  Harassment 
Policy.  As  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  212.5  and  California  Code  of Regulations, 
title  5,  section  4916,  sexual  harassment  is  defined  as  unwelcome  sexual  advances,  requests 
for  sexual  favors,  or  other  verbal,  visual,  or  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual  nature  made  by 

  

 

17 

Sexual  harassment  may  occur  under  any  of 

someone  from  or  in  the  work  or  educational  setting,  whether  it  occurs  between  individuals  of 
the  same  sex  or  individuals  of  opposite  sexes. 
the  following  conditions:  submission  to  the  conduct  is  explicitly  or  implicitly  made  a  term  or 
a  condition  of  an  individual’s  employment,  academic  status,  or  progress;  submission  to,  or 
rejection  of,  the  conduct  by  an  individual  is  used  as  a  basis  of  employment  or  academic 
decisions  affecting  the  individual;  the  conduct  has  the  purpose  or  effect  of  having  a  negative 
impact  upon  the  individual’s  work  or  academic  performance,  or  of  creating  an  intimidating, 
hostile,  or  offensive  work  or  educational  environment;  and  submission  to,  or  rejection  of,  the 
conduct  by  the  individual  is  used  as  the  basis  for  any  decision  affecting  the  individual 
regarding  benefits  and  services,  honors,  programs,  or  activities  available  at  or  through  the 
educational  institution. 

| 

(C)  Sexual  harassment  may  include,  but  is  not  necessarily  limited  to,  verbal, 

visual,  and  physical  conduct  as  well  as  threats,  demands,  or  pressure.  Verbal  sexual 
harassment  is  unwelcome  conduct  such  as  the  use  of  suggestive,  derogatory,  or  vulgar 
comments;  the  use  of  sexual  innuendo  or  slurs;  making  unwanted  sexual  advances, 
invitations,  or  comments;  pestering  for  dates;  making  threats;  and/or  spreading  rumors  about 
or  rating  others  as  to  their  sexual  activity  or  performance.  Examples  of  visual  sexual 
harassment  may  include  unwelcome  conduct  such  as  the  display  of  sexually  suggestive 
objects,  pictures,  posters,  written  material,  cartoons,  or  drawings;  the  use  of  graffiti  and/or 
computer-generated  images  of  a  sexual  nature;,  and/or  the  use  of  obscene  gestures  or  leering. 
Physical  sexual  harassment  is  unwelcome  conduct  such  as  unwanted  touching,  pinching, 
kissing,  patting,  or  hugging;  the  blocking  of  normal  movement;  stalking;  assault;  and/or 
physical  interference  with  work  or  study  directed  at  an  individual  because  of  the  individual’s 
sex,  sexual  orientation,  or  gender.  Threats,  demands,  or  pressure  to  submit  to  sexual  requests 
in  order  to  keep  a  job  or  academic  standing  or  to  avoid  other  loss,  and/or  offers  of  benefits  in 
return  for  sexual  favors. 

_ 

Touching  Students  on  the  Waist,  Back,  and  Shoulders 

31. 

(A)  As  set  forth  in  Findings  12,  16(A),  18(B)  —  (C),  24,  and  25  above,  on 

undetermined  dates  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  18,  2010,  respondent  touched  vim 
C  on  the  waist  once  in  order  to  move  her  away  from a  table,  touched 
R  once  on  the 
back  in  order  to  walk  behind  her  through  a  narrow  space,  touched  V 
back  and  shoulders  on  four  to  five  occasions,  and  touched 
shoulders  on  four  to  six  occasions. 

on  the  upper 
A  on  the  upper  back  and 

   

(B)  Complainant  did  not  present  any  evidence  or  testimony  by  an 

administrator  or  expert  as  to  when  a  teacher  may  touch  a  student,  if  at  all.  Two  of 
respondent’s  character  witnesses,  however,  presented  testimony  that  comported  with  the 
training  and  experience  of  the  majority  of  the  Commission.  Former  or  retired  social  studies 
teacher  and  track  coach  Ernest  Aguirre  did  not  ever  see  any  coach  touch  student-athletes  but 
he  did  see  respondent  give  “high  fives”  to  student-athletes  and  pats  on  the  back,  which  he  did 
not  find  to  be  inappropriate.  Social  studies  teacher  and  technology  coordinator  Jose  Barzaga 

18

  

  

    

  

testified  that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  a  teacher  to  touch  or  leer  at  students.  However, 
Barzaga  added  that  he  has  patted  students  on  the  shoulders  in  order  to  gain  their  attention  or 
to  stop  them  from  talking  while  he  gave  lectures.  He  has  also  given  “high  fives”  to  student 
for  a  job  well  done.  Barzaga  further  suggested  that  it  was  appropriate  to  pat  students  on  the 
back  or  shoulders  in  order  to  pass  or  walk  around  a  crowded  classroom  as  long  as  one  gave a 
verbal  cue  such  as  “excuse  me.”  Barzaga  has  touched  students  to  move  them  but  he  would 
not  touch a  student  or  female  student  on  the  waist  in  order  to  move  the  student. 

~ 

(C)  Here,  respondent  admitted  that  he  may  have  touched  or  patted  im  R, 

vi.  and  other  students  on  their  backs  while  passing  or  walking  by  them  in  his 
crowded  classroom.  As  established  by  his  uncontroverted  testimony,  respondent  gave  a 
verbal  cue,  such  as  “excuse  me,”  whenever  he  touched  a  student  on  the  back  or  shoulders  so 
that  he  could  walk  or  pass  by  the  student  in  the  classroom. 

SO 

32., 

Based  on  Findings  12,  16  —  17,  29  —  30,  and  31(B)  —  (C),  above,  it  was  not 
on  the  waist  on  one  occasion  in 

established  that  respondent’s  conduct  in  touching  ») 
the  classroom  was  unwelcome  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual  nature  or  sexual  harassment 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  22.5  and  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title 
5,  section  4916.  While  the  physical  contact  initiated  by  respondent  was  inappropriate  and 
unwelcome  and  caused  consternation  to  DIc  such  that she  was  compelled  to  immediately 
file  a  complaint  against  her  teacher,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent’s  conduct  was 
sexual  in  nature.  Rather,  the  evidence  showed  respondent  touched  DEBE C  on  the  waist  in 
order  to  move  her  to  the  side  of  a  table  because  she  was  blocking  the  view  of  other  students 
who  were  standing  nearby.  The  conduct  occurred  in  the  presence  of  other  students  and  did 
not  involve  any  sexual  intent  or  interest  on  the  part  of  respondent  as  shown  either  by  the 
nature  of  the  touching  or  the  circumstances  thereof.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that 
respondent  used,  or  planned  to  use, 
C’s  submission  or  rejection  of  the  physical  conduct 
to  make  an  academic  decision  or  that  the  conduct  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  student’s 
academic  performance  or  created a  hostile  or  offensive  educational  environment. 

| 

33. 

Based  on  Findings  18,  29  —  30,  and  31(B)  -  (C)  above,  it  was  not  established 

R  once  on  the  back  was  inappropriate  or 

that  respondent’s  conduct  in  touching 
constituted  unwelcome  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual  nature  or  sexual  harassment  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  22.5  and  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section 
4916.  Respondent  put  his  hand  on  the  student’s  back  so  that  he  could  walk  or  pass  by  her  in 
a  narrow  space  without  having  any  further  accidental,  physical  contact  with  the  student.  The 
classroom  was  crowded  and  there  was  very  little  room  for  respondent  to  walk  by  or  behind 
the  student  as  he  made  his  rounds  in  the  classroom  during  a  laboratory  exercise.  There  was 
no  evidence  that  respondent  made  or  initiated  the  physical  contact  for  an  inappropriate  or 
sexual  reason.  Respondent  testified  he  gave  a  verbal  cue  whenever  he  touched  a  student  to 
walk  by  the  student.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  respondent  used,  or  planned  to 
use, 
R’s  submission  or  rejection  of  the  physical  conduct  to  make  an  academic  decision 
or  that  the  conduct  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  student’s  academic  performance  or  created  a 
hostile  or  offensive  educational  environment. 

19 

   

  

  

  

34. 

Based  on  Findings  24,  25  —  26,  29  ~  30,  and  31(B)  —  (C)  above,  it  was  not 
established  that  respondent’s  conduct  in  touching  V 
V  and  KA  on  their  upper 
back  and  shoulders  on  several  occasions  in  the  classroom  was  inappropriate  or  constituted 
unwelcome  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual  nature  or  sexual  harassment  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  22.5  and  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  4916.  The 
weight  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent  initiated  or  made  physical  contact  with 
the  two  students  in  order  to  walk  by  them  or  around  them  in  the  crowded  classroom.  He 
indicated  he  always  stated  a  verbal  cue  whenever  he  had  to  touch  a  student  on  the  back  or 
shoulders.  As  such,  respondent’s  touching  of  the  two  students’  back  and  shoulders  was  not 
inappropriate  in  the  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  both  Vi 
and  KA  were  made 
to  feel  uncomfortable  in  his  class  by  his  conduct.  However,  there  was  insufficient  evidence 
physical  conduct  was  of  a  sexual  nature  or  done  with  sexual  intent  or 
to  demonstrate  that  the 
interest.  In ic 
testified  that  the  touching  on  her  upper  back  and  shoulders  was 
not  sexual. 
A  indicated  that  pats  on  her  back  and  shoulder  would  be  normal.  It  was 
not  established  that  respondent  used,  or  planned  to  use,  the  students’  submission  or  rej  ection 
of  the  physical  conduct  to  make  an  academic  decision  or  that  the  conduct  had  a  negative 
impact  on  either  student’s  academic  performance  or  created  a  hostile  or  offensive  educational 
environment. 

— 

Staring  or  Looking  at  Students 

35. 

(A)  In  addition  to  the  specific  allegations  of  leering  and  looking  at  certain 

For  example, 

m7  R  testified  that 

students  contained  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  complainant  presented 
evidence  through  the  testimony  of  a  number  of  students  that  respondent  generally  stared  at 
female  students  in  his  classes.  Students  testified  respondent  “checked  out”  the  female 
students  or  looked  at  their  breasts  or  buttocks. 
respondent  “checked  out  the  girls”  and  looked  at  their  chests  although  she  was  not  certain 
how  often.  LER,  however,  said  she  could  not  tell  if  respondent  looked  at  her  body. 
JEM  stated  respondent  looked  at  girls  while  they  were  doing  their  classwork 
assignments,  which  made  her  feel  uncomfortable. 
girls  in  a  manner  that  differed  from  other  teachers. 
L  stated  respondent  looked  at  girls  “up  and  down”  and  at  their  breasts  and/or  buttocks. 
Z  testified  respondent 
R 

looked  at  girls  from  “head  to  toe”  and  “checked  out  girls”  twice  each  week.  N 
indicated,  in  part,  that  respondent  “checked  out  girls  from  head  to  toe”  about  three  out  of  five 
days  each  week  and  when  they  were  wearing  shorts.  J 
girls  from  “head  to  toe.”  DEc  stated  respondent  looked  at  girls  from  “head  to  toe,” 
looking  at  their  buttocks  and  breasts.  J 
R  testified  respondent  was  respectful  to  her 
but  looked  at  girls  from  “head  to  toe”  and  “checked  them  out.”  P|  O  stated  respondent 
looked  at  girls  and  “checked  them  out.” 

A  said  respondent  did  not  look  at  her  in  that  way. 

R,  and  Ha” 
  

S  testified  respondent  looked  at 

testified  that  respondent  looked  at 

  
F,  KR, 

   

  

7 

(B)  On  the  other  hand,  V 

indicated  she  could  not  recall  respondent 

looking  at  girls  in  her  class.  JR|M  admitted  respondent  did  not  flirt  or  make  any 
comments  while  looking  at  the  female  students.  Respondent  presented  the  countervailing 

20 

   

  

  

    

  

testimony  of  other  students.  WIR  testified  respondent  did  not  stare  at  girls  in  her  class. 

R  stated  she  did  not  see  respondent  stare  at  girls  or  look  at  them  inappropriately. 

AIBA  testified  respondent  acted  professionally 
out”  girls  in  an  inappropriate  manner.  E 
and  girls  like  any  other  teacher  would  and  did  not  stare  at  girls. 

and  she  did  not  see  him  stare  at  or  “check 
C  testified  respondent  looked  at  both  boys 

(C)  Former  colleagues  of  respondent  indicated  he  always  acted  in  a 

professional  manner  at  the  high  school.  Volleyball  coach  Efrain  Barrajas-Alvarado  never 
saw  respondent  look  at  girls.  Counselor  and  former  teacher  Pilar  Estabrook  testified 
respondent  was  always  respectful  and  professional  with  students  and  his  eyes  never 
“wandered.”  Social  studies  teacher  and  technology  coordinator  Jose  Luis  Barzaga  did  not 
see  respondent  stare  or  leer  at  girls;  he  observed  respondent  in  the  classroom  on  two 
occasions  in  the  first  two  months  of  the  2010-2011  school  year.  Science  teacher  and  former 
colleague  John  Reid  never  saw  respondent  act  inappropriately  towards  or  leer  or  stare  at 
female  students.  Teacher  Jessica  Esparza,  who  was  assigned  to  take  over  respondent’s 
biology  classes  in  August  2010,  observed  respondent  on  five  occasions  in  the  first  two 
months  of  the  2010-2011  school  year  and  found  that  he  acted  professionally  in  his.classroom. 
Former  teacher  and  track  coach  Ernest  Aguirre  worked  with  respondent  on  the  high  school 
track  teams  until  he  retired  in  2010  and  never  saw  respondent  leer  or  stare  at  female  student- 
athletes  or  look  at  girls  in  an  inappropriate  way. 

36. 

(A)  Furthermore,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  26(B)  —  (D)  above,  the  evidence  did 

not  establish  that,  on_  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010, 
respondent  gave 

A  looks  or  leered  at  her. 

(B)  As  set  forth  in  Finding  17  above,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
during  the  period  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  looked  at  D 
from  head  to  toe  while  biting  his  lip. 

Cc 

(C)  As  set  forth  in  Findings  22  and  23(B)  above,  the  evidence  did  not  establish 

more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  respondent 
F  up  and  down,  resulting  in  her  feeling  weird  and  not  wanting  to  be  looked 

or 

that,  on  one 
looked  at  D 
at  in  that  manner. 

(D)  As  set  forth  in  Finding  19  above,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that,  on 

one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  respondent  watched 
LEBER  from  across  the  gym. 

37. 

Based  on  Findings  35  and  36  above,  a  majority  of  the  Commission  determined 
by  weighing  the  evidence  that  complainant  did  not  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
that,  on  one  or  more  occasions  from  July  1,  2010;  through  August  18,  2010,  respondent 
stared  inappropriately  at  female  students  in  his  classroom,  leered  at  the  female  students,  or 
looked  or  stared  at  female  students’  breasts  or  buttocks.  First,  complainant  did  not  prove  the 
specific  allegations  pled  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  that  respondent  - 
purportedly  looked  or  leered  at  female  students,  as  summarized  in  Findings  36  above. 

   

  

21 

Complainant  also  failed  to  prove  the  most  serious  and  blatantly  sexual  allegations  of  the 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  including  the  allegation  that  respondent  passed  his 
fingers  across  the  back  of 
A,  rubbed  his  genital  area  against  LIBR,  and  touched 

  

F's  body.  In  addition,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  touched  the  thigh  of 
R.  The  failure  to  prove  these  allegations  had  the  concomitant  effect  of  causing  the 

  

F  wrote  that  respondent  looked  at  her  table  “like  checking 

Commission  to  question  the  reliability  of  testimonial  evidence  that  respondent  customarily  or 
generally  looked  at  all  or  a  number  of  female  students  inappropriately.  Second,  in  their 
experience,  the  majority  of  the  Commission  was  not  familiar  with  or  had  ever  heard  students 
use  the  term  “from  head  to  toe”  to  describe  how  persons  might  look  at  others  or  at  female 
students.  In  fact,  in  their  written  statements  from  on  or  about  August  16,  2010,  only  one 
student  used  the  term  “head  to  toe.”  KIA  wrote  that  respondent  gave  her  “these  looks.” 
us  out.”  LIBR  and  Ti 
R  attested  respondent 

R  wrote  respondent  gave  “weird  looks.”  In  her  affidavit,  J 
“would  ‘check  out’ 
girls.”  The  only  student  who  used  the  term  “head  to  toe”  in  her  written 
statement  was  N 
R.  The  use  of  this  term  by  so  many  of  complainant’s  witnesses  had  a 
strong  tendency  in  reason  to  show  that  the  witnesses  were  repeating  what  had  been  suggested 
to  them,  which  had  the  effect  of  diminishing  the  weight  that  could  be  accorded  to  their  | 
testimony.  Third,  the  Commission  found  respondent  was  believable  when  he  testified  that  he 
did  not  stare  or  look  at  female  students  or  at  their  breasts  and  buttocks.  His  testimony  was 
corroborated  by  students  who  testified  in  his  defense  that  he  did  not  stare  at  female  students 
and,  in  part,  by  teachers  and  colleagues  who  testified  as  to  his  character  and  proper  conduct 
as  a  teacher. 

  

Personal  Questions  or  Conversation 

38. 

While  not  specifically  alleged  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges, 

complainant  also  presented  the  statements  and  testimony  of  students  to  complain  how 
respondent  complimented  the  female  students  and  asked  them  questions  or  engaged  them  in 
conversations  that  were  of  a  personal  nature.  For  example,  LJ  R  wrote  that  respondent 
asked  students  what  they  did  on  the  weekend  or  how  they  were  feeling.  . 
testified  respondent  told  girls  that  their  outfits  were  nice  and  that  they  looked  nice.  i»  |  F 
said  respondent  asked  students  at  her  pod  of  desks  what  they  had  done  on  the  weekends  but 
she  added  that  he  did  not  ask  for  a  date  or  make  any  suggestive  comments.  DF  indicated 
respondent  was  friendly  but  serious  when  he  was  teaching. 
respondent  asked  personal  questions  but  did  not  elaborate  as  to  what  kind  of  questions  that 
respondent  asked  of  the  students. TAR  indicated  respondent  complimented  the  female 
students,  DEo  conceded  that  respondent  talked  to  the  male  students  and  did  not  make 
any  sexual  or  inappropriate  comments. 

A  testified  that 

R  also 

| 

39. 

Based  on  Findings  9  and  38  above,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent’s 

custom  or  practice  of  asking  students  what  they  were  doing  or  had  done  on  the  weekends  or 
complimenting  students  on  their  outfits  or  dress  was  inappropriate.  As  described  above, 
respondent  and  other  teachers  in  their  SLC  at  Bell  High  School  were  trained  and  encouraged 
to  implement  personalization  strategies  in  their  classrooms  for  the  sake  of  facilitating  the 

22 

   

academic  and  overall  personal  growth  of  the  students.  The  questions  or  remarks  that 
respondent  asked  or  made  to  his  students  were  innocuous  and  wholly  in  keeping  with  the 
personalization  goal  of  the  SLC.  Respondent  often  asked  students  how  was  their  weekend  as 
a  general  greeting.  Inasmuch  as  there  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  ever  asked  what 
could  be  construed  as  a  sexual  or  romantic  question  or  spoke  about  an  inappropriate  or 
sexually  suggestive  topic  in  front  of  the  students,  the  Commission  cannot  conclude  that 
respondent’s  questions  or  comments  to  the  students  were  indicative  of  sexual  harassment  or 
other  misconduct. 

District  Laptop  Computer 

40. 

Under  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (rev.  2/03),  employees  of  the  District  are 

required  to  follow  the  District  rules,  regulations,  bulletins,  and  policies  and  procedures; 
improper  conduct  is  not  tolerated.  With  respect  to  the  proper  use  of  public  resources,  District 
employees  must  ensure  that  District  facilities,  equipment,  and  supplies,  or  other  resources  are 
used  for  District  purposes  only,  except  for  occasional  and  limited  personal  use  that  does  not 
interfere  with  the  performance  of  duties  or  create  an  appearance  of  impropriety. 
(Exh.  34) 

41. 

Onan  undetermined  date,  an  operations  coordinator  for  the  District  retrieved 

from  respondent  the  Gateway  laptop  computer  that  had  been  issued  to  and/or  checked  out  by 
him.  On  October  8,  2010,  the  District’s  IU  investigator  obtained  the  laptop  computer  from 
the  operations  coordinator.  On  October  12,  2010,  the  IU  investigator  then  submitted  the 
laptop  computer  to  a  District  computer  laboratory  for  a  forensic  scan.  On  October  12,  2010, 
Hong-Jan  Lee,  a  forensic  data  analyst  for  the  District,  performed  a  forensic  scan  on  the 
laptop  computer.  After  retrieving  the  laptop  computer  from  respondent,  the  District 
maintained  a  proper  chain  of  custody  of  the  equipment. 

42. 

On  or  about  October  12,  2010,  after  conducting  the  forensic  scan,  forensic 

analyst  Lee  prepared  a  one-page  Forensic  Scan  Report.  According  to  his  report,  Lee  used  a 
“FTK”  (Forensic  Toolkit)  to  extract  21  inappropriate  or  “adult  pornographic”  images  from  a 
file  path  on  the  laptop  computer  which  included  temporary  internet  files. 
In  his  report,  Lee 
further  stated: 

“T, 
“II. 

Folder  containing  pornographic  related  images. 
All  of  pornographic  images  dated  as  05/11/2007.” 

The  Forensic  Scan  Report  (Exh.  28)  and  copies  of  the  inappropriate  images  extracted  from  or 
found  on  the  laptop  computer  (Exh.  29)  were  admitted  into  evidence.  Forensic  analyst  Lee 
did  not  testify  in  the  hearing  and  no  further  explanation  was  presented  regarding  his  Forensic 
Scan  Report. 

43. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  14(C)  —  (D)  and  40  —  42  above,  during  the  two-month 

period  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010,  the  District  found  21  pornographic    

images  on  respondent’s  laptop  computer.  The  inappropriate  images  were  last  accessed  from 
or  downloaded  onto  the  laptop  computer  on  May  11,  2007. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  14(C)  —  (D)  and  40  —  42  above,  it  was  not  established 
that  respondent  “maintained”  or  “saved”  the  pornographic  images  or  adult  websites  on  his 
laptop  computer  during  the  two-month  period  from  July  1,  2010,  through  August  31,  2010. 
Nor  was  it  alleged  or  established  that  respondent  accessed  or  viewed  the  inappropriate 
images  or  adult  websites  on  his  laptop  computer  or  displayed  the  inappropriate  images  or 
adult  websites  on  his  laptop  computer  so  other  persons  or  students  could  see  unwelcome  or 
inappropriate  images  or  websites  during  this  same  two-month  period  or  at  any  other  time 
relevant  herein. 

44. 

Respondent  first  received  the  laptop  computer  from  the  District  or  Bell  High 

School  on  or  about  June  29,  2005.  On  approximately  six  occasions  from  June  29,  2005, 
through  April  26,  2010,  he  returned  the  laptop  computer  to  the  technology  office  at  Bell  High 
School  for  maintenance  and  record-keeping  purposes.  On  every  occasion  that  he  returned 
the  computer  to  the  technology  office,  he  picked  up  the  computer  from  the  technology  office 
later  on  the  same  day.  After  he  returned  and  obtained  the  laptop  computer  for  the  last  time 
on  April  26,  2010,  respondent  returned  the  computer  to  the  high  school  about  six  months 
later  on  October  10,  2010,  which  was  after  he  had  been  removed  from  the  classroom. 

45. 

 Atall  times  relevant  herein,  respondent  used  the  laptop  computer  to  prepare 

lesson  plans,  conduct  research  for  his  lessons,  take  attendance,  display  Power  Point 
presentations  in  his  classes,  and  participate  in  professional  development  and  training 
meetings.  He  used  the  laptop  computer  in  his  classroom  and  took  it  home  and  to 
professional  development  sessions  both  on  and  off  campus.  On  occasion,  respondent  left  his 
laptop  computer  unattended  in  his  classroom  and  at  professional  development  meetings.  He 
kept  his  Power  Point  presentations  on  his  laptop  computer  as  well  as  personal  and  family 
photographs. 

46. 

Respondent  insisted  that  he  did  not  access  adult  internet  websites  or  view 

_  inappropriate  or  pornographic  images  on  his  District-issued  laptop  computer  at  any  time.  He 

testified  that  he  did  not  know  where  the  inappropriate  images  came  from  or  how  the 
inappropriate  images  were  downloaded  or  saved  on  his  laptop  computer.  In  an  October  18, 
2011  letter  to  the  principal  at  Bell  High  School,  respondent  stated  that  he  did  not  “put  any 
pornographic  images  on  the  computer  issued  to  [him].”  (Exh.  CCC) 

47. 

_  Based  on  Findings  14(C)  —  (D)  and  40  —  46  above,  respondent  violated  the 

Employee  Code  of  Ethics  by  failing  to  ensure  that  the  laptop  computer  issued  to  him  by  the 
District  was  used  only  for  District  or  educational  purposes  or  did  not  create  an  appearance  of 
impropriety.  The  discovery  of  the  inappropriate  images  on  the  laptop  computer 
demonstrated  that,  on  May  11,  2007,  this  equipment  was  not  used  for  District  purposes.  The 
images  created  an  appearance  of  impropriety. 

24

  

Respondent  and  Character  Witnesses 

48. 

Respondent  insisted  that  he  did  not  view  any  female  students  as  being 

He  testified  he  did  not  leer  or  stare  at  female  students  or  their  body  parts  or 

attractive  or  pretty  and  did  not  judge  any  female  students  on  the  basis  of  their  physical 
appearance. 
touch  their  upper  backs  and  shoulders  with  sexual  or  illicit  interest.  Respondent  recognizes 
that  it  is  not  appropriate  or  moral  for-a  teacher  to  look  at  or  touch  students  in  such  a  manner. 
He  admitted  he  placed  his  hand  on  students’  backs  to  pass  by  the  students  and  move  about  | 
his  crowded  classroom  and  always  said  “excuse  me”  when  he  made  physical  contact. 
Respondent  did  not  know  and  was  not  aware  that  the  female  students  felt  uncomfortable 
because  he  touched  their  backs  to  walk  by  them  because  no  students  complained  to  him.  He 
is  saddened  and  upset  that  students  felt  uncomfortable  in  his  classroom  and  did  not  want  to 
come  to  his  class  or  to  ask  questions  in  order  to  avoid  him.  Respondent  wants  to  return  to 
teach  in  the  classroom  for  the  District  and,  if  allowed  to  do  so,  he  has  learned  that  he  should 
not  make  any  kind  of  physical  contact  with  students  and  give  only  verbal  cues  when  he  has 
to  walk  around  students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  was  a  credible  witness  and 
demonstrated  remorse  for  his  conduct. 

- 

49.  _  Efrain  Barrajas-Alvarado  has  known  respondent  for  several  years.  For  the  past 

five  years  since  2008,  he  has  been a  girls’  volleyball  coach  and  teacher’s  assistant  at  Bell 
High  School.  Prior  to  that  time,  from  2000  through  2005,  Barrajas-Alvarado  was  a  student  at 
Bell  High  School.  He  was  coached  by  respondent  on  the  freshmen  boys’  basketball  team  for 
two  months  and  on  the  track  team  when  he  was  a  senior.  He  graduated  from  Bell  High 
School  in  2005.  During  the  time  that  he  has  known  respondent,  Barrajas-Alvarado  has  never 
seen  respondent  act  or  treat  any  student  in  an  inappropriate  way.  In  July  and  August  2010, 
he  saw  respondent  come  into  the  gymnasium  where  the  girls’  volleyball  team  practiced  on  a 
daily  basis  and  he  did  not  see  respondent  look,  stop  and  watch,  or  stare  at  any  of  the  female 
student-athletes.  Respondent  always  walked  through  the  gymnasium  quickly  and  did  not  talk 
or  interact  or  try  to  talk  and  interact  with  anyone.  Barrajas-Alvarado  did  not  hear  any 
complaints  about  respondent  from  the  girls  on  his  volleyball  team.  He  opined  that 
respondent  is  a  good  teacher  and  coach. 

(Exh.  FFFF) 

49. 

(A)  Pilar  Estabrook  is  a  counselor  in  the  District.  Since  June  2012,  she  has 
been  a  middle  school  counselor  at  the  International  Studies  Learning  Center.  From  1999 
through  June  2012,  she  worked  at  Bell  High  School  as  a  teacher  and  then  as  a  counselor.  She 
taught  science  or  chemistry  from  1999  through  2006  and  was  the  co-chairperson  of  the 
science  department  during  the  2004-2005  school  year.  After  obtaining  her  counseling 
credential,  Estabrook  was  a  counselor  at  Bell  High  School  from  2006  through  June  2012. 
She  was  also  an  assistant  coach  for  the  track  team  with  respondent  from  2001  through  2004. 

(B)  Estabrook  has  known  respondent  since  1999  inasmuch  as  they  were 
colleagues  in  the  science  department  and  coaches  for  the  track  team.  Since  she  taught 
eleventh  grade  chemistry,  Estabrook  and  respondent  had  many  of  the  same  students  in  their 
classes. 
They  worked  and  prepared  lesson  plans  together  in  the  science  department. 
also  considers  herself  to  be  a  friend  of  respondent;  she  attended  his  wedding  in  2005.  In 

She 

  

25

Estabrook’s  view,  respondent  is  an  outstanding  and  dedicated  teacher  who  has  always 
maintained  a  professional  demeanor  and  attitude  and  observed  proper  boundaries.  He  was 
always  respectful  towards  students.  Estabrook  never  saw  respondent  leer  at  girls  or  act 
inappropriately  with  students.  Respondent  had  a  good  reputation  at  Bell  High  School.  He 
was  known  to  be  a  strict  but  fair  teacher  and  students  learned a  lot  in  his  classroom.  After 
she  became  a  high  school  counselor  and  spoke  with  students,  she  received  no  complaints 
about  respondent  from  students  in  her  counseling  workload  and  no  requests  from  students 
asking  to  be  transferred  from  his  class. 

(Exh.  MMMM) 

50. 

(A)  Jose  Luis  Barzaga  has  been a  social  studies  teacher  at  Bell  High  School 

since  2001.  He  is  a  lead  teacher  in  the  Humanitas  SLC  and  the  technology  coordinator.  He 
has  known  respondent  for  10  years  as  a  fellow  teacher  and  member  of  the  Humanitas  SLC. 
When  he  became  lead  teacher  for  the  Humanitas  SLC,  Barzaga  was  required  to  observe 
colleagues,  including  respondent,  while  they  were  engaged  in  classroom  teaching.  He 
observed  respondent  in  his  classroom  on  six  occasions  in  2008  and  2009  and  one  ortwo 
occasions  in  the  first  two  months  of  the  2010-2011  school  year.  Barzaga  found  respondent  to 
be  an  enthusiastic,  caring,  and  skillful  teacher  who  broke 
his  classroom  into  small  groups  for 
instructional  purposes  and  provided  support  to  students  struggling  with  the  curriculum. 
Respondent  had  a  reputation  for  being  a  strict  teacher  and  coach  who  required  the  student- 
athletes  on  his  basketball  teams  to  wear  shirts  and  ties  to  school  on  game  days.  Nevertheless, 
respondent  acted  respectfully  towards  his  students  and  the  students  respected  him.  Barzaga 
did  not  see  respondent  act  inappropriately  with  students;  he  did  not  observe  respondent  leer 
or  stare  at  female  students  or  “check  them  out.” 

(B)  As  established  by  Barzaga’s  testimony  and  affidavit,  teachers  assigned  to 

the  Humanitas  SLC  at  Bell  High  School  were  required  to  oversee  not  only  the  students’ 
academic  or  instructional  needs  but  also  their  social  and  emotional  well-being.  For  example, 
teachers  in  the  Humanitas  SLC  conducted  intervention  meetings  with  students  and  their 
parents  to  discuss  their  academic  and  emotional  concerns.  Moreover,  as  part  of  the 
personalization  goal  of  the  SLC,  respondent  and  other  teachers  were  encouraged  to  show  that 
they  cared  about  the  students  and  to  ask  them  what  they  did  or  what  movies  they  might  have 
seen  on  the  preceding  weekend.  Respondent  also  helped  to  organize  the  Eco-Gallery  that 
was  held  every  year  in  the  spring  at  Bell  High  School  and  for  which  students  made 
presentations  and  displayed  their  research.  Respondent  provided  photographs  of  his  students 
engaged  in  school  activities  for  the  Eco-Gallery  as  well  as  for  the  school  website.  Barzaga 
confirmed  that  respondent  stuttered  when  he  spoke. 

(Exh.  JJJJ) 

51. 

John  K.  Reid  has  been  a  science  teacher  at  San  Pedro  High  School  for  three 
years.  Previously,  he  taught  at  Bell  High  School  for  eight  years  from  2002  through  2010. 
He  worked  with  respondent  in  the  science  department  and  got  to  know  him  as  a  mentor  and 
friend.  As  members  of  the  science  department,  Reid  and  respondent  developed  and  shared 
curriculum  and  lesson  plans  and  prepared  examinations.  Reid  had  the  opportunity  to  observe 
respondent  instruct  students  in  the  classroom  on  three  or  four  occasions.  In  Reid’s  opinion, 
respondent  was  one  of  the  finest  science  teachers  at  Bell  High  School  and  had  excellent 
pedagogy  and  classroom  management  skills. 

He  found  respondent  to  be  well-prepared  and 

26

  

dynamic.  Respondent  treated  his  students  with  respect  and  motivated  them.  Reid  never  saw 
respondent  behave  inappropriately  with  any  student  or  look  or  stare  at  female  students.  Reid 
never  heard  of  any  complaints  about  respondent. 

52. 

(A)  Jessica  Esparza,  formerly  known  as  Jessica  Rivera,  is  the  teacher  who  was 

assigned  to  teach  respondent’s  classes  for  the  remainder  of  the  fall  semester  after  he  was 
removed  on  August  18,  2010.  She  taught  at  Bell  High  School  for  two  years  until  October 
2012.  Prior  to  that,  she  taught  at  Nimitz  Middle  School  in  Huntington  Park  from  2007 
through  June  2010. 
Currently,  she  is  a  teacher  at  Gage  Middle  School  in  the  District. 
Esparza  has  known  respondent  for  16  years,  having  graduated  from  Bell  High  School  in 
1999  where  she  participated  on  the  cross-country  and  track  teams  and  was  coached  by 
respondent  for  two  years.  She  considers  respondent  to  be  a  colleague  and  a  friend. 

(B)  As  a  colleague  of  respondent  in  the  science  department  at  Bell  High 

School,  Esparza  observed  respondent  while  he  taught  students  in  his  third  period  biology 
class,  which  was  her  conference  period,  on  five  occasions  during  July  and  August  2010.  She 
found  respondent  was  an  excellent  teacher  who  communicated  goals  of  the  lessons  and 
explained  the  subject  matter  to  the  students.  Esparza  noted  respondent  moved  around  his 
classroom  to  make  sure  that  the  students  remained on  task,  and  that  his  classroom  was 
crowded  with  approximately  34  students.  He  encouraged  the  students  to  ask  for  help  if  they 
needed  it.  Respondent  had  good  rapport  with  the  students  and  acted  appropriately  with  them. 
Esparza  found  that  respondent  managed  his  classroom  well  and  created a  positive  learning 
environment  for  the  students  who  were  engaged.  Esparza  did  not  see  respondent  behave 
inappropriately  with  any  female  students.  He  did  not  touch  female  students  or  look  at  them 
inappropriately.  In  Esparza’s  opinion,  respondent  was  respectful  towards  male  and  female 
students.  The  students  appeared  to  respect  respondent  and  Esparza  did  not  hear  any  negative 
comments  about  respondent  from  students  or  other  teachers. 

53. 

(A)  Ernest  Aguirre  testified  on  behalf  for  respondent.  Aguirre  is  a  retired 

social  studies  teacher  and  head  coach  for  the  track  teams  at  Bell  High  School.  He  worked  at 
Bell  High  School  from  1984  until  2009. 
years.  In  or  about  1993,  he  recruited  respondent  to  be  an  assistant  track  coach.  Respondent 
was  an  assistant  track  coach  under  Aguirre  from  1993  until  2006  when  he  was  selected  by 
Aguirre  to  become  the  head  track  coach.  Aguirre  chose  respondent  to  become  an  assistant 
and  head  track  coach  because  he  trusts  respondent’s  judgment  and  has  confidence  in  his 
abilities.  Aguirre  considers  respondent  to  be  a  good  friend  and  has  invited  him  to  family 
events.  Respondent  tutored  two  of  Aguirre’s  two  daughters  in  biology. 

He  has  known  respondent  for  approximately  20 

(B)  Aguirre  opined  that  respondent  is  an  excellent  teacher  and  role  model  who 

is  dedicated  to  his  profession  and  to  helping  young  people  succeed.  Aguirre  believes  that 
respondent  loves  his  job  with  the  District  and  would  not  do  anything  to  jeopardize  it. 
In 
Aguirre’s  view,  respondent  is  well-respected  by  his  colleagues  and  has  received  only  positive 
evaluations  from  his  supervisors. 
tutored  students,  and  communicated  well  with  students  and  parents  in  the  Latino  community. 
Aguirre  added  that  respondent  was  a  good  track  coach.  He  was  respected  by  other  coaches 

He  gave  presentations  at  staff  development  meetings, 

27    

in  the  District.  The  track  team  at  Bell  High  School  included  female  student-athletes  who 
comprised  about  45  percent  of  the  participants.  The  student-athletes  practiced  or  had  meets 
five  days  each  week  from  January  through  June  each  spring  semester.  The  female  student- 
athletes  wore  track  shorts  and  tops  that  were  relatively  revealing.  Working  with  and 
observing  respondent  coach  the  track  team  for  16  years,  Aguirre  never  saw  respondent  act  or 
look  inappropriately  at  any  student-athlete.  Aguirre  never  saw  respondent  leer  or  stare  at 
female  students  or  look  at  them  in  an  inappropriate  manner.  Aguirre  saw  respondent  give 
congratulatory  “high  fives”  and  pats  on  the  back  to  student-athletes  after  a  good  effort  or 
result  but  did  not  see  respondent  touch  students  improperly.  Aguirre  never  received  any 
complaints  from  students  about  respondent. 

54. 

Several  of  the  students  who  testified  on  behalf  of  complainant  actually  thought 

respondent  was  a  good  teacher  or  stated  that  they  did  well  in  his  class.  LR  thought 
respondent  was  a  good  teacher  and  should  be  allowed  to  keep  teaching  but  not  at  Bell  High 
School.  She  added  that  she  thought  respondent  was  not  a  sexual  predator  but,  rather,  a  weird 
and  socially  awkward  person.  LZ  thought  respondent  was  a  good  teacher;  she  enjoyed 
being  in  his  class. 
appreciated  him  as  a  teacher.  KA  stated  she  was  a  good  student  in  biology  and  did  well 
in  the  class.  NAMBR  liked  her  biology  class.  KR  indicated  she  got  a  good  grade  in 
biology. 

F  thought  respondent  was  a  “great  biology  teacher”  and  she 

7 

55. 

Allegations  contained  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  or  raised  by 

the  parties  at  the  hearing  in  this  matter  for  which  there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this 
Decision  were  unproven  or  deemed  surplusage  and  were  therefore  immaterial  to  the 
disposition  of  this  matter, 

* 

eK 

Kk 

K 

KF 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  makes  the  following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l, 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  inasmuch  as  the  District  is. 
seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  standard 
of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

2. 

It  is  well  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 

  

28

  

testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.” 
(1958)  161  Cal.  App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  trier  of  fact  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  The  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence.”  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality  Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d 
1040,  1052.) 

(bid,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 

. 

3. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  for  immoral  conduct  in  that  it 
was  not  established  that  respondent  engaged  in  any  immoral  conduct,  based  on  Findings  1  — 
55  above. 

In  general,  immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters  but  also  includes  conduct  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness,  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  towards 
good  order  in  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d 
808,  811.) 

In  the  instant  matter,  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent 

engaged  in  any  immoral  conduct.  The  allegations  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of 
Charges  that  charged  or  connoted  sexual  conduct  or  conduct  indicative  of  indecent  or 
depraved  intent  or  interest  on  the  part  of  respondent  vis-a-vis  female  students  in  his  classes 
were  not  proven.  Respondent  did  not  rub  his  genitals  against  LIBR  as  he  passed  behind 
her  during  a  laboratory  exercise.  He  did  not  pass  his  fingers  across  the  back  of  KA  or 
grab  her  shoulders,  He  did  not  touch  the  side  of  DEF’s  body  with  his  fist.  Respondent 
did  not  leer  at  female  students  or  look  at  them  up  and  down  as  if  he  were  “checking  them 
out”  as  sexual  objects.  Respondent  did  touch  the  waist  of  DIC,  the  back  of  LIBR,  and 
the  upper  back  and  shoulders  of  VEY  and  KWBBA  but  not  for  any  sexual  purpose, 
prurient  interest,  or  an  inappropriate  reason. 
her  from  the  front  of  a  table  because  she  was  blocking  the  view  of  other  students.  He 
touched  LIJR  on  the  back  so  that  he  could  walk  quickly 
exercise.  He  touched  the  upper  backs  and  shoulders  of  V 
by  them or  around  them  in  his  crowded  classroom.  He  always  gave  a  verbal  cue  when 
touching  a  student  on  the  upper  back  or  shoulders.  That  inappropriate  or  pornographic 
images  were  found  on  his  District-issued  laptop  computer  did  not  connote  immoral  conduct 
either,  for  the  images  were  saved  on  the  laptop  computer  more  than  six  years  ago  in  May 
2007  and  it  was  not  shown  that  respondent  viewed  the  images. 

He  touched Dia  C’s  waist  in  order  to  move 

behind  her  during 
'V  and 

a  laboratory 
A  as  he  passed 

4. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  public  schools  by  the  State 

  

29

  

Board  of  Education  or  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district,  based  on  Findings  |  —  55 
above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events 
or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered 
persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito 
Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
1176,  1180-1181.) 

Here,  complainant  did  not  prove  that  respondent  persistently  violated  any 

First,  upon  performing  a  forensic  scan  of  the  laptop  computer 

school  rules  or  regulations. 
issued  to  respondent,  the  District  found  that  21  pornographic  and  inappropriate  images  were 
saved  or  stored  on  the  laptop  computer.  The  saving  or  storage  of  the  inappropriate  images  on 
the  laptop  computer  constituted  a  violation  of  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  in  that 
the  District-issued  laptop  computer,  a  public  resource,  had  apparently  not  been  used  for 
proper  District  or  educational  purposes.  However,  the  forensic  scan  revealed  only  that  the 
images  were  dated  May  11,  2007.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  respondent 
viewed  the  images  on  May  11,  2007,  or  on  any  other  date.  Nor  was  it  shown  that  respondent 
used  or  continued  to  use  the  laptop  computer  to  access  and  view  inappropriate  websites 
and/or  images.  As  such,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  respondent  persistently 
violated  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  by  using  the  laptop  computer  to  access,  view,  or  save 
inappropriate  images. 

Second,  complainant  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  violated  the 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  respondent 

District’s  Employee-to-Student  Sexual  Abuse  and  Related  Discipline  Policy  or  its  Sexual 
Harassment  Policy. 
engaged  in  sexual  abuse  or  sexual  harassment  of  female  students.  He  did  not  rub  his  crotch 
against  a  female  student  or  touch  other  female  students  on  their  backs,  sides,  or  thighs  in  an 
inappropriate  or  sexual  manner.  He  touched  the  waist  of »  |  C  to  move  her  from  the  front 
of  table  as  she  was  blocking  the  view  of  other  students.  He  touched  the  back  or  upper  backs 
and  shoulders  of  three  other  students  in  order  to  pass  or  walk  by  them  in  his  crowded 
classroom.  His  actions  did  not  constitute  sexual  abuse  or  sexual  harassment.  Respondent  did 
not  leer  at  female  students  or  look  at  them  or  their  body  parts  in  an  inappropriate  or 
unprofessional  manner. 

| 

3. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  unprofessional  conduct,  based  on 
Findings  1  —  55  above. 

As  one  of  the  specific  grounds  for  which  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

may  be  dismissed  from  employment,  unprofessional  conduct  has  a  broad  import,  for  it  refers 
generally  to  conduct  demonstrating  unfitness.  However,  a  particular  act  or  omission  on  the 

30

part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  not  only  unprofessional  conduct  but  also  evident  unfitness 
for  service  and a  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  prescribed  rules  and  regulations. 
(Perez.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174- 
1175;  Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.  2d  546,  551.)  Unprofessional  conduct  may 
be  viewed  as  a  lesser  included  form  of  proscribed  behavior  within  evident  unfitness  for 
service.  Conduct  constituting  evident  unfitness  for  service  will  often  constitute 
unprofessional  conduct,  but  the  converse  is  not  true.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.  4th  1429,  1445.) 

6. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  in  that  it 
was  not  established  that  respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit 
to  be  a  teacher  due  to  a  defect  in  temperament  that  cannot  be  remedied  or  otherwise,  based 
on  Findings  1  —  55  above. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.  4th  1429,  1444- 
1445.)  Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  not  remediable  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.  at  1444.) 

In  general,  the  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  to  decide 
whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696.) 
If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  unfitness  is 
'  evident,  i.e.  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.  4th  1429,  1445.) 

In  the  Morrison  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 

immorality  or  unprofessional  conduct  are  raised  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case,  the  applicable 
standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Morrison,  supra,  |  Cal  3d.  at  229.)  The  terms 
immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  have  been  held  too  vague,  standing  alone,  and  must  be 
applied  to  a  specific  occupation  and  given  context  by  reference  to  fitness  for  the  performance 
of  that  occupation.  (Basset  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
The  Morrison  case  requires  that  the  determination 
(1988)  201  Cal.  App.  3d  1444,  1453.) 
whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  be  based  on  an  objective  and  analytical  approach  consisting 
of  a  review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an  assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  criteria  which 
include:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers 
and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 
the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  respondent;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 

  

31

likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  discipline  may 
adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  These 
factors  assist  a  board  of  education  in  determining  whether  a  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach,  and 
whether  the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and  overall  impact  on  his  or  her  students 
are  likely  to  meet  the  standards  of  the  board  of  education.  (Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.  3d  at 
229-  230.) 

Following  a  mandatory  application  of  the  Morrison  standard,  the  Commission 

on  Professional  Competence  has  broad  discretion  in  matters  of  teacher  discipline  and 
dismissal.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged 
conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as  measured  against  the 
Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman 
(1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220.) 

7, 

R  once  on  the  back  in  order  to  walk  or  pass  behind  her  in  the  laboratory 

Discussion—In  this  matter,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that,  from  July  1,  2010, 
through  August  18,  2010,  respondent  committed  several  inappropriate  acts  with  students  and 
with  respect  to  his  retention of  a  laptop  computer.  The  evidence  showed  respondent  touched 
student  a  once  on  the  waist  in  order  to  move  her  from  the  front  of  a  table,  touched 
student 
section  of  his  classroom,  touched  students  VJ  V  and  KA  several  times  on  their 
upper  back  and  shoulders  as  he  walked  by  or  around  them  in  his  classroom,  and  had  21 
pornographic  images  on  his  District-issued  laptop  computer  from  May  11,  2007. 
determine  whether  these  acts  constituted  unprofessional  conduct  or  demonstrate  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  the  Commission  must  measure  the  conduct  against  the  Morrison 
factors. 

To 

First,  respondent’s  touching  of  the  students  adversely  affected  them  as  they 

were  made  to  feel  uncomfortable  in  his  classroom.  The  degree  of  adversity  should  be  affixed 
as  moderate,  for,  while  they  complained  to  the  assistant  principal,  the  students  did  not  appear 
to  have  suffered  any  lingering  or  long  term  effects.  Except  for oa  C,  the  students  felt  that 
respondent  was  a  good  teacher,  enjoyed  his  class,  or  received  good  grades.  With  respect  to 
the  pornographic  images  on  the  laptop  computer,  the  retention  of  images  on  the  computer  did 
No  evidence  was  presented  that  respondent 
not  adversely  affect  students  or  other  teachers. 
viewed  or  accessed  the  images  or  displayed  the  images  to  students  or  school  staff.  Second, 
respondent’s  conduct  in  initiating  physical  contact  with  the  students  occurred  three  years  ago 
and  the  pornographic  images  on  the  laptop  computer  were  dated  more  than  six  years  ago. 
Third,  the  type  of  teaching  credential  held  by  respondent  had  no  relevance  to  this  analysis. 
Fourth,  extenuating  circumstances  existed  in  this  matter.  Respondent  moved  DIC  by  the 
waist  because  she  was  blocking  other  students  from  being  able  to  see  a  chart  or  information 
that  he  had  placed  on  a  table.  He  touched  LIBR  on  the  back  and  VV  and  KA 
on  the  upper  back  and  shoulders  so  that  he  could  walk  around  his  classroom  which  was 
crowded  due  to  the  number  of  students  and  their  backpacks.  On  the  other  hand,  respondent’s 
touching  of  Dfic  on  the  waist  and  LIBR  on  the  back,  which  was  below  their  upper 
back  and  shoulders,  constituted  aggravating  circumstances. 
With  respect  to  the  images  on 
his  computer,  the  forensic  scan  disclosed  that  the  images  were  dated  more  than  three  years 

32

  

prior  to  when  they  were  discovered  by  the  District.  That  the  evidence  did  not  show 
respondent  accessed  or  viewed  the  images  is  an  extenuating  factor.  No  evidence  was 
presented  of  any  publicity  of  respondent’s  conduct  or  his  removal  or  suspension  from 
teaching.  Fifth,  there  was  a  praiseworthy  aspect  to  respondent’s  conduct  in  that  he  touched 

R  on  the  back  so  he  could  walk  quickly  behind  her  in  a  small  space  and  avoid  or: 
prevent  her  from  backing  into  him.  Respondent  also  expressed  verbal  cues  whenever  he 
touched  a  student  on  the  upper  back  and  shoulders.  Respondent  did  not  have  or  exhibit  any 
illicit  or  sexual  interest  or  intent  when  he  touched  the  female  students  on  the  waist,  back,  and 
shoulders.  Contrary  to  what  was  alleged  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges, 
respondent  did  not  rub  his  genital  area  against  the  student  or  touch,  grab,  or  brush  up  against 
students  or  leer  at  them  in  an  illicit  or  improper  manner.  On  the  other  hand,  there  could  be 
no  praiseworthy  circumstance  for  having  pornographic  images  on  a  District-issued  computer. 
Sixth,  there  is  no  or  very  little  likelihood  that  respondent  would  repeat  his  conduct.  He  is 
now  well  aware  how  physical  contact  with  female  students  makes  them  feel  and  understands 
that  he  should  not  touch  students  even  if  he  uses  a  verbal  cue.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he 
accessed  or  viewed  inappropriate  images  on  his  laptop  computer  in  the  last  six  years  or 
would  be  inclined  to  do  so  in  the  future.  Seventh,  respondent’s  constitutional  rights  were  not 
raised  as  an  issue  in  his  disciplinary  proceeding  with  the  District  or  in  this  matter. 

Based  on  the  foregoing  review  and  required  analysis  of  respondent’s  conduct 

C  on  the  waist  in  order  to 

under  the  Morrison  factors,  the  Commission  determined  that  respondent  committed 
unprofessional  conduct  but  only  for  having  touched  student 
move  her  and  for  having  pornographic  images  on  his  District-issued  laptop  computer.  His 
touching  of  the  three  other  students  on  the  back,  upper  back,  and  shoulders  did  not  constitute 
unprofessional  conduct  because  respondent  made  the  physical  contact  only  so  that  he  could 
move  about  his  crowded  classroom,  and  not  due  to  any  illicit  purpose.  He  gave  verbal  cues 
whenever  he  touched  students  to  move  past  or  around  them.  Respondent’s  touching  the 
upper  back  and  shoulders  of  the  three  students  comported  with  the  experience  of  a  majority 
of  the  Commission.  Teachers  commonly  touch  or  pat  the  upper  back  and  shoulders  of 
students  to  gain  their  attention,  stop  them  from  talking  to  their  peers,  and  put  the  students 
back  on  task.  To  touch  students  on  the  upper  back  and  shoulders  so  that  a  teacher  can  move 
about  a  crowded  and  busy  classroom  without  bumping  into  them  and 
to  avoid  further  contact 
with  them  is  likewise  not  inappropriate  and  does  not  constitute  unprofessional  conduct. 
Respondent’s  touching  of DiIC’s  waist  to  move  her  appeared  to  have  been  the  result  of  a 
lapse  in  judgment  and  was  a  single  breach  of  proper  decorum  or  boundaries  but  did  not 
involve  inappropriate  or  sexual  intent.  His  retention  of  the  District-issued  laptop  computer 
containing  three-old-year  pornographic  images  was  unprofessional  for  the  reason  that  it 
violated  the  District’s  Code  of  Ethics  to  properly  use  school  equipment  and  avoid  the 
appearance  of  impropriety.  However,  while  unprofessional,  neither  the  single  touching  of 
the  student  on  the  waist  to  move  her  nor  the  retention  of  a  computer  with  pornographic 
images  demonstrated  that  respondent  has  a  defect  in  temperament  that  makes  him  evidently 
unfit  for  service.  Respondent  is  a  strict  but  fair  science  teacher,  who  received  satisfactory 
evaluations  of  his  performance  for  a  number  of  years  and  was  able  to  motivate  his  students  to 
learn  and  excel.  Respondent’s  commission  of  the  two  instances  of  unprofessional  conduct 

33

  

were  isolated  events  that  in  all  likelihood  will  not  be  repeated  in  the  future  and  do  not  require 
his  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  District. 

8 . 

WHEREFORE,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  makes  the 

following  Order: 

* 

Fe 

K  KK KR 

ORDER 

Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  OAH  Case  No.  2012050786,  filed  and  issued 
by  complainant  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  on  behalf  of  the  Board 
of  Education  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  and  against  respondent  David 
Arnold,  is  dismissed,  based  on  Conclusions  of  Law  1  —7  above,  jointly 
Respondent  David  Arnold is  retained  as  a  WHA  ed 

employeeof  the  Los 

and  for  all. 

Angeles  Unified  School  District.     

  

Dated:  Ws  /  3 

  
   

De l 
Karen 

G.  oe  Comm ayssion  Member 

y 

mee  1/24  [9018 

Dated: 

ms 
K  Le 

A 

. 

' 

= 

  

Vincent  Nafarrgte,  Commission  Member 
Administrative/Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

34 

 

  

