   

/ 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JOSE  CHAVARRIA, 

_  A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2012010365 

DECISION 

On  May  29,  30,  and  31,  2012,  and  June  1  and  8;  2012,  the  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The 
Commission  included  Administrative  Law  Judge  Michael  A.  Scarlett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  Davina  Keiser,  and  Enriqueta  Ramirez. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

decision  on  June  8,  2012.  The  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

L.  Carlos  Villegas  and  Martha  I.  Casillas,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Fagan,  Friedman  & 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 

Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented  Complainant,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources 
Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District).  Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law, 
Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  Respondent  Jose  Chavarria  (Respondent),  a 
permanent  employee  of  the  District,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

       

Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts(s)  of  Certificated  Employee  alleging  that  Respondent  had 
committed  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  inappropriate  treatment  of  a  colleague, 
and  poor  judgment  based  upon  allegations  that  Respondent  had  sexually  harassed  a 
coworker,  On  June  13,  2011,  the  District  also  provided  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of 
Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee,  suspending  Respondent  from  his  teaching  position  at 

On  January  24,  2012,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for 
the  District,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  in  her  official  capacity. 
The  Commission  proceeded  on  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

On  June  13,  2011,  the  District  provided  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

  

2. 

1. 

1

Hollenbeck  Middle  School  (Hollenbeck)  for.15  days.  On  December  14,  2011,  Respondent, 
through  his  attorney,  submitted  his  objection  to  the  District’s  Statement  of  Charges  and  the 
Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss,  and  requested  a  hearing  on  the  charges  alleged  by  the  District. 
The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  service. 

3, 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  between 

November  1,  2009,  and  December  31,  2009,  Respondent  committed  inappropriate  conduct 
towards  a  coworker,  Katherine  Czujko  (Czujko),  when  he  made  unweleomed  comments  of  a 
sexual  nature,  unwelcomed  sexual  advances,  unwelcomed  and  forced  touching  and  groping 
of  a  sexual  nature,  and  verbal  threats  that  collectively  constituted  sexual  harassment, 
unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  evident  unfitness 
for  service  in  violation  of  the  Education  Code,  sections  44932  and  44939. 

4, 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  this  hearing. 

6. 

5. 

Respondent  was  born  in  Mexico  and  immigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1989, 
when  he  was  about  14  years  old.  He  spoke  only  Spanish  when  he  arrived  in  this  country.  In 
2003  Respondent  enrolled  at  California  State  Polytechnic  University  -  Pomona  (Cal  Poly 
Pomona)  where  he  received  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Mathematics.  Respondent 
worked  as  a  teacher  assistant  at  Hollenbeck  from  approximately  2004  to  2005,  and  also 
served  as  a  student  teacher  at  Hollenbeck  while  receiving  his  teaching  credential  from  Cal 
Poly  Pomona  in  2008.  On  September  3,  2009,  Respondent  was  hired  as  a  probationary 
teacher  and  assigned  to  Hollenbeck  to  teach  Mathematics.  He  is  a  permanent  certificated 
employee  of  the  District.  Respondent  is  married  but  was  separated  from  his  wife  from  July 
2009  to  September  or  October  of  2010,  when  he  and  his  wife  reconciled.  They  remained 
married  as  of  the  date  of  hearing. 

Czujko  attended  the  University  of  California  San  Diego  where  she  received  a 
Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  2008  with  a  major  in  Political  Science  and  a  minor  in  Education, 
and  a  Masters  Degree  in  Education  in  2009.  In  September  2009,  Czujko  was  hired  by  the 
District  as  a  Science  teacher  at  Hollenbeck.  In  September  2009,  Czujko  and  her  then  fiancé, 
Emest  Raft,  moved  to  Los  Angeles  from  San  Diego,  California.  They  resided  together  in  an 
apartment  in  Altadena,  California  through  out  the  relevant  time  period  for  the  incidents 
alleged  in  the  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Czujko  had  dated  Raft  since 
she  was  16  or  17  years  old  while  in  high  school,  and  they  became  engaged  in  2006  when  she 
was  20  years  old.  On  September  30,  2011,  she  and  Raft  were  married.  Czujko  told  Raft 
about  her  friendship  with  Respondent  and  the  alleged  incidents  of  sexual  harassment 
committed  by  Respondent. 

    

meeting/open  house  in  September  2009.  At  Hollenbeck,  the  teachers  are  grouped  into  teams 
based  upon  the  students  that  are  attending  their  classes.  Students  have  the  same  English, 

Respondent  and  Czujko  met  for  the  first  time  at  a  Hollenbeck  parent 

Respondent  and  Czujko’s  Relationship  Background 

 

7. 

2 

Mathematics,  History,  and  Science  teachers  and  these  teachers  are  placed  into  “teams”  that 
meet  with  students’  parents  as  a  group.  Respondent  and  Czujko  taught  the  same  students  in 
their  Math  and  Science  classes,  respectively,  and  were  in  the  same  teacher  team. 
Consequently,  Respondent  and  Czujko  frequently  interacted  at  parent  meetings  to  discuss 
students’  progress  and  to  develop  plans  to  improve  students’  academic  performance.  As 
members  of  the  same  teacher  team,  they  also  frequently  attended  team  meetings  together. 
These  team  meetings  would  take  place  primarily  at  Hollenbeck  in  one  of  the  teacher’s 
classrooms  either  before  or  after  school  hours.  As  new  teachers,  they  frequently  attended  the 
same  trainings  and  conferences. 

8. 

Respondent  and  Czujko  worked  very  closely  as  team  members  during  the 
2009-2010  school  year.  They  worked  closely  together  as  team  members  to  perform  their 
duties.  Czujko  was  initially  struggling  to  adapt  to  the  Latino  culture  and  the  predominantly 
Spanish  speaking  student  population  at  Hollenbeck.  She  was  concerned  about  the  gang 
presence  on  the  Hollenbeck  campus  and  on  at  least  one  occasion  she  was  threatened  by  a 
student.  Respondent  offered  his  assistance  in  translating  discussions  at  parent/teacher 
meetings  and  provided  suggestions  on  how  to  effectively  control  her  classroom,  even 
offering  to  allow  Czujko  to  send  problem  students  to  his  classroom  when  they  became 
unruly.  Czujko  assisted  Respondent  in  preparing  lesson  plans  and  completing  health  plan 
enroliment  forms. 

9. 

By  all  accounts,  Respondent  and  Czujko  were  very  good  friends  from 
September  to  the  end  of  November  2009.  Czujko  admitted  that  she  and  Respondent 
socialized  off  campus  on  at  least  ten  occasions  between  September  and  November  2009,  for 
school  functions,  coffee,  walks,  and  dinner.  Often  they  would  discuss  their  students  and 
issues  that  both  were  confronting  as  first  year  teachers,  but  frequently  they  met  just  to 
socialize.  Respondent  and  Czujko  went  for  coffee  off  campus,  either  during  school  breaks  or 
after  school,  and  on  a  few  occasions  they  exercised  together,  walking  in  parks  near  the 
school.  On  some  of  these  occasions,  Respondent  would  stop  by  his  parents’  house,  where  he 
lived,  to  change  clothes  and  Czujko  would  accompany  him.  Respondent  usually  drove  when 
they  went  to  have  coffee  or  to  the  park. 

10. 

Towards  the  end  of  October  2009,  Czujko  and  Respondent  began  to  socialize 

more  frequently  off  campus.  On  October  22,  2009,  during  “back  to  school  night,” 
Respondent,  Czujko,  and  members  of  their  team  went  to  Respondent’s  sister’s  house  to  have 
dinner  during  a  break  between  parent  conferences.  In  late  October  2009,  Respondent  and 
Czujko  went  to  dinner  on  Olivera  Street  in  Los  Angeles  and  also  met  for  coffee  after 
Hollenbeck’s  Halloween  party.  On  November  7,  2009,  Respondent  and  Czujko  attended  a 
Beginning  Teacher’s  Support  Association  (BTSA)  meeting  together.  The  meeting  occurred 
on  a  Saturday  morning  and  Respondent  and  Czujko  met  at  Hollenbeck  and  drove  together  to 
the  BISA  meeting.  After  the  BTSA  meeting,  Respondent  and  Czujko  went  to  the  mall  in 
Montebello,  California  ahd  had  lunch. 

11. 

Between  September  and  November  2009,  Czujko  and  Respondent 

communicated  frequently  by  telephone  and  e-mails,  both  during  and  after  school  hours  and 
on  weekends.  As  their  friendship  became  closer,  Respondent  and  Czujko  began  to  have 

3 

  

 

discussions  regarding  personal  matters  in  their  lives  and  provided  each  other  with  emotional 
support.  Respondent  told  Czujko  about  problems  he  was  having  in  his  life,  including  that  he 
had  separated  from  his  wife  and  that  he  was  going  through a  stressful  period.  Czujko 
expressed  concern  and  sympathy  to  Respondent  regarding  his  personal  problems  and 
frequently  conveyed  to  him  how  important  their  friendship  was  and  that  she  enjoyed 
spending  time  with  him.  She  also  sent  him  an  e-mail  in  early  November  2009  stating  “Te 
gusto  mucho,  Jose”  with  the  symbol  of  a  heart  “<3”,  translated  to  mean  “J  care  about  you  a 
lot,  Jose.”  Czujko  sought  Respondent’s  advice  and  relied  on  him  for  assistance  in 
understanding  Spanish  and  the  Latin  culture.  In  November  2009,  their  e-mails  to  each  other 
began  to  take  on  a  more  intimate  tone,  although  Czujko  insisted  at  hearing  she  did  not 
perceive  the  e-mails  to  be  romantic  or  intimate  in  nature. 

12. 

|  Respondent  was  very  familiar  with  Hollenbeck  administration,  staff,  and 

personnel  prior  to  being  hired  as  a  teacher  in  September  2009.  He  was  a  very  popular 
teacher  and  well  regarded  at  Hollenbeck.  He  had  a  reputation  of  being  very  friendly  and 
outgoing.  However,  Respondent  was  also  considered  to  be  flirtatious,  chauvinistic,  and 
macho  by  female  teachers  and  staff. 

13. 

Respondent  often  referred  to  Czujko  as  “blondehead  weda  (white  girl).” 

Czujko  also  testified  that  Respondent  asked  her  on  occasion  “if  they  had  babies  what  color 
would  the  babies’  eyes  be?”  Respondent  denied  ever  making  this  comment  to  Czujko  but  the 
evidence  showed  that  he  made  a  similar  comment  to  another  school  teacher  at  Hollenbeck. 

14. 

Respondent  would  often  flirt  with  Kristine  Sheline,  a  female  Math  teacher  at 

Hollenbeck.  He  would  comment  on  her  appearance  and  at  one  point  told  her  that  she  looked 
like  a  model.  Respondent  told  Sheline,  who  was  married,  that  she  looked  nice  at  least  once 
per  week  and  also  asked  her  “When  am  I  going  to  find  a  girl  like  you?”  at  least  twice.  He 
told  Sheline  that  she  was  a  “Mexican  man’s  dream  girl”  and  asked  her  why  did  she  “have  to 
be  married?”  Respondent  asked  Sheline  if  she  thought  “they  could  make  blonde  babies,”  a 
comment  similar  to  one  made  to  Czujko.  Respondent  made  “strange  faces,”  “googly  eyes” 
and  flirted  with  Sheline,  and  on  one  occasion  mouthed  the  words  “I  want  you”  to  Sheline. 
As  Sheline  was  walking  down  the  hallway  at  school  one  day,  Respondent  remarked  “Wow, 
I’ve  never  seen  you  wear  those  pants  before.  They  look  really  nice  on  you.”  He  stopped  and 
stared  at  her  while  she  walked  down  the  hallway  and  into  her  classroom.  Sheline  recalled 
that  Respondent’s  comments  were  made  in  November  and  December  2009.  But  during  the 
second  semester,  in  the  Spring  of  2010,  Respondent  asked  Sheline  to  “hang  out”  with  him 
without  her  husband.  Sheline  thought  Respondent’s  comments  were  inappropriate  and  they 
made  her  feel  uncomfortable,  but  she  stated  Respondent  never  touched  or  grabbed  her  in  an 
inappropriate  manner.  She  did  not  feel  threatened  by  Respondent  because  she  “redirected” 
his  comments  and  changed  the  subject.  She  admitted  that  she  and  Respondent  joked 
sometimes  and  that  she  had  a  joking  personality.  Respondent  admitted  flirting  with  Sheline, 
but  testified  that  she  never  told  him  that  he  made  her  uncomfortable,  and  if  she  had,  he  would 
have  stopped. 

15.  -  Virginia  Elizabeth  Escambia,  who  worked  in  the  Hollenbeck  Title  One  office, 

stated  that  Respondent  told  her  that  she  was  beautiful  and  asked  her  for  her  telephone 

4

    

number,  which  she  declined  to  give  him.  She  stated  that  Respondent  gave  her  a  bracelet  and 
would  write  her  poems  in  2009,  which  made  her  feel  “awkward”  when  reading  them. 
Escambia  told  Respondent  several  times  that  she  had  a  boyfriend,  and  “didn’t  want  anything 
with  him,”  but  Respondent  asked  her  more  than  once  to  go  to  the  movies  or  to  have  ice 
cream.  He  always  asked  her  in  a  nice  way,  but  she  declined  his  overtures  each  time. 
Respondent  told  Escambia  that  Czujko  wanted  to  “hang  out  with  him”  and  that  Czujko  “gets 
jealous.” 

16. 

|  Maria  Ortiz,  a  teacher  at  Hollenbeck,  stated  that  Respondent  and  Czujko  were 

frequently  flirting  with  each  other  during  the  Fall  of  2009,  and  Respondent  told  her  that  he 
and  Czujko  were  dating.  She  noticed  that  their  relationship  changed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
second  semester  in  January  or  February  2010.  Respondent  told  her  that  Czujko  was  getting 
too  close  and  he  wanted  to  go  back  to  his  wife.  Ortiz  testified  that  Respondent  would  also 
frequently  tell  her  that  she  looked  good  or  pretty  and  told  her  that  she  was  a  very  nice  lady. 
Respondent  also  told  Ortiz  to  apply  for  the  teacher  position  at  Hollenbeck. 

17. 

In  2006,  while  working  as  a  teacher  assistant  at  Hollenbeck,  Respondent  lifted 
Maria  Gomez  up  from  the  floor  by  her  waist  and  twirled  her  around.  Gomez,  who  worked  in 
the  Title  One  office,  admonished  Respondent  and  told  him  that  his  conduct  was 
inappropriate.  Gomez  explained  to  Respondent  that  although  she  was  nice  and  friendly  with 
him,  he  should  not  confuse  the  relationship.  The  Title  One  coordinator  observed  this 
incident  and  spoke  to  Respondent  about  it.  Gomez  was  also  told  by  Respondent  that  he  and 
Czujko  were  dating  and  that  he  had  broken  the  relationship  off  because  he  did  not  want  to  get 
serious  with  Czujko, 

Causes  for  Dismissal 

18. 

The  District  alleges  that  Respondent  committed  several  acts  of  sexually 

harassing  conduct,  both  physical  and  verbal,  against  Czujko  from  November  1,  2009  through 
December  31,  2009.  The  incidents  have  been  arranged  below  in  four  separate  categories:  (1) 
the  San  Pedro  beach  incident;  (2)  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  incident;  (3)  the 
parent/teacher  conference  incident;  and  (4)  the  Hollenbeck  classroom  incidents  (both 
Respondent’s  and  Czukjo’s  classrooms).  The  sexual  harassing  conduct  is  alleged  to  have 
occurred  both  on  and  off  of  the  Hollenbeck  school  campus.  The  District  asserts  that  although 
Respondent  and  Czujko  started  their  relationship  as  colleagues  and  good  friends,  Respondent 
wanted  the  relationship  to  develop  into  an  intimate  and  romantic  relationship,  which  Czujko 
at  some  point  rebuffed.  According  to  the  District,  after  Czujko  rejected  Respondent’s 
advances,  his  conduct  towards  her  changed  and  he  became  forceful  in  his  insistence  that 
Czujko  begin  to  date  him  outside  of  their  professional  relationship  at  Hollenbeck. 

19. 

|  Respondent  and  Czujko  had  very  different  perspectives  of  the  nature  of  their 

relationship  starting  in  December  2009.  Respondent  testified  that  towards  the  end  of October 
and  into  November  2009,  he  and  Czujko’s  relationship  became  more  intimate  and  was  more 
of  a  romantic  affair.  Czujko  testified  that  she  continued  to  perceive  their  relationship  as  a 
good  friendship  until  Respondent  began  to  make  sexual  advances  in  late  November  2009 
which  she  rejected.  According  to  Czujko,  their  friendship  severed  towards  the  end  of 

5

    

   

November  2009  when  it  became  apparent  that  Respondent  wanted  a  more  intimate 
relationship,  not  just  a  friendship  and  cordial  professional  relationship. 

San  Pedro  Beach  Incident 

20. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  and  Czujko  spent  a  romantic  evening  on  San 
Pedro  beach  on  either  November  7  or  14,  2009.  He  recalls  agreeing  to  meet  Czujko  in 
Altadena  near  her  home  around  10:00  or  11:00  p.m.  to  have  coffee,  and  later  the  two  of  them 
went  to  San  Pedro  beach.  While  having  coffee,  Czujko  told  Respondent  that  she  missed  the 
beaches  in  San  Diego  and  Respondent  suggested  that  they  visit  a  beach  in  Los  Angeles  that 
would  remind  her  of  San  Diego.  According  to  Respondent,  they  went  to  San  Pedro  beach 
and  spent  an  intimate,  romantic  evening,  not  leaving  until  approximately  4:00  or  5:00  a.m.  in 
the  morning.  He  stated  that  they  held  hands  on  the  return  drive  home. 

21. 

Czujko  recalls  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  differently.  She  testified  that  they 
went  to  San  Pedro  beach  on  a  Saturday  towards  the  end  on  November  2009.  She  stated  that 
Respondent  picked  her  up  around  5:00  or  6:00  p.m.  to  go  for  coffee  in  Altadena.  Respondent 
offered  to  show  her  a  beach  in  Los  Angeles  that  would  remind  her  of  San  Diego  and  she 
agreed  to  accompany  him  to  the  beach.  However,  she  was  surprised  when  they  arrived  at  the 
beach  at  around  8:00  p.m.  and  it  was  closed  and  very  few  people  were  around.  Czujko  stated 
that  they  walked  onto  the  beach  but  she  became  uncomfortable  and  asked  Respondent  to  take 
her  home.  Respondent  then  threw  her  down  on  the  sand  in  a  playful  manner  and  began 
throwing  sand  at  her.  When  she  insisted  that  they  leave  the  beach,  Respondent  became  upset 
and  stated  that  he  wanted  to  date  Czujko  outside  of  their  school  relationship.  According  to 
Czujko,  she  then  told  Respondent  they  could  no  longer  spend  time  together  or  see  each  other 
outside  of  school.  Czujko  stated  that  Respondent  reluctantly  agreed  to  take  her  home  and 
that  they  only  spent  about  15  minutes  at  San  Pedro  beach.  While  driving  home,  Respondent 
tried  to  grab  her  thigh  and  hold  her  hand,  but  Czujko  rejected  his  advances.  According  to 
Czujko,  Respondent  became  upset  and  grabbed  her  jaw  and  turned  her  face  towards  him  and 
said  that  “if  he  wanted  to  spend  time  outside  of  school  with  me,  then  that  is  what  is  going  to 
happen  because  he  gets  what  he  wants.”  In  her  statement  to  the  District  during  the 
investigation,  Czujko  stated  that  Respondent  grabbed  her  jaw  and  twisted  her  head  towards 
him  and  said  in  an  extremely  angry  voice  “Look  Czujko,  when  I  want  something,  look  at  me, 
I  make  sure  that  I  get  it.”  Czujko  testified  that  she  returned  home  to  Altadena  around  9:00 
p.m.  that  evening.  Czujko  stated  that  she  was  shocked  and  upset  by  Respondent’s  behavior 
that  evening  and  that  she  no  longer  considered  Respondent a  friend  after  this  incident. 

22. 

Emmest  Raft  testified  that  Czujko  told  him  about  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident 

when  she  arrived  home  from  the  béach.  He  was  not  aware  she  had  gone  to  the  beach  with 
Respondent,  but  he  stated  that  Czujko  got  home  around  10:00  p.m.  and  although  he  did  not 
recall  the  date,  he  believed  it  was  on  a  weekend.  He  stated  that  she  was  upset  and  withdrawn 
when  she  came  home,  and  Czujko  told  him  Respondent  had  tried  to  kiss  her  and  was  making 
sexual  advances  while  they  were  on  the  beach.  Czujko  did  not  provide  more  specific  details 
to  Raft  about  Respondent’s  conduct  that  evening.  Raft  told  Czujko  to  stay  away  from 
Respondent  but  did  not  tell  her  to  report  the  incident  because  it  occurred  off  of  school 

grounds.   

  

    

Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  Incident 

23. 

On  December  1-3,  2009,  Respondent  and  Czujko  attended  the  Capturing  Kids’ 

Hearts  Training  Los  Angeles.  In  addition  to  Respondent  and  Czujko,  Hollenbeck  sent  five 
other  teachers  to  this  training,  Nana  Lopez,  Kristen  Sheline,  Pilar  Wright,  Emma  Veladore, 
and  Claudia  Andrade.  Czujko  drove  to  the  training  with  Respondent  on  the  first  day  even 
though  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  had  occurred  prior  to  this  event.  She  explained  that  she 
asked  Respondent  for  the  address  and  driving  directions  to  the  training  which  he  stated  he 
would  give  to  her.  On  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  training,  Respondent  told  Czujko  it 
would  be  difficult  to  explain  the  directions  and  that  she  should  just  ride  with  him.  Czujko 
believed  Maria  Ortiz  would  be  driving  with  Respondent  to  the  training  so  she  agreed  to  ride 
with  him.  However,  Ortiz  did  not  attend  the  training  and  Respondent  and  Czujko  drove 
alone  together  to  the  first  day  of  training.  No  incidents  occurred  either  on  the  drive  to,  or  at 
the  training  on  the  first  day. 

24. 

Czujko  drove  herself  to  the  second  day  of  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts 

Training.  She  stated  that  she  was  seated  at  a  round  table  along  with  Respondent  and  six  or 
seven  other  teachers.  Czujko  stated  Respondent  was  seated  next  to  her  when  he  began  to 
kick,  flick,  and  pinch  her  to  get  her  attention  during  the  training  session.  According  to 
Czujko,  Respondent  kicked  her  leg  under  the  table  two  or  three  times,  and  pinched  or  flicked 
her  hand  and/or  arm  on  the  table  two  or  three  times  as  well,  and  would  smile,  start  laughing, 
or  make  strange  faces  at  her.  At  some  point,  after  getting  Czujko’s  attention,  Respondent 
“mouthed”  the  words  “fuck  you”  and  “I  want  to  fuck  you,”  silently  without  others  at  the 
table  seeing.  Czujko  testified  that  she  felt  like  she  had  no  control  over  her  own  situation 
because  when  she  switched  seats  during  a  break,  Respondent  moved  her  materials  back  so 
they  were  right  next  to  where  he  was  seated.  Czujko  stated  she  “felt  frightened  and  anxious 
and  extremely  stressed”  during  the  training. 

25. 

 Czujko  testified  that  she  told  Kristen  Sheline  that  she  was  having  a  difficult 

time  at  the  training  because  Respondent  was  harassing  her.  According  to  Czujko,  when 
Sheline  asked  her  what  she  meant,  Czujko  told  Sheline  that  Respondent  was  “verbally  and 
physically  doing  things  that  were  sexually  harassing  and  making  me  uncomfortable.” 
Sheline  testified  that  at  some  point  Czujko  pulled  her  aside  at  the  training  mentioned  that 
Respondent  was  “bothering”  her  but  Czujko  did  not  give  her  any  details  about  Respondent’s 
conduct.  Sheline  switched  seats  with  Czujko  at  some  point  to  prevent  Respondent  from 
bothering  Czujko.  Sheline  testified  that  Czujko  seemed  “annoyed”  at  the  training  but  did  not 
seem  distressed  or  upset,  and  she  as  not  crying.  Sheline  did  not  know  Czujko  very  well  at 
the  time  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  occurred. 

26. 

Respondent  agreed  that  Czujko  drove  with  him  on  the  first  day  of  the 

Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training.  But  he  denied  that  he  kicked,  pinched,  or  flicked  Czujko 
on  the  second  day  of  the  training  and  denied  that  he  ever  “mouthed”  the  words  “fuck  you”  or 
“T  want  to  fuck  you”  to  Czujko  at  the  training. 

  

 

27. 

Respondent  testified  that  on  the  first  or  second  day  of  the  training,  Czujko 
received  a  telephone  call  from  a  substitute  teacher  covering  her  classroom.  The  substitute 
told  Czujko  that  a  student  in  her  classroom  was  misbehaving.  Respondent  stated  that  Czujko 
asked  him  to  call  the  student’s  parent  and  translate  for  her,  and  he  told  her  he  would  make 
the  call  later  that  day.  Respondent  stated  Czujko  became  angry  and  demanded  that  he  make 
the  call  immediately,  and  when  he  refused,  she  did  not  speak  to  him  anymore  during  the 
training.  However,  Respondent  stated  he  drove  Czujko  back  to  her  car  that  day  and  she 
refused  to  get  out  of  his  car  because  she  wanted  to  spend  time  with  him.  Respondent  stated 
he  told  her  he  could  not  spend  time  with  her  and  Czujko  became  angry  and  slammed  his  car 
door  when  she  got  out  of  the  car.  Respondent  stated  that  he  and  Czujko  did  not  speak  again 
at  the  training  after  his  incident. 

28. 

 Czujko  denied  that  a  substitute  teacher  called  her  at  the  training.  She  stated 
she  would  not  have  known  who  the  substitute  was  for  her  class  and  there  was  no  way  the 
substitute  would  have  had  her  cellular  telephone  number.  Czujko  testified  that  the  normal 
procedure  would  have  been  for  the  substitute  to  remove  the  student  from  the  classroom  by 
sending  him  or  her  to  the  dean,  a  different  classroom,  a  counselor,  or  calling  security  guards 
to  the  room.  Czujko  stated  she  would  learn  of  the  incident  only  when  she  returned  to  class 
and  a  note  detailing  the  incident  would  be  left  by  the  substitute  or  someone  in  administration. 
She  denied  that  this  incident  ever  occurred. 

29, 

Raft  testified  that  Czujko  told  him  about  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training 
incident.  He  advised  her  to  report  the  incident  to  school  administrators  but  that  Czujko  was 
afraid  because  she  believed  Respondent  had  a  good  working  relationship  with  school 
administrators.  Raft  stated  that  Czujko  told  him  that  she  was  afraid  of  being  fired  if  she 
reported  Respondent’s  conduct. 

Parent/Teacher  Conference  Incident 

30. 

Czujko  testified  that  during  the  first  two  or  three  weeks  of  December  2009, 

she,  Respondent,  Claudia  Andrade,  a  student,  and  the  student’s  parent  convened  a 
parent/teacher  conference  in  Andrade’s  classroom.  Andrade,  the  student,  and  the  student’s 
parent  were  seated  at  one  end  of  two  long  rectangular  tables  that  had  been  placed  together. 
Respondent  and  Czujko  were  seated  across  from  each  other  at  the  other  end  of  the  two  tables. 
Czujko  testified  that  while  Andrade  was  talking  to  the  student  and  parent  at  the  other  end  of 
the  table,  Respondent  was  pinching,  flicking,  and  kicking  her  and  “mouthing”  the  words  “I 
want  to  fuck  you,”  “fuck  you,”  and  “TJ  want  to  fuck  your  ass”  over  the  table.  Czujko  stated 
that  she  motioned  and  mouthed  to  Respondent  to  stop  and  she  pushed  her  chair  away  from 
the  table.  She  stated  that  she  did  not  want  to  call  attention  to  the  incident  and  that  she  did  not 
believe  Andrade,  the  student,  or  the  parent  observed  Respondent’s  conduct. 

31. 

Respondent  testified  that  this  incident  never  occurred. 

32. 

 Czujko  told  Raft  about  the  parent/teacher  conference  incident  and  he  advised 
her  to  report  Respondent  to  administrators  at  Hollenbeck.  Czujko  again  declined  to  report 
the  matter  to  the  District.  .Czujko  also  told  her  mother  and  two  friends,  Jeanette  Brown  and 

8 

  

 

Veronica  Forbes,  and  Hoisy  Tsao,  another  Science  teacher  at  Hollenback,  about  the  incident, 
but  none  of  these  persons  testified  at  hearing. 

Hollenbeck  Classroom  Incidents 

33. 

 Czujko  testified  that  during  the  second  or  third  week  of  December  2009,  there 

were  three  occasions  where  Respondent  physically  and  verbally  assaulted  her  in  both 
Respondent’s  and  her  own  classroom.  There  were  no  other  witnesses  to  any  of  these  events. 

(a)  Czujko  testified  that  the  first  classroom  incident  occurred  when  Respondent 
telephoned  her  to  come  to  his  classroom  during  the  third  period  to  call  a  parent 
regarding  one  of  their  students.  Because  third  period  was  a  free  “conference”  period 
for  both  Respondent  and  Czujko,  there  were  no  students  in  Respondent’s  classroom  at 
the  time.  Czujko  testified  that  she  arrived  at  Respondent’s  classroom  and  no  other 
team  members  were  there.  She  stated  Respondent  was  upset  because  she  would  not 
date  him  and  he  would  not  make  the  telephone  cail  to  the  parent  unless  Czujko  gave 
him  a  kiss.  According  to  Czujko,  when  she  refused  his  advances,  Respondent 
“pinned  me  against  the  blackboard  and  held  me  down  and  tried  to  kiss  me.”  Czujko 
stated  Respondent  grabbed  her  jaw,  pushed  her  against  the  blackboard  and  placed  his 
forearm  across  her  throat  choking  her.  According  to  Czujko,  she  tried  to  push 
Respondent  away  and  told  him  to  stop,  but  he  reached  his  hand  down  inside  her  shirt 
and  groped  her  breast.  Czujko  testified  that  she  pushed  Respondent  off  of  her  and 
told  him  “fuck  you.  Get  the  fuck  away  from  me.”  Czujko  began  to  run  out  of  the 
classroom  when  Respondent  grabbed  her  shoulders  and  tried  to  stop  her  and  she  told 
him  to  stop  and  get  off  of  her.  As  she  was  running  out  of  Respondent’s  classroom, 
Respondent  said  “I  want  to  fuck  your  ass.” 

(b)  The  second  classroom  incident  occurred  when  Respondent  came  into  her 
classroom  unannounced  on  another  occasion  during  third  period  and  was  very  angry 
with  her.  Czujko  testified  that  she  was  standing  near  a  panel  of  cabinets  that  are 
covered  by  chalkboards  and  Respondent  came  in  and  grabbed  her  jaw  and  forced  her 
up  against  the  cabinets  and  said  “Fuck  you.  You  think  you  can  get  away  with  not 
calling  me  when I tell  you  to.”  Czujko  stated  she  was  very  afraid  because  he  was  so 
angry.  According  to  Czujko,  Respondent  then  placed  one  hand  over  her  mouth  and 
his  forearm  across  her  throat,  and  pressed  her  up  against  chalkboards  and  said  “your 
mouth  is  saying  ‘no,’  but  your  body  is  saying  ‘yes.’  You  know  you  are  hot  and 
sexual  for  me.”  Czjuko  stated  she  pushed  Respondent  away,  ducked  underneath  him 
and  ran  out  of  her  classroom  into  Mr.  Hernandez’s  classroom  next  door.  She  did  not 
tell  Hernandez  about  this  incident  or  report  the  incident  to  administrators. 

(c)  Czujko  testified  that  on  two  other  separate  occasions  Respondent  “snuck  up” 
behind  her  in  her  classroom  during  the  third  period  and  lifted  her  dress  and  slapped 
and/or  pinched  her  on  her  buttocks  and  snapped  her  bra.  She  stated  that  she  was 
working  in  her  classroom  and  did  not  hear  Respondent  come  into  the  classroom  either 
time.  Respondent  told  Czujko  that  she  “wouldn’t  wear  a  dress  if  I  didn’t  want  him  to 
do  that.”  On  one  of  these  occasions,  Czujko  ran  out  of  the  classroom  to  the  women’s 

9

    

restroom  down  the  hallway,  but  it’s  unclear  in  the  record  how  she  diffused  or  escaped 
the  second  incident. 

(d)  Finally,  Czujko  testified  that  on  five  or  six  occasions  in  November  and  December 
2009,  Respondent  requested  her  to  perform  “professional  tasks”  for  him  and  she 
refused  to  assist  him.  According  to  Czujko,  Respondent  would  call  her  over  the 
telephone  and  say  “well,  fuck  you  then”  and  “you  are  fucking  lazy.”  Czujko  stated 
Respondent  would  repeatedly  call  her  on  the  classroom  telephone  while  students  were 
present  to  request  her  to  perform  tasks  for  him  and  when  she  refused  he  would  tell  her 
she  was  “fucking  lazy  then.  I  can’t  believe  you  won’t  fucking  help  me  with  that.” 

34. 

Respondent  categorically  denied  that  these  incidents  described  by  Czujko  took 

place  in  his  and  Czujko’s  classrooms. 

35. 

 Czujko  told  Raft,  her  mother,  and  two  of  her  friends  about  the  classroom 

incidents  but  she  did  not  report  the  incidents  to  Hollenbeck  administrators  or  the  police  at  the 
time  they  occurred.  Raft  encouraged  her  to  report  Respondent  but  she  was  reluctant  because 
of  her  fear  of  losing her  job  and  she  did  not  believe  anyone  would  believe  her. 

36. 

 Czujko  did  not  report  any  of  the  incidents  of  sexual  harassment  to  the  District 
until  November  2010.  Czujko  testified  that  she  was  reluctant  to  report  the  incidents  because 
Respondent  had  threatened  her  when  she  told  him  she  would  report  him  to  school  officials  if 
he  did  not  stop  harassing  her.  She  told  Raft  about  all  the  incidents  either  immediately  after 
the  incidents  occurred  or  shortly  thereafter.  Raft  stated  that  he  encouraged  Czujko  to  report 
the  incidents  to  Hollenbeck  administrators  but  she  was  afraid  of  losing  her  job  and  she  also 
feared  Respondent.  Raft  stated  he  did  not  report  the  incidents  himself  because  he  did  not  feel 
comfortable  going  over  Czujko’s  head  to  report  the  incidents  after  she  had  told  him  she  did 
not  want  to  pursue  that  course  of  action. 

37. 

 Czujko  felt  threatened  by  Respondent  because  of  several  threats  made  by 
Respondent  to  her.  She  stated  that  in  December  2009,  Respondent  told  her  that  he  had 
treated  another  female  teacher  assistant  similarly  to  how  he  was  treating  her  and  the  school 
never  found  out  or  did  anything  about  it.  Czujko  believed  that  because  he  had  not  been 
disciplined  by  school  administrators,  nothing  would  happen  if  she  complained  about 
Respondent’s  conduct.  She  testified  that  when  she  told  Respondent  she  would  report  him  if 
he  did  not  stop  harassing  her,  Respondent  threatened  to  hurt  her  pets,  and  on  a  few  occasions 
grabbed  her  and  choked  her,  and  told  her  she  would  be  sorry  if  she  reported  the  incidents  and 
that  he  would  use  his  “connections”  at  Hollenbeck  to  get  Czujko  fired. 

38. 

 Czujko  stated  that  Respondent  made  several  threats  to  her  in  December  2009 
in  an  attempt  to  either  force  her  to  date  him  or  to  dissuade  her  from  reporting  his  conduct  to 
school  administrators.  Respondent  called  himself  “power”  as  a  nickname  and  told  her  on 
one  occasion  “remember,  I  am  power,  and  I  know  where  you  live.”  Respondent  admitted 
that  his  nickname  was  “power”  and  that  he  had  gotten  the  name  as  a  child  because  he  was  a 
very  good  arm  wrestler.  Czujko  stated  that  Respondent  told  her  “you  won’t  like  my 
consequences  if  you  defy  commands.  If  you  tell  anyone  what  is  happening,  you  will  not  like 

10 

  

 

       

   

    
    

   

  

what  is  happening  to  you.  I  will  make  sure  that  you  are  not  in  good  favor  here  at 
Hollenbeck.”  Czujko  construed  these  comments  as  threats  and  they  made  her  reluctant  to 
report  Respondent  to  school  administration. 

39. 

Czujko  testified  that  in  December  2009,  Respondent  also  demanded  money 
from  her  to  stop  harassing  her.  Both  Raft  and  Czujko  testified  that  Respondent  had  called 
Czujko  and  demanded  money  to  leave  her  alone.  Czujko  considered  paying  Respondent  the 
money,  but  Rath  would  not  agree  because  of  the  financial  situation  he  and  Czujko  were  in  at 
the  time.  Although  telephone  communication  between  Respondent  and  Czujko  decreased 
significantly  in  December  2009,  there  were  several  telephone  calls  made  by  Czujko  to 
Respondent  during  the  second  and  third  weeks  of  December  2009.  Czujko  stated  that  the 
reason  for  the  telephone  calls  were  to  discuss  their  students  and  to  discuss  what  it  would  take 
for  Respondent  to  leave  her  alone,  including  paying  the  money  he  had  requested. 

40. 

Respondent  denied  making  any  threats  to  or  demanding  any  payment  from 
Czujko  for  any  purpose.  He  stated  Czujko  was  calling  him  in  December  2009  to  try  and 

41. 

|  Respondent  and  Czujko  had  very  little  social  contact,  if  any,  after  the  second 

semester  began  in  January  2010  and  during  the  remainder  of  the  2009-2010  school  year. 
Czujko  thought  everything  would  be  fine  going  forward  and  she  decided  to  return  to 
Hollenbeck  for  the  Fall  2010  semester.  Respondent  and  Czujko  again  shared  the  same 
students  and  were  on  the  same  team  for  the  2010  Fall  semester.  In  November  2010,  another 
incident  occurred  that  finally  made  Czujko  report  Respondent’s  conduct.  According  to 
Czujko,  one  Friday  during  an  after-school  program,  Respondent  brought  his  students  into  her 
classroom  to  play  with  a  video  gaming  system.  She  stated  that  while  Respondent’s  students 
were  playing  the  video  games,  Respondent  walked  over  to  her  and  held  up  deck  of  “Uno 
’  cards”  that  she  had  given  him  as a  gift.  She  said  Respondent  walked  by  her  and  whispered 
very  quietly  “Remember,  I’m  still  in  power.”  Czujko  ran  out  of  her  classroom  and  went 
home.  She  stated  she  was  terrified  and  felt  like  her  personal  space  had  been  invaded  and  she 
had  no  control  over  her  environment.  After  reflecting  over  the  weekend,  Czujko  decided  to 
report  Respondent’s  conduct  to  Ms.  Luz  Cortes,  Hollenbeck’s  Assistant  Principal. 
Respondent  filed  a  complaint  with  the  Los  Angeles  School  Police  Department.  The 
investigation  that  ensued  resulted  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  upon  which 
this  hearing  is  based. 

keep  their  relationship  going.      
  
  
  
   
    
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
     
   
   
  
  
misconduct  by  Respondent.  Consequently,  the  credibility  of  Respondent  and  Czujko  is 
     
imperative  in  determining  the  facts  in  this  case. 

     

and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v. 
Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 

    

It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness 

No  witnesses  other  than  Respondent  and  Czujko  observed  the  alleged 

   

Credibility  Determinations 

42. 

11 

  

  
  
      
  

   

   

testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence”,  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance,  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  1052.) 

The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which  is 

deemed  untrustworthy.  Disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the  contrary  of  that 
which  is  discarded.  “The  fact  that  a  jury  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a  witness  who 
testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in  support  of  the 
affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative  thereof  unless 
there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.”  (Hutchinson  v.  Contractors’ 
State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal. App.  2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v.  Central 
California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.  295,  304.)  Discrepancies  in  a  witness’s  testimony, 
or  between  that  witness’s  testimony  and  that  of  others  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the 
testimony  should  be  discredited.  (Wilson  v.  State  Personnel  Bd.  (1976)  58  Cal  App.3d  865, 
879.) 

Respondent's  Credibility 

43. 

 Respondent’s  testimony  and  prior  statements  were  inconsistent  and  untruthful 

to  an  alarming  degree.  There  are  serious  inconsistencies  in  Respondent’s  testimony 
regarding  the  timing  of  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  and  the  purported  romantic  and  intimate 
events  that  followed.  First,  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  did  not  occur  on  November  7  or  14, 
2009,  as  Respondent  asserts.'  Respondent  and  Czujko  attended  the  BTSA  meeting  together 
on  Saturday  November  7,  2009.  Several  e-mails  between  Respondent  and  Czujko 
established  that  the  BISA  meeting  occurred  on  November  7,  2009.  Czujko  also  credibly 
testified  that  she  and  Respondent  went  to  lunch  after  the  BTSA  meeting  and  she  introduced 
bank  statements  that  confirmed  she  incurred  credit  card  charges  at  the  Panda  Express  in  the 
Montebello  mall  on  November  7,  2009.  E-mails  exchanged  between  Respondent  and  Czujko 
on  November  7,  8,  and  9,  2009,  conspicuously  omitted  any  reference  to  meeting  for  coffee  or 
visiting  the  San  Pedro  beach  on  November  7,  2009.  E-mails  between  them  clearly  indicated 
that  they  were  still  very  good  friends  on  November  7,  2009.  E-mails  up  to  this  point 
typically  recounted  their  activities  of  prior  days,  but  their  e-mails  during  this  period  made  no 
mention  of  going  to  San  Pedro  beach.  The  evidence  also  established  that  Czujko  and  Raft 
were  in  Disneyland  in  Anaheim,  California  on  November  14,  2009.  Bank  statements  and 

*  Respondent  testified  at  his  deposition  that  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  occurred  on 

,   

Friday  November  6,  2009,  when  he  and  Czujko  met  after  school  for  coffee.  Thus, 
Respondent’s  testimony  regarding  this  incident  is  also  inconsistent  with  prior  deposition 

testimony. 

  

    

invoices  confirmed  hotel  charges  for  Czujko  in  Anaheim  on  November  14,  2009.  Further,  on 
December  8,  2010,  Respondent  told  police  officers  investigating  Czujko’s  sexual  harassment 
complaint  that  he  recalled  staying  all  night  on  a  beach  talking  with  Czujko  in  September 
2009,  not  November  7  or  14,  2009.  Thus,  Respondent  is  not  credible  on  his  recall  of  when 
the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  occurred. 

44. 

Respondent  was  also  not  credible  in  his  description  of  his  relationship  with 

Czujko  after  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident.  He  stated  that  they  remained  romantic  and 
intimate  after  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident.  According  to  Respondent,  they  subsequently 
went  to  the  Santa  Monica  pier  on  a  date,  and  on  at  least  three  other  occasions,  Czujko  visited 
his  home  and  they  were  intimate.  Czujko  admitted  that  she  had  visited  Respondent’s  house 
two  or  three  times,  but  denied  that  she  and  Respondent  were  ever  romantically  involved.  She 
stated  that  typically  she  and  Respondent  would  go  for  coffee  or  to  the  park  to  exercise  and 
Respondent  would  stop  by  his  house  briefly  to  change  clothes.  Respondent,  however, 
testified  that  on  three  occasions  Czujko  came  to  his  home  and  they  were  in  his  bedroom  with 
their  upper  body  clothing  removed  and  were  kissing  and  hugging.  To  support  this  assertion, 
Respondent  described a  tattoo  that  Czujko  had  on  her  side  that  he  could  not  have  been  aware 
unless  he  had  seen  Czujko’s  naked  upper  body.  He  described  the  tattoo  as  a  very  colorful 
flower,  possibly  roses,  with  bright  réd  or  orange  coloring.  He  could  not  recall  whether  the 
tattoo  was  on  Czujko’s  left  or  right  side,  but  recalled  that  it  covered  the  length  of  her  side 
from  her  waist  to  her  armpit. 

45. 

The  evidence  established  that  Czujko  did  in  fact  have  a  tattoo,  but  it  was 

drastically  different  in  appearance  from  that  which  Respondent  described  at  hearing.  The 
tattoo  was  without  color  and  resembled  a  black  ink  drawing  of  a  tree,  not  colorful  flowers. 
Respondents  testimony  that  the  tattoo  had  colorful  flowers  or  roses  was  clearly  untruthful, 
and  apparently  an  attempt  to  buttress  his  claim  that  their  relationship  was  intimate  and 
romantic.  Respondent  could  not  have  mistaken  Czujko’s  tattoo  for  a  colorful  depiction  of 
flowers  or  roses.  This  was  a  clear  attempt  to  embellish  the  nature  of  his  and  Czujko’s 
relationship.  Respondent's  credibility  on  this  point  was  further  eroded  when  he  testified  that 
he  and  Czujko  typically  spent  two  or  three  hours.together  in  the  bedroom  on  the  three 
occasions  she  visited  him  at  his  home.  However,  in  his  deposition,  Respondent  stated  that  on 
the  first  visit  to  his  home,  they  were  in  his  bedroom  almost  six  hours.  In  December  2010, 
Respondent  also  told  police  officers  that  he  never  touched  Czujko’s  breasts  or  buttucks,  and 
that  he  “never  touched”  Czujko  in  anyway.  Although  he  told  police  that  Czujko  had  gone  to 
his  house  three  times,  he  declined  to  tell  officers  that  he  and  Czujko  were  intimate  and. 
romantic,  kissing  and  hugging  in  his  bedroom  as  he  asserted  at  hearing.  Respondent’s 
testimony  was  thus  clearly  inconsistent  with  prior  statements  in  the  record. 

46. 

 Respondent’s  embellishment  of  the  romantic  and  intimate  nature  of  his 

relationship  with  Czujko,  and  his  inconsistent  statements  in  the  record,  weaken  his  credibility 
and  raises  doubts  about  the  veracity  of  his  version  of  the  alleged  incidents  of  sexual 
misconduct.  He  attempted  to  place  the  timing  of  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  in  early 
November  2009  to  undermine  Czukjo’s  testimony  that  their  friendship  ended  after  that 
incident.  The  evidence  established  that  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  occurred  towards  the 
end  of  November  2009,  and  that  Respondent  and  Czujko’s  relationship  did  in  fact 

13

    

significantly  change  after  this  incident.  ‘The  e-mails  and  telephone  calls  between  them  were 
reduced  significantly  and  their  relationship  apparently  became  strained  and  less  friendly. 
Respondent  testified  that  the  relationship  changed  in  December  2009  because  he  had  decided 
to  go  back  with  his  wife.  But  in  February  2010,  he  was  still  flirting  with  Kristine  Sheline  and 
asked  her  to  go  out  on  dates  with  him  without  her  husband.  This  does  not  reflect  the  conduct 
of  a  person  that  was  seeking  to  reunite  with  his  wife  in  December  2009,  and  again  points  to 
inconsistencies  in  Respondent’s  testimony. 

47. 

Finally,  Respondent’s  testimony  regarding  his  flirtatious  statements  and 

conduct  toward  Kristine  Sheline  was  inconsistent  with  statements  made  during  his 
deposition.  He  denied  making  certain  statements  to  Sheline  in  his  deposition,  which  were 
later  confirmed  at  hearing  by  Sheline. 

48. 

In  sum,  Respondent’s  testimony  was  often  untruthful,  inconsistent  and 

frequently  rebutted  by  more  credible  evidence  admitted  at  the  hearing. 

Czujko’s  Credibility 

49. 

 Czujko  characterized  the  relationship  between  her  and  Respondent  as  “very 
good  friends”  from  September  2009  until  the  end  of  November  2009.  Given  the  nature  of 
the  e-mail  communications  between  them  and  the  high  volume  of  telephone  calls  between 
them  through  the  end  of  November  2009,  it  is  clear  that  they  were  initially  very  good  friends. 
However,  it  is  also  apparent  that  the  relationship  was  progressing  towards  something  more 
than  a  good  friendship,  or  at  least  Respondent  perceived  it  to  be  more  than  just  a  friendship. 
Czujko  provided  emotional  support  of  a  very  personal  nature  to  Respondent  and  some  of  the 
e-mails  between  them  included  flirtatious  comments  by  both  of  them.  Czujko  admitted 
Respondent  was  very  helpful  in  assisting  her  in  navigating  the  cultural  barriers  that 
confronted  her  at  Hollenbeck,  and  that’s  why  she  initially  spent  so  much  time  with  him. 
There  was  significant  social  interaction  between  Respondent  and  Czujko  outside  of 
Hollenbeck  between  September  and  November  2009.  Unless  Czujko  was  extremely  naive, 
their  relationship  to  the  unknowing  eye  could  have  easily  been  perceived  as  one  of  more  than 
just  mere  friendship.  However,  even  if  the  relationship  had  been  progressing  towards  more 
than  a  mere  friendship,  when  Czujko  signaled  that  the  relationship  was  over  or  requested 
certain  boundaries  at  the  end  of  November  2009,  Respondent  should  have  respected  those 
boundaries  regardless  of  the  prior  nature  of  the  relationship. 

50. 

Czujko  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  and  her  relationship  changed 

significantly  after  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident.  Czujko  remembered  that  the  San  Pedro 
beach  incident  occurred  towards  the  end  of  November  2009,  and  the  evidence  supported  this 
time  period.  Czujko  stated  in  her  written  statement  to  the  District  that  Respondent 
apologized  for  his  conduct  after  the  San  Pedro  beach  incident  and  that  their  relationship 
returned  to  normal  for  “about  1-2  weeks.”  An  e-mail  between  them  on  Thanksgiving  Day 
November  26,  2009,  seems  to  confirm  that  Czujko  had  accepted  Respondent’s  apology  for 
the  beach  incident.  However,  within  the  next  week,  Respondent  again  began  to  make 
aggressive  sexual  advances  towards  Czujko  at  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  during 
the  first  week  of  December.  Respondent  admitted  that  their  relationship  changed  or  ceased 

14

    

in  December  2009,  although  he  claimed  the  relationship  ended  because  of  his  desire  not  to 
get  serious  and  to  return  to  his  wife. 

51. 

|  The  diminishing  e-mails  and  telephones  calls  between  Czujko  and  Respondent 
at  the  beginning  of  December  2009  supported  Czujko’s  claim  that  Respondent’s  conduct  had 
become  increasingly  more  sexually  aggressive  in  December  2009  and  that  their  relationship 
became  strained.  Although  the  record  showed  that  Czujko  made  several  calls  to  Respondent 
during  the  second  and  third  week  of  December  2009,  this  would  not  be  unusual  because  they 
remained  on  the  same  teacher  team.  Czujko  also  credibly  testified  that  some  of  her  calls  to 
Respondent  were  in  an  attempt  to  discuss  what  it  would  take  to  stop  the  harassment. 

52. 

Czujko’s  testimony  regarding  Respondent’s  conduct  was  consistent  with  prior 
statements  made  by  her  during  the  investigation  and  was  corroborated  by  Raft’s  testimony  at 
hearing.  Raft  credibly  testified  that  Czujko  told  him  about  the  incidents  involving 
Respondent  when  they  occurred  or  shortly  thereafter. 

53.. 

Kristine  Sheline  also  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  made  inappropriate 

comments  to  her  of  a  sexual  nature,  some  of  which  were  very  similar  to  comments  made  by 
Respondent  to  Czujko.  Although  Sheline  stated  that  Respondent  never  touched  her  in  a 
sexual  or  inappropriate  manner,  she  corroborated  Czujko’s  claims  that  Respondent  did  make 
inappropriate  comments  and  gestures  of  a  sexually  explicit  nature  while  at  Hollenbeck.  Of 
significance,  Sheline  corroborated  Czujko’s  claim  that  Respondent  was  bothering  her  during 
the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training.  Evidence  showed  that  Respondent  frequently  flirted 
with  other  female  teachers  and  staff  at  Hollenbeck  and  had  asked  them  out  on  dates.  This 
evidence  controverts  Respondent’s  testimony  that  he  never  made  any  sexual  advances 
towards  Czujko  or  any  other  teacher  while  he  worked  at  Hollenbeck. 

54, 

Finally,  although  Czujko  failed  to  report  Respondent’s  misconduct  until 

November  2010,  almost  one  year  after  the  incidents  occurred,  she  credibly  testified  that  she 
did  not  report  the  incidents  because  of  her  fear  of  not  being  believed  and  possibly  losing  her 
job.  She  was  a  new  teacher  at  Hollenbeck  and  Respondent  enjoyed  more  influence  due  to  his 
existing  relationship  with  the  administrators  at  Hollenbeck.  She  also  feared  retaliation  by 
Respondent,  a  fear  that  was  enhanced  by  Respondent’s  threats  against  her  in  December  2009. 
Victims  of  sexual  harassment  frequently  will  not  come  forward  or  delay  coming  forward 
with  allegations  against  the  harasser  for  fear  of  being  disbelieved  and/or  being  accused  of 
bringing  the  perpetrator’s  actions  upon  themselves.  That  it  took  Czujko  almost  one  year  to 
come  forward  with  her  allegations  is  not  dispositive  given  her  fear  of  Respondent  as  a  result 
of  the  verbal  and  physical  sexual  acts  committed  against  her  by  Respondent  and  his  threats  of 
retaliation  if  she  reported  the  incidents.  Moreover,  Respondent  claimed  at  hearing  that 
Czujko’s  allegations  and  complaint  of  harassment  arose  out  her  anger  for  his  decision  to  end 
their  relationship  and  go  back  to  his  wife.  However,  according  to  Respondent’s  own 
testimony  and  statements,  he  told  Czujko  in  December  2009  of  his  decision  to  end  the 
relationship.  If  Czujko’s  motive  was  based  upon  anger  because  Respondent  ended  the 
relationship  in  December  2009,  she  would  have  filed  her  complaint  in  December  2009,  not 
November  2010.  Czujko’s  statements  have  been  consistent  throughout  the  investigation  and 

15 

  

 

the  hearing  in  this  matter,  and  should  not  be  viewed  with  less  credibility  because  of  her  delay 
and  reluctance  to  come  forward  and  report  Respondent’s  harassment. 

55. 

On  this  evidence,  it  is  concluded  that  Czujko’s  testimony  was  more  credible 

than  Respondent’s  testimony.  Accordingly,  Czujko’s  testimony  regarding  Respondent’s 
sexual  advances,  verbal  and  physical  sexually  harassing  conduct,  and  threats  is  deemed  to  be 
credible,  and  sufficient  to  conclude  that  the  misconduct  occurred  as  alleged  in  the  District’s 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Hence,  the  Commission  finds  that  the  San  Pedro 
Beach  incident,  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  incident,  the  Parent/Teacher  Conference 
incident,  and  the  Hollenbeck  Classroom  incidents  as  described  by  Czujko  did  in  fact  occur. 

56.. 

The  District  has  several  policies  and  guidelines  which  certificated  employees 

57. 

On  September  1,  2009,  upon  being  hired  by  Hollenbeck,  Respondent  signed  an 

are  bound  to  follow.  The  District  has  a  Sexual  Harassment  Policy,  Bulletin  No.  1893.1  dated 
August  1,  2005,  that  prohibits:  (1)  verbal  unwelcome  conduct  such  as  the  use  if  suggestive, 
derogatory,  or  vulgar  comments;  the  use  of  sexual  innuendo  or  slurs,  making  unwanted 
sexual  advances,  invitations,  or  comments,  pestering  for  dates,  making  threats,  etc.;  (2)  visual 
unwelcome  conduct  such  as  display  of  sexually  suggestive  objects,  pictures,  posters,  written 
materials,  cartoons,  or  drawings,  and/or  the  use  of  obscene  gestures  or  leering;  (3)  physical 
unwelcome  conduct  such  as  unwanted  touching,  pinching,  kissing,  patting,  or  hugging;  the 
blocking  of  movement;  stalking;  assault,  and/or  physical  interference  with  work  or  study 
directed  at  an  individual  because  of  the  individual’s  sex,  sexual  orientation  or  gender;  and  (4) 
threats,  demands,  or  pressure  to  submit  to  sexual  requests  in  order  to  keep  a  job  or  academic 
standing  or  to  avoid  other  loss,  and/or  offers  of  benefits  in  return  for  sexual  favors.  The 
District  also  has  an  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  which  states  a  goal  of  creating  an  environment 
of  trust,  respect  and  nondiscrimination.  The  Ethics  Code  specifically  provides  “We  are 
committed  to  creating  an  environment  of  trust,  care  and  respect.  We  will  not  tolerate 
discriminatory  or  harassing  behavior  of  students  or  colleagues.” 

acknowledgement  of  his  receipt  of  the  policies  and  new  hire  information  for  the  District, 
including  receipt  of  the  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics. 
Respondent’s  conduct  described  in  the  San  Pedro  Beach  incident,  the  Parent/Teacher 
Conference  incident,  the  Capturing  Kids’  Hearts  Training  incident,  and  the  Hollenbeck 
Classroom  incidents,  specifically  violate  the  District’s  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics. 

  
Mit    

Hollenbeck  indicating  that  he  “meets”  all  the  criteria  for  teacher  evaluation  included  in  the 
performance  evaluation  for  that  evaluation  period,  which  included  the  2009-2010  school 
year. 

On  April  28,  2010,  Respondent  received  a  performance  evaluation  from 

Hf 

“it 

58. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction 

I. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944  and  Factual  Findings  |  through  5. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal-App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  Proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  requires  a  showing  that  it  is 
more  likely  than  not  to  be  true. 
In  other  words,  the  evidence  is  more  convincing  than  that 
which  is  offered  in  opposition.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009) 
171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.)  The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  proceeding. 

3. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 
hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.)  When  a  school  board  recommends 
dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against 
the  dismissal;  the  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing 
probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).)  The 
Commission’s  decision  is  deemed  to  be  the  final  decision  of  the  District’s  governing  board. 
(California  Teachers  Ass’n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  331.)  A 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  the  issues  before  it,  including  whether 
dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  (/bid.,  at  p.  343.) 

4. 

5. 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  do  not  set  forth 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  provides  in  pertinent  part  that 
no  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  by  a  school  district  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
following  causes,  including  for  (1)  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,  (4)  unsatisfactory 
performance,  (5)  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and/or,  (7)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her.” 

  
specified.  

specifically  which  of  the  District’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  six  alleged  bases 
for  dismissal  (that  is,  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance, 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  governing  board  of  the  school  district).  Rather,  the  District  alleges  that  all  six  charges 
“demonstrate  separately  and,  in  any  combination,”  (Accusation,  page  4,  line  24)  support  for 

?  All  further  statutory  references  shall  be  to  the  Education  code  unless  otherwise 

dismissal  (Accusation,  page  5,  lines  23-24).  The  Commission  has  examined  each  charge  to 
determine  whether  it  was  proven,  and  for  those  proven  has  determined,  as  set  forth  below, 
whether  such  charges  were  a  violation  of  one  or  more  of  the  six  statutory  bases  for  dismissal 
as  alleged. 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Immoral  Conduct 

6. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that.is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount  to 
unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.)  “Immoral  conduct,”  pursuant 
to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is 
hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct 
inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and 
dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v,  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through  22,  and  42  through  55  (San  Pedro 
Beach  Incident);  12  through  19,  23  through  29,  and  42  through  55  (Capturing  Kids’  Hearts 
Training  Incident),  12  through  19,  30  through  32,  and  42  through  55  (Parent/Teacher 
Conference  Incident),  and  12  through  19,  33  through  41,  and  42  through  55  (Hollenbeck 
Classroom  Incidents),  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  and  immoral  conduct.  As  set 
forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  6  and  7,  and  10  through  17  below,  Respondent’s  conduct  was 
directly  related  to  his  fitness  to  teach,  thereby  establishing  grounds  for  dismissal  pursuant  to 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

Evident  Unfitness  For  Service 

8. 

Under  section  44932,subdivision  (a)(5),  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  is  not 
synonymous  with  “unprofessional  conduct,”  and  the  term  means  clearly  not  fit  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies;  it  connotes  fixed  character 
trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet 
expectations  of  the  school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 
“Evident  unfitness”  includes 
in  its  definition  “unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 
inadequacies.”  To  terminate  the  teacher  on  grounds  of  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional 
conduct,  or  evident  unfitness  for  service,  it  must  also  be  established  that  the  conduct  renders 
the  teacher  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 
230.)  Thus  a  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on  criteria  set 
forth  in  Morrison.  In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist  to  dismiss  a  certificated 
employee  on  the  basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be 

18 

  

 

examined,  only  the  pertinent  ones.  (Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369, 
384.) 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through  22,  and  42  through  55  (San  Pedro 
Beach  Incident),  12  through  19,  23  through  29,  and  42  through  55  (Capturing  Kids’  Hearts 
Training  Incident),  12  through  19,  30  through  32,  and  42  through  55  (Parent/Teacher 
Conference  Incident),  and  12  through  19,  33  through  41,  and  42  through  55  (Hollenbeck 
Classroom  Incidents),  Respondent’s  conduct  evidenced  a  temperamental  defect  or 
inadequacy  which  renders  him  unfit  to  teach.  Respondent’s  repeated  verbal  and  physical 
unwelcomed  sexual  conduct  towards  Czujko  included  sexual  slurs,  vulgarities,  and 
obscenities  direct  toward  Czujko,  unwanted  physical  touching  and  kissing,  slapping  of  her 
buttucks,  lifting  of  her  dress,  grabbing  her  breast,  and  making  threats  and  demands  for  sexual 
relations.  These  acts  were  perpetrated  against  a  colleague  and  clearly  indicate  that  his 
temperament  is  unsuited  for  teaching.  In  addition,  significant  evidence  showed  that 
Respondent  had  made  sexual  advances,  although  not  as  egregious  as  the  conduct  directed  at 
Czujko,  towards  other  teachers  and  staff  at  Hollenbeck.  Respondent’s  misconduct  evidenced 
a  pattern  of  inappropriate  sexual  behavior  towards  his  colleagues,  conduct  which  primarily 
occurred  on  the  Hollenbeck  school  campus  during  school  hours.  As  set  forth  in  Legal 
Conclusions  8  and  9,  and  10  through  17  below,  Respondent’s  conduct  showed  his  unfitness 
to  teach,  thereby  establishing  grounds  for  dismissal  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 
(aj). 

Application  of Morrison  Factors 

10. 

Even  where  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident  unfitness  for 

service  is  established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional 
conduct,  or  evident  unfitness  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208  (Fontana),  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at 
1444-1445.)  Application  of  the  Morrison  standards  indicates  that  the  Commission  has  broad 
discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine 
whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but.to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as 
measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana,  supra,  45 
Cal.3d  at  220.) 

  
19  

In  Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  235,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that 
“an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his 
retention  in  the  profession  poses.a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students,  school 
employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  In  general,  the 
determination  of  fitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on  the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison,  to 
determine  whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for 
service.  In  the  Morrison  case,  the  Supreme  Court  of  California  held  that  the  determination 
whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  must  be  based  on  an  objective  and  analytical  approach.  The 
Morrison  court  identified  the  following  factors  to  be  considered  in  determining  whether  a 
teacher’s  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated; 

11. 

(3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  party  involved;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 
surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and 
(8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect 
upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (/d.  at  pp.  229-230.) 

12. 

The  Commission  members  considered  the  findings  in  their  entirety  and  the 
factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  in  assessing  Respondent’s  fitness  to  teach.  The  Commission 
members  unanimously  agreed  that  Respondent’s  conduct  in  its  entirety  reveals  that  he  has  a 
character  flaw  that  makes  him  unfit  to  teach  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivisions  (a)(1)  and  (a)(5). 

13. 

|  Respondent’s  conduct,  although  over  a  relatively  short  period  of  time, 
nonetheless  was  egregious,  persistent,  and  is  likely  to  recur  if  he  is  retained  to  teach. 
Respondent  disrespected  appropriate  boundaries  between  him  and  his  fellow  colleague, 
Czujko.  He  committed  multiple  instances  of  unwelcomed  sexual  conduct  toward  Czujko, 
including  sexual  advances,  physical  touchings,  verbal  vulgarities,  sexual  innuendos  and  slurs, 
obscene  gestures  and  leering,  and  threats  and  pressure  on  Czujko  to  submit  to  his  sexual 
requests.  The  likelihood  of  Respondent  repeating  this  conduct,  if  not  against  Czujko,  but 
also  another  teacher  or  colleague  is  high.  The  evidence  showed  that  Respondent  has  made 
sexual  advances  and  overtures  towards  other  teachers  and  staff,  and  although  these  sexual 
advances  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of  the  physical  and  verbal  harassment  to  which  he  subjected 
Czujko,  the  possibility  of  the  recurrence  of  Respondent’s  conduct  is  real.  He  is  clearly 
viewed  as  a  person  with a  flirtatious  and  strong  personality  and  is  unable  to  adhere  to  school 
policies  and  guidelines  regarding  sexual  harassment  and  unwilling  to  respect  the  appropriate 
boundaries  of  his  female  colleagues. 

14, 

    

Respondent’s  conduct  impaired  the  student/teacher  relationship  in  that  Czujko 

and  Respondent  worked  on  the  same  teacher  team,  had  the  same  students  and  frequently 
were  required  to  conduct  parent/teacher  conferences  together.  Czujko  relied  on  Respondent 
to  assist  her  with  Spanish  translations  during  conferences  for  many  of  her  students  and 
Respondent  made  her  submission  to  his  sexual  advances  a  condition  of  his  assisting  Czujko 
with  her  teaching  duties.  Respondent’s  conduct  frequently  occurred  during  the  school  day 
and/or  at  school  sanctioned  events.  He  disrupted  the  educational  process  because  Czujko 
was  forced  to  endure  the  sexually  harassing  conduct  while  attempting  to  perform  her  duties 
as  a  teacher  at  Hollenbeck. 

15.  |  There  were  also  aggravating  factors  attendant  to  Respondent’s  misconduct. 

His  conduct  was  particularly  physical  and  of  an  aggressive  nature,  On  more  than  one 
occasion,  he  groped  Czujko’s  breasts  and  slapped  her  buttucks,  physically  restrained  her 
either  by  her  cheek  or  throat,  and  used  threats  and  intimidation  to  dissuade  Czujko  from 
reporting  his  misconduct.  These  acts  frequently  occurred  either  in  Respondent’s  or  Czujko’s 
classrooms  and/or  at  other  school  related  functions  or  events.  This  physical  and  verbal 
sexual  harassment  on  the  Hollenbeck  school  campus  and  during  school  sanctioned  events 
constitutes  aggravating  factors  that  warrant  serious  consideration.  Respondent  also  lied

about  or  embellished  the  nature  of  his  relationship  with  Czujko  to  lead  investigators  to 
believe  that  he  and  Czujko’s  relationship  was  something  more  than  a  friendship  that  had 
become  sexual  in  nature. 

16. 

|  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  students,  teachers,  or  staff  were  aware  of 

Respondent’s  harassing  conduct  towards  Czujko,  although  it  was  general  knowledge  that 
Respondent  was  considered  flirtatious  and  unable  to  respect  appropriaté  boundaries  of 
female  staff  and  teachers.  There  was  also  no  apparent  motive  for  Respondent’s  sexually 
harassing  conduct;  other  than  his  belief  that  Czujko  was  sexually  attracted  to  him  because  of 
the  close  relationship  they  developed  during  the  first  three  months  of  the  2009  school  year. 
Finally,  although  the  incidents  of  harassment  against  Czujko  by  Respondent  curtailed 
significantly  in  January  2010,  and  thereafter,  and  Czujko  did  not  report  the  harassment  until 
November  2010,  the  egregious  nature  of  Respondent’s  conduct  and  his  apparent  inability  to 
respect  appropriate  boundaries  for  female  teachers  and  staff  at  Hollenbeck  raises  serious 
concerns  that  these  incidents  may  reoccur.  Czujko  delayed  reporting  the  incidents  of 
harassment  due  to  fear  and  intimidation  by  Respondent.  Another  incident  of  harassment  by 
Respondent  in  November  2010  triggered  Czujko’s  complaint  to  Hollenbeck  administration, 
indicating  that  Respondent  was  capable  of,  and  would  continue  his  harassing  conduct  if  not 
reported  and  addressed. 

17. 

The  application  of  the  Morrison  factors  support  the  conclusion  that 

Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  The  District  appropriately  concluded  that  Respondent  should 
be  dismissed.  Respondent’s  immediate  dismissal  was  necessary  to  protect  the  health  and 
safety  of  the  students,  faculty,  staff,  and  administrators  at  Hollenbeck. 

Persistent  Violation  of School  Rules 

18. 

Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San 

Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.)  Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  of 
school  rules  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.” 
(Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.  App.3d  77, 
81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are 
generally  not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.) 

19. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings:  12  through  22,  and  42  through  55  (San  Pedro 

Beach  Incident),  12  through  19,  23  through  29,  and  42  through  55  (Capturing  Kids’  Hearts 
Training  Incident),  12  through  19,  30  through  32,  and  42  through  55  (Parent/Teacher 
Conference  Incident),  and  12  through  19,  33  through  41,  and  42  through  55  (Hollenbeck 
Classroom  Incidents),  Respondent’s  conduct  constituted  verbal  and  physical  unwelcomed 
sexual  conduct  against  Czujko.  He  also  subjected  her  to  threats  and  demands  for  a  sexual 
relationship.  Respondent’s  conduct,  in  its  totality,  was  persistent  and  egregious,  and  thus 
constituted  a  violation  of  the  District’s  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics.  It  is  cause  for  discipline  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

2] 

  

 

Unsatisfactory  Performance  (Ed.  Code  44932(a)(4))  and  Willful  Refusal  to  Perform  Regular 
Assignments  Without  Reasonable  Cause  (Ed.  Code  section  44939). 

20. 

The  District  also  alleged  that  Respondent  was  subject  to  immediate  suspension 

and  dismissal  under  Section  44939  because  of  his  “willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 
assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of 
the  employing  school  district.”  However,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  this 
charge.  In  addition,  the  District  alleged  unsatisfactory  performance  by  Respondent  under 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4).  Again  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to 
establish  that  Respondent’s  performance  as  a  teacher  in  his  classroom  was  unsatisfactory.  In 
fact,  the  only  evidence  introduced  related  to  Respondent’s  performance  as  a  teacher  was  his 
performance  evaluation  from  April  28,  2010,-which  indicated  that  Respondent  met  all  of  the 
evaluation  criteria  included  in  the  performance  evaluation.  It  is  noted  however,  that  this 
evaluation  occurred  prior  to  the  November  2010  complaint  lodged  against  Respondent  by 
Katherine  Czujko  which  resulted  in  his  ultimate  dismissal  by  the  District. 

21. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct,  pursuant  to 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through  55, 
and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  7,  and  10  through  17. 

22. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through 
55,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  7,  and  10  through  17. 

23. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant 
to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through 
55,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5,  and  8  through  17. 

24. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 

obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  the  reasons  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  through  57,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  7,  and  10  through 
19, 

25. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  unsatisfactory  performance 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 
assignments  without  reasonable  cause  pursuant  to  section  44939,  by  reason  of  Factual 
Findings  12  through  58,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5,  and  20. 

26. 

Respondent  should  be  terminated  from  his  position  as  a  certificated  employee 
of  the  District.  In  reaching  these  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions,  the  determinations 
that  there  are  causes  to  dismiss  Respondent  and  that  Respondent  should  be  terminated  from 
employment  were  made  by  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission. 

22 

  

 

WHEREFORE,  IT  IS  HEREBY  ORDERED: 

ORDER 

Respondent  Jose  Chavarria  is  dismissed  from  his  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  Lrtaec  ?  4 

,  2012 

- 

fo. 

. 

, 

. 

DATED:  November: f  2012 

MIC 

A.  SCARLETT 
Administfative  Law  Judge, 

, 

DAVINA  LS 
Commission  Member 

Commission  Member 

patep:  /O-2bL 

  
   

  

