BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. 2012030007

JESUS RODRIGUEZ,

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional

Competence (Commission) at Los Angeles, California, on January 8, 9, 10, February 27, and
March 7, 2013. The Commission consists of the following members: Julie Gautreau,
teacher, Cypress School District; Joyce Abrams, teacher, retired; and David B. Rosenman,
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings.

The Los Angeles Unified School District (District) was represented by Bergman
Dacey Goldsmith, by Michele M. Goldsmith, Attorney-at-Law. Respondent Jesus Rodriguez
was present and was represented by Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, by Lawrence B.
Trygstad, Attorney-at-Law.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the parties submitted argument. On

March 7, 2013, the last day of hearing, Respondent objected to Exhibit 56, and made a
motion to strike the exhibit, sometime after it had been moved and received in evidence. The
late objection was sustained, and the motion to strike was granted, on the condition that
Respondent submit a transcript of the proceedings on March 7, 2013 to determine where
references had been made to Exhibit 56. The record was left open for Respondent to decide
whether to submit a transcript. On March 15, 2013, Respondent filed a Notice of Non-Filing
of Transcript, received in evidence as Exhibit Q. As Respondent has not met the condition
imposed to support his objection and motion, the rulings are vacated, the objection to Exhibit
56 is overruled, the motion to strike Exhibit 56 is denied, and Exhibit 56 is received in
evidence. The matter was submitted for decision as of March 15, 2013.

After due consideration of the entire record herein the Commission makes the

following factual findings, conclusions of law, and order:

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

4.

5.

The Accusation and Statement of Charges were brought by Vivian K. Ekchian

in her official capacity as Chief Human Resources Officer for the District.

Respondent Jesus Rodriguez (Respondent) has been employed by the District

for 24 years. He is a permanent certificated employee. Since approximately September 2005
he has been assigned to teach at Pacific Boulevard School, an elementary school.
Respondent’s most recent assignment was to teach fourth grade. At various times
Respondent has been the Grade Level Chairperson, a LEARN Council member, a UTLA
Chapter Chair and an LA – SI science implementation presenter.

3.

The Statement of Charges is dated February 3, 2012, and recommends the
dismissal of Respondent from the District for the following legal causes under Education
Code1 sections 44932 and 44939: (1) immoral conduct; (2) unprofessional conduct; and (3)
evident unfitness for service. (Exhibit 1.) On February 3, 2012, Ms. Ekchian, on behalf of
the Board of Education of the District, prepared a notice that the District intended to
immediately suspend Respondent without pay and dismiss him from his teaching position.
(Exhibit 2.) After being served with a copy of the Statement of Charges, Respondent
submitted a Demand for Hearing dated February 21, 2012. (Exhibit 3.) An Accusation was
signed by Ms. Ekchian and filed with the District on March 9, 2012. (Exhibit 6.) After
being served with a copy of the Accusation, Respondent submitted a Notice of Defense dated
March 13, 2012. (Exhibit 7.) The parties stipulated that the hearing could commence
beyond the statutory time limit. (Exhibit 9.)

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met by the parties and

jurisdiction exists for these proceedings.

The allegations in the Accusation relate to Respondent’s actions on September

1, 2010, of exposing himself in public and other actions in Elysian Park, as well as his
subsequent conviction for disturbing the peace, and suspension by the District. Factual
Findings 6-13 track the substantive allegations.

6.

On September 1, 2010, while in a public area near Park Row Drive, Los

Angeles, Respondent was observed by an undercover police officer walking towards the
officer touching his exposed penis.

7.

On September 1, 2010, while in a public area visible from Park Row Drive,

Respondent exposed his erect penis. (That this action was visible from Park Row Drive was
found by a Commission vote of two-to-one.)

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.

2

8.

On September 1, 2010, while in a public area visible from Park Row Drive,

Respondent masturbated his erect penis. (That this action was visible from Park Row Drive
was found by a Commission vote of two-to-one.)

9.

On September 1, 2010, while in a public area visible from Park Row Drive,

Respondent gestured to the undercover police officer while masturbating his exposed penis.
(That this action was visible from Park Row Drive was found by a Commission vote of two-
to-one.)

10.

Respondent pled “no contest” to a violation of Penal Code section 415 in

relation to the events of September 1, 2010.

11.

Respondent was convicted of a violation of Penal Code section 415 in relation

to the events of September 1, 2010.

12.

On March 9, 2011, the District issued to Respondent a Notice of
Unsatisfactory Acts referring to these same events and indicating that Respondent’s services
were unsatisfactory for the following reasons: (1) immoral conduct; (2) unprofessional
conduct; and (3) evident unfitness for service. (Exhibit 33.)

13.

On March 9, 2011, the District issued to Respondent a Notice of Suspension

referring to these same events and indicating that Respondent would be suspended for 15
days for the following reasons: (1) immoral conduct; (2) unprofessional conduct; and (3)
evident unfitness for service. (Exhibit 34.)

14.

On September 1, 2010, Respondent was arrested for violating Penal Code
section 647, subdivision (a), for soliciting another person or engaging in lewd conduct in
public. On October 26, 2010, as part of a plea bargain, the charges were amended and
Respondent pleaded nolo contendere to, and was convicted of a violation of Penal Code
section 415. Imposition of sentence was suspended and Respondent was placed on summary
probation for 24 months on terms and conditions.

15.

Penal Code section 415 is often referred to as “disturbing the peace.” Penal

Code section 415 is titled “Fighting; noise; offensive words,” and states:

“Any of the following persons shall be punished by imprisonment in the

county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, a fine of not more than four hundred dollars
($400), or both such imprisonment and fine:

“(1) Any person who unlawfully fights in a public place or challenges another

person in a public place to fight.

and unreasonable noise.

“(2) Any person who maliciously and willfully disturbs another person by loud

3

“(3) Any person who uses offensive words in a public place which are

inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction.”

16.

Based on his arrest for lewd conduct in violation of Penal Code section 647,

subdivision (a), the Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) issued a mandatory
suspension of Respondent’s teaching credential, effective October 5, 2010. Respondent was
then convicted under a different Penal Code section, section 415, which would not require
automatic suspension of his credential. Therefore, on December 8, 2010, the CTC notified
Respondent that it reinstated his teaching credential, retroactive to October 26, 2010.
(Exhibits 50 and P.)

17.

On January 15, 2013, the Superior Court granted Respondent’s petition for

relief under Penal Code section 1203.4 and the plea was set aside and vacated, a plea of not
guilty was entered, and the criminal complaint was dismissed. (Exhibit M.) This process is
often referred to as an expungement. Under Penal Code section 1203.4, Respondent is
required to disclose the conviction in response to any direct question in any application for
public office or for licensure by any state agency.

18.

According to Respondent, on the day of the incident, he had been setting up

his classroom. He changed his clothes at school and drove approximately six miles to
Elysian Park to run on some of the trails in preparation for running in a marathon several
months later. He ran for about one hour, using a clock/timer function on his cell phone, and
finished close to his starting point, about a 10 minute walk to his car, as a cool down period.
When he had the urge to urinate, he stepped off the side of the trail to a footpath, looking for
shrubbery, and exposed his penis through the leg opening of his running shorts for that
purpose. Respondent testified that, at that point, he was not visible from Park Row Drive,
due to the shrubbery and foliage by the hillside path. Respondent had seen a man near the
path who had removed his shirt and had also seen another man (the undercover officer)
walking on the path, and he was curious to see what would happen. Respondent is
homosexual. He passed the officer and turned back, to see the officer looking at him.
Respondent glanced down two or three times, to break eye contact, checking his cell phone
time function and, when he glanced up, the officer was looking at him. Respondent believed
the officer was a gay man who was expressing interest in him and flirting with him.
Respondent was attracted to him and interested to see if a social connection could be made.
Respondent testified he “tucked himself away” and approached the man to make social
contact, but not with intention to engage in a sex act in the park. Respondent explained that
he had condoms and a pack of lubricant in his pocket at the time of his arrest because they
were old and he had decided to remove them from his car to dispose of them. Respondent
testified that he said “I’m sorry” after he was arrested because he knew his intent to urinate
in public was “highly incorrect,” and because he was embarrassed about misreading the
situation. At the hearing, Respondent accepted responsibility for his conduct, was highly
embarrassed about it, and expressed that he let down his colleagues. He characterized it as a
“dumb mistake,” and added that it happened in seconds, and he felt trapped, humiliated, and
fearful.

4

19.

In many regards, the Commission did not find credible the foregoing version

of events as described by Respondent. Rather, the Commission found more credible the
testimony and written report of the undercover officer who described actions by Respondent
that support Factual Findings 6 through 9. Respondent had numerous opportunities to
discard the condoms and lubricant before the events occurred. Respondent had opportunities
to use restrooms or portable restrooms to urinate before the events occurred, or could have
used them later without exposing himself in public. Based on the evidentiary record, the
Commission concluded that Respondent was likely in that area of the park, known for
homosexual and other sexual activity, for the purpose of performing a lewd act or soliciting a
sexual act with another.

20.

Respondent denies that he had such purposes. He denies that his penis was

erect at any time during the events, or that he was masturbating his erect penis. There were
inconsistencies in Respondent’s testimony and between his testimony and other evidence,
such as his earlier arrest and the status of his credential, that also had a negative effect on his
credibility. For example, Respondent initially testified that his credential had never been
suspended or revoked. However, after he was made aware of the CTC’s letter of mandatory
suspension, and the subsequent reinstatement, he acknowledged that his credential had been
temporarily suspended. In another example, Respondent’s counsel represented that
Respondent had never been arrested before his arrest on September 1, 2010, and that this
explained his shock, surprise and reaction upon this, his “first” arrest.2 However, the
evidence revealed that Respondent did have a prior arrest for a bicycle equipment violation.
While at first blush this seems to be a minor memory failure, in subsequent testimony
Respondent explained that he was also accused of having outstanding warrants and it took
some effort on his part to appear in court and explain that the warrant related to another
person named Jesus Rodriguez. He first learned of the outstanding warrants in 1989, when
he spent most of the day in court with a Public Defender trying to sort things out. The arrest
for the bicycle equipment violation was in 1999, and he again was involved with the warrants
when he was stopped for a moving violation in 2009. These are memorable events, and the
representation by Respondent’s counsel that Respondent had never been arrested before
September 1, 2010, is attributable to Respondent and should be viewed with disbelief.
Respondent’s credibility is also negatively affected by his testimony and sworn answers to
interrogatories addressing the timing of the events of September 1, 2010, due to evidence that
his phone clock did not have the function for showing seconds, yet his answers indicated that
it did. Again, although the individual examples discussed herein may each seem to be minor,
the cumulative effect is to raise questions of Respondent’s credibility.3

2 Statements of counsel in arguments, pleadings or briefs may bind the client. (See,

Browne v. Superior Court (1940) 16 Cal.2d 593, 599; 1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed.)
Attorneys, § 235 et seq.) Briefs and arguments may constitute admissions by a party.
(Mangini v. Aerojet-General Corp. (1991), 230 Cal.App.3d 1125, 1152, citing and quoting
De Rose v. Carswell (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 1011, 1019, fn 3.)

3 On credibility of witnesses generally, see Conclusion of Law no. 4, below.

5

21.

As also discussed in the Conclusions of Law below, various factors must be

examined to determine if there is a sufficient nexus between Respondent’s acts and his
position as a teacher to support termination from that teaching position. These factors are:
(1) the likelihood that the conduct in question may have adversely affected students or fellow
teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time
of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the extenuating or
aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood of the recurrence
of the questioned conduct; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or
other teachers.

22.

The significant facts are that there was no evidence that any students were

aware of the events. At least two teachers were aware of some aspects of the events: Grace
Ollerenshaw, a friend and colleague who was also Respondent’s union representative during
the meeting when he was given the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and Notice of Suspension,
and David Basso, a friend and colleague of Respondent who had dinner with him wherein
some aspects of the events were discussed.

23.

Of significance was testimony from several District employees about the

adverse effects as they perceived them. Natividad Rozsa (Rozsa) is an Instructional Director
of the East Educational Service Center of the District responsible for supervising 15 schools,
including Pacific Boulevard School. It was her decision, with the input of others, that
Respondent should be suspended and dismissed from employment. One immediate effect of
the events is that the school year was about to start and it was immediately necessary to find
a replacement for Respondent. According to the school principal, Gabriel Duran (Duran), he
arranged for a substitute teacher, and subsequently needed two more substitutes that school
year due to Respondent’s continued absence from the classroom. Duran also communicated
with parents, who expressed concern about the changes in teachers. Rozsa spoke of the
numerous steps and people involved in the process of reaching the decision to suspend and
dismiss Respondent. Rosza believes that Respondent committed egregious conduct and
exercised poor judgment. She did not think it was appropriate for Respondent to be around
students and expressed concern for their safety. Rosza noted that, due to special education
programs at Pacific Boulevard School, there is a student population with disabilities, several
of whom have difficulty communicating, implying that she had a concern that students might
have difficulty reporting any improper acts by Respondent. She considered the acts as
immoral because people in the profession must be above board and students should be able
to trust their teachers, and because Respondent showed a lack of control in not restraining
himself while in public. Although Rosza was aware of information that the District had
handled some cases of teacher discipline in the past with a letter of reprimand, she was
responsible for determining the appropriate discipline in this case and decided the suspension
and dismissal were warranted.

6

24.

Rowena Lagrosa (Lagrosa) is the Operations Administrator of the East

Educational Service Center of the District overseeing 90 schools and approximately 159,000
students. (Lagrosa was the Superintendent of Local District 6 during the events in this
matter, before a recent reorganization of the District that restructured eight Local Districts
into four Educational Service Centers.) She echoed many of the concerns expressed by
Rozsa, particularly mentioning Respondent’s poor judgment, lack of self-control and
integrity, and a resulting risk to Respondent’s students. She commented on the risk that, if
Respondent masturbated in public, he might do so in the classroom. Lagrosa spoke of the
need for immediate action because Respondent’s arrest so closely preceded the beginning of
school for students, and the various actions taken by different District personnel. She
expressed concern for students’ safety and well-being, and was also concerned that the
events occurred during the day, there was a school in proximity to Elysian Park, and that
parents visiting schools and school personnel are often present in the days leading up to the
beginning of the students’ school year. Although Lagrosa was aware that Respondent
pleaded to the lesser charge of disturbing the peace, this did not change her opinion as the
original charges related to criminal and deviant behavior. When she later informed Duran of
the details of Respondent’s arrest, she characterized his reaction as shock and
disappointment. She stated Duran answered “no” to the question whether he would be
comfortable with his children in Respondent’s classroom. Lagrosa confirmed that each case
of discipline is decided on its own merits, with no guidelines for particular offenses. When
Respondent did not submit any reply or added information during the disciplinary process,
the District proceeded to its decision to suspend and dismiss him.

25.

Lagrosa addressed the District’s Employee Code of Ethics (Exhibit 16) and

concluded that Respondent did not meet the District’s expectations of its employees. Among
other things, the Code of Ethics states: “Everything we do has an impact in the classroom”
and “We are committed to creating an environment of trust, care and respect.” (Exhibit 16,
p. LAUSD 254, section A.) In her testimony she spoke specifically of these references. In
the opinion of Lagrosa, these responsibilities exist beyond a teacher’s presence in the
classroom. She considers Respondent’s actions to be a breach of the trust placed in teachers
in the professional learning community and she has lost trust in his ability to serve as a role
model for students, teachers, and in the community. Lagrosa was concerned that, if parents
and students became aware of Respondent’s acts, they would be distraught and the parents
would hold the administrators accountable and question why Respondent would be permitted
to have day-to-day contact with children. She was also concerned that Respondent had not
taken responsibility for his actions. Lagrosa acknowledged that some people who have made
a mistake might serve as a role model, but was concerned that the mistake might also be
repeated.

26.

Duran has been employed with the District for 21 years and has been the

principal at Pacific Boulevard School for six years, where he oversees 520 students in the
District’s largest elementary school that has a mixture of general education and special
education students. The 220 special education students range in age from three to 21. Many
have adult assistants. Many have disabilities whereby they cannot be left unattended.

7

27.

Duran first met Respondent at the school in 2006. In the week prior to the

beginning of school in September 2010, Duran had seen Respondent on campus during math
training. On September 1, Duran received a call from the police inquiring whether
Respondent was a teacher at the school or a flight risk. Duran learned Respondent had been
arrested for a lewd act, with few details. District personnel instructed Duran to obtain a
substitute for Respondent’s class for the first day of school. Duran did not know how long
Respondent would be out of the class, but was able to find a day-to-day substitute. As time
went on, he also needed to notify parents and other teachers of Respondent’s absence, which
also required modification of the grade level planning at the school. Duran needed a long
term substitute to cover for Respondent. All told, Duran needed three substitute teachers to
cover for Respondent for the school year and, for the next school year, a permanent
replacement was assigned. The use of the substitutes required additional actions,
coordination and communication by Duran.

28.

Duran authored a letter dated February 4, 2011 (Exhibit D) summarizing

Respondent’s experience and, in a very positive way, indicating that observations and
evaluations of Respondent were favorable. The letter depicts Respondent as a
knowledgeable teacher who is collaborative, open to suggestions, and skillful in
communicating and interacting with parents, students, colleagues and staff. Based on
positive personal and professional teaching qualities, Duran recommended that Respondent
be returned to his assignment as a fourth grade teacher.

29.

Duran explained that, when he wrote the letter, he was aware that Respondent
had been convicted of disturbing the peace, but was not aware of the underlying details of the
arrest. He thought Respondent had solicited a prostitute. Duran had been asked by Ignacio
Garcia in the District’s staff relations office to supply background information on
Respondent. Duran stated this usually means that some level of discipline was being
considered by the District. Duran testified that, if he knew then what he knows now about
the underlying acts, he would not have written the letter.

30.

Duran was directed by his superiors to serve Respondent with the Notice of

Unsatisfactory Act and a 15-day suspension, and he did so on March 9, 2011. It was only on
reading these notices that Duran learned of the nature of Respondent’s acts in the park.
Duran testified he was shocked and that this was contrary to the impression given by
Respondent by virtue of his teaching activities at the school. At the meeting, Respondent
made no comment after being given the notices. After the meeting, Duran spoke to Lagrosa,
who told him she had serious concerns that if Respondent returned to the campus it would
have a detrimental effect on the students and that the charges involved a lack of judgment.
Duran agreed. Duran testified that students’ parents are very active at the school and he
anticipated they would probably want their students removed from class if Respondent
returned. He wouldn’t speculate on the children’s reactions, but agreed it would be hard for
Respondent to serve as a good role model.

8

31.

As noted above (Factual Finding 22), Grace Ollerenshaw (Ollerenshaw ) was
the union representative who accompanied Respondent to the meeting with Duran on March
9, 2011. Ollerenshaw is also a fourth grade teacher at Pacific Boulevard School and
considers Respondent to be friend. She described Respondent as an “amazing” teacher who
is very passionate about his job. She and other teachers were first told only that Respondent
had been arrested. Ollerenshaw first learned of Respondent’s acts when she read the Notice
of Unsatisfactory Acts. Respondent told her he was urinating at the park. Later, when
meeting with other teachers, Ollerenshaw told them of the Respondent’s acts. Later, in
preparing to testify at the hearing, she read the police report for the first time. After, she
stated it would be hard to believe that Respondent was urinating. Her opinion of Respondent
had changed slightly. If he was returned to the classroom, she would be worried about
judgments he might make, as the incident depicted his lapse of judgment.

32.

Respondent holds a Multiple Subject teaching credential with an authorization
in Math, and holds a BCLAD certificate (Bilingual, Crosscultural, Language and Academic
Development). For the school year to begin in September 2010, Respondent had been
assigned, for the first time, to teach the gifted and talented class for fourth grade. There were
four fourth grade classes and, over the prior several years, Respondent had been active in
advocating and advancing team teaching and expansion of the science curriculum.
Respondent was considered “highly qualified” by the District and, under the union contract,
formal evaluation of his performance, which would usually be at intervals of every one, two
or three years, was extended to longer intervals.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION

1.

2.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to

Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 4.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter because it is seeking to

dismiss Respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The standard of proof is
preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

3.

The Commission has examined each alleged instance of conduct to determine
whether it was proven, and for those which were proven, the Commission has determined, as
set forth below, whether such charges were a violation of one or more of the statutory bases
for dismissal as alleged.

4.

On credibility generally: Evidence Code section 780 relates to credibility of a
witness and states, in pertinent part, that a court “may consider in determining the credibility
of a witness any matter that has any tendency in reason to prove or disprove the truthfulness
of his testimony at the hearing, including but not limited to any of the following: . . . (b) The
character of his testimony; . . . (f) The existence or nonexistence of a bias, interest, or other
motive; . . . (h) A statement made by him that is inconsistent with any part of his testimony at

9

the hearing; (i) The existence or nonexistence of any fact testified to by him. . . .”

The trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject

another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (Stevens v. Parke Davis &
Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a
witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of
testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth
out of selected material.” (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.
App.2d 762, 767.) Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a witness, even an
expert, although not contradicted. (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon (1971) 3 Cal.3d 875,
890.) And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence,”
including a single expert witness. (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance (1986) 189
Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) Discrepancies in a witness’s testimony, or between that witness’s
testimony and that of others does not necessarily mean that the testimony should be
discredited. (Wilson v. State Personnel Bd. (1976) 58 Cal App.3d 865, 879.) Positive
testimony of a witness may be contradicted by the inherent probabilities as to its accuracy
contained in that same witness’s own statement of the transaction. (Day v. Rosenthal (1985)
170 Cal.App.3d 1125).

5.

The statutory bases for dismissal alleged in the Accusation and Statement of

Charges are: (a) immoral conduct, pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939;
evident unfitness for service, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); and
unprofessional conduct, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).

6.

“Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932,

subdivision (a)(5), means clearly not fit or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of a
temperamental defect or inadequacy. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission
on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445 (Woodland).) Evident
unfitness for services requires that unfitness be attributable to a defect in temperament which
“connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Id. at 1444.)

7.

The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes

unfitness to teach, in determining what constitutes immoral conduct, and in deciding whether
the teacher should be sanctioned. (California Teachers Association v. State of California
(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.)

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and

44939, has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is sometimes used as
synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (Board of Education of the
San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811
(Weiland).) Immoral conduct can be construed according to common usage. “The term
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general

10

public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency,
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Palo Verde Unified
School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972 (Hensey).)

8.

The factual scenarios in Weiland and Hensey are helpful in understanding the
types of actions that can constitute “immoral conduct” and “evident unfitness for service” as
bases to dismiss a teacher. In Hensey, dismissal was justified for a junior college teacher
who used vulgar language and engaged in questionable acts. It was not necessarily each
individual act or comment but, rather the totality. As summarized from the published
opinion, he tore out a loudspeaker in his classroom. He referred to the school’s bell system
as sounding like a worn-out phonograph in a whorehouse and made numerous references
throughout the year to whores and whorehouses. He addressed Mexican-American students
in the presence of the rest of the class and warned them of super-syphilis in a town on the
Mexican border. He stated to his philosophy class that the district superintendent spent too
much time licking up the board and in connection with the statement simulated licking the
classroom wall with his tongue in an up and down manner. Although he explained that he
meant “face licking,” the expression means in common parlance licking an entirely different
portion of the anatomy and was obviously so intended. He also referred to the school walls
looking as though someone had peed on them and then smeared them with baby crap. The
court stated “while it could be assumed that both male and female students of that age were
familiar with the words used, a classroom, even on a junior college level, is not the time or
the place for the use of such language.” (Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at 975.) The different
actions and statements were described as creating a dangerous situation (loudspeaker),
bearing on his fitness to teach (whorehouse), humiliating and embarrassing to the Mexican-
American students and showing a lack of restraint and a tendency to vulgarity and bad taste
(super-syphilis), and disruptive conduct, an impairment of the teaching process, and not an
example of the responsible dissent which should be fostered in the classroom (licking). “All
of the incidents taken in the aggregate serve as a substantial basis for the trial court’s
determination that the charges of ‘immoral conduct’ and ‘evident unfitness for service’ were
true and constituted cause for dismissal.” (Ibid.)

9.

In Weiland, a teacher of an evening class was aware that when the number of

students in a class went down to 15 participants on three successive evenings, the class
would be automatically dropped off the roll and the teacher would lose her position.
Appellant testified that she falsified records to the extent, at least, of adding the names of
three persons who were absent. Although the teacher argued that other teachers did the same
and she did so “to expose the situation,” nevertheless her conduct was not justified and the
evidence was “that the purpose of the falsification was to secure appellant's continued
employment. The evidence was clearly sufficient to support the findings” of immoral
conduct. (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at 811.)

11

10.

A teacher’s anonymous internet ad for sex partners, including a picture of his

face and other body parts, constituted evident unfitness for service and immoral conduct,
over the teacher’s objection that it was personal conduct undertaken on personal time. The
court ruled the activity impaired the teacher’s ability to do his job by damaging his reputation
among colleagues. (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Comm’n on Prof. Competence (2011)
194 Cal.App.4th 1454.)

11.

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(l), may be
defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct
that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. (Board of Education v.
Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)

12.

Even where immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service are established, it

must also be established that such immoral conduct or evident unfitness renders the
Respondent unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-
230 (Morrison); Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208
(Fontana); Woodland, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at 1444-1445.)

In general, the determination of fitness requires an analysis based on the

criteria set forth in Morrison, to determine whether, as a threshold matter, the questioned
conduct indicates unfitness for service. In the Morrison case, the Supreme Court of
California held that the determination whether a person is fit to teach must be based on an
objective and analytical approach. Under the facts of that case, discussed in more detail
below, the Court reviewed the teacher’s conduct and determined that a school board may
consider such specific criteria as: (1) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected
students or fellow teachers and the degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness
in time of the conduct; (3) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the
existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the
conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct;
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent that discipline
may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the teacher.

Analysis of the Morrison factors indicates that the Commission has broad

discretion in disciplinary matters. The role of the Commission is not merely to determine
whether the charged conduct in fact occurred, but to decide whether the conduct, as
measured against the Morrison criteria, demonstrates unfitness to teach. (Fontana, supra, 45
Cal.3d at 220.)

13.

In Morrison, the Supreme Court faced a scenario where the state Board of

Education had revoked a teacher’s life diplomas for immoral and unprofessional conduct and
acts involving moral turpitude. (In the context of present day licensing, this is the equivalent
of a revocation of a teaching credential by the Commission on Teaching Credentials.) Marc
Morrison was licensed to teach in public secondary schools. In April 1963, while away from
school, he had a physical but non-criminal homosexual relationship with another teacher,
who reported it one year later to the school district. The Supreme Court determined that the

12

legal grounds for revocation were not unconstitutionally vague as long as the conduct
indicated unfitness to teach. In examining and interpreting the law concerning these grounds
for revocation, the Court determined that the licensing agency “may consider such matters
as” the factors now known as the Morrison factors. (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at 229.) In
applying the facts before it to those factors, the Supreme Court concluded that the record
contained no evidence that Morrison’s conduct indicated his unfitness to teach.

14.

Applying the facts of this case to the Morrison factors leads to the conclusion

that Respondent is unfit to teach.

(a) Morrison Factor: The likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or

fellow teachers and the degree of such adversity. Respondent’s conduct had an adverse
effect on other teachers, as established by Ollerenshaw. Although there was no evidence of
an actual adverse effect on students, several witnesses established that Respondent could not
function as an effective role model for students. In Board of Education v. Swan, supra, 41
Cal.2d at 552, the Court stated: “A teacher, and more particularly a principal, in the public
school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words
and actions are likely to be followed by the children coming under her care and protection.
(Citation.)” In Goldsmith v. Board of Education (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 168, the Court
noted: “[T]he teacher is entrusted with the custody of children and their high preparation for
useful life. His habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety
of his unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children
and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands, are of
major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention. . . .”

To be sure, teachers are not required or expected to act with perfection and rectitude
in every aspect of their personal and professional lives. Nevertheless, as noted in the Code of
Ethics: “Everything we do has an impact in the classroom.” (See Factual Finding 25 and the
Code of Ethics, Exhibit 16, p. LAUSD 254, section A.)

There was evidence that parents would be adversely affected, and it was clear that
District administrators were as well. Although Morrison analyzed the adverse effects on
students and fellow teachers only, there is no basis in logic to limit the analysis strictly to
these two categories. Evidence in this matter of the adverse effects on parents and
administrators can, and should, be considered as they are also requisite parts of the school
community within which teachers act.

(b) Morrison Factor: The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The
Morrison court applied this factor by concluding it was very attenuated when the complaint
of Morrison’s activity was made one year after the fact, Morrison resigned the next month,
19 months later the State Board held its hearing, the revocation was three years after the fact,
and by the time of the Supreme Court decision, the “incident had receded six years into the
past.” (Id. at p. 237.) Here, the District removed Respondent from the classroom the day
after the incident occurred and served the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts six months later
(four and one-half months after Respondent’s conviction). The formal charges were served

13

17 months after the incident and this hearing concluded 13 months after the charges were
served, a total of 30 months after the incident.

(c) Morrison Factor: The type of teaching certificate held by the teacher. Respondent

holds a Multiple Subject teaching credential, which entitles him to teach in classes typically
found at the elementary school level.

(d) Morrison Factor: The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances and

publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct. Extenuating circumstances are Respondent’s
desire to make a social connection. Aggravating circumstances are that he did so in a highly
inappropriate manner by exposing his erect penis, and masturbating, in a public park,
exhibiting an extreme lack of both good judgment and situational awareness. Although there
was no evidence of publicity in the nature of media coverage, there was evidence that some
teachers were aware of some of the details of the arrest and conviction, and many teachers
were certainly aware that Respondent was not present at school. Also, numerous District
administrators were aware of Respondent’s conduct.

(e) Morrison Factor: The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives
resulting in the conduct. Respondent’s desire to make a social connection is praiseworthy.
Blameworthy circumstances are that he did so in a highly inappropriate manner by exposing
his erect penis, and masturbating for self-gratification, in a public park, exhibiting an extreme
lack of both good judgment and situational awareness.

(f) Morrison Factor: The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. Many

District witnesses testified to their concerns that Respondent, having exercised such poor
judgment under the circumstances surrounding the incident in the park, could not be trusted
in a classroom to exercise the judgment necessary under his responsibility to properly
interact with his young students. To be sure, one of the motives underlying Respondent’s
actions was the desire to make a social connection to an adult male, and there was no
evidence to support a conclusion that Respondent has any other interest in his students other
than to see them succeed in their education.

(g) Morrison Factor: The extent that discipline may adversely impact or have a

chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the teacher. Respondent has the constitutional
right to associate with whomever he pleases and a right to privacy. Any termination of
Respondent from employment with the District will not adversely affect these or other
constitutional rights he may have.

15.

Respondent’s contention that the District did not establish that he was unfit to

teach is rejected. The Commission has considered the following two cases cited by
Respondent on this issue.

(a) Newland v. Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges (1977) 19

Cal.3d 705 (Newland) and Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691 (Jack M.).
These cases are cited by Respondent in his trial brief (Exhibit J) to support the proposition

14

that teachers charged with sexual offenses or lewd conduct were not unfit to teach. In
Newland, an applicant for a Community College credential had been convicted of lewd
conduct. The Supreme Court determined that the Board had improperly relied on a statute
barring issuance of a credential to anyone convicted of lewd conduct, with no hearing
involved, because that statute had been amended to remove the mandatory bar. The case was
remanded for the Board to decide whether to issue the credential or provide a fitness hearing.

(b) In Jack M., an elementary school teacher was arrested for lewd conduct under

Penal Code section 647, subdivision (a), after allegedly soliciting a homosexual act in a
public restroom. No criminal charges were brought. The teacher denied the acts occurred,
but the trial court upheld the arresting officer’s version of events. The school district
presented evidence by two school principals, testifying as experts, that the teacher did not
have the qualifications to teach, and was unfit to teach. To counter this evidence, the teacher
offered the expert testimony of a psychiatrist who was experienced in examining persons
who had been convicted of sexual offenses and who examined the teacher and reviewed his
history. The psychiatrist concluded, among other things, that the teacher was not a
homosexual and had engaged in an isolated act precipitated by unusual pressure and stress.
Assuming the act had occurred, it was his expert opinions that there was no danger of
recurrence, no danger to pupils or associates of the teacher, and because there was no
evidence of a pattern, the conduct attributed to the teacher would not be consistent with acts
endangering children or associates. (Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d at 696.) On these facts,
among others, the Supreme Court determined that there was sufficient evidence to support
the trial court’s resolution of this conflicting evidence in favor of the teacher. It rejected the
argument that the arrest established, per se, that the teacher was unfit to teach. Rather, a
hearing was necessary to gather the relevant evidence relating to fitness to teach.

(c) The effect of Newland and Jack M. on the present proceeding is that a hearing
was provided for the District and Respondent to present the relevant evidence relating to
fitness to teach. Having heard and considered that evidence, the Commission has concluded
that the District established that Respondent is not fit to teach.

16.

Another significant aspect of the evidence was that Respondent carefully

restricted his taking of responsibility by limiting it to his bad judgment in exposing his penis
for purposes of urinating. As noted above, the Commission finds Respondent’s version of
events is not supported by the evidence. Respondent made no expression of responsibility or
remorse for the acts actually found by the Commission to have taken place. Respondent’s
version of events was considered to be rationalization and justification. This was also
considered as supporting the conclusion that Respondent is not fit to teach.

17.

The acts which were proven demonstrate that Respondent is not fit to teach.
The acts that were proven amount to cause for dismissal of Respondent under each of the
legal bases charged by the District.

15

18.

There is cause to dismiss Respondent for immoral conduct, pursuant to

Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, for the reasons set forth in
Factual Findings 6 through 33.

19.

There is cause to dismiss Respondent for evident unfitness for service,

pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), for the reasons set forth in
Factual Findings 6 through 33.

20.

There is cause to dismiss Respondent for unprofessional conduct, pursuant to

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), for the reasons set forth in Factual
Findings 6 through 33.

21.

In reaching these Conclusions, the determinations that there is cause to dismiss

Respondent from his employment with the District were made by unanimous vote of the
Commission.

ORDER

The Accusation against Respondent Jesus Rodriguez is sustained and the District may
proceed with its dismissal of Respondent as an employee of the Los Angeles Unified School
District.

DATED: May ___, 2013.

DATED: May ___, 2013.

DATED: May ___, 2013.

____________________________
JULIE GAUTREAU, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
JOYCE ABRAMS, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

____________________________
DAVID B. ROSENMAN
Administrative Law Judge, Member,
Commission on Professional Competence

16

