BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

VALENCIA  BLACK  (EN  711928), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2012100891 

  

  

The-Commission-or  Professional  Competence  (Commission) heard this  matter  on  —= 

DECISION 

December  9,  11,  12,  13,  16,  17,  18,  and  20,  2013,  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The 
Commission  consisted  of  Karen  Schuett,  Liana  Collica,  and  Howard  W.  Cohen, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 
California,  ALJ  Cohen  presided. 

Cynthia  L.  Sands,  attorney  at  law  with  Liebert.  Cassidy  Whitmore,  represented 
complainant  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resource  Officer  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  (District). 

Daniel  J.  Kolodziej,  attorney  at  law  with  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented 

respondent  Valencia  Black,  who  was  present. 

Prior  to  the  presentation  of  evidence,  the  parties  brought  several  motions  in  limine. 

The  ALJ  considered  and  ruled  on  those  motions  in  limine,  as  well  as  on  motions  made  during 
the  course  of  the  hearing,  as  reflected  on  the  record.  Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 
decision  on  December  20,  2013. 

The  Commission  considered  the  entire  record  in  executive  session. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.--- 

Complainant-filed  and-served.on-respondent-a-Notice-of-  Intention-to-Dismiss—-—-  - 

and  Statement  of  Charges.  On  October  12,  2012,  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing.

2. 

On  November  9,  2012,  complainant,  acting  in  her  official  capacity,  filed  and 
served  on  respondent  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent  timely  served  a 
Notice  of  Defense. 

3. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  presently  on 

unpaid  leave  status. 

The  District's  Charges  Against  Respondent 

4. 

In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent,  the  District 

alleged  that  it  has  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  from  her  employment  as  a  permanent  © 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  for: 

a. 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1);? 

b. 

Immoral  conduct,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939; 

c. 

___Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under 

   
secti 

(a)(5),_ 
2,  Subdivision 

d. 

Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 
cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district, 
under  section  44939;  and 

€. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

5. 

In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  charged  respondent 

with  the  following  misconduct: 

, 

/ 

a. 

On  January  26,  2012,  respondent  pinched  Student  B.,  a  student  in  her 

class,  on  her  left  armpit,  causing  broken  skin,  bleeding,  and  swelling. 

b. 

On  November  22,  2011,  respondent  twice  pulled  the  hair  and  pinched 

the  shoulders  of  a  female  student. 

c, 

Also  on  November  22,  2011,  respondent  pinched  the  shoulders  or 

pulled  the  hair  and  ears  of  five  of  her  students. 

  

' 

if 

ff — 

an 

TI 

  

- 

me 

’  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  specified.

  

  

  

Respondent's  Background 

6. 

At  all  relevant  times,  respondent  taught  first  grade  at  52nd  Street  Elementary 

School  (52nd  Street  School).  Respondent  was  assigned  to  52nd  Street  School,  at  her  request, 
when  she  began  working  for  the  District  in  2002.  She  has  a  bachelor’s  degree  from 
California  State  University,  Dominguez  Hills  (CSUDH),  and  she  has  a  multi-subject 
credential  (K  through  6),  a  supplemental  credential  in  English  up  to  9"  grade,  and  a  Cross- 
cultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certificate. 

7. 

Respondent  was  raised  in  South  Los  Angeles  and  Watts  and  attended  public 

schools  in  the  District,  graduating  from  Susan  Miller  Dorsey  High  School.  She  was  raised  by 
a  single  mother  and  has  six  siblings;  in  her  family,  only  she  and  an  older  sister  attended 
college.  After  obtaining  an  Associate  of  Arts  degree  from  West  Los  Angeles  Community 
College,  respondent  worked  in  various  jobs  to  support  her  mother  and  a  younger  brother.  She 
worked  as  a  teaching  assistant  for  the  District  at  a  battered  women’s  shelter  from  1998  to 
2001  while  also  attending  CSUDH.  After  obtaining  her  bachelor’s  degree,  respondent  was 
accepted  into  the  student  teaching  program  in  the  Hawthorne  Unified  School  District,  She 
received  her  teaching  credential  and  sought  employment in  the District  i in n  order  to teach  i in 
the neighborhood-where she lived, near 52nd street school- 

= 

8. 

No  evidence  was  submitted  of  a  prior  history  of  discipline  against  respondent. 

The  Allegation  That  Respondent  Pinched  Student  B.  on  January  26,  2012,  and  Caused 
Broken  Skin,  Bleeding,  and  Swelling 

9, 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  January  26,  2012,  respondent 

pinched  Student  B.  on  her  left  armpit,  causing  broken  skin,  bleeding,  and  swelling. 

10. 

On  January  10,  2012,  Student  B.  started  attending  52nd  Street  School,  having 
transferred  from  Watts  Learning  Center  (WLC),  a  charter  elementary  school,  She  was  placed 
in  respondent’s  class  and,  on  her  first  day,  exhibited  behavior  issues,  including  running 
around  the  classroom  and  yelling  at  other  students  not  to  look  at  her.  At  the  end  of  the  school 
day,  respondent  told  Principal  Osbaldo  Jimenez  that  she  wanted  to  talk  with  him  about 
Student  B.’s  behavior.  Jimenez  told  respondent  that  he  could  not  talk  to  her  at  that  time,  but 
that  Mr.  Corral,  a  school  administrator,  would  look  into  her  concerns. 

11. 

Each  day  thereafter  in  respondent’s  classroom,  Student  B.  engaged  in  unusual 
behaviors,  disturbing  the  class.  On  at  least  two  occasions,  Student  B.  grabbed  and  bit  or  tried 
to  bite  respondent’s  leg,  and  respondent  removed  Student  B.  from  her  leg  by  pushing  Student 
B.’s  shoulders. 

12. 

At  the  close  of  a  school  day  during  Student  B.’s  first  week  in  respondent’s 

~—--~¢lass;  Student B.’s  father approached  respondent  and-told-her-that-he  wished  to-inform  her-of—-— 
some  matters  concerning  Student  B.  Jimenez,  however,  took  Student  B.’s  father  to  his  office 
and  held  further  discussions  with  him  outside  of  respondent’s  presence.

13. 

Jimenez  testified  that  Student  B.’s  father  told  him  that  Student  B.  had  suffered 
trauma  due  to  sexual  abuse  at  the  hands  of  her  mother.  Jimenez  did  not  share  this  information 
with  respondent.  Jimenez  discussed  Student  B.’s  behavior  with  her  father  three  or  four  times 
per  week  during  the  first  two  weeks  she  attended  52nd  Street  School.  Jimenez  told  Student 
B.’s  father  of  her  behavior  in  respondent’s  class;  Jimenez  testified  that  Student  B.’s  father 
was  not  surprised.  Jimenez  testified  that  he  tried  to  obtain  information  about  Student  B.  from 
WLC,  but  was  unsuccessful.  He  did  not  know,  for  instance,  that  the  Student  Success  Team 
(SST)  process  had  started  for  Student  B.  at  WLC.  Nevertheless,  given  the  information  he  had 
received  from  respondent  and  from  Student  B.’s  father,  school  policies  required  Jimenez  to 
support  respondent  and  help  her  “deal  with  [Student  B.’s]  egregious  behaviors  despite  [the] 
lack  of  or  missing  documentation”  from  WLC,  and  possibly  begin  the  SST  or  Individualized 
Education  Program  (IEP)  process  at  52nd  Street  School.  (Ex.  109.  p.  262.)  Jimenez  conceded 
that  training  on  how  to  properly  address  children  with  behavioral  issues  was  provided  only  to 
special  education  teachers,  not  to  respondent. 

  

14.‘ 

Dr.  Rosalinda  Lugo,  a  District  instructional  director  who  supervises  17 

  

principles,  including  Jimenez,  testified  that  school  administration  is  not  required  to 
immediately  inform  a  teacher  of  a  parent’s  report  of a  transfer  student’s  behavior  issues  at  a 
prior  school,  because  the  District  wants  the student to  have a chance at a “fresh start.”  This - 
    
testimony  was  not  credible;  it  contradicts  District  policies  that  require  that  teachers  be  given 
“information  and  resources”  necessary  to  provide  effective  intervention  when  a  student  has 
behavioral  needs  (Ex.  112,  p.  368-370),  and  would  in  practice  place  teachers  and  other 
students  at  risk.  It  also  contradicts  Dr.  Lugo’s  own  testimony  that,  once  the  District  is 
informed  of  a  student’s  prior  behavioral  issues,  such  as  engaging  in  violence  or  defiance, 
District  policy  mandates  that  the  teacher  be  informed. 

15. 

.On  January  17,  2012,  the  week  after  Student  B.  started  at  52nd  Street  School, 

Corral  came  to  respondent’s  classroom,  observed  the  class,  and  took  notes.  When  respondent 
asked  him  to  provide  her  with  advice  for  addressing  Student  B.’s  behaviors,  Corral  said  he 
needed  more  time  to  review  his  notes  before  he  could  discuss  the  matter  with  her.  He  never, 
however,  talked  to  respondent  about  Student  B.  and  never  offered  respondent  any 
suggestions. 

16. 

On  January  26,  2012,  just  as  the  children  in  respondent’s  classroom  were  to 

line  up  to  go  to  lunch,  Student  B.  began  running  around  the  classroom,  shouting  and  scaring 
the  other  students.  She  then  crawled  under  a  table  at  which  other  students  were  seated  and 
began  lifting  the  table  with  her  feet.  Respondent,  concerned  for  the  safety  of  Student  B.  and 
the  students  seated  at  the  table,  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  verbally  coax  Student  B.  out 
from  under  the  table.  Respondent  then  reached  under  the  table  and,  holding  Student  B.  under 
the  arms,  pulled  her  out. 

_...  17... 

..  Respondent.used_a.reasonable_amount.of  force in.the circumstances. If. 

respondent  did  pinch  Student  B.  when  bringing  her  out  from  under  the  table,  there  was 
insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  it  was  anything  but  accidental.  District  policy  states  that 
physical  abuse  of  a  student  does  not  include  physical  injury  inflicted  accidentally,  and  that  it

 

does  not  include  the  use  of  an  amount  of  force  that  is  reasonable  and  necessary  to  quell  a 
disturbance  threatening  physical  injury  to  persons  or  property.  (Ex.  60.,  pp.  83,  84.) 

18. 

Once  respondent  had  gotten  Student  B.  out  from  under  the  table,  one  of  the 

school’s  instructional  coaches,  Kelly  Picard,  was  called  to  escort  Student  B.  to  the  office  of 
the  school  nurse,  Zabrina  Washington.  Washington  examined  Student  B.  The  only  treatment 
Washington  deemed  necessary  was  to  provide  Student  B.  with  an  ice-pack  to  help  calm  her 
down.  Washington  wrote  on  an  office  referral  form  that  there  was  “0  bleeding  or  swelling,” 
though  she  also  noted  that  she  saw  two  small  scrape  marks  breaking  the  skin  under  Student 
B.’s  arm. 

19. 

Jimenez  misinterpreted  Washington’s  note;  he  insisted  at  the  hearing  that  the 

note  states,  “with  bleeding  or  swelling.”  His  interpretation  lacks  credibility,  as  it  is 
contradicted  by  the  plain  and  legible  language  of  the  note  itself.  It  is  also  contradicted  by 
Washington’s  testimony  at  the  hearing  that  she  wrote  that  there  was  no  bleeding  or  swelling, 
and  by  the  construction  of  the  sentence  in  the  note.  (If  Washington  had  written  “with”  instead 
of  “0,”  there  would  have  been  no  logical  reason  to  use  the  disjunctive  between  “bleeding” 
and  “swelling.”)  Jimenez  decided  not  to  question  Washington  about  what  she  had  seen 

—during 

her  examuination-of Studéentss.;  he testified that he-did not want  to  mar 

respondent’s 

reputation  by  questioning  Washington  while  his  investigation  was  ongoing.  His  mistaken 
interpretation  of  the  note,  however,  which  could  have  been  corrected  had  he  spoken  to 
Washington  or  read  the  note  more  carefully,  led  him  to  base  his  further  investigation 
activities  on  an  incorrect  assumption  about  respondent’s  contact  with  Student  B. 

20. 

Jimenez  called  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  (LAPD)  child  abuse  unit 

and  reported  the  possible  abuse  of  Student  B.  The  officer  who  took  the  call  told  Jimenez  that 
LAPD  would  send  someone  to  interview  Student  B.,  and  that  Jimenez  could  investigate  the 
matter  concurrently.  LAPD  Sgt.  Guy  Juneau  investigated  the  incident  on  the  same  day  it 
occurred,  after  the  school  nurse  examined  Student  B.  Prior  to  January  2012,  while  assigned 
to  the  LAPD  Juvenile  Unit,  Sgt.  Juneau  was  responsible  for  responding  to  calls  from  school 
sites  and  had  investigated  more  than  100  allegations  of  child  abuse.  Sgt.  Juneau  examined 
Student  B.’s  underarm  area.  He  saw  no  bleeding  or  swelling;  he  did  not  even  notice  a  scrape 
mark,  which  may  have  faded  by  the  time  he  examined  Student  B.  Sgt.  Juneau  testified  that  he 
interviewed  Student  B.,  who  told  him  that  she  had  been  disruptive  in  respondent’s  class,  had 
been  defiant  when  respondent  told  her  to  sit  down,  and  had  ran  around  the  desk,  and  that 
respondent  had  forced  her  into  her  seat,  during  the  course  of  which  she  had  been  pinched 
under  her  arm.  Sgt.  Juneau  concluded  that,  based  on  the  absence  of  any  visible  injury  or 

__by  Student 

*  There  was  inconclusive  evidence  as  to  whether  the  scrape  marks  were  self-inflicted 
B. Picard,  who escorted  Student B.  to the.nurse’s  office  from respondent’s_ 

classrdom,  testified  that  she  does  not  believe  Student  B.  created  the  marks,  but  while  walking 
to  the  nurse’s  office,  Student  B.  physically  illustrated  for  Picard  what  she  claimed  respondent 
had  done,  and  she  may  have  scraped  herself  in  doing  so. 

  

23--—  Student-s=testified-thats 

  
dent Bwould-frequently-misbehave by-sereaming;  — 

  

marks  of  any  kind  and  Student  B.’s  admission  about  her  disruptive  conduct,  no  crime  had 
occurred  and  no  further  investigation  was  warranted. 

21. 

Nevertheless,  Jimenez  conducted  an  investigation  into  the  incident.  He 

questioned  Student  B.;  she  told  Jimenez  that  five  students  saw  respondent  pinch  her.  When 
Jimenez  questioned  those  five  students,  however,  all  denied  seeing  respondent  pinch  Student 
B. 

: 

22. 

Jimenez  talked  to  Dr.  Lugo  and  to  Sergio  Franco,  in  the  Office  of  Staff 

Relations,  who  helped  Jimenez  draft  questions  to  ask  other  children  in  respondent’s  class. 
The  next  day,  and  over  the  following  five  days,  Jimenez  questioned  other  students;  he  had 
removed  respondent  from  her  classroom,  and  he  had  children  come  in  pairs  from  the 
classroom  to  his  office,  where  he  interviewed  them  individually.  Among  the  students 
Jimenez  interviewed  were  Student  S.  and  Student  Z.  Both  girls,  now  eight  years  old,  were 
deemed  competent  to  testify  and  did  testify  at  hearing.  However,  their  testimony  regarding 
their  recollection  of  events  that  transpired  when  they  were  six  years  old  was  not  internally 
consistent  and  in  many  particulars  lacked  credibility. 

running  around  the  classroom,  pulling  on  respondent’s  leg,  and  crawling  under  the  tables. 
Student  S.  testified  that  she  saw  respondent  pinch  Student  B.’s  shoulder;  her  testimony  was 
unclear  as  to  whether  she  saw  that  happen  once  or  twice,  but  she  testified  that  Student  B.  did 
not  say  anything  or  cry  out  in  pain  when  respondent  touched  her  shoulder.  On  one  occasion, 
Student  B.  was  holding  onto  respondent’s  leg  at  the  time,  trying  to  bite  respondent,  and 
Student  B.  kept  on  misbehaving  after  respondent  touched  her.  Student  S.  said  that  Student  B. 
did  bite  respondent’s  leg,  and  that  respondent  said,  “Ouch.”  Apparently  on  another  occasion, 
Student  B.  tried  to  hide  under  the  marker  board,  then  under  the  student  tables,  and  then  ran 
around  the  classroom.  Respondent  talked  to  Student  B.,  to  try  to  get  her  to  stop;  after 
respondent  touched  Student  B.’s  shoulder,  Student  B.  said  nothing  and  continued  running 
around.  Student  S.  testified  that  she  was  scared  of  Student  B.,  not  of  respondent.  Her 
testimony  was  confused;  although  she  clearly  testified  that  respondent  had  touched  Student 
B.’s  shoulder,  she  did  not  assist  in  establishing  whether  respondent  pinched  Student  B.  or 
touched  Student  B.  improperly. 

24. 

Student  Z.’s  testimony  was  also  confused  and  self-contradictory.  She  testified 

that  respondent  never  did  anything  bad  to  her  and  kept  her  and  the  other  children  in  class 
safe.  She  also,  however,  testified  that  respondent  would  scream  at  children  who  misbehaved 
and  pull  their  ears  and  hair.  She  did  not  identify  any  of  the  students  who  had  their  ears  or  hair 
pulled.  She  testified  that  Student  B.  bit  and  hit  other  students  in  the  class,  that  Student  B. 
“did  crazy  stuff,”  that  Student  B.  tried  to  grab  and  bite  respondent,  and  that  she,  Student  Z.., 
was  afraid  of  Student  B.  She  also  testified  that  respondent  called  the  office  for  help  with

    

  

Student B.  more  than  once  and  that  on  one  occasion  Student  Z.  went  to  get  another  teacher 
for  help. 

25. 

Student  B.  did  not  testify  at  the  hearing.  Yvette  Choyce,  a  special  education 

teacher  in  the  District  who  taught  Student  B.  at  WLC  in  2011,  testified  that  at  WLC  Student 
B.  had  displayed  behavior  similar  to  that  which  she  displayed  at  52nd  Street  School,  and  that 
those  behaviors  included  yelling,  hitting,  defiance,  crawling  under  tables,  endangering  other 
students,  and  falsely  accusing  others  of  hurting  her. 

26. 

Jimenez  testified  that  some  of  the  students  he  interviewed  said  they  saw 

respondent  pinch  Student  B.,  but  those  students  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing.  Student  S.  and 
Student  Z.  were  the  only  two  children  to  testify  regarding  the  charges  concerning  Student  B. 
In  view  of  the  fact  that  their  testimony  was  at  best  inconclusive  and  did  not  establish  that 
they  saw  respondent  pinch  Student  B.,  the  written  records  of  Jimenez’s  interviews  with  other 
students,  offered  as  “administrative  hearsay,”  cannot  be  found  to  explain  or  corroborate 
admissible  evidence  for  the  purpose  of making  a  factual  finding  that  respondent  deliberately 
pinched  Student  B.,  or  that  she  did  so  at  all.‘  They  are,  therefore,  inadmissible. 

27;-——hraddition-to-thes -fact-that-the-student-statements-are-unsubstantiated-hearsay;- == 

the  reliability  of  statements  allegedly  made  to  Jimenez  in  the  course  of  his  interviews  is 
compromised  for  other  reasons.  To  help  evaluate  the  statements  Jimenez  obtained  from  those 
students,  respondent  presented  the  testimony  of  Mitchell  Eisen,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of 
Psychology,  Director  of  the  Forensic  Psychology  Program  at  the  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles,  and  an  expert  in  memory  and  suggestibility. 

28. 

Dr.  Eisen  explained  that,  without  adults  to  help  them  define  reality,  young 
children,  including  six-year-olds,  have  difficulty  distinguishing  between  what  is  real  and 
what  is  not.  Children  are  subject  to  suggestion;  this  may  occur,  for  instance,  where  a  child  is 
asked  to  respond  to  a  leading  question,  which  may  cause  the  child  to  accept  misinformation 
as  true,  There  are  other  types  of  suggestibility  involving  delayed  misinformation  and 
retrieval  errors,  such  as  false  memories.  A  false  memory  is  a  false  narrative  that  someone  has 
been  convinced  is  true;  it  becomes  part  of  their  memory.  It  is  impossible  for  outside 
observers  to  tell  the  difference  between  the  truth  and  a  false  memory  because  the  person 
holding  the  false  memory  truly  believes  it.  With  children,  it  is  easier  to  suggest  that  a  non- 
existent  event  actually  occurred.  When  later  retrieving  their  memories,  children  confuse 
elements  of  the  false  event  with  their  autobiographical  memory.  The  false  event  can  then 

3  In  fact,  the  evidence  shows  that  respondent  sought  help  in  addressing  Student  B.’s 

behavior  approximately  20  times  in  two  weeks,  but  received  no  assistance. 

‘  “Administrative  hearsay,”  under  Government  Code  sections  11514,  subdivision (a), 

and  11513,  subdivision  (d),  is  hearsay  evidence,  otherwise  inadmissible,  offered  to 
supplement  or  explain  other  evidence;  it  cannot  independently  form  the  basis  of  a  factual 
finding. 

  

 

become  part  of  their  autobiographical  memory  even  though  they  did  not  believe  the  story 
when  they  first  heard  it. 

29. 

—  Jimenez’s  testimony  regarding  his  questioning  of  the  children  in  respondent’s 

class,  and  the  documentation  he  kept  of  that  questioning,  raise  serious  concerns  about  the 
effects  of  Jimenez’s  interview  techniques  on  the  children’s  stated  recollection.  Jimenez 
testified  that  he  changed  his  methodology  continually,  as  he  refined  his  process  of 
interviewing  based  on  his  accumulating  experience  and  on  advice  he  received  from  Dr.  Lugo 
and  from  Franco.  He  learned,  for  instance,  to  prepare  questions  in  advance.  But  he  never 
attempted  to  qualify  any  of  the  children,  before  he  began  questioning  them  substantively,  in 
order  to  determine  whether  they  were  competent  to  understand  and  truthfully  answer  the 
questions  he  was  about  to  ask.  And  in  many  instances,  Jimenez’s  questions  were  leading,  or 
directed  the  children  toward  a  certain  conclusion.  The  questioning  took  place  over  several 
days,  allowing  the  children  time  to  discuss  the  events  and  the  questioning  and  to  further 
affect  their  memory  of  what  happened  in  respondent’s  classroom. 

  

30. 

Dr.  George  McKenna,  who  at  the  time  was  the  Local  District  Supervisor  for 
LAUSD  Local  District  7  in  2012,  was  responsible  for  conducting  pre-disciplinary  hearings, 
hearing. 
  known  as Skelly hearings, in-_thatlocal-distict-  He-conducted respondent's  Skelly 
and,  after  reviewing  all  pertinent  documents,  recommended  to  Sergio  Franco  that  respondent 
not  be  dismissed. 

— 

31.  |  Complainant  bore  the  burden  of  proving  the  allegations  that  respondent 

inappropriately  pinched  Student  B.,  breaking  her  skin  and  causing  bleeding  and  swelling. 
Complainant  has  failed  to  meet  her  burden.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  shows  that 
administration  did  not  provide  respondent  with  the  information  or  training  necessary  to 
properly  address  Student  B.’s  behavioral  issues.  Student  B.  did  not  testify,  and  those  students 
who  did  testify  were  not  credible  as  to  whether  respondent  pinched  Student  B.  The  nurse’s 
note.  and  testimony,  and  the  testimony  of  the  investigating  police  officer,  contradict 
Jimenez’s  findings.  Jimenez’s  interviewing  techniques  were  inadequate  for  the  task  of 
accurately  ascertaining  what  occurred  in  respondent’s  classroom. 

The  Allegation  That  Respondent  Twice  Pulled  the  Hair  of  and  Pinched  a  Female  Student  on 
November  22,  2011 

32. 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November  22,  2011, 

respondent  twice  pulled  the  hair  of,  and  pinched  the  shoulders  of,  Student  H,  a  female 
student  in  her  class. 

33. 

As  discussed  below,  the  evidence  of  respondent’s  allegedly  pinching  Student 

H.  was  confused,  ambiguous,  inconsistent,  and  contradictory. 

34.” 

Student  H.’s  fathér,  O-H:,  testified. He  has  had  two  children  enrolled  in  52nd  ~~ 

Street  School.  He  participated  in  parent  activities,  was  the  chair  of  the  school  site  council, 
and  volunteered  in  his  children’s  classes  once  per  week.  He  volunteered  in  respondent’s  class 
when  Student  H.  was  there,  and  would  stay  in  the  classroom  for  30  to  45  minutes  each  time 

8

  

  

he  volunteered.  O.H.  observed  respondent  interact  with  his  daughter  and  with  other  students. 
He  found  respondent  to  be  professional  at  all  times,  even  when  students  were  unruly;  if  they 
defied  her  request  to  be  seated,  she  would  direct  them  to  their  seats,  occasionally  holding 
them  by  the  arm;  sometimes  the  students  who  were  very  unruly  made  a  comment  when 
respondent  touched  them.  But  O.H.  never  saw  respondent  use  physical  force  on  the  children 
or  hurt  them.  Student  H.  is  developmentally  delayed;  she  has  cognitive  disorders  and  some 
behavioral  issues.  O.H.  and  respondent  discussed  Student  H.  and  worked  on  her  issues 
together  weekly.  O.H.  and  respondent  discussed  having  Student  H.  get  an  IEP;  she 
eventually  did  so,  about  six  months  after  the  time  relevant  to  this  case,  and  has  since  been 
receiving  special  education  services.  O.H.  never  requested  that  Student  H.  be  removed  from 
respondent’s  classroom;  when  she  was  removed,  O.H.  thought  it  was  temporary,  and  would 
not  have  objected  to  Student  H.  being  moved  back  into  respondent’s  classroom. 

35. 

 Jimenez’s  notes  of  his  interview  of  Student  H.  show  that  he  asked  directive, 
leading,  or  yes  or  no  questions,  such  as  “Did  Ms.  Black  ever  hit  you?,”  “Does  it  hurt  when 
she  does  it?,”  “Does  she  do  it  a  lot?”  (Ex.  4.)  Student  H.  demonstrated  a  pinch  on  her  arm  in 
response,  Saying  it  hurt  and  that  respondent  did  that  to  her  while  she  was  waiting  in  line. 
Student  H.,  however,  denied that  respondent ever  pulled  her  hair  or  her  ear. 

36. 

Jimenez  also questioned  Student  A, using  questions  formulated  by  Franco. 
Jimenez,  however,  could  not  determine  from  his  own  interview  notes  whether  Student  A. 
confirmed  that  respondent  pinched  Student  H.  Jimenez  did  not  show  any  of  the  students  he 
interviewed  what  he  meant  by  “pinch,”  which  was  revealed  by  testimony  and  the  interview 
notes  to  be  an  ambiguous  term.  There  appeared  to  be  a  variety  of  types  of  contact  described 
by  the  students;  it  was  unclear  from  the  interview  documents  whether  students  were 
recounting  respondent  touching  children’s  shoulders,  guiding  them  by  their  shoulders, 
holding  or  lightly  squeezing  their  shoulders,  or  actually  pinching  their  shoulders.  None  of  the 
children  whom  Jimenez  interviewed  said  respondent  caused  Student  H.  any  pain;  they  did 
not  see  Student  H.  wince  or  hear  her  say  anything  as  a  result  of  respondent’s  touching  her. 

37. 

Student  H.  testified.  She  did  not  appear  to  be  afraid  of  respondent  at  all;  she 
waved  and  smiled  at  respondent  when  taking  the  stand.  She  testified  that  she  liked  going  to 
respondent’s  class,  that  she  felt  safe  there,  and  that  respondent  was  nice  to  her.  She  testified 
that  respondent  pinched  her  shoulder  once  when  she  was  in  class.  Student  H.  had  pushed  a 
table,  hurting  another  student’s  hand.  Student  H.  testified  that  respondent  responded  by 
pinching  her  on  the  upper  right  arm,  and  that  it  hurt  but  she  said  nothing.  But  she  then 
testified  that  respondent  pulled  her  from  the  table  by  the  shoulder  so  she  would  not  hurt  the 
other  student  again,  raising  the  question  of  whether  respondent  had  actually  pinched  her  and 
what  meaning  she  assigns  to  the  term  “pinched.”  She  also  testified  that  respondent  pinched 
her  on  one  other  occasion,  but  offered  no  details. 

38,  _.  Student  S.,  who  also  testified about  the  alleged  incident  involving  Student  B.____ 

(see  Factual  Finding  23),  testified  that  respondent  “pinched”  Student  H.’s  shoulder  only 
once,  when  Student  H.  misbehaved,  but  that  Student  H.  did  not  say  anything  when 
respondent  touched  her.  In  Jimenez’s  notes  of  his  interview  of  Student  S.,  he  wrote  that 

  

 

Student  S.  said  respondent  pinched  Student  H.  on  the  shoulder  once,  while  Student  H.  was  in 
line,  and  that  it  did  not  hurt  much,  but  that  Student  H.  cried  a  little.  This  inconsistency,  like 
the  inconsistencies  in  Student  H.’s  testimony  and  Jimenez’s  notes,  does  not  tend  to  establish 
that  Student  H.  was  in  pain  and  was  actually  pinched.  Student  S.  testified  that  she  likes 
respondent,  that  she  learned a  lot  from  respondent,  and  that  she  felt  safe  in  respondent’s 
class. 

39. 

Jimenez  did  not  discipline  respondent  after  conducting  his  investigation  into 
the  allegations  concerning  Student  H.  and  allegations  concerning  five  other  students.  (See 
Factual  Findings  40-42.)  His  interviews  with  the  students  did  not  yield  sufficient  evidence  of 
misconduct,  and  the  children  were  inconsistent  about  the  alleged  pinching  and  other  actions 
and  lacked  credibility  sufficient  to  warrant  a  letter  of  reprimand,  classroom  management 
coaching,  or  other  form  of  discipline.  Instead,  as  set  forth  in  a  November  23,  2011, 
conference  memorandum  issued  to  respondent,  Jimenez  met  with  respondent,  read  various 
Board  and  school  policies  to  her,  which  he  described  as  providing  her  with  “assistance  and 
guidance,”  and  directed  her  to  follow  District  policy,  including  a  bulletin  abolishing  corporal 
punishment.  He  wrote  that  failure  to  follow  his  directives  may  lead  to  disciplinary  action. 
Respondent  denied  that  she pinched  students  or  pulled  their  hair  or ears.  Jimenez  returned 
    
- 
  ~  respondent  to  her  classroom.  - 

nes  Pee 

pene)  penne 

wucee 

The  Allegation  That  Respondent  Pinched,  Pulled  the  Hair  of,  and  Pulled  the  Ears  of Five 
Students  on  November  22,  2011 

40. 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November  22,  2011, 

respondent  pinched  the  shoulders  and  pulled  the  hair  and  ears  of  five  students  in  her  class. 

41. 

No  student  testified  at  hearing  that  respondent  pulled  her  or  his  hair  or  ears, 

and  none  testified  to  being  pinched  other  than  Student  H.  (See  Factual  Findings  32-38.) 
Student  Z.  provided  inconclusive  testimony  about  events  in  respondent’s  classroom.  She 
testified  that  when  students  misbehaved,  respondent  would  scream  at  them  and  pull  their  ears 
and  hair,  but  she  offered  no  particulars.  On  the  other  hand,  Student  Z.  testified  that 
respondent  was  a  good  teacher  who  tried  to  keep  Student  Z.  and  the  other  students  safe,  and 
that  respondent  never  did  anything  to  Student  Z.  that  Student  Z.  did  not  like.  Student  Z. 
testified  that  Student  B.  misbehaved,  doing  “crazy  stuff,”  screaming,  knocking  over  chairs, 
hitting  other  students,  grabbing  respondent  and  trying  to  bite  her,  and  going  under  the  tables. 
She  testified  that  Student  B.  scared  her,  and  that  respondent  screamed  at  Student  B.  and  _ 
called  the  office  for  help  more  than  once.  She  testified  that  other  adults  came  into 
respondent’s  classroom  and  took  Student  B.  away.  Jimenez’s  notes  of  an  interview  he 
conducted  with  Student  Z.  reflect  that  she  told  him  that  Student  B.  was  bad,  that  she  was 
trying  to  kick  and  bite  respondent,  that  she  knocked  over  a  board  and  a  chair,  and  that 
respondent  tried  to  grab  her  to  put  her  in  her  seat,  that  she  had  difficulty  doing  so,  and  that 
she  then  called_the  office... 

an 

a 

. 

42. 

School  administration  did  not  take  disciplinary  action  against  respondent 

based  on  the  statements  Jimenez  obtained.  (See  Factual  Finding  39.) 

10 

  

 
  

  

  

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

43. 

Respondent  was  provided  with  a  conference  memorandum  dated  November 
23,  2011,  after  her  meeting  with  Jimenez  regarding  the  alleged  November  2011  incidents. 
The  memorandum  stated  that  failure  to  follow  Jimenez’s  directives  to  follow  Board  policy 
“may  lead  to  disciplinary  action  such  as  but  not  limited  to  a  notice  of  unsatisfactory  acts, 
notice  of  unsatisfactory  service,  [and]  a  suspension  without  pay  up  to  and  including 
dismissal”  from  the  District.  (Ex.  14.)  When  he  discussed  allegations  against  her  in  the 
November  2011  conference  with  respondent,  Jimenez  documented  respondent’s  questions  to 
him,  but  he  did  not  document  whether  he  answered  her  questions.  Nor  did  the  school 
administration  provide  respondent  with  any  adequate  means  for  addressing  Student  B.’s 
behaviors,  despite  her  numerous  requests  for  guidance  and  assistance.  Administration  did  not 
provide  information  to  respondent,  help  her  develop  a  meaningful  plan,  or  provide  resources 
to  help  respondent  achieve  specified  directives.  (Factual  Findings  10-15,  39.)  The  only 
“assistance  and  guidance”  Jimenez  documented  was  his  reading  to  her  of  certain  Board  and 
school  policies.  That  is  insufficient  to  constitute  “assistance  and  guidance.”  In  the  conference 
memorandum,  Jimenez  wrote  that  he  would  continue  to  investigate  the  allegations,  but  he 
admitted  that  he  conducted  no  further  investigation.  The  conference  memorandum  did  not 
constitute  disciplinary  action, and-respondent  was  immediately  returned-to  the  classroom.  .—— 

44, 

After  receiving  the  conference  memorandum,  respondent  filed  a  grievance 

with  Jimenez.  Jimenez  testified  that  he  did  not  know  that  the  grievance  pertained  to 
respondent,  because  all  teachers’  grievances  came  to  him  through  respondent,  the  UTLA 
chapter  chair.  Jimenez  testified  that  he  did  not  even  read  respondent’s  grievance.  This 
testimony  was  not  credible. 

45. 

On  March  27,  2012,  the  District  gave  respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Act,  with  an  attached  conference  memorandum  dated  February  29,  2012,  that  set  forth  seven 
directives.  The  Notice  recited  that  “This  notice  is  being  given  to  you  in  order  to  allow  you  an 
opportunity  to  correct  the  above  listed  deficiencies  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the. 
charges.”  (Ex.  55.)  On  the  same  date,  March  27,  2012,  the  District  gave  respondent  a  Notice 
of  Suspension.  When  she  received  the  notice,  respondent  had  already  been  removed  from  the 
classroom;  she  was  never  returned  to  the  classroom,  and  so  was  afforded  no  opportunity  to 
remediate  any  alleged  deficiencies,  none  of  which  has  been  established  in  this  matter. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  3.) 

Jurisdiction 

if 

Ht 

11 

  

i i 
; 
| 
j 

  

 

Burden  of Proof 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  are 
established.  In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  alleged  five  of  those 
enumerated  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service, 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  and  persistent 
violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations.  (Factual  Finding  4.) 

4, 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  charged  respondent  with 
several  acts  and  stated  that  those  acts,  separately  and  in  any  combination,  demonstrate  all  of 

=  = the-five-statutory- grounds-for-dismissal-@actual-Hinding-5.)-Fhe-Commission-examined-each== 

~~  charged  act  to  determine  whether  it  was  proven;  if proven, the Commission would consider  — 
whether  the  charges  were  a  violation  of  one  or  more  of  the  statutory  bases  for  dismissal  as 
alleged. 

5. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of 

proving  that  any  of  the  charged  acts  occurred. 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Valencia  Black  does  not  exist  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  6 
through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

7. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Valencia  Black  does  not  exist  under 

sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  based  on  immoral  conduct,  as  set  forth  in 
Factual  Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

8. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Valencia  Black  does  not  exist  under  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

9. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Valencia  Black  does  not  exist  under  section 
44939,  based  on  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

10. 

Cause  for_dismissal  of  respondent  Valencia  Black  does  not  exist-under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  based  on  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by 

12

  

i 
; 

i 

  

the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her, 
as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

11. 

—  Given  that  no  cause  for  discipline  exists  because  complainant  has  failed  to 

'  prove  any  of  the  factual  allegations  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  factors 
set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  need  not  be 
considered. 

dismissed. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Valencia  Black  is 
, 

ORDER 

    

DATED:  March  4,  2014 

Bou f  Lah  — 

  

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 

——________Administrative-Law-Judge— 

~~~  Office of Administrative Hearings 

  

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014    
LIANA  COLLICA 
Commission  Member 

13

the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her, 
as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

11. 

Given  that  no  cause  for  discipline  exists  because  complainant  has  failed  to 

prove  any  of  the  factual  allegations  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  factors 
set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  need  not  be 
considered. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Valencia  Black  is 

dismissed. 

ORDER 

  

DATED: 

,  2014 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 

—Administrativeaw_Judee——————______ 

  

"Office 

of  Administrative  Hearings 

: 

: 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

paren:  2/ 

2 

,  2014 

| 

KR Schull 

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  

LIANA  COLLICA 
Commission  Member 

  

13

the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her, 
as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  6  through  44  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

11. 

Given  that  no  cause  for  discipline  exists  because  complainant  has  failed  to 

prove  any  of  the  factual  allegations  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  factors 
set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  need  not  be 
considered. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Valencia  Black  is 

dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law_Judge 

Hearings 
9  ffive- of Administrative 

—— 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:,4/77  _,  2014 

  

A  ZOLLICA 

Commission  Member 

— 

13 

  

  

 

