BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 

AND 

THE  OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 

OF  THE  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JAMES  KELLEY, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2012060614 

 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on 

March  11  through  15  and  18  through  21,  and  September  18  through  20  and  24,  2013,  in 
Signal  Hill,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of  Scott  Chodorow,  Doug  Thompson,  and 
Howard  W.  Cohen,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California.  ALJ  Cohen  presided. 

Anthony  De  Marco  and  Heather  Dozier,  Attorneys  at  Law  with  Atkinson,  Andelson, 
Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  complainant  Christopher  Steinhauser,  Superintendent  of 
Human  Resource  Services  for  the  Long  Beach  Unified  School  District  (District),  who  at  all 
relevant  times  acted  through  his  designee,  Ruth  Perez  Ashley,  Assistant  Superintendent  of 
Human  Resource  Services  for  the  District. 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law  with  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented 

respondent  James  Kelley,  who  was  present. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  beard.  Respondent 

moved  Exhibit  BBB  into  evidence.  The  District  objected,  and  the  matter  was  taken  under 
submission.  The  ALJ  subsequently  admitied  Exhibit  BBB. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  September  24, 

2013. 

The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive  session.  After  due  consideration 

of  the  entire  record  herein,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  legal 
conclusions,  and  order. 

   

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Complainant  brought  the  First  Amended  Accusation  and  First  Amended 

Statement  of  Charges,  through  his  designee,  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 
paid  leave  status. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  presently  on 

3, 

On  May  10,  2012,  complainant,  through  his  designee,  filed  a  Statement  of 

Charges  against  respondent  with  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Long  Beach  Unified  School 
District  (Board).  The  Board  adopted  a  resolution  finding  that  the  charges  constituted  grounds  . 
for  dismissal  and  ordering  that  respondent  be  given  notice  of  dismissal,  the  dismissal  to  take 
effect  30  days  from  the  date  of  service  of  the  notice  unless  respondent  timely  requests  a 
hearing,’ 

. 

4, 

On  May  11,  2012,  complainant’s  designee  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

Intent  to  Dismiss,  accompanied  by,  among  other  documents,  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

5. 

On  May  22,  2012,  respondent’s  counsel  objected  in  writing  to  the  Statement  of 

Charges  and  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  requested  a  hearing. 

6. 

On  May  31,  2012,  the  District  filed  and  served  on  respondent  a  Notice  of 

Accusation  and  Accusation.  Respondent’s  counsel  timely  served  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

7. 

On  December  18,  2012,  complainant,  through  his  designee,  filed  a  First 

Amended  Statement  of  Charges  (FASOC)  with  the  Board.  The  Board  adopted  a  resolution 
finding  that  the  charges  constituted  grounds  for  dismissal  and  ordering  that  respondent  be 
given  notice  of  dismissal,  the  dismissal  to  take  effect  30  days  from  the  date  of  service  of  the 
notice  unless  respondent  timely  requests  a  hearing. 

8. 

On  December  19,  2012,  complainant’s  designee  served  respondent  with  a 

Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss,  accompanied  by,  among  other  documents,  the  FASOC. 

'  Respondent  raised  a  jurisdictional  challenge  on  the  ground  that  there  is  insufficient 

evidence  of  the  Board’s  adoption  of  the  resolution  in  compliance  with  the  law.  Ashley, 
complainant’s  designee,  testified  that  she  was  present  in  the  closed  session  at  the  May  10, 
2012,  Board  meeting,  during  which  the  Board  adopted  the  resolution  by  a  vote  of  five  to 
none.  The  subsequent  actions  taken  by  the  District  and  its  Board,  and  complainant,  are 
entirely  consistent  with  Ashley’s  account.  Nor  is  Ashley’s  testimony  in  any  way  contradicted. 
by  the  Board  minutes  of  May  10,  2012,  as  urged  by  respondent.  Those  minutes  confirm  a 
finding  that  the  Board  met  in  closed  session  on  that  date.  Although  the  minutes  state  that  “no 
reportable  actions  were  taken  in  Closed  Session”  (Ex.  BBB),  action  taken  in  a  closed  session 
to  dismiss  a  public  employee  is  not  to  be  reported  “until  the  first  public  meeting  following 
the  exhaustion  of  administrative  remedies  ..  .  .”  (Gov.  Code,  §§  54957,  54957.1,  subd. 
(a)(5).)  Respondent’s  administrative  remedies  are  not  exhausted  until  this  Decision  issues. 

9. 

On  January  4,  2013,  respondent,  in  writing,  requested  a  hearing. 

10. 

On  January  8,  2013,  the  District  filed  and  served  on  respondent  a  Notice  of 
First  Amended  Accusation  and  First  Amended  Accusation.  Respondent’s  counsel  timely 
served  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

The  District’s  Charges  Against  Respondent 

11. 

-  In  the  First  Amended  Accusation  and  FASOC  against  respondent,  the  District 

alleged  that  it  has  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as  a  permanent 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  for: 

a. 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1);” 

b. 

c. 

and 

Unsatisfactory  performance,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4); 

Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5); 

d. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

12. 

In  its  FASOC,  the  District  charged  respondent  with  misconduct  based  on  more 

than  30  alleged  separate  acts  and  omissions  from  the  2008-2009  school  year  through  the 
2011-2012  school  year. 

Respondent’s  Background 

13. 

At  all  relevant  times,  respondent  taught  graphic  arts  at  Wilson  Classical  High 
School  (Wilson  High).  Respondent  has  worked  for  the  District  in  various  capacities  for  over 
30  years;  he  was  first  assigned  to  teach  woodshop  at  Franklin  Middle  School  in  1982.  For  the 
last  18  years,  since  1995,  respondent  has  worked  for  the  District  at  Wilson  High,  teaching 
computer  applications  classes,  computer  diagnostics,  graphic  design,  and  printmaking,  He 
has  a  master’s  degree  from  California  State  University,  Long  Beach,  and  has a  clear  single 
subject  credential  in  industrial  and  technology  education, 

14. 

Respondent  was  under  some  personal  stress  due  to  his  father’s  illness  during 
the  2011-2012  school  year;  respondent  took  a  bereavement  leave  in  the  second  semester  of 
that  year,  when  his  father  died.  No  evidence  was  submitted  of  a  prior  history  of  discipline 
against  respondent. 

?  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  specified.

The  2008-2009  School  Year 

15. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  10)  but  did  not  establish  that,  late  in  the  2008- 

2009  school  year,  respondent  seized  a  male  student’s  skateboard  and  forcefully  banged  it 
against  the  wall  of  Building  500.  Former  Wilson  High  Principal  Lew  Kerns  testified  that  he 
witnessed  the  alleged  act.  Kerns’s  testimony  was  not  credible.  He  did  not  document  the 
alleged  incident  until  the  second  semester  of  the  following  school  year,  and  only  did  so  at  the 
current  principal’s  request.  His  testimony  that  he  just  happened  upon  the  alleged  incident  as 
he  turned  a  corner  conflicts  with  respondent’s  more  credible  version  of  the  event,  in  which  he 
described  using  the  skateboard  to  demonstrate  to  Kerns  an  action  taken  by  a  student. 

The  2009-2010  School  Year 

16. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  11)  and  established  that  on  January  25,  2010, 

respondent  threw  a  skateboard  belonging  to  student  G.P.°  out  of  the  classroom  door.  The 
evidence  further  established  that  respondent  threw  the  skateboard  only  a  short  distance  into  a 
raised  planter,  and  that  he  did  not  damage  the  skateboard  or  the  planter  or  cause  any  injury  to 
person  or  property. 

The  2010-2011  School  Year 

17. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  12)  and  established  that  respondent  used 
inappropriate  force  by  grabbing  the  leg  of  a  stool,  which  caused  student  A.M.,  who  was 
perched  on  the  stool,  to  fall  on  the  floor  and  hit  his  head  on  a  desk.  More  specifically,  on 
December  13,  2010,  during  respondent’s  fourth  period  class,  respondent  noticed  that  A.M. 
had  his  head  down  on  his  desk  and  appeared  to  be  sleeping.  Respondent  approached  A.M., 
who  was,  in  fact,  asleep,  and  woke  him  by  rapping  on  the  desk  with  his  hand.  A.M.  raised  his 
head,  but  again  put  his  head  down  to  go  to  sleep.  Respondent  told  A.M.  to  stand  up,  touching 
A.M.’s  shirt  as  A.M.  rose.  Respondent  directed  A.M.  to  stand  near  the  wall.  A.M.  did  so,  but 
then  took  a  stool  and  sat  on  it.  When  respondent  observed  that  A.M.  was  no  longer  standing, 
respondent  approached  A.M.  and  said  that  he  had  told  A.M.  to  stand.  Respondent  grabbed 
two  of  the  stool  legs,  causing  A.M.  to  lose  his  balance  and  fall.  Respondent  testified  that  he 
did  not  pull  the  stool  legs  until  he  thought  A.M.  was  standing  up,  and  that  he  did  not  intend 
to  cause  A.M.  to  fall.  The  District  did  not  establish  the  contrary—A.M.  and  other  students 
testified  about  the  incident  but  disagreed  on  so  many  important  particulars  concerning  the 
event  that  they  were  not  sufficiently  credible  to  demonstrate  any  improper  intent  on 
respondent’s  part. 

18. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  13)  but  did  not  establish  that  respondent 

violated  the  directives  of  Assistant  Principal  Debbie  Broadway  by  failing  to  make  himself 
available  for  telephone  calls  and  by  failing  to  provide  adequate  lesson  plans  while  on  paid 
administrative  leave.  Broadway  called  respondent  at  home  and  left  him  a  voicemail  message; 

>To  maintain  confidentiality,  this  decision  identifies  students  and  their  parents  by 

their  initials.

i 

  

: 

i 

    

! 
i 

respondent  called  back  within  a  reasonable  time.  Respondent  provided  the  requested  lesson 
plans;  the  Board  did  not  establish  that  they  were  inadequate.  Although  the  substitute  teacher 
responsible  for  respondent’s  classes  requested  explanation  of  some  of  the  details  of  those 
plans,  respondent  was  prohibited  from  contacting  the  substitute  teacher  to  explain  those 
details. 

The  2011-2012  School  Year 

19. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  14)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  October  10, 

2011,  respondent  responded  inappropriately  to  a  student’s  uniform  violation.  Respondent 
noticed  that  student  J.M.  was  wearing  his  pants  low,  in  violation  of  school  policy. 
Respondent  directed  student  J.M.  outside,  in  order  to  address  the  issue  without  embarrassing 
the  student.  Respondent  told  student  J.M.  that  he  was  not  behaving  at  his  grade  level,  not  an 
improper  derogatory  comment,  and  had  student  J.M.  tuck  in  his  shirt,  as  the  student  was  not 
wearing  a  belt  and  his  pants  kept  slipping  down.  The  District  offered  no  testimony  other  than 
student  J.M.’s,  which  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  respondent  did  anything  inappropriate 
in  enforcing  the  school  dress  code. 

20. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  15)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  October  17, 
2011,  respondent  treated  a  student  with  disrespect  by  failing  to  return  the  student’s  property 
in  a  timely  manner.  Respondent  confiscated  a  skateboard  from  student  B-L.  during  the  lunch 
period,  in  accordance  with  the  school’s  skateboard  policy;  respondent’s  uncontroverted 
testimony  was  that  he  saw a friend  of  student  B.L.’s  waving  the  skateboard  in  the  air  and 
slamming  it  down  on  a  concrete  planter.  Respondent  told  B.L.  he  could  retrieve  the 
skateboard  after  school  from  school  administration.  Respondent  stored  the  skateboard  in  his 
classroom  until  the  end  of  the  school  day,  when  he  attempted  to  turn  it  over  to  school 
administration.  The  administrators  were  in  a  meeting  after  school,  so  respondent  stored  the 
skateboard  in  his  classroom  overnight,  rather  than  immediately  turning  the  skateboard  over 
to  student  B.L.,  as  the  student  requested.  The  skateboard  was  returned  to  the  student  the  next 
morning,  within  24  hours  of  its  confiscation,  all  in  accordance  with  school  policy. 

21. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  16)  and  established  that,  on  October  21,  2011, 

respondent  made  students  uncomfortable  by  taking  photographs  of  them  at  lunchtime 
without  permission.  The  group  of  students  was  eating  lunch  outside;  there  was  litter  on  the 
ground  around  them.  Rather  than  ask  for  the  students’  names,  respondent  took  photographs 
of  the  students,  telling  them  that  he  would  “send  the  pictures  in”  if  they  did  not  pick  up  the 
trash  in  the  area. 

22. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  17)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November  9, 

2011,  respondent  prevented  his  students  from  using  the  classroom  computers.  Only  student 
J.B.  testified  that  he  was  unable  to  use  the  computer  that  day,  which,  he  claimed,  resulted  in 
his  being  unable  to  timely  submit  an  assignment.  The  District  alleged  that  respondent  marked 
down  the  student’s  grade  for  turning  the  assignment  in  late,  but  the  evidence  did  not  establish 
that  the  student  lost  any  points,

23. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  18)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November 

28,  2011,  respondent  threw  student  E.D.’s  assignment  on  the  floor.  The  District  did  establish 
that  respondent  called  the  assignment  “garbage”  because  the  assignment  papers  were 
unstapled. 

24. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  19)  but  did  not  establish  that,  in  November 

2011,  respondent  deducted  points  from  student  J.B.’s  grade  for  carrying  his  baseball 
equipment  into  his  classroom. 

25.- 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  20)  and  established  that,  on  December  1, 

2011,  respondent  responded  to  Principal  of  Instruction  Gonzalo  Moraga’s  e-mail  request  to 
meet  regarding  parent  complaints  with,  “Does  this  crap  ever  end?” 

26. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  21)  and  established  that,  on  December  9, 

2011,  respondent  told  a  parent  during  a  meeting  to  discuss  a  student’s  grade  that  he  did  not 
want  to  continue  to  hold  the  meeting  while  Moraga  was  present.  The  District  alleged  but  did 
not  establish  that  respondent  told  the  parent,  “Mr.  Moraga  is  out  to  get  me,”  and,  “I  don’t 
want  to  say  anything  because  he  is  going  to  write  me  up.” 

27.  —  The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  22)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  February  29, 
2012,  there  were  deficiencies  in  respondent’s  classroom  performance.  The  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  respondent  failed  to  post  an  objective  on  the  board,  or  that  he  failed  to  review 
the  purpose,  objective,  or  expectations  for  an  assignment  prior  to  directing  students  to  work 
on  the  computers.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  provide  a  deadline 
for  completion  or  explain  how  the  assignment  would  be  graded.  Several  students  were  unable 
to  access  a  computer,  as  15  computers  were  out  of  commission,  but  the  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  the  students  were  unable  to  do  their  assignments;  there  were  non-computer 
based  elements  to  the  assignment.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to 
check  for  understanding;  there  was  evidence  that  respondent  was  reviewing  students’ 
computer  work  while  at  his  desk,  on  his  computer,  and  that  he  also  repeatedly  walked  around 
the  classroom  and  checked  students’  work. 

28. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC, 

23)  and  established  that,  on  March  12,  2012, 

respondent  refused  to  follow  a  verbal  directive  from  Moraga.  Moraga  called  respondent’s 
classroom  and  directed  respondent  to  allow  student  S.B.,  whom  respondent  had  sent  to 
Moraga’s  office,  back  into  the  classroom  with  his  baseball  bat  and  equipment  bag. 
Respondent  refused,  saying  he  would  take  a  sick  day  instead.  Moraga  kept  the  baseball 
equipment  in  his  office,  and  student  §.B.  returned  to  respondent’s  classroom.  Two  days  later, 
on  March  14,  2012,  Moraga  met  with  respondent  and  directed  him  not  to  confiscate  sports 
equipment  from  students,  send  students  out  of  his  classroom  for  carrying  sports  equipment, 
or  discipline  students  for  carrying  sports  equipment  into  his  class. 

29. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  24)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  March  16, 
2012,  respondent  willfully  refused  to  follow  Moraga’s  March  14,  2012,  directive.  Student 
S.B.  brought  his  baseball  bat  and  equipment  bag  into  class  again.  Respondent  told  S.B.  that 
he  would  have  to  store  the  bat  in  the  office  or  an  unobtrusive  area  of  the  classroom. 

n
a

  

i 

Respondent  did  not  confiscate  the  equipment,  send  S.B.  out  of  the  classroom,  or  discipline 
S.B.  for  carrying  his  baseball  equipment  into  the  classroom.  The  District  also  alleged  but  did 
not  establish  that  respondent  suspended  S.B.  to  the  Alternate  Classroom  Experience  (“ACE”) 
program  and  deducted  20  points  from  S.B.’s  participation  grade  in  defiance  of  Moraga’s 
March  14  directive. 

30. 

The  District  alleged  two  separate  acts  in  this  charging  allegation.  (FASOC, 

725.) 

a. 

The  District  alleged  and  established  that,  on  April  2,  2012,  respondent 
submitted  lesson  plans  to  Mr.  Moraga  with  an  inappropriate  statement  regarding  his  recent 
administrative  leave.  Although  the  lesson  plans  were  shown  only  to  Moraga,  not  to  the 
students,  respondent’s  written  comment  about  his  “foolish  suspension”  was  inappropriate. 

b. 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that  respondent  refused  to 

submit  additional  lesson  plans  in  defiance  of  Moraga’s  ditectives.  Respondent  was  excused 
from  submitting  additional  lesson  plans,  pending  an  investigation,  and  the  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  respondent  never  submitted  additional  lesson  plans. 

31. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  {|  26)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  April  2, 

2012,  respondent  asked  Moraga  to  leave  his  class  because  Mr.  Moraga  might  “write  him  up.” 
Respondent  asked  Moraga  not  to  enter  the  classroom  because  the  computer  network  was 
inoperative.  The  District  also  alleged  but  the  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  students  were 
not  working  on  any  assignments  while  the  network  was  down. 

32. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  {|  27)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  at  least  two 
occasions  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent  forced  students  to  sit  at  their  desks 
the  entire  block  period,  not  allowing  them  to  log  onto  the  computers  to  submit  their 
assignments. 

33. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  {|  28)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  frequently  insulted  students  and  responded  inappropriately  to 
minor  student  issues  or  requests. 

a. 

Respondent  did  not  “belittle[]  all  of  the  students,  telling  them,  they  will 

be  living  on  the  streets,  when  they  are  18.”  The  alleged  statement  was  taken  out  of  context; 
respondent’s  actual  statement  was  not  belittling. 

b. 

Patent  T.C.  reported  to  Moraga  that  respondent  belittled  her  son;  she 
never  spoke  to  respondent  about  it,  as  Moraga  had  told  her  to  do,  and  the  evidence  does  not 
establish  that  respondent’s  criticism  of  student  K.C.’s  work  was  unjustified  or  improper. 

c. 

L.S.,  parent  of  student  Z.S.,  reported  that  respondent  intimidated  and 

insulted  students  and  that  respondent  threatened  her  son  with  detention  for  asking  a  question. 
Student  Z.S.’s  testimony  did  not  corroborate  his  mother’s  complaint.

 

34. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  29)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 
2012  school  year,  respondent  deducted  ten  points  from  two  students’  participation  grades  for 
using  Photoshop  after  completing  an  assignment  and  when  he  directed  the  students  to  sweep 
the  classroom.  With  respect  to  this  incident,  the  evidence  was  controverted  and  did  not 
establish  that  respondent’s  actions  were  in  any  way  inappropriate. 

35. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  {1  30)  and  established  that,  during  the  2011-2012 

school  year,  respondent  told  student  J.R.  that  the  work  he  had  done  on  an  assignment  was 
“crap.”  The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that  respondent  intimidated  and  belittled 
students  in  his  classes. 

36. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC, 

31)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  ordered  student  J.S.  to  “rip  [his]  paper  in  half  in  front  of  the 
class”  because  he  had  misread  the  assignment  directions.  The  evidence  did  not  establish 
either  that  respondent  ripped  up  the  assignment  himself  or  told  student  J.S.  to  do  so. 

37. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  132)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  retaliated  against  students  when  they  or  their  parents 
complained  about  respondent  to  administration  or  questioned  his  instruction.  The  allegation 
is  based  on  the  unsubstantiated  and  controverted  statement  of  Parent  J.R. 

38. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1133)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 
2012  school  year,  respondent  pushed  a  chair  over  in  class.  There  was  no  evidence  to  support 
an  unsubstantiated  allegation  about  a  chair  being  pushed  over  that  was  written  by  a  student’s 
parent  who  did  not  claim  to  have  witnessed  the  alleged  act. 

39. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  34)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  failed  to  respond  to  parent  concerns. 

a. 

Contrary  to  the  District’s  allegations,  the  evidence  showed  that 

respondent  did  respond  to  parents’  concerns.  Student  B.R.’s  claim  that  respondent  told 
students  that  he  would  not  listen  to  parent  complaints  was  unsubstantiated  and  controverted. 

b. 

Parent  M.B.  felt  respondent  was  unwilling  to  help  her  son  by  meeting 

with  him  outside  of  class  hours.  The  evidence  showed  that  respondent  had  posted  office 
hours  when  he  was  available  to  meet  with  students  after  school,  and  that  he  did  meet  with 
students  after  school.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  was  required  | to  make 
himself  available  at  other  times  more  convenient  for  M.B.’s  son. 

40. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  35)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  withheld  the  use  of  computers  from  all  students  as  a  form  of 
discipline  for  one  class  period  and  informed  the  students  that  the  three  assignments  due  that 
day,  each  of  which  required  use  of  a  computer,  would  be  recorded  with  scores  of  zero,  There 
was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  respondent  caused  the  computers  to  be  unavailable  as 
a  form  of  discipline,  or  that  the  students  were  not  given  work  to  do  during  that  class  period. 

 

41. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  36)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 
2012  school  year,  respondent  acted  improperly  when  he  spent  45  minutes  trying  to  operate  a 
malfunctioning  TV/VCR.  The  District  alleged  that,  while  respondent  was  attempting  to 
operate  the  TV/VCR,  students  were  not  engaged  in  guided  instruction  or  working 
independently  on  assignments,  and-that  students  were  required  to  but  could  not  complete  an 
assignment  based  on  the  video  respondent  was  attempting  to  play  because  the  video  was  not 
shown  in  its  entirety.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  any  misconduct  on  respondent’s  part. 
The  evidence  established  that  the  students  were  occupied  with  assignments  during  the  class 
period;  as  for  the  video  assignment,  the  average  score  received  by  students  in  the  class  was 
approximately  76  percent,  and  some  students  received  an  A  grade. 

42. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  137)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  improperly  refused  to  lend  relevant  texts,  such  as  Art  Talk,  to 
students  or  make  copies  of  the  texts  for  students  to  study.  The  evidence  demonstrated  that  the 
texts  in  question  were  not  relevant,  were  not  assigned,  and  in  any  event  were  available  for 
use  by  students  in  the  classroom  after  class. 

43, 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  1  38)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  acted  improperly  when  he  informed  a  student  that  his 
assignment,  “look[ed]  like  something  my  7  year  old  would  draw.”  (See  Factual  Finding 
33(b).) 

44.  —  The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  139)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  failed  to  effectively  communicate  grading  policies  and 
assignment  expectations  to  students  and  parents,  that  he  assigned  students  zero  scores  on 
assignments  based  on  content  respondent  failed  to  teach,  and  that  he  deducted  points  from 
student  work  in  a  manner  that  did  not  comport  with  the  assignment  evaluation  information 
provided  to  students.  The  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  post 
his  grading  policy,  that  the  policy  was  unclear,  or  that  grades  were  based  on  untaught  content 
or  reflected  improper  point  deductions. 

45. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  {1  40)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  failed  to  provide  a  class  agenda  or  assignment  criteria  to 
students  and  parents,  that  he  was  inconsistent  in  providing  handouts  on  key  concepts,  grading 
criteria,  and  expectations,  and  that  he  was  inflexible  about  assignment  due  dates.  The 
evidence  showed  that  respondent  did  provide  handouts  and  posted  the  necessary  information 
on  the  school  website,  and  that  respondent  was  flexible  and  did  extend  due  dates  for 
assignments. 

46. 

The  District  alleged  (FASOC,  #  41)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year,  respondent  added  a  “participation”  category  into  student  grades  for  the 
purpose  of  punishing  students.  The  evidence  did  not  show  that  the  category  was  intended  to 
punish  or  did,  in  fact,  constitute  punishment. 

Ht 

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

47. 

Respondent  was  provided  with: 

a. 

A  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

on  May  19,  2011,  which  included  a  Performance  Improvement  Plan  with  nine  directives; 

b. 

A  written  summary  of  an  October  27,  2011  conference  between 

respondent,  Gonzalo  Moraga,  Chris  Callopy,  Assistant  Executive  Director  of  the  Teachers 
Association  of  Long  Beach  (TALB),  and  Bill  Salas,  dated  October  28,  2011,  in  which 
respondent  was  warned  regarding  his  alleged  unsatisfactory  performance  and  unprofessional 
conduct,  and  which  included  nine  directives;  and 

c. 

A  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

on  March  2,  2012,  which  included  a  Performance  Improvement  Plan  with  eighteen 
directives. 

These  notices  and  warnings  were  inadequate  means  for  helping  respondent  remediate  or 
understand  any  deficiencies.  Administration  essentially  issued  commands  to  respondent;  it 
did  not  work  with  respondent,  develop  a  meaningful  plan,  or  provide  resources.  to  help 
respondent  achieve  specified  directives. 

48. 

On  April  26,  2012,  Moraga  prepared  an  evaluation  rating  respondent’s 

performance  as  unsatisfactory.  The  evaluation.  was  based  on  Moraga’s  observations  of 
respondent’s  classroom  instruction  on  December  8,  2011,  and  February  29,  2012.  Moraga 
wrote  that  respondent  “is  not  recommended  for  continued  service.”  (Ex.  2,  Tab  27.) 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

*  Jurisdiction 

Burden  of Proof 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  10.) 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.  App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  are 
established.  In  the  First  Amended  Accusation  and  FASOC,  the  District  alleged  four  of  those 

10 

  

|

 

enumerated  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness 
for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations.  (Factual  Finding  11.) 

4, 

The  District’s  First  Amended  Accusation  and  FASOC  charged  respondent 

with  numerous  acts.  The  First  Amended  Accusation  and  FASOC  set  forth  specifically,  for 
only  some  but  not  all  of  the  factual  allegations,  which  allegations  relate  to  which  of  the 
alleged  bases  for  dismissal  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (that  is,  unprofessional 
conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  or  refusal  to  obey  the  - 
school  laws  or  regulations).  The  District  alleged  in  the  FASOC,  however,  that  the  alleged 
acts  and  omissions  support  one  or  more  of  the  four  bases  for  discipline  and  support 
respondent’s.  dismissal 

5. 

t 
The  Commission  has  examined  each  charge  to  determine  whether  it  was 

proven,  and  for  those  proven  has  determined,  as  set  forth  below,  whether  the  charges  were  a 
violation  of  one  or  more  of  the  statutory  bases  for  dismissal  as  alleged. 

Unprofessional  Conduct 

6. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may 

be  defined  as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  that  is 
unbecoming  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41 
Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled  on  other  grounds  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575, 
588,  fn.  7.) 

7. 

Of  the  charged  acts  found  by  the  Commission  to  have  been  committed  by 
respondent,  eight  constitute  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  28,  30,  and  35. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

8. 

“Unsatisfactory  performance,”  which  is  not  defined  in  the  Education  Code  or 
in  case  law,  means  something  other  than  unprofessional  conduct.  (See  §  44938,  subd.  (c);  In 
re  Maes  (2010)  185  Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  established  if  a 
certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  in  the  opinion  of  his  or  her  employing  school 
district.  An  employing  school  district  cannot,  however,  arbitrarily  or  capriciously  decide  that 
a  certificated  employee  has  performed  unsatisfactorily.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers 
Assn.  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn.  20,  citing  56 
Cal. Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757)  (purpose  of  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to 
ensure  efficient  permanent  teaching  staff  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for 
their  positions). 

*  The  Commission  determined  that  the  action  of  respondent  set  forth  at  Factual 

Finding  26  was  not  an  instance  of  unprofessional  conduct  or  of  any  other  statutory  ground 
for  dismissal. 

11 

 

9, 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  most  of  the  alleged  acts  that,  according  to  the 

District,  constituted  unsatisfactory  performance  and  for  which  the  District  provided 
respondent  notice  (see  Factual  Findings  47  and  48).  Those  alleged  but  mostly 
unsubstantiated  acts  related  to  respondent’s  assignments  and  grading  system,  his  presentation 
of  lessons  and  supervision  of  students,  and  his  statements  to  students  in  the  classroom  and 
responses  to  parents.  (Factual  Findings  11-48.) 

10. 

Nor  do  the  acts  that  the  Commission  found  respondent,  in  fact,  committed 

(Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  26,  28,  30,  and  35)  constitute  unsatisfactory 
performance  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4).  The  Commission 
found  that  respondent  threw  a  skateboard  into  a  planter,  grabbed  the  legs  of  a  stool  a  student 
was  sitting  on  and  caused  the  student  to  fall,  took  photographs  of  some  students,  called  an 
unstapled  assignment  “garbage,”  wrote  “Does  this  crap  ever  end”  about  inquiries  from 
Moraga  concerning  parent  complaints,  requested  that  Moraga  not  be  present  for  a  parent 
meeting,  refused  to  comply  with  a  verbal  directive  about  a  student  with  a  baseball  bat, 
characterized  his  suspension  as  “foolish”  on  a  draft  lesson  plan  submitted  to  Moraga,  and 
told  a  student  that  the  work  he  had  done  on  an  assignment  was  “crap.”  The  Commission  has 
already  found  that  most  of  those  acts  constitute  unprofessional  conduct.  The  evidence  did  not 
support  an  additional  finding  that  Moraga’s  dissatisfaction  with  respondent  established  the 
charge  of  unsatisfactory  performance.  Respondent  and  Moraga  were  frequently  at  odds 
during  Moraga’s  first  year  as  principal  at  Wilson  High,  the  2011-2012  school  year.  The  fact 
that  the  evidence  did  not  substantiate  most  of  the  acts  alleged  in  Moraga’s  notices  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  suggests  that  the  administration’s  expressions  of  dissatisfaction 
with  respondent’s  conduct  were,  at  least  to  some  degree,  the  result  of  a  personal  dispute 
between  respondent  and  the  principal,  rather  than  respondent’s  failure  to  meet  the  District’s 
reasonable,  non-arbitrary  expectations.  The  District’s  failure  to  work  constructively  with 
respondent  to  correct  perceived  deficiencies  lends  support  to  that  suggestion.  (Factual 
Finding  47.) 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

11. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a 
temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission 
on  Prof.  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service 
requires  that  unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  that  “connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to 
meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (fd.  at  p.  1444.) 

12. 

Of  the  charged  acts  found  by  the  Commission  to  have  been  committed  by 

respondent  (Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  26,  28,  30,  and  35),  none  constitutes  evident 
unfitness  for  service. 

it 

it 

12 

 

13. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent’s  acts  of  unprofessional 

conduct  reflect  an  irremediable  character  trait  rendering  respondent  unfit  to  teach.  The 
Commission  determined,  therefore,  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
evident  unfitness  for  service  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

Persistent  Violation  of School  Laws  or  Regulations 

14. 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  a  permanent  employee  may  be 

dismissed  from  employment  for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  by  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him.  The  violation  or  refusal  to  obey 
reasonable  regulations  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous 
insubordination.”  (Governing  Bd.  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a 
period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Prof. 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  320  (absent  violation  of  school  rules,  lengthy 
private  debate  between  teacher  and  principal  does  not  indicate  continual  insubordination 
seriously  affecting  school  discipline).)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of 
school  rules,  but  requires  a  showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

15. 

The  charged  acts  found  by  the  Commission  to  have  been  committed  by 

respondent  (Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  26,  28,  30,  and  35),  do  not  constitute  a 
persistent  violation  of  laws  or  regulations.  While  the  act  established  at  Factual  Finding  28 
violated  a  directive  from  Moraga,  for  instance,  complainant  did  not  establish  anything  more 
than  isolated  incidents,  and  did  not  establish  that  respondent  persistently  violated  school 
rules,  the  District  code  of  conduct,  or  any  other  directive,  policy,  law,  or  rule  set  by  the 
District  or  the  State  Board  of  Education. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

16. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Bd.  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235  (Morrison), 

the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to.either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  Court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “unprofessional”  unless  the  conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach. 
(id.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth  factors  to  consider  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in 
question  indicated  unfitness.  As  it  has  been  determined  in  this  case  that  most  of  the  alleged 
conduct  did  not  occur,  it  is  only  necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to 

13 

acts  that  the  Commission  has  found  did  occur  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.>  That 
conduct  is  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  28,  30,  and  35. 

17. 

The  Morrison  factors  for  the  trier  of  fact  to  analyze  in  determining  whether  a 
teacher  is  unfit  to  teach  are:  (1)  the  likelihood  of  the  conduct  adversely  affecting  students  or 
fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of 
the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of 
extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5) 
the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 
likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may 
adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

18. 

Not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied. 

(Governing  Bd.  of  ABC  School  Dist.  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.  App.4th  369,  384.)  Moreover,  the 
Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established;  it  can,  rather, 
be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School 
Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.) 

19. 

Applying  the  Morrison  factors  in  this  case,  the  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

a. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  28,  30,  and  35  will  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 
teachers  to  any  significant  degree,  if  at  all.  Respondent’s  misconduct  had  no  general  effect;  it 
only  affected  those  students  involved,  usually  minimally,  and  did  not  and  will  not  adversely 
affect  fellow  teachers.  A  good  deal  of  respondent’s  supervisor’s  time  was  consumed  in 
managing  issues  concerning  respondent,  but  most  of  those  issues  were  not  well-founded. 
Although  respondent  made  some  poor  choices,  as  reflected  in  the  Commission’s  findings, 
respondent  had  cause  to  feel  that  administration  was  not  working  with  him  to  correct  any 
perceived  deficiencies.  It  cannot  be  concluded  that  respondent’s  relationship  with  his 
supervisor  provides  grounds  for  a  finding  of  unfitness  to  teach. 

b. 

Although  some  of  the  misconduct  is  relatively  proximate  in  time,  in 
that  it  occurred  two  to  three  years  ago,  it  is  not  so  recent  that,  given  the  limited  number  of 
students  affected,  it  can  be  established  as  grounds  for  a  finding  of  unfitness  to  teach. 

c. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  respondent’s  unfitness  to.  teach  classes 
in  the  subject  matter  for  which  he  is  credentialed.  (See  Factual  Findings  13,  18,  22,  27,  30, 
32-37,  39-46.) 

d. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  the  existence  of  aggravating 

circumstances  surrounding  respondent’s  conduct.  There  was  some  evidence  of  mitigating 

°  The  Morrison  analysis  does  not  apply  to  causes  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory 
performance  or  for  persistent  violation  of  laws  and  regulations.  (Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at 
pp.  227-230.)  It  is  presumed  that  such  conduct  is  related  to  fitness  to  teach. 

14

  

; 
: 

| 

circumstances  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  when  respondent’s  father  was  ill.  (Factual 
Finding  14.) 

e. 

For  most  of  the  acts  of  unprofessional  conduct  set  forth  in  Factual 

Findings  16,  17,  21,  23,  25,  28,  30,  and  35,  respondent  did  not  have  a  motive  sufficiently 
praiseworthy  to  excuse  the  conduct. 

f. 

For  some  of  the  acts  of  unprofessional  conduct  (Factual  Findings  16, 

17,  21),  there  is  little  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  For  other  acts, 
including  some  of  those  involving  respondent’s  interactions  with  Moraga  (Factual  Findings 
25,  28),  though  not  all  (Factual  Finding  30),  and  others  involving  students  (Factual  Findings 
23,  35),  there  is  some  likelihood  of  recurrence. 

g 

The  Commission  did  not  find  that  discipline  is  likely  to  cause  an 
adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  respondent  or  other 
teachers. 

Disposition 

20. 

|  Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220-222.)  “The 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach  ...,  and 
whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  [Citing  Fontana,  supra,  45 
Cal.3d  at  pp.  220-222.]  ‘[A]  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may 
require  a  sensitive  evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it 
warrants  the  grave  sanction  of  dismissal.’  [Citation].”  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of 
California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 

21. 

=  Inthis  case,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent’s  dismissal  is 

warranted.  (Factual  Findings  11-49  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-20.)  The  Commission  members 
agree  unanimously.  Respondent’s  conduct  in  this  case  was  not  unsatisfactory  or  illegal.  The 
Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  acts  that  in  some  but  not  all  cases  constitute 
unprofessional  conduct  but  that  do  not,  separately  or  in  the  aggregate,  suggest  that  he  is  unfit 
to  serve  as  a  teacher.  Respondent  has  no  other  disciplinary  history  with  the  District.  The 
Commission  does  not  believe  that  dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect  students,  school 
employees,  or  others  or  to  further  deter  him  from  engaging  in  similar  conduct  in  the  future.° 

/ 

°  Because  the  Commission  has  decided  that  respondent’s  dismissal  is  not  warranted, 

the  substantive,  procedural,  and  evidentiary  issues  raised  by  respondent  regarding  a 
grievance  procedure  and  collective  bargaining  agreement  need  not  be  decided  here. 

15 

  

 

The  First  Amended  Accusation  against  respondent  James  Kelley  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED:  December  3,  2013 

Sout 
HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  December  5",  2013 

  SCOTT  CHODORGW 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  December  7,  2013 

CO 

er 
TE Ene Cn  EEE 

a 

  ‘DOUG  THOMPSON 
Commission  Member 

 

16 

