BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2012050315 

 

NANCIE  WALENT 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  August  12-16,  2013,  and  September  3 
and  4,  2013.  The  Commission  consists  of  the  following  members:  Philip  Ramos, 
Teacher,  Pomona  Unified  School  District;  Jan  Miller,  Retited  Teacher,  Orange 
Unified  School  District;  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Michelle 
Goldsmith,  Esq.,  of  Bergman  Dacey  Goldsmith,  Attorneys  at  Law.  Respondent  Nancie 
Walent  (Respondent)  was  present  and  was  represented  by  Daniel  J.  Kolodziej,  Esq.,  of 
Trygstadt,  Schwab  &  Trygstadt,  Attorneys  at  Law. 

Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings  except  for 
Respondent’s  motion  to  strike  the  cause  of  action  for  unprofessional  conduct,  which  is 
hereby  denied.  Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  remained 
open  until  September  13,  2013  for  the  submission  of  a  copy  of  a  power  point 
presentation  and a  list  of  deposition  transcript  excerpts  submitted  jointly  by  the  parties. 
The  evidence  was  received  and  marked  as  Exhibits  F  and  G,  respectively.  The  record 
was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  September  13,  2013.  The 
Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive  session.  After  due  consideration  of  the 
record,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and 
order: 

if 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Vivian  K. 

Ekchian  in  her  official  capacity  as  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District. 

2. 

On  April  11,  2012,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the  District’s 

intention  to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  she  demanded  a  hearing.  On  April  26,  2012, 
Respondent  submitted  a  demand  for  a  hearing. 

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  and  Accusation  is  dated  May  16,  2012,"  and 

recommended  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  the  District  for  the  following  legal 
causes  under  Education  Code?  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1)  immoral  conduct;  (2) 
unprofessional  conduct;  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service;  and  (4)  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for 
the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  Respondent. 

4, 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties 

and  jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings.  Respondent’s  outstanding  Motion  to  Strike 
the  Cause  of  Action  for  Unprofessional  Conduct  based  upon  an  alleged  failure  to 
provide  Respondent  with  a  Stull  evaluation  is  denied. 

5. 

District  contends  that  Respondent  is  subject  to  dismissal  based  upon  a 

sexually  inappropriate  and  aggressive  statement  she  is  alleged  to  have  made  to  a  student, 
text  messages  she  sent  to  students  and  staff  and  having  dinner  alone  with  a  student. 

6. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  never  made  the  statement  alleged  or  any 
statement  similar  thereto,  that  she  sent  school  related  and  appropriate  text  messages  to 
students  she  coached  on  the  track  team,  she  responded  to  invitations  from  students  to 
join  the  track  team  after  track  meets  for  dinner  on  a  few  occasions  and  that  on  one 
occasion  she  and  a  student  arrived  at  the  JHOP  restaurant  for  a  track  team  post-meet 
dinner  and  no  one  else  came,  so  they  had  dinner  and  left.  Respondent  further  contends 
that  she  responded  to  a  text  message  from  a  staff  member  about  the  assistant  principal, 
but  did  not  initiate  the  contact. 

if 

noted. 

1 

Complainant’s  oral  motion  to  amend  the  Accusation  on  page  2,  line  7 
to  insert  “It  was  reported  that:”  after  “2010.”  was  granted,  on  the  final  day  of  hearing 
without  objection. 

2 

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise 

 

Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  graduated  from  California  State  University  at  Long  Beach 

with  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  Kinesiology  and  Physical  Education  with  an  emphasis 
in  Secondary  Physical  Education.  As  part  of  her  educational  program  she  completed 
course  work  in  athletic  training  and  conditioning.  Respondent  received  a  single  subject 
Ryan  credential  in  Physical  Education  in  2003. 

8. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  April  of  2004  and 

has  been  a  permanent  certificated  employee  since  July  7,  2006.  Respondent  was  a 
physical  education  teacher  at  John  Marshall  High  School  (Marshall  HS)  from  April  26, 
2004,  to  July  1,  2009.  She  served  as  an  assistant  track  coach  at  Marshall  HS  during  the 
2008-2009  school  year. 
Effective  July  1,  2009,  and  due  to  low  enrollment  at  Marshall 
HS,  Respondent  was  transferred  to  Drew  Middle  School  (Drew  MS)  where  she  served 
as  a  physical  education  teacher  until  she  was  reassigned  to  the  Local  District  7  Office  on 
May  7,  2010.  Respondent  remained  at  the  Local  District  7  office  until  she  was  assigned 
to  work  at  home  and  ultimately  removed  from  paid  status. 

9. 

While  Respondent  was  an  assistant  track  coach  at  Marshall  HS  during  the 

2008-2009  school  year,  she  was  assigned  to  coach  the  sprinters.  Among  the  sprinters 
were  male  students  MT,  VR,  GG  and  JC.  Respondent  was  not  popular  with  the 
coaching  staff  and  had  a  reputation  amongst  the  sprinters  as  being  somewhat  of  a  bossy, 
militaristic  coach.  VR  did  not  like  her  approach  and  tried  to  avoid  immediate  contact 
with  her  because  he  found  her  to  be  abrasive  and  to  interfere  with  the  way  he  wanted  to 
run  the  4x4  relay  race.  VR  also  was  a  hurdler  and  as  such  was  not  usually  coached  by 
Respondent  or  with  the  sprinters  except  for  the  4x4  relay. 

10. 

At  some  time  around  April  30,  2010,  the  Marshall  HS  football  coach, 

Andrew  Moran  (Moran),  became  aware  of  conversations  that  student  MT  had  with 
student  VR  and  a  second  conversation  between  MT  and  a  female  student.  Moran 
understood  there  to  have  been  a  comment  of  an  inappropriate  sexual  nature  made  to  MT 
by  Respondent.  MT  had a  reputation  amongst  his  friends  for  being  “over  the  top”  and 
not  entitely  truthful  when  telling  stories.  Moran  was  not  aware  of  this  reputation  and 
took  the  matter  seriously.  Moran  also  did  not  like  Respondent  and  was  happy  that  she 
had  been  reassigned  to  Drew  MS.  On  April  30,  2010,  Moran  reported  to  Vice  Principal 
Erick  Juarez  (Juarez)  that  Respondent  had  made  a  comment  of  an  aggressive  sexual 
nature  to  a  student.  Juarez  instructed  him  to  report  the  information  to  the  Los  Angeles 
Police  Department  and  prepare  a  Suspected  Child  Abuse  Report  (SCAR). 

11. 

Juarez  made  this  instruction  because  Moran,  like  all  of  the  District 

employees,  has  a  mandatory  duty  to  report  suspected  child  abuse.  Moran  reported  his 

if 

suspicions  to  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  and  prepared  a  SCAR.  In  the  SCAR, 
Moran  wrote: 

[MT]  told  me  that  Ms.  Walent  won’t  stop  texting  him,  she  is  no 
longer  a  teacher  or  coach  at  the  school  but  maintains  an  almost 
obsessive  relationship  with  members  of  the  track  team.  He  told 
me  that  at  times  she  has  been  inappropriate  verbally  in  a  sexual 
nature.  Specifically  “when  you  turn  18  I’m  going  to  rape  you” 
and  “you  couldn’t  handle a  girl  like  me,  you’d  be  done  in  2 
seconds.” 

12. 

Marshall  HS  principal  Daniel  Harrison  (Harrison)  interviewed  MT,  JC 
and  VR  on  May  4,  2010.  Harrison  testified,  and  his  summary  of  interviews’  reflects, 
that  MT  told  him  Respondent  had  taken  team  members  to  IHOP,  called  or  texted  track 
team  members  about  track  events,  discussed  track  form  and  style,  gave  massages,  joked 
about  dating  the  male  students,  and  talked  to  the  students  about  her  personal  relationship 
with  her  boyfriend.  There  was  no  mention  by  MT,  JC  or  VR  to  Harrison  that 
Respondent  stated  that  she  would  “rape”  MT  when  he  turned  18. 

13. 

On  May  27,  2010,  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  conducted  an 

investigation  of  the  SCAR  which  included  an  interview  of  MT  by  Officer  Malik  Wilds. 
Respondent  was  never  interviewed.  The  SCAR  complaint  was  closed  without 
prosecution,  because  Officer  Wilds’  investigation  determined  that  a  crime  had  not  been 
committed. 

14. 

District  school  police  Detective  Ray  Jordan  (Detective  Jordan),  who  was 

In  his  interview  with  Detective  Jordan  on  September  22,  2010,  MT  stated  that 

on  special  assignment  to  the  Employee  Relations  Unit,  interviewed  students  MT,  VR, 
LC,  former  student  MP,  Moran,  Hatrison,  and  the  school  athletic  director.  Detective 
Jordan  did  not  find  any  witness  that  heard  the  alleged  comment.  Significantly,  MT  told 
a  slightly  different  version  of  the  events  to  Detective  Jordan  than  to  Harrision  or  Officer 
Wilds. 
the  comment  was  made  in  joking  in  a  parking  lot  of  an  IHOP  restaurant  with  female 
student  LC  present  and  former  student  MP  present.  When  interviewed,  neither  LC  nor 
MP  remembered  the  statement.  MT  advised  Detective  Jordan  that  he  never  felt  harassed 
and  never  thought  that  Respondent  would  rape  him.  MT  also  told  Detective  Jordan  that 
Respondent,  on 
Respondent  was  a  big  “smack  talker”  and  the  comment  was  just  a  joke. 
the  advice  of  her  union  representative,  refused  to  be  interviewed  by  Detective  Jordan. 

15. 

 Videotaped  deposition  testimony  of  MT  was  offered  at  the  administrative 

hearing  because  MT  was  unavailable  and  out  of  the  country  at  the  time  of  the  hearing. 
MI’s  demeanor  and  the  manner  in  which  he  testified  suggested  that  he  wanted  to 
distance  himself  from  the  allegations  against  Respondent.  He  was  reluctant  to  answet 
questions  about  Respondent,  minimized  any  comments  she  made,  and  blamed  the  track 

5 

Harrison  did  not  take  notes  during  the  interviews. 

  

 

 

athletes  for  badgering  Respondent.  At  one  point  in  his  testimony,  MT  declined  to  give 
further  details  or  information  about  Respondent  and  cited  Ramadan, a  religious  holiday 
for  him,  as  the  reason.  MT  proclaimed  that  he  did  not  want  to  break  his  Ramadan  fast 
by  telling  lies.  MT  testified  that  there  was  a  joke  about  him  turning  18  that  was  made  in 
a  restaurant  with  other  students  around,  but  did  not  offer  any  specific  recollection  of 
Respondent  making  the  statement  alleged  in  the  Accusation. 

16. 

Respondent  credibly  testified  on  her  own  behalf  and  denied  ever  making: 

the  statement  alleged  or  any  statement  similar  to  the  alleged  statement  at  any  time. 
Respondent  was  candid  in  her  testimony.  Her  demeanor  was  professional  and  serious. 
She  provided  thoughtful  and  complete  answers  to  the  questions  asked  of  her  in  contrast 
to  MT’s  evasive  testimony.  Respondent’s  unequivocal  denial  of  the  statement  was 
more  convincing  than  MT’s  wavering  and  inconsistent,  uncorroborated  statements  made 
to  investigators,  administrators  and  staff  at  different  times. 

17. 

‘In  paragraph  1  of  the  amended  charges,  Complainant  alleges  that  “It  was 

reported  that:  on  Friday,  April  30,  2010,  Ms.  Nancie  Walent  a  P.E.  teacher  at  Drew 
Middle  School 
(a  displaced  PE.  teacher  from  Marshall  High  School)  said  to  [MT],  an 
11"  grade  male  student  at  Marshall  High  School,  ‘when  you  turn  18  I’m  going  to  rape 
you.  You  couldn’t  handle a  girl  like  me;  you’d  be  done  in  two  seconds.”  The 
Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  this  statement  or  any  similar  statement  was  made  to  MT  by  Respondent. 
However,  Moran  understood  this  or  something  similar  to  be  a  comment  made  by 
Respondent,  As  someone  with  a  mandatory  child  abuse  reporting  duty,  Moran  reported. 
it  as  such  to  the  school  administrators  and  police  under  direction  of  Marshall  HS 
administrators  on  April  30,  2010. 

18. 

In  paragraph  2  of  the  charges,  Complainant  alleges  that  “During  the 

2009-2010  school  year,  Ms.  Nancie  Walent,  a  P.E.  teacher  at  Drew  Middle  School  (a 
displaced  P.E.  teacher  and  former  assistant  track  coach  from  Marshall  High  School), 
sent  text  messages  to  [MT],  an  11"  grade  male  student,  asking  where  the  students 
were  going  to  meet  after  the  Marshall  High  School  track  meet.”  The  Commission 
found  that  Respondent  exchanged  text  messages  with  MT  regarding  post-track  meet 
dinners  and  sent  him  text  messages  to  determine  time  and  location  of  the  post-track 
meet  dinners.  There  was  nothing  inappropriate  about  the  text  messages  or 
Respondent’s  conduct  in  this  regard  and  the  text  messages  did  not  violate  any  law, 
policy,  prohibition  or  regulation. 

19.. 

In  paragraph  3  of  the  charges,  Complainant  alleges  that  “During  the 

2009-2010  school  year  Ms.  Nancie  Walent  a  P.E.  teacher  at  Drew  Middle  School,  (a 
displaced  P.E.  teacher  and  former  assistant  track  coach  from  Marshall  High  School), 
had  dinner  alone  with  [JC],  a  17  year  old  student  from  Marshal  High  School  from 
8:30  to  10:00  p.m.”  The  Commission  determined  that  Respondent  and  JC  did  have 
dinner  at  an  HOP  restaurant.  The  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  dinner  were  that  JC 
had  invited  Respondent  to  join  the  track  team  for  a  post-track  meet  dinner  at  the  end 

 

of  the  2009-2010  track  season  and  she  agreed  to  attend.  When  Respondent  arrived, 
she  was  surprised  to  find  that  JC  was  the  only  track  team  member  at  the  IHOP.  The 
other  members  of  the  track  team  had  gone  to  a  different  event  or  restaurant.  JC  and 
Respondent  had  dinner  at  the  IHOP  and  left  separately.  The  dinner  was  shortly  after  a 
track  meet  and  did  not  extend  until  10:00  p.m.  There  was  no  evidence  of  anything 
inappropriate  about  Respondent’s  conduct  or  her  attendance  at  the  dinner. 
Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  violate  any  law,  policy,  prohibition  or  regulation. 

20. 

Inparagraph 4  of  the  charges,  Complainant  alleges  that  “During  the 

2009-2010  school  year  Ms.  Nancie  Walent  a  P.E.  teacher  at  Drew  Middle  School,  (a 
displaced  P.E.  teacher  and  assistant  track  coach  from  Marshall  High  School),  texted 
members  of  the  Marshall  High  School  track  team.”  Complainant  established  that 
Respondent  exchanged  text  messages  with  some  of  her  former  students  including  MT 
and  JC.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  text  messages  or  Respondent’s  conduct  were 
inappropriate  in  any  way.  Respondent  attended  some  Marshall  HS  track  meets  after 
she  was  transferred  to  Drew  MS  for  the  sole  purpose  of  supporting  the  student 
athletes  that  she  had  previously  coached.  The  Commission  found  it  commendable 
that  Respondent  was  willing  to  return  to  Marshall  HS  to  support  her  former  student 
athletes.’  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  violate  any  law,  policy,  prohibition  or 
regulation. 

: 

21. 

Inparagraph  5  of  the  charges,  Complainant  alleges  that  “While  being 
housed  at  Local  District  7  offices,  Ms.  Nancie  Walent  P.E.  teacher  at  Drew  Middle 
School,  contacted  Drew  Middle  School  staff  members  to  inform  them  that  Mr. 
Manuel  Santamaria,  Assistant  Principal  at  Drew  Middle  School,  was  being  housed  at 
Local  District  7.”  Complainant  established  that  Respondent  replied  to  a  text  message 
from  her  colleague  Teresa.Conti,  an  adaptive  physical  education  teacher  at  Diew  MS, 
in  which  Ms.  Conti  asked  Respondent  “Where.are  you?”  and  “Is  Santa  there?” 
Respondent  replied  “I  saw  him.”  Both  Respondent  and  Ms.  Conti  understood  “Santa” 
to  mean  Mr.  Santamaria.  Respondent  did  not  initiate  the  contact  with  Ms.  Conti. 
Respondent  had  not  been  given  any  instruction  that  she  was  not  to  contact  former 
colleagues  nor  was  she  given  instruction  that  she  was  not  permitted  to  disclose  the 
names  of  any  other  employees  that  were  being  housed  at  the  Local  District  7  office. 
Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  violate  any  law,  policy,  prohibition  or  regulation. 

22. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  violated  school  rules, 
the  District  code  of  conduct,  the  Code  of  Ethics,  the  Sexual  Harassment  Policy,  the 
rules  for  housed  employees  at  District  7  Offices  or  any  other  directive,  policy  or  rule 
set  by  the  District  or  the  State  board  of  Education. 

* 

The  sprinters  did  not  have  an  assistant  coach  assigned  to  them  once 
Respondent  was  transferred  to  Drew.MS.  Respondent  was  not  permitted  to  volunteer 
as  an  assistant  coach  for  the  2009-2010  school  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant 

section  44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivisions  (c)(1)-(3),  when  a  school  board 

recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  it. 
Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or 
against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by 
imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction. 

3. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking 
to  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  standard  of 
proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  The  “preponderance  of  the  evidence” 
standard  requires  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  is  more 
probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (In  re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63  Cal.App.4th  700.) 

i 

4, 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  set  forth 

specifically  which  of  the  District’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  four 
alleged  grounds  for  dismissal: 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  (4)  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 

(1)  immoral  conduct,  (2)  unprofessional  conduct,  (3) 

5. 

Section  44932  provides  in  pertinent  part:  ' 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of 

(a) 
the  following  causes: 

(1)  =  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 
AT. 

(5). 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

.  [MT]... 

(7) 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

6. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 

    

   

 

inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932, 

subdivision(a)(1),  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or 
ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member 
of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41 
Cal.2d  546,  553;  see  Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983) 
149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174.) 

8. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason 
of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.) 
Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in 
temperament  which  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon 
receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.”  (Id.  at  p.  1444.) 

9. 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  of  school  rules 

must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.” 
(Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App. 
3d  317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

10. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are 

established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident 
unfitness  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.  3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d  208;  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.  4th  at  pp. 
Under  the  facts  of  the  Morrison  case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s 
1444-1445.) 
conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may  consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1) 
the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the 
degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 
the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 
likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 
discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights 
of  the  teacher. 

11. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  rectitude, 

 

indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  nor  that  she  displayed 
willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community  or  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to 
dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a) 
(1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7-22  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-6  and 
10. 

12. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in 
unprofessional  conduct.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  violated  ethical  rules 
or  engaged  in  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  teaching  profession.  The 
Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for 
unprofessional  conduct,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  the  reasons 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7-22  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-5,  7,  and  10. 

13. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach,  It  was 
not  established  that  Respondent  has  a  defect  in  her  temperament  or  a  fixed  character 
trait  that  makes  her  unfit  to  teach.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not 
exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant  to  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7-22  and  Legal 
Conclusions  1-5,  8,  and  10. 

14. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  violated  school  rules, 
the  District  code  of  conduct,  the  Code  of  Ethics,  the  Sexual  Harassment  Policy,  the 
rules  for  housed  employees  at  District  7  Offices  or  any  other  directive,  policy,  law,  or 
rule  set  by  the  District  or  the  State  board  of  Education.  The  Commission  determined 
that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7),  for  the  reasons 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7-22  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-5  and  9-10. 

15. 

Because  none  of  the  charges  were  sustained  the  Commission  does  not 
believe  that  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  apply  to  this  case.  Because  the  charges 
were  not  sustained,  the  Commission  determined  that  Respondent  should  not  be 
dismissed.  (Factual  Findings  7-22  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-14) 

if 

if 

Ht 

Oct 

30 

13  01:43p 

OQUEA 

, 

714-288-0227 

p.2 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Nancie  Walent  shall 

not  be  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

October,  2013     

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

October 

,  2013 

October 

,  2013 

Phillip  Ramos 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

10 

  
  

  

i 

i i | i \ 

i 
i 
\ 

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Nancie  Walent  shall 

not  be  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

October 

,  2013 

October  BO,  2013 

October 

,2013 

Jan  Miller 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Glynda  B.  Gomez  ~ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chaitperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

 

  

  
  

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Nancie  Walent  shall 

not  be  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

October 

,  2013 

October 

,  2013 

, 

October  30,  2013 

Jan  Miller 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Phillip  Ramos 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

    

Glynda  BfGomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

10 

  

 

