COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
CAPISTRANO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

   BEFORE  THE 
  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Amended  Accusation 
of: 

CHARLES  J.  BIEHN, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2012050145 

DECISION 

Respondent. 

  

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 
in  San  Juan  Capistrano  on  March  17  —  20,  24  —  27,  and  April  2  —  3,  2014,  under  the  authority 
of  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the 
following:  Martin  Casas,  Assistant  Principal,  Poway  Unified  School  District;  J.  Manuel 
Carcido,  Teacher,  Pasadena  Unified  School  District;  and  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative 
Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

Complainant  Dr.  Joseph  M.  Farley,  Superintendent,  Capistrano  Unified  School 
District,  was  represented  by  Daniel  R.  Shinoff  and  Jeanne  Blumenfeld,  Attorneys  at  Law,  of 
Stutz  Artiano  Shinoff  &  Holtz.  Respondent  Charles  J.  Biehn  was  present  throughout  the 
hearing  and  represented  by  Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  and 
Mitchell  B.  Hannah,  Attorney  at  Law. 

Prior  to  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  determined  that  the 
two  other  members  of  the  Commission  were  qualified  to  serve  on  the  Commission.  Upon 
commencement  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  presented  evidence  on  the  issue  of  whether  the 
four-year  statute  of  limitations  under  Education  Code  section  44944  was  applicable  or  was 
tolled  due  to  the  doctrines  of  equitable  estoppel  or  delayed  discovery.’  The  parties  had 

*  On  November  9,  2012,  an  administrative  law  judge  of  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings  denied  respondent’s  motion  to  strike  allegations  in  the  Accusation  that  occurred 
more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  charges.  Subsequently,  respondent  filed  a 
petition  for  writ  of  mandate,  seeking  review  of  the  ruling.  On  October  18,  2013,  in  Charles 
Biehn,  Petitioner,  vs.  Capistrano  Unified  School  District,  et  al,  Respondent,  Case  No.  30- 
2012-00616562,  the  Superior  Court  of  California,  County  of  Orange,  denied  respondent’s 
petition  for  writ  of  mandate  and  ruled  that  the  Commission  as  the  fact  finder  in  this 
administrative  hearing  should  decide  whether  or  not  the  equitable  doctrine  of  delayed 

  

  

  

previously  filed  briefs  on  the  admissibility  of  evidence  of  respondent’s  alleged  conduct  that 
occurred  more  than  four  years  before  the  filing  of  charges  in  this  matter. 

Upon  completion  of  this  first  phase  of  the  hearing,  the  Commission  determined  that 

the  four-year  statute  of  limitations  under  Education  Code  section  44944  did  not  apply  due  to 
the  application  of  the  doctrine  of  delayed  discovery.  Thereafter,  the  hearing  proceeded  to  the 
second  phase  and  the  parties  presented  additional  witnesses  and  documentary  evidence  with 
respect  to.  the  remaining  allegations  of  the  Amended  Accusation.  The  evidence  presented 
during  the  first  phase  of  the  hearing  was  considered  part  of  the  evidence  for  the  hearing  on 
the  merits  of  the  Amended  Accusation. 

On  conclusion  of  the  evidentiary  phase  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  presented  oral 

argument.  The  Commission  then  conducted  deliberations  at  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  on  April  10  —  11,  2014,  in  Los  Angeles;  on  April  18,  2014,  in  San  Diego;  and  on 
July  10,  2014,  in  San  Juan  Capistrano. 

Oral,  documentary,  and  stipulated  evidence  having  been  received  and  oral  arguments 
heard,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  deliberated  and  considered  the  evidence 
in  closed  sessions,  submitted  this  matter  for  decision  on  April  3,  2014,  and  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that,  on  January  21,  2014, 

the  Amended  Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by  complainant  Dr.  Joseph  M.  Farley  in  his 
official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  Capistrano  Unified  School  District,  State  of 
California  (District).  With  administrative  offices  in  San  Juan  Capistrano,  the  District  is  a 
fairly  large  comprehensive  school  district  comprised  of  56  primary  and  secondary  schools 
and  approximately  4,200  certificated  and  classified  employees  who  serve  approximately 
49,000  pupils. 

2. 

Respondent  Charles  J.  Biehn,  also  known  as  Chi  Chi  Biehn  (respondent),  has 

been  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  since  in  or  about  November  1993.  He 
holds  a  credential  to  teach  social  science  at  the  high  school  level.  Respondent  graduated 
from  the  District’s  Capistrano  Valley  High  School  (CVHS)  in  1989  and  then  matriculated  to 
Saddleback  College.  He  played  on  the  football  teams  while  attending  both  high  school  and 
community  college.  Respondent  then  transferred  to  the  University  of  La  Verne  and 
graduated  with  his  college  degree  in  or  about  1993. 

3. 

While  he  attended  college,  respondent  was  a  volunteer  coach  for  the  football 

team  at  CVHS  under  the  tutelage  of  the  head  football  coach  at  the  time  who  was  Eric  Patton. 
After  he  graduated  from  college,  respondent  began  working  for  the  District  as  a  suspension 

  

discovery  should  apply  to  allow  the  District  to  present  evidence  of  conduct  that  occurred 
more  than  four  years  before  the  filing  of  the  charges. 

   

     

teacher,  tutor,  and  resident  substitute  teacher.  On  an  undetermined  date,  respondent  attained 
a  preliminary  teaching  credential  and  began  working  and  receiving  a  stipend  as  a  coach  for 
the  high  school’s  sports  teams.  In  or  about  November  1993,  respondent  was  hired  by  the 
District  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee.  He  began  teaching  social  studies  at  Aliso 
Niguel  High  School  where  he  became  a  coach  for  the  freshman  baseball  team  and  an 
assistant  football  coach.  Among  his  duties  as  an  assistant  football  coach,  respondent 
coordinated  the  offense,  coached  the  quarterbacks,  and  made  recommendations  to  the  head 
football  coach  and  equipment  manager  about  replacing  equipment  for  the  football  teams. 

4. 

(A)  Several  years  later,  during  the  2002-2003  school  year,  the  position  of  head 

football  coach  at  CVHS  became  open  when  the  existing  coach  quit  after  coaching  the 
football  team  but  one  season.  Respondent  applied  for  the  position.  He  aspired  to  become  a 
head  football  coach  at  the  high  school  level.  He  had  applied  for  other  coaching  vacancies  on 
two  prior  occasions. 

(B)  In  the  spring  of  2003,  the  principal  at  CVHS  was  Tom  W.  Ressler  and  the 

co-athletic  director  was  Tom  Airey.  Ressler  has  worked  for  the  District  for  30  years.  He 
was  the  principal  of  CVHS  for  five  years  and  taught  English  there  for  15  years.  He  has 
known  respondent  since  1985  when  respondent  was  a  student  and  football  player  at  the  high 
school.  Ressler  was  also  the  athletic  director  for  five  years  in  1990’s.  In  2008,  Ressler  was 
appointed  the  principal  at  the  District’s  new  high  school,  San  Juan  Hills  High  School.  Airey 
was  the  co-athletic  director  at  CVHS  for  three  years  from  2002  through  2005.  As  co-athletic 
director,  Airey  hired  coaches  for  CVHS,  supervised  22  sports  teams,  oversaw  the  budget  of 
the  CVHS  athletic  department,  and  allocated  District  funds  to  the  sports  teams.  Airey  isa 
social  studies  teacher,  chairperson  of  the  social  studies  department,  and  a  coach  for  the 
basketball,  track,  and  cross-country  teams  at  CVHS. 

(C)  Respondent  was  interviewed  for  the  head  football  coaching  position  by 

Principal  Ressler  and  the  co-athletic  director  Airey.  The  principal  considered  respondent  to 
be  an  excellent  candidate  for  the  position  of  head  football  coach.  He  believed  respondent 
was  trustworthy  and  a  leader.  Airey  found  respondent  was  energetic  and  likeable, 
knowledgeable  about  football,  and  had  built  good  relationships  with  student  athletes  at  Aliso 
Niguel  High  School.  Respondent  had  a  vision  for  the  football  program  at  CVHS.  After  the 
interview  process  was  completed,  Principal  Ressler  recommended  respondent  to  be  hired  as 
the  new  football  coach  at  CVHS.  In  or  about  March  2003,  the  District  approved  the 
principal’s  recommendation  and  hired  respondent.  Respondent  completed  his  teaching  and 
coaching  assignments  for  the  2003-2003  school  year  at  Aliso  Niguel  High  School  before 
transferring  to  CVHS  for  the  next  school  year.  He  began  his  head  football  coaching  duties 
right  away  that  spring  of  2003. 

respondent  was a  first-time  head  high  school  football  coach  at  age  33.  He  became   

When  he  was  hired  as  the  head  football  coach  at  CVHS  in  March  2003, 

Respondent  Biehn 

5. 

  

     

responsible  for  overseeing  the  football  program  at  the  high  school,  which  included  the 
varsity,  junior  varsity,  and  freshman  football  teams,  and  supervising  and  coaching  the 
student-athletes  on  those  teams.  He  was  required  to  teach  the  fundamentals  of  football,  work 
with  student-athletes  during  the  annual  spring  practice  session,  and  prepare  and  coach  the 
varsity  football  team  for  the  games  in  the  fall  season.  Respondent’s  duties  included 
implementing  and  overseeing  the  offensive  and  defensive  schemes  and  game  plans  for  the 
football  team,  ensuring  the  safety  of  the  players,  and  supervising  the  student-athletes’ 
academic  achievement  and  eligibility.  While  it  was  the  District  which  hired  personnel, 
respondent  made  recommendations  to  the  District  for  the  hiring  of  assistant  coaches  for  the 
varsity  football  team  and  coaches  for  the  two  lower  level  teams.  Respondent  was  responsible 
for  the  upkeep  of  the  football  facilities,  which  included  the  football  field  and  locker  room, 
and  the  maintenance  and  ordering  of  the  football  uniforms  and  equipment.  He  was  required 
to  interact  and  meet  with  the  football  booster  club  comprised  of  parents  and  members  of  the 
community.  During  the  summer  in  the  month  of  July,  the  District  and  CVHS  allowed 
respondent  to  operate  a  summer  football  camp  for  student-athletes  and  youngsters  interested 
in  playing  football.  Any  funds  or  fees  from  the  summer  camp  were  considered  respondent’s 
income.  As  the  head  football  coach,  respondent  was  expected  to  be  a  leader  and 
representative  of  the  football  teams  on  the  high  school  campus  and  in  the  community. 
Respondent  was  supervised  and  his  performance  evaluated  by  the  principal  and  the  co- 
athletic  director  at  CVHS. 

6. 

(A)  As  soon  as  he  was  hired  as  the  CVHS  football  coach,  respondent  began 
searching  for  assistant  coaches  for  the  varsity  team  and  coaches  for  the  junior  varsity  and 
freshman  teams  whom  he  could  recommend  for  hiring.  He  organized  the  schedules  for  the 
upcoming  spring  practice  session,  the  team’s  participation  in  a  summer  passing  league,  the 
preseason  football  camp,  the  conditioning  and  weight-lifting  program  for  the  players,  and  the 
practices  and  games  for  the  fall  season.  The  high  school  football  season  was  typically  from 
August  through  November  or  December  of  the  fall  semester  depending  upon  whether  the 
varsity  team  made  the  playoffs.  Respondent  contacted  coaches  from  other  high  schools  to 
schedule  games,  met  with  parents  and  the  booster  club  members,  and  recruited  students  on 
campus  to  join  the  football  team.  At  the  end  of  the  fall  football  season,  respondent  was 
expected  to  organize  a  football  banquet. 

(B)  In  the  spring  of  2003,  respondent  checked  the  football  facilities,  including 

the  football  field  and  training  room,  and  related  equipment,  including a  lift  from  which 
coaches  could  view  and  record  games  and  practices,  to  ensure  their  proper  maintenance  and 
operation.  Respondent  also  had  to  evaluate  the  equipment  needs  of  the  football  team. 
Because  the  CVHS  football  program  was  a  ‘non-cut”  program,  every  student  who  came  out 
for  football  was  able  to  participate  on  the  varsity,  junior  varsity,  or  freshman  football  team 
and  needed  football  equipment.  Respondent  met  with  Robert  “Bob”  Parker,  the  CVHS 
equipment  manager,  who  was  also  the  locker  room  attendant  and  a  custodian,  and  discussed 
the  football  team’s  needs  for  equipment. 

inventorying  the  football  equipment  and  related  supplies,  maintaining  the  scoreboard  as  well   

(C)  As  the  CVHS  equipment  manager,  Parker’s  duties  included  checking  and 

  

 

as  the  football  lift  used  by  coaches  and  others  to  view  and  record  football  practices  and 
games,  and  overseeing  the  equipment  and/or  training  room  and  the  locker  room.  By  Parker’s 
count  there  were  approximately  220  football  helmets,  250  shoulder  pads,  300  hip  and  knee 
pads,  scrimmage  vests,  practice  and  game  jerseys  and  pants,  football  equipment  tools,  back 
plates  and  footballs  on  hand  at  CVHS.  Much  of  the  football  equipment  was  dated  or  old. 
Each  year  after  the  football  season  and  in  or  about  December,  football  helmets  were  typically 
sent  to  a  vendor  or  company  which  examined  the  helmets  and,  if  deemed  safe,  reconditioned 
for  continued  use  by  student-athletes.  Upon  looking  at  the  football  equipment  at  CVHS, 
respondent  wanted  to  purchase  new  football  helmets  and  equipment  for  his  team.  Parker 
suggested  to  respondent  that  he  meet  with  Bill  Lapes  (Lapes)  of  Lapes  Athletic  Team  Sales 
(LATS)  if  he  wanted  to  purchase  new  football  equipment. 

7. 

That  spring  of  2003,  respondent  met  with  co-athletic  director  Airey  and 

Principal  Ressler  to  discuss  the  football  budget.  Airey  advised  respondent  that  the  CVHS 
football  team  was  to  be  allocated  approximately  $8,000  to  buy  safety  equipment  for  the 
football  team.  As  he  told  other  coaches,  Airey  instructed  respondent  that,  for  the  purchasing 
of  football  equipment,  he  had  to  complete  and  obtain  approval  of  a  purchase  requisition  and 
submit  the  purchase  requisition  to  the  District.  Ressler  told  respondent  not  to  exceed  the 
football  budget  and  that  he  should  listen  to  Parker  about  buying  new  equipment.  Respondent 
told  both  Airey  and  Ressler  that  he  planned  to  meet  with  Bill  Lapes  about  purchasing  new 
equipment  from  LATS.  The  administrators  did  not  tell  respondent  not  to  meet  with  Lapes. 
Respondent  was  aware  that  the  District  funds  were  to  be  used  to  purchase  safety  equipment 
for  football  but  he  also  believed  that  the  funds  could  be  used  to  buy  what  was  necessary  to 
play  the  game,  such  as  footballs. 

8. 

(A)  As  was  its  practice,  the  District  provided  funds  to  its  high  schools  in  the 
late  spring  or  early  summer  to  purchase  football  and  other  athletic  equipment,  such  as  balls 
and  nets,  and  safety  equipment.  The  amount  of  the  District’s  allocation  was  determined  in 
accordance  with  a  formula. 

(B)  Due  to  the  physical  nature  of  the  sport  and  the  potential  for  injury, football 

required  more  safety  equipment  than  other  sports.  Safety  equipment  for  football  included 
helmets,  different  types  of  pads  for  the  shoulders,  hips,  and  backs,  and  jerseys  and  pants  that 
allowed  for  the  use  of  the  pads.  The  athletic  director  at  each  high  schoo]  allocated  the 
District  funds  to  the  various  sports  teams  and  coaches  at  the  high  school.  At  CVHS,  the 
football  team  received  approximately  $8,000  to  $10,000  per  school  year  from  the  District  to 
purchase  safety  equipment  for  the  players.  In  or  about  June  of  each  school  year,  the  athletic 
director  advised  the  football  coach  of  the  amount  of  the  District  funds  allocated  to  the 
football  team  for  the  upcoming  fall  season. 

(C)  Funds  for  the  football  program  also  came  from  donations  and  the  fund- 

raising  activities  of  the  players’  parents  and  the  football  booster  club.  Funds  from  the  student 
body  association  supplemented  the  District  funds.  In  addition,  the  CVHS  football  team 

    
could  receive  funds  or  credits  from  a  vendor  if  the  football  team  participated  in  a  spirit  pack   

program  wherein  student-athletes  purchased  such  items  as  a  practice  shirt  and  shorts  from  the 
vendor. 

9. 

(A)  In  2003,  the  District  and  CVHS  had  an  established  procedure  to  buy 

football  equipment  from  a  vendor.  This  procedure  was  not  fully  memorialized  in  writing  or 
described  in  a  manual.  When  seeking  to  order  equipment  from  the  vendor,  respondent  and 
other  District  coaches  were  required  to  first  obtain  a  quote  for  the  equipment  from  a  vendor. 
The  vendor’s  quote  described  the  equipment,  the  unit  price,  the  quantity  or  number  of  units 
of  each  piece  of  equipment,  and  the  total  price  of  the  equipment  covered  under  the  quote. 
Respondent  and  other  coaches  were  then  required  to  complete  a  District  purchase  requisition 
form  and  attach  the  quote  to  the  form.  On  the  purchase  requisition,  the  coach  indicated  that 
he  or  she  was  the  requisitioning  employee,  the  reason  for  the  purchase,  such  as  football 
equipment  for  the  upcoming  fall  season,  and  could  specify  whether  the  equipment  was  to  be 
delivered  to  the  school  site  or  picked  up  by  the  coach.  The  school  secretary  usually  typed  the 
purchase  requisition  form  which  was  then  submitted  to  the  high  school  principal  for  review. 
At  CVHS  at  that  time  in  2003,  Principal  Ressler  typically  approved  the  purchase  requisition 
because  he  assumed  the  coach  was  ordering  what  was  needed  for  his  sports  team  and  the 
information  on  the  purchase  requisition  form  was  accurate.  The’school  secretary  then 
forwarded  the  approved  purchase  requisition  to  the  District’s  business  offices  for  processing. 

(B)  At  the  District  business  offices,  the  fiscal  services  division  verified 

whether  there  were  sufficient  funds  to  buy  the  equipment  listed  on  the  purchase  requisition 
before  entering  the  funding  account  code  on  the  purchase  requisition  form.  The  purchasing 
division  then  prepared  a  purchase  order  which  was  based  on  the  purchase  requisition  and  the 
attached  quote.  The  purchase  order  contained  the  stamped  signature  of  the  District  employee 
who  had  authority  to  sign  the  form  under  a  delegation  order.  The  purchasing  division  then 
transmitted  the  purchase  order  to  the  vendor  by  facsimile  transmission  and  gave  copies  of  the 
purchase  order  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District,  the  purchasing  division,  and  the 
requisitioning  employee.  After  delivery  or  pick-up  of  the  equipment,  the  requisitioning 
employee  or  school  site  was  required  to  send  the  packing  slip  or  an  electronic  mail  message 
to  the  purchasing  division  to  confirm  receipt  of  the  equipment  that  was  ordered  under  the 
purchase  order.  On  confirmation  of  delivery  or  receipt,  the  purchasing  division  prepared  and 
issued  a  check.  The  check  was  then  sent  to  the  Orange  County  Department  of  Education 
which  forwarded  the  check  to  the  vendor  on  issuance  of  an  authorization  of  release  of  the 
check. 

10. 

(A)  In  or  about  May  2003,  respondent  informed  Parker  what  the  budget  was 

for  the  CVHS  football-team  for  the  upcoming  fall  season  and  the  two  of  them  went  to  see 
Lapes  at  the  LATS  offices  to  select  and  order  new  football  equipment.  Respondent  and 
Parker  viewed  the  new  football  equipment  and  gear  on  display  or  in  stock  at  the  vendor. 
Respondent  informed  Lapes  that  approximately  $8,000  was  available  to  purchase  safety 
equipment  for  the  football  team  for  the  2003  season.  Lapes  asked  them  what  they  needed  for 
the  CVHS  football  team.  Respondent  replied  that  he  needed  helmets,  pads,  footballs,  game 
watches,  and  spirit  wear.  For  the  spirit  wear,  Lapes  suggested  that  the  players  come  into  his 
company’s  showroom  and  buy  spirit  wear  and  the  football  team  could  accrue  credits  to 

 

  

purchase  equipment.  Respondent  was  not  interested  in  requiring  his  players  spend  their  own 
money  on  spirit  wear.  Thereupon,  respondent  ordered  spirit  wear  comprised  of  players’  tee 
shirts  and  shorts  and  coaches’  shirts  and  football  watches  and  asked  Lapes  to  deliver  the 
merchandise.  He  told  Lapes  that  the  football  booster  club  would  pay  for  the  spirit  wear 
order.  Respondent  and  Parker  then  selected  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and 
indicated  that  Parker  would  order  the  football  equipment  later.  After  the  meeting,  respondent 
and  Parker  went  out  to  dinner  with  Lapes. 

(B)  In  or  about  May  2003,  Lapes  prepared  a  quote  for  the  order  or  purchase  of 

football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  gave  the  quote  to  respondent  or  Parker. 
Co-athletic  director  Airey  and  Parker  used  the  quote  from  LATS  to  prepare  a  purchase 
requisition  for  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  for  the  2003  season,  as  more 
fully  described  in  Findings  23  and  32  below. 

  

Lapes  Athletic  Team  Sales,  Inc. 

11. 

(A)  LATS  was  founded  and  organized  in  1991  by  William  “Bill”  Lapes  to 
market  and  sell  athletic  and  football  equipment  and  apparel  to  high  schools  and  colleges. 
LATS  had  sales  offices  and  a  warehouse  facility  in  Lake  Forest  and  later  in  Laguna  Hills  in 
south  Orange  County.  At  all  times  relevant  herein,  Lapes  was  the  majority  shareholder  and 
chief  executive  officer  of  LATS.  He  also  worked  as  a  salesperson  for  the  company.  In  1992, 
Lapes’  son,  Chad,  joined  the  company  and  worked  in  the  purchasing  area,  dealing  with 
customer  orders  and  suppliers  or  manufacturers  of  athletic  equipment, 
son,  Adam,  also  began  working  full-time  at  LATS  and  performed  purchasing,  retail  sales, 
and  warehousing  duties. 

(B)  Prior  to  forming  LATS,  Lapes  was  a  salesperson  for  Goodman’s  Sporting 

Goods.  He  was  also  a  coach  for  the  football  team  at  CVHS  where  his  sons  attended  high 
school.  After  Lapes  formed  his  own  sporting  goods  supply  company,  CVHS  and  other  high 
schools  in  the  District  as  well  as  high  schools  and  colleges  throughout  southern  California 
began  ordering  and  purchasing  football  equipment,  apparel,  and  athletic  supplies  for  their 
teams  from  him. 

(C)  As  established  by  or  inferred  from  the  evidence,  the  football  coaches  for 

the  District’s  high  schools  have  ordered  and  purchased  football  and/or  athletic  equipment 
from  LATS  since  in  or  about  1991.  The  purchasing  of  football  equipment  was  not  subject  to 
a  competitive  bidding  process  of  the  District.  Nor  were  the  football  coaches  required  to 
obtain  the  best  prices  for  the  football  equipment. 

(D)  As  established  by  the  District’s  records,  including  Vendor  History  Reports 

and  Requisition  Entry  for  Purchase  Orders,  and  investigative  reports  (Exh.  80),  between 
2000  and  2008,  the  administrators,  athletic  directors,  and  football  coaches  and  staff  at  the 
District’s  Aliso  Niguel,  San  Clemente,  and  Tesoro  High  Schools  as  well  as  CVHS  ordered 
football  and  other  athletic  equipment  and  supplies  from  LATS.  Administrators  and  coaches 

In  2004,  Lapes’  other 

   

   submitted  purchase  requisitions  to  the  District  and  the  District  prepared  and  forwarded 

purchase  orders  to  LATS  for  football  and  athletic  equipment  and  supplies  for  their  high 
school  sports  teams.  The  District  paid  LATS  for  the  purchase  orders  when  it  received 
confirmation  that  the  football  and  athletic  equipment  and  supplies  were  delivered  to  the  high 
schools.  Over  the  years  since  its  inception,  LATS  developed  sales  accounts  with  the  high 
schools  of  the  District  and  became  an  authorized  vendor  of  football  and  athletic  equipment 
for  the  District. 

12. 

(A)  When  LATS  was  formed  in  1991,  the  head  football  coach  at  CVHS  was 

Eric  Patton.  Parker  had  just  become  the  equipment  manager  at  CVHS  and  continued 
performing  his  duties  as  the  equipment  manager  for  the  next  15  years.  In  the  1990’s  and 
early  2000’s,  Parker  accompanied  Patton  and  the  subsequent  head  football  coaches  at  CVHS 
to  LATS  to  order  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  high  school  football  team.  On  an 
undetermined  date  in  or  before  2003,  Parker  also  began  working  for  LATS  during  one  month 
each  summer,  delivering  athletic  equipment  and  supplies  to  various  schools  or  school 
districts. 

(B)  When  Parker  and  the  football  coaches  went  to  the  LATS  offices  in  the 

13. 

(A)  Soon  after  starting  LATS  in  1991,  Lapes  created  special  accounts  at  LATS 

spring,  they  met  with  Lapes  and  discussed  what  football  equipment  and  supplies  were  needed 
for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  the  amount  of  money  that  the  District  had  allocated  to  the 
high  school  to  purchase  football  safety  equipment  for  the  upcoming  fall  football  season.  The 
head  football  coach  and  Parker  selected  football  equipment  that  they  wanted  to  order  for  the 
CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  completed  team  sales  orders  or  quotes  for  the  equipment  which 
were  used  to  prepare  purchase  requisitions  that  were  filed  with  the  District.  The  District 
prepared  purchase  orders  for  the  football  equipment  and  forwarded  the  purchase  orders  to 
LATS.  Upon  receipt  of  the  purchase  orders,  LATS  purportedly  filled  the  orders  and 
delivered  the  football  equipment  to  CVHS.  The  District  paid  LATS  on  receiving 
confirmation  from  CVHS  that  the  football  equipment  ordered  under  the  purchase  had  been 
delivered  to  the  high  school.  However,  LATS  did  not  actually  deliver  the  football  equipment 
to  the  high  school  and,  instead,  provided  a  credit  to  the  football  team  when  the  District  paid 
its  purchase  invoice  as  described  below. 

    

for  the  high  schools  and  colleges  that  were  customers  of  his  company.  The  accounts  were 
initially  called  “slush  accounts.”  In  or  about  2003,  LATS  changed  the  name  of  these 
accounts  to  “promo”  or  promotional  accounts.  These  accounts  were  kept  by  LATS  as  part  of 
its  normal  business  operations  and  activities  and,  in  or  about  2000,  placed  and  maintained  on 
its  “SportzPak”  software  program  on  the  business  computer.  LATS  kept  a  promotional  or 
slush  account  for  each  of  the  high  school  football  teams  in  the  District,  including  CVHS,  and 
other  high  schools  and  colleges.  The  promotional  account  was  identified  at  LATS  by  the 
number  “9”  before  the  regular  account  number  for  the  high  school  or  college  football  team. 
For  example,  the  regular  account  number  for  CVHS  was  the  first  four  letters  of  the  name  of 
the  high  school  plus  a  number,  or  “CAPIO1.”  The  promotional  account  was  identified  as 
“QCAPIOL.” 

  

  

(B)  When  a  high  school  or  college  sports  team  ordered  athletic  or  football 

equipment,  LATS  issued  a  purchase  invoice  to  the  school  administration  for  the  purported 
delivery  of  the  equipment  to  the  high  school  or  college.  The  school  administration  paid  for 
the  order  or  LATS  purchase  invoice.  However,  the  equipment  ordered  and  paid  for  was 
typically  not  delivered  by  LATS  to  the  high  school  or  college.  Rather,  LATS  provided  a 
credit  to  the  promotional  or  9  account  for  the  high  school  or  college  athletic  program  based 
on  the  payment  for  the  equipment  less  the  applicable  sales  tax.  Lapes  then  allowed  the  coach 
of  the  athletic  program  to  use  the  credits  and  accumulated  credits  in  the  promotional  account 
maintained  by  LATS  for  the  high  school  or  college  sports  team  to  order  and  purchase  athletic 
equipment,  supplies,  and  apparel  from  LATS  for  his  or  her  high  school  sports  team  and 
personnel,  including  apparel  and  gear  for  coaches  and  administrators.  LATS  delivered  the 
items  for  these  purchases  which  were  paid  for  or  debited  from  the  promotional  account  to  the 
high  school  or  college. 

(C)  Records  and  documents  demonstrated  that  LATS  had  promotional  or  9 

accounts  for  CVHS  since  the  early  1990’s.  For  example,  a  note  dated  September  13,  1994, 
stated  that  “Parker  has  slush  of  $121.”  A  team  sales  order  dated  October  20,  1995,  showed 
that  Parker  ordered  cleats  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  noted  on  the  team  sales  order 
that  the  purchase  was  to  be  “take[n]  off  slush”  account.  On  a  team  sales  order  placed  by 
Parker  that  was  to  be  shipped  on  October  12,  1995,  there  was  a  note  that  the  purchase  was  to 
be  deducted  from  the  “slush  fund.”  In  a  team  sales  order  dated  August  24,  2000,  Parker 
returned  five  girdles  and  Lapes  wrote  on  the  order  that  the  slush  account  was  to  be  credited 
$143.40.  Numerous  LATS  documents  from  the  1990’s  contained  references  to  slush 
accounts  for  CVHS  and  other  high  schools.” 

14. 

(A)  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  suggested  that  Lapes  started  using  the 

promotional  accounts  at  LATS  for  the  high  school  and  college  football  teams  and  allowing 
the  football  coaches  to  purchase  football  equipment  with  credits  placed  in  the  promotional 
accounts  for  business  reasons.  High  school  football  teams,  like  that  at  CVHS,  were  allocated 
a  certain  amount  of  funding  from  the  school  district  or  administration  to  buy  football 
equipment  but  the  high  school  coaches,  who  ordered  football  equipment  for  their  teams,  did 
not  know  what  the  level  of  funding  was  going  to  be  for  the  upcoming  fall  football  season 
until  in  or  about  June  of  the  preceding  school  year.  In  addition,  soon  after  the  fall  football 
season  ended  in  or  about  November  or  December,  high  school  football  teams  sent  their 
football  helmets  to  outside  companies  for  inspection  and  possible  reconditioning.  The 
coaches  did  not  know  how  many  of  the  helmets  would  be  deemed  safe  to  be  used  again  by 
the  student-athletes  until  after  the  helmets  were  reconditioned  and  returned  in  several 
months,  which  was  usually  in  or  about  April.  As  such,  high  school  football  coaches  did  not 
know  how  much  funding  was  available  to  buy  football  equipment  or  what  football  equipment 

?  Pursuant  to  complainant’s  motion,  pages  1127-1128,  1157-1162,  1170-1171,  and 

1174-1177  of  Exhibit  69  were  admitted  into  evidence.  After  the  Commission  began 
deliberations,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  on  his  motion  admitted  the  entirety  of  Exhibit 
69  into  evidence  as  a  matter  of  fairness  and  for  the  purposes  of  mitigation. 

  
 

     

was  needed  for  their  football  teams  for  the  upcoming  fall  football  season  until  in  or  about 
June  or  July. 

(B)  For  its  part,  LATS  was  required  to  project  what  its  customers  were  going 

to  order  for  the  year.  LATS  was  a  member  of  a  buying  group  comprised  of  vendors 
throughout  the  country.  The  buying  group  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  in  bulk 
from  manufacturers  and  vendors  in  order  to  obtain  the  best  possible  selection  and  prices.  In 
January  or  February  each  year,  LATS  was  required  to  place  a  booking  order  with  or  through 
the  buying  group.  LATS  had  to  forecast  the  volume  of  football  equipment,  such  as  helmets, 
that  was  going  to  be  ordered  by  its  customers  for  the  upcoming  season  based,  in  part,  on  their 
past  orders.  The  evidence  suggested  that  Lapes  used  the  promotional  accounts  as  a  way  to 
deal  with  the  uncertainties  and  vicissitudes  of  high  school  funding  levels  and  equipment 
orders,  the  timing  of  the  booking  orders  and  school  district  purchase  payments  for  orders, 
and  the  difficulty  of  forecasting  of  orders  by  high  school  football  teams.  On  the  other  hand, 
Lapes  also  may  have  instituted  the  promotional  accounts  to  keep  his  customers  and  to  have 
an  assured  stream  of  orders  and  income  from  them.  In  any  case,  LATS  obtained  and 
accumulated  orders  by  high  school  and  college  football  teams,  collected  payments  on  the 
orders,  and  provided  credits  in  the  promotional  accounts  set  up  for  use  by  its  customers. 
Football  coaches,  in  turn,  were  able  to  use  existing  and  past  credits  in  the  promotional 
accounts  to  order  equipment  for  the  spring  football  practice  session  and  for  the  preseason 
practice  sessions.  Once  the  football  season  started  in  September,  football  coaches  were  able 
to  use  the  funds  placed  in  the  promotional  accounts  due  to  credits  for  payments  made  by 
school  districts  and  administrations  in  the  late  summer  or  early  fall  for  invoices.  Lapes’ 
manner  of  doing  business  with  the  promotional  accounts  began  to  unravel  and  apparently 
caused  financial  difficulties  for  his  company  by  2006. 

LATS  and  Geoffrey  and  Teresa  Sando 

15. 

(A)  Inor  about  April  2003,  Geoffrey  Sando  (Sando),  a  certified  public 

accountant  with  an  Orange  County  public  accounting  firm,  began  performing  accounting 
work  for  LATS.  Sando’s  firm  had  prepared  LATS’  tax  returns  and  annual  financial 
statements  for  several  years.  As  the  accountant  for  LATS,  Sando  went  to  the  LATS  offices 
once  a  week  and  performed  various  accounting  tasks.  For  example,  he  printed  a  list  of 
vendors  that  were  owed  payments  for  the  week  and  prepared  checks  from  LATS  bank 
accounts  to  pay  the  vendors.  He  answered  questions  of  the  staff.  Once  a  month,  for 
purposes  of  preparing  financial  statements,  Sando  reconciled  LATS’s  customer  accounts, 
accounts  receivable,  and  bank  accounts.  At  the  end  of  LATS’  fiscal  year  each  September 
30th,  Sando  helped  to  prepare  or  had  access  to  the  company’s  inventory  records  of  its  athletic 
equipment  and  supplies. 

(B)  Sando  was  LATS’  accountant  for  approximately  five  years  and  claimed 

that  he  never  had  a  reason  to  question  any  business  record  prepared  by  its  staff  or  the 
continued  financial  viability  or  profitability  of  the  company.  Sando  had  reviewed  the  tax 
returns  and  financial  statements  or  audits  of  the  company  and  believed  that  LATS  was 

 

     
10 

On  the 
making  money  every  year.  Sando  described  LATS  as  having  “been  around  forever.” 
other  hand,  Sando  was  also  aware  that  Lapes  was  earning  $180,000  annually  from  LATS  and 
enjoyed  gambling.  During  one  tax  year,  Lapes  reported  having  earned  $1  million  in 
winnings  from  gambling. 

(C)  In  or  about  November  2006,  LATS  began  having  financial  trouble.  A 
bank  demanded  that  LATS  pay  $100,000  of  an  outstanding  loan  or  line  of  credit  totaling 
$450,000  and  submit  a  plan  to  repay  the  loan  or  line  of  credit.  Checks  made  by  Sando  were 
not  being  mailed  out  to  suppliers  because  the  company  lacked  sufficient  cash  to  cover  the 
checks  or  to  pay  the  suppliers.  Lapes’  two  sons  proposed  to  buy  67  percent  of  the  company’s 
stock  for  $200,000.  Sando  advised  Lapes  that  his  sons’  proposal  would  not  solve  his 
company’s  financial  problem  inasmuch  as  LATS  owed  $450,000  to  the  bank  and  Lapes 
wanted  to  retain  control  of  the  company.  Sando  told  Lapes  that  he  needed  $400,000. 

(D)  In  or  about  February  2007,  Sando  invested  $400,000  in  LATS  and  thereby 

acquired  45  percent  of  the  stock  of  the  company.  Sando  believed  that  his  investment  was 
sound  and  would  bring  financial  stability  to  the  company.  As  a  condition  of  his  investment, 
Sando  insisted  that  Lapes  execute  a  shareholder  agreement  wherein  75  percent  of  the 
company’s  shares  were  required  to  incur  additional  debt  or  to  increase  salaries  and  two 
signatures  were  required  on  company  checks.  However,  Lapes  failed  to  abide  by  the 
shareholder  agreement.  Just  one  month  later,  in  or  about  March  2007,  Lapes  disappeared  for 
three  or  four  days  with  the  company’s  checks  and  wrote  checks  totaling  $129,000  to  himself. 
When  he  returned,  Lapes  told  Sando  what  he  had  done.  Sando  responded  by  loaning 
$50,000  to  LATS.  Over  the  course  of  the  next  year,  Sando  loaned  a  total  of  $240,000  to 
LATS.  The  company,  however,  continued  to  experience  a  cash  flow  shortage. 

(E)  In  or  about  February  2008,  Lapes  asked  Sando  for  another  loan  so  that 

LATS  could  buy  products  from  suppliers  to  sell  to  customers.  After  initially  suggesting  the 
company  reduce  its  costs  by  curtailing  salaries  or  health  insurance  coverage  for  employees, 
Sando  called  in  his  promissory  note  or  notes.  Payments  on  the  loans  that  he  had  made  to  the 
company  were  past  due.  As a  result,  Sando  acquired  the  assets  of  LATS  and  all  of  the  stock 
in  company,  including  the  stock  belonging  to  Lapes.  Lapes  was  terminated  from  his  position 
and  employment  with  LATS. 

(F)  After  he  became  the  owner  of  LATS  in  or  about  March  2008,  Sando  began 

reviewing  the  company’s  expense  accounts  and  accounts  receivable  more  closely.  Sando 
found  that  there  was  an  outstanding  balance  of  $175,000  in  the  accounts  receivable  and  that  a 
number  of  high  schools  owed  money  to  LATS  for  the  purchases  of  athletic  equipment. 
Sando  and  his  spouse,  Teresa  Sando,  called  or  contacted  customers  and  schools  to  try  to 
collect  on  the  accounts  receivable.  Several  customers  informed  Sando  and  his  spouse  that 
they  had  already  written  checks  to  Lapes  in  payments  of  their  accounts.  Sando  learned  Lapes 
had  taken  customer  payments  of  approximately  $35,000  that  belonged  to  LATS.  In  or  about 
June  2008,  Sando  decided  to  liquidate  the  assets  and  inventory  of  LATS,  terminate  its  lease, 
and  wind  up  and  close  the  business. 

11 

 

  

(G)  Subsequently,  in  or  about  late  2008,  Sando  filed  a  report  with  the  Orange 
County  Sheriff's  Department,  complaining  that  Lapes  and  his  two  sons,  who  had  started  their 
own  athletic  supply  company,  had  taken  a  vehicle,  computer,  and  other  business  assets 
belonging  to  LATS.  In  or  about  February  2009,  Sando  filed  a  civil  lawsuit  seeking  damages 
from  Lapes  and  his  two  sons.  Sando  testified  that  he  obtained  a  default  judgment  of  $1 
million  against  Lapes.  According  to  Teresa  Sando,  the  civil  lawsuit  was  resolved  through 
mediation. 

16. 

(A)  After  he  took  over  the  ownership  and  control  of  LATS  and  decided  to 
close  the  business  in  May  2008,  the  Sandos  began  rummaging  through  the  files,  computer 
records,  storage  areas,  and  offices  at  LATS  and  collected  and  reviewed  the  various  business 
records  and  documents  of  the  company  that  they  found  on  the  premises.  They  found 
handwritten  team  sales  orders,  bank  deposit  slips  or  registries,  check  registries,  copies  of 
checks  from  customers  or  school  districts  that  had  been  deposited  by  LATS,  packing  slips 
that  accompanied  deliveries  of  athletic  equipment,  invoices  or  quotes,  inventory  records,  and 
ledgers.  After  closing  the  business,  the  Sandos  took  home  approximately  150  file  boxes 
containing  LATS  documents. 

(B)  The  Sandos  also  printed  records  of  accounts  receivable,  sales  orders,  and 

purchase  orders  from  customers  and  school  districts  that  were  stored  on  the  LATS  computer. 
On  the  computer,  the  Sandos  found  the  SportzPak  software  program  that  LATS  used  to 
record,  store,  and  track  sales,  purchase  orders,  and  accounts  receivable.  The  LATS  Sportz- 
Pak  program  contained  account  receivable  data  and  histories  and  account  receivable  aged 
trial  balances  for  individual  high  schools  and  colleges  that  were  customers  of  the  company. 
The  program  showed  that  LATS  assigned  an  account  or  customer  number  to  each  high 
school  and  college  and  used  this  account  number  on  the  sales  or  customer  account  and 
account  receivable  for  the  high  school  or  college.  In  addition,  the  Sandos  found  that  LATS 
maintained  so-called  account  receivable  aged  trial  balances  on  its  Sportz-Pak  program  for 
each  of  the  high  schools  and  colleges  that  were  customers  of  the  company.  For  these  account 
receivable  aged  trial  balances,  LATS  prefixed  the  account  number  for  each  high  school  and 
college  with  the  number  “9.” 
documents  and  records,  including  team  sales  orders  or  invoices,  that  referenced  orders  and 
purchases  from  the  so-called  “slush”  and  “promo,”  or  promotional  accounts. 

Ina  file  or  storage  room  at  LATS,  Teresa  Sando  found 

(C)  After  poring  over  the  records  and  documents  from  LATS  for  several  months, 

Teresa  Sando  concluded  that  the  promotional  or  9  accounts  were  not  accounts  receivable  but 
special  accounts  established  by  LATS  for  the  coaches  at  high  schools  and  colleges  to  be  able  to 
purchase  football  and  athletic  equipment  at  their  discretion.  Because  they  were  unable  to  find 
documents  such  as  purchase  orders,  delivery  records,  and  sales  tax  payments  at  LATS,  the 
Sandos  wrongly  assumed  that  LATS  did  not  ever  order  or  purchase  any  equipment  or  product 
from  its  suppliers  and  manufacturers  and  did  not  deliver  any  of  the  equipment  ordered  by  the 
high  schools  and  colleges  at  all.  The  Sandos  surmised  the  promotional  accounts  were  funded  or 
credited  by  LATS  based  on  payments  made  by  the  high  schools  and  colleges  on  purchase  orders 
for  equipment  that  was  not  delivered  to  the  high  schools  and  colleges.  The  Sandos  came  to  find 

12 

 

  

  

out  that  LATS  had  slush  or  promotional  accounts  of  this  nature  for  approximately  100  high 
school  and  collegiate  sports  programs. 

(D)  With  respect  to  CVHS,  Teresa  Sando  found  that  LATS  had  accounts  for 

CVHS,  the  football  booster  club  for  CVHS,  and  the  coaches  of  other  athletic  teams  at  CVHS. 
She  found  that  there  were  16  accounts  for  CVHS  at  LATS.  It  was  not  established  whether  all 
of  the  accounts  that  LATS  had  for  CVHS  were  promotional  accounts.  The  CVHS  football 
team,  like  other  high  schools  in  the  District  and  in  southern  California,  had  a  promotional 
account. 

17. 

In  the  spring  of  2010,  after  she  and  her  husband  had  resolved  their  civil 

lawsuit  against  Lapes  and  his  two  sons,  Teresa  Sando  called  the  District  as  well  as 
approximately  40  other  school  districts  to  complain  about  the  promotional  accounts  that 
LATS  had  maintained  for  their  high  school  sports  teams  and  coaches.  In  the  fall  of  2010,  the 
Districts  Superintendent  met  with  Teresa  Sando,  who  spoke  about  the  alleged  involvement 
of  the  coaches  in  the  District’s  high  schools  with  LATS  and  their  use  of  the  LATS 
promotional  accounts  to  buy  football  equipment.  Teresa  Sando  provided  documents  to  the 
Superintendent.  The  District  commenced  an  investigation  of  the  allegations  by  consulting 
with  its  counsel  who,  in  turn,  retained  a  private  investigator. 

18. 

On  June  6,  2011,  investigators  from  the  Orange  County  Sheriffs  Department 

met  with  Teresa  Sando  to  discuss  her  complaint  about  Lapes.  Eventually,  the  District 
Attorney  of  Orange  County  declined  to  prosecute  or  to  file  any  criminal  charges  in 
connection  with  the  Sando’s  complaints.  Teresa  Sando  claimed  that  the  Sheriff's 
Department  did  not  investigate  her  complaint  because  sheriff's  deputies  and  other  law 
enforcement  officers  bought  football  equipment  from  LATS  for  an  annual  “Cop  Bowl” 
football  game.  Teresa  Sando  also  asserted  that  investigators  from  the  Orange  County  District 
Attorney’s  Office  had  a  slush  account  at  LATS.  The  Sandos  have  continued  to  press  their 
complaints  against  the  high  school  coaches  due  to  their  sense  of  “moral  outrage”  about  the 
existence  of  the  promotional  accounts  as  well  as  their  bitter  disappointment  about  the 
financial  losses  from  their  $650,000  investment  in  LATS.  The  weight  of  the  evidence 
suggested  that  the  Sandos  attribute  the  loss  of  their  investment  in  LATS  to  Lapes’  use  of  the 
promotional  accounts  to  facilitate  and  promote  the  business  of  the  athletic  equipment  supply 
company. 

Statement  of  Charges 

19. 

In  November  2010,  the  District’s  counsel  retained  Robert  Price,  a  private 

investigator  based  in  San  Diego,  to  conduct  the  investigation  of  the  complaints  lodged  by 
Teresa  Sando  against  its  high  school  football  coaches  and  the  use  of  the  LATS  promotional 
accounts.  Price  is  a  former  special  agent  accountant  with  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation 
and  has  experience  in  investigating  economic  crimes.  Price  investigated  allegations  against 
nine  coaches  employed  by  the  District.  The  scope  of  Price’s  investigation  included,  in  part, 
the  obtaining  and  reviewing  of  documents  and  records  from  the  Sandos  and  the  District; 

13 

 

  

meeting  and  speaking  with  Teresa  Sando,  sheriff's  personnel,  the  Superintendent,  and 
District  employees;  conducting  interviews  of  interested  persons,  including  Parker;  and 
gathering  policies  of  the  Governing  Board  for  the  District.  Price  approached  the 
investigation  in  the  same  manner  as  if  he  were  conducting  an  investigation  of  economic  or 
white  collar  crimes.  On  December  28,  2011,  Price  issued  a  report  of  his  investigation  of 
respondent’s  conduct.  No  criminal  charges  were  filed  as  a  result  of  Price’s  investigation. 

20. 

(A)  On  January  29,  2012,  Dr.  Joseph  M.  Farley  made  the  Notice  of  Charges 
that  There  Exists  Cause  to  Discipline  a  Permanent  Certificated  Employee  Charles  J.  Biehn 
(Notice  of  Charges)  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932.  Dr.  Farley  filed  the  Notice  of  Charges  with  the Governing 
Board  and  recommended  therein  that  the  Governing  Board  immediately  discipline 
respondent,  including  considering  to  suspend  and/or  dismiss  him  as  a  permanent  certificated 
employee  for  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  or 
refusal  to  obey  school  and/or  District  rules. 

(B)  On  January  30,  2012,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel 
Services  informed  respondent  that  the  Governing  Board  was  planning  to  meet  on  February  6, 
2012,  to  hear  charges  to  determine  whether  cause  existed  to  recommend  disciplinary  action, 
including  his  dismissal  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee,  under 
Education  Code  section  44934  and  to  determine  whether  to  proceed  with  disciplinary action. 
A  copy  of  the  charges  was  provided  to  respondent. 

21. 

(A)  On  March  2,  2012,  the  District  served  respondent  with  the  Notice  of 

Intention  to  Dismiss,  Notice  of  Charges  that  Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss,  a  Request  for  Hearing 
form,  exhibits  to  the  notice  of  charges,  and  pertinent  sections  of  the  Education  and 
Government  Codes.  In  the  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss,  the  District  notified  respondent  in 
accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44934  that  the  Governing  Board  by  majority  vote 
had  determined  to  dismiss  him  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 

(B)  On  March  2,  2012,  respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the 
aforementioned  documents  and  filed  a  request  to  have  a  hearing  before  the  Commission  to 
determine  if  there  is  cause  to  dismiss  him  from  his  employment  with  the  District. 

22. 

(A)  On  May  31,  2012,  the  Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by  complainant  Dr. 

Joseph  M.  Farley  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

(B)  On  or  about  October  15,  2013,  the  District  notified  respondent  that  the 

Governing  Board  had  approved  the  Amended  Notice  of  Charges  to  immediately  suspend  him 
without  pay  and  to  dismiss  him  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  The  District  notified  respondent  that  his  pay  ended  on 
October  10,  2013,  and  his  District-paid  benefits  would  be  terminated  on  October  31,  2013. 
The  District  indicated  that  a  copy  of  the  Amended  Notice  of  Charges  would  be  included  in  an 
Amended  Accusation  that  would  be  served  upon  respondent’s  attorney  and  filed  with  the 

 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings.   
  

  

(C)  On  January  21,  2014,  the  Amended  Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by 
complainant  Dr.  Joseph  M.  Farley  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  District. 
Jurisdiction  exists  in  this  matter  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44934. 

CVHS  Orders  for  Football  Equipment 

23. 

(A)  By  the  spring  of  2003,  when  respondent  was  hired  as  its  new  head  football 

coach,  the  CVHS  football  program  and  coaches  had  an  established  practice  of  obtaining 
quotes  from  LATS  before  the  summer  for  the  proposed  purchases  of  equipment  for  the fall 
season,  submitting  purchase  requisitions  with  the  LATS  quotes  to  the  District,  receiving 
credit  from  LATS  its  promotional  account  when  the  District  paid  for  the  purchase  order 
and/or  LATS  invoice,  and  ordering  and  receiving  football  equipment  paid  from  the 
promotional  account.  By  2003,  LATS  was  likewise  an  authorized  and  preferred  vendor  of 
the  District  and  the  football  coaches  of  the  District’s  high  schools,  respectively 

(B)  In  or  about  May  2003,  after  respondent  and  Parker  visited  the  LATS 

facility,  co-athletic  director  Airey  and  Parker  submitted  the  purchase  requisition  for  football 
equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  for  the  fall  2003  football  season.  For  subsequent 
seasons  through  2007,  respondent  and  Parker  visited  the  LATS  offices  early  in  the  calendar 
year  to  view  football  equipment.  For  the  2004  fall  football  season,  respondent  and  Airey 
submitted  the  purchase  requisition  for  football  equipment  to  the  District.  For  the  2005 
through  2007  football  seasons,  respondent  submitted  the  purchase  requisitions  to  the  District. 
From  2003  through  2007,  after  the  District  issued  purchase  orders  to  LATS  to  purchase 
football  equipment  as  described  in  the  purchase  requisitions  and  attached  quotes  from  LATS, 
the  weight  of  the  evidence  suggested  that  no  football  equipment  was  delivered  by  LATS  to 
CVHS.  LATS  nevertheless  issued  invoices  to  the  District  seeking  payment  for  purported 
deliveries  of  football  equipment  under  the  purchase  orders  and  the  District  paid  LATS  on  the 
invoices  after  receiving  confirmation  received  from  the  high  school  that  equipment  was 
purportedly  delivered  to  the  school  site.  Upon  receiving  payment  from  the  District,  LATS 
credited  the  promotional  account  that  it  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team 

(C)  From  2003  through  2006,  after  the  District  paid  LATS  on  its  invoices, 

respondent  allowed  Parker  to  order  football  equipment,  apparel,  and  supplies  from  LATS  for 
the  CVHS  football  team.  After  Parker’s  position  was  eliminated  in  2006,  respondent  ordered 
the  equipment  from  the  vendor  although  Parker  ordered  some  items  on  occasion  from  LATS. 
Whenever  Parker  made  or  called  in  the  orders  to  LATS  for  football  equipment,  LATS 
delivered  the  equipment  ordered  by  Parker,  Parker  accepted  delivery  of  the  orders,  and  the 
weight  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent  knew  or  was  aware  of  Parker’s  actions 
and  approved  of  Parker’s  orders  for  the  CVHS  football  team. 

 

(D)  At  all  times  relevant  herein,  from  2003  through  2007,  when  or  after  LATS 

delivered  the  football  equipment  to  CVHS  ordered  by  Parker  and  respondent,  the  cost  of   
    

  

these  orders  were  paid  for  by  LATS  debiting  the  CVHS  football  team’s  promotional  account. 
Parker  usually  accepted  the  deliveries  at  the  high  school  and  signed  the  delivery  invoices. 

(E)  There  are  District  records  that  date  back  to  2000  showing  that  this  process 
of  ordering  and  paying  for  football  equipment  under  the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS 
football  team.  A  summary  of  the  orders  and  purchases  of  football  equipment  from  LATS  for 
the  CVHS  football  team  from  2000  through  2007  is  set  forth  in  the  following  paragraphs. 

Orders  for  2000  Football  Season 

24. 

District  records  demonstrated  that,  in  2000,  CVHS  football  team  received 

credit  on  the  promotional  account  maintained  by  LATS.  For  the  2000  football  season,  the 
District  paid  LATS  for  three  invoices  for  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team. 
Specifically,  on  or  about  July  7,  2000,  the  District  issued  checks  to  LATS  in  the  amounts  of 
$5,279.75,  $2,167.93,  and  $711.15,  in  payment  of  the  invoices  and  the  underlying  purchase 
orders.  In  turn,  LATS  credited  the  promotional-account  of  CVHS  with  the  amounts  of 
$4,900,  $2,012,  and  $660,  which  sums  corresponded  to  the  District’s  payments  of  the 
invoices  less  the  applicable  sales  tax. 

25. 

During  the  ensuing  fall  2000  football  season,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered 
and  received  delivery  of  football  equipment  from  LATS.  For  example,  on  or  about  August  5, 
2000,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and  received  25  helmets,  120  jaw  pads,  120  chin 
straps  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $4,299.  On  August  6,  2000,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered 
and  received  10  knee  braces,  4  special  shoulder  pads,  and  eight  “lightning”  shoulder  pads 
from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $1,840.  On  August  9,  2010,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and 
received  36  practice  pants,  girdles,  knee  pads,  and  thigh  pads  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of 
$2,661.80.  On  September  29,  2000,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and  received  10  lateral 
knee  braces  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $430.  Payments  for  these  purchases  of  football 
equipment  in  2000  were  made  by  LATS  deducting  the  amounts  of  the  invoices  for  these 
purchases  from  the  promotional  account  of  CVHS.  No  additional  checks  were  issued  by  the 
District  in  payment  of  these  purchases  of  football  equipment  in  2000. 

26. 

In  addition,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  CVHS  for  other 

undetermined  payments  of  invoices  or  purchases  of  football  equipment  as  established  by  the 
LATS  accounts  receivable  aged  trial  balance  (Exh.  74).  For  example,  on  July  7,  2000,  LATS 
issued  a  credit  memo  in  the  amount  of  $2,467  to  the  promotional  account  for  payment  of  an 
undetermined  invoice  or  purchase. 

  

Orders  for  2001  Football  Season 

27. 

For  the  2001  football  season,  the  District  paid  LATS  for  four  invoices  for 

football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Specifically,  on  or  about  June  28,  2001,  the 
District  issued  checks  to  LATS  in  the  amounts  of  $4,512.85,  $5,759.85,  $1,198.65,  and 

  
16   

 

$479.45  in  payment  of  the  invoices  and  the  underlying  purchase  orders.  In  turn,  LATS 
credited  the  promotional  account  of  CVHS  with  the  amounts  of  $4,198,  $5,358,  $1,115,  and 
$446,  which  sums  corresponded  to  the  District’s  payments  of  the  invoices  less  the  applicable 
In  2001,  LATS  credited  the  account  for  payments  of  other  undetermined  invoices 
sales  tax. 
as  well. 

28. 

During  the  ensuing  fall  2001  football  season,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered 

and  received  delivery  of  football  equipment  from  LATS.  For  example,  on  August  5,  2001, 
the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and  received  12  helmets,  10  dozen  jaw  pads,  chin  straps  and 
buckles,  hip  pads,  replacement  cleats,  96  web  belts,  knee  braces,  104  girdles,  400  mouth 
pieces,  knee  pads,  thigh  pads,  24  game  footballs,  and  12  practice  footballs,  at  a  total  cost  of 
On  September  2,  2001,  51  practice  pants  were  bought  at  a  cost  of 
approximately  $6,596.60. 
$631.95,  and,  on  October  25,  2001,  weighted  sideline  markers  and  Gatorade  were  bought  at  a 
cost  of  $455.40.  The  payments  for  these  purchases  in  2001  were  made  by  LATS  deducting 
or  debiting  the  amounts  of  the  invoices  for  these  purchases  from  the  promotional  account  of 
CVHS.  No  other  checks  were  issued  by  the  District  for  these  purchases  in  2001. 

Orders  for  2002  Football  Season 

29. 

For  the  2002  football  season,  and  on  an  undetermined  date  in  or  about  May 

2002,  Co-Athletic  Director  Airey  and  Parker  submitted  a  purchase  requisition  to  the  District 
for  the  purchase  of  football  equipment  from  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team  at  a  cost  of 
approximately  $12,622.92.  Lapes  prepared  the  four  team  sales  order  or  quotes  for  the 
purchase  requisition.  After  the  principal  approved  the  purchase  requisition,  the  purchase 
requisition  and  LATS  quote  were  forwarded  to  the  District’s  business  office.  The District 
completed  a  purchase  order  and  sent  the  purchase  order  to  LATS.  On  August  9,  2002,  the 
District  paid  the  sum  of  $12,622.92  to  LATS  for  purportedly  filling  the  purchase  order. 

30. 

 Inpaying  $12,622.92  to  LATS,  the  District  paid  LATS  for  four  invoices  for 

football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Specifically,  on  August  9,  2002,  the  District 
issued  checks  in  the  amounts  of  $3,070.88,  $6,745.15,  $1,038.71,  and  $1,768.18  to  LATS. 
In  turn,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts 
of  $2,850,  $6,260,  $964,  and  $1,641,  which  corresponded  to  the  District’s  payments  of  the 
four  invoices  less  the  applicable  sales  tax. 

31. 

For  the  ensuing  2002  fall  football  season,  from  October  5,  2002,  through 

December  6,  2002,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and  received  delivery  of  football 
equipment  from  LATS  which  was  paid  for  from  the  promotional  account  maintained  by 
LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  For  example,  on  October  5,  2002,  the  CVHS  football 
team  ordered  and  received  20  helmets,  hip  pads,  thigh  pads,  knee  pads,  jaw  pads,  shoulder 
pads,  300  mouth  pieces,  36  practice  pants,  replacement  cleats,  chin  straps,  and  48  web  belts, 
at  a  total  cost  of  $7,871.30.  On  October  29,  2002,  the  CVHS  football  team  ordered  and 
received  6  helmets  at  a  cost  of  $640.  Payments  for  these  purchases  were  made  by  LATS 
deducting  the  amounts  of  the  invoices  for  these  purchases  from  the  promotional  account  that 

 

  

  

17 

LATS  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  The  District  did  not  issue  any  checks  to 
LATS  for  these  purchases  in  2002. 

Orders  for  2003  Football  Season 

32, 

For  the  2003  football  season,  and  in  or  about  May  2003,  Co-Athletic  Director 
Airey  and  Parker  jointly  submitted  a  purchase  requisition  to  the  District  for  the  purchase  of 
Lapes 
football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $8,290. 
prepared  the  team  sales  order  or  quote  for  the  purchase  requisition.  After  the  principal 
approved  the  purchase  requisition,  the  purchase  requisition  and  LATS  quote  were  forwarded 
to  the  District’s  business  office.  The  District  completed  a  purchase  order  and  sent  the 
purchase  order  to  LATS.  On  or  about  September  23,  2003,  and  after  receiving  confirmation 
of  the  purported  delivery  of  the  equipment  to  CVHS,  the  District  paid  the  sum  of  $8,932.48 
to  LATS  for  filling  the  purchase  order. 

33. 

(A)  On  October  6,  2003,  LATS  deposited  into  its  business  bank  account  three 
checks  in  the  amounts  of  $178.54,  $209.47,  and  $8,932.48  that  the  company  received  from 
the  District  in  payment  of  its  invoices  for  football  equipment.  On  November  18,  2003, 
LATS  deposited  into  its  business  bank  account  another  check  in  the  amount  of  $866.31  that 
it  received  from  the  District  in  payment  of  an  invoice  for  football  equipment. 

(B)  In  2003,  LATS  credited  the  sum  of  approximately  $9,094  to  the 
promotional  or  9  account  for  CVHS  for  the  checks  that  it  received  from  the  District  and  other 
Specifically,  on  July 
undetermined  sources  in  payment  of  invoices  for  football  equipment. 
30,  2003,  LATS  credited  $8,290  to  the  promotional  account  of  CVHS  football  team  for  the 
District’s  payment  of  $8,932.48.  On  October  30,  2003,  LATS  credited  $804  to  the 
promotional  account  of  CVHS  football  team  for  the  payment  of  $866.31  by  the  District.  As 
was  its  business  practice,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  that  the  company 
maintained  for  CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts  of  the  District’s  payments  of  invoices 
less  the  amounts  of  the  applicable  sales  tax. 

34. 

For  the  2003  spring  football  practice  session  and  2003  fall  football  season, 

respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
from  LATS,  as  described  in  Finding  35  below. 

: 

35. 

(A)  On  May  12,  2003,  Parker  ordered  36  black  coaches  shorts  and  36  Oxford 
tee-shirts  with  insignias  from  LATS.  Lapes  was  the  salesperson  on  the  order  and  the  team 
sales  order.  As  showed  by  the  purchase  orders,  LATS  bought  the  items  from  suppliers  and 
had  the  CVHS  Cougar  insignia  or  logo  sewed  on  the  shorts  and  tee-shirts.  On  May  20,  2013, 
LATS  delivered  the  items  under  the  order  to  CVHS  to  the  attention  of  Parker.  The  total  cost 
of  the  order  was  $1,004.98  and  the  order  was  paid  when  LATS  debited  or  deducted 
$1,004.98  from  the  existing  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team. 

 

  

18 

  

(B)  On  May  21,  2003,  Parker  ordered  four  stop  watches,  one  lanyard,  and  one 
plastic  whistle  from  LATS  at a  total  cost  of  $94.78.  In  a  separate  team  sales  order  dated  May 
21,  2003,  Parker  ordered  six  helmets,  six  face  masks,  four  jaw  pads,  six  helmet  pumps,  and 
belts  at  a  total  cost  of  $922.10.  On  May  21,  2003,  Parker  also  ordered  18  game  footballs,  12 
practice  footballs,  60  football  socks,  60  girdles,  18  practice  pants,  and  200  mouth  pieces  at  a 
total  cost  of  $2,530.94.  On  May  28,  2003,  Parker  ordered  one  line-up  marker  costing 
$107.75,  including  sales  tax.  Parker  received  or  picked  up  the  items  from  these  orders.  Each 
of  these  orders  was  paid  for  by  LATS  debiting  the  purchase  costs  from  the  CVHS  football 
promotional  account. 

(C)  On  June  2,  2003,  Parker  ordered  12  coach’s  shorts  costing  $271.53  from 
LATS.  On  June  9,  2003,  Parker  ordered  24  jackets  with  embroidery  for  the  CVHS  football 
coaches  at  a  cost  of  $1,224.  The  jackets  were  to  be  embroidered  in  the  left  chest  area  with 
image  of  a  football  and  the  words,  “Capistrano  Valley  Cougars.” 

(D)  On  July  7,  2003,  Parker  ordered  41  polo  shirts  and  24  jackets  with 

embroidery  at  a  cost  of  $781.80.  LATS  paid  another  company  to  stitch  embroidery  on  the 
clothing  items.  LATS  delivered  the  polo  shirts  on  July  30,  2003.  On  July  29,  2003,  Parker 
ordered  24  small  knee  pads  at  a  cost  of  $96. 

(E)  On  August  8,  2003,  Parker  ordered  six  coach’s  shorts  and  36  Oxford  tee- 

shirts  with  “Cougar  Football”  embroidered  on  the  gear  at  a  cost  of  $377.80.  In  a  separate 
team  sales  order  dated  August  8,  2003,  Parker  ordered  30  orange  poly  spots  and  10  wrist 
coaches  at  a  cost  of  $168.  On  August  13,  2003,  Parker  ordered  four  triple  extra-large  mesh 
athletic  shorts  at  a  cost  of  $60.  On  August  14,  2003,  Parker  ordered  three  small  shoulder 
pads  at  a  cost  of  $266.85.  On  August  15,  2003,  Parker  ordered  six  small  shoulder  pads,  12 
large  football  practice  pants,  and  four  cases  of  sport  drink  at  a  cost  of  $618.80.  On  August 
26,  2003,  Parker  ordered  screws,  nuts,  and  snaps  for  football  helmets  at  a  cost  of  $45.55. 

(F)  On  September  9,  2003,  Parker  ordered  four  white  practice  jerseys  and  four 

black  practice  jerseys,  each  of  which  were  double  extra-large  in  size  and  had  numbers,  at  a 
cost  of  $128.00  plus  sales  tax  of  $9.92.  On  September  10,  2003,  Parker  ordered  six  sets  of 
hip  pads  at  a  cost  of  $45.80  plus  sales  tax  of  $3.55.  On  September  24,  2003,  Parker  ordered 
four  sets  of  polo  shirts  and  shorts  with  logos  of  CVHS  football  at  a  cost  of  $142.  On 
September  25,  2003,  Parker  ordered  24  baseball  hats  with  the  embroidered  image  of  the 
CVHS  mascot,  a  cougar,  at  a  cost  of  $334.80.  LATS  contracted  another  company  to 
embroider  the  hats.  On  September  29,  2003,  Parker  ordered  a  football  down  marker  and 
chain  set  at  a  cost  of  $326.95  plus  sales  tax. 

50  T-hooks  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $105.80  plus  $10  for  freight.  On  November  3,  2003, 
Parker  ordered  three  Spalding  silver  footballs  at  a  cost  of  $108.  On  November  13,  2003, 
Parker  ordered  100  replacement  football  cleats  at  a  cost  of  $51.  On  November  17,  2003, 

Parker  ordered  one  heavy-duty  hinged  knee  brace  for  $46.50  plus  $10  for  freight  or  handling.    

  

(G)  On  October  7,  2003,  Parker  ordered  24  white  socks,  100  helmet  snaps,  and 

/ 

36. 

Each  of  the  team  sales  orders  and  purchases  from  LATS  by  Parker  in  2003  for 

the  CVHS  football  team,  as  described  in  Findings  34  and  35  above,  were  paid  when  LATS 
debited  or  deducted  the  amounts  of  the  orders  and  invoices  from  the  promotional  account 
that  LATS  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  wrote  on  the  team  sales  orders 
that  the  purchases  were  to  be  taken  or  debited  from  the  promotional  account.  The  CVHS 
football  team  received  delivery  of  the  equipment.  The  District  did  not  issue  any  checks  in 
payments  of  these  orders  and  purchases.  Parker  ordered  the  items  for  the  CVHS  football 
team  with  respondent’s  knowledge  and/or  consent. 

37. 

On  May  20,  2003,  and  September  28,  2003,  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial 
Balance  showed  that  LATS  credited  the  promotional  or  9  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team 
with  the  amounts  of  $1,440  and  $60,  respectively.  The  reason  or  reasons  for  these  credits  or 
credit  memos  were  not  established  by  the  evidence  in  this  matter.  Nor  was  it  established  that 
these  credits  were  bribes  or  kick-backs  paid  to  respondent. 

Orders  for  2004  Football  Season 

38. 

(A)  For  the  2004  football  season,  and  in  or  about  May  2004,  Co-Athletic 

Director  Airey  and  respondent  submitted  a  purchase  requisition  to  the  District  for  the 
purchase  of  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  at  a  cost  of  $9,226.90.  Lapes  or 
his  son  Adam  Lapes  prepared  the  team  sales  orders  or  quotes  for  the  purchase  requisition. 
The  District  completed  a  purchase  order  and  sent  the  purchase  order  to  LATS. 

(B)  On  an  undetermined  date  in  2004,  LATS  sent  four  invoices  to  the  District 

seeking  payment  of  $5,468.31,  $3,010.75,  $874.93,  and  $587.99,  or  a  total  payment  of 
$9,941.98,  for  the  football  equipment  ordered  by  the  District  under  its  purchase  order.  On  or 
about  August  27,  2004,  after  receiving  confirmation  of  the  purported  delivery  of  the  football 
equipment  that  was  ordered,  the  District  issued  a  check  to  LATS  in  the  amount  of  $9,941.98, 
which  constituted  payment  for  LATS’  four  invoices.  On  September  1,  2004,  LATS 
deposited  the  $9,941.98  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(C)  On  or  about  July  21,  2004,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the 
CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts  of  $5,075,  $2,794.20,  $812,  and  $574.70,  which  sums 
corresponded  to  the  District’s  payments  of  the  four  invoices  less  the  applicable  sales  taxes. 
On  September  16,  2004,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team 
for  additional  payments  of  $458  and  $250  for  undetermined  reasons. 

39. 

For  the  2004  spring  football  practice  session  and  the  2004  fall  football  season, 
respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
from  LATS,  as  described  in  Finding  40  below. 

 

40. 

(A)  On  January  7,  2004,  Parker  ordered  athletic  tape,  Elastikon,  skin  lubricant, 

elastic  wraps  and  bandages,  and  24  bottles  of  sport  drink  at  a  cost  of  $583.45.  On  January 
30,  2004,  Parker  ordered  75  mesh  practice  jerseys  with  numbers  on  the  backs  and  front  of  the 

    
20   

  

  

jerseys  at  a  cost  of  $1,336.50.  Parker  ordered  the  practice  jerseys  for  shipment  or  delivery  in 
July  2004.  LATS  contracted  out  the  numbering  of  the  jerseys.  On  July  23,  2004,  LATS 
delivered  the  jerseys  to  CVHS. 

(B)  On  February  5,  2004,  Parker  ordered  eight  youth-sized  sleeveless  tee-shirts 

for  delivery  in  May  2004  at  a  cost  of  $40.  On  March  11,  2004,  Parker  ordered  three 
medicine  balls  at  a  cost  of  $179.97. 

(C)  On  March  31,  2004,  respondent  ordered  15  black  football  helmets with 

face  masks  at  a  cost  of  $2,250.  The  helmets  were  to  be  delivered  in  July  2004  and  shipped  to 
Parker  at  CVHS.  Lapes  and  his  son  Adam  were  the  salespersons  for  LATS  on  this  order  and 
Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On  July  23,  2004,  LATS  delivered  the  helmets  under  this 
order  to  CVHS  and  Parker  accepted  the  delivery. 

(D)  On  May11,  2004,  Parker  ordered  12  game  footballs,  200  mouthpieces,  72 
football  game  socks,  36  knee  pads,  36  hip  pads,  96  web  belts,  and  500  replacement  cleats  for 
CVHS  football  team  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $1,665.60.  The  items  were  to  be  delivered  in 
July  2004.  Adam  Lapes  was  the  salesperson  on  the  order  and  completed  the  team sales 
order.  On  July  23,  2004,  LATS  delivered  the  items  under  this  team  sales  order.  In  a  separate 
team  sales  order  on  the  same  date,  Parker  also  ordered  72  girdles,  48  practice  pants,  and  18 
scrimmage  vests  for  delivery  in  July  at  a  cost  of  $1,671.60,  The  items  under  both  of  these 
orders  were  to  be  delivered  by  July  2004.  Adams  Lapes  was  the  salesperson  who  wrote  both 
of  the  team  sales  orders.  LATS  delivered  the  items  under  both  orders  on  July  23,  2004. 

(E)  On  May  11,  2004,  Parker  ordered  11  black  and  17  white  polo  shirts  with 
the  CVHS  football  logo  embroidered  on  the  left  areas  of  the  polo  shirts  at  a  cost  of  $475.50. 
Adam  Lapes  was  the  LATS  salesperson  and  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the 
polo  shirts  to  CVHS. 

(F)  On  May  11,  2004,  Parker  ordered  six  black  V-neck,  pullover  jackets  ata 

cost  of  $188.80.  The  jackets  were  to  be  embroidered  with  an  image  of  a  football  and  the 
words,  “Capistrano  Valley  Cougars”  and  delivered  in  July  2004.  LATS  contracted  out  the 
embroidery  work.  On  August  31,  2004,  LATS  delivered  the  jackets  to  CVHS. 

(G)  On  May  11,  2004,  Parker  ordered  three  jaw  pads  at  a  cost  of  $167.85  and 
for  shipment  in  July  2004.  Adam  Lapes  prepared  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the 
jaw  pads  to  CVHS  on  August  4,  2004. 

(H)  On  May  18,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  whistles  and  two  lanyards  for  same- 

day  shipment  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $47.90  plus  sales  tax  of  $3.71.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the 
team  sales  order  and  delivered  the  whistles  and  lanyards  to  Parker  at  CVHS. 

(1)  On  July  23,  2004,  Parker  ordered  10  stopwatches  at  cost  of  $129.50  for 

same-day  shipment  or  pick-up.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Parker 
acknowledged  receipt  of  the  stop  watches  by  signing  a  copy  of  the  team  sales  order. 

     
21 
  

 

  

(J)  On  July  27,  2004,  Parker  ordered  six  game  footballs  at  a  cost  of  $299.28 

and  requested  immediate  shipment.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  for  the  footballs. 
LATS  delivered  the  footballs  to  CVHS  one  week  later  on  August  4,  2004. 

{K)  On  July  27,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  black  pull-over,  V-neck  jackets  and 

four  white  polo  shirts,  all  with  the  logo  of  the  CVS  football  team,  at  a  cost  of  $133.70. 
Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Lapes  bought  two  of  the  polo  shirts  from 
Timberline  Colorado  and  LATS  contracted  out  the  embroidery  work.  Adam  Lapes  delivered 
the  jackets  and  polo  shirts  to  CVHS  on  August  13,  2004. 

(L)  On  August  13,  2004,  Parker  ordered  three  jaw  pads  at  a  cost  of  $97.20.  On 
August  10,  2004,  Parker  ordered  six  helmet  pumps  at  a  cost  of  $53.94.  On  August  18,  2004, 
Parker  ordered  18  practice  pants  and  three  shoulder  pads  at  a  cost  of  $311.10.  On  August  20, 
2004,  Parker  ordered  a  weighted  sideline  marker  and  two  end-zone  pylons  at  a  cost  of  $259. 
The  jaw  pads,  helmet  pumps,  practice  pants,  shoulder  pads,  sideline  marker,  and  pylons  were 
delivered  or  picked  up  from  LATS  in  the  same  month. 

(M)  On  August  20,  2004,  Parker  ordered  three  face  masks  at  a  cost  of  $93. 
Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  face  masks  to  CVHS  on  September 
15,  2004. 

(N)  On  September  1,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  large,  youth  football  shoulder 
pads  for  same-day  delivery  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $59.90.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales 
order  and  delivered  the  shoulder  pads  to  Parker. 

(O)  On  September  9,  2004,  respondent  ordered  three  four-inch  back  plates  for 
same  day  delivery  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $107.85.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order 
and  delivered  the  back  plates  to  Parker  at  CVHS 

(P)  On  September  17,  2004,  Parker  ordered  three  six-point  chin  straps  for 

same-day  delivery  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $19.35.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  and  the 
chin  straps  were  delivered  or  picked-up  on  the  same  day. 

(Q)  On  October  8,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  air  horns  and  12  power  packs, 

and  500  replacement  cleats  at  a  cost  of  $190.90.  On  the  same  date,  Parker  ordered  an 
equipment  bag  at  a  cost  of  $26.35  plus  sales  tax  of  $7.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  both  team  sales 
order  and  delivered  the  cleats  to  Parker  at  CVHS  on  the  same  day.  The  cleats  were  in  stock 
at  LATS.  The  air  horns  and  power  packs  were  not  in  stock  and  had  to  be  ordered.  LATS 
delivered  the  air  horns,  power  packs,  and  equipment  bag  to  CVHS  on  October  13,  2004. 

(R)  On  October  20,  2004,  Parker  ordered  24  pairs  of  extra-large  tube  socks  for 

same-day  delivery  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $67.20.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order 
and  delivered  the  socks  to  Parker  at  CVHS  on  the  same  day  as  the  order. 

  

  

22 

 

(S)  On  October  14,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  packages  of  four-inch  Elastikon 
and  two  packages  of  two-inch  Elastikon  for  same-day  delivery  or  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $135. 
Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  and  delivered  the  Elastikon  to  Parker  on  the  same 
day  as  the  order. 

(T)  On  November  15,  2004,  respondent  ordered  four  silver  footballs  for 

immediate  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $144.  On  the  same  day,  respondent  ordered  an  eighth  inch, 
short  T-nut  at  a  cost  of  $17.  Lapes  wrote  both  team  sales  orders  and  respondent  picked  up  or 
had  someone  else  pick  up  the  items  from  LATS  on  the  same  day  as  the  orders. 

(U)  On  December  8,  2004,  Parker  ordered  two  navy  fleece  crew  sweatshirts, 
two  navy  fleece  sweatpants,  three  polo  shirts,  six  navy  Dri-Fit  tee-shirts,  and  a  pair  of  New 
Balance  size  11  shoes  for  a  cost  of  approximately  $212.25  plus  $16.45  for  freight,  or  a  total 
of  $228.70.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  The  items  were  picked  up  from  LATS  on 
December  17,  2004. 

41. 

Each  of  the  team  sales  orders  and  purchases  made  in  2004,  as  described  in 
Findings  39  and  40  above,  were  paid  by  LATS  debiting  or  deducting  the  amount  of  the  order 
and  invoice  from  the  promotional  account  that  LATS  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football 
Lapes  or  the  LATS  salesperson  wrote  on  each  team  sales  order  that  the  cost  of  the 
team. 
purchase  was  to  be  taken  or  debited  from  the  promotional  account.  CVHS  or  the  football 
It  was  not  established  that  the 
team  received  delivery  of  the  equipment  under  each  order. 
District  paid  for  any  of  the  orders  by  the  issuance  of  a  District  check. 

42. 

On  September  16,  2004,  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed 
that  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts  of 
$450  and  $250,  respectively.  The  reason  or  reasons  for  these  credits  or  credit  memos  were 
not  established  by  the  evidence  in  this  matter.  It  was  not  established  that  the  $450  credit 
memo  arose  from  the  return  of  five  football  helmets  under  Invoice  No.  45461  because  said 
invoice  was  dated  August  18,  2005.  These  credits  were  not  demonstrated  to  have  been 
bribes  or  kick-backs  paid  to  respondent. 

Orders  for  2005  Football  Season 

43. 

(A)  For  the  2005  football  season,  and  on  an  undetermined  date  in  or  about 
May  2005,  respondent  submitted  a  purchase  requisition  to  the  District  for  the  purchase  of 
football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  at  a  cost  of  $8,325.  Lapes  prepared  two  team 
sales  orders  or  quotes  for  the  purchase  requisition.  The  District  completed  a  purchase  order 
and  sent  the  purchase  order  to  LATS.  According  to  the  purchase  requisition  and/or  purchase 
order,  respondent  planned  to  take  delivery  of  the  football  equipment  in  mid-July  2005  by 
picking  up  the  equipment  at  the  LATS  offices. 

(B)  On  or  about  August  16,  2005,  LATS  sent  two  invoices  to  the  District 

seeking  payment  of  $6,605.08  and  $2,365.11,  or  a  total  of  $8,970.19,  for  the  football 

  

  
23   

 

equipment  under  the  purchase  order.  After  receiving  confirmation  of  the  purported delivery 
of  the  football  equipment,  the  District  paid  the  sum  of  $8,970.19  to  LATS  for  the  two 
invoices.  On  August  26,  2005,  LATS  deposited  the  $8,970.19  check  into  its  business  bank 

account. 

(C)  On  or  about  August  17,  2005,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of 
CVHS  with  the  amounts  of  $6,130  and  $2,195,  which  corresponded  to  the  District’s  payment 
of  the  two  invoices  totaling  $8,970.19  for  its  purchase  order  less  the  applicable  sales  tax. 

44. 

For  the  2005  spring  football  practice  session  and  the  2005  fall  football  season, 
respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
from  LATS,  as  described  in  Finding  45  below. 

45. 

(A)  On  May  3,  2005,  respondent  ordered  12  triple  extra-large,  grey  tee-shirts 
with  “Cougar  Football”  to  be  color  printed  on  the  tee-shirts  at  a  cost  of  $110.  LATS 
contracted  out  the  printing  of  logo  on  the  tee-shirts.  Adam  Lapes  delivered  the  tee-shirts  to 
CVHS  on  May  20,  2005. 

(B)  On  May  27,  2005,  Parker  ordered  two  pairs  of  white  New  Balance  coach’s 

shoes,  sizes  10  and  11,  for  $120.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On  June  13,  2005, 
Parker  picked  up  two  pairs  of  New  Balance  shoes  from  LATS. 

(C)  On  June  1,  2005,  Parker  ordered  24  thigh  pads,  24  hip  pads,  36  knee  pads, 
36  practice  pants,  48  girdles,  48  scrimmage  vests,  300  mouth  pieces  for  the  CVHS  football 
team  at  a  cost  of  $1,974.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On  July  14,  2005,  LATS 
delivered  the  ordered  items  in  six  boxes  and  respondent  signed  for  and  took  delivery  of  the 
boxes  of  items. 

(D)  On  June  1,  2005,  Parker  also  ordered  24  shoulder  pads,  six  black  football 
helmets  with  face  masks,  and  12  footballs  for  shipment  in  July  at  a  cost  of  $3,060.  Lapes 
wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  items  under  this  order  to  CVHS  in  six  boxes 
on  July  14,  2005,  and  respondent  signed  packing  slip. 

(E)  On  June  1,  2005,  Parker  also  ordered  48  gold  and  48  black  web  belts,  60 
pairs  of  white  football  socks,  24  chin  straps,  24  jaw  pads,  a  bag  of  chin  straps,  two  bags  of  T- 
nuts,  and  one  bag  of  T-hooks  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  The  items  were  to  be  shipped  in 
July  2004  and  cost  $701.15.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  items 
under  this  order  to  CVHS  on  July  14,  2005,  and  respondent  accepted  delivery  and  signed  the 
packing  slip. 

(F)  On  June  1,  2005,  Parker  also  ordered  18  black  polo  shirts,  one  black 

woman’s  polo  shirt,  13  white  and  black  polo  shirts,  six  black  pull-over  V-neck  jackets  at  a 
cost  of  $1,251.10.  The  polo  shirts  were  to  be  embroidered  with  the  logo  of  the  CVHS 
football  team  and  LATS  contracted  out  the  embroidery  work.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales 
order.  On  July  18,  2005,  LATS  delivered  the  polo  shirts  and  jackets  to  CVHS. 

  

 

24   

  

  

(G)  On  June  1,  2005,  Parker  also  ordered  six  pairs  of  white  tube  socks  for  the 

CVHS  football  team  at  a  cost  of  $18.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Parker  picked  up 
the  socks  on  the  same  day  as  the  order. 

(H)  On  July  18,  2005,  respondent  ordered  two  repair  or  football  hardware  kits 
at  a  cost  of  $155.00.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  repair  kits 
to  CVHS  on  or  about  July  18,  2005. 

(I)  On  July  21,  2005,  Parker  ordered  six  practice  pants,  36  knee  pads,  three  jaw 

pad  for  wiil  call  pick-up  at  a  cost  of  $421.19.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Parker 
picked  up  the  items  on  the  same  day  as  the  order. 

(J)  On  August  8,  2005,  Parker  ordered  four  white,  four  Navy  blue,  and  four 

Oxford  Dri-Fit  tee-shirts  at  a  cost  of  $114.60.  On  August  19,  2005,  Parker  ordered  12 
medium-sized  practice  pants  and  six  large  size  practice  pants  at  a  cost  of  $215.10.  Ina 
separate  transaction  on  the  same  date,  Parker  ordered  three  footbal!  helmets  on  a  rush  basis  at 
the  cost  of  $345  plus  sales  tax  of  $26.74,  or  a  total  of  $371.74.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales 
orders.  LATS  delivered  the  tee-shirts  and  practice  pants  to  CVHS  on  August  19,  2005,  and 
the  helmets  on  August  22,  2005. 

(K)  On  September  15,  2005,  respondent  ordered  a  kicking  and  five  wrist 

coaches  devices  on  a  rush  basis  from  LATS  for  $66.40  plus  sales  tax  of  $5.15.  Lapes  wrote 
the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  items  on  September  15  and  23,  2005.  An 
undetermined  person  signed  the  packing  slip  and  accepted  delivery  of  the  items  on 
September  15,  2005.  Respondent  accepted  delivery  on  September  23,  2005,  and  signed  the 
packing  slip. 

(L)  On  August  22,  2005,  Parker  ordered  one  air  liner  costing  $33  on  a  rush 
basis.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  air  liner  to  CVHS  on August 
23,  2005.  An  undetermined  person  at  CVHS  signed  the  packing  slip. 

(M)  On  September  16,  2005,  respondent  ordered  one  white  snug  tight  game 

jersey  with  numbers  on  the  front  and  back  of  the  jersey  on  a  rush  basis  for  $50.  Adam  Lapes 
wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  contracted  out  the  numbering  on  the  jersey.  On 
September  23,  2005,  LATS  delivered  the  jersey  to  CVHS.  Respondent  accepted  delivery  of 
the  item  and  signed  the  packing  slip. 

(N)  On  October  24,  2005,  Parker  ordered  an  electric  ball  inflator  costing  $98 

plus  $12  freight  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS 
agreed  to  ship  the  ball  inflator  to  Parker  at  CVHS. 

(O)  On  November  28,  2005,  Parker  ordered  four  pairs  of  Reebok running 

shoes  and  three  pairs  of  Reebok  women’s  running  shoes  from  LATS  for  $388.  Ona  separate 
order  on  the  same  date,  Parker  ordered  two  pairs  of  Reebok  running  shoes  for  $120.  Adam 
Lapes  wrote  the  order.  Parker  picked  up  the  shoes  from  the  LATS  offices.  It  was  not 

25   

 

established  that  Parker  ordered  these  women’s  running  shoes  for  the  CVHS  football  team. 
The  order  and  all  of  the  shoes  were  paid  for  by  LATS  debiting  the  cost  of  the  shoes  from  the 
promotional  account  that  it  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team. 

(P)  On  December  1,  2005,  Parker  ordered  a  pair  of  New  Balance  running 

shoes  costing  $69.85  from  LATS.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Parker  picked  up 
the  running  shoes  from  the  LATS  office. 

(Q)  On  December  20,  2005,  Parker  ordered  six  pairs  of  black  socks  at  a  cost  of 
$23.70  on  a  will  call  basis.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  Parker  picked  up  the  socks  on 
the  same  day  as  the  order. 

46. 

Each  of  the  team  sales  orders  and  purchases  that  were  made  by  respondent  and 

Parker  in  2005  as  described  in  Findings  44  and  45  above,  were  paid  when  LATS  debited  or 
deducted  the  amount  of  the  order  and  invoice  from  the  promotional  account  that  LATS 
maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  or  another  LATS  salesperson  noted  on  each 
team  sales  order  that  the  cost  of  the  purchase  was  to  be  taken  or  debited  from  the 
promotional  account.  CVHS  or  the  football  team  received  delivery  of  the  equipment  under 
each  order.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District  paid  for  any  of  the  orders  by  the  issuance 
of  a  District  check. 

47, 

(A)  On  May  6,  2005,  LATS  issued  two  invoices  to  the  Football  Booster 
Association  of  CVHS  seeking  payment  of  $5,826.05  for  the  sale  of  football  equipment 
and/or  apparel  to  the  CVHS  football  team.  On  May  21,  2005,  the  Football  Booster 
Association  paid  the  invoices  by  providing  a  check  of  $5,826.05  to  LATS.  On  June  1,  2005, 
LATS  deposited  the  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(B)  On  May  20,  2005,  LATS  issued  two  invoices  for  $3,412.94  to  the  Football 
Booster  Association  of  CVHS  for  a  total  payment  of  $6,825.88  for  football  equipment  and/or 
apparel  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  On  May  28,  2005,  the  Football  Booster  Association 
paid  the  invoices  by  providing  a  check  of  $6,825.88  to  LATS.  On  June  7,  2005,  LATS 
deposited  the  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(C)  From  July  7,  2005,  through  August  11,  2005,  LATS  issued  six  invoices  to 
the  Football  Booster  Association  of  CVHS  for  the  payment  of  $5,263.59  for  the  purchase  of 
football  equipment  and/or  apparel  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  On  August  22,  2005,  the 
Football  Booster  Association  paid  the  invoices  by  providing  a  check  of  $5,263.59  to  LATS. 
On  August  25,  2005,  LATS  deposited  the  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(D)  Because  LATS  supplied  football  equipment  and  apparel  to  the  CVHS 

football  team  and  the  LATS  invoices  were  paid  for  by  the  Football  Booster  Association  of 
CVHS,  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred  that  LATS’s  invoices  to  the  Football  Booster 
Association  were  for  the  sale  and  delivery  of  football  equipment  and/or  apparel  to  the  CVHS 
football  team.  However,  it  was  not  established  what  items  of  football  equipment  or  apparel 

26 

 

were  purchased  or  paid  for  by  the  Football  Booster  Association  or  that  the  Football  Booster 
Association  paid  for  spirit  wear  or  apparel  for  coaches  and  the  high  school  staff. 

48. 

(A)  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed  that,  on  February  28, 

2005,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  two  credit 
memos  of  $320,  or  a  total  of  $640,  on  February  28,  2005.  LATS’  credits  or  credit  memos 
contained  references  to  the  two  invoices  which  were  paid  by  the  Football  Booster 
Association  on  May  28,  2005,  as  set  forth  in  Finding  47(B)  above. 

(B)  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed  that  LATS  credited  the 

promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  three  credit  memos  of  $96,  $280,  and 
$600,  or  a  total  of  $976,  on  April  25,  2005.  LATS’s  credits  or  credit  memos  contained 
references  to  two  invoices  which  were  paid  by  the  Football  Booster  Association  on  May  21, 
2005,  and  August  22,  2005,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  47(A)  and  (C)  above. 

(C)  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  the  reason  or  reasons  why  LATS 
credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  for  the  payment  of  these 
invoices  by  the  Football  Booster  Association  when,  in  fact,  the  Football  Booster  Association 
had  its  own  account  with  LATS.  It  was  not  established  that  these  credits  to  the  promotional 
or  9  account  were  bribes  or  kick-backs  paid  to  respondent. 

49. 

(A)  On  January  12,  2005,  respondent  ordered  a  nine-inch  Incrediball  at  a  cost 

of  $35.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  and  the  Incrediball  was  picked  up  on  the 
same  day  as  the  order. 

(B)  On  March  9,  2005,  Parker  ordered  a  batting  tee  and  a  nine-inch  Incrediball 

from  LATS  for  $59.00  plus  sales  tax  of  $4.57.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  and 
the  items  were  picked  up  from  LATS  on  March  15,  2005. 

(C)  It  was  not  established  that  the  items  under  the  orders  and  purchases 

described  in  Findings  49(A)  and  (B)  were  for  respondent’s  personal  benefit  or  constituted 
gifts.  These  orders  were  for  athletic  equipment  or  supplies  and  were  de  minims  purchases  in 
the  scale  of  orders  and  purchases  made  for  CVHS  from  2003  through  2007. 

Orders  for  2006  Football  Season 

50. 

(A)  For  the  2006  football  season,  and  in  or  about  May  2006,  respondent 

submitted  a  purchase  requisition  to  the  District  for  the  purchase  of  football  equipment  for  the 
CVHS  football  team  at  a  cost  of  $8,750.38. 
which  were  attached  or  made a  part  of  the  purchase  requisition.  The  District  completed  a 
purchase  order  and  sent  the  purchase  order  to  LATS.  Respondent  planned  to  take  delivery  of 
the  football  equipment  in  mid-July  2006  by  picking  up  the  equipment  from  LATS. 

Lapes  prepared  two  team  sales  order  or  quotes 

27 

 

  

(B)  On  September  13,  2006,  and  after  receiving  confirmation  of  the  purported 

confirming  delivery  of  the  equipment  under  its  purchase  order,  the  District  paid  LATS  for 
the  purchase  order  and  LATS  invoice  by  issuing  a  check  of  $8,750.38  to  the  vendor.  On 
September  18,  2006,  LATS  deposited  the  $8,750.38  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(C)  On  or  about  August  6,  2006,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  that 

LATS  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts  of  $5,016  and  $3,105,  which 
corresponded  to  the  District’s  payment  of  the  two  invoices  totaling  $8,750.38  less  the 
applicable  sales  tax. 

51. 

For  the  2006  spring  football  practice  session  and  the  2006  fall  football  season, 
respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
from  LATS,  as  described  in  Finding  52  below. 

52. 

(A)  On  April  5,  2006,  Parker  ordered  20  football  helmets,  20  face  masks,  and 
21  shoulder  pads  for  delivery  by  July  2006.  The  cost  of  the  order  was  $4,824.50.  The  team 
sales  order  was  written  by  Lapes  who  also  noted  on  the  order  that  the  cost  of  the  order  should 
be  deducted  from  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team.  On  or  about  July  2, 
2006,  the  order  was  filled  and  Parker  picked  up  the  items  from  the  LATS  office  and  signed 
the  shipping  or  packing  invoice. 

(B)  On  April  5,  2006,  Parker  ordered  48  practice  pants,  36  knee  pads,  36  thigh 
pads,  36  hip  pads,  six  chin  straps,  48  jaw  pads,  and  12  game  footballs  for  the  CVHS football 
team  from  LATS.  The  cost  of  the  order  was  $2,387.40.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order. 
On  July  12,  2006,  Parker  picked  up  the  items  under  this  order  from  the  LATS  office.  Parker 
signed  the  shipping  or  packing  invoice,  acknowledging  his  receipt  of  the  merchandise. 

(C)  On  April  5,  2006,  Parker  ordered  a  down  marker  and  a  football  chain  set  at 

a  cost  of  $391  for  delivery  in  July.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On  July  12,  2006, 
Parker  picked  up  the  down  marker  and  chain  from  the  LATS  office  and  signed  an  invoice 
acknowledging  receipt  of  three  boxes. 

(D)  On  August  21,  2006,  respondent  ordered  two  women’s  polo  shirts  with  the 
CVHS  football  logo  to  be  embroidered  in  the  left  chest  area  at  a  cost  of  $74.  Lapes  wrote  the 
team  sales  order  which  was  a  rush  order.  Adam  Lapes  had  another  company  perform  the 
embroidery.  On  September  6,  2006,  the  order  was  ready  and  Parker  picked  up  the  order  of 
two  women’s  polo  shirts  from  LATS  office. 

(E)  On  November  29,  2006,  Parker  ordered  Reebok  women’s  running  shoes, 

Reebok  men’s  walking  shoes,  two  pairs  of  Reebok  men’s  running  shoe,  Mizuno  training 
shoes,  and  a  black  jacket  at  a  cost  of  $379.70.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  which 
was  a  rush  and  will  call  order.  Parker  picked  up  this  order  for  five  pairs  of  shoes  and a  jacket 
from  the  LATS  office. 

 

  

28 

53. 

Each  of  the  team  sales  orders  and  purchases  that  were  made  by  respondent  and 

Parker  in  2006,  as  described  in  Findings  51  and  52  above,  were  paid  by  LATS  debiting  or 
deducting  the  amount  of  the  order  and  invoice  from  the  promotional  account  that  LATS 
maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Lapes  or  another  LATS  salesperson  noted  on  the 
team  sales  order  that  the  cost  of  the  purchase  was  to  be  taken  or  debited  from  the 
promotional  account.  CVHS  or  the  football  team  received  delivery  of  the  equipment  under 
each  of  these  orders.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District  paid  for  any  of  these  orders  by 
the  issuance  of  a  District  check. 

_ 

54. 

Onan  undetermined  date  prior  to  June  5,  2006,  LATS  issued  four  invoices  to 

the  Football  Booster  Association  of  CVHS  for  payment  of  $14,538.60  for  the  purported 
purchase  of  football  equipment  and  apparel  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  On  June  5,  2006, 
the  Football  Booster  Association  gave  a  check  of  $14,538.60  to  LATS  in  payment  of  the  four 
invoices.  On  June  17,  2006,  LATS  deposited  the  check  into  its  business  bank  account  and 
credited  the  account  of  the  Football  Booster  Association.  It  may  be  inferred  that  football 
equipment  and/or  apparel  was  purchased  or  paid  for  by  the  Football  Booster  Association.  It 
was  not  established  that  the  Football  Booster  Association  paid  for  spirit  wear  or  apparel  for 
coaches  and  staff  or  how  the  purchase  was  related  to  the  District’s  purchase  orders  of  the 
District  or  the  purchases  by  respondent  and  Parker. 

55. 

(A)  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed  that  LATS  credited  the 

promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  $600  on  March  14,  2006.  The  credit 
memo  contained  a  reference  to  an  invoice  was  paid  by  the  Football  Booster  Association  on 
June  5,  2006,  as  set  forth  in  Finding  54  above. 

(B)  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  the  reason  or  reasons  why  LATS 

credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  for  the  payment  of  this  invoice 
by  the  Football  Booster  Association.  It  was  not  established  that  this  credit  or  credit  memo  to 
the  promotional  account  was  a  bribe  or  kick-back  paid  to  respondent. 

Orders  for  2007  Football  Season 

56. 

(A)  For  the  2007  football  season,  and  on  June  11,  2007,  respondent  prepared 

or  caused  the  preparation  of  a  purchase  requisition  for  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS 
football  team  in  the  amount  of  $8,043.54.  He  obtained  two  quotes  for  the  sale  or  purchase  of 
football  equipment,  Invoice  Nos.  55991  and  55992,  from  Lapes  which  indicated  that  the 
equipment  would  be  shipped  in  July  2007. 

(B)  Under  quote  of  Invoice  No.  55991,  Lapes  offered  to  sell  and  deliver  to  the 
CVHS  football  team  15  helmets  and  face  masks,  20  shoulder  pads  to  be  fitted  by  vendor,  20 
six-inch  injury  shoulder  pads,  20  hip  pads,  40  knee  pads,  and  40  extra-large  thigh  pads  at  a 
cost  of  $2,267.74,  including  sales  tax.  Under  the  quote  of  Invoice  No.  55992,  Lapes  offered 
to  sell  18  medium  shoulder  pads  for  $775.80,  including  sales  tax. 

29 

   

(C)  Respondent  attached  the  quotes  to  the  purchase  requisition  form  and 
forwarded  the  form  to  the  school  secretary  Lynn  Church-Bell.  Respondent  indicated  he 
would  pick  up  the  football  equipment  that  was  to  be  purchased.  Church-Bell  typed  the 
purchase  requisition  and  gave  it  to  Principal  Ressler  who  approved  and  signed  the  purchase 
requisition.  Church-Bell  then  forwarded  the  purchase  requisition  to  the  District  business 
office. 

(D)  On  or  about  July  2,  2007,  the  District  determined  there  were  sufficient 

funds  for  the  purchase  of  the  $8,043.54  of  football  equipment  and  prepared  Purchase  Order 
No.  270431  which  was  then  signed  and  authorized  by  business  office  personnel. 
purchase  order  indicated  that  respondent  submitted  the  purchase  requisition,  the  purchase 
was  for  football  equipment  for  CVHS  for  the  2007  season,  and  the  equipment  was  to  be 
delivered  by  August  1,  2007.  The  District  business  office  sent  the  purchase  order  to  LATS. 
Subsequently,  LATS  sent  two  invoices  to  the  District,  requesting  payment  of  $8,043.54  for 
purportedly  filling  the  purchase  order. 

The 

(E)  On  August  15,  2007,  the  District’s  accounts  payable  office  asked  Church- 

Bell  whether  the  items  ordered  under  Purchase  Order  No.  270431  from  LATS  had  been 
received  at  CVHS  and  whether  the  District  should  pay  the  two  invoices  totaling  $8,043.5  that 
had  been  submitted  by  LATS.  Church-Bell  replied  that  the  items  had  been  received  and  that 
it  was  “OK”  to  pay  the  invoices.  On  August  21,  2007,  the  District  issued  the  check  in  the 
amount  of  $8,043.54  to  LATS.  On  or  about  August  24,  2007,  LATS  received  the  check  and 
deposited  the  check  into  its  business  bank  account. 

(F)  On  or  about  August  24,  2007,  after  depositing  the  District’s  check,  LATS 
credited  the  promotional.  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  the  amounts  of  $6,745  and 
$720,  which  corresponded  to  the  District’s  payment  of  the  two  invoices  totaling  $8,750.38 
less  the  applicable  sales  tax. 

57. 

For  the  2007  spring  football  session  and  the  2007  fall  football  season, 

respondent  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  for  the  CVHS  football  team  from  LATS, 
as  described  in  Finding  58  below. 

58. 

(A)  On  April  1,  2007,  respondent  ordered  72  practice  pants,  100  pairs  of 

football  socks,  24  footballs,  36  smail  hip  pads,  36  small  knee  pads,  36  youth  thigh  pads,  and 
three  equipment  bags.  The  cost  of  these  items  was  $3,397.40  and  it  was  requested  that  the 
items  be  delivered  in  July  2007.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  eight 
boxes  for  this  order  to  CVHS  on  July  16,  2007,  and  another  portion  of  the  order  was  picked 
up  from  the  LATS  office.  Parker  accepted  and  signed  for  the  delivery  of  the  equipment  on 
July  16,  2007. 

(B)  On  April  1,  2007,  respondent  ordered  48  scrimmage  vests,  48  web  belts, 
300  mouth  pieces,  48  chin  straps,  two  hardware  kits,  100  chin  strap  buckles  from  LATS  for 
delivery  in  July  2007.  The  cost  of  the  order  was  $1,322.60.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales 

30 

 

  

order.  On  July  16,  2007,  LATS  filled  and  delivered  the  order  to  CVHS  where  Parker  signed 
the  packing  slip. 

(C)  On  April  1,  2007,  respondent  also  ordered  17  shoulder  pads  for  delivery  in 
July  and  at  a  cost  of  $1,564.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  shoulder 
pads  to  CVHS  on  July  16,  2007.  Parker  signed  the  packing  slip  at  the  time  of  delivery. 

(D)  On  April  19,  2007,  Lapes  sold  six  pairs  of  black  socks  to  the  CVHS 

football  team  at  a  cost  of  $23.70.  Lapes  received  the  order  and  wrote  the  team  sales  order 
but  it  was  not  established  who  ordered  the  socks.  The  socks  were  picked  up  from  LATS  on 
the  same  day  that  the  order  was  placed  with  the  Lapes. 

(E)  On  May  1,  2007,  respondent  ordered  12  football  helmets  with  face  masks 
for  delivery  in  July  and  at  a  cost  of  $2,208.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On  July  16, 
2007,  LATS  delivered  the  helmets  in  three  boxes  to  CVHS.  Parker  accepted  delivery  of  the 
items  and  signed  the  packing  slip. 

(F)  On  June  18,  2007,  respondent  ordered  one  medium-sized  youth  shoulder 
pads  and  one  youth  back  plate  at  a  cost  of  $42  plus  $10  for  freight.  Lapes  wrote  the  team 
sales  order.  The  items  were  picked  up  from  LATS  on  the  same  day  that  the  order  was 
placed. 

(G)  On  June  22,  2007,  respondent  ordered  one  youth  football  helmet  with  a 
face  mask  on  a  rush  basis  and  at  cost  of  $174  plus  $10  for  freight.  Lapes  wrote  the  team 
sales  order.  LATS  delivered  the  helmet  and  face  mask  to  CVHS  on  July  16,  2007.  Parker 
accepted  the  delivery  of  the  helmet. 

(H)  On  July17,  2007,  respondent  ordered  one  football  helmet  for  $165.  He 

requested  that  the  helmet  be  delivered  “at  once.”  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  On 
August  9,  2007,  LATS  delivered  the  helmet  to  CVHS  where  respondent  accepted  the 
delivery  and  signed  the  packing  slip. 

(1)  On  September  14,  2007,  an  undetermined  person  ordered  one  football  for 

the  CVHS  football  team  from  LATS  at  a  cost  of  $55.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales 
order.  The  football  was  picked  up  from  LATS  on  the  same  day  as  the  order. 

(J)  On  November  2,  2007,  respondent  ordered  three  women’s  polo  shirts  with 
the  football  logo  of  the  CVHS  football  team  to  be  embroidered  on  the  shirts  on  a  rush  basis. 
The  cost  of  the  shirts  was  $108.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  LATS  contracted  out  the 
embroidery  work.  On  November  7,  2007,  LATS  delivered  the  polo  shirts  to  CVHS. 
Respondent  accepted  the  delivery  and  signed  the  packing  slip. 

59. 

Each  of  the  team  sales  orders  and  purchases  of  football  equipment  and  apparel 
for  the  CVHS  football  team  in  2007,  as  described  in  Findings  57  and  58  above,  were  paid  for 
when  LATS  debited  or  deducted  the  amount  of  the  order  and  invoice  from  the  promotional 

 

  
31     

60. 

account  that  LATS  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  The  CVHS  or  its  football  team 
received  delivery  of  the  items  under  each  order.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District  paid 
for  any  of  the  orders  by  the  issuance  of  a  District  check. 

    
  

shoes  for  $158  plus  $10.61  for  freight.  On  March  20,  2007,  Parker  ordered  two  pairs  of 
Reebok  running  shoes  at  a  cost  of  $110  plus  $10.61  for  freight.  Adam  Lapes  wrote  both 
team  sales  order  which  were  rush  orders.  In  March  2007,  LATS  shipped  the  shoes  to  Parker 
at  his  home  address  in  Lake  Elsinore. 

six  pairs  of  black  socks,  and  two  loose-fitting  performance  tee-shirts  at  a  cost  of  $133.50  and 
on  a  will  call  basis.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order  and  the  items  were  picked  up  from 
LATS  on  the  same  day. 

(C)  On  January  22,  2008,  Parker  ordered  a  baseball  glove  from  LATS.  The 
baseball  glove  cost  $30.  Lapes  wrote  the  team  sales  order.  The  baseball  glove  was  picked 
up  LATS  on  the  same  day  as  the  order. 

(A)  On  March  13,  2007,  Parker  ordered  two  pairs  of  Reebok  women’s  running 

(B)  On  December  11,  2007,  Parker  ordered  two  pairs  of  New  Balance  shoes, 

(D)  It  was  not  established  that  the  orders  and  purchases  made  by  Parker  in 

March  and  December  2007  and  January  2008,  as  described  in  Findings  60  (A)  —  (C)  above, 
were  for  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  The  shoes  that  Parker  ordered  in 
March  2007  were  shipped  to  his  home.  Parker  admitted  that  he  ordered  shoes  for  his  wife; 
his  testimony  that  he  paid  cash  for  the  shoes  was  not  credible.  The  shoes  and  apparel  ordered 
in  December  2007  occurred  after  the  football  season.  The  baseball  glove  ordered  in  January 
2008  did  not  constitute  equipment  for  football.  Therefore,  the  weight  of  the  evidence 
demonstrated  that  these  orders  and  purchases  by  Parker  by  use  or  debiting  of  the  promotional 
account  were  for  his  own  or  his  family’s  personal  use. 
It  was  not  established  that  respondent 
knew  or  approved  of  these  purchases  of  shoes  and  apparel  by  Parker  for  his  personal  benefit. 

61. 

(A)  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed  that,  on  March 23, 
2007,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  two  credit 
memos  of  $609  and  $100.  The  LATS’  credits  or  credit  memos  contained  references  to  two 
undetermined  invoices.  According  to  the  “Slush  Account  Activity”  summary  prepared  by 
Teresa  Sando,  these  two  invoices  were  purportedly  issued  to  and  paid  by  the  Football 
Booster  Association. 

(B)  LATS’  Accounts  Receivable  Trial  Balance  showed  that,  on  March  12, 

2008,  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  a  credit 
memo  of  $700.  The  credit  memo  contained  a  reference  to  an  undetermined  invoice. 
According  to-the  “Slush  Account  Activity”  summary  prepared  by  Teresa  Sando,  the  invoice 
was  purportedly  for  an  “open  order”  for  which  LATS  did  not  receive  payment. 

(C)  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  the  reason  or  reasons  why  LATS 

credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  for  the  payment  or  nonpayment 

  
32 

  

      of  these  invoices.  These  credits  to  the  CVHS  football  promotional  account  were  not  shown 

to  have  been  bribes  or  kick-backs  paid  to  respondent. 

62. 

        Other  Evidence 
   
   
   
  
   
   

2013,  respondent  was  a  social  studies  teacher  and  the  head  football  coach  at  CVHS  for 
several  years.  He  taught  social  studies  at  CVHS  for  approximately  nine  school  years  from 
the  fall  of  2003  through  October  2013.  He  was  the  head  football  coach  for  seven  seasons 
from  March  2003  through  December  2009.  He  was  co-athletic  director  for  three  years  from 
2005  to  2008. 

(A)  Prior  to  his  suspension  from  employment  with  the  District  in  October 

      

(B)  Respondent  went  with  Parker  on  his  last  annual  visit  to  LATS  to  view 

football  equipment  in  or  about  February  2007.  Six  months  later,  Parker  told  respondent  that 
LATS  was  going  out  of  business.  For  the  2008  football  season,  respondent  obtained  quotes 
to  buy  football  equipment  from  the  athletic  supply  company  started  by  Lapes’  two  sons, 
Chad  and  Adam  Lapes,  which  was  called  “C  and  A  Athletics.” 

(C)  On  December  19,  2009,  after  the  football  team’s  season-ending  banquet, 
respondent  resigned  his  position  as  head  football  coach  of  CVHS.  Respondent  testified  that 
he  resigned  because  he  no  longer  had  the  energy  necessary  to  fulfill  the  responsibilities  of  the 
position  and  wanted  to  spend  more  time  with  his  children.  Respondent  also  admitted  that,  in 
the  spring  of  2009,  he  was  asked  by  an  attorney  representing  Teresa  Sando  to  pay  for  LATS 
invoices  that  had  not  been  paid.  He  then  spoke  to  the  principal  and  athletic  director  about  the 
invoices. 

   
    

   

63. 

(A)  As  established,  in  part,  by  the  testimony  of  Co-Athletic  Director  Airey,  the 

    
   

(B)  Before  the  start  of  each  sports  season,  Co-Athletic  Director  Airey  met  with 

purchasing  of  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  was  not  subject  to  a 
competitive  bid  process.  When  respondent  became  the  head  football  coach  at  CVHS  in 
March  2003,  CVHS  and  its  athletic  department  did  not  have  a  manual  that  advised  coaches 
how  to  operate  a  sports  team  or  program,  interact  and  raise  funds  with  booster  clubs,  or  deal 
with  or  purchase  equipment  from  vendors.  Respondent  was  not  required  to  undergo  any 
training  about  purchasing  sports  equipment  or  relating  to  vendors. 

directly.     

the  coaches  at  CVHS  and,  using  a  checklist,  he  told  the  coaches  about  the  paperwork 
requirements,  the  necessity  that  student-athletes  maintain  their  grades,  fundraising  with 
booster  clubs,  and  the  rules  of  the  California  Interscholastic  Federation.  With  respect  to  the 
purchasing  of  equipment,  Airey  instructed  coaches,  including  respondent,  that  purchase 
requisitions  had  to  be  approved  before  sports  equipment  could  be  ordered  for  their  teams. 
After  respondent  became  the  head  football  coach,  Airey  advised  respondent  to  get  a  quote 
from  LATS  or  any  other  supplier.  Airey  did  not  expect  respondent  to  get  the  best  price  for 
the  football  equipment  and  did  not  believe  it  was  improper  for  respondent  to  contact  vendors 

    
  
      
    
    
            
  

   

   

   

     (C)  Airey  corroborated  that  teachers  and  administrators  received 

complimentary  polo  shirts  from  the  football  and  basketball  programs  that  the  staff  wore  to 
school  on  game  days  and  at  the  games.  He  did  not  know  whether  District  funds  were  used  to 
purchase  polo  shirts  for  coaches  but  assumed  that  the  polo  shirts  were  paid  by  the  fund- 
raising  activities  of  the  football  booster  club  and  school  spirit  packs.  It  was  not  established 
that  respondent  was  ever  questioned  about  how  he  paid  for  the  polo  shirts  for  the  high  school 
staff.  Both  the  athletic  director  and  principal  were  aware  that  spirit  packs  were  purchased  by 
the  students, 

64. 

(A)  Phillipa  Geiger,  Executive  Director  of  the  District’s  Fiscal  Services 

Department,  was  not  aware  of  any  instance  where  the  District  ever  issued  any  check  to a 
vendor  in  payment  of  an  invoice  before  the  District  had  verified  that  the  items  had  been 
received  under  the  purchase  order.  The  District  required  verification  of  the  delivery  of  items 
before  issuing  a  check  to  a  vendor.  Verification  was  made  by  the  transmittal  of  a  packing 
slip  from  the  vendor,  receipt  of  a  copy  of  the  purchase  order  from  the  requisitioning 
employee  that  items  had  been  received,  or  an  email  from  the  school  site  Stating  items  had 
been  delivered.  Geiger  was  not  aware  of  the  District  having  paid  for  athletic  equipment  or 
merchandise  that  had  not  been  delivered  or  received  at  a  school  site. 

(B)  Principal  Ressler  could  not  recall  any  instance  when  respondent 

complained  to  him  that  supplies  or  merchandise  ordered  from  LATS  was  not  received. 
Ressler  did  not  know  of  any  instance  of  LATS  paying  cash  or  benefits  to  respondent. 

(C)  As  further  established  by  the  testimony  and  report  of  Orange  County 

Sheriff's  investigator,  Superintendent  Farley  conceded  that  the  District  did  not  advise  the 
coaches  of  the  policies  and  procedures  pertaining  to  the  purchasing  of  equipment  and  the 
accounts  that  provided  the  funds  for  the  purchases.  The  Superintendent  indicated  in  a 
meeting  with  the  Sheriff’s  investigator  that  the  matter  was  an  ethical  one  and  the  coaches 
should  have  known  better.  The  District  has  changed  its  procedure  for  confirming  delivery  of 
athletic  equipment  to  its  high  schools.  The  District  now  requires  that  delivery  be  confirmed 
by  two  employees. 

65. 

 Parker’s  testified  he  did  not  know  about  promotional  account  number 

“9CAPIO1”  or  how  orders  for  football  equipment  were  paid  for  but  he  admitted  that  he  heard 
about  promotional  or  slush  accounts  at  LATS  over  the  years  and  knew  of  the  existence  of  the 
promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Parker  did  place  orders  with  LATS  to  buy 
football  equipment  while  he  was  the  equipment  manager  during  respondent’s  tenure  as  head 
football  coach  and  beforehand  during  the  service  of  the  preceding  head  football  coaches.  He 
testified  credibly  that  the  purchasing  of  football  equipment  at  CVHS  did  not  change  over  the 
years  or  when  respondent  was  hired  as  the  football  coach.  He  ordered  polo  shirts  for  coaches 
and  administrators,  including  women,  after  consulting  respondent.  From  2003  through  2006, 
Parker  received  and  accepted  delivery  of  orders  of  football  equipment  at  CVHS  by  LATS 
signing  packing  slips  and  did  not  return  any  equipment  to  LATS,  except  for  five  helmets  in 
August  2005  that  Lapes  wanted  to  ship  to  another  high  school  in  Riverside  County.  Parker’s 

   

  

 

  

statements  to  the  District’s  investigator  proved  more  probative  in  this  matter  than  his 
testimony. 

Respondent’s  Testimony 

66. 

(A)  Respondent  admitted  that,  after  he  was  hired  as  the  head  football  coach, 
he  was  told,  and  became  aware,  that  the  District  would  pay  only  for  safety  equipment,  such 
as  helmets  and  pads,  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  He  reasonably  believed,  however,  that  the 
District  would  also  pay  for  equipment  necessary  to  play  football,  such  as  football  jerseys  and 
pants  which  were  worn  over  the  pads,  hardware  for  the  helmets,  tape,  and  cleats. 
Respondent  admitted  that  he  did  not  believe  that  the  monies  allocated  by  the  District  to  the 
CVHS  football  team,  which  was  approximately  $7,000  to  $10,000  per  year,  were  sufficient 
to  purchase  safety  equipment,  equip  and  clothe  the  players,  and  operate  the  football  program. 

(B)  Respondent  testified  credibly  that  he  did  not  accept  cash  or  gifts  from 

LATS  as  incentives  to  order  football  equipment  from  that  vendor  and  did  not  accept 
equipment  or  merchandise  from  LATS  for  his  family.  His  testimony  that  he  did  not  prepare 
“dummy  invoices,”  and  did  not  have  control  over  the  promotional  account  was  believable 
inasmuch  as  there  was  no  proof  of  these  allegations 

(C)  On  the  other  hand,  with  respect  to  the  allegations  of  the  Amended 

Accusation,  respondent  testified  he  was  not  aware  of  any  slush  fund  or  account  but  conceded 
that  Parker  mentioned  to  him  about  the  past  use  of  the  slush  account.  Respondent  testified 
that  he  was  not  interested  in  being  involved  with  or  using  the  slush  or  promotional  account, 
which  he  thought  was  a  form  of  fund-raising.  Respondent  further  claimed  that  he  did  not 
order  football  equipment  from  LATS  and  could  not  recall  any  instance  when  he  placed  an 
order.  He  asserted  that  Parker  was  the  one  who  ordered  the  football  equipment  and  supplies 
for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  accepted  the  deliveries  or  picked  up  the  orders.  Respondent 
admitted  he  did  sign  for  deliveries  of  equipment  to  the  high  school  but  indicated  he  did  not 
think  he  was  responsible  for  buying  football  equipment.  He  testified  he  was  unaware  of  any 
equipment  not  being  delivered  to  the  high  school  because  no  one  complained  to  him  about  it 
and  he  did  not  conduct  any  follow-up  to  check  and  see  if  LATS  was  paid.  Respondent 
further  claimed  that  the  Football  Booster  Association  paid  for  spirit  packs,  non-safety 
football  equipment,  and  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff.  Respondent’s  claims  outlined  in  this 
sub-paragraph  were  not  supported  by  the  evidence  and  were  not  credible. 

67. 

(A)  There  was  no  direct  evidence  that  LATS  failed  to  deliver  the  football 

equipment  that  the  District  ordered  each  year  by  the  issuances  of  its  purchase  orders  to  the 
vendor.  No  District  employee  ever  complained  that  equipment  was  not  received.  There  was, 
however,  clear  evidence  in  LATS  business  records  and  documents  of  the  existence  of  the 
promotional  account,  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  LATS  records  also  showed  that 
respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  directly  from  the  vendor  and 
that  the  equipment  ordered  by  them  was  picked  up  or  delivered  to  the  high  school.  The 
evidence  further  documented  that  LATS  maintained  and  used  the  promotional  account  to  pay 

  

  
35  

   for  or  to  cover  the  cost  of  these  direct  orders  made  by  respondent  and  Parker.  There  was  also 

an  absence  in  the  District  records  of  any  payment  for  these  direct  orders  by  respondent  and 
Parker  throughout  each  year. 

  

(B)  Based  on  the  evidence  of  the  credit  memos  placed  by  LATS  in  the 

promotional  account  after  the  District  received  confirmation  of  the  purported  delivery  of 
football  equipment  and  paid  the  LATS  invoices;  the  orders  for  football  equipment,  supplies, 
and  apparel  that  respondent  and  Parker  made  directly  to  LATS;  the  delivery  of  equipment 
from  these  direct  orders  to  Parker  or  the  high  school;  and  the  payment  for  these  direct  orders 
by  the  debiting  of  the  promotional  account,  it  can  be  reasonably  inferred  from  this  evidence 
that  LATS  did  not  fill  the  District’s  purchase  orders  at  any  time  from  2003  through  2007  by 
delivering  football  equipment  before  each  football  season.  Respondent  and  Parker  surely 
would  not  have  had  to  place  orders  for  football  equipment  and  supplies  with  LATS  every 
year  and  there  would  have  been  no  reason  to  debit  the  promotional  account  to  pay  for 
football  equipment  if,  in  fact,  the  District’s  purchase  orders  for  football  equipment  had  been 
filled  by  LATS  each  football  season.  The  direct  orders  for  equipment  by  respondent  and 
Parker  and  the  use  of  the  promotional  account  to  pay  for  the  direct  orders  have  a  tendency  in 
reason  to  show  that  no  deliveries  were  made  by  LATS  on  the  District’s  purchase  orders. 

(C)  Moreover,  the  conclusion  that  LATS  did  not  deliver  football  equipment 

before  each  football  season  pursuant  to  respondent’s  purchase  requisitions  and  the  District’s 
purchase  orders  coupled  with  the  evidence  of  respondent’s  and  Parker’s  direct  orders  for 
football  equipment,  supplies,  and  apparel  which  were,  in  fact,  delivered  to  the  high  school, 
leads  to  the  further  inference  that  the  purchase  requisitions,  which  were  accompanied  by  the 
LATS  quotes  and  submitted  to  the  District,  in  part,  by  respondent  for  2004  and  by 
respondent  for  the  years  2005.through  2007,  were  false  or  fraudulent  statements. 
Respondent  knew  or  should  have  known  that  LATS  would  not  be  delivering  football 
equipment  as  set  forth  in  the  purchase  requisitions  and  attached  LATS  quotes.  When  he 
submitted  the  purchase  requisitions  to  the  District  and  caused  the  District  to  issue  purchase 
orders  to  the  vendor,  respondent  knew  or  should  have  known  that  he  was  not  requisitioning 
for  football  equipment.  He  did  not  expect  LATS  to  deliver  the  football  equipment  under  the 
purchase  requisitions;  rather,  he  expected  the  District  to  issue  and  pay  the  purchase  orders  so 
that  credit  would  be  accrued  with  LATS  that  could  be  used  to  purchase  football  equipment 
for  his  high  school  football  at  a  later  and  more  convenient  time. 

(D)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  made  any  false  statements  or 
Tepresentations  regarding  whether  football  equipment  was  delivered  to  the  high  school 
pursuant  to  the  District’s  purchase  orders.  In  2007,  the  only  year  that  there  is  direct  evidence 
of  a  purchase  requisition  and  a  purchase  order,  the  District’s  accounts  payable  office  had  to 
contact  school  secretary  Church-Bell  by  email  to  check  if  delivery  was  made  to  CVHS  on  the 
purchase  order.  Church-Bell  testified  that,  before  sending  the  e-mail  to  the  District's 
accounts  payable  office  that  it  was  OK  to  pay  LATS?’  invoices,  she  would  have  received  a 
document,  such  as  packing  slip  or  invoice,  from  the  requisitioning  employee  verifying  that 
CVHS  had  received  shipment  or  delivery  of  items  ordered  under  a  purchase  order.  However, 
Church-Bell  did  not  specifically  name  any  person  who  verified  the  delivery  and  the  evidence 

  
  

  

36 

did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  made  any  false  statements  to  the  school  secretary  or  to 
the  District  about  LATS’  purported  delivery  of  football  equipment  under  the  District’s 
purchase  orders. 

Alleged  Stolen  Funds 

68. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  from  May  2003  through  March  2008, 

respondent  stole,  or  conspired  with  Lapes  or  his  company  LATS  or  any  other  person,  to  steal 
District  funds  in  the  total  amount  of  $42,260.90  or  any  other  amount.  No  direct  evidence 
was  presented  showing  respondent  stole  District  funds.  Nor  was  there  any  evidence  of  an 
agreement  or  plan  between  respondent  and  Lapes  to  steal  funds  from  the  District  or  to 
commit  a  crime  or  illegal  act  through  the  use  of  the  LATS  promotional  account  for  the 
CVHS  football  team. 

(B)  Table  1  of  the  Amended  Accusation  summarized  the  credits  or  credit 

memos  provided  by  LATS  to  the  CVHS  football  team’s  promotional  account  for  payments 
made  by  the  District  on  invoices  or  purchase  orders  for  football  equipment  and  supplies  for 
each  football  season  from  March  2003  through  August  2007.  It  was  not  established  that 
these  credits  or  credit  memos  were  allocated  to  a  “special  account”  for  respondent.  Rather, 
the  evidence  demonstrated  that  these  amounts  were  credited  to  the  promotional  account  for 
the  CVHS  football  team  after  the  District  paid  LATS’  invoices.  Respondent  then  used  the 
credits  in  the  promotional  account  to  order  football  equipment  that  was  needed  for  the  CVHS 
football  team.  For  most  of  these  years  in  question,  equipment  manager  Parker  assisted 
respondent  by  ordering  or  placing  orders  for  football  equipment  with  Lapes  or  LATS’  other 
salespersons  and  by  taking  delivery  of  the  football  equipment  either  at  the  high  school  or  at 
LATS’  offices.  Payments  for  these  orders  were  made  by  LATS  debiting  the  promotional 
account. 

(C)  As  described  above,  Lapes  began  using  the  promotional  accounts  for  the 
customers  of  his  athletic  supply  company  beginning  in  or  about  1991  and  had  promotional 
accounts  for  a  number  of  high  schools.  The  evidence  specifically  showed  that  LATS 
credited  and  debited  sums  to  and  from  the  promotional  account  for  the  purchase  of  football 
equipment  for  CVHS  football  team  in  the  years  before  respondent  was  hired  as  the  head 
football  coach.  When  respondent  became  the  head  football  coach  in  March  2003,  the  LATS 
promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team  had  a  balance  of  $1,870.41.  In  May  2003, 
the  balance  had  increased  to  $3,065.61.  In  other  words,  LATS  had  already  in  place  and  had 
been  using  the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team  for  several  years  prior  to 
respondent  being  hired  as  the  head  football  coach.  Respondent  did  not  enter  into  any 
agreement  with  Lapes  or  LATS  to  open  or  to  start  the  promotional  account. 

(D)  Further,  it  is  difficult  to  conclude  that  respondent  and  Lapes  conspired  to 
steal  District  funds  beginning  in  2003  when  no  evidence  was  presented  of  any  agreement  or, 
conversely,  of  any  amount  of  ill-gotten  gains  that  Lapes  and  his  company  LATS  made  under 
any  alleged  agreement.  The  evidence  did  not  show  that  LATS  made  money  but,  in  fact,  lost 

37 

 

     

The  argument  that  Lapes  entered  into  any  agreement  with 

money  and  went  out  of  business. 
respondent  to  steal  District  funds  was  not  reasonable  in  light  of  the  fact  that  Lapes  had  the 
same  promotional  accounts  for  many  high  schools  as  well  as  colleges  and  no  evidence  was 
presented  that  Lapes  stole  money  from  any  other  high  school  or  college.  As  set  forth  in 
Findings  11  —  14  above,  Lapes  started  using  the  promotional  accounts  to  facilitate  the  sale  of 
athletic  and  football  equipment  to  schools  and  athletic  programs  and  not  to  steal  money  from 
the  District,  CVHS,  or  any  other  high  school  in  the  District. 

(E)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  had  any  dominion  or  control  over 

the  promotional  account  in  which  LATS  placed  the  District  funds.  It  was  not  established  that 
respondent  knew  or  was  made  aware  by  Lapes  or  other  LATS  personnel  of  the  credits, 
debits,  or  balance  in  the  promotional  account.  The  promotional  account  was  wholly  in  the 
control  and  maintained  by  LATS  as  part  of  its  business  operations. 

69. 

(A)  The  evidence  of  respondent’s  orders  and  purchases  from  LATS  for  the 

CVHS  football  team  during  his  tenure  as  head  football  coach  demonstrated  that  respondent 
did  not  steal  any  District  monies. 

(B)  For  the  2003  football  season,  Co-Athletic  Director  Airey  and  Parker 
submitted  the  purchase  requisition.  The  District  paid  the  sum  of  $10,186.80  to  LATS. 
LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  $9,094,  which  was 
the  amount  of  the  District’s  payments  less  the  applicable  sales  tax. 
including  orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff,  respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football 
equipment  and  supplies  from  LATS  that  amounted  to  approximately  $5,534.49.  The  cost  of 
these  purchases  was  deducted  from  the  promotional  account.  Orders  for  apparel  for  coaches 
and  staff  in  2003  were  approximately  $3,660.11.  As  such,  respondent’s  purchases  of  football 
equipment  and  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  in  2003  totaled  approximately  $9,194.60.  While 
this  amount  was  less  than  the  District’s  payment,  it  was  not  shown  that  any  difference 
between  the  District’s  payment  and  respondent’s  orders  from  LATS  was  given  to  or  stolen 
by  respondent,  inured  to  respondent’s  personal  benefit,  or  constituted  stolen  monies. 

In  2003,  without 

(C)  For  the  2004  football  season,  Co-Athletic  Director  Airey  and  respondent 

submitted  the  purchase  requisition  for  $9,226.90.  The  District  paid  $9,941.98  to  LATS. 
After  the  District’s  payment,  LATS  then  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS 
football  team  with  $9,255.90.  In  2004,  without  including  orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and 
staff,  respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  from  LATS  that 
amounted  to  approximately  $9,784.18.  Orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  were 
approximately  $1,026.70.  As  such,  respondent’s  purchases  of  football  equipment  and 
apparel  for  coaches  in  2004  totaled  approximately  $10,810.88,  which  exceeded  the  District’s 
payment. 

(D)  For  the  2005  football  season,  respondent  submitted  the  purchase 

requisition  to  the  District  for  $8,325.  The  District  paid  $8,970.19  to  LATS.  LATS  then 
credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  $8,325.  In  2005,  without 
including  orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  and  for  non-football  equipment,  respondent 

 

     
38 

     

and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  that  totaled  approximately  $7,162.73. 
Apparel  and  shoes  for  coaches  and  staff  amounted  to  approximately  $2,173.55. 
As  such, 
respondent’s  purchases  of  football  equipment  and  apparel  for  coaches  in  2005  totaled 
approximately  $9,336.28,  which  exceeded  the  District’s  payment  to  LATS. 

(E)  For  the  2006  football  season,  respondent  submitted  the  purchase 

requisition  to  the  District  for  $8,750.38.  The  District  paid  $8,750.38  to  LATS  on  its 
invoices.  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team  with  $8,121. 
In  2006,  without  including  orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  and  non-football 
equipment,  respondent  and  Parker  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  that  totaled 
approximately  $7,602.90. 
approximately  $453.70.  As  such,  respondent’s  purchases  of  football  equipment  and  apparel 
for  coaches  and  staff  in  2006  totaled  approximately  $8,056.60  for  2006.  While  this  amount 
was  less  than  the  District’s  payment,  it  was  not  shown  that  any  difference  in  amount  between 
the  District’s  payment  and  respondent’s  orders  from  LATS  was  given  to  or  stolen  by 
respondent,  inured  to  respondent’s  personal  benefit,  or  constituted  stolen  monies. 

Orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  amounted  to 

(F)  For  the  2007  football  season,  respondent  submitted  the  purchase 

(G)  Because  respondent’s  expenditures  for  the  CVHS  football  team  largely 

requisition  to  the  District  for  $8,043.54.?  The  District  paid  $8,043.54  to  LATS  on  its 
invoices.  LATS  credited  the  promotional  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team  with  $7,465. 
In  2007,  excluding  orders  for  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  and  for  non-football  equipment, 
respondent  ordered  football  equipment  and  supplies  totaling  approximately  $8,971.17,  which 
was  in  excess  of  the  District’s  payment.  Orders  for  apparel  and  shoes  for  coaches  and  staff 
amounted  to  approximately  $530.72.  As  such,  respondent’s  purchases  of  football  equipment 
and  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff  totaled  approximately  $9,447.89  in  2007,  which  exceeded 
the  District’s  payment  to  LATS. 

equaled  or  exceeded  the  District’s  payment  to  LATS  for  each  year  and  there  was  no  proof  of 
stolen  funds,  it  cannot  be  concluded  that  respondent  stole  any  funds  from  the  District. 
Respondent  used  the  funds  to  purchase  football  equipment  and  apparel  for  the  student- 
athletes  and  the  coaches  and  staff  at  CVHS. 

documents  for  the  preceding  years.     

attached  to  the  purchase  requisition  for  football  equipment  for  the  2007  season  and  the  orders 
and  purchases  made  for  the  CVHS  football  during  2007  showed  that  what  respondent 
ordered  and  obtained  delivery  in  football  equipment  in  2007  was  substantially  similar  to  the 
quotes  and  purchase  requisition. 
and  facemasks.  In  May,  June,  and  July  2007,  respondent  ordered  14  helmets  and  facemasks. 
The  quotes  offered  to  sell  20  shoulder  pads,  20  hip  pads,  40  knee  pads,  and  40  thigh  pads  to 
the  CVHS  football  team.  In  April  2007,  respondent  ordered  and  received  36  hip  pads,  36 

>  Complainant  presented  the  actual  quotes,  purchase  requisition,  and  purchase  order 

| Moreover,  a  review  of  the  LATS  quotes  (Invoice  Nos.  55991  and  55992) 

For  example,  the  quotes  included  the  sale  of  15  helmets 

The  District  did  not  maintain  or  keep  those  records  or 

for  only  the  2007  football  season. 

70. 

  

knee  pads,  and  36  thigh  pads.  In  April  2007,  respondent  also  ordered  and  received  17 
shoulder  pads.  In  June  2007,  respondent  ordered  another  set  of  shoulder  pads.  For  2007,  the 
evidence  of  the  orders  had  a  tendency  in  reason  to  demonstrate  that  respondent  ordered  and 
received  football  equipment  that  was  similar  to  the  football  equipment  ordered  or  described 
in  the  District’s  purchase  order,  respondent’s  purchase  requisition,  and  the  LATS  quote. 

Alleged  Personal  Purchases 

71. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  from  May  2003  through  March  2008, 

respondent  accessed  or  used  stolen  funds  placed  or  paid  to  the  promotional  account  of  the 
CVHS  football  team  to  order  or  purchase  merchandise  of  a  personal  nature  from  LATS  for 
himself,  his  family,  or  his  associates.  As  set  forth  in  Findings  68  —  70  above,  respondent  did 
not  steal  District  funds  and  did  not  access  or  use  stolen  District  funds.  LATS  placed  the 
District  funds  in  the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team,  less  the  sales  tax,  and 
debited  the  account  when  respondent  ordered  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football 
team.  Funds  of  the  District  paid  to  LATS  for  football  equipment  were  not  stolen  but  kept  in 
the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  debited  to  pay  for  football 
equipment  ordered  by  respondent. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  used  the  promotional  account 

maintained  by  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team  to  purchase  personal  items  for  himself  or 
for  his  family.  A  review  of  the  orders  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  purchased 
personal  items  which  were  paid  for  by  the  promotional  account  that  contained  District  funds. 

72. 

(A)  The  items  described  in  Table  2  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  as  having 
been  ordered  in  2003,  were  not  personal  items  or  merchandise  purchased  for  respondent’s 
personal  benefit.  From  May  12,  2003,  through  November  17,  2003,  Parker  ordered  and 
purchased  athletic  apparel  or  clothing  from  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  coaches  for  the 
2003  fall  football  season,  including  coaches’  shorts  and  Oxford  tee-shirts,  polo  shirts, 
jackets,  baseball  hats,  and  socks.  Except  for  the  socks,  the  athletic  apparel  was  embroidered 
with  the  CVHS  football  logo  or  insignia.  Parker  ordered  these  items  with  respondent’s 
consent  and  under  his  direction.  These  items  did  not  constitute  merchandise  of  a  personal 
nature  for  respondent  or  his  family  and  associates  but  rather  athletic  apparel  and  clothing  for 
the  coaches  or  staff  of  the  CVHS  football  teams. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  the  heavy  duty  knee  brace  purchased  from 

LATS  on  November  17,  2003,  was  a  personal  item  for  respondent  or  his  family  and 
associates.  A  heavy-duty  knee  brace  was  likely  bought  for  use  by  a  high  school  student- 
athlete  to  help  him  to  play  football.  The  purchase  occurred  during  the  football  season. 

73. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  items  described  in  Table  2  of  the  Amended 

Accusation,  as  having  been  ordered  in  2004,  were  personal  items  or  merchandise  purchased 
for  respondent’s  personal  benefit.  The  athletic  tape,  Elastikon,  skin  lubricant,  elastic  wraps 
and  bandages,  and  sport  drink  purchased  on  January  7,  2004,  could  reasonably  have  been 

40 

 

  

  

acquired  to  replenish  the  athletic  supplies  at  CVHS  after  the  football  season  or  to  be  used  by 
the  football  staff  and  football  players  for  purposes  of  rehabilitation  and  training.  The  polo 
shirts  and  pull-over  jackets  embroidered  with  the  CVHS  football  logo  were  likely  athletic 
apparel  or  clothing  for  the  football  coaches  and/or  high  school  staff.  The  two  large,  youth 
shoulder  pads  ordered  on  September  1,  2004,  could  reasonably  have  been  used  by  younger 
CVHS  student-athletes  on  the  freshman  football  team.  The  24  pairs  of  socks  ordered  on 
October  20,  2004,  were  delivered  to  CVHS  and  could  reasonably  have  been  for  the  use  by 
the  players  on  the  football  teams.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that  the  eight  youth- 
sized  sleeveless  tee-shirts  costing  $40  and  ordered  by  Parker  on  February  5,  2004,  or  the 
sweatshirts,  sweatpants,  polo  shirts,  tee-shirts,  and  shoes  costing  $228.70  and  ordered  by 
Parker  on  December  8,  2004,  were  for  purposes  other  than  for  the  CVHS  football  team  or 
football  coaches. 

74. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  all  of  the  items  described  in  Table  2  of  the 

Amended  Accusation,  as  having  been  ordered  from  LATS  in  2005,  were  personal  items  or 
merchandise  purchased  for  respondent’s  personal  benefit. 

(B)  The  tee-shirts,  which  were  ordered  on  May  25,  2005,  and  cost  $110,  were 

likely  athletic  apparel  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  The  tee-shirts  were  extra-large  in  size 
and  had  “Cougar  Football”  printed  on  them.  The  shoes  costing  $120;  the  six  pairs  of  socks 
costing  $18;  the  31  polo  shirts,  six  jackets,  and  the  one  woman’s  polo  shirt  costing  $1,251; 
and  the  12  extra-large  tee-shirts  costing  $114.60,  which  were  purchased  in  May,  June,  and 
August  2005,  respectively,  were  not  shown  to  be  other  than  pre-season  purchases  of  apparel 
for  football  coaches  and  a  female  staff  member. 

(C)  On  the  other  hand,  respondent’s  order  of  an  Incrediball  in  January  2005  for 
$35  and  Parker’s  order  of  a  batting  tee  and  an  Incrediball  in  March  2005  for  $63.37  were  not 
purchases  for  the  CVHS  football  team  or  staff.  Parker’s  November  28,  2005  orders  of  four 
pairs  of  men’s  running  shoes  and  three  pairs  of  women’s  running  shoes  costing  $388  and  two 
pairs  of  running  shoes  for  $120  were  not  purchases  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  In  addition, 
Parker’s  orders  in  December  2005  of  a  pair  of  running  shoes  for  $69.85  and  socks  for  $23.70 
were  not  purchases  of  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  However,  none  of 
these  items  were  shown  to  have  been  purchases  by  or  for  respondent  for  his  personal  benefit. 
The  Incrediballs  and  batting  tee  could  reasonably  have  been  orders  for  other  CVHS  athletic 
teams.  Parker  picked  up  the  shoes  and  socks  described  in  this  paragraph  from  LATS  himself 
and  it  was  not  shown  that  respondent  was  aware  of  Parker’s  orders. 

   

Accusation,  as  having  been  ordered  from  LATS  in  2006,  were  personal  items  or  merchandise 
On  August  21,  2006,  respondent  ordered  two 
purchased  for  respondent’s  personal  benefit. 
women’s  polo  shirts  costing  $74.  The  polo  shirts  were  embroidered  with  the  CVHS  football 
logo.  This  purchase  was  not  shown  to  be  other  than  a  purchase  of  polo  shirts  for  female  staff 
members  at  CVHS.  It  was  not  shown  that  respondent  bought  these  items  for  his  own  benefit. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  items  described  in  Table  2  of  the  Amended 

75. 

41 

76. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  all  of  the  items  described  in  Table  2  of  the 

Amended  Accusation,  as  having  been  ordered  from  LATS  in  2007,  were  personal  items  or 
merchandise  purchased  for  respondent’s  personal  benefit. 

(B)  The  socks  costing  $23.70  and  ordered  in  April  2007,  the  youth  medium 

sized  shoulder  pads  costing  $52  and  ordered  in  June  2007,  and  the  youth  football  helmet  with 
face  mask  costing  $184  and  ordered  in  June  2007,  were  not  shown  to  be  purchases  for 
respondent’s  personal  benefit.  These  items  could  reasonably  have  been  used  by  the  CVHS 
football  team. 
November  2007  were  likely  purchases  of  apparel  for  CVHS  staff.  The  shirts  were 
embroidered  with  the  CVHS  football  logo. 

The  women’s  polo  shirts  costing  $108  and  ordered  by  respondent  in 

(C)  On  the  other  hand,  Parker’s  orders  of  women’s  and  men’s  running  shoes 

for  $168.61  and  two  pairs  of  running  shoes  for  $120.61  in  March  2007;  order  of  two  pairs  of 
shoes,  socks,  and  tee-shirts  for  $133.50  in  December  2007;  and  order  for  baseball  glove  for 
$30  in  January  2008,  were  not  purchases  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  These  purchases  were 
for  Parker’s,  and  not  respondent’s,  personal  benefit.  The  shoes  ordered  in  March  2007  were 
delivered  to  Parker’s  home.  The  other  items  were  picked  up  by  Parker  from  LATS.  All  of 
these  items  were  ordered  at  a  time  when  Parker  was  no  longer  the  equipment  manager  for 
CVHS.  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  knew  of  or  approved  of  these  purchases  by 
Parker  in  2007.  As  such,  the  evidence  suggested  that  Parker  made  these  orders  or  purchases 
for  his  own  benefit. 

77. 

On  May  19,  2003,  respondent  filed  a  Fictitious  Business  Statement  with  the 

Orange  County  Clerk-Recorder  that  he  was  going  to  start  a  business  under  the  name,  “Black 
and  Gold  Football.”  Black  and  Gold  Football  was  the  name  of  respondent’s  summer  football 
camp  business  that  CVHS  and  the  District  allowed  him  to  operate  on  the  high  school 
campus.  It  was  not  established  that,  from  May  2003  through  May  2008  or  on  any  other 
dates,  respondent  purchased  football  equipment  for  his  summer  camp  business  by  debiting 
purchases  from  the  promotional  account  maintained  by  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
and  funded  by  the  District  monies  for  his  business. 
Scant  evidence  was  presented  on  the 
nature  and  breadth  of  respondent’s  summer  football  camp  business,  including  whether  he 
needed  football  equipment  for  his  summer  camp. 

Alleged  Bribes 

78. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  from  May  2003  through  March  2008, 

respondent  accepted  bribes  or  kick-backs  from  LATS  on  multiple  occasions  or  accepted 
payments  from  LATS  to  influence  his  purchasing  decisions  or  his  choice  of  vendors  or  to 
influence  him  to  ignore  the  District’s  purchasing  policies.  Nor  was  it  established  that  LATS 
provided  respondent  with  bribe  money,  gifts,  or  other  things  of  value  so  that  he  would 
purchase  football  equipment  and  sporting  goods  for  his  football  team  exclusively  from  LATS 
and  not  require  LATS  to  submit  competitive  bids  or  quotes  for  its  sales  to  the  District.  It  was 
not  established  LATS  gave  bribes  to  anyone.  LATS  had  been  an  authorized  vendor  of  the 

42    

District  and  a  preferred  vendor  of  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  for  several 
years  before  respondent  was  hired  as  the  CVHS  football  coach.  At  no  time  relevant  herein 
was  the  purchase  of  football  equipment  subject  to  a  competitive  bidding  process  under  the 
Board’s  policies.  The  District’s  investigator  admitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that 
respondent  accepted  any  cash  or  checks. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  LATS  gave  $5,825  of  bribe  money  to 

respondent  by  placing  said  amounts  into  his  “special  account.”  Nor  was  it  established  that 
respondent  used  bribe  money  put  into  his  special  account  by  LATS  to  satisfy  his  “personal 
obligations,”  to  purchase  personal  clothing  for  himself  and  his  associates,  or  to  purchase 
items  for  his  benefit  and  the  benefit  of  his  family  and  associates.  The  promotional  account 
was  not  respondent’s  special  or  personal  account  but  an  account  maintained  by  LATS  for  the 
CVHS  football  team  that  had  been  started  by  Lapes  as  a  promotional  or  business  tool  when 
he  first  began  doing  business  as  a  vendor  in  or  about  1991.  The  money  placed  into  the 
promotional  account  by  LATS  did  not  constitute  bribe  money  but  was  District  funds  to  be 
used  to  purchase  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  As  summarized  in 
Findings  68  —  77  above,  respondent  did  not  purchase  personal  items  from  LATS  by  use  of 
the  promotional  account;  he  bought  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and 
apparel  for  coaches  and  staff. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  78(A)  —  (B)  above,  it  was  not  established  that  LATS’ 
credits  or  credit  memos  to  the  promotional  account  maintained  for  the  CVHS  football  team 
totaling  $5,825,  as  referenced  in  Table  3  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  constituted  bribes  or 
payments  of  bribes  or  kick-backs  to  respondent.  No  evidence  or  opinion  was  presented  that 
these  credits  to  the  promotional  account  were  bribes  or  kickbacks  or  that  respondent  was 
even  aware  of  these  credits  to  the  promotional  or  9  account  of  the  CVHS  football  team.  In 
the  absence  of  any  probative  evidence,  the  classification  of  these  credits  or  credit  memos  as 
bribes  or  kick-backs  constituted  nothing  more  than  speculation. 

79. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  violated  school  laws  of  the  state  by 

giving  and  accepting  bribes,  committing  theft,  circumventing  the  District’s  open  bidding 
requirements,  engaging  in  a  conspiracy  to  defraud  the  District,  or  misappropriating  public 
funds.  Aside  from  the  fact  that  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  respondent  did  not 
commit  these  alleged  acts,  there  was  no  evidence  or  argument  presented  as  to  what  state 
school  laws  were  allegedly  violated  by  respondent. 

   

43 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent’s  conduct  constituted  violations  of 

California’s  Penal  Code  sections  424,  subdivision  (a)  (appropriation  or  misuse  of  public 
monies  or  falsification  of  public  monies  account),  487  (grand  theft),  503  —  504  and  514 
(embezzlement),  532  (fraud),  or  641.3  (commercial  bribery).  The  Orange  County  Sheriff's 
Department  and  District  Attorney  did  not  file  any  criminal  charges  against  respondent  and 
did  not  prosecute  him  for  any  crimes.  The  evidence  was  insufficient  in  this  matter  to 
demonstrate  that  respondent  committed  these  offenses. 

District’s  Policies 

80. 

(A)  Under  the  Gifts,  Grants,  and  Bequests  Policy,  the  Governing  Board  may 

accept  any  bequest  or  gift  of  money  or  property  on  behalf  of  the  District.  The  Board  has 
stated  under  this  policy  that  it  fully  supports  athletic  and  academic  programs  and 
competitions  as  an  extension  of  the  educational  program.  Ifa  school  wishes  to  augment 
District-funded  positions,  this  policy  states  it  is  permissible  to  seek  donations  from  parents, 
guardians,  or  private  donors.  Gift  money  will  be  accepted  for  stipend  payment  for  co- 
curricular  activities  but  will  not  be  accepted  to  pay  for  the  primary  employment  of 
employees.  Upon  acceptance  of  funds  and  equipment  by  the  District,  the  policy  requires  that 
all  monies  are  to  be  deposited  into  a  District-based  account  which  has  been  established  for 
each  school  site  and  which  must  be  monitored  by  the  school  principal.  All  gifts,  grants,  and 
bequests  become  District  property. 

(B)  Under  the  Gifts  to  School  Personnel  Policy  (BP  3291),  the  Governing 

Board  recognizes  that  sometimes  students,  parents,  and  community  members  give  nominal 
gifts  to  District  employees  to  show  their  appreciation  for  a  job  well  done,  and  that  vendors 
sometimes  distribute  free  marketing  materials  or  stationary  items  to  staff  members.  The 
Governing  Board  prohibits  the  acceptance  of  gifts  in  situations  in  which  it  could  be  construed 
that  the  gift  was  given  as  a  condition  for  providing  educational  services  to  a  student,  or  to 
influence  the  District’s  decision  to  purchase  instructional  materials  or  any  other  items  of 
value.  Under  this  policy,  the  Governing  Board  has  stated,  in  part,  that  acceptance  of  any  gift 
or  money  or  other  valuable  thing  by  an  District  employee,  which  he  or  she  suspects  or 
believes  to  be  made  as  an  inducement  to  directly  or  indirectly  introduce,  recommend,  or 
otherwise  influence  the  adoption  or  purchase  of  any  instructional  material  or  other  items 
required  in  the  operation  of  the  schools,  is  against  the  policy  of  the  District.  Any  school 
employee  who  violates  this  policy  shall  be  subject  to  removal  from  his  or  her  official 
position. 

(C)  It  was  not  established  that,  from  May  2003  through  March  2008, 

respondent  failed  to  abide  by  or  violated  the  Gifts,  Grants,  and  Bequests  Policy  or  the  Gifts 
to  School  Personnel  Policy  of  the  Governing  Board.  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  to 
show  that  respondent  received  any  gift  of  materials,  supplies,  or  money  from  Lapes  or  his 
company  LATS. 

81. 

(A)  Under  the  Policy  for  Bids  (BP  3311a),  which  was  adopted  in  February 
1996,  the  Governing  Board  has  stated,  in  part,  that  the  District  shall  purchase  equipment, 
supplies,  and  services  on  a  competition  bidding  basis  when  required  by  law  or  whenever  it  is 
in  the  best  interest  of  the  District.  Care  must  be  taken  to  observe  all  statutory  requirements 
for  bidding  and  bidding  procedures.  For  purchases  made  using  procedures  other  than  formal 
bid  requirements,  local  vendors  shall  be  given  preferences  when  quality  and  price  are 
competitive.  Time  of  delivery  and  other  factors  that  directly  affect  District  costs  a  continued 
operation  shall  be  considered. 

44

  

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  the  Policy  for  Bids  of  the  Governing  Board  was 
applicable  to  the  charges  or  facts  in  this  matter.  The  evidence  demonstrated  that  the  purchase 
of  football  equipment  for  the  CVHS  football  team  was  not  required  to  be  made  on  the  basis 
of  a  competitive  bidding  process. 

82. 

(A)  Under  the  Relations  with  Vendors  Policy  (BP  3315a),  which  was  adopted 

in  February  1996,  the  Governing  Board  has  provided  that  vendors  shall  contact  the 
purchasing  department  to  arrange  for  sales  presentations.  If  visits  to  other  departments  and 
school  sites  are  required,  the  purchasing  department  shall  make  the  arrangements  for  such 
visits.  The  purchasing  department  is  prohibited  from  extending  favoritism  to  any  vendor. 
Each  purchase  order  is  to  be  placed  on  the  basis  of  quality,  price,  and  delivery,  with  past 
service  being  a  factor  if  all  other  considerations  are  substantially  equal.  The  purchasing 
department  is  to  conduct  all  price  negotiations  with  vendors  when  necessary. 

(B)  Under  the  Relations  with  Vendors  Policy,  vendors  are  not  to  make  any 

substitutions  without  the  approval  of  the  purchasing  department.  Vendors  or  requisitioners 
shall  not  make  any  exchange  without  the  approval  of  the  purchasing  department.  All 
communications  with  suppliers  shall  be  through  the  purchasing  department,  except  in  special 
cases  where  technical  details  make  it  advisable  to  delegate  authority  to  others.  For  this 
exception,  a  copy  of  all  correspondence  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  purchasing  department. 

(C)  Vendors  are  to  be  referred  to  the  purchasing  department  by  other  District 
personnel  if  direct  contact  is  made  with  a  school  or  department.  In  interviews  with  vendors, 
no  one  who  is  not  a  member  of  the  purchasing  department  shall  commit  himself  or  herself  by 
implication  or  otherwise  as  the  District’s  source  of  supply  for  any  product. 

(D)  It  was  not  established  that  the  Relations  with  Vendors  Policy  of  the 

Governing  Board  was  enforced  or  followed  by  the  District  from  May  2003  through  March 
2008,  while  respondent  was  the  head  football  coach  at  CVHS,  or  at  any  time  prior  to  March 
2003. 
select  football  equipment  and  to  obtain  quotes  to  buy  football  equipment  for  their  high  school 
football  teams. 

The  District  allowed  football  coaches  to  negotiate  directly  with  LATS  to  view  and 

83. 

(A)  Under  the  Student  Activities  Funds  Policy  (BP  3452a),  which  was  adopted 

in  February  1996,  the  Governing  Board  has  proclaimed  that  student  organizations  may  raise 
and  spend  money  in  order  to  promote  the  general  welfare  morale,  and  educational 
experiences  of  the  students.  Student  funds  shall  finance  worthwhile  activities  which  go 
beyond  those  provided  by  the  District.  Minutes  must  be  kept  of  student  organization 
meetings  and  shall  properly  reflect  all  financial  activities.  Student  funds  shall  be  managed  in 
accordance  with  sound  business  procedures  designed  to  encourage  the  largest  possible 
educational  return  to  students  without  sacrificing  the  safety  of  the  funds.  With  Governing 
Board  approval,  student  funds  shall  be  held  or  invested  in  one  of  the  ways  allowed  by  law. 
Students’  funds  must  be  disbursed  according  to  procedures  established  by  the  student 
organization  and  approved  by  an  official  designated  by  the  Governing  Board,  the  certificated 
employee  who  is  the  advisor  for  the  student  organization,  and  a  student  organization 

  

  

45

  

representative.  The  principal  or  designee  is  responsible  for  the  proper  conduct  of  all 
financial  activities  of  the  student  organization. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  the  Student  Activities  Funds  Policy  of  the 

Governing  Board  was  applicable  to  the  charges  or  facts  in  this  matter.  While  some  evidence 
was  presented  that  funds  from  the  associated  student  body  supplemented  the  funds  of  the 
District  to  pay  for  the  CVHS  football  team,  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  how  much  money 
was  provided  by  the  associated  student  body  to  the  CVHS  football  team  or  whether  such 
money  was  ever  used  to  purchase  football  equipment. 

84. 

(A)  Under  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy  (BP  3310a),  which  was  adopted 
in  February  1996,  the  Governing  Board  has  the  authority  and  responsibility  for  all  purchase 
contracts  of  the  District.  This  authority  and  responsibility  can  be  delegated  with  certain 
restrictions  as  set  forth  in  the  Government  and  Education  Codes.  The  Superintendent  or  his 
designee  must  maintain  effective  purchasing  procedures  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  District 
receives  maximum  value  for  the  money  it  spends  and  that  records  are  kept  in  accordance 
with  the  law.  Insofar  as  it  is  possible,  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy  provides  that  goods 
and  services  purchased  will  meet  the  needs  of  the  person  or  department  ordering  them  at  the 
lowest  price  consistent  with  standard  purchasing  practice.  Maintenance  costs,  replacement 
costs,  and  trade-in  values  shall  be  considered  when  determining  the  most  economical 
purchase  price.  The  superintendent  or  his  designee  may  issue  and  sign  purchase  orders  and 
shall  submit  them  to  the  Governing  Board  for  its  approval.  The  purchasing  department 
conducts  all  purchase  transactions  for  the  District. 

(B)  With  regard  to  the  relationship  between  the  purchasing  department  and  the 
schools,  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  the  purchasing  of 
services  and  supplies  is  centralized  in  the  purchasing  department.  All  requests  for  prices  or 
for  repair  services  and  all  purchases  shall  be  made  by  the  purchasing  department,  unless  an 
exception  has  been  made  by  the  deputy  superintendent  of  business  and  support  services.  The 
purchasing  department  is  required  to  keep  other  departments  informed  regarding  new 
materials,  services,  sources,  prices,  and  processes  in  manufacturing.  The  purchasing 
department  is  prohibited  from  assisting  any  District  employee  in  securing  materials  for 
personal  use  at  a  discount. 

(C)  Under  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy,  the  purchasing  department  must 

maintain  a  library  of  current  trade  catalogues  in  its  offices  that  are  available  for  use  by 
District  departments  and  schools,  be  constantly  alert  to  any  change  affecting  purchasing 
economies,  and  study  the  school  supplies  market  to  determine  the  most  advantageous  time  to 
purchase  specific  materials. 
The  purchasing  department  is  also  required  to  maintain  an  up- 
to-date  list  of  vendors  of  various  materials  used  by  the  District’s  departments  and  schools. 
The  director  of  purchasing  and  buyers  within  the  purchasing  department  shall  visit  suppliers 
when  such  visitation  is  deemed  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  a  necessary 
augmentation  to  the  purchasing  process, 

  

46 

 

   

(D)  Supplies  and  equipment  to  be  used  within  the  District  shall  be 
standardized  as  much  it  is  feasible  and  does  not  hamper  service.  In  keeping  with  purchasing 
procedures,  instructional  committees  may  be  formed  for  developing  standard  bid  lists  for  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  maximum  economy  from  volume  buying.  The  purchase  order  form 
Shall  be  restricted  to  use  by  the  purchasing  department. 

85. 

_  Based  on  Findings  32  —  59,  62  —  67,  and  84  above,  from  May  2003  through 

March  2008,  respondent  violated  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy  of  the  District  by 
purchasing  football  equipment  and  apparel  from  LATS  through  the  use  of  the  promotional 
account  maintained  by  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team  when,  in  fact,  the  policy  provides 
that  the  purchasing  department  is  to  conduct  all  purchase  transactions  for  the  District. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  had  rudimentary  knowledge  of  the  Board’s  policies;  his  claim 
that  he  was  not  directed  to  follow  the  policies  had  little  evidentiary  weight  and  did  not  excuse 
his  violation  of  the  purchasing  policy.  Respondent  was  aware  of  the  purchasing  policy  and 
procedure,  for  he  filed  purchase  requisitions  for  several  years. 

86. 

(A)  Under  the  Codes  of  Ethics,  the  Governing  Board  expects  employees  of  the 
District  to  maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  to  follow  District  policies,  and  to  abide  by 
state  and  national  laws.  Employee  conduct  should  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  District  and 
the  goals  of  the  educational  program. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  32  —  59,  62  —  67,  84  —  85,  and  86(A)  above,  from  May 

2003  through  March  2008,  respondent  violated  the  District’s  Codes  of  Ethics  by  failing  to 
follow  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy  and  by  misrepresenting  to  the  purchasing 
department  that  the  CVHS  football  team  had  received  delivery  of  football  equipment  under 
purchase  orders.  Respondent  stated,  or  allowed  Parker  and/or  other  District  employees  to 
state,  to  CVHS  and  the  purchasing  department,  that  football  equipment  had  been  delivered 
when,  in  fact,  LATS  did  not  deliver  football  equipment  under  the  District’s  purchase  orders. 
Thereafter,  respondent  ordered  and  received  football  equipment  from  LATS  through  the  use 
of  the  promotional  account  maintained  by  LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  without 
complying  with  the  Purchasing  Procedures  Policy. 

Character  Witnesses 

87. 

(A)  Bruce  Michael  Carlisle  has  been  a  social  studies  teacher  at  CVHS  for  the 

past  nine  years.  He  was  chairperson  of  the  social  studies  department  from  2008  through 
2011.  From  2003  through  October  2013,  Carlisle  frequently  interacted  with  respondent  on 
the  CVHS  campus  and  during  departmental  meetings.  Carlisle  is  also  a  coach  at  CVHS,  has 
worked  as  a  timekeeper  at  games,  and  watched  football  games.  Carlisle  was  also  a  student  in 
respondent’s  class  at  Aliso  Niguel  High  School  on  undetermined  dates  in  the  1990’s. 

(B)  Based  on  his  professional  interactions  with  and  personal  observations  of 
respondent  over  the  past  nine  or  10  years,  Carlisle  has  found  respondent  to  be  an  honest  and 
direct  person  who  strives  to  abide  by  a  strong  code  of  honor.  Respondent  is  highly  regarded 

  

  
47 

  

by  his  fellow  teachers.  He  constructs  detailed  lessons  plans,  is  well-prepared,  comes  to 
school  early,  and  has  a  well-organized  and  clean  classroom.  Respondent  cares  about  his 
students  and  his  teaching.  Respondent  is  personable  and  able  to  connect  with  his  students 
who  believe  that  he  has  a  plan  for  them  every  day  and  are  able  to  learn  the  subject  matter 
under  his  guidance.  According  to  Carlisle,  respondent  applies  concepts,  imparts  knowledge, 
and  evaluates  information.  Carlisle  has  found  respondent  to  be  a  good  teacher  and  a  leader 
on  the  high  school  campus.  He  knows  of  no  complaints  against  respondent.  He  is  aware  of 
the  allegations  against  respondent  in  this  matter  and  has  followed  respondent’s  case  through 
newspaper  or  media  reports. 

88. 

William  J.  Cunerty  is  a  retired  teacher  and  former  football  coach.  He  taught 

English  and  coached  football  at  Saddleback  College.  He  was  the  head  football  coach  at 
CVHS,  the  District’s  Dana  Hills  High  School,  and  West  Torrance  High  School.  Cunerty  has 
known  respondent  since  the  latter  was.  14  years  old  and  attended  Cunerty’s  football  camps. 
Later,  Cunerty  coached  respondent  when  he  played  at  Saddleback  College.  He  has  continued 
to  observe  respondent  while  respondent  worked  as  a  football  coach.  In  Cunerty’s  view, 
respondent  has  helped  to  develop  the  student-athletes  on  football  teams  so  that  they  are  able 
to  grow  and  mature.  He  believes  that  the  student-athletes  like  respondent.  Cunerty  has  never 
found  respondent  to  have  done  anything  untrustworthy  or  to  have  lied.  He  trusts  respondent 
and  sees  respondent  as a  friend. 

89. 

Airey  viewed  respondent  as  a  model  head  football  coach.  Respondent  was 

organized  and  communicated  well  with  his  football  staff,  CVHS  administrators,  parents,  and 
football  officials.  He  held  student-athletes  out  from  games  or  practices  when  it  was  the  right 
thing  to  do  for  them.  After  graduating,  players  often  returned  to  the  high  school  to  work  with 
respondent.  In  Airey’s  opinion,  respondent  did  not  do  anything  to  show  that  he  is  a  dishonest 
or  untrustworthy  employee. 

Performance  Evaluations 

90. 

In  his  evaluation  the  2003-2004  school  year,  Principal  Ressler  found,  in  part, 
that  respondent  drew  students  out  to  ensure  that  material  applied  to  their  life  situations  and 
encouraged  all  students  to  participate  in  classroom  activities.  He  respected  diverse  opinions 
and  arranged  activities  to  enable  students  to  understand  information.  Respondent  was  an 
active  member  of  the  Western  Association  of  Schools  and  Colleges  (WASC)  focus  in 
learning  group  and  worked  collaboratively  with  members  of  his  department  to  achieve 
educational  goals.  Principal  Ressler  commended  respondent  for  the  outstanding  job  that  he 
did  as  the  head  football  coach.  Respondent  offered  leadership  and  promoted  sportsmanship. 

91. 

(A)  Following  the  2005-2006  school  year,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory 
evaluation  of  his  performance  as  a  high  school  strength  and  exercise  teacher.  Respondent 
created  an  environment  in  the  weight  room  where  students  knew  the  routines  and 
expectations.  He  did  an  excellent  job  of  keeping  all  students  on  task  and  motivated;  there 
were  no  disciplinary  issues  or  safety  problems  in  the  weight  room.  He  understood  that 

  

48  

  

football  players  needed  a  base-line  of  strength  and  conditioning  to  prevent  injuries  in  practice 
and  during  games.  Respondent  was  deemed  a  valuable  and  collegial  member  of  the  CVHS 
staff.  That  school  year,  he  served  as  a  physical  education  teacher,  head  football  coach,  and 
co-athletic  director. 

(B)  Among  his  goals  as  co-athletic  director  for  the  2005-2006  school  year, 

respondent  noted  that  he  would  develop  an  athletic  budget  that  was  based  on  money  provided 
by  the  District  and  associated  student  body  and  would  meet  the  needs  of  the  athletic 
department  and  individual  sports  teams. 
and  needs  of  the  athletic  programs  at  CVHS,  find  ways  to  improve  the  facilities  and 
equipment  for  the  student-athletes,  and  gain  the  cooperation  of  coaches  and  players  to 
maintain  the  athletic  facilities  and  equipment. 

He  indicated  he  would  determine  the  current  assets 

92. 

For  the  2010-2011  school  year,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory  evaluation 

of  his  teaching  performance  as  a  tenth  grade  social  studies  or  world  history  teacher.  He 
engaged  and  supported  students  in  learning  by  using  video  and  power  point  presentations, 
giving  lectures,  and  making  quick  formative  assessments.  He  immediately  reviewed  and 
discussed  the  students’  questions  and  answers  on  book  reviews. 
He  maintained  an  effective 
learning  environment  by  developing  focused  units  to  improve  test  scores,  using  data  from  the 
prior  school  year  to  identify  areas  of  need,  and  encouraging  student  participation. 
Respondent  facilitated  the  learning  of  English  language  learners  by  engaging  them  in  the 
lessons  and  calling  on  students  to  use  their  own  knowledge  and  experiences.  In  the  area  of 
professional  development,  respondent  used  his  time  in  the  professional  learning  community 
to  collaborate  with  members  and  other  departmental  colleagues.  Respondent  was  described 
as  a  pleasure  to  observe  because  he  was  enthusiastic  and  committed  to  his  students  and  to 
CVHS. 

93. 

Allegations  contained  in  the  Amended  Accusation  or  raised  by  the  parties  at 

the  hearing  in  this  matter  for  which  there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this  Decision  were 
unproven  or  deemed  surplusage  and  were  therefore  immaterial  to  the  disposition  of  this 
matter. 

x  ok 

eK 

eh 

kK 

#e 

& 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  makes  the  following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  inasmuch  as  the  District  is 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  standard 

  

49   

 

  

of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

In  a  dismissal  proceeding  initiated  against  a  certificated  employee  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44934,  the  hearing  shall  be  initiated,  conducted,  and  a 
decision  made  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act 
commencing  with  Government  Code  section  11500.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (a).) 
hearing  need  not  be  conducted  according  to  the  technical  rules  relating  to  evidence  and 
witnesses;  any  relevant  evidence  shall  be  admitted  if  it  is  the  sort  of  evidence  on  which 
responsible  persons  are  accustomed  to  rely  in  the  conduct  of  serious  affairs  and  hearsay 
evidence  may  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  supplementing  or  explaining  other  evidence.  (Gov. 
Code,  §  11513,  subd.  (c)  and  (d).) 

The 

2. 

It  is  well  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/bid.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.  App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  trier  of  fact  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  The  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence.”  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality  Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d 
1040,  1052.) 

The  trier  of  fact  must  weigh  the  evidence,  consider  the  credibility  of  witnesses, 

and  resolve  the  conflicts  in  the  evidence  or  in  the  reasonable  inferences  that  may  be  drawn 
therefrom.  (Fibreboard  Paper  Products  Corp.  v.  East  Bay  Union  of Machinists  (1964)  227 
Cal.App.2d  675,  696.)  An  inference  is  a  deduction  of  fact  that  may  logically  and  reasonably 
be  drawn  from  another  fact  or  group  of  facts  found  or  otherwise  established  in  the  action. 
(Evid.  Code,  §  600,  subd.  (b).)  An  inference  is  not  evidence  but  rather  the  result  of  reasoning 
from  evidence;  an  inference  of  fact  must  be  based  upon  substantial  evidence  and  not 
conjecture.  (Fashion  21  v.  Coalition  for  Humane  Immigrant  Rights of  Los  Angeles  (2004) 
117  Cal.App.4th  1138,  1149.) 

3. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  for  immoral  conduct  in  that  it 
was  not  established  that  respondent  engaged  in  any  immoral  conduct,  based  on  Findings  1  — 
93  above. 

In  general,  immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters  but  also  includes  conduct  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness,  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  towards 

 

50   

good  order  in  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d 
808,  811.) 

In  the  instant  matter,  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent 

engaged  in  any  immoral  conduct.  The  Amended  Accusation  made  charges  of  theft, 
misappropriation,  bribery,  embezzlement,  and  kick-backs  based,  in  large  part,  on  the  credits 
made  to  the  promotional  account  for  the  CVHS  football  team  and  respondent’s  purchases  of 
football  and  related  equipment  that  were  paid  from  the  promotional  account.  While  theft  and 
bribery  involve  acts  of  moral  turpitude,  respondent  did  not  steal  District  funds  or  conspire 
with  Lapes  to  steal  District  funds.  He  did  not  misappropriate  or  embezzle  any  District 
monies  or  accept  bribes  from  LATS  to  continue  ordering  from  the  athletic  goods  vendor. 
The  funds  expended  from  the  promotional  account  to  purchase  the  football  equipment 
originated  from  the  District  but  respondent  did  not  have  any  control  of  the  funds  or  the 
promotional  account.  LATS  started  and  maintained  the  promotional  account.  Respondent 
did  not  purchase  any  goods  or  items  for  his  personal  benefit.  Rather,  in  continuing  the 
practice  at  CVHS  of  ordering  equipment  from  LATS  through  the  use  of  the  promotional 
account,  respondent  bought  only  football  equipment  for  his  football  team.  Respondent 
submitted  what  has  been  determined  to  have  been  false  or  fraudulent  purchase  requisitions, 
but  he  did  so,  not  with  immoral  or  evil  intent,  to  order  football  equipment  for  his  team  and 
apparel  for  coaches  and  staff.  His  conduct  did  not  connote  any  immoral  intent  to  benefit 
himself  or  to  harm  the  District,  CVHS,  or  its  students. 

4, 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  public  schools  by  the  governing 
board  of  the  District,  based  on  Findings  1  —  93  above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events 
or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered 
persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito 
Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
1176,  1180-1181.) 

Here,  complainant  proved  that  respondent  persistently  violated  the  District’s 
The  policy  required  that  ail  purchasing  for 

policies  for  purchasing  procedures  and  ethics. 
the  District,  which  would  naturally  include  the  District’s  high  schools  and  athletic  programs, 
be  conducted  by  the  District’s  purchasing  department.  Respondent  was  apprised  of  this 
procedure  and  followed  it  to  a  certain  extent.  He  obtained  quotes  from  LATS  for  football 
equipment  and  submitted  the  quotes  and  purchase  requisitions  to  the  District’s  business 
office  for  processing  and  preparation  of  purchase  orders.  The  District  was  to  pay  for  the 
purchases  on  receiving  confirmation  of  delivery  of  the  equipment.  From  2003  through  2007, 
respondent  circumvented  the  policy  by  representing  that  equipment  was  received  or 

51 

 

delivered  to  the  high  school  when,  in  fact,  LATS  did  not  delivery  equipment  ordered  by  the 
District.  Thereafter,  respondent  and  equipment  manager  Parker  with  respondent’s  consent 
ordered  football  equipment  through  the  debiting  of  a  promotional  account  maintained  by 
LATS  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  As  such,  respondent  conducted  purchase  transactions  in 
violation  of  District  policy.  His  failure  to  abide  by  purchasing  policy  likewise  violated  the 
Board’s  ethics  policy. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  in  that 
respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit  to  be  a  teacher  due  to  a 
defect  in  temperament  that  cannot  be  remedied  or  otherwise,  based  on  Findings  1  —  93  above. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.  4th  1429,  1444- 
1445.)  Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  not  remediable  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Id.  at  p.  1444.) 

In  general,  the  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  to  decide 
whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696.) 
If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  unfitness  is 
evident,  i.e.  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.  4th  1429,  1445.) 

In  the  Morrison  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 

immorality  or  unprofessional  conduct  are  raised  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case,  the  applicable 
standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra, 
1  Cal  3d.  at  229.)  The  terms  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  have  been  held  too  vague, 
standing  alone,  and  must  be  applied  to  a  specific  occupation  and  given  context  by  reference 
to  fitness  for  the  performance  of  that  occupation.  (Basset  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1988)  201  Cal.  App.  3d  1444,  1453.) 
Morrison  case  requires  that  the  determination  of  whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  be  based  on 
an  objective  and  analytical  approach  consisting  of  a  review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an 
assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  criteria  which  include:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  respondent;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity, 
if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7) 
the  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher.  These  factors  assist  a  board  of  education  in  determining  whether  a 

52     

  

 

The 

teacher’s  fitness  to  teach,  and  whether  the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and 
overall  impact  on  his  or  her  students  are  likely  to  meet  the  standards  of  the  board  of 
education.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra,  1  Cal.  3d  at  229-  230.) 

Following  a  mandatory  application  of  the  Morrison  standard,  the  Commission 

has  broad  discretion  in  matters  of  teacher  discipline  and  dismissal.  The  role  of  the 
Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to 
decide  whether  the  conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates 
unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220.) 

6. 

Analysis  under  Morrison  Factors—The  evidence  demonstrated  that,  from  in  or 

about  May  2003  through  March  2008,  respondent  violated  the  District’s  purchasing 
procedures  and  ethics  policies  by  personally  engaging  in  the  purchases  of  football  equipment 
from  LATS  through  the  use  and/or  debiting  of  a  promotional  account  maintained  by  the 
vendor  for  the  CVHS  football  team.  Respondent  also  made  false  statements  on  purchase 
requisitions  submitted  to  the  District  from  2004  through  2007.  To  determine  whether  these 
acts  demonstrated  evident  unfitness  for  service,  the  Commission  measures  respondent’s 
conduct  against  the  Morrison  factors. 

| 

First,  respondent’s  purchases  by  use  of  the  vendor’s  promotional  account  were 

not  shown  to  have  adversely  affected  students  or  teachers  at  the  high  school.  Student- 
athletes  were  not  deprived  of  any  athletic  equipment  by  respondent’s  purchases  through  the 
promotional  account  but  were  provided  football  equipment  and  supplies  necessary  to  play 
football  in  a  safe  manner  and  environment.  It  was  not  shown  that  the  football  team  was  ever 
in  need  of  more  equipment  or  that  equipment  was  missing  or  in  disrepair  and  unsafe 
condition.  Teachers,  staff,  and  coaches  at  the  high  school  were  provided  shirts  and  jackets 
that  were  worn  at  school  and  during  games  to  enliven  the  school  spirit  and  staff  camaraderie. 
Second,  respondent’s  conduct  in  purchasing  football  equipment  by  use  of  the  promotional 
account  was  neither  recent  nor  remote  in  time.  He  engaged  in  the  conduct  for  approximately 
six  years  from  March  2003  through  March  2008.  Third,  the  type  of  teaching  credential  held 
by  respondent  was  not  shown  to  have  any  relevance  to  this  analysis.  Respondent  was 
credentialed  to  teach  social  science  at  the  secondary  level  and  received  satisfactory  and  good 
evaluations  of  his  performance  as  a  certificated  employee. 

Fourth,  there  were  both  extenuating  and  aggravating  circumstances  in  this 

matter.  In  extenuation,  respondent  did  not  unlawfully  steal,  embezzle,  or  misappropriate  any 
District  funds  and  did  not  personally  profit  from  his  purchases.  He  ordered  football 
equipment  for  his  football  team  as  well  as  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff.  This  scheme  with 
the  vendor  LATS  to  use  District  funds  to  accrue  credit  in  the  promotional  accounts  had  been 
in  place  for  several  years  before  respondent  was  hired  at  CVHS.  As  a  new  coach,  he 
continued  the  practice.  He  did  not  receive  any  training  or  a  manual  to  help  him  with 
purchases  from  vendors.  No  administrator  questioned  respondent’s  purchases,  especially  the 
purchases  of  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff. 
District  policies  by  personally  ordering  and  receiving  football  equipment  through  the 
promotional  account  was  not  an  isolated  incident  but  continued  over  the  course  of  five 

In  aggravation,  respondent’s  violation  of  the 

   

  

53 

football  seasons.  He  was  advised  by  the  co-athletic  director  that  he  was  required  to  submit  a 
purchase  requisitions  to  purchase  equipment.  He  did  submit  purchase  requisitions  but  the 
purchase  requisitions  and  the  quotes  or  team  sales  orders  attached  to  his  purchase 
requisitions  were  false  or  fraudulent  in  that  he  knew  or  should  have  known  that  LATS  was 
not  going  to  deliver  the  equipment  under  the  purchase  requisitions  or  orders.  There  was  no 
probative  evidence  of  any  publicity  about  respondent’s  conduct  in  ordering  football 
equipment  from  LATS. 

Fifth,  it  was  not  clear  what  motives  respondent  had  in  ordering  and  purchasing 

He  sought  to  purchase  equipment  in  order  to 

football  equipment  from  LATS  through  the  use  of  the  promotional  account  that  was 
maintained  by  the  vendor  for  the  CVHS  high  school  football  team.  Respondent  denied 
involvement  in  the  scheme  with  Lapes  and  LATS.  However,  the  weight  of  the  evidence 
suggested  that  respondent  had  largely  praiseworthy  motives.  As  shown  by  the  record  of  his 
purchases,  respondent  ordered  predominantly  football  equipment  for  his  football  team  and  he 
also  ordered  apparel  for  coaches  and  staff. 
equip  his  team  and  outfit  the  coaching  and  school  staff.  He  was  motivated  to  help  his  players 
on  his  football  team  to  compete  well  in  practice  and  on  the  playing  field.  He  also  wanted  to 
raise  school  spirit  and  obtain  the  support  of  the  school  staff. 
In  continuing  the  established 
practice  at  CVHS  in  buying  equipment  and  supplies  from  LATS  by  use  of  the  promotional 
account,  respondent  found  the  process  to  be  more  flexible  and  convenient  in  that  he  was  able 
to  buy  equipment  when  the  need  arose  and  at  his  discretion.  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply 
with  the  District  purchasing  policy  was  a  blameworthy  motive.  Sixth,  there  is  very  little 
likelihood  that  respondent  would  repeat  his  conduct  of  violating  the  District’s  purchasing  and 
ethics  policy.  Any  authority  that  he  had  to  order  equipment  ended  when  he  resigned  as  the 
head  football  coach  in  December  2009.  LATS  went  out  of  business  in  2008.  Seventh,  this 
matter  does  not  involve  or  impact  respondent’s  constitutional  rights. 

7. 

Discussion—The  Commission  had  a  very  difficult  time  deciding  this  case. 

First,  in  its  view,  many  of  the  witnesses,  both  for  the  District  and  respondent,  were  not 
completely  candid  about  what  they  knew  regarding  the  promotional  account  at  CVHS  and 
the  involvement  of  coaches  and  administrators  in  the  purchasing  of  football  equipment.  The 
District’s  investigation  relied  largely  on  the  review  of  the  LATS  documents  conducted  by 
Teresa  Sando  and  recommended  charges  that  were  not  supported  by  the  evidence,  such  as  the 
allegations  of  crimes  and  violations  of  most  of  the  Board’s  policies.  The  original  owner  of 
LATS,  his  sons,  and  the  CVHS  equipment  manager,  all  of  whom  were  employees  of  the 
company,  had  their  own  reasons  to  avoid  testifying  about  the  vendor’s  promotional  account. 
Because  the  District  did  not  monitor  the  vendor’s  prices  or  sales  quotes  or  the  delivery  of 
equipment  and  allowed  school  staff  to  even  confirm  deliveries  by  e-mail  messages  without 
the  benefit  of  shipping  documents,  District  business  office  personnel  were  able  to  testify 
generally  about  the  purchasing  procedure  but  not  about  the  delivery  of  equipment  under  the 
District’s  purchase  orders. 

Second,  respondent  has  been  a  good  teacher  for  the  District.  He  received 

satisfactory  and  good  evaluations  of  his  performance  in  the  classroom  and  as  a  coach  and 
supervisor  in  the  athletic  facilities.  He  is  respected  and  well-liked  by  his  colleagues  and 

54 

   

supervisors.  The  violations  alleged  in  the  Amended  Accusation  did  not  involve  his 
competency  or  performance  as  a  teacher.  However,  respondent’s  denials  of  complicity  in  the 
scheme  to  use  the  LATS  promotional  account  and  his  failure  to  take  responsibility  for  his 
actions  and  violations  of  Board  policies,  including  his  claim  that  Parker  ordered  equipment 
on  his  own  and  without  respondent’s  input  or  approval,  were  not  helpful  to  his  cause  when 
considered  against  the  extensive  documentary  evidence  of  the  orders  of  football  equipment 
made  by  respondent  and  Parker  and  respondent’s  role  as  the  head  football  coach. 
Respondent  was  responsible  for  ordering  football  equipment  and  for  ensuring  compliance 
with  the  District’s  purchasing  policy. 

In  the  documented  history  of  the  purchases  from  LATS  by  the  District  and 

CVHS  football  team,  which  dated  back  to  1991,  the  Commission  found  mitigating 
circumstances  for  respondent’s  actions.  After  he  was  hired  as  the  head  football  coach,  he 
continued  what  appeared  to  have  been  a  long-standing  practice  of  purchasing  equipment 
from  LATS  and  using  the  promotional  account  to  buy  safety  and  non-safety  equipment,  such 
as  apparel,  for  his  team,  coaches,  and  the  high  school  staff.  He  bought  largely  football 
equipment  and  supplies  for  his  football  team  and  did  not  take  any  money  or  merchandise  for 
himself.  The  documentary  evidence  in  this  matter  also  demonsirated  that  respondent  ordered 
equipment  from  LATS  using  the  promotional  account  for  several  football  seasons.  The 
District  did  not  pay  for  these  direct  orders  but  did  pay  LATS  for  its  purchase  orders.  The 
Commission  was  able  to  infer  and  to  find  that  deliveries  were  not  made  on  the  District’s 
purchase  orders.  Consequently,  respondent’s  purchase  requisitions  were  deemed  to  have 
been  false  or  fraudulent  statements.  Respondent’s  false  or  fraudulent  statements  on  the 
purchase  requisitions  and  his  direct  orders  and  purchases  of  equipment  in  violation  of  the  two 
Board  policies  were  serious  and  repeated  violations  and  connoted  a  character  trait  for  a  lack 
of  honesty  and  a  tendency  to  circumvent  and  not  follow  school  district  policies.  His  conduct 
helped  to  continue  and  sustain  a  school  and  business  environment  that  was  conducive  to 
embezzlement  or  theft  and  raised  questions  and  uncertainty  about  the  status  of  public  funds 
and  budgeting  for  schools  and  school  athletics.  As  such,  the  seriousness  and  continuous 
nature  of  respondent’s  conduct  outweighed  the  mitigating  circumstances  and  require  that  he 

be  terminated  from  his  employment  with  the  District.     

  

 

WHEREFORE,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  makes  the  following 

Order: 

ORDER 

Amended  Accusation,  Case  No.  2012050145,  filed  and  issued  by  complainant  Dr. 

Joseph  M.  Farley  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  of  the  Capistrano  Unified 
School  District,  and  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Board,  against  respondent  Charles  J.  Biehn 
is  sustained,  based  on  Conclusions  of  Law  1  — 7  above,  jointly  and  for  all.  Respondent 
Charles  J.  Biehn  is  terminated  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Capistrano 
Unified  School  District. 

Dated:  /,  / O 

Zo  ¥ 

I,  Martin  Casas,  concur  with  the  Decision  and 
Order. 

Dated:  7/  0  out 

VE 

Aéf 

~~  3 

: 

Dated:  #4  |  (0,  IY 

“Martin  Casas, 

Commission  Member 

Assistant  Principal 
Poway  Unified  School  District 

J,  J.  Manuel  Carcido,  concur  with  the  Decision 
and d  Order  oe 
ue 

ce 

Z 

LO 

   

. 

i  “3 

aan 

Manuel Coraid 0,  Commission  Member 
Teacher 
Pasadena  Unified  Schoo!  District 

i 

i 

7 
U  bid 

™_... 

Vincent  Nafafyete,  Commission  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

   

56 

  

