BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
LINCOLN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
. 
COUNTY  OF  SAN  JOAQUIN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

HEIDI  KAESLIN, 
a.k.a.  HEIDI  RENEE  KAESLIN, 
a.k.a.  HEIDI  GATES, 
a.k.a.  HEIDI  LEE, 
a  Permanent  Certificated  Employee 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2012050003 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Rebecca  M.  Westmore,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  and  Chairperson  of  the  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  of  the  Lincoln  Unified  School  District,  and 
Commission  members,  Wendy  Taylor  and  Jon  Alota,  Ph.D.,  on  October  22,  23,  24,  25,  26, 
29,  30  and  31,  2012,  and  February  4,  5,  6,  13,  14,  25,  26  and  27,  2013,  in  Stockton, 
California. 

Marleen  L.  Sacks,  Attorney  at  Law,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo, 

represented  complainant,  Lincoln  Unified  School  District  (LUSD  or  district). 

Thomas  J.  Driscoll,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Driscoll  Law  Firm,  represented  respondent, 

Heidi  Kaeslin,  a.k.a.  Heidi  Renee  Kaeslin,  a.k.a.  Heidi  Gates,  a.k.a.  Heidi  Lee,  who  was 
present  throughout  the  proceedings. 

Documentary  and  testimonial  evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed,  and  after 
the  Commission  met  in  Executive  Session,  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  February 
27,  2013. 

.

    

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  LUSD,  assigned  to 

teach  special  education  at  Lincoln  High  School  (LHS). 

2. 

On  February  14,  2012,  Michele  Tatum,  in  her  official  capacity  as  Associate 

Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  notified  respondent  in  writing  of  LUSD’s  intention  to 
recommend  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  (Board)  that  respondent  be  terminated 
from  her  employment.  In  the  notice,  Ms.  Tatum  wrote,  in  pertinent  part:  “[y]ou  are  advised 
that  you  may  respond  to  these  charges  in  a  meeting  with  Tom  Uslan,  or  in  writing.’  You  may 
be  represented  by  a  union  representative  or  counsel  if  you  choose  to  meet  with  him.  If  you 
do  not  contact  me  to  set  up  a  meeting  to  take  place  no  later  than  February  27,  2012,  we  will 
assume  that  you  do  not  wish  to  respond  to  the  Statement  of  Charges  at  this  time  .... 
If  you 
wish  to  schedule  a  meeting  and  bring  your  attorney,  please  notify  me  by  ...  February  17, 
2012  so  that  our  attorney  can  be  present  as  well.” 

3. 

In  a  letter  to  respondent  dated  February  22,  2012,  Thomas  W.  Uslan,  in  his 
official  capacity  as  Superintendent,  confirmed  that  respondent  “chose  not  to  respond  to  the 
charges,”  and  indicated  that  LUSD  “will  recommend  your  immediate  suspension  without  pay 
and  dismissal  from  employment  at  the  upcoming  Board  meeting  on  ...  February  29,  2012 

9 

oe 

4. 

On  February  29,  2012,  Mr.  Uslan  filed  with  the  Board  the  Statement  of 

Charges  against  respondent,  alleging  cause  for  the  immediate  suspension  and  dismissal  of  | 
respondent.  On  March  2,  2012,  the  district  notified  respondent  in  writing  of  the  Board’s 
intention  to  immediately  suspend  respondent  without  pay  and  to  dismiss  her  at  the  expiration 
of  30  days  from  the  date  of  service  of  notice  upon  her  of  the  charges  presented  to  the  Board, 
unless  she  demanded  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  to  dismiss  her  from  employment 
with  the  district.  On  March  28,  2012,  respondent  demanded  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 
cause  to  dismiss  her  from  the  district.  On  April  2,  2012,  the  district  filed  and  served  the 
Accusation  in  this  matter.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

Summary  of Allegations 

5. 

The  district  contends  that  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  respondent  used 

her  district-issued  laptop,  district  work  time  and  work  resources  for  her  personal  pornography 
businesses;  maintained  inappropriate  images  of  nude  children  on  her  district-issued  laptop; 
maintained  derogatory  cartoons/drawings  on  her  district-issued  laptop;  improperly  used  her 
district-issued  mobile  phone;  conducted  her  personal  pornography  business  during  district 
time;  and  engaged  in  dishonesty  and  insubordination.  The  district  alleges  that  such  actions 
by  a  high  school  special  education  teacher  constitute  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  Education 

  

'  This  meeting  was  referred  to  throughout  this  hearing  as  a  “Skelly”  hearing. 

2

Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939;  evident  unfitness  to  serve,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5);  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
‘schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  district,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and  dishonesty,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3).  The  district  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal  from  her 
position  as  a  permanent  and  certificated  employee  in  the  district. 

Respondent’s  Conduct 

inch  laptop  computer. 

6. 

On  January  25,  2010,  the  district  issued  to  respondent  a  new  MacBook  Pro  15- 

7. 

Prior  to  receiving  the  new  MacBook  Pro  15-inch  laptop  computer  from  the 
district,  respondent  received  an  email  from  LHS  Principal,  Debra  Holmerud,  advising  that 
she  could  turn  in  her  old  laptop  to  the  district’s  information  technology  personnel,  and  they 
would  transfer  the  information  from  respondent’s  old  laptop  to  her  new  laptop.  Upon  receipt 
of  her  new  laptop,  respondent  recalled  seeing  old  files  from  her  old  laptop. 

8. 

In  the  fall  of  2010,  respondent  began  an  extramarital  affair  with  then-Stockton 

police  officer  Richard  Frank  Fields,”  who  had  been  assigned  by  the  Stockton  Police 
Department  to  serve  as  a  School  Resource  Officer  at  LHS  beginning  in  2005. 

9. 

In  the  fall  of  2010,  respondent  accompanied  Mr.  Fields  to  three  meetings  with 

web  developer  Joel  Estrellado  (Estrellado)  in  Elk  Grove,  California,  to  discuss  launching  a 
website  called  “teachertitties.com.”  Using  her  district-issued  laptop,  respondent  took  notes 
during  the  meetings,  and  later  translated  those  notes  for  Mr.  Fields,  who  described  himself  as 
“the  most  computer  illiterate  person  in  the  world.” 
Estrellado  agreed  to  build  the  website,  and  instructed  Mr.  Fields  to  obtain  content  for  the 
website.  Mr.  Fields  paid  Estrellado  $2,000  to  build  the  website. 

In  late  October/early  November  2010, 

10. 

The  idea  for  the  teachertitties.com  website  originated  during  a  happy  hour 
occasion  in  or  about  2009,  in  which  respondent  and  other  teachers  in  respondent’s  special 
education  group  were  discussing  how  they  could  make  extra  money.  Mr.  Fields  testified  that 
respondent  was  the  first  one  to  mention  a  website  for  male  students  to  view  their  teachers’ 
breasts.  Respondent  denied  that  she  was  the  first  one  to  vocalize  the  idea.  In  2009, 
respondent  accompanied  Mr.  Fields  to  a  meeting  with  a  web  developer  who  worked  for 
Disney;  however,  according  to  Mr.  Fields,  the  web  developer  was  unable  to  build  the  website 
because  it  conflicted  with  his  employment  at  Disney.  In  late  2009/early  2010,  Mr.  Fields 
purchased  the  domain  name  for  teachertitties.com. 

  

*  Mr.  Fields  retired  from  the  Stockton  Police  Department  in  May  2011. 

  

3

  

11. 

In  or  about  November  2010,  Estrellado  launched  a  “teaser”  webpage  for 

teachertitties.com,  which  depicted  the  following  four  faceless  women:  “Ms.  Jones”  pushing 
her  breasts  out  of  her  open  top;  “Mrs.  WoosLey”  pulling  open  her  top  and  exposing  her 
breasts;  “Ms.  Payne”  with  her  shirt  unbuttoned  to  her  waist  and  her  tie  covering  her  cleavage; 
and  “Ms.  Wilson”  with  her  cleavage  exposed.  The  webpage  included  two  captions  reading: 

Remember  that  English  teacher  you  had  in  high  school  who  was 
sooo  beautiful  and  smelled  so  good?  This  site  will  feature  the 
most  beautiful  teachers  in  your  area  who  love  to  show  their  best 
assets!  ... 

Beautiful  Breasts! 

WEB  SITE  COMING  SOON! 

For  extra  Credit 
Please  see  any  of  the 
teachers  after  class! 

The  webpage  also  displayed  an  “I  ¥  Teachers”  logo  which  depicted  a  woman’s  breasts 

below  the  words  “I  ¥  Teachers”. 

The  teachertitties.com  webpage  represents  images  and  information  that  is 

inappropriate  for  a  high  school  special  education  teacher.  It  is  directly  related  to  the  teaching 
profession,  and  casts  teachers  in  an  unfavorable  light  and/or  suggests  that  teachers  are  more 
interested  in  showing  their  breasts  than  teaching  students.  The  Commission  found  the  teaser 
webpage  to  be  pornographic. 

12. 

Subsequent  to  the  launching  of  the  teachertitties.com  teaser  webpage,  Mr. 

Fields  and  respondent  spoke  every  day  about  how  to  get  content  for  the  teachertitties.com 
website.  Mr.  Fields  contacted  a  realtor  friend  to  rent  an  empty  building  where  he  could 
throw  a  party  and  take  pictures  for  the  website.  Respondent  talked  to  her  husband,  Trent 
Kaeslin,  about  content  for  the  website,  and  told  Mr.  Fields  that  her  husband’s  friend  offered 
to  throw  a  party  so  that  Mr.  Fields  could  take  pictures  for  the  website.  Neither  of  these 
suggestions  worked  out,  however,  so  Mr.  Fields  contacted  a  photographer  who  quoted a  price 
for  taking  pictures.  The  photographer  also  recommended  that  Mr.  Fields  obtain  a  Model 
Release  form,  and  sent  to  Mr.  Fields’  email  a  link  to  a  form  that  Mr.  Fields  could  manipulate. 
Mr.  Fields  did  so,  and  emailed  a  draft  to  respondent’s  work  email  for  review. 

13. 

In  fall  2010,  respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  came  up  with  the  idea  to  sell  “I  ¥ 

Teachers”  t-shirts  to  pay  for  the  development  of  the  teachertitties.com  website.  Mr.  Fields 
did  not  like  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  logo  displayed  on  the  teachertitties.com  teaser  webpage,  so 
respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  collaborated  to  create  a  new  logo  for  the  t-shirts.  Respondent 

  

4

sketched  a  logo  which  took  the  form  of  an  outline  of  a  woman’s  breasts,  and  suggested  that 
the  outline  be  faint  so  that  it  was  not  “too  obvious.”  Mr.  Fields  took  the  sketch  to  Mudville 
Rags,  a  print  shop  in  Stockton,  California,  where  the  sketch  was  modified  to  create  the  logo 
which  was  ultimately  used  on  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts.  Respondent  accompanied  Mr. 
Fields  to  two  meetings  at  Mudville  Rags.  Respondent  also  suggested  to  Mr.  Fields  that  they 
could  sell  more  t-shirts  if  they  advertised  that  some  of  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  the  t- 
shirts  would  be  donated  to  breast  cancer  research.  In  her  August  23,  2010  deposition, 
respondent  confirmed  in  response  to  the  question  whether  the  idea  was  that  she  would  receive 
money  from  the  proceeds,  that  “[t]he  idea  was  that  eventually,  at  some  point,  if  Rich  was 
successful,  I  could  leave  teaching.  Sure.  That  was  a  dream.” 

14. 

‘In  late  fall  2010,  Mr.  Fields  and  Estrellado  discussed  the  profitability  of  a 

different  website  in  which  companies  would  automatically  feed  pornographic  videos  onto  a 
website,  and  they  could  make  money  from  the  advertising  on  that  website.  The  website  was 
named  “mysluttyteachers.com,”  and  Mr.  Fields  purchased  the  domain  name.  Mr.  Fields  paid 
Estrellado  $1,000  to  build  the  website. 

| 

15. 

In  order  to  create  the  keywords  to  get  people  to  visit  mysluttyteachers.com, 

Mr.  Fields  and  Estrellado  had  to  categorize  the  content  of  pornographic  video  clips. 
Respondent  accompanied  Mr.  Fields  to  a  meeting  in  which  Estrellado  discussed  how  to 
categorize  the  pornographic  video  clips.  Using  her  district-issued  laptop,  respondent  took 
notes,  and  later  taught  Mr.  Fields  how  to  categorize  those  video  clips.  At  the  request  of  Mr. 
Fields,  respondent  also  categorized  the  video  clips.  They  used  labels  such  as  “straight”; 
“female/female”;  and  “threesomes”;  and  categorized  the  type  of  sex,  such  as  “oral”  and 
“lesbian.”  Respondent  also  allowed  her  husband  to  categorize  video  clips  on  her  district- 
issued  laptop.  After  categorizing  the  videos  for  approximately  four  to  five  nights,  however, 
respondent  told  Mr.  Fields  that  she  did  not  want  to  continue  categorizing  the  videos  because 
it  made  her  feel  uncomfortable.  According  to  Mr.  Fields,  “it  turned  out  to  be  a  lot  of  work” 
to  get  the  mysluttyteachers.com  website  up  and  running,  so  he  and  respondent  abandoned  the 
categorizing  of  the  videos,  and  decided  not  to  pursue  the  website  idea. 

16. 

During  a  subsequent  meeting  with  the  web  developer,  Estrellado  suggested 
that  Mr.  Fields  and  respondent  obtain  a  professional  email  address  to  link  all  the  websites 
together.  Mr.  Fields  and  respondent  discussed  the  same,  and  came  up  with  the  name  R&H 
Entertainment,  an  acronym  for  “Rich  &  Heidi.”  On  December  10,  2010,  respondent  went 
home  during  her  fourth  period  prep  class,  and  using  her  district-issued  laptop,  submitted  an 
on-line  application  to  the  United  States  Patent  and  Trademark  Office  (USPTO)  to  register 
and  trademark  R&H  Entertainment.  Using  her  maiden  name,  Heidi  Lee,  respondent 
identified  herself  on  the  application  as  the  owner  of  the  trademark,  doing  business  as  R&H 
Entertainment,  and  used  her  debit  card  to  purchase  the  trademark.  The  application  was 
submitted  at  10:51:58  PST,  and  completed  and  successfully  validated  at  11:14:12  PST.  |

  

17. 

On  December  11,  2010,  Mr.  Fields,  doing  business  as  R&H  Entertainment, 

registered  the  trademark  for  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  with  the  USPTO.  In  his  description  of 
the  mark,  Mr.  Fields  wrote:  “The  mark  consists  of  black  lettering  for  I,  Teachers,  red  heart, 
and  a  gray  outline  of  breasts.”  At  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  there  was  nothing 
inappropriate  about  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  logo,  and  argued  that  the  outline  under  the  words  “I  ¥ 
Teachers”  was  a  “cursive”  or  “lazy”  “W.”  However,  respondent’s  argument  is  belied  by  Mr. 
Fields’s  description  of  the  logo  on  the  trademark  application  as  “a  gray  outline  of  breasts.” 

18. 

Thereafter,  Mr.  Fields  obtained  a  copy  of  a  Non-Disclosure  Agreement  from 
respondent’s  husband,  and  changed  the  wording  to  reflect,  in  pertinent  part,  that  the  Non- 
Disclosure  Agreement  was  “by  and  between  Rich  Fields  and  Heidi  Kaeslin  (the  “Owners”), 
of  R&H  Entertainment....”  The  Owner  is  engaged  in  the  business  of  adult  entertainment... 
Information  will  be  disclosed  to  the  Recipient  to  determine  whether  the  Recipient  could  assist 
Rich  Fields  and  Heidi  Kaeslin  with  the  development  of  the  business  ....  The  Owner  has 
requested  that  the  Recipient  will  protect  the  confidential  material  and  information  which  may 
be  disclosed  between  the  Owner  and  the  Recipient....”  [Bolding  in  original.] 

19. 

In  late  December  2010/early  January  2011,  Mr.  Fields  and  Estrellado  discussed 

launching  a  website  to  sell  adult  sex  toys  and  accessories.  The  website  was  named 
“360pig.com,”  and  Mr.  Fields  purchased  the  domain  name.  Respondent  drew  a  rough  sketch 
of  a  pig  for  the  logo,  and  referred  Mr.  Fields  to  an  artist  named  Brandon.  Respondent’s 
rough  sketch  was  modified  to  the  pig  drawing  that  ultimately  became  the  logo  for  the 
website.  In  order  to  obtain  the  sex  toys  and  accessories  to  sell  on  the  website,  Mr.  Fields  and 
respondent  discussed  attending  the  Adult  Video  News  Expo  in  Las  Vegas  to  find  a  “drop 
shipper”  to  supply  them  with  the  products. 

20. 

Mr.  Fields  believed  that  the  trip  to  the  Adult  Video  News  Expo  would  also  be 
a  good  way  to  promote  the  teachertitties.com  website,  so  he  asked  Mudville  Rags  to  create  a 
flyer  advertising  the  website  that  they  could  distribute  at  the  Adult  Video  News  Expo.  The 
original  flyer  included  a  chalk  board  with  a  picture  of  a  woman’s  breasts,  and  the  language: 
“Remember  your  favorite  teacher?  Ever  dream  about  seeing  her  tits?  NOW  YOU  CAN! 
Log  on  to  teachertitties.com  to  view  the  titties  you’ve  dreamed  about.”  In  addition,  the  flyer 
included  a  notebook  page  with  the  language:  “Support  your  teachers  by  purchasing  your 
OWN  super  soft  I  ¥  Teachers  t-shirt.  Portions  of  the  proceeds  will  go  towards  breast  cancer 
research.  See  teachertitties.com  for  ordering  info.”  Finally,  the  flyer  included  the  “I  ¥ 
Teachers”  logo.  However,  Mr.  Fields  decided  it  was  too  much  work  to  set  up  donations  to  a 
charity,  so  he  asked  Mudville  Rags  to  delete  the  language  regarding  the  donations  for  breast 
cancer  research,  and  print  100  flyers  for  distribution  at  the  Adult  Video  News  Expo. 

21. 

On  January  7,  2011,  respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  drove  to  Las  Vegas  to  attend 

the  Adult  Video  News  Expo,  and  to  meet  a  “drop  shipper”  who  could  supply  the  sex  toys  and 
accessories  for  sale  on  the  360pig.com  website.  They  handed  out  two  of  the  flyers 
advertising  the  teachertitties.com  website,  one  of  which  was  to  drop  shipper  El  Dorado 

6

  

Trading  Company  (EDTC).  Respondent  subsequently  emailed  EDTC  for a  list  of  their  top 
1,000  selling  items,  and  EDTC  supplied  the  products  for  sale  on  360pig.com.  The  “I  ¥ 
Teachers”  t-shirts  were  also  sold  on  the  360pig.com  website.  The  Commission  found  the 
360pig.com  website  to  be  adult  entertainment. 

22. 

In  early  spring  2011,  in  the  “back  corner  office  behind  closed  doors”  in  the 

special  education  department,  respondent  showed  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  to  special 
education  teachers  Shelly  Moreira,  Melissa  Prettyman-Pope,  Kristina  Garcia,  and  Brock 
Kaiser,  and  offered  one  of  the  t-shirts  to  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope.  Respondent  also  told  Dr. 
Moreira  that  she  was  helping  Mr.  Fields  develop  the  teachertitties.com  website,  at  which  time 
Dr.  Moreira  cautioned  her  to  be  careful. 

23. 

Melissa  Prettyman-Pope  worked  as  a  Resource  Specialist  at  LUSD  with 
respondent.  At  hearing,  she  testified  that  when  respondent  first  talked  to  her  about  the 
teachertitties.com  website  in  the  spring  of  2011,  she  thought  it  was  a  joke.  However,  when  it 
became  apparent  that  respondent  was  serious,  she  was  shocked,  and  did  not  want  any  part  of 
it.  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  testified  that  respondent  was  often  trying  to  come  up  with  “get  rich 
quick  schemes,”  and  she  understood  that  respondent  was  working  on  the  website  to  make 
extra  money  because  she  did  not  want  to  stay  in  teaching.  Respondent  identified  to  Ms. 
Prettyman-Pope  that  her  business  partner  was  Rich  Fields.  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  confirmed 
that  when  respondent  showed  her  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  in  the  office,  respondent  had  with 
her  a  box  containing  between  20  and  50  t-shirts.  According  to  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope, 
respondent  was  excited  about  showing  the  t-shirts  to  the  staff  because  she  thought  it  would 
catch  on  and  drum  up  business  for  the  website.  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  was a straight-forward 
and  persuasive  witness. 

24. 

‘In  late  April/early  May  2011,  respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  decided  to  pursue  a 

postcard  business  venture,  so  Mr.  Fields  purchased a toilet,  and  they  took  pictures  of 
themselves  with  their  pants  down  sitting  on  the  toilet.  The  idea  was  to  have  the  pictures  of 
themselves  on  the  toilet  superimposed  onto  scenic  shots  from  around  the  world,  with  the 
words,  “Just  shitting  here  thinking  of  you.”  They  hired  a  photographer  to  photograph 
landmarks  in  San  Francisco,  and  in  the  summer  of  2011,  met  with  one  of  Mr.  Fields’s  friends 
in  the  Bay  Area  who  had  a  connection  to  a  postcard  manufacturer.  Respondent  and  Mr. 
Fields  were  advised  to,  and  did,  mail  an  envelope  to  themselves  containing  the  postcard  idea 
so  that  they  had a  record  of  it.  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  the  idea  for  the  postcard 
came  to  her  while  she  was  in  college,  but  she  decided  not  pursue  it  at  that  time.  Respondent 
also  admitted  that  while  the  photographs  of  her  and  Mr.  Fields,  and  of  the  postcard,  were 
found  on  her  district-issued  laptop,  she  had  deleted  them  after  she  sent  the  images  to  a 
photographer  to  photo  shop  them  onto  the  background  of  scenic  shots  from  around  the 
world.  In  her  deposition,  respondent  admitted  that  placing  the  postcard  images  on  her 
district-issued  laptop  was  not  an  appropriate  use  of  the  district’s  computer,  and  at  hearing, 
admitted  that  “I  should  not  have  used  the  school  computer”  for  the  postcard  business  venture.

  

  

The  Commission  found  the  pictures  of  respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  sitting  on a  toilet  with  their 
pants  down  to  be  lewd  and  distasteful. 

25. 

Inthe  summer  of  2011,  Mr.  Fields  had  a  banner  made  to  advertise  the 

teachertitties.com  website.  The  banner  was  designed  and  made  by  respondent’s  friend  who 
worked  at  a  print  shop,  and  was  given  to  Mr.  Fields  free  of  charge. 

26. 

In  May  2011,  respondent  asked  her  husband’s  friend,  Peter  Nicholas  Schapiro, 

Jr.,  if  he  could  put  her  in  touch  with  a  web  designer  for  a  project.  At  hearing,  Mr.  Schapiro 
testified  that  he  asked  respondent  about  the  nature  of  the  website,  and  she  told  him  it  was 
similar  to  “flashyourrack.com.”  Mr.  Schapiro  met  with  Brent  Redford  on  May  30,  2011  to 
inquire  of  his  interest,  and  on  June  2,  2011,  sent  a  text  message  to  respondent  with  Mr. 
Redford’s  contact  information.  In  an  email  dated  June  3,  2011,  respondent  apologized  for 
missing  Mr.  Redford’s  calls,  but  indicated  that  she  had  the  flu  and  would  give  him a  call  once 
she  was  feeling  better.  At  hearing,  respondent  denied  discussing  a  “porn  website”  with  Mr. 
Schapiro,  and  asserted  that  she  had  never  heard  of  the  website  flashyourrack.com. 

27. 

In  or  about  June  2011,  respondent,  Mr.  Fields  and  respondent’s  friend, April 

Scott,  discussed  how  to  obtain  pictures  for  the  teachertitties.com  website.  April  Scott 
bragged  about  how  she  could  obtain  pictures  of  women’s  breasts  by  taking  her  boat  out  to 
Windmill  Cove  Resort  &  Marina  (Windmill  Cove)  on  the  Delta,  in  Stockton,  California,  on 
Taco  Tuesday.  Mr.  Fields  offered  the  banner  to  April  Scott,  provided  her  with  copies  of  the 
Model  Release  forms,  and  instructed  her  to  make  sure  everyone  was  over  18  years  old,  and 
that  they  signed  a  Model  Release  form  prior  to  having  their  picture  taken.  Mr.  Fields  also 
gave  approximately  20  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts  to  April  Scott  to  sell  on  the  boat  trip.  On  June 
21,  2011,  April  Scott,  respondent  and  respondent’s  friend,  Samantha  McGregor,  donned  their 
“I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts  and  took  a  boat  ride  to  Windmill  Cove.  On  arrival,  respondent  and 
April  Scott  hung  the  teachertitties.com  banner,  and  April  Scott  asked  approximately  20 
women  if  they  would  be  interested  in  having  pictures  of  their  breasts  taken  for  a  start-up 
Internet  company.  Approximately  one  dozen  women  agreed  to  lower  their  bikini  tops  and 
expose  their  breasts  for  the  camera.  Respondent  held  up  towels  behind  the  women  in  order  to 
provide  them  with  privacy  from  the  other  patrons  in  the  bar  and  restaurant. 

28. 

Following  the  boat  trip,  April  Scott  photo-shopped  out  all  identifying  marks, 

such  as  tattoos,  from  the  photographs,  and  emailed  them  to  Mr.  Fields.  The  following 
weekend,  in  the  presence  of  respondent,  April  Scott  showed  Mr.  Fields  how  to  edit  the 
photographs.  Mr.  Fields  then  emailed  a  couple  of  the  photographs  to  Estrellado;  however, 
the  photographs  were  not  ultimately  uploaded  to  the  teachertitties.com  website. 

29. 

On  August  21,  2011,  respondent  sent  a  text  message  to  Mr.  Schapiro 

requesting  information  about  a  lead  for  an  iPhone  application  (app)  developer.  According  to 
respondent,  the  app  was  an  idea  that  respondent  and  April  Scott  came  up  with  called  “Sweet 
Nothings,”  in  which  “A  guy  can  make  his  woman  feel  good  (or  vice  versa)  through 

  

8

expressions  via  text  that  he  can  ‘calendar’  in  to  his  day.”  At  hearing,  screen  shots  of 
respondent’s  text  messages  were  admitted  which  establish  that  on  August  21,  2011, 
respondent  asked  Peter  Nicholas  Schapiro,  Jr.,  for  the  name  of  a  “lead”  for  the  iPhone  app. 
At  hearing,  Mr.  Schapiro  testified  that  Mr.  Schapiro  responded  that  he  would  send  her  the 
information  “[a]s  soon  as  I  get  back....”  On  August  22,  2011,  Mr.  Schapiro  sent  the  contact 
information  to  respondent’s  email  address,  and  respondent  asked  if  Mr.  Schapiro  could“... 
send  a  copy  to  randhentertainment@yahoo.com  as  well  ....”  Respondent’s  laptop  contained 
an  undated,  unsigned  letter  from  respondent  and  April  Scott,  to  “Kent,”  regarding  the  app 
“Sweet  Nothings,”  and  requesting  information  as  to  how  to  create  the  app,  and  the  cost. 

30. 

On  August  31,  2011,  respondent  spoke  to  her  husband  on  her  iPhone.  She  did 
not  successfully  hang  up  the  iPhone,  however,  before  using  a  flip  phone,  given  to  her  by  Mr. 
Fields,  to  talk  to  Mr.  Fields  and  tell  him  that  she  loved  him.  Unbeknownst  to  respondent,  her 
husband  overheard  the  conversation.  When  she  arrived  home,  Mr.  Kaeslin  was  noticeably 
irate,  so  respondent  asked  him  what  was  wrong.  Respondent  confirmed  to  her  husband  that 
she  was  having  an  affair  with  Mr.  Fields,  and  Mr.  Kaeslin  grabbed  respondent’s  purse,  keys 
and  iPhone,  and  told  her  to  get  out.  During  this  confrontation,  Mr.  Kaeslin  twisted 
respondent’s  arm.  As  respondent  walked  down  the  street,  Mr.  Kaeslin  called  her  back  into 
the  house,  and  used  respondent’s  iPhone  to  call  Mr.  Fields  and  tell  him  to  come  and  pick  up 
his  girlfriend  as  she  would  need  a  place  to  stay.  Mr.  Kaeslin  then  emptied  out  respondent’s 
purse,  took  her  money,  and  took  the  flip  phone  and  smashed  it  in  half.  At  the  request  of 
respondent,  however,  Mr.  Kaeslin  left  $800  in  cash  that  respondent  owed  to  her  friend  Joy. 
Mr.  Kaeslin  then  went  into  their  kitchen,  took  out  a  blank  piece  of  computer  paper  and  wrote 
out  a  Divorce  Agreement.  At  that  time,  respondent  reached  for  her  iPhone  and  Mr.  Kaeslin 
twisted  her  arm,  took  the  iPhone  and  smashed  it  on  the  kitchen  counter. 

31. 

Between  September  2  and  20,  2011,  respondent  charged  $181.67  on  her 

district-issued  cell  phone,  and  between  September  21  and  October  4,  2011,  charged  $115.14 
on  her  district-issued  cell  phone.  Between  September  6  and  October  3,  2011,  respondent 
spoke  to  Mr.  Fields  for  198  minutes  during  her  second  and  fourth  period  classes,  and 
admitted  during  her  interview  with  district  administrators  that  the  majority  of  the  calls  on  her 
district-issued  cell  phone  were  personal  calls  to  her  father,  sisters,  and  friends.  As  of  the  date 
of  this  hearing,  respondent  had  not  reimbursed  the  district  for  the  cell  phone  charges. 
Respondent  asserted  at  hearing  that  she  had  not  reimbursed  the  district  for  the  cell  phone 
charges  because  the  district  had  not  provided  her  with  a  break-down  of  the  personal  and 
business  calls.  The  Commission  found  respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  to 
be  excessive. 

32. 

Jeffrey  L.  Rinek  is  a  licensed  private  investigator  with  Rinek  and  Associates. 
He  is  also  the  President  and  Co-Founder  of  Parental  Options,  Inc.,  organized  to  help  parents 
protect  their  children  from  the  dangers  associated  with  the  virtual  world.  Mr.  Rinek  also 
serves  as  a  professor  at  Folsom  Lake  College  teaching  the  legal  aspects  of  evidence,  report 
writing  and  criminal  law.  Prior  to  his  current  positions,  he  served  as  a  Special  Agent  for  the 

    

9

  

Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI)  from  1978  through  2006.  As  a  special  agent,  he 
conducted  investigations  into  various  matters  including  crimes  against  children,  behavioral 
science,  and  violent  sexual  assault  and  exploitation. 

33. 

In  or  about  September  2011,  Mr.  Rinek  received  a  call  from  a  former  colleague 

requesting  that  he  contact  respondent’s  husband  regarding  possible  pornography  on 
respondent’s  district-issued  laptop.  After  speaking  with  respondent’s  husband,  Mr.  Rinek 
verified  that  the  websites  identified  by  Mr.  Kaeslin  publicly  existed.  Specifically,  Mr.  Rinek 
looked  at  the  teachertitties.com,  mysluttyteachers.com,  and  360pig.com  websites.  He  noted 
the  numerous  categories  of  products  and  accessories  offered  on  the  360pig.com  website; 
reviewed  the  “About  Us”  section  on  the  R&H  Entertainment  Facebook  page;  printed  out 
material  from  the  websites,  and  recommended  to  Mr.  Kaeslin  that  he  notify  LUSD,  and 
obtain  respondent’s  laptop  for  forensic  analysis. 

34. 

On  October  6,  2011,  Mr.  Rinek  met  with  LUSD  administrators,  and  entered 

into  a  contract  with  the  district  to  process  and  analyze  the  laptop.  Mr.  Rinek  and  his 
colleague,  Harold  Dorl,’  made  a  mirror  image  of  the  laptop;  processed  it  using  the  Forensic 
Took  Kit  (FTK)  forensic  computer  analysis  software  program;  reviewed  all  computer 
activity,  graphic  files,  or  material  relating  to  pornography;  classified  the  ten  files  they 
retained;  created  a  Report  of  Investigation;  and  turned  the  mirror  image  of  the  laptop  and  the 
report  over  to  the  district.  The  forensic  analysis  began  on  or  about  October  18,  2011,  and  the 
Report  of  Investigation  was  completed  on  November  11,  2011. 

35. 

 Respondent’s  laptop  contained  17  pictures  of  approximately  five  women’s 

breasts  that  were  produced  from  a  digital  camera  on  June  24,  2011.  At  hearing,  respondent 
argued  that  these  pictures  were  “clinical.”  However,  they  were  not  intended  to  be  viewed  by 
doctors  or  professors  of  anatomy.  They  were  taken  on a  boat  displaying  a  teachertitties.com 
banner,  by  April  Scott,  who  claimed  to  work  for  a  start-up  Internet  company,  in  order  to 
create  content  for  the  teachertitties.com  website,  and  were  sent  to  Estrellado  for  uploading  to 
that  website.  The  Commission  found  these  pictures  to  be  pornographic.  At  hearing, 
respondent  also  argued  that  these  pictures  were  taken  on a  private  boat  during  the  summer 
when  she  was  not  required  to  answer  to  the  district  for  her  behavior.  However,  respondent’s 
argument  misses  the  mark.  The  pictures  of  the  women’s  breasts  that  were  taken  on  the 
private  boat  during  the  summer  were  ultimately  uploaded  to  respondent’s  laptop,  and 
remained  there  from  June  through  October  2011.  Once  those  pictures  were  on  the  district- 
issued  laptop,  they  became  the  district’s  business. 

  

>  Mr.  Dorl  has  been  a  self-employed  Independent  Consultant  and  Computer  Forensics 

Examiner  since  2006.  Prior  to  his  current  position,  he  served  as  a  Certified  Forensic 
Examiner  for  the  FBI  from  1996  through  2006. 
10

  

36.  |  Respondent’s  laptop  contained  one  picture  of  “a  pillow  defined  by  a  three 

dimensional  representation  of  a  male  penis  and  testicles.”  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted 
that  this  picture  was  sent  to  her  as  an  attachment  to  an  email,  but  contends  that  it  was 
subsequently  deleted.  The  Commission  found  this  picture  to  be  obscene. 

37.  | Respondent’s  laptop  contained  305  images  in  the  unallocated  space  depicting 

“nude  adults  in  several  different  sexual  acts”;  “[s]everal  depictions  of  multi  partner  sexual 
acts”;  “possible  simulated  rape”;  and  “sexual  sadism.”  The  Commission  found  these  images 
to  be  pornographic. 

38.  |  Respondent’s  laptop  contained  75  images  relating  to  teachertitties.com; 
mysluttyteachers.com;  360pig.com;  “I  ¥  Teachers”;  and  R&H  Entertainment,  including  the  “I 
¥  Teachers”  logo;  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt;  teachertitties.com  banner;  360pig.com  logo;  and 
pictures  of  respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  sitting  on  a  toilet  with  their  pants  down.  In  addition, 
respondent’s  laptop  contained  the  trademark  application  filed  with  the  USPTO;  a  Non- 
Disclosure  Agreement  for  R&H  Entertainment;  respondent’s  letter  applying  for  a  job;  a 
reference  letter  from  Mr.  Fields  on  behalf  of  respondent;  respondent’s  resume;  Rich  Fields’ 
resume;  Samantha  McGregor’s  resume;  a  Model  Release  form  for  R&H  Entertainment;  and  a 
Business  Investment  Proposal  listing  the  various  costs  associated  with  the  marketing  and  sale 
of  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts.  The  Commission  found  these  images  and  documents  to  be 
promotional  materials  for  the  websites,  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  postcard  business  venture. 

39. 

Respondent’s  laptop  contained  341  images  depicting  “sexual  act  simulation,” 
and  “possible  sexual  intent.”  According  to  Mr.  Rinek,  the  images  included  “an  adult  female 
in  a  school  classroom,  using  a  camera  to  take  a  picture  of  her  breasts  exposed  by  pulling  out 
her  blouse  of  shirt”;  “another  picture  [which]  shows  a  deliberate  staging  of  a  scene  depicting 
a  brown  object  on  a  desk  with  a  person’s  rear  end  posed  over  it  to  provide  the  impression  that 
it  represented  defecation  by  the  person  bent  over  onto  the  desk”;  and a  series  of  pictures  of 
respondent  and  Mr.  Fields  “sitting  on  a  toilet,  with  their  pants  pulled  down,  simulating  the  act 
of  defecation.”  The  Commission  found  many  of  these  images  to  be  obscene,  and  several  to  be 
offensive  and  vulgar. 

40. 

|  Respondent’s  laptop  contained  a  photograph  of  a  “Lesson  of  the  Day”  drawing 
on  a  white  board  in  a  classroom  depicting  a  “Smart  &  Pretty”  teacher,  a  “Student  in  SP  ED,” 
and  the  student  dumped  upside  down  in  a  trashcan  as  “Worthless  Trash.”  Respondent 
admitted  drawing  the  picture,  but  asserted  that  she  does  not  know  who  took  a  photograph  of 
it,  or  how  it  got  on  her  laptop.  According  to  respondent,  the  drawing  was  a  “joke,”  and  was 
taken  out  of  context.  She  also  referred  to  the  drawing  as  a  “release”  from  the  “pretty  serious 
issues”  they  deal  with.  Respondent  claims  that  her  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  as 
worthless  trash  does  not  “hold  a  candle”  to  other  material  being  shared  in  her  department. 
The  Commission  found  this  drawing  to  be  repugnant. 

11

    

41. 

Respondent’s  laptop  contained  104  images  of  nude  children  “in  questioned 

sexual  poses”  which  according  to  Mr.  Rinek,  “are  similar  in  pose  to  erotic  pictures  of 
[respondent].”  At  hearing,  Mr.  Rinek  specifically  identified  pictures  focused  on  the  genital 
areas  of  children,  a  picture  with  a  child’s  hands  resting  between  her  legs;  a  picture  of a  girl 
with  her  legs  spread  apart  displaying  her  genitalia;  and  a  picture  with  a  child  with  simulated 
breasts.  The  Commission  found  it  inappropriate  that  respondent  retained  a  large  volume  of 
images  of  nude  children  on  her  district-issued  laptop,  particularly  as  many  of  the  images  were 
focused  on  the  buttocks  or  genital  areas  of  the  children. 

42. 

 Respondent’s  laptop  contained  a  Daffy  Duck/Bugs  Bunny  cartoon  in  which 

Daffy  Duck  states  “Im  [sic]  African  American,”  and  Bugs  Bunny  responds  “Your  [sic]  a 

Fuckin  Nigger.”  Respondent  admitted  that  the  cartoon  was  emailed  to  her  by  Mr.  Fields,  but 
asserted  that  she  had  deleted  it.  The  Commission  found  this  cartoon  to  be  highly  offensive. 

43. 

 Respondent’s  laptop  contained  10  images  “depicting  non  pornographic 

pictures  of  a  sexual  nature  and  intent.”  The  pictures  “are  predominantly  those  of  adults  ... 
without  nudity.”  The  Commission  found  these  images  to  be  pornographic. 

44. 

_Respondent’s  laptop  contained  401  pictures  of  respondent  “in  sexual  poses, 

minimally  dressed  ...”  and  respondent  “posing  nude  simulating  masturbation.”  Respondent 
claimed  the  photographs  were  taken  in  October  2010,  for  a  “boudoir  book”  entitled  “Heidi’s 
Collection  Photos  and  Fantasies,”  which  respondent  gave  to  her  husband  for  his  birthday. 
Respondent  denied,  however,  that  three  of  the  pictures  simulated  masturbation,  and  argued 
that  she  was  covering  herself  with  her  hand  because  she  was  lying  down  and  the 
photographer  was  standing  over  her  taking  the  pictures,  and  she  wanted  to  make  sure  she  was 
covered.  At  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  she  used  her  laptop  to  create  the  book  because 
she  wanted  to  learn  how  to  use  the  program  that  was  already  on  the  laptop,  and  because  the 
quality  of  the  photos  on  the  MacBook  Pro  “turned  out  pretty  well”  compared  to  the  photos  on 
Shutterfly,  an  on-line  publishing  service.  The  Commission  found  these  pictures  to  be 
pornographic. 

45. 

Respondent’s  laptop  contained  one  image  in  the  unallocated  space  depicting  a 
young  female  on  all  fours,  naked,  with  her  mouth  wide  open,  appearing  to  be  screaming,  and 
a  person  standing  behind  her.  The  Commission  found  this  image  to  be  pornographic. 

46. 

On  October  6,  2011,  Assistant  Superintendent  Tatum  received  a  call  from  Mr. 

Hancock  regarding  excessive  calls  on  respondent’s  district-issued  cell  phone.  Ms.  Tatum  met 
with  respondent,  who  indicated  that  she  used  the  district-issued  cell  phone  to  call  her  parents 
subsequent  to  the  break-up  of  her  marriage.  According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  respondent  never 
mentioned  that  she  used  the  district-issued  cell  phone  to  call  her  boyfriend,  Mr.  Fields.  Later 
that  day,  Ms.  Tatum  met  with  respondent  again  and  asked  her  to  identify  the  telephone 
numbers  on  the  cell  phone  bill,  during  which  time,  Superintendent  Uslan  joined  the  meeting 

12

  

to  discuss  a  complaint  he  had  received  regarding  respondent’s  use  of  her  district-issued 
laptop. 

47. 

During  the  meeting  with  Superintendent  Uslan,  respondent  initially  denied  that 

she  had  accessed  pornography  on  her  district-issued  laptop,  but  then  admitted  that  she  had 
looked  at  it  a  couple  of  times.  Respondent  also  identified  R&H  Entertainment  as  an  Internet 
site,  but  indicated  that  it  was  not  a  business,  and  that  the  name  had  been  changed.  Prior  to 
any  further  questioning,  respondent  requested  union  representation,  and  the  meeting  was 
adjourned  pending  the  arrival  of  union  representative  Janet  Olmstead.  Respondent  identified 
R&H  Entertainment  as  an  on-line  store,  which  was  owned  by  Mr.  Fields  and  Estrellado,  and 
denied  that  she  was  in  a  business  relationship  with  R&H  Entertainment.  Respondent  also 
denied  having  any  connection  to  teachertitties.com,  mysluttyteachers.com,  or  360pig.com. 
According  to  respondent,  she  just  typed  for  them. 

48. 

Effective  October  7,  2011,  respondent  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave. 

Among  the  items  removed  by  district  administrators  from  respondent’s  classroom,  was  a 
Trader  Joe’s  shopping  bag  containing  a  stack  of  R&H  Entertainment  business  cards  with  Mr. 
Fields’  name  and  cell  phone  number,  and  copies  of  double-sided  Model  Release  forms.  At 
hearing,  Ms.  Tatum  testified  that  the  stack  of  Model  Release  forms  measured  approximately 
one  quarter  inch  thick. 

49. 

Ina  letter  to  respondent  dated  November  17,  2011,  Ms.  Tatum  confirmed  that 
respondent  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave,  and  that  she  would  continue  to  receive 
her  normal  pay  and  benefits. 

50. 

On  January  9,  2012,  Ms.  Tatum  reported  to  the  Stockton  Police  Department 
that  numerous  nude  and  questionable  photographs  of  respondent’s  children  were  found  on 
respondent’s  district-issued  laptop.  The  Stockton  Police  Department  initiated  an 
investigation  to  determine  if  the  photographs  were  “possible  child  pornography.”  After 
reviewing  the  images,  however,  Detective  Yates  and  District  Attorney  Reed  determined  that 
the  nude  photographs  “did  not  meet  the  elements  of  child  pornography.”  According  to 
Detective  Yates,  the  photographs  “did  not  meet  the  elements  for  PC  311.1  as  the  minors  were 
not  engaged  in  or  simulating  sexual  conduct.  Despite  the  fact  that  most  of  the  images 
displayed  the  minor’s  [sic]  buttocks  and  genitals,  it  was  not  the  main  focus  of  the  images.” 

51. 

Ms.  Tatum  interviewed  respondent  on  January  19,  2012,  during  which  time 

respondent  admitted  that  she  understood  the  district  owned  the  laptop  and  could  take  it  back, 
and  that  while  it  states  that  a  teacher  should  not  use  the  laptop  for  personal  purposes, 
everyone  was  doing  it.  When  confronted  with  a  copy  of  the  R&H  Entertainment  Facebook 
page,  respondent  told  Ms.  Tatum  that  she  was  the  muse  for  the  statement  in  the  “About  Us” 
section  which  read:  “This  company  was  created  by  a  young  teacher  who  was  inspired,  after 
her  male  students  spent  most  of  the  period  staring  at  her  boobs,  to  create  the  “I  Heart 
Teachers”  shirt.  Knowing  this  idea  would  probably  not  land  her  an  early  retirement,  she 

13

  
    

thought,  “Why  the  hell  not”  and  moved  forward  with  her  idea  by  finding  a  partner,  a 
computer  whiz,  and a  t-shirt  designer.  The  rest  is  history.”  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted 
that  she  mentioned  to  Mr.  Fields  that  it  would  not  look  good  if  a  male  cop  in  retirement  was 
promoting  R&H  Entertainment,  so  they  discussed  a  better  way  to  market  R&H 
Entertainment,  and  came  up  with  idea  to  use  the  young  teacher  inspired  by  her  students. 
According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  respondent  also  denied  in  the  interview  that  she  displayed  the  “I  ¥ 
Teachers”  t-shirt  at  school,  and  stated  that  her  involvement  in  the  websites  stopped  in 
March/April  2011.  Respondent  also  admitted  to  Ms.  Tatum  that  it  never  occurred  to  her  to 
think  about  the  impact  her  actions  would  have  on  the  district  as  a  result  of  her  involvement  in 
the  websites. 

52. 

In  his  August  22,  2012  deposition,  Mr.  Fields  admitted  that  the  original  plan 

for  these  websites  was  to  make  money  for  his  retirement.  According  to  Mr.  Fields,  however, 
while  there  was  no  agreement  between  him  and  respondent  regarding  how  to  split  the 
revenues  from  the  various  websites,  Mr.  Fields  “was  hoping  to  make  a  whole  bunch  of 
money,”  and  “was  hoping  to  stay  with  Heidi.  So,  the  money  that  I  made  was  gonna  be  our 
money.”  In  her  August  23,  2012  deposition,  respondent  confirmed  that  she  intended  to  make 
money  off  the  website  businesses.  According  to  respondent,  “the  intention  was  for  Rich  to 
make  money  for  his  retirement.  That  was  the  goal.  And  eventually  if  he  was  super 
successful  and  there  was  an  opportunity  for  me  to  leave  education  and  make  great  money, 
sure.  That  would  be  alluring  to  anybody.”  At  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  she  hoped 
Mr.  Fields  would  be  successful.  And  when  asked  if  in  the  future  there  could  be  a  payoff  from 
her  investment,  respondent  stated,  “Yeah,  but  I  think  everyone  thinks  that  when  they  have  an 
idea  in  their  head.  I’ve  had  many  ideas  in  my  head  thinking  I  would  make a  lot  of  money, 
and  nothing  ever  happened.”  At  hearing,  Mr.  Fields  asserted  that  although  the  websites  were 
taken  down  in  or  about  September  2011,  after  respondent  called  him  and  asked  him  to  shut 
them  down,  Mr.  Fields  decided  to  keep  the  360pig.com  website  up  and  running  because  it 
had  the  potential  to  make  money  as  a  result  of  the  news  article  regarding  him  and  respondent 
that  was  scheduled  to  be  released  by  The  Stockton  Record. 

53. 

Inher  August  23,  2012  deposition,  respondent  also  confirmed  that  she 

considered  Mr.  Fields  to  be  her  business  partner,  and  admitted  that  she  used  her  district- 
issued  laptop  to  work  on  the  websites  with  Mr.  Fields  at  her  home  “[p]robably  five  or  six 
times,”  during  which  time  they  would  “talk  about  how  this  could  work,  and  if  there’s  any 
way  to  even  get  pictures  ....”  According  to  respondent,  the  work  included  “taking  notes, 
stuff  like  that.” 

54. 

In  her  deposition,  respondent  also  admitted  that  her  husband  knew  the 

password  to  her  district-issued  laptop,  and  that  he  would  use  her  laptop  at  their  home.  In 
addition,  respondent’s  babysitter,  Samantha  McGregor,  would  sync  her  iPhone  to  her  laptop 
to  upload  photographs.  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  her  twin  sister  used  the  photo 
booth  application  on  her  laptop  to  take  pictures.  In  his  August  29,  2012  deposition,  Mr. 
Fields  admitted  that  he  had  the  password  to  respondent’s  district  email.  Respondent  could 

14

not  recall  signing  an  agreement  with  the  district  indicating  that  she  would  not  allow  anybody 
else  to  use  her  district-issued  laptop,  but  agreed  that  if  she  had  signed  such  an  agreement, 
then  she  was  in  violation  of  that  agreement. 

55. 

Donald  Vilfer  has  been  the  President  of  Califorensics,  a  computer  forensics 
firm,  since  2002.  Prior  to  his  current  position,  Mr.  Vilfer  was  a  Supervisory  Special  Agent 
for  the  White  Collar  Crime  and  Computer  Crimes  Squad  of  the  FBI  from  1996  to  2001.  In 
the  fall  of  2012,  Mr.  Vilfer  was  hired  to  conduct  a  forensic  analysis  of  respondent’s  laptop. 
In  his  September  19,  2012  Computer  Forensics  Report,  Mr.  Vilfer  recounted  that  his 
assignment  was  to  “recover  all  deleted  items  and  determine,  if  possible,  the  dates  the 
deletions  occurred.”  Mr.  Vilfer  was  also  asked  to  retrieve  all  information  pertaining  to  the 
teachertitties.com,  mysluttyteachers.com,  and  360pig.com  websites,  and  “identify  all  sexually 
explicit  items”  and  report  the  details  relating  to  those  images.  Of  the  1,698,632  items  Mr. 
Vilfer  identified,  207,775  of  those  items  were  “data  carved  from  unallocated  space.” 
According  to  Mr.  Vilfer,  as  files  had  been  data  carved,  they  “were  unable  to  determine  when 
many  of  the  files  were  deleted  from  the  hard  disk.” 

. 

56. 

Athearing,  Mr.  Vilfer  defined  the  “unallocated  space”  on  a  computer  as  space 

that  the  operating  system  has  not  set  aside  for  a  particular  file;  the  “allocated  space”  on  a 
computer  as  space  where  the  operating  system  saves  information  that  a  user  downloads;  and 
“cache”  as  temporary  storage  space.  According  to  Mr.  Vilfer,  it  is  not  common  knowledge  to 
computer  users  what  is  retained  on  a  computer,  or  that  deleted  does  not  mean  permanently 
deleted. 

57. 

According  to  Mr.  Vilfer,  respondent’s  computer  contained  iPhone  backups  of 

photographs  from  respondent’s  husband’s  phone  number;  pictures  of  naked  children  that 
could  not  be  classified  as  child  pornography;  40  images  related  to  teachertitties.com  that  in 
Mr.  Vilfer’s  opinion  were  not  sexually  explicit;  a  “Mozilla  Firefox  bookmark  referencing 
mysluttyteachers.com,  with  sexually  explicit  carved  images;  information  related  to 
360pig.com  with  no  sexually  explicit  graphics;  a  spreadsheet  listing  the  top  selling  sex  toys 
and  other  sex  paraphernalia  that  was  created  on  respondent’s  laptop  on  August  10,  2011;  338 
sexually  explicit  images,  332  of  which  were  in  the  unallocated  space,  and  six  of  which  were 
resident  in  allocated  space;  and  glamour  shots  of  respondent  that  Mr.  Vilfer  opined  “are  not 
considered  sexually  explicit  or  pornographic.” 

Respondent’s  Background 

58.  |  Respondent  holds  a  clear  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  general 

subjects,  a  clear  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  Certificate, 
and  a  clear  Level  II  Education  Specialist  Instruction  Credential  authorizing  her  to  teach 
students  with  mild/moderate  disabilities. 

15

    

59. 

Respondent  has  been  teaching  in  the  LUSD  since  the  2002-2003  school  year. 

During  2002-2003,  she  taught  special  education  at  John  R.  Williams  Elementary  School,  and 
in  the  2003-2004  school  year,  began  teaching  special  education  at  LHS.  She  teaches  English 
and  English  study  skills.  During  this  time,  respondent  also  coached  girls’  varsity  soccer  for 
four  years  for  the  LUSD.  Prior  to  working  for  LUSD,  respondent  taught  special  education 
for  three  years  at  Chapparral  High  School  in  Parker,  Colorado. 

60. 

Observations  of  respondent’s  classroom  conducted  between  2008  and  2010,  by 

Vice  Principal  Joseph  B.  Hancock,  were  positive.  On  October  15,  2008,  Mr.  Hancock 
observed  respondent’s  fifth  period  RSP  English  Support  class  and  concluded  that 
respondent’s  lesson  “served  as  a  great  instrument  to  assist/accommodate  the  successful 
placement  of  your  students  in  a  regular  English  class.”  He  noted  in  his  report  that  “[t]his  was 
a  positive  learning  environment.  Great  job  Heidi!” 

61. 

On  March  25,  2009,  Mr.  Hancock  observed  respondent  discussing  the  “The 

Diary  of Anne  Frank”  with  her  fourth  period  SDC  English  4  class.  Mr.  Hancock  concluded 
that  “[t]he  students  followed  the  story  very  well.  It  was  an  interesting  story  and  I  could  look 
around  the  room  and  see  everyone  was  engaged.  Vocabulary  and  concepts  were  clarified 
within  each  dated  narrative  that  was  read.  Students  provided  input  and  respected  comments 
made  that  added  to  the  discussion.” 

62. 

An  evaluation  of  respondent  performed  on  April  29,  2010,  indicated  that  she 

met  or  exceeded  district  standards  in  all  categories  of  her  instructional  and  professional 
responsibilities.  Her  overall  rating  was  satisfactory.  The  evaluator  commented  that  “Heidi 
has  taken  on a  valuable  role  as  a  collaborating  teacher  within  our  Strategies  department.  This 
has  been  an  essential  role  in  maximizing  students  [sic]  success  in  English  and  interaction 
with  their  regular  education  peers.  Heidi  is  an  effective  teacher  and  effectively  breaks 
curriculum  down  through  Sparknotes  text  analysis  and  other  eclectic  preview/review 
strategies.” 

63. 

An  observation  of  respondent’s  sixth  period  English  Support  class  was 
conducted  on  October  1,  2010,  and  the  notes  indicated  that  “[t]here  was  good  on  task 
behavior  and  multitasking  by  the  teacher.  The  students  made  good  use  of  heir  time  and  were 
on  task.  One  student  in  the  back  of  the  class  was  not  doing  much  other  than  socialize  [sic] 
and  was  sharing  silly  bands  with  her  friend  the  first  day;  You  [sic]  did  a  good  job  prompting 
her  to  get  something  done,  i.e.  reading.  Good  strategy  of  ‘grabbing  a  magazine’  for  those 
who  were  done  since  they  got  chatty.  Students  seemed  very  comfortable  to  get  feedback 
from  you  on  their  essays.” 

64. 

Ina  November  3,  2010  observation  of  respondent’s  English  Support  class, 

respondent  co-taught  the  reading  of  the  “Enders  Game”  with  Melissa  Prettyman.  Mr. 
Hancock  commented  in  his  report,  in  pertinent  part,  that  “[t]his  was  a  very  effective 
collaborative  lesson.  Both  of  you  take  a  great  amount  of  time  to  dissect  key  points  of  a 

16

reading  when  presenting  to  your  classes.  Working  together  maximized  the  students  receiving 
the  same  opportunity  to  reinforce  their  understanding  of  the  text  ....  All  students  were 
paying  attention  and  taking  notes.  Some  of  those  taking  notes  were  not  following  the  reading 
of  the  text  so  I  did  not  know  if  they  had  already  read  this  information  or  if  this  was  common 
practice.” 

Respondent’s  Defenses 

65.  |  Respondent  contends  that  the  charges  against  her  are  the  result  of  a  vendetta  by 

her  husband.  According  to  respondent,  if  she  had  not  had  the  extramarital  affair  with  Mr. 
Fields,  “this  would  never  have  been  an  issue.”  However,  after  her  husband  discovered  that 
she  was  having  an  affair  it  was  his  mission  to  destroy  her.  He  threatened  her,  told  her  he 
would  get  her  in  trouble  with  her  job,  and  hired  a  private  investigator  to  lie  to  the  district 
about  what  happened.  In  support  of  her  contention,  respondent  claims  that  subsequent  to 
their  separation,  when  her  husband  came  over  to  her  house  to  play  with  their  children, 
respondent  saw  him  shut  down  her  laptop  when  she  walked  into  the  kitchen.  Respondent 
believes  that  her  husband  installed  maliciously  incriminating  evidence  on  her  laptop  at  that 
time.  Respondent  also  believes  that  because  her  husband  was  paying  private  investigator 
Jeffrey  Rinek  to  make  her  look  bad,  that  she  could  see  how  Mr.  Rinek  could  also  have 
transferred  incriminating  images  onto  her  laptop. 

Respondent’s  contentions  are  without  merit.  The  incriminating  images  and 
documents  that  served  as  the  basis  for  the  charges  against  respondent  were  resident  in  the 
unallocated  and  allocated  spaces  of  respondent’s  laptop  as  a  direct  result  of  the  work  she  did 
with  Mr.  Fields  on  the  various  pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites  beginning  in 
the  fall  of  2010.  This  was  corroborated  by  respondent’s  own  testimony,  and  that  of  Mr. 
Fields,  who  confirmed  that  the  images  and  documents  were  used  for  specific  websites,  the  “I 
¥  Teachers”  t-shirts,  the  postcard  business  venture,  and  the  boudoir  book.  Moreover,  no 
evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  any  of  the  incriminating  images  or  documents  was 
installed  on  respondent’s  laptop  by  either  her  husband  or  Mr.  Rinek. 

66. 

Respondent  acknowledged  her  awareness  of  an  Administrative  Regulation 

providing  that  employees  only  use  district  equipment  for  district  use  only,  but  contends  that 
personal  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  was  permissible  in  the  district.  In  support  of  her 
contention,  respondent  asserted  that  “[t]he  District  told  us  from  day  one,  when  we  were 
issued  computers,  that  we  had  to  take  it  home,  that  we  had  to  take  an  insurance  policy  on  it, 
and  that  basically  —  yeah,  it  was  written  “Not  for  personal  use,”  but  they  were  [sic]  knew  we 
were  using  it  for  personal  use. 
So,  how  can  I  assume  that  this  computer  that  I’m  supposed  to 
use  and  take  home  with  me  and  take  an  insurance  policy  out  on,  that  I  can’t  use,  at  times,  for 
personal  use  when  I’m  at  home?  Tell  me  how  that’s  —  I  mean,  why  would  I  have  to  take  out 
an  insurance  policy,  then?”  The  Loan  Agreement  signed  by  respondent  when  she  was  issued 
the  laptop  indicated,  in  pertinent  part,  that  “[b]efore  equipment  can  be  borrowed,  an 
insurance  policy  must  be  executed  in  which  the  replacement  value  of  the  equipment  is 

17

    

protected  against  damage  or  loss.  A  current  homeowner’s  or  renter’s  policy  is  acceptable.” 
Respondent’s  contention  that  she  was  permitted  to  use  the  district-issued  laptop  for  personal 
reasons  because  she  had  to  provide  evidence  of  homeowner’s  insurance  is  without  merit. 
Respondent  acknowledged  that  the  laptop  was  “Not  for  personal  use,”  and  no  where  in  the 
language  of  the  Loan  Agreement  did  it  give  respondent  permission  to  use  the  district-issued 
laptop  for  personal  use.  The  insurance  coverage  was  specifically  to  protect  the  laptop  from 
damage  or  loss. 

As  further  support  for  her  contention  that  personal  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop 

was  permissible  in  the  district,  respondent  asserted  that  she  was  told  by  LHS’  Principal, 
Debra  Holmerud,  that  they  “had  to  ...  take  [their]  computers  home.”  At  hearing,  Principal 
Holmerud  testified  that  when  the  laptops  were  issued,  all  the  teachers  were  given  the  option 
to  either  use  a  locking  cable  to  secure  their  laptops  to  heavy  classroom  furniture,  store  them 
in  a  locking  cabinet  at  school,  or  take  their  laptops  home.  According  to  Ms.  Holmerud,  the 
teachers  were  given  these  options  to  protect  their  laptops  from  theft  or  damage.  Ms. 
Holmerud’s  testimony  was  persuasive,  while  respondent’s  was  not.  Therefore,  respondent’s 
contention  that  it  was  appropriate  for  her  to  use  her  district-issued  laptop  for  personal  use 
because  she  was  told  to  take  her  computer  home  is  without  merit.  Ms.  Holmerud’s 
instructions  were  to  protect  the  district-issued  laptop  from  theft  or  damage,  and  did  not 
constitute  permission  to  use  the  district-issued  laptop  for  personal  use. 

Respondent  also  contends  that  personal  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  was 
permissible  because  it  was  the  “culture”  of  the  district.  According  to  respondent,  “if  my 
department  head  is  doing  stuff  personally  during  school  hours  with  a  group  of  people  all  the 
time  during  their  prep,  how  is  that  showing  me  an  example  that  it’s  not  acceptable  and 
common  practice  for  people  to  use  their  computer  for  personal  stuff?”  In  addition, 
respondent  contends  that  there  are  teachers  who  do  drugs  and  use  the  district’s  email  “to 
connect  a  time  to  go  party,”  so  they  are  using  their  computers  “on  campus  during  school 
hours  for  personal  use.”  Respondent  also  identified  an  LUSD  custodian  who  allegedly  used 
the  district’s  time  and  technology  to  send  an  email  of  a  “nudie  picture  of  a  woman;  a  very 
erotic  picture”  to  “a  whole  chain  of  people”  on  October  7,  2011.  In  his  August  29,  2012 
deposition,  Mr.  Fields  confirmed  that  he  received  the  email  from  the  LUSD  custodian,  and 
identified  other  LUSD  custodians  and  security  officers  who  were  on  the  email  distribution 
list.  However,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  respondent’s  department  head  was 
using  her  laptop  for  other  than  incidental  personal  use,  and  no  evidence  was  presented  that 
the  district  knew  that  teachers  were  doing  drugs  and  using  the  district’s  email  to  schedule 
their  parties,  or  that  the  LUSD  custodian  was  emailing  erotic  pictures  to  other  LUSD 
custodians  and  security  officers.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  her  personal  use  of 
the  district-issued  laptop  was  permissible  because  it  was  the  culture  of  the  district  is  without 
merit. 

Respondent  also  contends  that  because  the  district  knew  that  teachers  were  using  their 

district-issued  laptops  for  personal  use  during  school  time,  she  did  nothing  wrong  when  she 

18

used  her  district-issued  laptop  at  home  to  register  the  domain  name  for  R&H  Entertainment, 
and  to  view  and  categorize  pornographic  video  clips.  Furthermore,  in  her  deposition, 
respondent  queried,  in  pertinent  part,  “[w]ell  who’s  the  moral  compass  here  of  saying  what  is 
right  and  what’s  wrong?  ...  I’m  just  saying  that  you’re  saying  that  what  I  did  was  wrong. 
Who’s  saying  that  that’s  wrong?”  And  when  asked  in  her  deposition  if  she  admitted  to  Ms. 
Tatum  during  her  January  19,  2012  interview  that  she  knew  she  was  not  supposed  to  use  the 
district’s  computer  for  personal  reasons,  respondent  stated:  “[w]ell  that’s  what’s  stated  on  the 
paper,  but  that’s  not  what  they  know  every  teacher  does,”  and  when  asked  again  if  she 
admitted  that  she  knew  she  was  not  supposed  to  her  use  district  laptop  for  personal  use, 
respondent  stated:  “[w]ell,  then,  I  want  to  make  sure  that  it’s  clear  that  yeah,  you  guys  are 
telling  me  that’s  the  case,  but  that’s  not  what  everybody  does.”  Respondent  then  went  on  to 
identify  all  of  her  colleagues  in  the  special  education  department  who  used  their  district- 
issued  laptops  for  personal  use,  and  asserted  that  “they’re  buying  plane  tickets,  or  they’re 
checking  Facebook,  or  they’re  doing  iMovie,  or  they’re  putting  photos  together  for  an  8th 
grade  graduation  thing.  It’s  all  done  during  school  time  around  their  prep.  I  saw  it  happen 
all  the  time.” 

At  hearing,  Dr.  Moreira  admitted  that  she  checks  her  Facebook  at  school  on  her 

district  issued-laptop,  and  Ms.  Tatum  affirmed  that  teachers  use  their  laptops  to  check  their 
Facebook  and  emails,  and  to  maintain  pictures  of  their  family  and  friends  and  personal  songs. 
According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  incidental  is  acceptable. 

The  laptop  was  issued  to  respondent  for  district-related  business.  Incidental  personal 
use  of  the  laptop  to  check  Facebook  and  email,  and  to  maintain  pictures  of  family  and  friends 
and  personal  songs,  was  acceptable  to  the  administration.  However,  while  respondent  claims 
she  only  registered  a  domain  name  and  viewed  and  categorized  pornographic  video  clips 
using  her  laptop  at  home,  respondent  also  used  her  laptop  to  type  notes  from  meetings  with 
the  web  developer,  and  store  pictures  of  women’s  breasts;  hundreds  of  images  of  people 
engaged  in  sex  acts;  logos  for  the  websites  and  t-shirt  businesses;  a  flyer  advertising  the 
teachertitties.com  website;  a  business  investment  proposal;  a  model  release  form;  and 
trademark  applications,  all  in  furtherance  of  the  development  of  the  websites,  “I  ¥  Teachers” 
t-shirt,  and  postcard  business  venture.  In  addition,  respondent  used  her  laptop  to  store 
personal  pictures  for  a  boudoir  book;  a  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  as  worthless 
trash;  and  a  racist  cartoon.  None  of  these  materials  relate  to  district  business,  and  the  sheer 
volume  of  images  and  documents  found  on  respondent’s  laptop  confirm  that  it  was  not  used 
for  incidental  personal  use.  It  is  disquieting  that  respondent  equates  her  personal  use  of  the 
district’s  laptop  with  that  of  checking  Facebook  and  emails.  That  was  clearly  not  the  case 
here.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  she  did  nothing  wrong  when  she  used  the 
district  laptop  for  personal  business  is  without  merit. 

67. 

Respondent  contends  that  the  district  did  not  provide  her  with  notice  of  the 
administrative  regulations  or  board  policies  prohibiting  her  from  using  her  district-issued 
laptop  for  personal  business,  and  did  not  provide  her  with  in-service  training  regarding  the 

19

    

use  of  her  district-issued  laptop,  or  how  computers  operate  and  store  information.  According 
to  respondent,  “I  don’t  know  enough  about  computers  to  know  that  if  you  go  somewhere,  that 
junk  comes  in”;  “I  don’t  know  what  happens  when  you’re  on  certain  sites”;  and  “I  don’t 
know  what  gets  downloaded  without  your  knowledge.”  In  addition,  respondent  asserted  that 
she  was  unaware  that  viewing  and  categorizing  pornographic  video  clips  would  leave 
anything  on  her  computer. 

The  evidence  presented  established,  however,  that  respondent  signed  a  Consent  and 
Waiver  on  behalf  of  the  San  Joaquin  County  Office  of  Education  Data  Processing  JPA  (DP 
JPA),  and  the  District,  on  September  9,  2009,  in  which  she  agreed  to  the  following  pertinent 
terms  regarding  her  use  of  the  school’s  computer  network: 

My  use  of  the  IT  JPA  WAN  must  be  consistent  with  the  DP  JPA 
and  the  district’s  primary  goals. 

I  will  not  use  the  IT  JPA  WAN  for  illegal  purposes  of  any  kind. 

I  will  not  use  the  IT  JPA  WAN  to  transmit  threatening,  obscene, 
or  harassing  materials.  The  district  and  DP  JPA  will  not  be  held 
responsible  if  I  participate  in  such  activities.  In  fact,  by 
completing  this  contract,  I  agree  that  the  DP  JPA  and  district  are 
not  responsible  for  such  behavior  on  my  part. 

I  will  not  use  the  IT  JPA  WAN  to  interfere  with  or  disrupt 
network  users,  services,  or  equipment.  Disruptions  include,  but 
are  not  limited  to,  distribution  of  unsolicited  advertising, 
propagation  of  computer  worms  or  viruses,  using  printers  other 
than  those  designated  in  my  department  for  employees  use,  and 
using  the  network  to  make  unauthorized  entry  to 0  any  other 
machine  accessible  via  the  network. 

I  will  not  use  the  IT  JPA  WAN  to  access  information  or 
resources  unless  permission  to  do  has  been  granted  by  the 
owners  or  holders  of  rights  to  those  resources  or  information.  It 
is  assumed  that  information  and  resources  accessible  via  the  IT 
JPA  WAN  are  private  to  the  individuals  and  organizations 
which  own  or  hold  rights  to  those  resources  and  information 
unless  specifically  stated  otherwise  by  the  owners  or  holders  of 
rights. 

20

_  The  Consent  and  Waiver  also  warned,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

In  accordance  with  the  Electronic  and  Communications  Privacy 
Act  of  1985,  18  USCS  Section  2510,  all  employees  are  hereby 
given  notice  that  there  are  no  facilities  provided  by  the  IT  JPA 
WAN  for  sending  or  receiving  private  or  confidential  electronic 
communications.  All  messages  shall  be  determined  to  be  readily 
accessible  to  the  general  public.  Do  not  use  this  system  for  any 
communications  which  the  sender  intends  only  for  the  sender 
and  intended  recipients  to  read  .... 

Respondent  signed  the  Consent  and  Waiver  subject  to  the  following: 

I  understand  and  will  abide  by  the  provisions  and  conditions  of 
this  contract.  I  understand  that  any  violations  of  the  above 
provisions  may  result  in  disciplinary  action,  the  revoking  of  my 
user  account,  and  the  appropriate  legal  action.  I  also  agree  to 
report  any  misuse  of  the  information  system  to  my  supervisor  or 
to  the  Department  of  Information  and  Technology.  Misuse  can 
come  in  many  forms,  but  can  be  viewed  as  any  messages  sent  or 
received  that  indicate  or  suggest  pornography,  unethical  or 
illegal  solicitation,  racism,  sexism,  inappropriate  language,  and 
other  issues  described  in  this  document.  All  the  rules  of  conduct 
described  in  district  or  school  site  policies,  procedures,  and 
handbooks,  apply  when  I  am  on  the  network. 

I  understand  that  the  email  account  supplied  by  the  Data 
Processing  JPA  (DP  JPA)  is  not  my  personal  e-mail  and  that 
it  and  it’s  [sic]  content  are  solely  the  property  of  the  DP  JPA 
and  can  be  viewed  by  those  authorized  by  the  DP  JPA. 

[Bolding  in  original. ] 

While  respondent  is  not  charged  with  using  the  district’s  network  to  work  on  the 
websites,  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts,  and  postcard  business  venture,  the  Consent  and  Waiver 
form  signed  by  respondent  provided  her  with  general  notice  regarding  the  misuse  of  the 
district’s  information  system,  and  specifically  identified  “messages  sent  or  received  that 
indicate  or  suggest  pornography,  unethical  or  illegal  solicitation,  racism,  sexism, 
inappropriate  language,  and  other  issues  ....” 
respondent  with  notice  that  there  were  “rules  of  conduct  described  in  district  or  school  site 
policies,  procedures,  and  handbooks,”  albeit  they  apply  to  use  of  the  district’s  network. 

In  addition,  the  Consent  and  Waiver  provided 

21

    

Moreover,  in  her  June  1,  2012  Unemployment  Insurance  Appeal  Hearing  in  Stockton, 

California,  respondent  admitted,  inter  alia,  that  she  understood  the  laptop  was  for  work  use 
only;  she  allowed  her  husband  and  her  babysitter  to  use  the  laptop;  there  were  quite  a  few 
inappropriate  pictures  of  adults  on  her  laptop;  and  that  the  inappropriate  pictures  on  her 
computer  was  a  violation  of  her  employer’s  policy.  When  asked  by  the  Administrative  Law 
Judge  why  she  did  it,  respondent  answered:  “I  wasn’t  thinking  that  it  would  ever  be  known 
....”  Respondent’s  admissions  at  the  Unemployment  Insurance  Appeal  Hearing  establish  that 
she  was  aware  that  district  policies  existed  regarding  the  use  of  district  equipment,  even 
though  those  policies  had  not  been  placed  in  front  of  her  or  signed  by  her.  Moreover,  an 
ordinary,  reasonable  person  would  have  known  that  use  of  district  property  for  personal  use 
would  not  include  working  on  for-profit  adult  entertainment  or  pornographic  websites,  a  t- 
shirt  business  depicting  women’s  breasts,  a  postcard  business  depicting  people  sitting  on  a 
toilet,  or  a  boudoir  book.  Finally,  respondent  admitted  to  district  administrators  in  her 
January  12,  2012  interview  that  she  knew  the  district-issued  laptop  was  not  for  personal  use. 
Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  the  district  failed  to  provide  her  with  notice  of  the 
administrative  regulations  or  board  policies  prohibiting  her  from  using  her  district-issued 
laptop  for  personal  business,  was  without  merit. 

68. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  was  unaware  that  when  she  plugged  her  iPhone 

into  her  laptop,  the  iPhone  would  “sync”  with  her  laptop  to  automatically  upload  the 
photographs  from  her  iPhone  to  her  laptop.  At  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  when  she 
connected  her  iPhone,  she  only  saw  “activity”  if  she  looked  at  iTunes,  and  that  she  usually 
did  not  look  at  iPhoto  because  she  looked  at  those  photos  through  her  iPhone.  Respondent 
could  not  recall  if  the  iPhone  displayed  an  image  on  the  screen  that  it  was  syncing 
information,  but  admitted  that  she  did  not  alter  the  iPhone  to  automatically  sync  with  her 
laptop.  Respondent  testified  at  hearing  that  “now  I  plug  it  into  the  wall.” 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Tatum  testified  that  when  she  plugs  her  iPhone  into  her  laptop,  the 
iPhone  default  setting  indicates  that  it  is  “syncing”  the  information  from  the  iPhone  to  the 
laptop,  and  instructs  her  not  to  disconnect  the  iPhone.  Ms.  Tatum’s  testimony  on  this  issue 
was  plausible  and  credible,  while  respondent’s  was  not.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention 
that  her  iPhone  automatically  uploaded  photographs  from  her  iPhone  to  her  laptop  without 
her  knowledge  is  without  merit. 

69. 

Respondent  contends  that  the  images  and  photographs  identified  by  the 

district’s  forensic  expert  were  not  on  the  district-issued  laptop  at  all  as  they  could  not  be  seen 
by  anyone  who  opened  the  laptop.  According  to  respondent,  the  images  and  photographs 
were  primarily  buried  in  bit  maps  in  the  unallocated  space  of  respondent’s  laptop,  and  could 
only  be  seen  with  the  use  of  specialized  forensic  software.  In  support  of  her  contention, 
respondent  asserted  that,  “I  didn’t  think  there  was  anything  on  there,  because  everything,  I 
thought,  had  been  deleted.”  Once  again,  respondent’s  contention  is  without  merit.  Even  if 
the  images  and  photographs  are  stored  in  the  unallocated  spaces  of  the  laptop  that  does  not 
exonerate  respondent.  She  still  used  the  district-issued  laptop  to  work  on  the  pornographic 

22

  

and  adult  entertainment  websites,  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  postcard  business  venture,  and 
boudoir  book. 

70. 

Respondent  also  proffered  the  defense  that  her  work  on  the  websites  was  a 
“ruse”  to  spend  time  with  Mr.  Fields.  According  to  respondent,  they  created  the  Business 
Investment  Proposal  for  R&H  Entertainment  and  the  Non-Disclosure  Agreement  to  deceive 
respondent’s  husband  into  believing  that  they  were  working  on  the  websites  rather  than  their 
relationship.  At  hearing,  respondent  described  the  Business  Investment  Proposal  as  a  “joke,” 
and  R&H  Entertainment  as  a  “fake  business.”  However,  respondent’s  testimony  is  belied  by 
her  own  admission,  and  Mr.  Fields’  confirmation,  at  hearing  that  respondent  registered  the 
trademark  for  R&H  Entertainment  using  her  maiden  name  in  December  2010,  and  that  Mr. 
Fields  paid  respondent’s  friend  and  former  LUSD  student,  Lindsey  Halloran,  to  create  a 
Facebook  page  for  R&H  Entertainment  in  or  about  May  2011.  No  evidence  was  presented  at 
hearing  to  establish  that  respondent  transferred  or  sold  her  ownership  of  the  R&H 
Entertainment  trademark.  Therefore,  as  the  current  owner  of  the  trademark,  she  is 
responsible  for  that  website.  Respondent  also  admitted  that  April  Scott  took  the  Facebook 
page  down  at  respondent’s  house  in  September  2011,  after  Lindsey  Halloran  text  the 
fictitious  person  access  information  to  either  her  or  April  Scott.  In  addition,  at  hearing, 
respondent  testified  that  because  Mr.  Fields  and  his  son  were  in  a  band,  they  intended  to  use 
R&H  Entertainment  to  promote  music  bands  in  town.  Therefore,  R&H  Entertainment  was  a 
legitimate  business. 

These  admissions,  in  conjunction  with  their  meetings  with  web  developers;  Mr. 
Fields’  purchase  of  the  website  domain  names;  Mr.  Fields’  payment  of  monies  to  web 
developer  Estrellado;  respondent’s  sketch  of  a  logo  for  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts; 
respondent’s  modeling  of  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  to  her  colleagues;  respondent’s 
discussion  with  Dr.  Moreira  and  Melissa  Prettyman-Pope  regarding  the  teachertitties.com 
website;  respondent’s  viewing  and  categorizing  of  adult  entertainment  video  clips  for  content 
for  the  mysluttyteachers.com  website;  respondent’s  sketch  of  a  logo  for  the  360pig.com 
website;  respondent’s  referral  to  Mr.  Fields  of  an  artist  named  Brandon  to  draw a  pig  logo; 
respondent’s  trip  to  the  Adult  Video  New  Expo  in  Las  Vegas;  respondent’s  request  to  EDTC 
for  a  list  of  the  top  1,000  selling  sex  toys  and  accessories;  and  respondent’s  work  to  launch  a 
postcard  business  venture,  establish  that  respondent  was  in  fact  working  on  pornographic  and 
adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  the  postcard  business  venture. 
Respondent’s  contention  that  her  involvement  in  the  websites  was  a  “ruse”  to  make  her 
husband  believe  she  was  working  on  the  websites  is  astounding  and  absolutely  without  merit. 

71.  |  Respondent  contends  that  she  was  authorized  by  Assistant  Principal  Bender  to 

use  her  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal  business  beginning  on  September  2,  2011.  In 
her  August  23,  2012  deposition,  respondent  asserted  that  when  she  asked  Ms.  Bender  if  she 
could  use  the  district’s  cell  phone  to  make  personal  calls  to  her  parents  and  family,  that  Ms. 
Bender  “said,  ‘Absolutely,’  and  ‘...  made  it  appear,  to  me  very  clear,  that,  ‘Use  it. 
understand  the  circumstances.  We’ll  get  this  figured  out.  Do  whatever  you  need  to  do.” 

I 

23

    

However,  three  months  prior  to  her  deposition,  in  her  June  19,  2012  Answers  to  Special 
Interrogatories,  respondent  stated,  in  pertinent  part,  that  after  her  husband  “smashed  her 
personal  phones,”  she  “asked  [Ms.  Bender]  if  she  could  temporarily  use  her  district-issued 
cell  phone  for  personal  business.  Ms.  Bender  didn’t  give  her  an  answer  one  way  or  another, 
but  indicated  that  she  would  advise  the  principal  [sic]  of  the  situation....  On  October  6,  when 
she  was  confronted  by  district  administrator  Joe  Hancock  regarding  the  phone  use,  she  told 
him  about  her  crisis  involving  [her  husband],  her  attempts  to  obtain  permission  from  Ms. 
Bender,  and  she  offered  to  pay  for  all  her  use.”  Then,  at  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  on 
September  2,  2011,  she  explained  to  Assistant  Principal,  Katherine  Bender  that  she  was 
going  through  a  divorce,  her  husband  had  “busted”  her  cell  phones,  and  she  did  not  have  a 
bank  account  or  money  to  purchase  a  replacement  cell  phone,  and  asked  Ms.  Bender  if  she 
would  talk  to  LHS  Principal  Holmerud  about  allowing  respondent  to  use  the  district’s  cell 
phone  to  call  her  parents  and  family  until  she  could  obtain  a  replacement  cell  phone. 
According  to  respondent,  she  also  told  Ms.  Bender  she  was  willing  to  pay  for  any  charges 
once  she  received  her  next  paycheck.  Respondent  followed  up  with  Ms.  Bender  on  three  or 
four  occasions,  but  never  heard  back  from  her. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Bender  testified  that  respondent  approached  her  while  she  was 
finishing  up  a  meeting,  and  asked  her  a  quick  question  regarding  in  what  capacity  she  could 
use  the  district-issued  cell  phone.  Ms.  Bender  told  respondent  she  would  talk  to  Principal 
Holmerud  and  get  back  to  her.  According  to  Ms.  Bender,  respondent  did  not  tell  her  why  she 
needed  to  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone,  and  did  not  offer  to  pay  for  the  phone  charges. 
Subsequent  to  their  first  discussion,  respondent  shared  with  Ms.  Bender  that  her  marriage  had 
broken  up,  and  that  she  wanted  to  make  things  right.  Ms.  Bender  encouraged  respondent  to 
do  so  for  her  children.  Ms.  Bender  testified  that  in  their  second  discussion,  respondent  never 
told  her  that  her  husband  had  threatened  her  and  broken  her  phones,  or  that  she  had  no 
money,  credit  cards,  or  bank  accounts.  Ms.  Bender  explicitly  denied  ever  telling  respondent 
that  she  could  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone,  and  asserted  that  she  never  checked  with 
Principal  Holmerud  because  “it  didn’t  seem  urgent,”  and  because  Principal  Holmerud  was 
“very  accessible,”  so  respondent  could  have  spoken  directly  with  Principal  Holmerud. 

Ms.  Bender’s  testimony  at  hearing  was  persuasive  and  credible,  while  respondent’s 

was  not.  Ms.  Bender’s  testimony  was  also  corroborated  by  respondent’s  hearing  testimony  in 
which  she  stated  that  she  followed  up  with  Ms.  Bender  on  three  or  four  occasions.  Had  Ms. 
Bender  given  respondent  permission  to  use  her  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal 
business,  respondent  would  not  have  had  to  follow  up  with  her.  Therefore,  respondent’s 
contention  that  Ms.  Bender  authorized  her  to  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone  in  September 
2011  is  without  merit. 

72. 

Respondent  also  proffered  the  defense  that  the  use  of  her  district-issued  cell 

phone  for  personal  business  from  September  2,  2011  through  October  3,  2011,  was  justified 
as  an  emergency.  According  to  respondent,  her  husband  had  broken  her  phones,  and  she  did 
not  have  sufficient  funds  to  purchase  her  own  cell  phone,  and  the  money  to  which  she  did 

24

have  access  was  necessary  for  the  purchase  of  diapers,  wipes,  food,  gas,  utilities  and  clothes 
for  herself  and  her  children.  However,  at  hearing,  April  Scott  confirmed  that  she  offered 
respondent  whatever  help  she  needed  following  the  break-up  of  her  marriage.  The  evidence 
also  established  that  in  summer  2011,  respondent  kept  approximately  $700  in  an  envelope  in 
a  drawer  at  Mr.  Fields’  house,  and  between  spring  2011  and  fall  2011,  respondent  only  used 
$500  to  purchase  clothes  and  boots  for  herself.  At  hearing,  Mr.  Fields  confirmed  that  there 
At  hearing,  respondent  denied  that  there 
was  “a  couple  hundred  dollars  left  after  August.” 
was  any  money  left  from  the  $700  she  kept  at  Mr.  Fields’  home,  because  a  pair  of  boots  she 
wanted  was  $20  more  than  she  had  in  the  drawer. 

In  addition,  on  September  1,  2011,  respondent’s  joint  checking  account  with  her 
husband  had  a  balance  of  $6,082.90.  Although  withdrawals  were  made  from  the  account  for 
medical  bills,  utilities,  daycare,  credit  card  payments,  life  insurance  premiums,  educational 
supplies,  and  mortgage  payments,  as  well  as  cash  withdrawals  totaling  $1,531.83  made  by 
Mr.  Kaeslin,  the  account  remained  open  and  accessible  to  respondent  until  it  was  closed  on 
September  9,  2011.  Furthermore,  in  an  email  to  respondent  on  September  3,  2011,  Samantha 
McGregor  stated  “Can  I  help  you  out  with  the  phone  situation  ...  Or  can  u  only  use  a  phone 
from  rich  or  whatever  ....”  On  or  about  September  4,  2011,  Mr.  Fields  met  respondent  at  a 
Target  store  and  offered  to  buy  her  a  phone;  however,  according  to  Mr.  Fields,  respondent 
did  not  take  him  up  on  his  offer  because  “she  had  the  school  phone  ....”  On  September  6, 
2011,  respondent  opened  a  savings  account  at  Wells  Fargo  Bank  with  a  deposit  of  $95,  and 
on  September  13,  2011,  respondent  deposited  $500  into  the  account,  which  she  received  from 
Mr.  Fields.  As  of  September  30,  2011,  the  balance  in  the  savings  account  was  $595. 

On  September  13,  2011,  respondent  also  opened  a  checking  account  at  Wells  Faro 

Bank  with  a  deposit  of  $500,  which  she  received  from  Mr.  Fields,  and  on  September  16, 
2011,  deposited  $4,000  into  the  account,  which  was  also  given  to  her  by  Mr.  Fields.  On 
September  30,  2011,  respondent’s  paycheck  was  directly  deposited  into  the  account. 
Between  September  16  and  October  17,  2011,  withdrawals  were  made  from  the  account  for 
Netflix;  food  at  Donut  King,  S-Mart,  Raley’s,  Marina  Marketplace,  and  Safeway  Stores;  gas; 
retail  purchases  at  Best  Buy,  Old  Navy,  Target,  CVS,  Jo-Ann  Stores,  and  Wal-Mart; 
DIRECTV;  utilities;  dry  cleaning;  a  show  at  the  cinema;  and  mortgage  payments.  There 
were  also  cash  withdrawals  totaling  $500  made  by  respondent.  On  October  17,  2011,  the 
balance  in  the  checking  account  was  $1,336.77.  In  her  deposition,  respondent  also  confirmed 
that  Mr.  Fields  added  her  name  to  his  business  account  maintained  at  the  Bank  of  Stockton, 
and  that  the  $500  in  the  account  was  available  to  her  “[i]n  case  I  ever  needed  money.” 
Therefore,  respondent  always  had  access  to  the  $500  in  her  joint  business  account  with  Mr. 
Fields. 

Respondent’s  contention  that  her  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  was  justified  as 
an  emergency  because  she  did  not  have  access  to  money  to  purchase  her  own  cell  phone,  was 

25

  

not  credible,  and  therefore  is  without  merit.  Respondent  had  access  to  money  immediately 
following  the  break-up  of  her  marriage,  but  chose  instead  to  use  the  district-issued  cell 
phone. 

73. 

Respondent  contends  that  her  use  of  her  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal 

business  was  not  improper  because  “[t]eachers  are  on  that  cell  phone  all  the  time  making 
personal  calls  during  classroom.  You  can  see  them  outside.”  In  her  deposition,  respondent 
specifically  identified  one  district  employee  and  generally  identified  employees  in  the  special 
education  department  who  use  their  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal  business.  In  his 
deposition,  Mr.  Fields  admitted  that  he  contacted  respondent  on  her  district-issued  cell  phone 
subsequent  to  the  break-up  of  her  marriage,  and  while  she  was  at  work,  “as  many  times  as  I 
could  ...  before,  during  and  after  work  hours,”  because  “I  knew  how  her  classes  were.  I 
knew  how  — 
I  knew  her  schedule,  and  she  had  a  lot  of  down  time”  during  which  they  could 
talk.  At  hearing,  respondent  confirmed  that  there  were  opportunities  for  down  time  in  her 
classroom,  and  asserted  that  she  did  not  see  the  harm  in  taking  a  personal  phone  call  if  she 
chose  to. 

Respondent’s  contention  that  it  was  appropriate  for  her  to  use  her  district-issued  cell 

phone  for  personal  business  during  school  time  because  everyone  was  doing  it  is  not 
persuasive.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  employees  identified  by  respondent 
were  misusing  their  district-issued  cell  phones.  Nevertheless,  the  district  regulations  and 
policies  expressly  prohibit  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal  business  during 
class  time  absent  an  emergency,  and  respondent  has  failed  to  establish  that  her  use  of  the 
district-issued  cell  phone  was  justified  as  an  emergency.  In  addition,  respondent  failed  to 
establish  that  she  obtained  permission  from  the  district  to  use  her  district-issued  cell  phone 
for  personal  business.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  is  was  appropriate  to  use  the 
district-issued  cell  for  personal  use  because  everyone  was  doing  it,  is  without  merit. 

74. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  was  not  required  to  check  with  the 
administration  if  she  could  leave  the  campus  and  go  home  during  her  prep  period.  According 
to  respondent,  “...  I  didn’t  have  to  check,  when  my  department  head  and  other  people  on 
campus  were  always  leaving  during  their  prep.  So,  why  would  I  check  if  my  boss  —  my 
department  head  boss  and  other  people  are  doing  it?”  However,  respondent  acknowledged 
that  the  head  of  her  department  was  not  an  administrator,  but  a  faculty  member,  who  was  not 
responsible  for  conducting  her  evaluations.  In  her  deposition,  respondent  identified  two 
teachers  who  she  believed  left  campus  during  their  prep  period  with  the  administration’ s 
knowledge.  However,  she  did  not  know  if  those  teachers  had  cleared  it  with  the 
administration  prior  to  leaving  campus,  and  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  the 
administration  knew  that  these  teachers  were  leaving  campus  during  their  prep  period 
without  authorization.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  is  not  persuasive  and  is  without 
merit. 

26

  

  

75. 

Respondent  also  contends  that  it  was  appropriate  for  her  to  go  home  during  her 
prep  period  prep  class  to  conduct  personal  business  because  she  did  not  have  students  during 
that  time;  she  “worked  through  a  majority  of  [her]  lunches”;  and  she  “would  stay  after 
school”  to  tutor  students,  for  which  she  did  not  get  paid.  According  to  respondent,  her  fourth 
period  prep  class  “backed  up”  to  her  lunch  period.  However,  at  hearing,  Principal  Holmerud 
testified  that  prep  period  is  district  time,  and  that  time  is  designated  for  teachers  to  prepare  to 
teach,  and  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  testified  that  prep  period  was  for  preparing  lessons,  working 
on  IEPs,  and  conducting  school,  not  personal,  business.  The  testimony  of  Principal 
Holmerud  and  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  was  a  plausible  explanation  of  what  is  expected  of 
teachers  during  their  prep  period.  In  addition,  Ms.  Tatum  confirmed  that  prep  period  is 
district  time  in  which  teachers  prepare  their  IEPs,  reports  and  lesson  plans.  According  to  Ms. 
Tatum,  teachers  are  generally  not  permitted  to  go  home  early  for  lunch,  even  if  their  prep 
period  is  before  lunch;  however  they  can  do  so  in  the  event  of  an  emergency.  Ms.  Tatum  was 
extremely  thoughtful  with  her  responses,  and  presented  as a  sincere,  credible  witness. 
Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  it  was  appropriate  for  her  to  go  home  during  her 
fourth  period  prep  class  to  conduct  personal  business  is  without  merit. 

76.  |  Respondent  contends  that  the  district  did  not  follow  proper  procedure  when 

they  met  with  her  on  October  6,  2011.  According  to  respondent,  the  district  was  required  to, 
but  did  not  offer  her  union  representation  prior  to  questioning  her.  Ms.  Tatum  testified  that 
no  prior  written  notice  of  the  meeting  was  given  to  respondent,  and  she  was  unaware  that 
respondent  would  be  placed  on  leave  at  the  outset  of  that  meeting.  According  to  Ms.  Tatum, 
however,  respondent  was  free  to  leave  the  meeting  at  any  time,  and  neither  she  nor 
Superintendent  Uslan  conveyed  to  respondent  that  she  had  to  stay  in  the  meeting,  which 
lasted  approximately  one  hour. 

Respondent’s  contention  is  without  merit.  No  evidence  was  presented  by  respondent 
to  support  her  contention  that  the  district  was  required  to  offer  her  union  representation  prior 
to  their  questioning.  However,  the  evidence  did  establish  that  once  respondent  requested 
union  representation,  the  meeting  was  adjourned  pending  the  arrival  of  union  representative 
Janet  Holmstead.  In  addition,  respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  she  was  the high  school 
teachers’  union  representative  at  LUSD  during  -the  2010/2011  school  year,  and  that  she 
served  as  a  union  co-representative  in  the  2011/2012  school  year,  until  she  was  placed  on 
administrative  leave.  Therefore,  she  knew,  or  reasonably  should  have  known  the  provisions 
of  the  bargaining  agreement  regarding  her  rights  to  union  representation. 

77. 

Respondent  contends  that  the  district  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  was 
dishonest.  In  support  of  her  contention,  respondent  asserted  that  at  the  time  she  answered 
Superintendent  Uslan’s  questions,  there  was  no  pornography  on  her  laptop  because  she  had 
deleted  it,  and  she  was  not  in  a  business  relationship  with  Mr.  Fields  because  by  that  time 
their  relationship  had  ended.  However,  the  evidence  established  that  during  the  October  6, 
2011  meeting  with  Superintendent  Uslan,  respondent  initially  denied  that  there  was 
pornography  on  her  computer  but  corrected  herself  upon  further  questioning,  and  that 

27

  

respondent’s  relationship  with  Mr.  Fields  did  not  end  until  May  2012.  Respondent  also 
denied  that  she  had  any  connection  to  the  teachertitties.com,  mysluttyteachers.com,  and 
360pig.com  websites,  when  in  fact  she  was  an  integral  part  of  the  work  necessary  to  get  the 
websites  up  and  running.  Respondent  also  told  Mr.  Uslan  that  she  came  up  with  the  idea  for 
teachertitties.com,  but  at  hearing  asserted  that  she  did  not,  and  only  told  Mr.  Uslan  that  she 
did  because  she  did  not  want  to  name  anybody  else.  Moreover,  respondent  told 
Superintendent  Uslan  that  she  had  permission  from  Ms.  Bender  to  use  the  district-issued  cell 
phone,  when  in  fact  she  did  not. 

At  hearing,  respondent  acknowledged  that  the  charge  of  dishonesty  also  included 
respondent’s  statements  that  she  ceased  her  involvement  with  R&H  Entertainment  in  fall 
2010;  teachertitties.com  and  mysluttyteachers.com  in  April  2011;  and  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t- 
shirts  in  spring  2011,  and  that  she  was  not  involved  with  360pig.com.  However,  the  evidence 
established  that  in  August  2011,  respondent  used  the  R&H  Entertainment  email  address  to 
obtain  contact  information  for  her  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  app.;  in  June  2011,  respondent 
assisted  April  Scott  in  obtaining  pictures  of  women’s  breasts  for  the  teachertitties.com 
website;  on  October  7,  2011,  respondent  had  copies  of  the  Model  Release  form  that  was  to  be 
used  for  content  for  the  teachertitties.com  websites  in  her  classroom;  and  on  August  10, 
2011,  a  spreadsheet  listing  the  top  selling  sex  toys  and  other  sex  paraphernalia  was  created  on 
respondent’s  laptop.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  the  district  failed  to 
demonstrate  that  she  was  dishonest  is  without  merit. 

78. 

Respondent  contends  that  the  district  has  failed  to  establish  that  she  was 

insubordinate.  In  support  of  her  contention,  respondent  asserted  that  she  was  not  required  to 
check  with  the  administration  prior  to  leaving  for  Florida  to  visit  her  sister  while  she  was  on 
paid  administrative  leave  in  January  2012.  According  to  respondent,  she  traveled  to  Florida 
to  visit  her  sister  for  five  days  to  help  her  with  her  children,  and  to  work  on  “Quickbooks 
stuff,”  and  admitted  that  she  did  not  check  with  the  administration  prior  to  leaving.  In  her 
deposition,  respondent  queried,  in  pertinent  part,  “[w]hy  would  I  need  to  check?  They  put 
me  on  administrative  leave,  and  no  one  told  me  that  I  wasn’t  allowed  to  do  anything  while 
I’m  at  home  waiting  to  find  out  what’s  going  to  happen  with  my  job.  No  one  gave  me  any 
clear  rules  or  expectations  until  after  I  came  home  ....”  Respondent  asserted  that  even  after 
she  received  notice  from  the  district  that  she  was  not  supposed  to  leave  the  state  while  she 
was  on  paid  administrative  leave,  she  did  not  understand  why  she  could  not  leave  the  state, 
and  contended  that  “[i]f  you  are  putting  me  on  leave  and  —  not  you,  meaning  you,  but  the 
District  —  putting  me  on  leave,  not  allowing  me  to  perform  my  duties,  and  not  expecting  me 
to  be  sitting  in  a  room  somewhere  at  least  during  the  time  they’re  investigating,  who  are  they 
to  tell  me  what  I  can  and  cannot  do?  Meaning  the  District,  not  you.”  Respondent  admitted 
however,  that  she  was  paid  her  regular  salary  during  that  time. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Tatum  explained  that  if  a  teacher  has  a  family  emergency  or  needs  to 

leave  town,  they  are  required  to  communicate  with  the  Human  Resources  Department  to 
determine  if  Personal  Need  is  necessary.  According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  paid  administrative  leave 

28

  

is  not  a  paid  vacation.  In  addition,  teachers  do  not  acquire  paid  vacations.  In  a  letter  dated 
January  25,  2012,  Ms.  Tatum  advised  respondent  that  “as  an  active  District  employee,”  she  is 
“expected  to  be  available  to  the  District  during  regular  District  hours  on  designated  days.” 
Ms.  Tatum  also  notified  respondent  that  “[i]f  for  any  reason  you  are  not  available,  you  are 
expected  to  comply  with  the  existing  leave  request  protocols  outlined  in  the  collective 
bargaining  agreement  and  other  policies  and  procedures,  including,  but  not  limited  to, 
notifying  the  District’s  HR  office  and  filling  out  applicable  leave  requests  and  obtaining 
permission.  The  District  will  then  make  appropriate  modifications  to  your  leave  banks  and 
pay  status,  as  appropriate.  Specifically,  you  are  advised  that  your  status  on  administrative 
leave  is  not  a  ‘paid  vacation’  and  you  are  not  free  to  leave  the  town  without  following  these 
protocols.”  Ms.  Tatum  asserted  that  respondent’s  decision  not  to  follow  her  directive  was 
considered  by  the  district  to  be  insubordination. 

Respondent’s  decision  to  travel  to  Florida  to  visit  family  while  she  was  on  paid 

administrative  leave  demonstrates  her  lack  of  respect  for  the  provisions  of  the  Bargaining 
Agreement  between  the  California  Teachers  Association  and  LUSD,  which  provides  that 
employees  are  entitled  to  use  up  to  seven  days  of  accumulated  sick  leave  for  Personal 
Necessity  Leave,  and  for  “unspecified  compelling  reasons.”  Article  VII,  Section  3  of  the 
Bargaining  Agreement  also  specifies,  in  pertinent  part,  that  “[p]ersonal  necessity  leave  shall 
not  be  used  for  vacation,  recreation,  or  to  engage  in  other  employment.”  Respondent  knew, 
or  reasonably  should  have  known,  that  personal  necessity  need  was  available  to  her. 

Moreover,  respondent’s  testimony  that  the  district  had  no  right  to  tell  her  what  to  do 

when  she  was  on  paid  administrative  leave  screams  defiance.  Respondent  has  been  employed 
by  the  district  since  2002.  Her  lengthy  employment,  coupled  with  her  role  as  the  high  school 
teachers’  union  representative,  establishes  that  she  knew,  or  reasonably  should  have  known, 
that  teachers  do  not  acquire  paid  vacations.  She  also  knew,  or  reasonably  should  have 
known,  that  paid  administrative  leave  was  not  a  paid  vacation.  At  a  minimum,  respondent 
should  have  notified  the  district  that  she  was  leaving  the  state  to  visit  her  family.  The  fact 
that  respondent  received  the  January  25,  2012  letter  from  Ms.  Tatum  after  she  returned  from 
her  trip  to  Florida,  does  not  relieve  her  of  her  obligation  to  follow  the  rules  established  under 
her  employment  contract.  Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  the  district  failed  to 
establish  that  she  was  insubordinate  is  without  merit. 

79. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  is  a  highly  regarded  and  excellent  teacher  who 

was  misguided  by  her  extramarital  affair.  The  following  letters  were  submitted  in  support  of 
respondent’s  contention. 

Shelly  Moreira,  Ed.D.  is  the  Department  Chair  of  LUSD’s  Special  Education 

Department.  In  an  email  to  LUSD’s  Strategies  Department,  dated  October  9,  2011,  Dr. 
Moreira  urged  the  staff  to  “do  all  that  you  can  to  stop  the  rumors”  circulating  about 

  

29

  

respondent  being  out  on  leave,  and  indicated  that  “[t]his  is  a  huge  loss  for  our  department,  as 
we  can  all  agree  that  Heidi  is  an  excellent,  caring  teacher.  My  hope  is  that  Heidi  will  return 
to  her  teaching  position  soon  and  pick  up  where  she  left  off.” 

On  January  2,  2012,  the  parent  of  a  LHS  student  wrote  a  letter  “To  whom  it  may 
concern,”  stating  that  his  contacts  with  respondent  have  been  “professional,  courteous,  polite 
and  caring,”  and  that  respondent  “has  been a  positive  influence  [with  their  daughter]  helping 
her  academically  and  socially.” 

On  April  14,  2012,  April  Scott*  wrote  a  letter  on  Wicklund  Elementary  School  (WES) 
letterhead  on  behalf  of  respondent,  and  signed  it  as  the  Principal  of  WES.  In  her  letter,  April 
Scott  asserted  that  respondent’s  knowledge  of  the  curriculum  was  “exemplary,”  and  her 
“passion  for  teaching  is  evident.”  She  described  respondent  as  “always  cooperative  with 
administration  and  looked  to  as  a  leader  amongst  her  peers.”  At  hearing,  however,  April 
Scott  admitted  that  she  used  the  WES  letterhead  without  permission  from  the  administration, 
and  signed  it  as  the  Principal  of  the  school  even  though  she  had  resigned  from  WES,  under 
unfortunate  circumstances,  in  March  2012.  April  Scott  testified  at  hearing  that  she  did  not 
think  it  was  inappropriate  to  use  the  WES  letterhead  to  write  a  reference  letter  for  respondent, 
or  to  sign  it  as  the  Principal.  April  Scott’s  demeanor  at  hearing  was  disrespectful,  dismissive, 
and  completely  unprofessional.  The  Commission  found  that  April  Scott  was  not  a  credible 
witness. 

On  April  19,  2012,  Dr.  Moreira  wrote  a  letter  of  recommendation  in  which  she 
described  respondent  as  “a  valued  teacher”;  “a  dedicated  staff  member”;  and  “an  excellent 
Resource  Specialist”  who  “understands  the  difficulties  students  with  Learning  Disabilities 
face.”  At  hearing,  Dr.  Moreira  stated  “I  wrote  it  like  a  fool  and  didn’t  realize  I  was  being  set 
up.”  According  to  Dr.  Moreira,  respondent  asked  her  to  write  the  letter  because  her  attorney 
told  her  she  needed  reference  letters  so  she  could  apply  for  positions  in  other  school  districts. 
However,  respondent  had  not  revealed  to  her  what  the  charges  were,  and  Dr.  Moreira  had  not 
reviewed  the  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  at  that  time.  Once  she  learned  of  those 
charges,  however,  Dr.  Moreira  regretted  writing  the  letter  because  she  realized  she  did  not 
know  the  extent  of  the  problems  facing  respondent,  and  believed  that  she  had  written  the 
letter  for  someone  she  did  not  know.  Dr.  Moreira  asserted  that  had  she  known  about  the 
charges,  she  would  not  have  written  the  letter  of  recommendation.  Later,  when  she  was 
approached  by  Ms.  Tatum  regarding  the  reference  letter,  Dr.  Moreira  realized  “what  an  idiot  I 
had  been  for  not  asking  someone  about  it  first.” 

On  April  26,  2012,  Tara  Bell,  Principal  of  Franklin-McKinley  School  District,  wrote  a 
reference  letter  describing  respondent  as  “a  hardworking,  dedicated,  and  organized  Resource 

  

*  April  Scott  was  a  Vice  Principal  at  LHS  for  eight  years  prior  to  being  demoted  for, 
inter  alia,  using  district  resources  to  access  information  to  help  her  son  who  was  involved  in 
the  disciplinary  process  at  LUSD. 

30

  

Specialist  Teacher”  whose  “dedication  to  her  students  and  the  Lincoln  High  School 
Community  was  extremely  valued.”  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  she  did  not  tell  Ms. 
Bell  that  she  had  been  fired  from  LUSD  when  she  asked  for  the  reference  letter.  According 
to  respondent,  Ms.  Bell  “pretty  much  knew  why  I  was  being  fired.” 

80.  |  Respondent  contends  that  she  was  only  involved  in  an  ill-conceived  idea  for  a 

In  addition,  at  hearing,  Dr.  Moreira  confirmed  that  “for  months” 

brief  period.  However,  respondent  worked  on  the  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and 
the  postcard  business  venture  for  at  least  10  months  during  the  2010/2011  school  year,  and 
was  still  using  the  R&H  Entertainment  email  address  on  August  22,  2011,  when  she  asked 
Mr.  Schapiro  to  send  her  the  contact  information  for  a  lead  on  her  idea  for  a  “Sweet 
Nothings”  iPhone  app. 
beginning  in  the  spring  of  2011,  respondent  talked  to  her  about  the  teachertitties.com  website 
in  the  special  education  office,  and  then  “weeks  later”  modeled  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  for 
her  in  the  “back  office”  during  their  lunch  period.  According  to  Dr.  Moreira,  she  was 
“disappointed”  with  respondent,  “devastated”,  and  could  not  believe  it  had  gone  that  far.  Dr. 
Moreira  told  respondent  to  “be  careful,”  because  “it  was  a  bad  idea.”  Therefore,  respondent’s 
contention  that  she  was  only  involved  in  an  ill-conceived  idea  for  a  brief  period  is  without 
merit. 

81. 

Respondent  contends  that  her  actions  did  not  cause  harm  to  her  students,  or  the 

district.  Insufficient  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  students  were  impacted  by 
respondent’s  conduct.  However,  at  hearing,  Dr.  Moreira  testified  that  when  respondent 
talked  about  the  teachertitties.com  website  in  the  special  education  office,  and  modeled  the  “I 
¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  for  her  in  the  “back  office”  during  their  lunch  period,  there  were  “always 
people  in  the  special  education  office  during  their  lunch  period  because  “we  routinely  ate 
lunch  together.”  Dr.  Moreira  was  disappointed  when  she  learned  that  respondent  was 
working  on  the  teachertitties.com  website.  Respondent  also  showed  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t- 
shirt  to  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  and  two  other  colleagues  in  the  back  office  of  the  special 
education  department.  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  testified  that  she  was  shocked  that  respondent 
had  taken  it  that  far. 

Furthermore,  in  an  October  12,  2011  email  to  Ms.  Tatum,  Vice  Principal  Hancock 

summarized  his  15-minute  interview  with  a  paraprofessional  regarding  her  observations  of 
respondent,  noting  that: 

1. 

Making  copies  of  Bank  of  America  Mortgage  Statement 
Many  phone  calls  made/received  during  class.  Hushing 
the  students  when  on  personal  calls.  One  student  even 
asked  the  teacher  to  take  a  call  outside.  Personal 
paperwork  was  being  shuffled  on  many  of  the  calls,  but 
no  further  details  provided. 

31

    

3. 

4, 

The  aide  was  sent  to  take  care  of  American  Fidelity 
paperwork  having  to  do  with  personal  deductions.  That 
took  about  30  minutes. 
A  couple  of  times  the  teacher  left  the  room  and  the  aide 
was  in  the  room. 

Lisa  Fields  has  been  a  paraprofessional  with  LUSD  for  five  years.  She  serves  as  an 

instructional  aide  to  resource  and  mainstream  English  teachers.  In  the  fall  of  2011,  Ms. 
Fields  worked  in  respondent’s  classroom  during  three  English  classes  and  two  resource 
classes.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Fields  testified  that  in  September  2011,  she  observed  respondent  on 
a  cell  phone  “constantly,”  and  “a  lot  during  class  time.”  In  addition,  she  observed  respondent 
leaving  the  classroom  to  take  a  phone  call  a  “handful  of  times,”  and  asserted  that  respondent 
was  on  the  phone  in  the  classroom  more  times  than  she  was  on  the  phone  outside.  According 
to  Ms.  Fields,  respondent  “shushed”  the  class  on  at  least  two  occasions  while  she  was  on  the 
phone,  and  was  gone  an  entire  class  period  on  one  occasion,  leaving  Ms.  Fields  to  take  over 
the  lesson.  Lisa  Fields  was  a  credible  witness.  At  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  she  used 
the  phone  frequently  during  the  work  day,  but  asserted  that  it  was  “mostly  during  my  prep 
period.”  Respondent  also  admitted  that  calls  came  in  when  she  had  students  in  the  classroom, 
but  that  she  would  step  outside  to  take  the  call.  According  to  respondent,  there  were  times 
that  the  aides  would  step  in  and  take  on  the  teaching  role.  Respondent  also  admitted  that  she 
shushed  the  children  in  her  class  when  she  was  taking  a  phone  call,  but  asserted  that  it  was 
when  she  was  leaving  a  message  for  a  parent  regarding  a  student  who  had  not  finished  their 
homework.  Respondent  denied  ever  leaving  the  classroom  for  an  entire  class  period. 

In  addition,  on  November  16,  2011,  The  Stockton  Record  ran  a  news  article  entitled 

“Teacher’s  role  in  porn  websites  investigated,”  detailing  the  events  leading  up  to 
respondent’s  placement  on  paid  administrative  leave,  and  her  subsequent  “marriage 
troubles.”  Several  news  articles  followed  in  print  and  on  the  Internet,  nationally  and 
internationally.  A  Google  search  of  respondent’s  name  in  June  2012  returned  48,500  results 
of  media  reports  regarding  the  status  of  respondent’s  role  as  a  special  education  teacher  for 
LUSD,  and  her  involvement  in  the  websites  teachertitties.com,  mysluttyteachers.com, 
360pig.com  and  R&H  Entertainment. 

Thereafter,  on  November  16,  2011,  Superintendent  Uslan  received  an  email  from  a 

parent  of  a  former  LHS  student.  The  email  expressed  “how  disturbed”  the  parent  “was  by  the 
news  article  regarding  Heidi  Kaeslin  and  Officer  Mr.  Fields,”  and  summarized  how  the 
parent  had  asked  Principal  Holmerud  on  numerous  occasions  to  reassign  her  son  to  a 
different  Special  Education  representative,  because  respondent’s  “tactics  and  behavior  were 
not  that  of  an  advocate.” 

On  November  23,  2011,  Superintendent  Uslan  also  received  an  email  from  a 

gentleman  expressing  his  “outrage  at  the  serious  misconduct  reported  by  the  Stockton  Record 
involving  a  Lincoln  High  School  teacher,  Heidi  Kaeslin.”  The  author  believed  that 

32

respondent  should  be  terminated  from  her  job  at  LUSD  for  using  “a  taxpayer  funded 
computer  to  host  pornographic  websites  —  which  she  intended  to  run  as  a  profit  making 
enterprise.”  According  to  the  author,  “Ms.  Kaeslin  will  never  regain  her  reputation  among 
parents,  her  students,  and  the  community  at  large  necessary  to  be  an  effective  public  school 
teacher.”  The  author  also  pointed  out  that  “Ms.  Kaeslin  has  the  difficult  and  important 
responsibility  of  helping  guide  Lincoln  High  school  teenagers  through  a  mine-field  of 
difficult  issues  ...,”  and  “has  made  a  mockery  of  the  teaching  profession.”  The  author  went 
on  to  describe  respondent  as  “a  laughing  stock  of  her  students,”  and  “ethically  challenged,” 
and  urged  Superintendent  Uslan  to  “seek  all  possible  remedies  to  keep  [respondent]  away 
from  the  children  of  Lincoln  Unified.” 

The  impact  of  respondent’s  actions  on  her  colleagues  and  the  district  is  apparent. 

Therefore,  respondent’s  contention  that  her  actions  did  not  cause  harm  to  the  district  is 
without  merit. 

82. 

All  other  defenses  raised  by  respondent  at  hearing  which  are  not  addressed 

herein  were  considered  and  found  to  be  without  merit. 

District’s  Decision  to  Terminate  Employment 

83. 

At  hearing,  Superintendent  Uslan  testified  that  after  receiving  Mr.  Rinek’s 
report  in  mid-November  2011,  he  determined  that  respondent’s  conduct  was  “outlandish, 
unprofessional  and  immoral”;  that  she  exploited  her  position  as  a  teacher;  and  that  she  was 
dishonest  with  LUSD’s  administrators  about  the  extent  of  her  involvement  in  the  websites, 
and  about  obtaining  permission  to  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal  calls. 
Superintendent  Uslan  also  testified  that  respondent  never  expressed  remorse  for  being 
involved  in  pornography-related  websites;  for  using  her  district-issued  laptop  to  sort  through 
pornography;  for  using  her  district-issued  laptop  to  store  pornography,  a  racial  cartoon,  and  a 
drawing  portraying  a  special  education  student  as  trash;  or  for  using  her  district-issued  cell 
phone  without  permission.  According  to  Superintendent  Uslan,  respondent  is  an 
embarrassment  to  the  school  district;  students  and  the  administration  do  not  respect  her; 
parents  have  expressed  concerns  about  her  potential  return  to  the  school  district;  and 
respondent’s  name  will  forever  be  associated  with  adultery  and  pornography.  Superintendent 
Uslan  believes  that  respondent  should  be  terminated  from  her  position  with  LUSD. 

84. 

At  hearing,  Assistant  Superintendent  Tatum  testified  that  after  reviewing  Mr. 
Rinek’s  report,  she  was  “absolutely”  concerned  that  the  pictures  of  women’s  breasts  would 
be  used  as  pornography  on  a  website,  and  asserted  that  it  was  “very  disturbing”  to  find 
pornography  on  the  district-issued  laptop,  which  was  to  be  used  for  educational  purposes 
_  only.  She  was  concerned  that  there  were  a  large  number  of  nude  pictures  of  respondent’s 

children  on  the  laptop,  which  were  focused  on  the  child’s  genital  area,  or  the  child  was  ina 
provocative  pose.  According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  the  large  volume  of  child  pictures  on 
respondent’s  laptop  was  disconcerting  to  the  district,  especially  because  they  were  found 

    

33

  

along  with  a  large  volume  of  pornographic  images.  Ms.  Tatum  was  also  concerned  that  one 
of  the  pictures  on  respondent’s  laptop  was  of  a  paraprofessional  taking  a  photograph  down 
her  shirt  in  a  LUSD  classroom,  and  “extremely  concerned”  that  a  discriminatory,  prejudicial, 
offensive  and  inappropriate  cartoon  was  on  respondent’s  laptop,  as  well  as  a  drawing 
depicting  a  special  education  student  as  worthless  trash  which  she  described  as  “clearly 
offensive.”  Ms.  Tatum  believes  that  respondent’s  work  on  the  websites,  coupled  with  the 
publicity  regarding  her  involvement  served  as  a  distraction  from  the  learning  environment, 
and  infringed  on  her  instructional  and  prep  time. 

85. 

|  Ms.  Tatum  was  also  concerned  that  respondent  used  her  district-issued  cell 

phone  to  talk  excessively  to  her  boyfriend  during  a  time  when  she  was  expected  to  teach  and 
work  with  her  students.  According  to  Ms.  Tatum,  during  the  time  respondent  was  on  the 
district-issued  cell  phone  with  Mr.  Fields,  the  students  were  not  properly  supervised,  and 
when  she  was  out  of  the  classroom  preoccupied  with  the  phone,  there  was  no  evidence  that 
she  had  a  complete  visual  of  all  her  students,  so  her  students  were  at  risk. 

86. 

Ms.  Tatum  testified  that  respondent  violated  the  district’s  policies  by  using  her 
laptop  for  pornographic  images  which  are  not  compatible  with  teaching  students  and  conflict 
with  teacher  standards;  was  dishonest  in  her  interviews  with  the  administration;  failed  to 
accept  responsibility  to  adhere  to  the  highest  ethical  standards;  demonstrated  unprofessional 
judgment;  and  has  cast  the  district  in  a  negative  and  demeaning  light.  According  to  Ms. 
Tatum,  the  notoriety  surrounding  this  case  can  affect  potential  employees  in  terms  of 
recruitment;  parents  thinking  about  sending  their  children  to  LUSD;  and  students  who  have 
heard  of  this  case;  and  school  funding  is  dependent  on  school  enrollment.  Ms.  Tatum 
believes  that  respondent  can  no  longer  teach  effectively  in  the  district  because  she  has 
damaged  her  professional  relationship;  the  students  are  aware  of  her  actions;  she  has  been 
linked  to  pornography;  she  will  not  be  taken  seriously;  she  cannot  be  trusted;  she  is  not 
willing  to  take  direction  from  the  district;  her  rationale  for  doing  something  is  that  everyone 
is  doing  it,  rather  than  being  a  role  model;  she  justified  and  rationalized  her  actions  because 
she  was  doing  it  at  home  on  her  own  time;  she  does  not  believe  she  did  anything  wrong;  she 
lacks  responsibility;  and  she  lacks  remorse. 

Evident  Unfitness for  Service 

87. 

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44944  create  the  statutory  framework  for 

this  proceeding.  The  statutes  give  discretion  to  both  the  district  and  the  Commission.  The 
district  has  the  right  to  determine  when  to  seek  disciplinary  action  against  a  teacher  and  what 
discipline  to  seek.  The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  the  charged 
conduct  occurred  and  whether  the  discipline  sought  should  be  imposed. 

88. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  identified  eight  factors  to  be  considered  in  determining  whether  a  teacher’s 
conduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely 

  

34

affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  teacher;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct 
in  question;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 
conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question;  and  (8)  the  extent  to 
which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (/d.,  at  pp.  229-230.) 

Adverse  Affect  on  Students  or  Teachers.  There  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  a 
finding  that  respondent’s  involvement  with  the  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts,  and  the 
postcard  business  venture  had  an  adverse  affect  on  students.  However,  her  involvement  did 
have  an  adverse  affect  on  her  fellow  teachers.  Dr.  Moreira’s  testimony  that  respondent 
modeled  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts  to  her,  and  particularly  her  comments  that  she  was 
disappointed  that  respondent  had  allowed  the  development  of  the  websites  to  get  that  far,  was 
particularly  persuasive.  It  was  evident  during  Dr.  Moreira’s  testimony  that  her  ability  to 
relate  to  respondent  as  a  teacher  has  been  irreparably  damaged.  Moreover,  Dr.  Moreira 
explained  that  their  staff  routinely  ate  lunch  together  in  the  department  lunch  room,  where 
respondent  talked  to  her  about  the  teachertitties.com  website.  In  addition,  Ms.  Prettyman- 
Pope’s  testimony  that  she  was  shocked  that  respondent  had  taken  it  that  far  was  also 
persuasive.  Furthermore,  respondent  showed  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts  to  two  other 
colleagues  in  the  back  office  of  the  special  education  department.  Therefore,  the  evidence 
established  respondent’s  conduct  had  an  adverse  affect  on  her  fellow  teachers. 

The  Degree  of the  Adverse  Affect.  The  damage  respondent’s  actions  could  have 
caused  to  students  if  they  saw  adult  entertainment  materials  on  her  laptop  in  the  classroom  is 
incalculable.  The  damage  her  actions  caused  her  fellow  teachers  is  evident.  In  addition,  the 
district  may  have  been  subject  to  legal  action  for  creating  a  hostile  environment,  or  for 
sexual  harassment,  negligence  or  infliction  of  emotional  distress,  by  the  employees  who 
viewed  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirts,  and  who  may  have  overheard  respondent’s  conversation 
with  Dr.  Moreira  regarding  the  teachertitties.com  website.  Therefore,  the  evidence 
established  that  the  potential  for  harm  was  great  and  could  easily  have  been  anticipated: 

Proximity  or  Remoteness  in  Time  of the  Conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  involving  the 
use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  and  district-issued  cell  phone  occurred  between  fall  2010  and 
fall  2011.  The  district  took  immediate  action  to  place  her  on  administrative  leave  and 
conduct  an  investigation,  and  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges  as  soon  as  legally  permissible. 
The  charges  were  filed  within  five  months  of  the  district’s  discovery  of  respondent’s  conduct. 
Therefore,  respondent’s  conduct  was  not  remote  in  time. 

Type  of teaching  certificate.  Respondent  holds  a  clear  Multiple  Subject  Teaching 

Credential  in  general  subjects,  a  clear  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development 
(CLAD)  Certificate,  and  a  clear  Level  II  Education  Specialist  Instruction  Credential 
authorizing  her  to  teach  students  with  mild/moderate  disabilities.  During  the  2010-2011 

35

    

school  year,  she  taught  English  and  English  study  skills  in  the  special  education  department 
at  LHS. 

Extenuating  and  Aggravating  Circumstances  Surrounding  the  Conduct.  Respondent’s 

assertion  that  she  stopped  working  on  the  websites  by  March/April  2011  does  not  constitute 
an  extenuating  circumstance.  Stopping  work  on  the  websites  does  not  make  respondent  less 
culpable  or  exonerate  her.  Moreover,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  did  not  stop 
working  on  the  websites  by  March/April  2011.  In  May  2011,  respondent  sent  a  request  to 
Nick  Schapiro  for  a  referral  to  a  web  designer  for  a  project  similar  to  flashyourrack.com;  in 
June  2011,  she  went  on  the  boat  trip  to assist April  Scott  in  obtaining  pictures  of  women’s 
breasts  to  upload  to  the  teachertitties.com  website;  in  August  2011,  she  sent  a  request  to  Nick 
Schapiro  for  a  referral  to  an  iPhone  app  developer  for  “Sweet  Nothings”;  and  again  in  August 
2011,  she  received  the  list  of  Top  1,000  selling  items  from  EDTC  for  360pig.com. 
Therefore,  respondent’s  decision  to  stop  working  on  the  websites  in  March/April  2011,  was 
not  credible,  and  as  such  does  not  constitute  an  extenuating  circumstance. 

At  hearing,  respondent  argued  that  the  extenuating  circumstances  surrounding  her  use 

of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  was  the  result  of  “classic  abused  women’s  syndrome.” 
However,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  respondent  was  abused  by  her  husband. 
The  evidence  demonstrated  that  on  August  31,  2011,  respondent’s  husband  twisted  her  wrist 
on  two  or  three  occasions  when  he  pried  her  purse  and  cell  phones  from  her  after  finding  out 
that  she  was  having  an  extramarital  affair.  Respondent  did  not  seek  medical  assistance  for 
problems  with  her  wrist.  And  other  than  this  incident  on  August  31,  2011,  there  was  no 
evidence  presented  to  demonstrate  a  history  of  abuse  by  her  husband.  Therefore,  no 
connection  was  established  between  possible  abuse  and  the  excessive  use  of  the  district- 
issued  cell  phone. 

Conversely,  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  respondent’s  involvement  with 
the  pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  postcard  business 
venture,  and  boudoir  book  were  established.  Respondent  exploited  her  position  as  a  teacher 
in  order  to  make  money,  and  does  not  believe  her  actions  were  inappropriate.  In  addition, 
and  despite  the  overwhelming  evidence  presented  against  her,  respondent  did  not  accept 
responsibility  or  express  remorse  for  her  actions.  She  only  expressed  remorse  for  having  an 
extramarital  affair,  and  for  how  she  has  been  portrayed  in  this  case.  Moreover,  at  hearing 
respondent  denied  any  culpability  for  her  involvement  in  the  various  business  ventures,  and 
instead  pointed  to  her  boyfriend,  Estrellado,  April  Scott,  Lindsey  Halloran,  and  Samantha 
McGregor,  as  the  ones  responsible  for  the  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  photographs  of 
women’s  breasts,  the  R&H  Entertainment  Facebook  page,  and  the  photographs  of  naked 
children  maintained  on  respondent’s  laptop.  No  consideration  whatsoever  was  given  by 
respondent  to  the  work  that  she  performed  in  order  to  promote  the  pornographic  and  adult 
entertainment  websites  that  objectify  female  teachers,  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  postcard 
business  venture,  including  attending  meetings  with  the  web  developer;  taking  notes; 
sketching  a  logo  for  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt;  viewing  and  categorizing  pornographic  video 

36

clips;  sketching  a  logo  for  the  360pig.com  website;  attending  an  Adult  Video  News  Expo  in 
Las  Vegas  to  find  a  drop  shipper  for  sex  toys  and  accessories;  handing  out  flyers  advertising 
the  teachertitties.com  website  in  Las  Vegas;  modeling  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt  to  co- 
workers;  talking  to  co-workers  about  the  teachertitties.com  website;  assisting  with  obtaining 
pictures  of  women’s  breasts  for  the  teachertitties.com  website;  emailing  EDTC  for  their  list 
of  top  1,000  selling  items  for  the  360pig.com  website;  registering  a  trademark  application  for 
R&H  Entertainment;  and  maintaining  all  the  information  on  her  district-issued  laptop. 

Furthermore,  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  respondent’s  drawing  on  the 

classroom  whiteboard  depicting  a  “pretty  and  smart  teacher,”  and  a  special  education  student 
upside  down  in  a  trash  can  as  “worthless  trash”  were  established.  Respondent’s  conduct  was 
in  complete  disregard  of  the  possibility  that  students  may  walk  into  the  classroom  and  view 
the  drawing,  or  that  other  teachers  would  walk  into  the  classroom  and  view  the  drawing. 

In  addition,  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  respondent’s  excessive  use  of  the 

district-issued  cell  phone  were  established.  Without  obtaining  permission  to  do  so, 
respondent  used  the  district-issued  cell  phone  to  make  numerous  calls  to  her  boyfriend, 
during  class  time.  She  does  not  believe  this  was  inappropriate,  and  shifted  responsibility  to 
the  district  to  tell  her  that  she  could  not  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal 
business.  Therefore,  the  evidence  established  that  aggravating  circumstances  existed  related 
to  respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone. 

Praiseworthiness  or  Blameworthiness  of the  Motive.  Respondent’s  motive  for 

working  on  the  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  postcard  business  venture,  was  to 
make  money.  This  motive  is  neither  praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy.  However,  respondent  is 
blameworthy  for  exploiting  her  position  as  a  teacher,  and  using  her  district-issued  laptop  to 
do  so.  Respondent’s  motive  for  using  the  district-issued  cell  phone  was  to  contact  her 
boyfriend,  family  and  friends  following  the  beak-up  of  her  marriage.  This  motive  is  neither 
praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy.  However,  respondent  is  blameworthy  for  excessively  using 
the  district-issued  cell  phone  without  first  obtaining  permission  from  the  district  to  do  so. 
Respondent’s  motive  for  drawing  a  picture  on  the  classroom  whiteboard  depicting  a  special 
education  student  upside  down  in a  trash  bin  as  “worthless  trash”  was  “a  joke.”  It  is 
disquieting  that  respondent  believes  that  joking  around  about  her  students  is  acceptable 
behavior  for  a  teacher.  The  damage  that  could  have  been  caused  to  her  students  had  any  one 
of  them  walked  into  the  classroom  and  viewed  it,  is  immeasurable.  It  also  illuminates  what 
respondent  thinks  of  her  students,  and  for  that  she  is  particularly  blameworthy. 

Likelihood  of Recurrence  of the  Conduct.  The  question  of  recurrence  in  this  case  is 

not  difficult  to  predict.  It  is  likely  that  respondent  will  continue  to  engage  in  behaviors  in  the 
future  that  will  impact  her  performance  as  a  teacher.  Respondent  knew,  or  reasonably  should 
have  known  the  rules  regarding  use  of  the  district’s  laptop,  yet  she  used  it  to  work  on  adult 
entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  the  postcard  business  venture.  Her 
conduct  demonstrated  a  high  level  of  recklessness  and  an  extreme  lack  of judgment. 

37

    

Moreover,  she  was  cautioned  by  Dr.  Moreira  to  be  careful,  but  instead  of  purchasing  her  own 
laptop  to  continue  her  involvement  in  the  websites,  she  continued  using  the  district-issued 
laptop.  And  in  her  Unemployment  Insurance  Appeals  Board  hearing,  respondent  admitted 
that  she  did  not  think  she  would  get  caught.  Now  that  she  has  been  caught,  she  continues  to 
deny  responsibility,  or  express  remorse,  for  her  actions.  Had  respondent  not  been  caught, 
there  is  no  indication  that  her  involvement  in  adult  entertainment  websites  would  have 
stopped,  as  evidenced  by  her  request  to  Mr.  Schapiro  in  late  August  2011  for  a  referral  to  an 
app  developer  for  yet  another  business  venture.  All  this  suggests  that  respondent  may 
continue  to  use  her  laptop  to  engage  in  personal  matters  regardless  of  the  rules  prohibiting 
such  use  were  she  confident  that  she  could  do  so  without  being  caught. 

In  addition,  at  hearing,  respondent  asserted  that  she  has  no  intention  of  being  involved 
in  these  business  ventures  again  because  she  only  did  it  to  help  Mr.  Fields,  and  is  no  longer  in 
a  relationship  with  him.  The  implication  she  asks  the  Commission  to  draw  is  that  she  only 
did  it  because  of  Mr.  Fields.  However,  respondent  admitted  in  her  deposition  that  she 
intended  to  make  money  from  these  businesses.  Moreover,  her  testimony  that  she  only  did  it 
to  help  Mr.  Fields,  suggests  that  if  respondent  were  involved  in  another  relationship,  there  is 
a  strong  likelihood  she  will  engage  in  other  actions  that  may  or  may  not  be  appropriate,  just 
to  help  her  new  beau. 

Therefore,  the  evidence  supports  a  finding  that  there  is  a  strong  likelihood  of 

recurrence  of  respondent’s  conduct. 

Chilling  Effect  on  Constitutional  Rights  of  Teacher.  Disciplining  respondent  for  using 
her  district-issued  laptop  to  work  on  pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥ 
Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard  business  venture,  and  the  boudoir  book,  and  for  excessively 
using  her  district-issued  cell  phone  to  call  her  boyfriend  during  class  time,  does  not  infringe 
on  her  constitutional  rights  or  the  constitutional  rights  of  other  teachers. 

89. 

In  Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  the  Supreme  Court 

upheld  the  standard  established  in  Morrison,  and  added  two  factors  for  analysis:  (1)  the 
effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity,  and  (2)  disruption  of  educational  process. 

Effect  of Notoriety  and  Publicity.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  first  publicized  in  the 

Stockton  Record  on  November  16,  2011.  A  parent  of  a  former  LHS  student  responded  to  the 
article  in  a  letter  to  Superintendent  Uslan  expressing  how  disturbed  the  parent  was  by  the 
allegations,  and  another  letter  to  Superintendent  Uslan  expressed  outrage  towards 
respondent’s  conduct.  The  news  was  also  covered  in  The  Lincolnian,  LHS’  newspaper. 
Publicity  since  then  has  been  extensive  and  continuous,  as  the  Stockton  Record  article  was 
subsequently  picked  up  by  several  on-line  news  papers,  resulting  in  an  excess  of  48,000 
results  from  a  search  of  respondent’s  name.  In  addition,  media  personnel  were  present  during 
the  hearing  of  this  case.  At  hearing,  Superintendent  Uslan  explained  that  respondent  is  an 
embarrassment  to  the  school  district;  students  and  the  administration  do  not  respect  her; 

38

parents  have  expressed  concerns  about  her  potential  return  to  the  school  district;  and  her 
name  will  forever  be  associated  with  adultery  and  pornography.  Assistant  Superintendent 
Tatum  explained  that  the  notoriety  surrounding  this  case  can  affect  potential  employees  in 
terms  of  recruitment;  parents’  thinking  about  sending  their  children  to  LUSD;  and  students 
who  have  heard  of  this  case.  Therefore,  the  evidence  established  that  the  district  has  received 
negative  publicity  as  a  result  of  respondent’s  actions. 

Disruption  of Educational  Process.  Respondent’s  excessive  use  of  the  district-issued 
cell  phone,  during  class  time,  disrupted  the  educational  process,  as  evidenced  by  Lisa  Fields’  , 
testimony  that  respondent  was  constantly  on  the  cell  phone;  took  calls  outside  the  classroom; 
left  the  classroom  for  an  entire  class  period  to  take  a  call;  and  shushed  her  students  while  she 
was  on  the  phone.  Therefore,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent’s  actions  disrupted  the 
educational  process. 

90. 

Additionally,  in  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Confidence  (1992)  2  Cal.  App.  4th  1429,  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  has 
been  defined  as: 

Clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies... 
[the  term]  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not 
remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails 
to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

Respondent’s  actions  connote  fixed  character  traits  of  poor  judgment,  lack  of  common 

sense,  recklessness,  and  dishonesty  -  character  traits  which  she  is  unable  or  unwilling  to 
remedy,  as  evidenced  by  her  continuing  assertions  that  her  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to 
work  on  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  the  postcard  business 
venture,  as  well  as  her  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  without  permission,  was 
appropriate.  Superintendent  Uslan  and  Assistant  Superintendent  Tatum  have  lost  confidence 
in  respondent’s  ability  to  teach  and  serve  as  a  role  model  at  LUSD. 

Accordingly,  after  application  of  the  analysis  in  Morrison,  Jack  M.,  and  Woodland  to 

respondent’s  conduct,  the  charge  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Education 
Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Immoral  Conduct 

91. 

|  Having  determined  that  respondent’s  conduct  demonstrates  that  she  is  unfit  to 
teach,  the  next  question  becomes  whether  her  conduct  is  immoral.  In  Board  of Education  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811,  the  court  explained: 

39

    

The  term  “immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is 
hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good 
morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but 
includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of 
corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 
pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  and  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  her  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  upside  down  in  a  trash  can 
as  “worthless  trash,”  evidences  indecency  and  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference.  Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  to  talk  to  her  boyfriend 
during  class  time  without  permission  from  the  district  evidences  willful  and  flagrant  conduct. 
Therefore,  the  charge  of  immoral  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Persistent  Violation  of or  Refusal  to  Obey  Laws  or  Rules 

92. 

The  district  charged  that  respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to 

advance  the  development  of  pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  and  her 
excessive  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone  without  permission  from  the  district,  constitute 
grounds  for  discipline  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7).  The 
district  maintains  that  respondent  has  demonstrated  persistent  violations  of  or  refusal  to  obey 
the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  her.  The  district  established  violations  of  the  following  LUSD 
Administrative  Regulations,  Loan  Agreement,  Board  Policies,  and  Code  of  Ethics: 

Administrative  Regulation  3512,  relating  to  Business  &  Non-Instructional  Operations, 

Equipment,  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

Employees  and/or  students  shall  use  district  equipment  only  for 
school-related  tasks.  The  Superintendent  or  designee  shall 
ensure  that  all  employees  understand  that  personal  use  of  district 
equipment  is  prohibited  and  that  a  violation  may  be  cause  for 
disciplinary  action. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application,  and  to  create  a  boudoir  book 
for  her  husband,  constitutes  a  persistent  violation  of  Administrative  Regulation  3512. 

40

Therefore,  the  charge  of  persistent  violation  of  Administrative  Regulation  3512  is  sustained 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Administrative  Regulation  4040,  relating  to  Personnel,  Employee  Use  of  Technology, 
On-Line/Internet  Services:  User  Obligations  and  Responsibilities,  provides,  in  pertinent  part, 
that: 

Employees  are  authorized  to  use  district  equipment  to  access  the 
Internet  or  on-line  services  in  accordance  with  Board  of 
Education  policy  and  the  user  obligations  and  responsibilities 
specified  below. 

1. 

The  employee  in  whose  name  an  on-line  services 
account  is  issued  is  responsible  for  its  proper  use  at  all 
times.  Employees  shall  keep  account  information,  home 
addresses  and  telephone  numbers  private.  They  shall  use 
the  system  only  under  their  own  account  name. 

Employees  shall  use  the  system  responsibly  and 
primarily  for  work-related  purposes. 

Employees  shall  not  access,  post,  submit,  publish  or 
display  harmful  or  inappropriate  matter  that  is 
threatening,  obscene,  disruptive  or  sexually  explicit,  or 
that  could  be  construed  as  harassment  or  disparagement 
of  others  based  on  their  race/ethnicity,  national  origin, 
gender,  sexual  orientation,  age,  disability,  religion  or 
political  beliefs. 

Employees  shall  not  use  the  system  to  promote 
unethical  practices  or  any  activity  prohibited  by  law, 
Board  policy  or  administrative  regulations. 

[91-19] 

pertinent  part,  that: 

In  exchange  for  the  laptop,  respondent  signed  a  Loan  Agreement  agreeing,  in 

I  agree  to  hold  myself  personally  responsible  for  any  damage  or 
loss  that  may  come  to  this  equipment  while  on  loan  tome  [sic] 
and  off  LUSD  propety  [sic]. 
I  agree  that  no  other  person  shall 
be  allowed  to  use  the  equipment.  I  agree  to  return  the 
equipment  in  the  same  condition  as  when  received  from  the 

41

  
  

District.  I  agree  to  pay  for  any  corrective  action  needed  to 
restore  or  replace  the  piece(s)  of  equipment  to  the  original 
condition. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application;  store  her  drawing  of  a 
special  education  student  upside  down  in  a  trashcan  as  “worthless  trash”;  and  store a  racist 
cartoon,  constitute  persistent  violations  of  Administrative  Regulation  4040.  In  addition, 
respondent  allowed  her  husband,  twin  sister,  boyfriend,  and  babysitter  to  use  her  laptop,  in 
violation  of  the  Loan  Agreement  and  Administrative  Regulation  4040.  Therefore,  the  charge 
of  persistent  violations  of  the  Loan  Agreement  and  Administrative  Regulation  4040  is 
sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Board  Policy  4040,  relating  to  Personnel,  Employee  Use  of  Technology,  provides,  in 

pertinent  part,  that: 

All  Personnel:  Employee  Use  of  Technology 

The  Board  of  Education  recognizes  that  technological  resources 
can  enhance  employee  performance  by  improving  access  to  and 
exchange  of  information,  offering  effective  tools  to  assist  in 
providing  a  quality  instructional  program,  and  facilitating 
district  and  school  operations.  The  Board  expects  all  employees 
to  learn  to  use  the  available  technological  resources  that  will 
assist  them  in  the  performance  of  their  job  responsibilities.  As 
needed,  employees  shall  receive  training  in  the  appropriate  use 
of  these  resources. 

Employees  shall  be  responsible  for  the  appropriate  use  of 
technology  and  shall  use  the  district’s  technological  resources 
only  for  purposes  related  to  their  employment.  Such  use  is  a 
privilege  which  may  be  revoked  at  any  time. 

Employees  should  be  aware  that  computer  files  and 
communications  over  electronic  networks,  including  email  and 
voice  mail,  are  not  private.  These  technologies  shall  not  be  used 
to  transmit  confidential  information  about  students,  employees 
or  district  operations  without  authority. 

42

On-Line/Internet  Services 

The  Superintendent  or  designee  shall  ensure  that  all  district 
computers  with  internet  access  have  a  technology  protection 
measure  that  prevents  access  to  visual  depictions  that  are 
obscene  or  child  pornography,  and  that  the  operation  of  such 
measure  is  enforced  .... 

CV].  09] 

The  Superintendent  or  designee  shall  establish  administrative 
regulations  and  an  Acceptable  Use  Agreement  which  outline 
employee  obligations  and  responsibilities  related  to  the  use  of 
district  technology.  He/she  also  may  establish  guidelines  and 
limits  on  the  use  of  technological  resources.  Inappropriate  use 
shall  result  in  a  cancellation  of  the  employee’s  user  privileges, 
disciplinary  action  and/or  legal  action  in  accordance  with  law, 
Board  policy  and  administrative  regulations. 

The  Superintendent  or  designee  shall  provide  copies  of  related 
policies,  regulations  and  guidelines,  upon  request,  to  all 
employees  who  use  the  district’s  technological  resources. 
Employees  shall  be  asked  to  acknowledge  in  writing  that  they 
have  rad  and  understood  the  district’s  Acceptable  Use 
Agreement. 

[W]---09) 

[V]..-09] 

Use  of  Cellular  Phone  or  Mobile  Communications  Device 

An  employee  shall  not  use  a  cellular  phone  or  other  mobile 
communications  device  for  personal  business  while  on  duty, 
except  in  emergency  situations  and/or  during  scheduled  work 
breaks. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application,  and  to  create  a  boudoir  book 
for  her  husband,  constitutes  a  persistent  violation  of  Board  Policy  4040.  Therefore,  the 
charge  of  persistent  violation  of  Board  Policy  4040,  as  it  relates  to  employee  use  of 
technology,  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

43

    

Respondent’s  excessive  use  of  the  district-issued  cell  phone,  without  permission  from 

the  district,  coupled  with  her  inconsistent  statements  regarding  her  conversations  with  Ms. 
Bender,  constitute  a  persistent  violation  of  Board  Policy  4040.  Therefore,  the  charge  of 
persistent  violation  of  Board  Policy  4040,  as  it  relates  to  the  use  of  the  cell  phone,  is 
sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Board  Policy  4119.21/4219.21/4319.21,  relating  to  All  Personnel,  Professional 

Standards,  provides  that: 

The  Board  of  Education  expects  district  employees  to  maintain 
the  highest  ethical  standards,  follow  district  policies  and 
regulations,  and  abide  by  state  and  federal  laws.  Employee 
conduct  should  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  district  and  advance 
the  goals  of  the  educational  programs.  Each  employee  should 
make  a  commitment  to  acquire  the  knowledge  and  skills 
necessary  to  fulfill  his/her  responsibilities  and  should  focus  on 
his/her  contribution  to  the  learning  and  achievement  of  district 
students. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application,  and  to  create  a  boudoir  book 
for  her  husband,  did  nothing  to  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  district  or  advance  the  goals  of 
LUSD’s  educational  programs,  and  therefore  constitutes  a  persistent  violation  of  Board 
Policy  4119.21/4219.21/4319.21.  Therefore,  the  charge  of  persistent  violation  of  these 
policies  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Board  Policy  4136/4236/4336,  relating  to  All  Personnel,  Nonschool  Employment, 

provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  Board  of  Education  recognizes  that  district  employees  may 
receive  compensation  for  outside  activities  as  long  as  these 
activities  are  not  inconsistent,  incompatible,  in  conflict  with  or 
inimical  to  the  employee’s  duties  or  to  the  duties,  functions  or 
responsibilities  of  the  district. 

Outside  paid  activities  are  incompatible  with  district 
employment  if  they  require  time  periods  that  interfere  with 
the  proper,  efficient  discharge  of  the  employee’s  duties  .... 
[Bolding  in  original.] 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 

44

business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application;  create  a  boudoir  book  for  her 
husband;  store  her  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  upside  down  in  a  trashcan  as 
“worthless  trash”;  and  store  a  racist  cartoon,  are  activities  that  are  inconsistent  and  inimical  to 
her  duties,  and  the  duties,  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  district,  and  therefore 
constitute  persistent  violations  of  Board  Policy  4136/4236/4336.  Therefore,  the  charge  of 
persistent  violations  of  Board  Policy  4136/4236/4336,  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence. 

Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Education  Profession  4119.21,  subdivision  (a),  relating  to 

Professional  Standards,  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  in  the  Preamble: 

The  educator  recognizes  the  magnitude  of  the  responsibility 
inherent  in  the  teaching  process.  The  desire  for  the  respect  and 
confidence  of  one’s  colleagues,  of  students,  or  parents,  and  of 
the  members  of  the  community  provides  the  incentive  to  attain 
and  maintain  the  highest  possible  degree  of  ethical  conduct. 

Respondent’s  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 

pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application;  create  a  boudoir  book  for  her 
husband;  store  her  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  upside  down  in  a  trashcan  as 
“worthless  trash”;  and  store a  racist  cartoon,  constitute  persistent  violations  of  Code  of  Ethics 
of  the  Education  Profession  4119.21,  subdivision  (a).  Therefore,  the  charge  of  persistent 
violations  of  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Education  Profession  4119.21,  subdivision  (a),  is 

_  Sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

Dishonesty 

93. 

The  district  charged  that  respondent’s  statements  to  district  administrators 

regarding  her  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  and  the  district-issued  cell  phone,  were 
dishonest,  and  constitute  grounds  for  discipline  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(3).  Specifically,  the  district  alleged  that  respondent  was  dishonest  in  her 
October  6,  2011  meeting  with  Superintendent  Uslan  when  she  initially  denied  having 
pornography  on  her  laptop,  and  corrected  herself  upon  further  questioning;  when  she  claimed 
that  she  only  had  a  “few”  pictures  on  her  computer  and  that  they  were  primarily  of  her 
children,  when  she  had  hundreds  of  pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  images  stored  on 
her  laptop;  when  she  claimed  she  was  not  in  a  business  relationship  with  Mr.  Fields,  yet 
admitted  in  her  deposition  and  to  Ms.  Prettyman-Pope  that  she  was  in  a  business  relationship 
with  Mr.  Fields;  and  when  she  claimed  she  did  not  stand  to  make  money  from  the  website 
businesses,  yet  admitted  in  her  deposition  that  she  did  intend  to  make  money  from  the 
website  businesses.  In  addition,  the  district  alleged  that  respondent  was  dishonest  in  her 
January  19,  2012  interview  with  Assistant  Superintendent  Tatum  when  she  claimed  she  was 
instructed  to  take  her  district-issued  laptop  home  every  night,  yet  Dr.  Moreira  gave  her  three 

45 

 

  

options  how  to  protect  her  laptop  from  damage  or  loss;  when  she  claimed  that  she  ended  her 
involvement  with  the  websites  in  spring  2011,  yet  continued  with  teachertitties.com  through 
June  2011;  and  when  she  claimed  that  she  needed  to  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone 
because  she  did  not  have  access  to  money  to  buy  her  own  cell  phone,  yet  had  sufficient  funds 
in  the  bank,  coupled  with  offers  from  Mr.  Fields,  April  Scott  and  Samantha  McGregor  to 
assist  her  financially. 

The  evidence  established  that  respondent  was  dishonest  with  Superintendent  Uslan 

about  the  use  of  her  district-issued  laptop,  the  extent  and  purpose  of  her  involvement  with  the 
pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  her  relationship  with  Mr.  Fields.  In  addition,  the  evidence  established 
that  respondent  was  dishonest  with  Assistant  Superintendent  Tatum  regarding  Dr.  Moreira’s 
instructions;  her  access  to  money  to  purchase  her  own  cell  phone;  and  her  continued 
involvement  in  the  teachertitties.com  website  subsequent  to  spring  2011.  Furthermore,  the 
evidence  established  that  respondent  was  dishonest  and  inconsistent  each  time  she  asserted 
that  she  had  permission  from  Ms.  Bender  to  use  the  district-issued  cell  phone  for  personal 
business,  when  in  fact  she  did  not.  Therefore,  the  charge  of  dishonesty,  as  set  forth  in 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3),  is  sustained  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence. 

Appropriate  Discipline 

94. 

Having  determined  respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral,  constituted  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  and  demonstrated  persistent  violations  of  administrative  and  board 
policies,  and  that  she  was  dishonest,  the  only  remaining  question  is  whether  dismissal  is  the 
appropriate  discipline.  The  Commission  concludes  that  it  is.  Respondent’s  only  real  defense 
is  her  ability  as  a  teacher;  however,  while  she  demonstrated  satisfactory  teaching  skills  as  a 
special  education  high  school  teacher  from  October  2008  to  November  2010,  the 
Commission  is  not  convinced  that  the  appropriate  discipline  is  less  than  dismissal. 

Respondent  held  a  position  of  responsibility,  and  served  as  a  role  model.  If  she 

expected  her  students  to  follow  her  instructions,  then  she,  too,  must  abide  by  the  district’s 
policies  and  procedures.  Instead,  respondent  demonstrated  extremely  poor  judgment  and 
recklessness  over  a  substantial  period  of  the  2010/2011  school  year.  She  knew,  or  reasonably 
should  have  known  that  using  the  district-issued  laptop  to  advance  the  development  of 
pornographic  and  adult  entertainment  websites,  the  “I  ¥  Teachers”  t-shirt,  the  postcard 
business  venture,  and  the  “Sweet  Nothings”  iPhone  application,  as  well  as  to  create  a  boudoir 
book  for  her  husband;  store  her  drawing  of  a  special  education  student  upside  down  in  a 
trashcan  as  “worthless  trash”;  and  store  a  racist  cartoon,  was  wrong.  The  laptop  was  not  a 
gift  from  the  district. 
It  was  a  tool  to  allow  her  to  complete  district-related  business  both  on 
and  off  campus,  as  well  as  to  use  it  for  incidental  personal  use  that  was  not  inconsistent  with 
or  inimical  to  her  duties,  or  the  duties,  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  district.  Once 
respondent  started  using  the  district-issued  laptop  for  her  personal  business,  it  became  the 

46

  

district’s  business,  and  respondent’s  personal  use  was  neither  incidental,  nor  consistent  with 
her  duties  as  a  teacher,  or  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  district.  Respondent  must 
have  appreciated  the  consequences  if  someone  were  to  find  the  material  on  her  district-issued 
laptop. 

Respondent’s  indifference  to  the  policies  and  procedures  of  the  district,  in  conjunction 

with  her  lack  of  understanding  of  the  impact  her  involvement  would  have  on  her  students, 
fellow  teachers,  and  the  district  is  astounding.  Moreover,  her  refusal  to  accept  responsibility 
for  her  actions;  her  lack  of  remorse  for  her  actions;  and  her  attempts  to  blame  others,  confirm 
that  the  district  has  no  assurance  that  respondent  has  the  ability  to  make  sound  judgments, 
and  cannot  be  satisfied  that  such  misconduct  on  respondent’s  part  would  not  recur, 
particularly  if  respondent  were  again  to  believe  that  her  activities  would  be  undetected. 
Respondent  demonstrated  that  she  lacks  respect  for  authority,  and  does  not  appreciate  the 
seriousness  of  her  actions  involving  the  use  of  the  district-issued  laptop  and  district-issued 
cell  phone.  Therefore  the  district’s  decision  to  dismiss  respondent  is  the  correct  one. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Statute  and  Case  Law 

l. 

The  district  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  existence  of  grounds  to  dismiss  Ms. 

Kaeslin  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardener  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

2. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  any  of  the  following 
reasons:  “immoral...  conduct,”  “dishonesty,”  “evident  unfitness  for  service,”  “persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subds. 
(a)(1),  (3),  (5)  and  (7).) 

Cause  for  Discipline 

3. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 

committed  acts  constituting  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  8  through  10,  12,  13,  15  through  19,  21 
through  24,  26  through  29,  31,  35  through  45,  48,  52  through  54,  57,  65,  70,  80,  81,  88,  89 
and  91, 

— 

4. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 

committed  acts  of  dishonesty  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3), 
by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  46,  47,  51  through  54,  66,  71,  77  and  93. 

47

  

5. 
It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 
committed  acts  constituting  evident  unfitness  for  service  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  8  through  10,  12,  13,  15 
through  19,  21  through  24,  26  through  29,  31,  35  through  45,  48,  52  through  54,  57,  65,  70, 
80,  81,  87  through  91. 

6. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 
committed  acts  constituting  persistent  violation  of  the  rules  of  the  District  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  66,  67,  74, 
75,  78  and  92. 

7. 

By  reason  of  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  6,  and  Factual  Finding  94,  dismissal 

of  respondent  from  her  position  as  a  certificated  teacher  with  the  district  is  warranted. 

ORDER 

The  decision  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Lincoln  Unified  School  District  to 
dismiss  respondent  Heidi  Kaeslin,  a.k.a.  Heidi  Renee  Kaeslin,  a.k.a.  Heidi  Gates,  a.k.a.  Heidi 
Lee,  from  her  position  as  a  certificated  teacher  with  the  district,  is  affirmed. 

DATED:  March2620  13 

DATED:  Marché  2013 

DATED:  March“  2013 

  

STMORE 

REBECCA  M. 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  Member 

Commissio  (  Member 

  Yon  ALOTA,  Ph.D. 
Commission  Member 

48

  

