BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

FRANCISCO PARODI,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2012031244

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in Los

Angeles, California, on December 3 and 4, 2012. The Commission consisted of Philip
Ramos, Temisha Brame, and Administrative Law Judge Ralph B. Dash, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided.

Anahid Hoonaian, Attorney at Law, represented the Los Angeles Unified School

District (District).

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented Francisco Parodi (Respondent).

The parties submitted the matter for decision on December 4, 2012.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, employed as a Soccer

Coach and Dean at Van Nuys High School (VNHS) during the 2008-2009 school year. District
alleged that Respondent demonstrated unprofessional conduct (Education Code1 section 44932,
subdivision (a)(1)), immoral conduct (sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939), evident
unfitness for service (section 44932, subdivision (a)(5)), willful refusal to obey reasonable
regulations (section 44932, subdivision (a) (7)), and willful refusal to perform regular
assignments without reasonable cause (section 44939), all arising out of a single incident
involving the alleged search of two students on February 9, 2009.

As more fully set forth below, District failed to present any direct evidence that the
incident occurred as described in the Accusation and Statement of Charges. Accordingly,
District’s Accusation and Statement of Charges is dismissed.2

1

All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

In making the below Findings, the Commission weighed the testimony of all

witnesses and documents. The Commission followed the guidance of the California
Supreme Court in arriving at these Findings. In Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9
Cal.3d 51, the court noted that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness
and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (Id. at 67.) The
trier of fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly
contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the
testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected available material.”
(Id. at 67-68.)3

The parties entered into a Stipulation Regarding Evidentiary Issues and Facts

(Exhibit 32) which established the following:

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

Respondent was a Soccer Coach and Dean at VNHS during the 2008-2009

school year.

On or about March 19, 2012, the District issued a Notice of Intent to Dismiss

placing Respondent on immediate unpaid suspension.

On or about March 19, 2012, the District received Respondent’s demand for

hearing dated March 27, 2012.

Because this matter is being dismissed based on a failure of proof regarding
the alleged misconduct, Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss under section 44938, reserved for
determination in this Decision, is moot.

In this matter, the Commission evaluated the credibility of the witnesses

pursuant to the factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780: the demeanor and manner of
the witness while testifying, the character of the testimony, the capacity to perceive at the
time the events occurred, the character of the witness for honesty, the existence of bias or
other motive, other statements of the witness which are consistent or inconsistent with the
testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the witness testified, and the attitude
of the witness toward the proceeding in which the testimony has been given. The manner
and demeanor of a witness while testifying are the two most important factors a trier of fact
considers when judging credibility. The mannerisms, tone of voice, eye contact, facial
expressions and body language are all considered, but are difficult to describe in such a way
that the reader truly understands what causes the trier of fact to believe or disbelieve a
witness.

2.

a.

b.

c.

d.

2

3

2

f.

3.

e.

On or about April 3, 2012, counsel for Respondent was served with the

Accusation and Statement of Charges alleging cause to dismiss Respondent for immoral and
unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of and refusal to
obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of
the public schools by the State Board of Education by the governing board of the school
district employing him, and willful refusal to perform regular assignments.

On or about April 5, 2012, Respondent served his Notice of Defense.

As gathered from all admissible evidence, the incident complained of is as

follows. VNHS is in an area of known gang activity. The Deans and other administrators
regularly patrol the grounds of the school to make sure holes have not been cut in the fence
to allow illegal ingress. One particular area of the campus, the handball courts, was under
regular scrutiny because it was an area where students would congregate to smoke marijuana,
deal drugs and get in fights. The high walls of the courts would screen the view of these
activities. 4 The principal required the Deans to “circulate in the area” of the handball courts.
The Deans and other administrators (principal and four assistant principals) and the campus
police were authorized to conduct searches of a student if they had reason to believe a
student might have contraband. The searches could include having the student lift the legs of
his pants and/or raise his shirt to expose the belt line. The Deans also had the authority to do
an “exterior pat down” of a student or have him empty his pockets if they reasonably
believed the student had contraband.

4.

In the early afternoon of February 9, 2009, Respondent was on patrol near the

handball courts. He was accompanied by a “campus security aid.” According to the
principal, at the time of the incident there were also “five P.E. teachers and a hundred
students” in adjacent areas. For reasons not disclosed by the evidence,5 Respondent became
aware of a student named M
conducted a search of some sort. M
stepfather who then filed a complaint with the school.

apparently complained about the search to his

). Respondent approached M

O. (M

and

5.

On February 11, 2009, M

made a written statement in Spanish (Exhibit

12). The exhibit contains an English translation (page 21 of Exhibit 12), however the
District could not authenticate the translation and while M
evidence, the translation was not. The District did not call M
was admitted as “administrative hearsay.”7

’s statement was admitted in
to testify.6 The statement

On a date not disclosed by the evidence, but after February 9, 2009, VNHS

had the handball courts taken down.

Neither Respondent nor any of the alleged eyewitnesses to the event testified

According to the District’s counsel, M

was not in the country at the time

4

5

6

at the hearing.

of the hearing.

3

6.

M

gave the written statement to Jack Molina, a former Dean and
about the incident.

described the incident as follows: Respondent searched
by having him take off his jacket, lift up his shirt, and give himself a “wedgie.”8 9

Assistant Vice Principal at VNHS, who also spoke with M
According to Mr. Molina, M
M
Respondent grabbed M
According to Mr. Molina, M
Based on M

’s boxer shorts to show how he wanted the boxers to be pulled.

felt that Respondent “was trying to view his privates.”
’s statement, Mr. Molina filed a report with the “child abuse hotline.”10

7.

Mr. Molina’s recitation of M

’s oral statements differed, in a critical
respect, with the Incident Report Form Mr. Molina completed the day he spoke with M
(Exhibit 13). In that report, Mr. Molina wrote, “Mr. Parodi grabbed [M
’s] sweat pants
did not do this as it would
and told M
expose his genitals (emphasis added).” Thus, according to Mr. Molina’s report but contrary
to his testimony, Respondent did not touch M

to pull his boxers away from his body. M

’s underwear.

8.

After Mr. Molina filed a report with Children’s Protective Services, the police

were notified, conducted an investigation, and closed their file taking no action. The
Commission on Teacher Credentialing also investigated the matter and declined to
commence disciplinary proceedings against Respondent’s credentials. According to Mr.
Molina, during the summer of 2009, the District conducted its own investigation of the
alleged incident. Mr. Molina was directed “by the District” to conduct interviews of
everyone in the vicinity of the alleged incident, which he did with the assistance of other
administrators. According to Mr. Molina, two campus aids were present at the time of
Respondent’s alleged search of M
untoward conduct by Respondent. Of the “90 to 100 students” who were interviewed during
the summer of 2009, only two made any statements about Respondent. Both students
“thought that [Respondent] was overzealous but nothing sexual.”

, neither of whom “claimed any knowledge” of any

7

8

9

10

The evidentiary value of administrative hearsay is fully discussed below.

A wedgie is typically a prank in which a person's underpants are pulled up

sharply from behind in order to wedge the clothing between the person's buttocks. For
purposes of conducting a search, a wedgie could reveal whether contraband was hidden
inside a student’s underpants. No evidence was presented to suggest that this search
technique was in any way unlawful.

M

’s statement does not appear to contain any remarks about a “wedgie.”
When this was pointed out Mr. Molina, he responded, without explanation, that the “wedgie
information came up later.”

As a “mandated reporter” Mr. Molina was required to notify Children’s

Protective Services. However, he noted during his testimony that having students make
complaints about security searches was commonplace and “goes with the nature of the job.”

4

9.

Mr. Molina’s testimony regarding the summer of 2009 investigation differed

from his report about that investigation (Exhibit 15), which he wrote on September 30, 2009,
more than three years before he testified at this hearing. In that report, Mr. Molina wrote,
“On June 29, 2009 I received an e-mail from the office of staff relations with direction to
interview students on their return to school. . . . Approximately 60 students that were
enrolled in the P.E. class with M
administrator.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, according to this report but contrary to Mr.
Molina’s testimony, 60 (not “90 to 100”) students were interviewed, and the interviews took
place when the students had returned to school after the summer break, seven months after
the alleged incident occurred, and not during the summer of 2009.

were summoned and interviewed by an

10.

The second student allegedly involved in this incident was C

F.

). According to the Accusation and Statement of Charges, on the same day as the

(C
to “pull up his underwear and show it to
incident with M
, Respondent told C
him” and also told this student to give himself a wedgie.11 C
did not testify nor did
the District present any credible evidence, either direct or administrative hearsay, to support
these allegations. The District did attempt to offer some corroborative evidence with respect
to the allegations. This consisted of the second page of Exhibit 15, Mr. Molina’s
investigation report. The second page of the report was not admitted in evidence as it only
contained Mr. Molina’s summary of a statement made by an Assistant Principal regarding a
statement made by C
the sort of evidence that reasonably prudent persons would rely on in the conduct of serious
affairs12 and thus had no probative value.

to that Assistant Principal. This “multiple level hearsay” is not

11.

Although Respondent did not testify, there was administrative hearsay

evidence that Respondent denied any wrongdoing (Exhibit 19, p. 44). Since there was no
direct evidence to corroborate Respondent’s version of the events, no Finding can be made
that his statements were either true or false.13 However, for context, and as evidence that
neither the District’s allegations nor Respondent’s denials were baseless, even though neither
was proven at hearing, the following is Respondent’s version of the events as he related the
same to a District Investigation Unit (IU) investigator on October 7, 2010: 14

According to Mr. Molina, C

was a “gang member wannabe,” was

“truant all the time,” and would “ditch classes.” In other words, C
type of student on whom security personnel would focus.

was exactly the

See, Government Code section 11513, subdivision (c).

The fact that [the trier of fact] may disbelieve the testimony of a witness who

testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself furnish any evidence in support of the
affirmative of that issue and does not warrant a finding in the affirmative thereof unless there
is other evidence in the case to support such affirmative.” (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ State
License Bd. of Cal. (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632, citing Marovich v. Central Cal.
Traction Co. (1923) 191 Cal.295, 304.)

11

12

13

5

Mr. Parodi stated that on February 9, 2009, M
that were searched by the handball courts. The search was done in the
presence of others and in the same manner as all searches performed.

was one of 15-20 students

IU Investigators questioned Mr. Parodi regarding his searching procedures.
Specifically, Mr. Parodi was questioned about allegations that he instructed
student to give themselves a “wedgie” as a standard part of his search
procedures. . . . Mr. Parodi stated that he did instruct students to give
themselves a wedgie. . . . Mr. Parodi was asked if he believed that asking
students to give themselves a wedgie was appropriate, and he replied, “Yes. It
is effective in discovering contraband such as drugs and weapons.” Mr. Parodi
was asked if he ever inappropriately touched the private areas of students
during these searches, and Mr. Parodi responded, “No!”

Mr. Parodi told IU Investigator that his job as a Dean at Van Nuys HS was a
difficult one due to the school being infected (sic) with gangs and drugs. Mr.
Parodi added that he was threatened on more than one occasion by local gang
members at the school. Mr. Parodi stated that he was simply trying to do his
job.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Absent a statute to the contrary, the burden of proof in disciplinary

administrative proceedings rests upon the party making the charges. (Parker v. City of
Fountain Valley (1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113; Evid. Code, § 115.) The “burden of proof”
means the obligation of a party, if he or she is to prevail on a particular fact, to establish by
evidence a requisite degree of belief or conviction concerning such fact. (Redevelopment
Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.) The burden of proof in this
proceeding is thus on District to prove the charging allegations.

2.

The standard of proof in this proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence.
(Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-
1040; (Evid. Code, § 115.) “The phrase ‘preponderance of evidence’ is usually defined in
terms of probability of truth, e.g., ‘such evidence as, when weighed with that opposed to it,
has more convincing force and the greater probability of truth.’ (BAJI (8th ed.), No. 2.60.)”
(1 Witkin, Evidence, Burden of Proof and Presumptions § 35 (4th ed. 2000).)

14

Although the statement of a party may be introduced as direct evidence against
a party under Evidence Code section 1220, the document in which Respondent’s statement is
contained is itself hearsay, as it is part of a compilation of evidence and neither the author of
the document nor any District official with knowledge of the facts was called as a witness to
verify the accuracy and/or authenticity of the document. Thus the statement could only be
admitted as administrative hearsay.

6

3.

The term “administrative hearsay” is a shorthand reference to the provisions of

Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), to the effect that hearsay evidence that is
objected to, and is not otherwise admissible, may be used to supplement or explain other
evidence but may not, by itself, support a factual finding. Administrative hearsay, coupled
with direct, though circumstantial, evidence, may be sufficient to support a finding. As an
example, in Komizu v. Gourley (2002) 103 Cal.App.4th 1001, a report of blood alcohol
content did not qualify for an exception to the hearsay rule but was admitted subject to
Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d) as administrative hearsay. The report was
properly used to explain and supplement a police officer’s report, which contained certain
direct but circumstantial evidence of the driver’s blood alcohol level. Combined, these two
sources provided the trial court with evidence sufficient to support a finding of fact.

4.

One must distinguish between the admissibility of evidence and the weight to

be given that evidence. The following excerpt from an article published by the Loyola of
Los Angeles Law Review is instructive:15

California statutory law expressly provides that all agencies affected by the
APA are not bound by “the technical rules relating to evidence.”

The foregoing practice necessarily permits the admission of hearsay evidence.
“There [being] no reason for administrative bodies to be more restrictive than
courts . . . , evidence competent in judicial proceedings, including hearsay with
an exception, is generally held competent in administrative proceedings.”
Even incompetent hearsay is admissible. The question turns on whether
incompetent hearsay, without more, is sufficient to satisfy the moving party's
burden and thereby support the agency's findings. In order to avoid confusion,
it is important that the “admissibility” issue not be viewed in the same light as
the “sufficiency” standard; they are different creatures. Admissibility is not the
equivalent of evaluation; the former makes certain concessions in the interest
of full and complete discovery while the latter, in the interest of fairness,
withholds legal sanction to evidence found not to be trustworthy. Unlike the
common practice in judicial proceedings, the fact that evidence may be
admissible does not therefore guarantee the sufficiency of such evidence to
sustain a finding. Consequently, evidence which is deemed admissible is
generally considered to be “competent.” On the other hand, evidence once
admitted which is capable of sustaining a finding will amount to “sufficient”
evidence. Finally, determining what constitutes sufficient evidence will
depend upon the applicable judicial or statutory rule. (Italics in original.)

(Ronald Kenneth Leo Collins, The Sufficiency of Uncorroborated Hearsay in Administrative
Proceedings: The California Rule (1975) 8 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 632, 642.

15

All footnotes have been omitted.

7

5.

6.

A permanent District employee may be dismissed for cause only after a

dismissal hearing. (Sections 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

Under section 44944, subdivision (b), the dismissal hearing must be

conducted by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence. Two members of
the Commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the respondent and one by the
district, and the third member of the Commission must be an administrative law judge from
the Office of Administrative Hearings.

7.

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may

only vote for or against it. Likewise, when suspension is recommended, the Commission
may only vote for or against suspension. The Commission may not dispose of a charge of
dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Section 44944, subdivision
(c)(1)(3).)

8.

Section 44932 provides in part:

(a)

No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or

more of the following causes:

[¶] . . . [¶]

(3)

Dishonesty.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(7)

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the

state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public
schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the
school district employing him or her . . . .”

9.

Section 44932, subdivision (b) provides that a district may suspend a
permanent employee without pay for a specific period of time if it follows the same
procedures as for dismissal of a permanent employee.

10.

Section 44939 provides in part:

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified by the person
filing them with the governing board of a school district, or upon a written
statement of charges formulated by the governing board, charging a permanent
employee of the district with immoral conduct, . . . with willful refusal to
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, . . . the
governing board may, if it deems such action necessary, immediately suspend
the employee from his duties and give notice to him of his suspension, and that

8

30 days after service of the notice, he will be dismissed, unless he demands a
hearing.

11.

No direct evidence was presented that Respondent committed any of the acts

alleged as a basis for discipline in the Accusation and Statement of Charges. Thus the
District failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent demonstrated
unprofessional conduct (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1)), immoral conduct
(sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939), evident unfitness for service (section 44932,
subdivision (a)(5)), willful refusal to obey reasonable regulations (section 44932, subdivision
(a) (7)), or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (section
44939). The District simply failed to establish that Respondent should be dismissed for the
acts alleged in the Accusation.

12.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the
California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching
profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger
of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions
as a teacher.” The court concluded that a teacher’s conduct cannot abstractly be
characterized as “immoral,” “unprofessional,” or “involving moral turpitude” unless the
conduct indicated that a teacher is unfit to teach. (Id. at p. 229.) The court set forth
guidelines to aid in determining whether the conduct in question indicated this unfitness.
However, as it has been determined that the conduct was not proven as alleged, it is not
necessary to discuss the “Morrison factors” as they relate to that conduct.

The Accusation and Statement of Charges is dismissed.

ORDER

DATED:

DATED:

DATED:

RALPH B. DASH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

Philip Ramos
Commission Member

Temisha Brame
Commission Member

9

