BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Immediate  Suspension 
and  Dismissal  of: 

BRENT  MELBON, 
a  permanent  certificated  employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2012050349 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  in  San  Juan  Capistrano,  California,  on  March  23,  24,  25,  26,  30, 
and  April  1,  2,  and  6,  2015.' 

Daniel  R.  Shinoff,  Esq.  and  Jeanne  Blumenfeld,  Esq.,  Stutz  Artiano  Shinoff  &  Holtz, 

represented  the  Capistrano  Unified  School  District. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Esq.,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  Respondent  Brent  Melbon, 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  case  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of 

who  was  present  each  day. 

the  hearing  on  April  6,  2015. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 
governing  board  of  the  Capistrano  Unified  School  District  (District),  and  is  organized, 
existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other 
laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

2. 

Respondent  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

"On  March  19,  2015,  the  parties  jointly  stipulated  to  waive  their  right  to  designate  a 

commissioner  to  hear  this  matter,  and  elected  to  have  the  ALJ  hear  the  matter  alone  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1). 

 

3. 

Ata  properly  noticed  Board  meeting  held  on  February  27,  2012,  a  verified 
written  Notice  of  Charges  That  There  Exists  Cause  to  Discipline  a  Permanent  Certificated 
Employee  (Charges)  were  filed  with  the  Board  and  considered.  Upon  majority  vote,  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44934,”  the  Board  determined  that  cause  existed  as  specified  in 
section  44932  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
with  the  District.  The  Board  approved  the  Charges. 

4. 

On  March  2,  2012,  the  District  personally  served  Respondent  with  the  Charges 
and  a  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  (Notice),  notifying  him  that,  at  the  expiration  of  30  days 
from  his  receipt  of  the  Charges  and  Notice,  his  employment  with  the  District  would  be 
terminated,  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing. 

5. 

On  March  2,  2012,  Respondent  demanded  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  to  terminate  his  employment  with  the  District. 

6. 

No  earlier  than  May  31,  2012,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation,  alleging  that 

cause  existed  for  Respondent’s  dismissal  as  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District,  as  set 
forth  in  the  Charges. 

7. 

On  June  12,  2012,  a  Notice  of  Defense  was  filed  on  behalf  of  Respondent, 

which  contained  a  request  for  a  hearing  to  contest  the  Accusation. 

8. 

On  or  after  November  15,  2012,  an  Amended  Accusation  was  filed,  alleging 

cause  existed  to  terminate  Respondent’s  employment  with  the  District. 

9. 

At  a  properly  noticed  Board  meeting  held  on  October  9,  2013,  a  verified 
written  Amended  Notice  of  Charges  to  Suspend  Without  Pay  and  Dismiss  Certificated 
Permanent  Employee  (Amended  Charges)  were  filed  with  the  Board  and  considered.  Upon 
majority  vote,  pursuant  to  sections  44934  and  44939,  the  Board  determined  that  cause 
existed  to  immediately  suspend  Respondent  without  pay  and  to  dismiss  Respondent  from 
employment  with  the  District.  The  Board  approved  the  Amended  Charges. 

10. 

On  October  15,  2013,  the  District  notified  Respondent  in  writing  that  the 

Board  had  approved  the  Amended  Charges,  that  the  Board  intended  to  immediately  suspend 
him  without  pay  and  to  dismiss  him,  and  that  the  Amended  Charges  would  be  included  at  the 
hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  to  terminate  his  employment  with  the  District. 
Respondent’s  last  day  of  paid  employment  with  the  District  was  October  10,  2013. 

11. 

Onor  about  January  21,  2014,  the  District  filed  the  Second  Amended 

Accusation,  charging  that  there  existed  cause  for  the  immediate  suspension  of  Respondent 
without  pay  and  for  his  dismissal  as  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District,  as  set  forth  in  the 
Amended  Charges. 

>  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  noted  otherwise. 

  

 

Respondent's  Background  Information 

12. 

‘In  January  1991,  and  thereafter,  Respondent  has  possessed  a  Clear  Single 

Subject  credential  with  an  authorization  in  physical  education  (PE),  which  has  authorized 
him  to  teach  PE  in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes  organized 
primarily  for  adults.  Since  2011,  Respondent  has  also  held  a  Crosscultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  (CLAD)  Certificate. 

13. 

After  graduating  from  high  school,  Respondent  coached  high  school  football 
and  baseball  as  a  walk-on  assistant.  He  began  working  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  Santa 
Ana  Unified  School  District  (SAUSD)  in  1991  after  obtaining  his  credential.  He  later 
obtained  a  full-time  job  for  SAUSD  teaching  at  a  junior  high  school. 

14.  —  Respondent  first  became  involved  with  the  District  as  a  walk-on  assistant 

coach  while  he  was  still  employed  by  the  SAUSD.  In  1998,  Respondent  was  hired  by  the 
District  as  a  full-time  teacher  at  Dana  Hills  High  School  (DHHS)  in  the  subjects  of  PE  and 
Health.  He  also  served  as  an  assistant  football  coach. 

Funding  Football  at  Dana  Hills  High  School 

15. 

By  2008,  it  cost  approximately  $175,000  per  season  to  fund  the  DHHS 

football  program,  which  included  the  freshman,  sophomore  and  varsity  teams.  That  amount 
included  expenses  for  coaching  stipends,  equipment,  transportation  for  away  games, 
banquets,  awards  and  uniforms. 

16. 

Despite  the  District’s  pledge  to  carry  out  a  free  appropriate  public  education 

(FAPE)  for  students,  including  not  requiring  them  to  “pay”  for  extracurricular  activities  such 
as  high  school  football,  the  District  typically  only  provided  approximately  $8,000  to  $10,000 
per  year  for  the  DHHS  football  program.  That  funding  was  barely  enough  to  purchase  new 
and/or  refurbish  existing  safety  equipment,  such  as  helmets  and  pads.  The  Associated 
Student  Body  (ASB)  could  also  provide  some  funding,  but  that  was  limited  to  very  little 
every  year,  if  at  all. 

17. 

The  vast  majority  of  funding  for  the  DHHS  football  program  came  from  the 

Dana  Hills  High  School  12th  Man  Football  Club,  also  known  as  the  “Booster  Club.”  The 
Booster  Club  was  a  non-profit  organization  established  to  provide  organizational  and 
financial  support  for  the  DHHS  football  program.  In  2008,  the  Booster  Club  developed  a 
budget  of  $155,000  to  support  DHHS  football  for  the  2008  season.  It  was  able  to  do  so 
because  it  raised  approximately  $160,000  that  year.  The  Booster  Club  provided  funding  and 
helped  purchase  the  items  mentioned  above  not  funded  by  the  District,  which  included  parts 
of  the  team  uniform  (other  than  helmets  and  some  safety  pads),  training  wear,  and  apparel  for 

the  coaching  staff.    

18. 

The  Booster  Club  had  its  own  officers  and  a  board  of  directors,  and  was 

independent  of  the  District  and  DHHS.  Because  the  District  and  the  DHHS  principal  had 
control  over  entities  and  people  operating  on  the  DHHS  campus,  the  District  ultimately  had 
the  ability  to  prevent  or  prohibit  certain  Booster  Club  activities.  However,  in  2008  it  was 
clear  that  the  District  exercised  no  control  over  the  Booster  Club’s  purchases,  nor  was  the 
Booster  Club  required  to  seek  approval  from  the  District  before  the  Booster  Club  made  a 
purchase  for  the  football  program.  However,  the  Booster  Club  President  in  2008,  Doug 
Pearson,  thought  it  expedient  to  share  information  about  Booster  Club  activities,  including 
financial  reports,  with  DHHS  Principal  Robert  Nye.  Thus,  Principal  Nye  was  well  aware  of 
the  Booster  Club  purchases  and  activities  that  year,  and  he  voiced  no  objection  at  any  time. 

19. 

The  head  varsity  football  coach  was  viewed  by  both  Principal  Nye  and  Mr. 
Pearson  as  the  liaison  between  the  District,  DHHS  and  the  Booster  Club.  The  head  coach 
was  expected  to  attend  most  meetings,  as  well  as  give  direction  for  the  types  of  items  to  be 
placed  in  the  budget. 

The  Transactions  in  2008  Alleged  in  the  Second  Amended  Accusation 

20. 

The  DHHS  football  program  suffered  a  terrible  year  in  2007.  The  varsity 

football  team  went  winless  and  the  Booster  Club’s  finances  were  in  disarray.  The  varsity 
football  coach  was  blamed  for  those  problems,  and  he  resigned  abruptly  in  Fall  2007. 
Principal  Nye  and  Mr.  Pearson  worked  in  conjunction  with  recruiting  and  interviewing 
candidates  for  the  job.  They  ultimately  agreed  on  hiring  Respondent  for  the  position. 

23. 

21. 

22. 

Respondent  was  hired  as  varsity  head  football  coach  in  January  2008. 

Respondent  asked  around  for  recommendations  of  vendors  who  could  supply 

One  of  the  first  things  Respondent  had  to  do  was  order  equipment  for  spring 
football  practice,  as  well  as  for  summer  practice  and  the  2008  season.  Given  the  fact  that  he 
was  starting  later  than  an  incumbent  coach  would,  time  was  of  the  essence. 

Although  he  had  been  an  assistant  coach  for  almost  20  years,  he  had  never  before  been  a 
head  coach.  In  his  new  position,  Respondent  was  responsible  for  the  entire  DHHS  football 
program,  which  in  2008  ultimately  consisted  of  approximately  150  student/athletes  and  20 
coaches.  He  was  also  expected  to  work  closely  with  the  Booster  Club  and  Mr.  Pearson. 

   

the  football  teams’  (freshman,  sophomore  and  varsity)  equipment  needs.  A  few  other  coaches 
mentioned  Bill  Lapes  of  Lapes  Athletic  Team  Sales  (LATS),  which  was  a  sporting  goods 
vendor  in  the  area.  Respondent  was  familiar  with  Bill  Lapes  and  LATS  from  when  he  was  an 
assistant  coach  at  DHHS  and  Scott  Orloff  was  the  DHHS  varsity  head  football  coach  several 
years  before.  Because  Respondent  was  short  on  time  to  place  the  order,  he  went  along  with 
the  recommendations  to  use  LATS  without  doing  much  further  research.  Respondent 
conferred  with  Mr.  Pearson  of  the  Booster  Club,  who  agreed  with  using  LATS. 

24, 

Bill  Lapes  and  LATS  were  well  known  to  Southern  California  sports 

programs.  LATS  sold  sporting  goods,  uniforms  and  equipment  to  several  high  school  schools 
within  the  District,  in  Orange  and  Los  Angeles  Counties,  as  well  as  colleges  and  professional 
teams. 

25. 

For  many  years,  Bill  Lapes  had  a  policy  at  LATS  of  advising  coaches  that  an 

additional  margin  amount  could  be  built  into  the  overall  price  of  sporting  goods  and 
equipment  purchased  from  LATS.  A  special  account  would  be  developed  for  each  school. 
The  special  account  number  would  usually  start  with  a  “9.”  After  a  margin  amount  was 
agreed  upon  and  an  order  placed,  a  sales  order  would  be  completed  by  Mr.  Lapes.  A  credit  in 
the  amount  of  the  margin  paid  by  the  purchaser  would  be  placed  into  the  school’s  special  9 
account.  Thus,  the  credit  was  based  on  amounts  actually  paid  by  the  purchaser  to  LATS. 
However,  for  purchases  that  were  made  on  behalf  of'a  school  district,  by  the  district,  no  such 
margin  was  established  and  no  amount  would  be  paid  by  the  District  and/or  placed  into  a 
school’s  “9  account.”  Once  the  credit  was  placed  into  the  special  9  account,  the  coach  could 
use  that  credit  to  “purchase”  additional  goods  sold  by  LATS. 

26. 

A.In  the  past,  LATS  had  occasionally  sold  safety  equipment  to  DHHS.  When 

DHHS  made  such  purchases  from  LATS,  it  used  the  official  school  account  number  of 
“DANO9.”  Those  purchases  were  subject  to  the  District’s  various  purchasing  policies  and 
guidelines  because  the  purchases  were  being  made  directly  by  the  District.  Those  purchases 
were  never  subject  to  Mr.  Lapes’  margin  process. 

B.  However,  when  DHHS  football  coaches  prior  to  Respondent  ordered  from 
LATS  soft  goods  not  purchased  by  the  District,  such  purchases  would  often  times  be  made 
subject  to  the  above-described  margin  system  and  the  margin  amount  placed  in  the  school’s 
special  account  number  of  9DANO3.  Some  of  the  transactions  involving  account  9DANO3 
were  labeled  with  the  term  “slush.”  After  Bill  Lapes’  bankers  and  accountants  objected  to  the 
use  of  that  word,  the  special  9  accounts  were  referred  to  as  “promotional  accounts.” 

27. 

In  early  February  2008,  Respondent  met  with  Bill  Lapes  at  DHHS  so  Lapes 

could  look  at  the  school’s  football  equipment  inventory  and  advise  Respondent  what  he 
would  need  for  the  2008  season. 

28. 

On  or  about  February  18,  2008,  Respondent  visited  Bill  Lapes  at  the  LATS 

office.  At  that  time,  Respondent  advised  Mr.  Lapes  that  he  wanted  to  order  the  DHHS  “spirit 
packs”  from  LATS.  Spirit  pack  is  the  name  given  to  the  package  of  items  players  in  the 
DHHS  football  program  would  need  for  spring  and  summer  practice,  as  well  as  the 
upcoming  season.  Specifically,  the  spirit  packs  would  include  a  hooded  sweat  shirt,  two 
specialty  t-shirts,  shorts,  a  reversible  mesh  jersey,  chin  strap,  shimmel  shirt,  practice  jersey, 
hex  pad  girdle,  football  socks  and  a  mouth  protector. 

 

  

29. 

Mr.  Lapes  advised  Respondent  that  the  best  way  to  handle  the  spirit  packs 
would  be  to  establish  a  set  price  for  each  pack,  and  have  the  players’  parents  come  to  the 
LATS  office  on  a  given  day  to  purchase  the  items  directly  from  LATS.  In  the  prior  year  at 
DHHS,  the  Booster  Club  purchased  the  spirit  packs  and  resold  them  to  the  players.  By  all 
accounts,  that  process  was  a  disaster  the  Booster  Club  did  not  want  to  repeat  in  2008. 

30. 

In  addition,  Mr.  Lapes  advised  Respondent  to  add  an  additional  “margin” 

amount  into  the  total  sales  price  for  the  spirit  packs.  Lapes  explained  to  Respondent  that  the 
margin  was  necessary  for  several  reasons:  a)  up  to  ten  percent  of  the  players’  families  in  the 
program  would  not  be  able  to  afford  the  spirit  pack  and  they  would  have  to  be  given  the 
items  at  no  cost  as  “a  scholarship;”  b)  some  of  those  who  placed  orders  would  end  up  not 
playing  football  and  their  orders  would  go  unclaimed;  c)  some  of  the  items  would  need  to  be 
returned  because  of  size  and  fit  problems;  and  d)  the  remaining  money  could  be  used  to 
purchase  items  for  the  program  from  the  credit  that  was  placed  into  the  special  9  account. 

31. 

A.  Mr.  Lapes  advised  Respondent  that  the  margin  for  the  DHHS  spirit  packs 

should  be  $50  extra  per  spirit  pack.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
that  Respondent  was  familiar  with  the  margin  process  used  by  Bill  Lapes.  Although 
Respondent  knew  of  Lapes  from  coaching  circles  and  had  once  before  visited  his  office  with 
Scott  Orloff  when  Orloff  was  the  DHHS  varsity  head  football  coach,  none  of  those  facts 
established  that  Respondent  had  prior  knowledge  of  the  margin  process.  Respondent  denied 
it  during  his  testimony.  Respondent’s  testimony  in  this  regard  was  corroborated  by  Chad 
Lapes,  one  of  Bill  Lapes’  sons  involved  in  the  LATS  business,  who  testified  that  he  did  not 
think  Respondent  knew  the  parameters  of  the  margin  system  or  how  it  worked. 

B.  Mr.  Lapes  explained  to  Respondent  that  the  margin  process  was  necessary 
to  avoid  the  football  program  from  being  charged  for  spirit  packs  that  went  unpurchased  and 
that  the  margin  process  he  used  was  commonly  done  in  the  local  sporting  good  community. 
Based  on  the  testimony  of  others  in  this  case,  including  Lapes,  his  two  sons,  and  Doug 
Pearson,  it  was  established  that  Lapes’  margin  process  was,  in  fact,  commonly  used  by  small 
sporting  goods  companies  such  as  LATS  for  purchases  not  being  made  directly  by  a  school 
district. 

C.  Respondent  was  not  sure  how  to  proceed.  He  felt  $50  per  spirit  pack 

seemed  excessive.  Respondent  told  Lapes  that  he  would  think  about  the  margin  amount  to  be 
added  to  the  spirit  packs.  Lapes  advised  that  the  margin  amount  finally  agreed  upon  would  be 
placed  in  a  special  account  based  upon  the  amount  of  the  spirit  pack  purchases. 

32. 

On  or  about  February  18,  2008,  while  Respondent  was  at  the  LATS’  office,  he 

A.  Sales  order  number  58392  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 

made  the  following  orders  with  Mr.  Lapes,  pursuant  to  the  aforementioned  discussion: 

     

amount  of  $5,206.48,  for  the  shorts  that  would  go  into  the  spirit  packs.  As  a  result  of  this 
order,  the  amount  of  $1,120.00  was  allocated  into  the  special  account  (9DANO03)  for  DHHS. 

  

     

B.  Sales  order  number  58393  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 

amount  of  $3,490.02,  for  the  reversible  mesh  jerseys  shirts  that  would  go  into  the  spirit 
packs.  As  a  result  of  this  order,  the  amount  of  $800.00  was  allocated  into  the  special  account 
for  DHHS. 

C.  Sales  order  number  58395  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 
amount  of  $1,545.35,  for  the  shimmel  shirts  and  practice  jerseys  that  would  go  into  the  spirit 
packs.  As  a  result  of  this  order,  the  amount  of  $90.00  was  allocated  into  the  special  account 
for  DHHS. 

D.  Sales  order  number  59010  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 
amount  of  $4,437.15,  for  sleeveless  t-shirts  that  would  go  into  the  spirit  packs.  As  a  result  of 
this  order,  the  amount  of  $960.00  was  allocated  into  the  special  account  for  DHHS. 

E.  Sales  order  number  59011  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 
amount  of  $4,333.71,  for  hooded  sweatshirts  that  would  go  into  the  spirit  packs.  As  a  result 
of  this  order,  the  amount  of  $880.00  was  allocated  into  the  special  account  for  DHHS. 

F.  Sales  order  number  59012  was  generated  by  Mr.  Lapes  on  that  date,  in  the 
amount  of  $10,167.83,  for  the  hex  pad  girdles,  football  socks,  chin  straps  and  mouth  guards 
that  would  go  into  the  spirit  packs.  As  a  result  of  this  order,  the  amount  of  $504.00  was 
allocated  into  the  special  account  for  DHHS. 

33. 

At  or  about  this  time,  Respondent  conferred  with  Mr.  Pearson  of  the  Booster 

Club  concerning  the  spirit  pack  orders.  Since  the  spirit  packs  would  be  purchased  by  the 
players’  parents,  this  was  considered  a  Booster  Club  matter.  Respondent  explained  to  Mr. 
Pearson  that  LATS  proposed  a  margin  to  be  used  to  help  fund  the  “scholarship  kids,”  as  well 
as  to  cover  problems  caused  by  mis-sized  items  or  orders  made  by  those  who  would  not  end 
up  playing  football.  However,  Respondent  did  not  advise  Mr.  Pearson  that  any  part  of  the 
remaining  credit  from  the  margin  could  or  would  be  used  to  obtain  items  for  the  football 
program.  Mr.  Pearson  felt  the  margin  as  explained  to  him  by  Respondent  was  reasonable  and 
he  also  agreed  with  Respondent  that  the  margin  amount  of  $50  was  too  high.  Mr.  Pearson 
approved  that  Respondent  communicate  a  lower  margin  amount  to  Mr.  Lapes,  the  exact 
amount  of  which  was  not  established.  The  Booster  Club  board  approved  this  arrangement. 

34. 

Ona date  not  established,  Respondent  contacted  Mr.  Lapes  and  advised  him  of 

the  lower  margin  amount  agreed  to  by  the  Booster  Club.  This  amount  was  not  established. 

35. 

|  Respondent  and  Bill  Lapes  scheduled  the  DHHS  football  program  Team  Night 

    

to  be  on  Tuesday,  May  6,  2008,  from  4:00-7:00  p.m.  at  the  LATS  office.  The  spirit  packs 
would  be  sold  that  night  to  each  player  for  $198.11,  which  amount  included  the  margin 
agreed  upon  by  Respondent  after  conferring  with  the  Booster  Club.  The  Team  Night  for 
freshmen  players  would  be  on  June  24th  from  1:00-6  p.m.  at  the  LATS  office.  The  cost  of 
the  spirit  packs  for  the  freshman  team  was  $193.80.  Flyers  for  these  events  were  made  and 
circulated  among  the  players. 

  

 

  

    

36. 

A.  The  total  amount  of  credits  placed  in  the  DHHS  special  9  account  based  on 
the  aforementioned  orders  was  $4,354.00.  The  amount  of  the  credit  allocated  to  the  special  9 
account  was  based  on  the  sales  prices  of  the  aforementioned  orders,  though  the  amount  of  the 
margin  or  the  exact  process  used  for  calculating  it  was  not  established. 

B.  Although  it  is  alleged  that  the  credits  from  the  aforementioned  orders  were 

placed  in  the  9  account  on  various  dates  in  March  2008,  such  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  only  evidence  presented  on  this  topic  was  a  copy  of  a 
LATS  Customer  Inquiry  report  for  the  DHHS  9  account  as  of  August  2008.  The  dates  in 
question  are  listed  on  that  document  as  a  “Due  Date,”  which  does  not  indicate  the  dates  the 
credits  were  placed.  The  only  witness  who  shed  light  on  that  document  was  Teresa  Sando,  an 
investor  who  took  control  of  LATS  a  few  months  later  as  described  in  more  detail  below. 
Mrs.  Sando  admitted  in  her  testimony  that  she  had  no  other  documentation  showing  what 
went  into  the  credit  account  or  out  of  it.  The  date  Mrs.  Sando  assigned  to  when  the  credit  was 
allocated  was  essentially  based  on  her  speculation.  No  other  evidence  was  presented 
indicating  when  the  credit  into  the  special  account  was  made.  Based  on  these  circumstances, 
it  is  simply  assumed  the  credit  was  placed  into  the  special  9  account  on  the  date  the  sales 
order  was  generated  on  or  about  February  18,  2008. 

37. 

A.  Onor  about  February  29,  2008,  Respondent  placed  an  order  with  Bill  Lapes 

for  a  number  of  t-shirts  and  shorts  to  be  used  by  him  and  his  coaching  staff.  This  order 
generated  LATS  sales  order  number  59107.  (Ex.  27.)  Mr.  Lapes  testified  that  this  order  was 
placed  by  Respondent,  which  was  not  contradicted  by  Respondent  in  his  testimony.  The 
amount  of  the  order  was  $1,805.40,  excluding  tax.  Mr.  Lapes  did  not  add  tax  to  his  sales 
orders  when  the  items  in  the  order  would  be  “purchased”  through  the  credit  placed  in  the 
special  9  account,  since  those  items  in  essence  had  already  been  paid  for  in  connection  with 
the  order  that  generated  the  credit.  Respondent  testified  that,  in  his  experience,  coaches 
generally  do  not  pay  for  such  apparel,  but  instead  receive  funding  for  them  from  booster  or 
support  clubs.  Thus,  Respondent  suggested  that  the  Booster  Club,  through  the  players’ 
parents,  was  essentially  funding  this  purchase,  which  was  not  unusual  to  him  for  the  items  in 
question. 

B.  Although  some  of  the  items  had  been  purchased  by  LATS  from  outside 

vendors,  it  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  items  reflected  in 
this  sales  order  were  delivered  to  Respondent  or  that  the  transaction  was  completed.  No 
documents  from  Teresa  Sando  showed  when  deductions  from  the  special  9  account  were 
made  or  for  which  sales  orders.  Mrs.  Sando  also  admitted  on  cross-examination  that  she  had 
no  documentary  proof  that  these  items  had  been  delivered  to  DHHS.  Since  Respondent  and 
his  staff  also  had  shirts  and  shorts  purchased  for  them  directly  by  the  Booster  Club  outside  of 
Mr.  Lapes’  margin  process,  the  fact  that  coaches  had  shirts  and  shorts  for  the  2008  season 
does  not  establish  that  they  came  from  this  order. 

    
 

  

  

     

The  Transactions  in  2008  Not  Alleged  in  the  Second  Amended  Accusation 

38. 

The  transactions  described  above  are  the  only  ones  specifically  alleged  in  the 
Second  Amended  Accusation.  However,  there  was  evidence  presented  concerning  a  number 
of  other  related  transactions.  For  example,  at  or  about  the  time  that  Respondent  ordered  the 
spirit  pack  items  described  above,  Bill  Lapes  also  gave  him  two  “spec”  sales  orders  for  team 
football  helmets  and  safety  pads,  in  case  Respondent  wanted  to  use  LATS  for  acquiring  those 
items.  (Exs.  17  &  25.)  However,  those  were  basically  quotes  by  Lapes,  as  he  explained  that 
such  a  purchase  would  be  funded  by  the  District  and,  for  that  reason,  the  District’s 
purchasing  policies  would  have  to  be  followed.  Mr.  Lapes  provided  two  such  quotes  to 
Respondent,  depending  on  how  much  the  District  decided  in  the  summer  of  2008  to  allocate 
for  such  equipment.  However,  Mr.  Lapes  did  not  create  a  sales  order  at  that  time  and 
Respondent  did  not  order  those  items  at  that  time.  For  reasons  discussed  in  more  detail 
below,  Respondent  never  ordered  this  equipment  from  LATS.  He  ultimately  threw  away  the 
two  quotes  from  Mr.  Lapes.  There  was  never  any  discussion  between  Bill  Lapes  and 
Respondent  of  linking  such  a  District-involved  transaction  with  Mr.  Lapes’  margin  process. 

39.  |  On  or  about  February  18,  2008,  Bill  Lapes  completed  a  sales  order  for  one 

football  for  the  DHHS  football  program.  (Ex.  26.)  The  sales  order  indicated  that  the  football 
would  be  funded  by  the  credit  in  the  special  9  account  for  DHHS.  Respondent  was  listed  on 
the  sales  order.  Since  Respondent  was  always  listed  on  DHHS  sales  orders,  his  name  on  this 
document  does  not  necessarily  mean  he  placed  the  order.  Mr.  Lapes  has  no  independent 
recollection  of  this  order  and  Respondent  testified  he  did  not  remember  receiving  a  football 
from  LATS  then.  Thus,  it  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  this 
order  was  ever  made  by  Respondent  or  that  the  football  was  delivered  to  DHHS. 

40. 

In  late  February  20,  2008,  Respondent  ordered  from  LATS  a  number  of 

football  jerseys  and  shirts  for  members  and  friends  of  the  Boosters  Club.  The  orders  would 
be  paid  for  by  the  Booster  Club.  (Exs.  18  &  19.)  The  transactions  were  not  subject  to  Mr. 
Lapes’  margin  process.  It  appears  that  more  Booster  Club  orders  were  placed  for  t-shirts  and 
other  items  in  March  and  April  2008.  (Exs.  33-37.)  Those  sales  orders  did  not  involve  the 
special  9  account  for  DHHS  footbail.  Instead,  the  orders  were  made  by  and  for  the  Booster 
Club.  There  is  insufficient  documentation  to  demonstrate  all  of  the  items  in  all  of  the  orders 
were  actually  delivered  to  and  paid  for  by  the  Booster  Club;  it  was  only  established  that  some 
of  these  orders  were  completed. 

41. 

Onor  about  February  29,  2008,  Bill  Lapes  completed  a  sales  order  for 

coaches’  hats  and  visors  in  the  amount  of  $425.50.  (Ex.  28.)  The  purchase  of  those  items 
would  be  funded  by  the  credit  in  the  special  9  account  for  DHHS.  Respondent  was  listed  on 
the  sales  order.  However,  it  is  not  clear  from  the  involved  paperwork  who  actually  placed  the 
order.  DHHS  employee  Gloria  Watson  later  signed  for  receipt  of  delivery  of  a  box  with  a 
manifest  sheet  indicating  the  contents  were  the  hats  and  visors.  Ms.  Watson  testified  that  her 
practice  at  that  time  was  to  notify  the  teacher  to  whom  the  item  was  addressed  so  they  could 
pick  up  the  item,  in  this  instance  Respondent.  Respondent  did  not  address  this  transaction  in 
his  testimony. 

    

  

  

 

42. 

On  or  about  February  29,  2008,  Bill  Lapes  completed  sales  orders  for  a  few 

hooded  sweatshirts  in  the  amount  of  $188.00.  (Ex.  29.)  The  purchase  of  those  items  would  be 
funded  by  the  credit  in  the  special  9  account  for  DHHS.  Respondent  was  listed  on  the  sales 
order.  However,  it  is  not  clear  from  the  paperwork  who  actually  placed  the  orders.  Moreover, 
Teresa  Sando  conceded  in  her  testimony  that  she  had  no  documentation  showing  any  of  the 
credit  from  the  special  9  account  was  removed  as  a  result  of  this  order.  Nor  was  it  established 
that  these  items  were  ever  delivered  to  DHHS  or  Respondent. 

43. 

On  or  about  April  17,  2008,  a  sales  orders  for  40  t-shirts  was  completed.  (Ex. 

30.)  Bill  Lapes  is  listed  on  the  sales  order,  but  he  testified  that  he  had  left  the  company  by 
that  date.  Respondent  was  also  listed  on  the  sales  order  but,  as  discussed  above,  the  fact  that 
his  name  was  on  the  sales  order  does  not  necessarily  mean  he  placed  the  order.  Teresa  Sando 
testified  this  order  did  not  involve  the  special  9  account,  meaning  it  was  not  to  be  funded  by 
using  credit  from  the  special  9  account.  Although  there  is  some  documentation  indicating  the 
items  were  purchased  by  LATS  from  another  vendor,  Chad  Lapes  cast  substantial  doubt  on 
that  when  he  testified  that  LATS  had  stopped  spending  money  on  acquiring  such  items  at 
that  time,  as  explained  in  more  detail  below.  Although  delivery  documentation  was  also 
presented,  it  does  not  show  from  where  the  items  came  or  what  was  actually  shipped. 
Moreover,  the  time  frame  for  delivery  listed  in  the  documentation  from  the  other  vendor  does 
not  match  the  delivery  time  frames  reflected  in  the  delivery  documentation.  Thus,  it  was  not 
established  that  this  transaction  was  consummated  or  completed. 

LATS  Liquidates  and  is  Replaced  by  C  &  A  Athletics 

44. 

LATS  was  owned  by  Bill  Lapes.  His  two  sons,  Adam  and  Chad  Lapes,  were 

his  key  employees  at  LATS.  As  his  business  lagged  over  time,  Bill  Lapes  took  capital 
investments  from  Geoffrey  and  Teresa  Sando. 

45. 

In  2008,  Mr.  Lapes  was  heavily  indebted  to  the  Sandos.  By  their  account,  the 

Sandos  had  invested  approximately  $650,000  in  the  LATS  business.  The  Sandos  were  not 
involved  with  the  business  at  that  time,  though  Mr.  Sando  had  been  monitoring  LATS’  books 
and  finances  for  several  years,  first  as  an  auditor  hired  to  consult  with  the  company,  and  later 
as  an  investor.  Mr.  Sando  had  known  for  years  about  Bill  Lapes’  margin  process  and 
apparently  never  voiced  an  objection. 

46. 

By  February  2008,  the  LATS  business  was  doing  poorly  and  Bill  Lapes  was  in 

default  on  his  promissory  notes  and  investment  agreements  with  the  Sandos.  In  April  2008, 
the  Sandos  called  their  notes  and  ultimately  took  control  of  LATS.  Bill  Lapes  left  the 
company  in  April  2008.  By  April  28,  2008,  LATS  no  longer  took  orders  and  basically 
stopped  doing  business.  At  that  time,  LATS  was  put  in  liquidation  mode  by  the  Sandos. 
Other  employees  were  let  go  by  early  May  2008.  Chad  and  Adam  Lapes  were  allowed  to 
remain  with  the  company  to  assist  the  liquidation  process  until  they  were  also  let  go  in  May 
2008. 

10 

 

  

  

47. 

Soon  after  the  Sandos  took  over  LATS  in  April  2008,  Bill  Lapes  contacted 
Respondent  and  advised  him  that  LATS  could  not  fulfill  the  DHHS  spirit  packs  order.  Mr. 
Lapes  advised  Respondent  to  contact  his  two  sons,  Chad  and  Adam,  who  were  forming  their 
own  business.  Respondent  panicked,  because  he  was  against  hard  deadlines  to  begin  with 
and  this  situation  might  result  in  his  football  program  not  having  critical  items  in  time  for 
spring  practice.  As  a  fledgling  head  coach,  the  notion  of  not  having  Spring  practice  gear  on 
time  would  have  been  an  embarrassment  to  Respondent.  He  was  desperate  to  fix  the 
situation.  At  or  about  this  time,  Respondent  conferred  with  Mr.  Pearson  of  the  Booster  Club. 
Mr.  Pearson  agreed  that  it  made  sense  to  use  the  Lapes  sons  because  they  were  familiar  with 
the  DHHS  football  program  through  their  employment  with  LATS.  Mr.  Pearson  was  also 
concerned  the  Booster  Club  could  be  dragged  into  bankruptcy  should  LATS  take  that  route 
and  he  felt  using  affiliated  employees  might  remedy  that  situation. 

48. 

At  some  time  in  May  2008,  Mrs.  Sando  was  put  in  charge  of  the  liquidation 

efforts.  While  that  was  happening,  Chad  and  Adam  Lapes  were  forming  a  separate  business, 
C  &  A  Athletics  (CAA),  which  was  the  same  type  of  sporting  good  vendor  as  LATS  had 
been.  The  Lapes  sons  were  working  toward  liquidating  LATS  at  the  same  time  that  they  were 
forming  and  operating  CAA? 

49, 

Respondent  contacted  Chad  Lapes  immediately.  Chad  Lapes  told  Respondent 
that  his  new  company,  CAA,  could  fill  the  order  in  time.  Respondent  agreed  to  virtually  the 
same  spirit  pack  as  had  been  previously  devised  by  Bill  Lapes,  at  the  same  price.  There  was 
no  discussion  or  agreement  to  add  a  margin  into  the  Spirit  pack  price.  The  players’  parents 
would  pay  CAA  directly  for  the  spirit  packs.  A  new  Team  Night  was  scheduled  for 
Wednesday,  May  14th  from  4:00  to  7:00  p.m.,  this  time  at  the  DHHS  football  weight  room. 

50. 

The  Team  Night  was  held  as  scheduled.  The  players’  parents  paid  CAA 

directly  for  the  spirit  packs.  No  credit  or  margin  was  offered  or  given  to  DHHS  or 
Respondent.  But  the  event  was  chaotic.  The  Lapes  arrived  to  the  Team  Night  late.  Although 
they  were  able  to  procure  the  spirit  pack  items,  there  were  still  problems  with  some  of  the 
Spirit  packs  sold,  Several  parents  complained  about  missing  items  or  those  that  did  not  fit 
properly,  both  that  evening  and  thereafter.  Respondent  was  displeased  with  the  quality  of 
some  of  the  goods  and  the  chaos. 

51. 

Although  Respondent  and  Mr.  Pearson  were  thankful  that  CAA  was  able  to 
step  into  the  breach  and  provide  the  goods  in  time  for  spring  practice  on  such  short  notice, 
Respondent  decided  to  not  use  CAA  in  the  future  for  team  supplies  or  spirit  packs.  In  fact,  in 
2009  Respondent  used  Sport  Chalet  for  the  DHHS  football  program  spirit  packs. 

*  A  dispute  later  arose  between  the  Sandos  and  the  Lapes  sons  over  the  events 
described  below.  The  dispute  lead  to  a  civil  lawsuit  filed  by  the  Sandos  against  the  Lapes 
sons.  The  litigation  was  resolved  by  a  confidential  settlement,  the  terms  of  which  were  not 
revealed.  It  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  case  to  decide  the  particulars  of  that  dispute,  nor  were 
such  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  based  on  the  record  presented. 

11 

  

 

   
   The  Alleged  Kick-Backs  or  Bribes  from  LATS 

52.  —  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

accepted  bribes  or  kick-backs  from  LATS,  accepted  payments  from  LATS  to  influence  his 
purchasing  decisions,  or  that  LATS  asked  Respondent  to  ignore  the  District’s  purchasing 
policies.  It  was  not  established  that  LATS  provided  Respondent  with  bribe  money,  gifts,  or 
other  things  of  value  so  that  he  would  purchase  football  equipment  and  sporting  goods  for 
the  DHHS  football  teams  from  LATS  and/or  not  require  LATS  to  submit  competitive  bids  or 
quotes  for  its  sales  to  the  District.  Since  the  above-described  orders  were  not  being  made  by 
the  District,  the  District’s  purchasing  policies  did  not  even  apply.  In  fact,  Respondent 
received  nothing  of  value  from  LATS  for  placing  the  orders,  since  the  credits  allocated  to  the 
special  9  account  correlated  exactly  with  amounts  actually  paid  to  LATS  by  the  players’ 
parents. 

53. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  credits  to 

the  special  9  account  for  the  DHHS  football  program  totaling  $4,354.00  constituted  bribes  or 
payments  of  bribes  or  kick-backs  to  Respondent.  The  special  9  account  established  by  Bill 
Lapes  was  not  Respondent’s  special  or  personal  account  but  rather  an  account  maintained  by 
LATS  for  the  DHHS  football  team  that  had  been  started  by  Lapes  as  a  promotional  tool 
many  years  before  Respondent  was  hired  in  early  2008.  LATS  also  had  been  an  authorized 
vendor  of  the  District  for  safety  items,  such  as  helmets  and  pads,  and  on  occasion  for  the 
DHHS  football  team,  for  many  years.  Respondent  did  not  purchase  personal  items  from 
LATS  by  use  of  the  promotional  account.  In  late  February  2008,  Respondent  ordered  shirts 
and  shorts  for  his  coaching  staff,  and  perhaps  hats  and  visors  for  the  coaching  staff.  Those 
purchases  were  covered  by  the  special  9  account  set  up  by  Bill  Lapes,  and  were  intended  for 
the  coaching  staff,  not  for  Respondent’s  personal  use.  Respondent  testified  that  such  items 
were  generally  not  purchased  by  the  coaches  themselves,  but  rather  by  booster  clubs. 

54. 

The  testimony  of  Teresa  Sando  that  these  transactions  equated  to  bribes  or 
kick-backs  was  not  persuasive,  in  that  she  was  not  involved  in  the  LATS  business  at  the 
relevant  times,  but  rather  after  the  events  in  question  (as  discussed  in  more  detail  below).  Her 
knowledge  of  the  documents  generated  at  the  times  in  question  was  shaky,  often  based  on 
speculation  and  hearsay,  and  ultimately  unreliable  unless  otherwise  corroborated.  Bill  Lapes, 
and  his  two  sons,  denied  that  the  credits  to  the  special  9  account  served  as  kick-backs  or 
bribes.  So  did  Respondent.  As  discussed  in  more  detail  below,  Mrs.  Sando  expressed  her 
opinions  to  the  Orange  County  Sheriff's  Department,  who  investigated  the  matter.  No 
criminal  charges  were  ever  brought  against  Respondent. 

District  Policies  and  Related  Laws 

55. 

The  Second  Amended  Accusation  alleges  that  a  number  of  District  policies 

were  violated  by  Respondent  for  his  actions  in  2008  that  are  specifically  alleged  in  that 
pleading.  Those  events,  as  well  as  the  events  in  2008  not  alleged  in  the  pleading,  are 
analyzed  below  to  determine  whether  Respondent  violated  the  following  District  policies  or 

state  laws.   

 

  

56. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3290  by  giving  and 

accepting  bribes,  circumventing  the  District’s  open  bidding  requirements,  and  engaging  in  a 
conspiracy  to  defraud  the  District. 

B.  Board  Policy  3290  regulates  “Gifts,  Grants  and  Bequests.”  Under  this 
policy,  the  Board  may  accept  any  bequest  or  gift  of  money  or  property  on  behalf  of  the 
District.  The  Board  has  stated  under  this  policy  that  it  fully  supports  athletic  and  academic 
programs  and  competitions  as  an  extension  of  the  educational  program.  If  a  school  wishes  to 
augment  District-funded  positions,  this  policy  states  it  is’ permissible  to  seek  donations  from 
parents,  guardians,  or  private  donors.  Gift  money  will  be  accepted  for  stipend  payment  for 
co-curricular  activities  but  will  not  be  accepted  to  pay  for  the  primary  employment  of 
employees.  Upon  acceptance  of  funds  and  equipment  by  the  District,  the  policy  requires  that 
all  monies  are  to  be  deposited  into  a  District-based  account  which  has  been  established  for 
each  school  site  and  which  must  be  monitored  by  the  school  principal.  All  gifts,  grants,  and 
bequests  become  District  property. 

C.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  violated  this  policy.  As  discussed 

above,  Respondent  did  not  receive  or  seek  bribes  or  kick-backs.  No  probative  evidence  was 
presented  to  show  that  Respondent  received  any  gift  of  materials,  supplies,  or  money  from 
Bill  Lapes  or  his  company  LATS.  Moreover,  since  this  policy  is  aimed  at  gifts  to  the  District, 
it  was  not  shown  to  be  applicable  to  Respondent  as  an  employee. 

57. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3291  for  the  same 

reason  as  alleged  concerning  Board  Policy  3290. 

B.  Board  Policy  3291  regulates  “Gifts  to  School  Personnel.”  Under  this  policy, 

the  Board  recognizes  that  sometimes  students,  parents,  and  community  members  give 
nominal  gifts  to  District  employees  to  show  their  appreciation  for  a  job  well  done,  and  that 
vendors  sometimes  distribute  free  marketing  materials  or  stationary  items  to  staff  members. 
The  policy  describes  the  type  of  gifts  that  cannot  be  accepted  by  District  employees, 
including  those  intended  to  influence  an  employee’s  exercise  of  discretion  in  District 
purchases. 

C.  While  this  policy  may  be  more  applicable  to  an  employee  like  Respondent, 

as  opposed  to  policy  3290  dealing  with  gifts  to  the  District,  Board  Policy  3291  went  into 
effect  in  June  2008,  after  the  events  in  question  involving  Respondent.  Therefore,  it  cannot 
be  concluded  that  Respondent  violated  this  policy. 

58. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3300  for  the  same 

reason  as  alleged  concerning  Board  Policy  3290. 

  

B.  Board  Policy  3300  regulates  “Expenditures/Expending  Authority.”  Under 
this  policy,  the  Board  authorizes  the  District  Superintendent  or  his/her  designee  to  purchase 
supplies,  materials  and  equipment,  as  well  as  enter  into  service  contracts  below  the  bid  limits 
for  work  to  be  done.  All  contracts  entered  into  must  be  approved  by  the  Board. 

  
13    

  

C.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3300.  The 

transactions  in  question  between  Respondent  and  LATS  or  Respondent  and  CAA  were  not 
District  purchases  subject  to  this  policy.  They  were  transactions  between  those  business 
entities  and  either  the  Booster  Club  or  the  players’  parents.  While  the  District  may  be 
interested  in  such  transactions,  since  they  involved  students  of  the  District,  there  is  nothing  in 
policy  3300  indicating  that  it  was  intended  to  apply  to  non-District  purchases.  While  Bill 
Lapes  gave  Respondent  two  quotes  or  bids  for  safety  equipment  that  would  normally  pertain 
to  this  policy,  nothing  came  of  those  bids.  Most  revealing  was  the  testimony  of  District 
Executive  Director  of  School  Services,  Philippa  Geiger,  and  then  DHHS  Principal  Nye  (he  is 
no  longer  with  the  District),  who  both  agreed  that  the  District  has  no  oversight  or  approval 
power  over  Booster  Club  purchases.  Since  the  District  shunts  almost  all  of  the  funding  for 
football  to  the  Booster  Club,  it  would  be  unfair  to  still  apply  the  District’s  own  unique 
purchasing  policies  to  transactions  made  by  that  independent  entity. 

59. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3310  by  failing  to 
obtain  prior  approval  from  the  District  Purchasing  Director,  the  school  principal,  or  the 
school  athletic  director  for  purchases  he  made  with  District  funds. 

B.  Board  Policy  3310  regulates  “Purchasing  Procedures.”  Under  Board  Policy 
3310,  the  Board  has  the  authority  and  responsibility  for  all  purchase  contracts  of  the  District. 
This  authority  and  responsibility  can  be  delegated  with  certain  restrictions  as  set  forth  in  the 
Government  and  Education  Codes.  The  Superintendent  or  his/her  designee  must  maintain 
effective  purchasing  procedures  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  District  receives  maximum  value 
for  the  money  it  spends  and  that  records  are  kept  in  accordance  with  the  law.  Insofar  as  it  is 
possible,  this  policy  provides  that  goods  and  services  purchased  will  meet  the  needs  of  the 
person  or  department  ordering  them  at  the  lowest  price  consistent  with  standard  purchasing 
practice.  Maintenance  costs,  replacement  costs,  and  trade-in  values  shall  be  considered  when 
determining  the  most  economical  purchase  price.  The  Superintendent  or  her/his  designee 
may  issue  and  sign  purchase  orders  and  shall  submit  them  to  the  Board  for  its  approval.  The 
purchasing  department  conducts  all  purchase  transactions  for  the  District. 

C.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3310  for  the 

reasons  explained  above  regarding  Board  Policy  3300.  Respondent  did  not  use  District  funds 
for  the  transactions  in  question.  None  of  the  purchases  were  made  by  or  for  the  District,  but 
rather  by  the  Booster  Club  or  the  players’  parents.  Principal  Nye  was  well  aware  that 
Respondent,  as  the  DHHS  varsity  head  football  coach,  would  be  making  such  purchases 
through  the  Booster  Club.  He  voiced  no  concern  that  such  purchases  were  done  outside  of 
the  District’s  purchasing  policies.  The  only  transactions  that  would  seemingly  apply  to  this 
policy  were  the  quotes  for  the  safety  goods  provided  by  Bill  Lapes.  However,  nothing  came 
of  those  quotes. 

60. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3311  by  not  requiring 

LATS  to  submit  a  competitive  bid  or  by  intentionally  misrepresenting  bids  submitted  by 
LATS  to  the  District. 

14 

   

B.  Board  Policy  3311  regulates  “Competitive  Bidding.”  Under  Board  Policy 
3311,  the  Board  has  stated,  in  part,  that  the  District  shall  purchase  equipment,  supplies,  and 
services  on  a  competition  bidding  basis  when  required  by  law  or  whenever  it  is  in  the  best 
interest  of  the  District. 

C.  It  was  not  established  that  this  policy  was  applicable  to  the  charges  or  facts 
in  this  matter.  The  evidence  established  that  the  soft  goods  purchased  by  the  Booster  Club  or 
players’  parents  for  the  DHHS  football  program  were  not  required  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of 
a  competitive  bidding  process,  since  they  were  not  District  purchases.  Director  of  School 
Services  Geiger  and  Matthew  Reid  (who  was  the  DHHS  Athletic  Director  at  the  time)  were 
clear  in  their  testimony  that  DHHS  football  purchases  had  not  been  subject  to  the  bidding 
process  in  2008  or  previously. 

61. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  3315  for  the  same 

reason  as  alleged  concerning  Board  Policy  3290. 

B.  Board  Policy  3315  regulates  “Relations  with  Vendors.”  Under  this  policy, 

the  Board  has  provided  that  vendors  shall  contact  the  District’s  purchasing  department  to 
arrange  for  sales  presentations.  If  visits  to  other  departments  and  school  sites  are  required, 
the  purchasing  department  shall  make  the  arrangements  for  such  visits.  The  purchasing 
department  is  prohibited  from  extending  favoritism  to  any  vendor.  Each  purchase  order  is  to 
be  placed  on  the  basis  of  quality,  price,  and  delivery,  with  past  service  being  a  factor  if  all 
other  considerations  are  substantially  equal.  The  purchasing  department  is  to  conduct  all 
price  negotiations  with  vendors  when  necessary.  Vendors  are  to  be  referred  to  the  purchasing 
department  by  other  District  personnel  if  direct  contact  is  made  with  a  school  or  department. 
In  interviews  with  vendors,  no  one  who  is  not  a  member  of  the  purchasing  department  shall 
commit  herself  by  implication  or  otherwise  as  the  District’s  source  of  supply  for  any  product. 

C.  It  was  not  established  that  this  policy  was  enforced  or  followed  by  the 

District  in  2008  relative  to  the  football  program.  The  District  freely  allowed  football  coaches 
to  negotiate  directly  with  LATS  and  other  sporting  goods  vendors  to  view  and  select  football 
equipment  and  to  obtain  quotes  to  buy  football  equipment  for  their  high  school  football 
teams,  probably  because  most  of  the  funding  came  from  sources  other  than  the  District. 

62. 

A.  Itis  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  Board  Policy  4119.21  for  the  same 

reason  as  alleged  concerning  Board  Policy  3290. 

B.  Board  Policy  4119.21  provides  a  “Code  of  Ethics.”  Under  this  policy,  the 
Board  expects  employees  of  the  District  to  maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  to  follow 
District  policies,  and  to  abide  by  state  and  national  laws.  Employee  conduct  should  enhance 
the  integrity  of  the  District  and  the  goals  of  the  educational  program. 

C.  Based  on  the  above,  it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
that  Respondent  violated  the  District’s  Code  of  Ethics  in  2008  by  failing  to  disclose  to  Doug 
Pearson  and  the  Booster  Club  the  fact  that  a  margin  to  be  built  into  the  DHHS  football  spirit 

15 

  

 

packs  would  include  a  credit  he  could  use  to  make  purchases  on  behalf  of  the  football 
program.  Although  Respondent  disclosed  that  a  margin  would  be  built  into  the  order,  he  only 
disclosed  to  Mr.  Pearson  that  the  margin  was  for  gear  for  scholarship  players  and  to  address 
clothing  sizing  problems  and  errors  or  for  packs  that  went  unclaimed.  Mr.  Pearson  was 
surprised  to  learn,  for  the  first  time  during  the  hearing,  that  the  margin  included  credit  for 
program  purchases.  That  was  a  significant  detail  to  omit,  especially  because  Mr.  Pearson  had 
made  clear  to  Respondent  how  important  financial  transparency  was  to  the  Booster  Club 
given  its  disastrous  financial  situation  following  the  2007  season.  Unlike  many  of  the  other 
District  policies  involved  in  this  case,  this  policy  applied  to  all  District  employees  under  all 
circumstances  substantially  related  to  District  activity.  The  fact  that  the  purchases  in  question 
involved  the  Booster  Club  and  students  of  the  District,  for  a  District  supported  activity, 
provides  the  nexus  between  the  policy  and  Respondent’s  activity.  In  failing  to  disclose  a  key 
fact  to  the  Booster  Club,  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  or  maintain  the  highest  ethical 
standard  or  comport  himself  with  complete  integrity.  In  this  regard,  Respondent’s  conduct 
did  not  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  District.  However,  since  there  was  no  margin  built  into 
Respondent’s  transaction  with  CAA,  Respondent  did  not  violate  this  policy  relative  to  that 
transaction.  Respondent  made  full  disclose  to  Mr.  Pearson  about  the  CAA  deal. 

63. 

A.  It  is  alleged  that  Respondent  violated  provisions  of  various  school  laws  of 

the  state  by  giving  and  accepting  bribes,  circumventing  the  District’s  open  bidding 
requirements,  and  engaging  in  a  conspiracy  to  defraud  the  District,  and  that  such  activity  also 
violated  California  Penal  Code  sections  424,  subdivision  (a),  and  641.3. 

B.  The  District  argues  that  Education  Code  sections  60071,  60072  and  60073 

were  violated  because  Respondent  accepted  bribes  and  kick-backs.  As  discussed  above,  it 
was  not  established  that  Respondent  did  so.  Moreover,  those  Education  Code  sections  do  not 
apply  because  they  discuss  inducements  relative  to  the  purchase  of  “instructional  material.” 
It  is  not  clear  that  football  equipment  could  or  should  be  considered  as  “instructional 
material.”  In  addition,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s  conduct  violated  California 
Penal  Code  sections  424,  subdivision  (a)  (appropriation  or  misuse  of  public  monies  or 
falsification  of  public  monies  account),  or  641.3  (commercial  bribery).  Although  the  matter 
was  investigated  by  the  Orange  County  Sheriffs  Department  and  discussed  with  personnel 
from  the  Orange  County  District  Attorney’s  Office,  no  criminal  charges  were  ever  filed  or 
prosecuted  against  Respondent.  No  evidence  was  presented  indicating  that  any  such  charges 
were  brought  against  Bill  Lapes,  his  two  sons,  or  any  other  District  employee  involved  in 
similar  activity  with  LATS.  Thus,  the  evidence  was  insufficient  to  demonstrate  that 
Respondent  committed  such  crimes. 

   

reconstruct  LATS’s  business  records  and  pursuing  amounts  she  believed  were  owed  to  LATS 
by  various  customers,  including  DHHS  and  Respondent.  The  Sandos  were  trying  to  recover 
as  much  of  their  $650,000  investment  in  LATS  as  possible  through  the  liquidation  process. 

The  Sando’s  Complaints  and  the  District’s  Investigation  of Respondent 

During  the  summer  of  2008,  Teresa  Sando  spent  much  of  her  time  trying  to 

64. 

16 

  

    

65. 

While  trying  to  collect  outstanding  accounts  receivable,  Mrs.  Sando 

discovered  that  LATS  had  set  up  various  special  9  accounts  to  track  the  amount  of  credits 
that  had  been  allocated  to  various  schools  pursuant  to  Bill  Lapes’  margin  process  described 
above.  One  document  showed  approximately  80  high  schools  with  such  9  accounts,  many  of 
those  within  the  District.  As  discussed  above,  this  should  not  have  been a  surprise  to  the 
Sandos,  as  Mr.  Sando  had  intimate  access  to  the  LATS  books  and  records  for  several  years. 

66.  |  While  working  on  collecting  the  accounts  receivables,  Mrs.  Sando  saw 
documents  pertaining  to  Respondent’s  spirit  pack  orders,  as  well  as  some  of  the  other 
transactions  discussed  above.  By  this  time,  the  Sandos  had  fired  Bill,  Chad  and  Adam  Lapes. 
Mrs.  Sando  did  not  have  a  complete  understanding  of  the  documents  or  what  they  reflected. 
Based  on  what  she  could  gather,  she  believed  LATS  had  provided  substantial  goods  to  the 
DHHS  football  program  but  had  not  been  paid  for  them. 

67. 

Ona  date  not  established  in  2008,  Mrs.  Sando  tried  to  call  Respondent  about 

collecting  on  the  account  receivable  she  believed  existed.  She  was  unable  to  reach  him. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  remember  receiving  such  a  phone  call. 

68. 

In  December  2008,  Mrs.  Sando  mailed  an  invoice  to  Respondent’s  attention  at 

DHHS  in  an  attempt  to  collect  the  amount  she  believed  LATS  was  owed.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  did  not  receive  that  letter,  so  he  did  not  respond  to  it. 

69. 

In  March  2009,  an  attorney  representing  the  Sandos  and  LATS  sent  a  demand 
letter  and  copies  of  invoices  to  Respondent’s  attention.  Respondent  was  surprised  to  receive 
the  demand  letter,  because  LATS  had  failed  to  provide  the  spirit  packs.  Respondent 
conferred  with  Chad  Lapes,  who  told  him  that  because  CAA  had  obtained  and  provided  the 
spirit  packs,  nothing  was  owed  to  LATS.  Chad  Lapes  told  Respondent  about  the  dispute 
between  CAA,  LATS  and  the  Sandos,  and  that  unfortunately  Respondent  and  the  District  had 
become  ensnared  in  it.  Respondent  explained  this  to  Principal  Nye,  who  seemed  satisfied  by 
Respondent’s  explanation.  Since  this  was  not  a  District  purchase,  the  District  took  no  action. 
The  Sandos  never  presented  a  formal  claim  or  request  for  payment  to  the  District,  nor  did 
LATS  or  the  Sandos  ultimately  take  any  legal  action  against  the  District,  Respondent  or  the 
Booster  Club  for  payment. 

70. 

In  October  2010,  Mrs.  Sando  complained  about  this  matter  to  Superintendent 

    

Joseph  Farley.  Mrs.  Sando  complained  about  Respondent  and  several  other  District 
employees  who  had  business  dealings  with  Bill  Lapes  and  LATS.  Mrs.  Sando  lodged  similar 
complaints  with  several  other  school  districts  throughout  Southern  California.  Specifically, 
Mrs.  Sando  complained  to  Superintendent  Farley  that  several  of  the  District’s  athletic 
coaches,  including  Respondent,  had  engaged  in  a  scheme  with  Bill  Lapes  to  defraud  the 
District,  in  that  Mr.  Lapes,  through  his  margin  process,  had  supplied  money  and  goods  to 
District  coaches  in  exchange  for  purchasing  goods  for  their  school  teams  from  LATS. 

 

71. 

In  November  2010,  the  District  commenced  an  investigation  into  the  Sando 
complaint  by  retaining  Robert  Price  of  ESI  International,  Inc.,  a  private  investigation  firm. 
Mr.  Price  obtained  documents  from  the  District  and  Mrs.  Sando,  as  well  as  other  sources.  He 
interviewed  several  individuals  who  had  dealings  with  the  various  coaches  subject  to  the 
Sando  complaint,  as  well  as  personnel  from  the  Orange  County  Sheriff's  Department 
(OCSD).  Mrs.  Sando  completely  cooperated  with  Mr.  Price.  It  does  not  appear  as  if  Mr.  Price 
had  any  difficulty  obtaining  other  information.  However,  Mr.  Price  did  not  interview  Chad  or 
Adam  Lapes,  Principal  Nye,  then  Athletic  Director  Reid  or  anyone  from  the  Booster  Club, 
including  Mr.  Pearson.  Those  were  key  people  who  had  material  information  about  the 
events  in  question.  Mr.  Price  was  unable  to  interview  Respondent  for  legal  reasons  beyond 
his  control.  Mr.  Price  completed  his  report  on  December  29,  2011. 

72. 

Relying  heavily  on  Teresa  Sando’s  version  of  events,  and  with  an  incomplete 

understanding  of  what  happened  due  to  his  failure  to  interview  the  key  figures  mentioned 
above,  Mr.  Price  reached  the  conclusion  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  bribes  and  kick- 
backs  from  Bill  Lapes  and  LATS,  had  violated  the  District’s  open  bidding  requirements,  and 
engaging  in  a  conspiracy  to  defraud  the  District.  Mr.  Price’s  conclusions  are  unpersuasive  for 
the  reasons  mentioned  above,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  evidence  presented  at  the  hearing 
did  not  bear  them  out.  Moreover,  Mr.  Price  did  not  appear  as  a  credible  witness.  He  became 
easily  upset  and  offended  on  cross-examination  when  asked  fairly  routine  questions  about  his 
investigation,  so  much  so  that  it  did  not  appear  that  Mr.  Price  was  a  neutral  fact-finder. 

73. 

Mr.  Price’s  report  was  received  by  Superintendent  Farley  in  either  late 

December  2011  or  early  January  2012.  Superintendent  Farley  had  been  hired  in  2010,  well 
after  the  events  in  question,  and  when  the  District  was  suffering  from  a  financial  crisis.  He 
was  in  crisis  mode  at  that  time.  Mr.  Price  had  also  reported  on  misconduct  committed  by 
several  other  coaches  within  the  District.  Superintendent  Farley  seemed  uninterested  in 
looking  at  each  coach’s  individual  situation.  Superintendent  Farley  did  not  consider 
progressive  discipline  for  Respondent.  When  he  decided  to  fire  Respondent,  he  did  not  have 
access  to  many  important  facts  developed  during  the  hearing.  (Mr.  Farley  left  the  District  in 
2015.) 

74,  —  Mrs.  Sando  also  lodged  a  complaint  about  District  coaches,  including 

Respondent,  with  the  OCSD.  It  is  not  clear  when  she  did  so.  OCSD  Sergeant  Michael  Starnes 
interviewed  Mrs.  Sando  in  June  2011.  It  is  clear  that  Sergeant  Starnes  does  not  view  Mrs. 
Sando  as  a  credible  witness.  Sergeant  Starnes  also  interviewed  Superintendent  Farley  on 
January  3,  2012.  Sergeant  Starnes  noted  in  his  report  of  that  conversation  that  Superintendent 
Farley  “conceded  that  the  School  District  failed  to  show  or  advise  the  coaches  of  the  policies 
and  procedures  with  the  School  District  regarding  the  purchasing  of  equipment  and  the 
account  from  where  the  funds  came  from.”  During  the  hearing,  Sergeant  Starnes  was 
adamant  that  Superintendent  Farley  had  made  that  statement.  In  his  testimony,  Mr.  Farley 
denied  making  it.  His  denial  was  not  persuasive.  No  reason  is  apparent  why  Sergeant  Starnes 
would  attribute  that  statement  to  Superintendent  Farley  if  he  had  not  made  it.  Sergeant 
Starnes  had  no  reason  to  include  such  a  statement  in  his  report  if  it  had  not  been  made;  Mr. 
Farley  does  have  a  reason  to  now  deny  having  made  that  statement. 

18 

  

 

75. 
complaint. 

Nocriminal  complaint  was  filed  against  Respondent  as  a  result  of  the  Sando 

76. 

A.  While  the  instant  matter  was  being  litigated,  the  parties  were  involved  in 
writ  of  mandamus  proceedings  brought  by  Respondent  against  the  District  in  the  Superior 
Court  of  the  State  of  California,  County  of  Orange.  The  writ  was  in  response  to  ALJ  Amy 
Yerkey’s  denial  of  Respondent’s  motion  to  dismiss  this  case  heard  on  December  4,  2012. 

B.  In  the  writ,  Respondent  argued  that  the  District  had  violated  provisions  of 
the  Education  Code  by  basing  discipline  against  Respondent  for  events  that  occurred  more 
than  four  years  after  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  was  filed  (the  so-called  “four  year  rule” 
discussed  in  more  detail  below).  Respondent  argued  that  ALJ  Yerkey  was  in  error  for 
denying  his  motion  to  dismiss.  The  District  countered,  in  part,  that  equitable  doctrines  such 
as  estoppel  or  delayed  discovery  would  allow  it  to  proceed  against  Respondent  based  on 
events  occurring  beyond  the  four  year  period. 

C.  Superior  Court  Judge  Andrew  P.  Banks  denied  Respondent’s  writ,  ruling 

77. 

Other  Evidence 

In  2008,  Respondent  had  a  little  or  no  understanding  that  the  District  had 

that  it  is  an  issue  that  should  be  litigated  in  this  administrative  hearing  before  it  would  be  ripe 
for  adjudication  by  the  Superior  Court.  It  is  clear  from  the  transcript  of  the  hearing  on  the 
writ  that  in  reaching  his  decision,  Judge  Banks  interpreted  ALJ  Yerkey’s  order  denying  the 
motion  to  dismiss  as  holding  only  that:  a)  the  District  was  permitted  to  allege  events  beyond 
the  four  year  period  in  the  Second  Amended  Accusation;  b)  the  District  was  permitted  to 
attempt  to  prove  that  application  of  equitable  doctrines,  such  as  delayed  discovery,  was 
warranted;  and  c)  whether  the  equitable  doctrines  apply  is  a  matter  to  be  first  decided  in  this 
administrative  hearing. 

policies  in  place  for  purchases  made  by  the  District.  No  training  or  guidelines  were  given  to 
District  coaches  on  the  purchasing  policies.  The  District  had  no  specific  policies  or 
regulations  in  place  at  the  time  regarding  purchases  made  by  support  clubs  or  players’ 
parents.  Respondent  received  no  specific  training  on  that  topic.  When  Respondent  was 
dealing  with  LATS  in  2008,  Principal  Nye  and  Athletic  Director  Reid  were  fully  aware  that 
the  Booster  Club  or  players’  parents  would  be  funding  soft  goods  needed  to  participate  in  the 
football  program.  Neither  Principal  Nye  nor  Athletic  Director  Reid  made  Respondent  aware 
of  his  need  to  follow  any  particular  policy  or  rule  in  that  regard.  As  he  stated  to  Sergeant 
Starnes,  Superintendent  Farley  believed  that  the  District  had  failed  to  show  or  advise  coaches 
of  the  District’s  policies  and  procedures  for  purchasing  equipment. 

   

coach  while  working  for  the  District.  He  had  no  prior  history  of  discipline  with  the  District. 
He  received  nothing  but  satisfactory  District  evaluations.  When  Respondent  resigned  from 
coaching  at  DHHS  in  November  2010,  former  Athletic  Director  Reid  provided  him  with  a 
positive  letter  of  recommendation.  Mr.  Reid  also  testified  that  Respondent  was  a  good  coach 

It  is  undisputed  that  Respondent  has  been  a  competent  teacher  and  football 

78. 

19 

   

and  a  positive  role  model  for  his  student/athletes.  Former  DHHS  Principal  Nye  similarly 
testified  that  Respondent  was  a  good  football  coach.  Mr.  Pearson  of  the  Booster  Club 
testified  that  Respondent  was  a  good  football  coach.  Mr.  Pearson,  who  worked  closely  with 
Respondent  during  the  times  in  question,  supports  Respondent  in  this  case. 

79. 

Respondent  presented  three  character  witnesses,  including  his  brother  and 

father-in-law,  who  depict  Respondent  as  honest,  diligent  and  passionate  about  teaching  and 
coaching  high  school  student/athletes.  The  third  character  witness  was  Matt  Barkley,  a 
professional  football  player.  Respondent  coached  Mr.  Barkley’s  sixth  grade  pee-wee  football 
team.  Mr.  Barkley  sees  Respondent  as  a  mentor  and  role-model.  Mr.  Barkley  testified  that  of 
all  the  people  he  has  come  into  contact  with  in  his  years  of  football,  Respondent  is  one  of  the 
few  he  trusts.  Since  Mr.  Barkley  has  been  involved  in  some  of  the  premiere  football 
programs  in  this  country,  from  high  school  to  college  to  the  NFL,  and  has  played  for  some  of 
the  best  coaches  in  this  country,  his  esteem  for  Respondent  is  significant. 

80. 

In  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the  District  and  teachers 

during  the  times  in  question,  the  District  committed  to  using  progressive  discipline,  including 
counseling  and  corrective  action.  No  such  measures  were  used  for  Respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

1. 

In  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  allegations  of  the 

Second  Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the 
evidence  means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is 
more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226 
Cal.App.3d  314,  325.) 

Application  of  the  Four  Year  Rule 

2. 

Respondent  had  previously  moved  to  dismiss  this  case  based  on  his  argument 

that  the  District  violated  the  so-called  “four  year  rule.”  The  motion  was  denied.  Respondent’s 
writ  of  mandate  appealing  that  denial  was  similarly  denied,  with  the  Superior  Court  Judge 
concluding  the  issue  should  be  decided  as  part  of  the  administrative  hearing. 

3. 

Respondent  reiterated  his  argument  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  through  a 

motion  in  limine,  in  which  he  argued  that  evidence  of  events  “more  than  four  years  from  the 
date  of  the  charges”  should  be  excluded.  The  District  opposed  the  motion,  arguing  that  the 
four  year  rule  was  not  an  absolute  bar  and  that  various  exceptions  applied.  The  ALJ  reserved 
ruling  on  the  motion,  finding  that  because  the  issue  is  a  mixed  question  of  fact  and  law,  a 
decision  could  only  be  made  after  the  relevant  evidence  was  presented.  The  parties  agreed  to 
present  evidence  on  the  issue  and  for  the  ALJ  to  decide  the  issue  in  the  instant  Decision. 

  

   20

    

A.  The  Four  Year  Rule 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44944  governs  the  conduct  of  dismissal  hearings  such 

as  this.  When  this  case  was  initially  filed,  section  44944  stated,  in  relevant  part,  that  “no 
decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or  suspension  of  any  employee  shall  be  made  based  on 
charges  or  evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters  occurring  more  than  four  years  prior  to 
the  filing  of  the  notice.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (a)(5).) 

5. 

Effective  January  1,  2015,  the  portion  of  Education  Code  section  449444  cited 

above  was  amended  to  read,  “no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or  suspension  of  an 
employee  shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or  evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters 
occurring  more  than  four  years  before  the  filing  of  the  notice,  except  allegations  of  an  act 
described  in  Section  44010  of  this  code  or  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the 
Penal  Code.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (b)(2)(B).)  Another  provision  of  section  44944  was 
amended  to  read,  “No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters 
that  occurred  more  than  four  years  before  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice,  except 
allegations  of  an  act  described  in  Section  44010  of  this  code  or  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6, 
inclusive,  of  the  Penal  Code.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (b)(2)(A).) 

6. 

A  lengthy  discussion  concerning  the  retroactive  application  of  the  amended 

version  of  section  44944  to  this  matter  filed  well  before  the  effective  date  of  the  amendment 
is  not  necessary,  since  the  language  of  both  versions  is  virtually  identical,  and  there  are  no 
allegations  in  this  case  concerning  the  type  of  conduct  encompassed  by  Education  Code 
section  44010  or  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  to  11165.6.  Thus,  the  recent  version  of  section 
44944  is  deemed  to  apply  in  this  case.  In  fact,  in  his  motion  in  limine,  Respondent  argued  the 
amended  version  applies.  The  District  apparently  agrees. 

7. 

A.  The  next  question  is  the  date  from  which  the  four  year  period  begins  to  run. 

Section  44944  simply  describes  that  period  as  four  years  “before  the  filing  of  the  notice.” 
Seizing  on  the  word  “filing”  in  that  provision,  Respondent  argues  the  four  year  period  began 
four  years  from  the  date  the  initial  Accusation  was  filed  in  May  2012,  meaning  discipline  in 
this  case  cannot  be  based  on  events  occurring  prior  to  May  2008,  barring  an  exception. 
Seizing  on  the  word  “notice”  in  that  provision,  the  District  points  to  February  27,  2012,  when 
the  Board  resolved  to  give  notice  to  Respondent  of  its  intention  to  dismiss  him;  and  March  2, 
2012,  when  the  District  served  Respondent  with  the  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  (Notice). 
However,  the  District  argues  the  four  year  period  “should  date  back  to  March  2008,” 
apparently  using  the  date  of  service  of  the  Notice  on  Respondent. 

Mt 

Hf 

“  Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  further  statutory  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

21 

  

 

B.  Education  Code  section  44944  is  not  clear  on  this  point.  Section  44934, 

subdivision  (b),  discusses  action  a  school  board  can  take  “[u}pon  the  filing  of  written 
charges,”  including  deciding  by  majority  vote  to  “give  notice”  to  a  permanent  certificated 
employee  of  its  intention  to  dismiss  or  suspend  that  employee.  There  is  nothing  in  section 
44934  discussing  the  filing  of  an  accusation  or  similar  pleading,  so  Respondent’s  argument 
pointing  to  the  filing  of  the  initial  Accusation  in  May  2012  is  unsupported.  The  District 
apparently  filed  with  the  Board  written  charges  against  Respondent  no  later  than  February 
27,  2012.  However,  those  written  charges  would  not  have  included  any  sort  of  notice  to 
Respondent.  On  the  other  hand,  Respondent  would  be  served  with  notice  of  the  charges,  but 
that  process  would  not  involve  filing  any  document  or  pleading. 

C.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  ALJ  cannot  decipher  exactly  what  the 

Legislature  intended.  Since  the  four  year  rule  is  aimed  at  prohibiting  discipline  based  on  stale 
charges  and  evidence,  it  seems  more  reasonable  to  link  the  four  year  period  to  when  a  teacher 
first  becomes  aware  of  the  employing  school  board’s  decision  to  initiate  disciplinary 
proceedings.  Thus,  the  four  year  period  should  be  viewed  as  reaching  back  four  years  from 
when  a  teacher  is  first  served  with  a  school  board’s  notice  of  intention  to  dismiss  or  suspend 
him  or  her.  Such  is  a  fairer  view  of  this  statute’s  application,  in  that  a  school  district  could 
theoretically  file  charges  with  its  school  board  but  action  on  that  filing  could  be  delayed  to 
the  detriment  of  the  teacher  in  question. 

D.  In  this  case,  the  limitation  period  should  date  back  to  March  2,  2008,  which 

is  four  years  from  when  Respondent  was  served  with  the  Board’s  Notice.  Discipline  in  this 
case  should  not  be  based  on  events  or  conduct  occurring  before  March  2,  2008,  unless  the 
District  has  proven  that  an  exception  applies. 

B.  Exceptions  to  the  Four  Year  Rule  Generally 

8. 

A.  In  his  motion  in  limine,  Respondent  pointed  out  that  section  44944  was 

amended  after  the  writ  proceedings  to  add  a  specific  exception  to  the  four  year  rule  for 
violations  of  Education  Code  section  44010  or  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  through  11165.6 
(which  relate  to  child  abuse  and  sexual  offenses).  Respondent  argues  that  because  the 
Legislature  included  no  other  exceptions  to  the  four  year  rule  in  its  amendment,  no  other 
exceptions  apply,  including  equitable  doctrines. 

B.  In  2007,  and  well  before  the  amendment  to  section  44944,  the  California 

Supreme  Court  in  Atwater  Elementary  School  Dist.  v.  California  Dept.  Of  General  Services 
(2007)  41  Cal.4th  227,  235,  held  that  the  four  year  rule  of  section  44944  is  not  absolute  and 
that  equitable  exceptions,  such  as  equitable  estoppel,  may  apply. 

C.  In  construing  a  statutory  amendment,  one  must  ascertain  the  Legislature’s 

intent  so  as  to  effectuate  the  purpose  of  the  law.  (In  re  Kinnamon  (2005)  133  Cal.App.4th 
316.)  The  language  of  a  statute  should  not  be  given  a  literal  meaning  if  doing  so  would  result 
in  absurd  consequences  that  the  Legislature  did  not  intend;  intent  prevails  over  the  letter  of 
the  law  and  the  letter  will  be  read  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  enactment.  (/d.)  Courts 

22 

   

     

should  not  change  the  clear  words  of  a  statute  to  accomplish  a  purpose  that  does  not  appear 
on  the  face  of  the  statute  or  from  its  legislative  history.  (People  v.  Mobil  Oil  Corp.  (1983) 
143  Cal.App.3d  261,  270.)  When  a  statute  has  been  construed  by  judicial  decision,  and  that 
construction  is  not  altered  by  subsequent  legislation,  it  must  be  presumed  that  the  Legislature 
is  aware  of  the  judicial  construction  and  approves  of  it.  (Stavropoulos  v.  Superior  Court 
(2006)  141  Cal.App.4th  190,  196.) 

D.  Since  the  Legislature  is  presumed  to  have  known  of  the  Atwater  decision 

when  it  amended  section  44944,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  amendments  expressing  the 
Legislature’s  intent  to  abrogate  Atwater,  it  is  presumed  the  Legislature  still  approves  of  the 
notion  that  the  four  year  rule  is  not  absolute  and  that  equitable  doctrines  may  apply. 
Moreover,  it  appears  that  the  intention  of  the  Legislature  in  amending  section  44944  was  to 
expand  circumstances  in  which  discipline  can  be  based  on  conduct  occurring  beyond  the  four 
year  period,  specifically  allegations  of  child  abuse  or  sexual  offenses.  Nothing  in  the 
amendment  suggests  that  the  equitable  doctrines  are  no  longer  applicable.  Construing  the 
amendments  as  Respondent  suggests  would  tend  to  contract  situations  in  which  discipline 
could  be  based  on  events  occurring  beyond  the  four  year  period,  which  would  not  seem  to 
effectuate  the  purpose  of  the  law.  Thus,  in  this  case,  the  amendment  to  section  44944  does 
not  seem  to  have  abrogated  or  reduced  application  of  the  Atwater  decision. 

C.  Does  Equitable  Estoppel  Apply? 

9. 

10. 

Generally,  the  party  asserting  application  of  a  statute  of  limitations  must  prove 

the  facts  necessary  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  it.  (Samuels  v.  Mix  (1999)  22  Cal.4th  1,  10.)  The 
existence  of  an  estoppel  is  a  question  of  fact  and  the  settled  rule  as  to  the  proof  of  equitable 
estoppel  is  that  the  burden  rests  upon  the  party  asserting  it  to  prove  all  the  elements.  (Jones  v. 
Sunset  Oil  Co.  (1953)  118  Cal.App.2d  668,  673.)  The  same  rules  should  apply  to  the  other 
equitable  doctrines.  Thus,  while  Respondent  has  the  burden  of  establishing  the  benefits  of  the 
four  year  rule,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  establishing  an  exception  to  it. 

As  mentioned  above,  the  Court  in  Atwater  Elementary  School  Dist.,  supra,  41 
Cal.4th  227,  235,  held  that  the  doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel  may  be  applied  as  an  exception 
to  the  four  year  rule  if  the  elements  are  established.  In  that  case,  the  Court  recognized  that  the 
doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel  is  founded  on  the  principle  that  no  person  may  profit  from  his 
own  wrongdoing.  Although  the  case  law  is  far  from  clear,  once  equitable  estoppel  is 
established,  the  applicable  time  limitation  is  no  longer  applicable.  There  is  no  tolling  of  the 
time  period;  the  limitation  is  no  longer  considered.  (Atwater  Elementary  School  Dist.,  supra, 
41  Cal.4th  227,  232;  Lentz  v.  McMahon  (1989)  49  Cal.3d  393,  398-399.) 

    

concealment  of  material  facts;  (b)  made  with  knowledge,  actual  or  virtual,  of  the  facts;  (c)  to 
a  party  ignorant,  actually  and  permissibly,  of  the  truth;  (d)  with  the  intention,  actual  or 
virtual,  that  the  ignorant  party  act  on  it;  and  (e)  that  party  was  induced  to  act  on  it.  (Simmons 
v.  Ghaderi  (2008)  44  Cal.4th  570,  584.) 

A.  Avvalid  claim  for  equitable  estoppel  requires:  (a)  a  representation  or 

11. 

  

  

B.  Here,  a  key  element  in  proving  equitable  estoppel  is  missing,  i.e.,  the 
District  relied  on  Respondent’s  misrepresentation  or  concealment.  Although  there  was 
evidence  that  Respondent  failed  to  disclose  details  of  his  transactions  with  LATS  or  Bill 
Lapes,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  actively  concealed  his  conduct.  When 
Mrs.  Sando  initially  submitted  invoices  to  Respondent  for  payment  in  early  2009,  Principal 
Nye  was  fully  aware  of  the  transactions  and  Mrs.  Sando’s  contention  that  Respondent, 
DHHS  and/or  the  District  were  responsible  for  paying  for  such  items.  The  record  fell  well 
short  of  evidence  showing  that  Respondent  intentionally  misrepresented  or  concealed 
material  facts  to  the  District.  Thus,  the  District  failed  to  show  that  equitable  estoppel  applies. 
This  was  the  ruling  reached  by  ALJ  Yerkey  in  denying  Respondent’s  motion  to  dismiss  and 
there  was  no  evidence  adduced  at  the  hearing  demonstrating  that  her  ruling  was  in  error. 

12. 

A.  In  addition,  case  law  indicates  that  equitable  estoppel  is  not  applicable  if 

the  party  asserting  it  was  apprised  of  the  requisite  facts  before  the  applicable  limitation 
expires.  For  example,  in  Lobrovich  v.  Georgison  (1956)  144  Cal.App.2d  567,  573-574,  it  was 
held  that  where  there  was  still  ample  time  to  institute  an  action  within  the  statutory  period 
after  circumstances  inducing  delay  had  ceased  to  operate,  the  party  cannot  claim  an  estoppel. 

B.  In  its  discussion  concerning  the  application  of  equitable  estoppel,  the 

Supreme  Court  in  the  Atwater  case  relied  on  its  prior  decision  in  the  case  of  Lanizy  v.  Centex 
Homes  (2003)  31  Cal.4th  363.  In  Lanizy,  the  Court  held  that  equitable  estoppel  “comes  into 
.  the  circumstances  in  which  a 
play  only  after  the  limitations  period  has  run  and  addresses  . 
party  will  be  estopped  from  asserting  the  statute  of  limitations  as  a  defense  to  an  admittedly 
untimely  action  because  his  conduct  has  induced  another  into  forbearing  suit  within  the 
applicable  limitations  period.  (Lantzy,  supra,  31  Cal.4th  363,  383.)  The  Court  in  Lanizy 
rejected  a  claim  of  equitable  estoppel  during  the  pleading  stage  of  a  construction  defect  suit, 
and  upheld  the  dismissal  of  the  case  after  demurrer,  in  part,  because  the  party  asserting 
equitable  estoppel  had  knowledge  of  the  alleged  misconduct  in  question  before  the  expiration 
of  the  applicable  ten  year  statute  of  limitations.  (Jd.  at  p.  385.) 

. 

13. 

In  this  case,  the  District  was  aware  of  Respondent’s  conduct  in  October  2010, 

including  the  dates  of  his  transactions  with  LATS  in  February  2008.  The  District  had  over 
one  year  to  timely  initiate  charges  against  Respondent  based  on  the  events  of  February  2008. 
When  the  District  received  Mr.  Price’s  investigative  report  concerning  Respondent  in  either 
late  December  2010  or  early  January  2011,  it  still  had  time  to  initiate  charges  against 
Respondent  based  on  events  in  February  2008.  Since  the  District  was  aware  of  the  requisite 
facts  before  the  four  year  period  applicable  to  those  events  expired,  it  may  not  assert 
equitable  estoppel  as  an  exception  to  the  four  year  rule.  (Factual  Findings  1-11;  64-74.) 

D.  Does  Delayed  Discovery  Apply? 

14.  —  The  District  argues  that  delayed  discovery  also  applies.  The  Court  in  Atwater 

did  not  specifically  address  equitable  doctrines  other  than  equitable  estoppel  because  the 
parties  in  that  matter  had  not  adequately  set  forth  the  factual  basis  on  which  other  equitable 
principles  would  rest.  In  addition,  “consideration  of  the  individual  doctrines  is  unnecessary” 

24 

 

  

     

because  “[a]  conclusion  that  any  one  applies  resolves  whether  the  four-year  time  limitation  is 
absolute.”  (Atwater  Elementary  School  Dist.,  supra,  41  Cal.4th  227,  232.)  There  is  no 
indication  in  Atwater  that  equitable  estoppel  is  the  only  equitable  relief  that  may  apply  as  an 
exception  to  the  four  year  rule.  Respondent  presented  no  argument  why  equitable  estoppel 
should  be  available  but  not  the  related  equitable  doctrine  of  delayed  discovery.  In  fact,  and  as 
explained  below,  delayed  discovery  simply  tolls  the  applicable  time  period  until  the  party  in 
question  had  reasonable  notice  of  the  underlying  facts.  Such  is  a  less  drastic  relief  than 
equitable  estoppel,  where  the  time  limitation  in  question  vanishes  if  estoppel  is  proven.  If  the 
more  drastic  remedy  of  equitable  estoppel  is  applicable  to  section  44944,  it  begs  the  question 
why  the  less  drastic  relief  from  the  delayed  discovery  doctrine  would  not  be.  Accordingly, 
the  equitable  doctrine  of  delayed  discovery  is  viewed  as  also  available  in  such  cases. 

15. 

A.  “The  most  important  exception  to  that  general  rule  regarding  accrual  of  a 
cause  of  action  is  the  ‘discovery  rule,’  under  which  accrual  is  postponed  until  the  plaintiff 
‘discovers,  or  has  reason  to  discover,  the  cause  of  action.’  Discovery  of  the  cause  of  action 
occurs  when  the  plaintiff  ‘has  reason  .. 
.  to  suspect  a  factual  basis’  for  the  action.  ‘The  policy 
reason  behind  the  discovery  rule  is  to  ameliorate  a  harsh  rule  that  would  allow  the  limitations 
period  for  filing  suit  to  expire  before  a  plaintiff  has  or  should  have  learned  of  the  latent  injury 
and  its  cause.’”  (Pooshs  v.  Philip  Morris  USA,  Inc.  (2011)  51  Cal.4th  788,  797  [citations 
omitted].) 

B.  Under  the  delayed  discovery  doctrine,  the  accrual  date  of  a  cause  of  action 

is  delayed  until  the  plaintiff  is  aware  of  his  or  her  injury  and  its  cause.  The  plaintiff  is 
charged  with  this  awareness  as  of  the  date  he  or  she  suspects  or  should  suspect  that  the  injury 
was  caused  by  someone’s  wrongful  act.  The  period  of  limitations,  therefore,  will  begin  to  run 
when  the  plaintiff  has  a  “suspicion  of  wrongdoing”;  in  other  words,  when  he  or  she  has 
notice  of  information  of  circumstances  to  put  a  reasonable  person  on  inquiry.  V/olly  v.  Eli 
Lilly  &  Co.  (1988)  44  Cal.3d  1103,  1109-1111.) 

16. 

The  District  was  informed  of  Respondent’s  conduct  in  fall  2010,  when  Mrs. 

Sando  presented  her  complaint.  This  was  when  the  District  first  learned  of  the  particulars  of 
the  transactions  between  Respondent  and  Bill  Lapes,  including  Mr.  Lapes’  margin  process 
and  the  account  credits  allocated  to  the  DHHS  special  9  account.  It  was  not  established  that 
the  District  had  any  reason  to  believe  prior  to  Mrs.  Sando’s  complaint  that  Respondent  had 
participated  in  Bill  Lapes’  margin  process.  The  District  immediately  launched  its 
investigation  in  November  2010.  After  the  conclusion  of  the  investigation  in  December  2011, 
the  District  filed  charges  against  Respondent  with  the  Board  in  late  February  2012.  After  the 
Board  decided  to  terminate  Respondent,  the  District  promptly  served  Respondent  with  notice 
that  he  was  being  terminated  in  early  March  2012.  It  must  be  remembered  that  applying  the 
delayed  discovery  rule  here  means  simply  allowing  charges  and  evidence  of  events  only  one 
month  beyond  the  actual  four  year  rule  period,  i.e.,  from  March  2008  to  February  2008.  Nor 
is  this  a  situation  where  the  District  waited  the  full  four  years  after  its  discovery  of  the  facts 
to  seek  discipline.  Thus,  the  equities  here  weigh  in  favor  of  applying  the  delayed  discovery 
doctrine,  meaning  discipline  in  this  matter  can  be  based  on  the  events  dating  to  February 
2008  without  violating  the  four  year  rule  of  section  44944.  (Factual  Findings  1-11;  64-74.) 

     
25 

  

 

Can  Respondent  Be  Disciplined  For  Events  Not  Alleged  in  the  Operative  Pleading? 

17. 

A.  As  discussed  above,  the  Second  Amended  Accusation  alleges  many  of  the 
events  in  question,  including  the  various  orders  placed  by  Respondent  on  or  about  February 
18,  2008,  which  generated  the  sales  amounts  that  created  the  credits  placed  into  the  DHHS 
special  9  account.  The  Second  Amended  Accusation  also  pleads  the  order  on  or  about 
February  29,  2008,  in  which  it  is  alleged  that  Respondent  used  some  of  the  credit  from  the 
special  9  account  for  coaches’  t-shirts  and  shorts. 

B.  However,  there  was  evidence  presented  concerning  a  number  of 

transactions  not  specifically  alleged  in  the  operative  pleading,  including  two  quotes  from  Bill 
Lapes  for  team  helmets  and  pads,  one  football,  a  number  of  orders  made  directly  by  the 
Booster  Club,  and  two  orders  for  hats,  visors  and  hooded  sweatshirts  placed  on  or  about 
February  29,  2008,  in  which  the  District  contends  Respondent  used  credits  from  the  special  9 
account  to  obtain  those  items. 

18. 

Administrative  pleading  is  not  bound  by  the  strict  rules  applicable  to  pleadings 

in  civil  court  proceedings.  Fair  notice  to  the  respondent  is  more  important  than  compliance 
with  technical  pleading  rules.  (Stearns  v.  Fair  Employment  Practice  Com.  (1971)  6  Cal.3d 
205,  213.)  In  the  absence  of  a  statute  or  regulation,  due  process  requires  only  that  the 
respondent  be  informed  of  the  charges  and  afforded  the  basic,  appropriate  elements  of 
procedural  due  process  in  the  hearing.  (Goss  v.  Lopez  (1975)  419  U.S.  565.)  A  pleading  is 
sufficient  and  comports  with  due  process  when  it  provides  the  respondent  with  enough  notice 
of  the  charge  to  enable  him  or  her  to  prepare  a  defense.  (Dyment  v.  Board  of Medical 
Examiners  of State  of  Cal.  (1922)  57  Cal.App.  260,  265.)  No  prejudice  will  be  found  if  it 
appears  from  the  record  that  the  respondent  was  in  fact  able  to  prepare  a  defense.  Jaramillo 
v.  State  Bd.  for  Geologists  and  Geophysicists  (2006)  136  Cal.App.4th  880.) 

19. 

In  this  case,  the  Second  Amended  Accusation  gave  Respondent  fair  notice  that 

his  immediate  suspension  and  dismissal  were  being  sought  as  a  result  of  his  various 
transactions  with  Bill  Lapes  and  LATS  in  February  2008  and  thereafter.  Though  the 
operative  pleading  alleges  some,  but  not  all,  of  those  transactions,  it  is  clear  that  Respondent 
had  been  able  to  prepare  his  defense  to  all  of  the  transactions,  as  he  presented a  spirited  and 
vigorous  defense  to  all  of  the  evidence  presented  by  the  District,  including  the  transactions 
not  specifically  alleged.  Since  all  of  the  orders  in  question  directly  relate  to  each  other,  the 
evidence  presented  concerning  the  events  not  alleged  also  tends  to  explain  or  supplement 
understanding  of  the  events  actually  alleged.  Under  these  circumstances,  due  process  will  not 
be  denied  if  all  of  the  transactions  occurring  in  2008,  alleged  or  not,  are  considered  for 
purposes  of  determining  if  good  cause  exists  to  suspend  or  terminate  Respondent’s 
employment  with  the  District. 

26 

  

 

Cause  for  Immediate  Suspension  and/or  Termination 

20. 

A.  The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a),’  are  established.  In  this  case,  the  District  seeks  Respondent’s  dismissal  based  on 
subdivisions  (a)(1)  [immoral  conduct],  (a)(6)  [evident  unfitness  for  service],  and  (a)(8) 
[persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her}. 

B.  In  addition,  a  governing  board  may  immediately  suspend  a certificated 

employee  without  pay  pursuant  to  section  44939  upon  the  filing  of  a  statement  of  charges 
alleging  specified  acts  of  misconduct,  including  immoral  conduct.  In  this  case,  the  cause  for 
discipline  based  on  Respondent’s  alleged  immoral  conduct  would  support  such  an  immediate 
suspension  if  proven.  However,  the  other  two  stated  causes  for  discipline  alleged  in  the 
Second  Amended  Accusation  are  not  included  in  section  44939  as  grounds  for  an  immediate 
suspension  without  pay. 

21. 

A.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and 
44939.  (Factual  Findings  12-80.) 

B.  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness; 
or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland 
(1960)  179  Cal.-App.2d  808,  811.) 

C.  In  this  case,  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  Respondent  engaged  in 
any  immoral  conduct.  The  Second  Amended  Accusation  made  charges  of  bribery,  fraud  and 
kick-backs  based  largely  on  the  credits  made  to  the  special  9  account  for  the  DHHS  football 
program  and  Respondent’s  few  purchases  of  football  clothing  that  were  paid  from  that 
account.  Respondent  did  not  steal  District  funds  or  conspire  with  Bill  Lapes  to  steal  District 
funds.  He  did  not  misappropriate  or  embezzle  any  District  monies  or  accept  bribes  or  kick- 
backs  to  continue  ordering  from  LATS.  Respondent  did  not  purchase  any  goods  or  items  for 
his  personal  benefit.  Rather,  the  items  ordered  on  a  few  occasions  from  the  special  9  account 
were  used  only  for  football  program  equipment  and  activities.  The  evidence  indicates  it  is  not 
unusual  for  high  school  coaches’  apparel  to  be  funded  by  booster  or  support  groups,  as 
opposed  to  out-of-pocket  expenses  by  the  coaches  themselves.  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not 
connote  any  immoral  intent  to  benefit  himself  or  to  harm  the  District,  DHHS,  or  its  students. 

   

substantive  changes  to  any  of  the  subdivisions  relied  upon  by  the  District  for  discipline, 
many  of  the  subdivisions  were  renumbered  and  thus  vary  from  the  operative  pleading. 

°  Section  44932  was  also  amended  effective  J anuary  1,  2015.  While  there  were  no 

27 

    

22. 

A.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

is  evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 
(Factual  Findings  12-80.) 

B.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 
unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “’Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.) 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  any  sort  of  fixed 

character  trait  rendering  him  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher.  If  anything,  Respondent  is  a  good 
teacher  and  a  good  football  coach.  Other  than  this  case,  he  has  had  an  unblemished  record  as 
an  educator  since  he  became  credentialed  in  1991.  The  events  upon  which  the  District  seeks 
discipline  were  isolated  to  essentially  a  two  month  period  in  2008.  Respondent’s  orders  with 
Bill  Lapes  were  placed  in  February  2008  just  a  few  weeks  after  he  had  been  hired  as  the  head 
football  coach  at  DHHS.  Respondent  had  little  to  no  training  on  District  purchasing  policies 
and  was  up  against  hard  deadlines  to  order  practice  and  season  clothing  and  equipment  for 
the  DHHS  football  program.  The  orders  and  transactions  ultimately  consummated  were  not 
subject  to  District  purchasing  policies  because  they  involved  the  Booster  Club  and  players’ 
parents.  The  margin  process  suggested  by  Bill  Lapes  was  not  unusual  in  the  athletic 
community.  The  concept  that  coaching  staff  apparel  would  be  funded  by  a  booster  or  support 
club  was  not  foreign  to  Respondent  either.  Thus,  while  Respondent  failed  to  be  completely 
candid  with  the  Booster  Club  in  disclosing  the  full  parameters  of  the  margin  process 
suggested  by  Mr.  Lapes, it cannot  be  concluded  that  his  failure  to  do  so,  on  one  occasion, 
demonstrated  any  negative  character  trait.  Nor  did  the  few  orders  funded  from  the  credits 
generated  from  the  initial  spirit  pack  orders  that  were  used  to  provide  apparel  to  Respondent 
and  his  coaching  staff. 

D.  In  addition,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  not 

remediable  upon  receipt  of  notice  from  the  District  that  his  conduct  failed  to  meet  the 
District’s  expectations.  As  discussed  above,  Respondent’s  conduct  in  failing  to  disclose  the 
full  parameters  of  Bill  Lapes’  margin  process  to  the  Booster  Club  and/or  the  players’  parents 
did  violate  the  Board’s  Code  of  Ethics  set  forth  in  Board  Policy  4119.21.  However,  there  is 
absolutely  no  question  that  if  the  District  had  advised  Respondent  of  such,  he  would  have 
never  again  become  involved  in  any  transaction  involving  a  margin  or  anything  remotely 
similar  to  what  happened  with  Bill  Lapes  or  LATS. 

    

A.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  Board  of  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8).  (Factual 
Findings  12-80.) 

23. 

  

 

     

B.  Cause  for  discipline  here  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules  or 

district  policies.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.)  However,  there  must  be  a  “showing 
of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (/d.  at  p.  1196.)  The  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77, 
81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are 
generally  not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.) 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  the  sort  of 

”  insubordinate  behavior  typically  associated  with  this  statute.  While  he  did  violate  the  Board's 

Code  of  Ethics  by  participating  in  Bill  Lapes’  margin  process  without  disclosing  the  full 
parameters  of  it  to  the  Booster  Club  or  its  board,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s 
violation  of  that  policy  was  knowing,  intentional  or  persistent.  It  was  not  established  that 
Respondent  violated  any  other  Board  policies  or  District  regulations,  and  it  is  not  even  clear 
that  he  knew  the  Board’s  Code  of  Ethics  existed.  Respondent  received  little  to  no  training  on 
District  purchasing  policies  and  even  Superintendent  Farley  admitted  to  Sergeant  Starnes  that 
the  District  failed  to  show  or  advise  coaches  of  the  District’s  policies  and  procedures  for 
purchasing  equipment.  Respondent’s  actions  occurred  when  he  was  new  to  his  position  as 
head  football  coach  and  was  thrown  into  the  process  of  ordering  athletic  equipment  under 
very  tight  deadlines.  The  concept  of  coaching  apparel  being  funded  by  booster  or  support 
clubs  was  not  unusual  to  Respondent,  so  the  fact  that  some  of  the  credits  developed  from  the 
margin  process  were  used  in  that  way  would  not  automatically  signal  that  the  transactions 
violated  the  Code  of  Ethics.  This  is  not  a  case  where  it  was  established  that  Respondent  knew 
the  Code  of  Ethics,  understood  the  LATS  transactions  violated  the  code,  and  yet  he 
intentionally  and  persistently  chose  to  engage  in  that  activity. 

24. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  immediately  suspend  Respondent  can  only  be 

supported  by  his  engaging  in  immoral  conduct.  As  discussed  above,  it  was  not  established 
that  Respondent  did  so.  Therefore,  it  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
that  cause  existed  to  immediately  suspend  Respondent  without  pay  pursuant  section  44939. 
(Legal  Conclusions  20-21,  Factual  Findings  1-80.) 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

25. 

In  deciding  whether  cause  for  dismissal  exists  for  immoral  conduct  or  evident 

unfitness  for  service,  it  also  must  be  established  that  a  teacher’s  misconduct  relates  to  his 
fitness  to  teach,  within  the  meaning  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d 
214,  227-230).  In  this  case,  since  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s  conduct 
demonstrated  either  immorality  or  evident  unfitness  for  service,  examination  of  the  Morrison 
factors  is  unnecessary.° 

°  Nonetheless,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  Morrison  factors  would  support  cause  for 
discipline  if  applied.  For  example,  there  was  little  showing  that  Respondent’s  conduct 

 

     
29 

  

  

Disposition 

26. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach  ..  .,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.)  Thus, 
even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

27. 

In  this  case,  the  District  failed  to  establish  that  cause  exists  to  immediately 

suspend  or  dismiss  Respondent’s  employment.  This  is  not  to  say  that  Respondent  did  nothing 
improper.  His  lack  of  complete  candor  to  the  Booster  Club  and  his  players’  parents  regarding 
the  margin  process  was  an  exercise  of  poor  judgment  and  it  violated  the  Board’s  Code  of 
Ethics,  notwithstanding  the  mitigating  circumstances.  In  that  sense,  his  conduct  is  better 
viewed  as  unprofessional  and/or  unsatisfactory.  Yet  even  assuming  that  conduct  would  have 
supported  legal  cause  for  discipline,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  circumstances  here  would 
have  warranted  cither  an  immediate  suspension  or  dismissal.  Respondent  served  as  the  head 
football  coach  at  will.  Once  the  activity  was  discovered,  Superintendent  Farley  or  Principal 
Nye  would  have  been  justified  in  firing  Respondent  as  the  head  football  coach.  They  would 
have  also  been  justified  in  directing  that  Respondent  receive  counseling  and/or  a  stern  letter 
of  reprimand.  Perhaps  even  a  short  suspension  would  have  been  justified.  Such  actions 
would  have  been  entirely  consistent  with  the  principles  of  progressive  discipline  stated  in  the 
collective  bargaining  agreement  that  was  in  effect  at  the  times  in  question.  However,  any 
discipline  greater  than  that  would  have  been  highly  problematic  and  unsupported  for  all  of 
the  reasons  discussed  above. 

ORDER 

The  Second  Amended  Accusation  is  dismissed.  The  immediate  suspension  without 
pay  of  Respondent  Brent  Melbon  is  reversed.  The  dismissal  of  Respondent  Brent  Melbon 
from  employment  with  the  Capistrano  Unified  School  District  is  reversed. 

DATED:  July  9,  2015 

 

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

adversely  affected  students  or  the  District;  if  there  was  any  adversity,  it  was  minimal;  the 
events  in  question  happened  in  2008,  more  than  seven  years  ago  and  were  remote  in  time;  a 
number  of  mitigating  facts  were  established,  but  nothing  aggravating;  and  it  is  highly 
unlikely  that  Respondent  would  repeat  such  conduct  in  the  future. 

  
30     

