BEFORE  THE 
ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
COMMISSION 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  Case  No.  2012060115 

KAPILA  BHUTA, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (Commission)  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  April  8,9,  10,  11,  12,  15  and  16, 
2013.  The  Commission  consists  of  the  following  members:  Alana  Faure,  teacher,  San 
Marino  Unified  School  District;  Pamela  Moule,  teacher,  retired;  and  David  B.  Rosenman, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  My  T.  Huynh, 

Attorney-at-Law.  Respondent  Kapila  Bhuta  was  present  and  represented  herself. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  parties  submitted  argument, 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  as  of  April  16,  2013. 

After  due  consideration  of  the  entire  record  herein  the  Commission  makes  the 

following  factual  findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  Amended  Accusation  and 

Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Vivian  K.  Ekchian  in  her  official  capacity  as  Chief 
Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District. 

2, 

Respondent  Kapila  Bhuta  (Respondent)  has.  been  employed  by  the  District  and 

is  a  permanent  certificated  employee.  Since  approximately  September  2002  she  has  been 
assigned  to  teach  at  153™  Street  Elementary  School  in  grades  three,  four  or  five. 

3. 

Respondent  submitted  Activity  Logs  for  the  period  May  9,  2008,  through 
December  2009  that  required  verification  signatures  of  participants.  .Respondent  forged

some  of  the  signatures  on  these  logs  in  order  to  receive  compensation  for  hours  of  services 
  
Supposedly  rendered  to  participants.  The  circumstances  are  explained  in  more  detail  below, 

4, 

On  December  10,  2010,  the  District  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Acts  referring  to  these  events  and  others,  indicating  that  Respondent’s 
services  were  unsatisfactory  for  the  following  reasons:  (1)  poor  judgment;  (2)  submission  of 
forged  documents  for  additional  pay;  and  (3)  failure  to  adhere  to  the  District’s  Code  of 
Ethics.  (Exhibit  1,  pp.  6  and  7.)  The  Notice  contained  the  recommendation  of  Albert 
Lozano  (Lozano),  principal  of  153"  Street  Elementary  School,  that  Respondent  be  dismissed 
from  employment.  The  recommendation  was  approved  by  the  Local  District  Administrator. 

5, 

The  Statement  of  Charges  was  served  on  Respondent  on  May  9,  2012, 

Respondent  submitted  a  Demand  for  Hearing  dated  May  23,  2011.  (Exhibit  7,  p.  547.)  An 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  was  signed  by  Ms.  Ekchian  and  filed  with  the  District 
on  June  14,  2012.  (Exhibit  7.)  The  District  alleged  that  Respondent  should  be  dismissed  due 
to  the  forged  signatures  for  the  following  violations  of  the  Education  Code’:  (1) 
unprofessional  conduct,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1);  (2)  immoral  conduct,  sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939;  (3)  dishonesty,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3);  (4) 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5);  (5)  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board 
of  the  local  school  district  employing  her,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and  (6)  willful 
refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  section  44939,  The  District  also 
alleged  that  it  issued  to  Respondent  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and,  on  May  19,  2011, 
a  Below  Standard  Stull  Evaluation.  After  being  served  with  a  copy  of  the  Accusation, 
Respondent  submitted  a  Notice  of  Defense  dated  July  17,  2012.  (Exhibit  8.)  The  Amended 
Accusation  was  signed  April  11,  2013.  (Exhibit  14.)  The  parties  stipulated  that  the  hearing 
could  commence  beyond  the  statutory  time  limit.  (Exhibit  10.) 

6. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

7. 

Respondent  admitted  she  forged  the  signatures.  The  circumstances  all  relate  to 
Respondent’s  status  as  a  teacher  with  a  certification  from  the  National  Board  for  Professional 
Teaching  Standards,  known  as  NBC  teachers  (for  National  Board  Certification  teachers). 
Under  contracts  negotiated  with  the  teachers’  union,  the  District  provides  a  pay  raise  of 

'  During  the  hearing  there  was  no  specific  reference  made  to  where,  if  anywhere,  the 

written  initial  Statement  of  Charges  is  found  in  the  exhibits.  The  written  evidence  is 
voluminous  and  may,  somewhere,  contain  this  document.  The  date  it  was  served,  May  9, 
2012,  was  not  in  dispute. 

*  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  indicated. 

 

7,5  percent  to  NBC  teachers,  An  additional  7.5  percent  raise  is  given  to  NBC  teachers  who 
  perform  92  hours  per  year  of  approved  additional  services,  To  establish  that  the  extra  92 

hours  of  services  were  performed,  NBC  teachers  submit  Activity  Logs  indicating  the 
following:  the  task  number  assigned  to  certain  categories  of  activities  (the  task  numbers  and 
descriptions  are  at  the  bottom  of  each  log  and  include,  for  example,  new  teacher  support, 
grant  writing,  conference  attendance,  etc.);  the  activity  location,  date  and  number  of  hours; 
description  of  the  activity;  and  a  verification  signature  (with  printed  name  and  title).  There 
are  six  Activity  Logs  at  issue  covering  the  period  from  January  18,  2008,  through  November 
23,  2009. 

8. 

The  earliest  Activity  Logs  in  issue  relate  to  Kimberly  Franklin  (Franklin), 

another  teacher  at-153"  Street  Elementary  School,  and  include  21  entries  from  January  18  to 
June  4,  2008.  All  listed  activities  occurred  at  the  school  (with  the  exception  of  one  activity), 
and  all  are  under  Task  4,  Training  in  District  Intern,  Pre-Intern,  and  Teacher  Training 
Academy  programs,  (Emphasis  in  original  Activity  Logs.)  The  total  time  for  all  activities  is 
32  hours.  (Exhibit  1,  pp.  LAUSD  105-107.) 

, 

9, 

Respondent  testified  that  Franklin  was  to  receive  help  under  the  PAR  program 

(Peer  Assessment  Review)  and  that  Respondent  was  assigned  as  Franklin’s  PAR  teacher. 
According  to  Respondent,  she  met  with  Franklin  for  all  of  these  sessions  and  discussed  the 
various  subjects  listed  on  the  Activity  Logs,  Respondent  asked  Franklin  to  sign  the  logs,  and 
Franklin  refused,  stating  she  did  not  want  others  to  know  she  had  received  the  help  from 
Respondent.  Respondent  then  signed  Franklin’s  name.  Other  than  the  admission  that  she 
signed  Franklin’s  namie,  the  Commission  does  not  find  Respondent’s  testimony  to  be 
credible. 

10, 

Franklin  denied  any  meetings  with  Respondent  to  discuss  any  of  the  subjects 

listed  on  the  21  log  entries  bearing  her  name.  Franklin  testified  credibly  that  she  had  the  sort 
of  interactions  with  Respondent  that  she  might  have  with  other  teachers,  in  the  nature  of 
short  discussions,  perhaps  in  the  hallway,  lunch  room,  or  classrooms,  touching  very  generally 
and  briefly  on  relevant  topics.  However,  she  denied  receiving  PAR  assistance  from 

3  The  initial  Accusation  included  allegations  predating  January  2008.  However,  there 

is  a  four-year  time  limitation  relating  to  evidence  that  can  be  submitted  in  cases  where  a 
school  district  seeks  to  terminate  employment  of  a  teacher  (section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5), 
discussed  in  mote  detail  below  in  Factual  Finding  34  and  the  Legal  Conclusions),  Due  to 
this  limitation,  the  time  period  of  the  evidence  was  shortened  to  May  9,  2008  to  November 
23,  2009.  (The  date  of  May  9,  2008,  is  four  years  prior  to  service  on  Respondent  of  the 
Statement  of  Charges.  See  motion  papers  (Exhibits  AA,  BB,  CC,  11  and  12),  rulings  on  the 
motions  made  on  the  record  on  April  8,  2013,  and  the  Amended  Accusation  (Exhibit  14).) 
Later,  the  ALJ  granted  the  District’s  request  to  present  evidence  of  events  as  early  as  January 
2008,  based  on  the  facts  and  equitable  principals  discussed  in  more  detail  in  later  Factual 
Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions.

Respondent,  as  well  as  any  assistance  from  Respondent  in  the  District’s  training  programs 

  for  District  Interns  or  Pre-Interns,  or  the  Teacher  Training  Academy,  or  anything  amounting 

to  32  hours  of  interaction  with  Respondent  for  purposes  of  training  or  assistance.  The 
signatures  on  the  21  log  entries  are  not  Franklin’s,  and  she  did  not  authorize  Respondent  to 
sign  for  her. 
carefully  and  directly.  Her  testimony  was  credible. 

Franklin  was  sincere  and  measured  in  her  testimony,  answering  questions 

. 

11. 

PAR  is  an  assistance  program  authorized  by  the  District.  There  is  little 

consistency  to  Respondent’s  claim  that  Franklin  completed  forms  requesting  PAR  and  that 
Respondent’s  assignment  as  Franklin’s  PAR  teacher  was  approved  by  the  District,  and 
Respondent’s  claim  that  Franklin  would  not  sign  the  logs  because  Franklin  did  not  want  it 
known  that  she  was  receiving  help.  The  Commission  finds  that  the  activities  Respondent 
claimed  to  have  provided  to  Franklin  did  not  occur,  and  that  Respondent  forged  Franklin’s 
signature  on  the  21  entries. 

12,  .  Next  in  chronological  order  is  an  Activity  Log  with  two  entries  purportedly 

signed  by  Karol  McQueary  (McQueary).  (Exhibit  1,  p.  LAUSD  108.)  Dated  January  22  and 
February  25,  2008,  each  entry  is  for  two  hours  for  Task  2  (professional  development  sessions 
for  schools,  local  district,  etc.),  at  two  school  improvement  grant  meetings  for  activities 
described  as  “funding  allocation”  and  “materials  for  schools.”  The  signature  verification  is 
printed  “Carol  (A.P.)”  and  the  signature  reads  “Carol  M.” 

13, 

Respondent  testified  that  she  worked  with  McQueary  on  allocating  funds  from 

a  school  grant,  including  deciding  which  materials  would  be  purchased.  .There  were  two 
different  grants  described  in  testimony:  a  school  improvement  grant  that  Respondent  worked 
on  and  a  QUIA  grant  worked  on  by  McQueary.  Respondent  contends  that  she  worked  with 
McQueary  and,  when  she  asked  McQueary  to  sign  the  Activity  Log,  McQueary  refused 
because  the  funds  to  pay  Respondent  would  come  from  the  grant  funds,  which  had  been 
exhausted.  Respondent  testified  she  asked  McQueary  to  ask  Principal  Lozano  for  help,  and 
McQueary  reported  back  that  Lozano  said  there  was  no  source  for  the  money  and  instructed 
McQueary  not  to  sign  the  Activity  Log.  Respondent  did  not  inquire  of  Lozano  about  this 
conversation  during  his  testimony  at  the  hearing.  Respondent  signed  for'McQueary,  Other 
than  Respondent’s  admission  that  she  signed  McQueary’s  name,  the  Conimission  does  not 
find  Respondent’s  testimony  to  be  credible. 

14. 

McQueary  testified  that  she  was  a  teacher  and  administrator  at  153"  Street 
School.  She  worked  on  part  of  the  QUIA  grant  which  was  available  for  low-performing 
schools,  Grant  funds  were  used  for  the  school  computer  lab.  She  was  not  aware  of  the 
school  improvement  grant  referred  to  by  Respondent.  McQueary  did  not  work  with 
Respondent  on  the  activities  listed  in  the  Activity  Log  and  Respondent  did  not  ask  her  to  sign 
it,  She  did  not  give  Respondent  permission  to  sign  her  name.  McQueary  was  credible  in  her 
testimony. 

,

15. 

The  Commission  finds  that  the  activities  Respondent  claimed  to  have 

participated  in  with  McQueary  did  not  occur  with McQueary, and that Respondent  forged 
McQueary’s  signature  on  the  two  log  entries. 

16, 

Respondent  submitted  an  Activity  Log  for  May  1,  2008,  claiming  one  hour  of 

preparation  and  two  hours  of  services  on  Literacy  Night,  under  Task  2  (professional 
development  sessions  for  schools,  local  district,  etc.).  The  signature  verification  states 
“Literacy  Coach”  and  the  signature  reads  “Agee.”  (Exhibit  1,  p.  LAUSD  104.) 

17. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  worked  with  the  school’s  literacy  coach, 

_  Chionesa  Agee  (Agee),  on  the  listed  activities.  Respondent  gave  a  presentation  to  parents 

after  school  that  was  well  received.  When  Respondent  gave  the  log  to  Agee,  Agee  said  she 
would  talk  to  Lozano  first  and,  later,  told  Respondent  that  Lozano  instructed  her  not  to  sign. 
When  asked  later  at  the  hearing  if  Agee  told  her  that  Lozano  said  not  to  sign,  Respondent 
testified  she  was  not  sure.  Although  Lozano  testified  at  the  hearing,  Respondent  did  not  ask 
him  ifhe  had  any  conversation  with  Agee  about  the  log.  Respondent  signed  Agee’s  name, 
Other  than  Respondent’s  admission  that  she  signed  Agee’s  name,  the  Commission  does  not 
find  Respondent’s  testimony  to  be  credible, 

18. 

Agee  testified  that  she  may  have  met  with  Respondent,  like  she  does  with 

other  teachers,  during  the  day  for  professional  development  activities.  Agee  is  aware  that 
NBC  teacher  activities  are  for  extra  pay  and  are  for  services  above  and  beyond  the  teacher’s 
usual  activities,  Agee  did  not  engage  in  any  such  activities  with  Respondent,  and  specifically 
denied  working  with  Respondent  on  the  preparation  and  Literacy  Night  activities  listed  by 
Respondent  in  the  log.  Respondent  did  not  ask  Agee  to  sign  the  log,  and  Agee  did  not  give 
Respondent  permission  to  sign  her  name.  Agee  was  credible  in  her  testimony. 

19. 

The  Commission  finds  that  the  activities  Respondent  claimed  to  have 

participated  in  with  Agee  did  not  occur  with  Agee,  and  that  Respondent  forged  Agee’s 
signature  on  the  log  entry. 

20. 

Respondent  submitted  an  Activity  Log  with  three  entries,  August  26,  27  and 
28,  2008,  each  claiming  seven  hours  for  “Training  for  D.L  teachers”  at  UTLA  (referring  to 
the  building  housing  the  union,  United  Teachers  Los  Angeles).  All  three  entries  are  under 
Task  3,  Training  in  District  Intern,  Pre-Intern,  and  Teacher  Training  Academy  programs  (the 
task  numbers  had  changed  since  the  Activity  Log  for  Franklin,  which  described  this  as  Task 
4;  see  Factual  Finding  8).  The  signature  verification  states  “Facilitator”  and  the  signature 
reads  “Liz.”  (Exhibit  1,  p.  LAUSD  83.) 

21. 

The  reference  to  “Liz”  is  to  Elizabeth  Zayas  (Zayas),  a  senior  secretary  at  the 

time  for  the  Teacher  Support  Unit  that  provides  teacher  training  through  programs  for  district 
interns  and  pre-interns,  and  which  organizes  and  runs  the  Teacher  Training  Academy. 
Respondent  testified  that  she  was  an  instructor  for  the  Teacher  Training  Academy  program 
that  occurred  August  26-29,  2008.  She  was  told  to  bring  her  Activity  Log  for  signature  on 
the  last  day  of  training..  However,  Respondent  testified  that  she  hurt  her  knee  the  night

| 
I 
i 
t 

  

before  and  called  to  notify  Zayas  and  her  boss,  Janet  Peaks  (Peaks),  that  she  would  not  come 
  on  August  29.  Respondent  listed  “Liz”  on  the  logs  because  she  communicated  mostly  with 

Zayas  regarding  the  Teacher  Training  Academy. 

 

22, 

Testimony  from  Zayas  and  Peaks  established  that  there  was  district  intern 

training  earlier  in  the  summer  of  2008,  not  during  August  as  listed  on  Respondent’s  Activity 
Log.  However,  based  on  Respondent’s  testimony,  she  was  claiming  hours  for  the  Teacher 
Training  Academy,  not  for  the  intern  training.  There  was  a  Teacher  Training  Academy 
program  on  August  26-29,  2008.  Both  Zayas  and  Peaks  denied  that  Respondent  participated 
in  that  program  by  referring  to  a  sign-in  sheet  (Exhibit  6)  that  trainers  were  required  to  sign 
and  which  listed  two  other  NBC  teachers,  not  Respondent,  as  trainers  for  that  time  period. 
Respondent  testified  she  did  not  need  to  sign,  as  the  sign  in  was  only  for  trainers  being  paid 
by  a  stipend  instead  of  using  the  hours  for  the  NBC  pay  raise.  Neither  Zayas  nor  Peaks  recall 
any  communication  with,  or  messages  from,  Respondent  about  signing  the  log,  Peaks  did 
not  recall  any  phone  call  from  Respondent  about  hurting  her  knee  and,  as  a  result,  not 
teaching  on  August  29.  Peaks  had  communicated  with  Respondent  at  other  times  when 
Respondent  had  been  an  instructor  at  the  Academy,  but  could  not recall  any  conversations 
with  her  specifically  about  the  Academy  training  in  August  2008.  Zayas  did  not  sign  the  log 
or  give  permission  to  Respondent  to  sign  for  her.  Zayas  and  Peaks  were  credible  in  their 
testimony.  Respondent  was  not  credible. 

23. 

The  Commission  finds  that  the  activities  Respondent  claimed  to  have 

participated  in  with  Liz’s  name  listed  did  not  occur,  and  that  Respondent  forged  Zayas’s 
signature  on  the  log  entry. 

24. 

Respondent  submitted  an  Activity  Log  with  four  entries,  on  December  1,  3,  6 

and  10,  2008,  claiming  a  total  of  10  hours  for  activities  under  Task  6,  grant  writing, 
performed  at  home  to  research,  prepare  and  submit  a  grant  proposal.  The  signature 
verification  states  “Rodriguez  A.P.”  and  the  signature  purports  to  be  that  of  Oscar  Rodriguez 
(Rodriguez),  the  Assistant  Principal  of  153"  Street  Elementary  School.  (Exhibit  1,  p. 
LAUSD  129.) 

25. 

Respondent  established  that  she  researched,  prepared  and  submitted  a  grant 

proposal  to  DonorsChoose.org  in  December  2008  to  stock  her  classroom  library  with  books 
and  magazines  to  help  her  students  become  better  readers,  increase  critical  thinking,  and 
improve  their  scores  on  standardized  tests.  (Exhibit  1,  p.  LAUSD  130,  and  Exhibit  K,  pp. 
11-20.)  The  total  of  ten  hours  listed  for  these  activities  is  not  unreasonable. 

26. 

Respondent  testified  she  gave  the  Activity  Log  to  Lozano  along  with  some 

documents  relating  to  the  grant,  but  Lozano  responded  he  needed  more  information,  After 
Respondent  provided  more  documents,  she  testified  Lozano  replied  that  he  had  called  an 
NBC  teacher  coordinator,  Lourdes  Fasani  (Fasani),  but  Fasani  had  not  replied.  Respondent 
testified  that  she  called  Fasani  and  Fasani  told  her  that  Lozano  had  not  contacted  her  about 
this.  However,  although  Fasani  testified  at  the  hearing,  Respondent  did  not  ask  her 
specifically  about  this.  After  Lozano  refused  to  sign  the  log,  Respondent  asked  Rodriguez  to 

sign,  who  replied  that  he  would  look  at  it.  A  few  days  later,  Rodriguez  told  Respondent  that 
  he  had  been  instructed  by  Lozano  not  fo  sign  the  log.  Respondent  then signed Rodriguez’s 

name  on  the  log, 

27.  —  Lozano  testified  that  Respondent  asked  him  to  sign  a  different  Activity  Log 

relating  to  a  grant  from  DonorsChoose.org  in  December  2011  and,  whem  he  received 
documents  from  DonorsChoose.org  relating  to  the  grant  proposal,  he  signed  the  log.  At  the 
hearing,  Respondent  did  not  ask  Lozano  any  questions  relating  to  the  grant  proposal  or 
Activity  Log  from  December  2008. 

28. 

Rodriguez  testified  credibly  that  he  did  not  recall  Respondent  bringing  the 

December  2008  log  to  him.  He  recalled  there  were  times  NBC  teachers  brought  logs  to  him 
and  requested  his  signature.  He  would  sign  for  special  education  teachers,  but  it  was 
Lozano’s  responsibility  to  review  logs  of  other  teachers  such  as  Respondent.  Rodriguez  had 
no  recollection  of  this  log  or  any  conversation  with  Respondent  about  it.  He  did  not  give 
Respondent  permission  to  sign  his  name  on  the  log.  Rodriguez  was  credible. 

29, 

The  Commission  finds  that  Respondent  proved  she  engaged  in  the  grant 

activities  listed  on  this  log,  that  Respondent  forged  Rodriguez’s  signature  on  the  log  entry, 
and  that  Respondent’s  explanation  of  the  circumstances  of  seeking  a  signature  was  not 
credible  or  established  by  the  evidence. 

30. 

Respondent  submitted  an  Activity  Log  for  two  activities  dated  November  12 
and  23,  2009,  each  for  2.5  hours  of  services  under  Task  4  (Training  in  District  Intern,  Pre- 
Intern,  and  Teacher  Training  Academy  programs)  for  activities  to.-support  a  teacher  at 
another  school  on  the  subjects  of  lesson  integration  and  creating  a  lesson  plan.  The  two 
signature  verifications  state  “Fonda  Jones”  (Jones)  and  the  signatures  read  “Fonda  Jones.” 
(Exhibit  1,  p,.  LAUSD  79.) 

31. 

Respondent  had  been  contacted  by  the  PAR  program  about  providing  PAR 

1.)  Respondent  testified  she  made  several  attempts  to 

support  for  Jones.  (Exhibit  N,  p. 
contact  Jones,  Jones  had  cancelled  a  prior  meeting,  and  was  late  for  the  November  12 
meeting,  Respondent  testified  that  she  covered  the  subject  of  classroom  management  at  the 
November  12  meeting,  they  viewed  a  video,  and  she  gave  Jones  some  notes.  Respondent 
testified  that  she  covered  the  subject  of  integrated  lessons,  with  some  notes  for  Jones,  at  the 
November  23  meeting.  (See  notes,  Exhibit  N,  pp.  2  and  3.)  Jones  signed  the  log  entry  for 
the  November  12  meeting.  Respondent  testified  that  after  the  November  23  meeting  she  sent 
the  log  to  Jones  for  signature,  made  several  calls  that  were  not  returned,  and  that  Jones  sent 
back  the  log  without  a  signature  for  that  meeting.  Respondent  signed  Jones’s  name  for  the 
November  23  log  entry.  Respondent  could  not  explain  why  the  log  listed  the  second  activity 
as  occurring  November  23,  yet  her  note  of  the  subjects  covered  is  dated  December  23. 

32,  —  Jones  testified  credibly  that  she  met  Respondent  once  —  for  about  30  minutes. 
They  had  a  general  discussion  introducing  themselves,  and  Jones  recalls  telling  Respondent 
she  wanted  help  with  classroom  management.  Jones  does  not  recall  discussing  lesson

integration  or  other  subjects.  Jones  did  not  receive  either  of  the  note  pages  prepared  by 
Respondent  and  does  nof  recall  discussing  the  specific  subjects  noted,  Jones  signed  the  log 
for  November  12,  but  does  not  recall  if  it  included  the  activity  time  of  two  hours  thirty 
minutes,  The  meeting  did  not  take  that  long.  She  never  received  a  log  sent  to  her  from 
Respondent  or  had  any  other  contact  from  Respondent.  Jones  was  receiving  other  assistance, 
Jones  did  not  give  Respondent  permission  to  sign  the  log  entry  for  November  23,  2009, 

33. 

The  Commission  finds  that  the  activities  Respondent  claimed  to  have 

participated  in  with  Jones  did  not  occur  as  described  in  the  log  entry  for  November  12,  and 
did  not  occur  at  all  as  described  in  the  log  entry  for  November  23,  2009, 

The  Four-Year  Rule  and  Evidence  of Events  Prior  Thereto 

34. 

A-section  of  the  Education  Code  creates  a  time  limit  for  the  evidence  that  can 

be  presented  in  a  case  to  dismiss  a  teacher  from  employment  with  a  school  district. 
Section  44944,  subdivision  (1)(5),  states  in  part:  “No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence 
introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing 
of  the  notice,  Evidence  of  records  regularly  kept  by  the  governing  board  concerning  the 
"  employee  may  be  introduced,  but  no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or  suspension  of  any 

employee  shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or  evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters 
occurring  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  notice,”  This  time  limit  is  referred  to 
here  as  the  four-year  rule.  The  period  is  counted  backwards  from  the  date  the  teacher  is 
served  with  a  “notice.”  This  is  a  reference  to  section  44934  and  means  a:hotice  of  the  school 
district’s  intention  to  dismiss  the  employee.  In  this  matter,  the  notice  was  served  on 
Respondent  on  May  9,  2012  (see  Factual  Finding  5).  Consequently,  the-four-year  rule  would 
operate  to  limit  the  evidence  to  the  period  from  May  9,  2008  to  May  9,  2012. 

35. 

Activity  Logs  for  NBC  teachers  can  be  submitted  for  review  and  approval 

twice  each  school  year  —  once  in  December  and  then  the  following  June:  After  receipt  and 
review,  the  applicable  extra  pay  is  added  to  subsequent  paychecks,  The  Activity  Logs  are 
submitted  along  with  a  Cover  Sheet  including  information  on  the  numberof  logs  attached 
and  a  summary  of  the  number  of  hours  of  activities.  The  Cover  Sheet  is  signed  and  dated  by 
the  teacher  and,  when  received  by  Fasani,  she  also  signs  and  dates  the  Cover  Sheet, 

36. 

The  following  cover  sheets  were  submitted  during  the  relevant  four-year 

period  and  were  signed  by  Respondent  on  the  dates  indicated:  June  5  and  December  12, 
2008  (Exhibit  1,  pp.  LAUSD  103,  82);  June  22  and  December  10,  2009  (Exhibit  1,  pp. 
LAUSD  121,  74);  and  June  10,  2010  (Exhibit  1,  p.  LAUSD  63).  All  cover  sheets  have 
attached  to  them  the  Activity  Logs  covering  the  school  semester  ending  in  that  month. 

37. 

Of  particular  significance  is  the  cover  sheet  signed  by  Respondent  on  June  5, 
2008,  which  was  received  by  the  District  on  June  6,  2008.  (Exhibit  1,  p. LAUSD  103.)  The 
District  contends  that  this  was  the  first  opportunity  in  which  it  would  have  learned  of 
activities  claimed  by  Respondent  which  occurred  prior  to  the  four-year  cutoff;  that  is, 
activities  which  Respondent  claimed  occurred  from  January  2008  through  May  8,  2008.

More  specifically,  the  following  Activity  Logs  are  in  issue:  Franklin,  with  16  activity  dates 
from  January 18 to May  8;  2008 (and  several  after  that  date),  and  McQueary,  with  two 
activity  dates,  January  22  and  February  25,  2008.  (Exhibit  1,  pp.  105-108.) 

    

38. 

The  District  contends  that,  because  these  Franklin  and  McQueary  Activity 
Logs  were  submitted  to  the  District  on  June  6,  2008,  a  date  within  the  four-year  rule,  the 
District  may  use  them  in  evidence  and  not  run  afoul  of  the  four-year  rule,  without 
consideration  of  any  equitable  doctrine  that  would  relieve  the  District  from  strict  application 
of  the  four-year  rule. 

39, 

This  contention  is  rejected.  The  four-year  rule  is  plain  on  its  face  and  operates 

to  limit  the  time  period  of  evidence  the  District  may  present  to  support  dismissal  charges 
against  Respondent.  Although  the  District  received  this  evidence  within  the  four-year 
period,  the  evidence  itself  relates  to  events  before  the  four-year  period. 

40. 

In  the  alternative,  the  District  contends  that  there  are  three  exceptions  to  the 

four-year  rule  that  apply  to  permit  the  use  of  this  evidence.  Respondent  objects  to  these 
exceptions,  The  exceptions  are  known  as  delayed  discovery,  equitable  estoppel,  and 
fraudulent  concealment,  All  three  are  considered  equitable  doctrines,  The  bases  of  these 
exceptions  are  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Legal  Conclusions  5  tol5  below.  The  following 
Factual  Findings  support  the  conclusion  that  the  District  has  submitted  sufficient  facts  to 
support  the  use  of  all  three  of  the  exceptions,  and  can  therefore  submit  evidence  of  events 
from  January  through  May  8,  2008. 

41. 

|  The  District  has  over  1600  NBC  teachers,  the  largest  number  in  California  and 

the  fifth  largest  nationally.  As  of  June  2008,  the  District  was  organized  into  local  districts, 
and  153"  Street  Elementary  School  was  in  Local  District  8.  There  were  102  NBC  teachers  in 
Local  District  8  at  that  time.  The  program,  including  the  procedures  for  the  pay  raise  for  92 
hours  of  activities,  is  overseen  by  the  Teacher  Support  Unit.  The  program  allows  for  hours 
to  be  submitted  in  December  and  June,  The  program  for  the  2011-12  school  year  is 
described  in  Exhibit  3.  Types  of  activities  that  may  be  claimed  are  listed,  as  well  as  limits 
for  some  of  those  activities.  For  example,  grant  writing  has  a  ten-hour  limit.  The  activities 
must  be  above  and  beyond  those  of  a  teacher’s  regular  assignment. 

42, 

Additional  information  was  provided  by  Peggy  Taylor-Pressley  (Taylor- 
Pressley),  the  Director  of  the  Teacher  Support  Unit,  Barbara  Locker-Halmy  (Locker),  a 
specialist  in  NBC  teachers  and  other  District  support  programs,  Peaks,  the  administrator  and 
coordinator  for  teacher  training,  Zayas,  a  senior  secretary  to  Peaks,  and  Fasani,  a  specialist  in 
the  Teacher  Support  Unit.  Collectively,  they  testified  to  the  process  of  receipt  and  review  of 
Activity  Logs  and  approval  for  the  pay  raise.  When  Respondent’s  logs  were  received,  Fasani 
dated  and  signed  the  cover  sheet.  Logs  could  be  submitted  in  December,  but  all  logs  for  the 
school  year  were  due  at  the  end  of  the  school  year  in  June.  Until  the  logs  were  submitted, 
Fasani  did  not  know  which  activities  the  teacher  would  submit.  Fasani  reviewed  the  logs  to 
note  the  type  and  date  of  activity  and  number  of  hours,  and  to  confirm  that  there  were 
signatures  for  each  activity.  The  types  of  activities  that  were  acceptable  might  change  from

year  to  year  and  NBC  teachers  were  informed  of  the  changes.  Fasani  “took  it  on  faith”  that 
the  signatures  on  the  logs  were  by  the  people  listed. 
qualify,  she  would  not  forward  the  claim  to  be  paid.  If  claims  included  an  improper  activity 
or  exceeded  the  limit  of  hours  for  an  activity,  the  overage  would  not  be  forwarded  for  pay. 
For  example,  Fasani  informed  Respondent  that  a  parent’s  signature  for  a  workshop  activity 
listed  on  a  log  was  not  acceptable  and  that  the  principal  would  have  to  sign.  Other  times 
Fasani  notified  Respondent  that  Respondent  could  not  sign  for  an  activity  or  that  an  activity 
did  not  qualify.  (See,  for  example,  Exhibit  Z,  pp.  9  and  10.)  Respondent  had  complained  to 
Fasani  that  Respondent  was  having  difficulty  getting  her  principal  to  sign  Activity  Logs.  . 

If  she  knew  the  signature  did  not 

43, 

Prior  to  budget  cut-backs,  Taylor-Presley  had  eight  administrators  who 
reviewed  Activity  Logs  and  prepared  a  roster  for  her  review.  The  rosters  contain  the 
employee’s  name,  employee  number,  and  total  number  of  hours.  The  signatures  on  Activity 
Logs  were  to  verify  the  activity  occurred  so  that  the  raise  could  be  paid.  It  is  not  acceptable 
to  claim  an  activity  that  did  not  occur,  nor  is  it  acceptable  to  have  the  verifier  have  someone 
else  sign  or  for  the  NBC  teacher  submitting  the  log  to  sign  as  verifier.  The  administrators 
generally  do  not  confirm  that  the  claimed  activity  occurred,  as  there  is  not  enough  manpower 
for  this  level  of  review.  However,  if  there  is  something  that  appears  inconsistent,  inquiries 
are  made.  Taylor-Presley  is  aware  of  only  one  situation,  that  of  Respondent,  where  there  was. 
an  investigation  of  a  claim  to  determine  whether  the  signature  belonged  to  the  person 
identified  as  the  verifier. 

¢ 

44, 

Locker  also  assisted  in  NBC  teacher  support,  among  other  things,  She 

specifically  arranged  for  substitute  teachers  if  an  NBC  teacher  was  to  be  absent  from  a 
regular  classroom  assignment  to  perform  an  activity  elsewhere, 

45, 

The  District  discovered  the  questionable  Activity  Logs  in  its  investigation  ofa 

situation  where  Respondent  requested  a  substitute  teacher  for  Monday,  April  13,  2009. 
Respondent  planned  on  being  at  the  West  Athens  Elementary  School  to  observe  teachers  she 
was  mentoring  under  another  program  (BTSA-Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment). 
The  prior  week  was  spring  break  and  Respondent  was  in  India  tending  to  her  family.  Due  to 
a  family  medical  emergency,  Respondent  returned  late  from  India  and  was  not  present  at 
either  153"  Street  or  West  Athens  schools  on  April  13.  Because  Respondent’s  time  card  for 
April  13  was  noted  “PD,”  which  Lozano  knew  was  for  professional  development  such  as 
BTSA  or  NBC  teacher  activities,  he  believed  that  Respondent  had  not  properly  and  honestly 
completed  her  time  card.  On  April  27,  2009,  Lozano  held  a  conference  with  Respondent 
expressing  his  concerns  about  the  incident.  Lozano  prepared  a  conference  memo  dated  April 
28,  2009,  containing  his  version  of  the  meeting,  including  his  concerns,  Respondent’s 
statements,  and  Lozano’s  assistance,  guidance  and  directives.  The  memo  was  given  to 
Respondent  along  with  several  of  the  documents  mentioned  in  the  meeting.  (Exhibit  1,  pp. 
14,  15,  and  17-50.)  In  the  memo,  Lozano  informed  Respondent  that  the  District  may 
investigate  other  hours  she  submitted  for  the  NBC  teacher  pay  raise  or  for  the  BTSA 
program, 

10

  "supervisor  and neglected  to  report  it  on  her  time  card,  He  wrote:  “The  above  acts  combined 

46, 

 Lozano’s  memo  noted  that  Respondent  had  not  reported  her  absence  to  her 

may  constitute  fraud.”  His  memo  includes  that  Respondent  “claimed  to  have  called  and 
emailed  Ms.  Locker  on  April  20,  2009  to  let  her  know  you  did  not  go  to  West  Athens  but  did 
not  notify  anyone  else.”  (Exhibit  1,  p.  14.)  Ina  written  response,  Respondent  noted,  among 
other  things,  “I  didn’t  commit  any  fraud,  I  was  waiting  for  Ms.  Locker’s  response.”  (Exhibit 
1,  p.  17.)  Locker  denied  recall  of  this  email  or  call  from  Respondent.  Locker  did  testify 
about  an  email  she  sent  to  Respondent  on  April  13  asking  if  she  “took  a  sub  day,”  and 
Respondent's  reply  that  she  did,  (Exhibit  1,  p.  52.)  Locker  denied  any  other  contact  from 
Respondent  notifying  her  of  the  absence.  Locker  explained  that  funding  for  substitute 
teachers  was  different  if  the  substitute  was  for  BTSA  activities  or  NBC  teacher  activities, 

47. 

Subsequently,  Lozano  served  Respondent  with  a  Letter  of  Reprimand  dated 

June  3,  2009,  relating  to  this  incident.  (Exhibit  1,  p.  55.)  Both  the  conference  memo  and  the 
letter  of  reprimand  express  a  concern  about  fraud  and  counsel  Respondent  to  follow  District 
procedures  for  time  card  sign  in  and  to  adhere  to  the  contract  relating  to  the  NBC  teacher  and 
BTSA  programs. 

: 

48, 

The  District’s  Office  of  Inspector  General  (OIG)  received  allegations  of 

fraudulent  signatures  on  April  23,  2009.  OIG  Senior  Investigator  Amy  Prenowitz 
investigated  Respondent’s  Activity  Logs  and  issued  a  report  dated  July  27,  2010.  (Portions 
of  the  report  are  found  in  Exhibit  Z,  pp.  1-5.)  It  cannot  be  determined  from  the  evidence  in 
this  case  how  the  inquiry  concerning  Respondent  moved  from a  focus  on  the  events  of  April 
13,  2009,  to  an  allegation  of  fraudulent  NBC  activity  ten  days  later. 
investigated  the  matter,  including  interviews  with  Respondent  and  with  many  of  the  people 
whose  signatures  appeared  on  the  Activity  Logs,  The  investigation  also  included  events 
preceding  those  at  issue  in  this  hearing.  The  OIG  report  confirmed  that  Respondent  had 
submitted  forged  signatures,  many  of  which  were  admitted  by  Respondent,  and  that 
Respondent  had  received  the  pay  raises  related  to  those  activities. 

In  any  case,  OIG 

49, 

The  OIG  report  noted  that  Respondent  claimed  to  have  performed  all  of  the 

listed  activities,  but  that  some  of  the  people  whose  names  were  forged  stated  they  never 
participated  in  those  activities  with  Respondent.  Of  interest,  the  OIG  report  also  noted  that: 
(1)  there  was  no  documentation  for  OIG  to  verify  that  the  activities  took  place;  (2)  there  is  no 
written  policy  describing  who  can  sign  as  a  verifier;  (3)  the  process  for  review  and  payment 
of  the  claims  does  not  include  verification  of  the  signature  or  of  the  occurrence  of  the 
activity;  and  (4)  it  was  recommended  that  the  “District  draft  policies  and  procedures  defining 
a  comprehensive  methodology  with  regard  to  the  documentation  of  [NBC  teacher]  Activity 
Logs.”  (Exhibit  Z,  p.  5.) 

Other  Factual  Findings  Necessary  to  Determine  the  Matter 

50. 

Lozano  gave  Respondent  a  written  evaluation  dated  May'16,  2011,  indicating 

“Below  Standard  Performance.”  (Exhibit  K,  pp.  2-4.)  (Because  some  of  the  headings  are 
too  dark  to  read  clearly,  reference  can  be  made  to  an  evaluation  on  a  similar  form  dated  June 

11

  

| 

!   

2,  2010,  found  at  Exhibit  K,  pp.  5-7.)  Several  listed  items  were  checked  as  meeting 
standards  while  others  were  checked  as  “needs  improvement.”  Some  of  the  items  were 
.  evaluated  based  on  Lozano’s  observations  of  Respondent  in  the  classroom  or  in  a  parent 
teacher  conference,  One  item  checked  as  “needs  improvement”  refers  to  maintaining 
accurate  and  timely  records,  and  on  the  item  titled  “Follows  district  and  state  policies,  laws 
and  regulations,”  Lozano  marked  “No.”  The  evaluation  refers  to  the  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Act  issued  December  10,  2010  (see  Factual  Finding  4),  and  Lozano  testified 
that  Respondent’s  submission  of  forged  Activity  Logs  was  the  primary  basis  for  his 
conclusion  that  Respondent  exhibited  “Below  Standard  Performance”  on  the  May  16,  2011 
evaluation, 

a, 

51. 

In  May  2008  and  June  2010,  Lozano  gave  Respondent  evaluations  indicating 

that  she  meets  standard  performance  and  which  included  positive  comments  about  the 
various  items  being  evaluated.  (Exhibit  K,  pp.  5-9.) 

: 

52. 

Respondent  submitted  sufficient  evidence  from  which  to  conclude  that  Lozano 
was  not  an  easy  man  to  work  for.  A  student’s  mother  who  often  volunteered  in  Respondent’s 
classroom  testified  that  Lozano  was  aggressive  in  one  interaction  with  Respondent,  and  often 
humiliated  Respondent.  The  mother  also  testified  that  she  was  disappointed  in  the  manner  in 
which  Lozano  handled  her  complaint  that  her  child  was  being  threatened. by  another  student. 
The  mother  also  stated  that  in  one  instance  she  “caught”  Lozano  in  a  lie.  This  witness’s 
statements  bear  some  indicia  of  bias;  however,  generally  she  supported  Respondent’s  opinion 
that  Lozano  exhibited  some  animosity  towards  Respondent. 

53. 

Another  teacher  at  the  school,  Katherine  Katsenis  (Katsenis),  was  a  union 
representative  and  often  interacted  with  Lozano  in  that  capacity.  Katsenis  was  a  special 
education  teacher  who  came  to  Respondent’s  class  daily  to  support  a  student.  She  has  since 
resigned  from  the  District.  In  her  opinion,  Respondent  is  an  excellent  teacher,  Katsenis 
believes  that  Lozano  had  a  vendetta  against  Respondent,  and  cited  the  example  of  Lozano’s 
comment  that  high  test  scores  for  Respondent’s  students  must  be  because  she  cheated. 
Katsenis  also  noted  that  Lozano  was  very  focused  on  District  policies  for  conduct  and 
activities,  and  was  very  good  at  locating  and  providing  District  policies  in  many  situations 
when  a  teacher’s  conduct  was  under  review.  Although  Katsenis  agrees  that,  generally,  it  is 
wise  to  follow  these  policies,  she  also  said  there  were  policies  on  any  subject  and  it  was  not 
possible  to  follow  every  District  policy.  As  she  testified,  “there  is  policy,  and  then  there  are 
humans.” 

54. 

Nevertheless,  it.  was  not  established  that  Lozano  took  the  actions  relevant  in 

this  matter  based  on  anything  other  than  proper  justification.  There  was  evidence  that 
Lozano  reimbursed  Respondent  for  science  supplies  from  his  own  pocket,  and  that  Lozano 
signed  Activity  Log  entries  for  Respondent’s  grant  writing  when  he  received  verification  that 
the  grant  proposal  had  been  written.  (Exhibit  1,  p.  58.)  Although  he  may  have  been  difficult 
for  Respondent  and  Katsenis  to  deal  with  at  times,  Lozano  was  appropriately  concerned 
about  the  April  13,  2009  incident  concerning  the  substitute  teacher/nonappearance  by 
Respondent,  as  well  as  the  subsequent  discovery  that  she  submitted  forged  signatures  on 

12

some  Activity  Logs. 

  

55. 

As  discussed  in  the  Legal  Conclusions  below,  case  law  has  identified  various 
factors  to  be  examined  to  determine  if  there  is  a  sufficient  nexus  between  Respondent’s  acts 
and  her  position  as  a  teacher  to  support  termination  from  that  teaching  position,  These 
factors  are:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in  question  may  have  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (2)  the  proximity.  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4) 
the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 
likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 

56. 

Some  significant  facts  related  to  these  factors  are  that  there  was  no  evidence 

that  any  students  were  aware  of  the  events.  Several  teachers  were  aware  of  some  aspects  of 
the  events,  such  as  Franklin,  McQueary,  Agee,  and  Jones.  All  testified  that  they  would  not 
trust  another  teacher  who  had  submitted  documents  with  forged  signatures. 

57. 

More  specifically,  Franklin  was  concerned  that  Respondent  cheated  and  lied, 

and  she  would  be  uncomfortable  working  with  such  a  person.  A  specific  concern  was  the 
risk  Respondent  might  forge  her  name  again.  Franklin  believed  Respondent  was  not  a  good 
role  model  because  she  was  dishonest.  Honesty  is  particularly  important  for  teachers  who 
issue  grade  reports  and  deal  with  parents  and  students,  Although  it  is  noted  that  Franklin 
continued  to  work  in  the  same  school  with  Respondent  after  Franklin  was  aware  of  the 
forgery,  there  was  no  specific  evidence  that  they  worked  together  in  any  way. 

38, 

 McQueary  was  upset  about  the  fraud  because  it  made  it  appear  that  she 

approved  something  when  she  did  not. 
It  would  bother  her  and  make  her  uncomfortable  to 
work  with  Respondent  because  the  trust  needed  in  the  school  setting  is  broken.  _McQueary 
was  concerned  that,  if  students  and  parents  knew,  their  trust  in  teachers  would  be  broken, 
Respondent  cannot  be  a  positive  role  model  because  her  basic  honesty  is  called  into  question, 
and  teachers  try  to  teach  students  the  importance  of  honesty. 

59, 

Jones  expressed  concern  that  the  forged  Activity  Log  showed  she  received 

more  assistance  from  Respondent  than  Respondent  actually  gave.  According  to  Jones,  it  is 
not  ethical  for  a  teacher  to  submit  a  false  document.  A  teacher  is  a  role  model,  and  such 
actions  would  give  students  a  negative  impression.  Jones  stated  it  would  be  “scary”  to  work 
with  Respondent  because  you  would  not  know  what  to  expect,  such  as  a  false  report  to  her 
principal. 

60, 

Agee  was  upset  by  Respondent’s  actions  because  it  is  not  acceptable  for 

someone  to  sign  her  name,  and  it  made  her  wonder  what  else  that  person  would  say  that 
Agee  had  signed.  You  must  work  collaboratively  as  colleagues  however  she  could  not  trust 
Respondent,  Agee  questioned  Respondent’s  ethical  code,  morals  and  values. 

13

  

  

61. 

_Inhis  testimony,  Lozano  referred  fo  the  District’s  Code  of  Ethics  (Exhibit  T, 
pp.  21-24),  with  emphasis  on  the  portions  referring  to  a  teacher’s  impact  on  the  classroom, 
setting  of  an  example,  demonstrating  integrity,  and  providing  honest  and  accurate 
information  (at  p.  22,  sections  A,  A.1.,  and  A.3.)  Applying  these  portions,  a  teacher  must  be 
the  role  model  for  integrity  and  honesty.  Payroll  records  need  to  be  accurate,  and  he  cannot 
tolerate  falsification  or  cheating.  Lozano  made  particular  mention  that,  after  his  conference 
with  and  memo  to  Respondent  alerting  her  to  the  issue  of  honest  recordkeeping,  there  was  an 
incident  of  another  false  signature  (Jones,  on  November  23,  2009),  It  is  not  acceptable  for 
faculty  to  sign  in  for  other  faculty,  and  a  false  signature  negatively  affects  morale  and  is  a 
counterproductive  role  model  to  students  and  the  community  because  students  would  feel 
they  could  cheat.  Lozano  did  not  trust  what  Respondent  claimed  she  did,  or  what  she  said, 

62. 

 Taylor-Presley  was  shocked  by  Respondent’s  actions,  stating  they  cast  doubt 

on  the  validity  of  all  submissions  to  the  NBC  teacher  program.  If  there  is  a  cloud  of 
suspicion,  or  the  perception  that  there  was  no  integrity  behind  the  program,  she  was 
concerned  that  the  District  might  change  the  program  or  the  pay  incentive,  She  was  also 
concerned  about  Respondent’s  further  participation  in  the  program.  It  would-be  difficult  to 
accept  documents  from  Respondent.  There  are  no  guidelines  that  would  prevent  Respondent 
from  getting  either  of  the  NBC  teacher  pay  raises,  Taylor-Presley  agrees  with  the  National 
Board’s  description  of  the  NBC  certification  process  (Exhibit  1,  p.  30)  and  the  references  to 
ethical  dimensions,  and  that  teachers  are  held  to  a  high  standard  and  act  as  role  models. 
Respondent  did  not  meet  these  standards  or  those  in  the  District  Code  of  Ethics.  She  did  not 
follow  the  laws  and  policies  and  she  is  not  a  good  role  model  because  of  her  dishonesty. 
Taylor-Presley  stated  if  she  was  advising  others  to  be  honest,  “I  must  live  it.”  Respondent’s 
actions  give  students  “an  alternative  we  might  not  want  them  to  follow.” 

63. 

Rodriguez  was  shocked  by  Respondent’s  actions,  which  he  characterized  as 

ethical  dishonesty.  Other  than  these  events,  he  considered  Respondent  to  be  a  good  teacher 
and  role  model.  He  specifically  mentioned  her  support  of  special  education  students. 

_  However,  in  light  of  these  events,  he  is  not  comfortable  with  Respondent. 

64. 

According  to  Peaks,  Respondent’s  submission  of  logs  with  Zayas’s  forged 
signature  was  not  ethically  acceptable.  Forging  of  signatures  is  not  what  trainers  should 
model  in  front  of  other  teachers/trainees.  The  integrity,  attitudes  and  values  of  a  professional 
counts  as  much  as  other  skills.  A  teacher  must  show  honesty  and  integrity  with  colleagues 
and  students. 

: 

65. 

Respondent  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  a  supplemental 
authorization  in  English  and  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  emphasis. 
Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  for  more  than  20  years.  She  began  with  the  District  in  2002. 
Her  background  and  accomplishments  outside  of  the  four-year  evidence  time  limitation 
cannot  be  considered.  (See  footnote  3,  and  Legal  Conclusions  below.)  Respondent  was 
active  in  seeking  grants  and  provided  other  enrichment  programs  and  activities  for  students, 
parents  and  colleagues, 

14

66. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  performed  the  work  claimed  in  the  logs.  When 

  investigated  by  OIG,  Respondent  acknowledged  the  forgeries.  Respondent  testified  that  she 
was  “compelled”  to  forge  signatures  because  when  she  asked  if  Fasani  would  sign  when  the 
participants  did  not,  Fasani  said  no.  She  was  not  getting  help  from  other  BTSA  teachers  or 
Locker  or  the  union.  There  was  no  remedy  for  this  in  the  District’s  NBC  procedures,  The 
OIG  report  supported  her  position  that  the  NBC  Activity  Log  procedures  were  insufficient. 
There  were  no  guidelines  or  protocols  on  how  to  properly  complete  the  verifier  signature 
portion  of  the  logs.  Many  administrators  were  not  aware  of  the  log  procedures  and  they  and 
others  were  reluctant  to  sign. 

67. 

In  addition  to  the  incidents  described  above,  Respondent  testified  she  had 

numerous  other  incidents  where  she  was  frustrated  in  her  attempts  to  obtain  other  signatures. 
For  some  activities  Respondent  did  not  submit  a  log  for  signature,  and  other  times  no  one 
would  sign  it  so  she  didn’t  submit  it  for  the  pay  raise. 
her  logs  were  not  accepted.  In  another  instance,  a  log  entry  was  signed  by  a  parent  and 
Fasani  said  this  was  not  acceptable  and  that  an  administrator  should  sign,  In  one  instance, 
Respondent  lost  approximately  $1000  due  to  a  mistake  she  claimed  was  made  by  Locker 
about  whether  an  activity  was  to  be  paid  as  a  stipend  or  used  for  the  NBC  pay  raise.  All  told, 
Respondent  claimed  she  lost  credit  for  many  hours  of  activities  she  performed  and,  therefore, 
lost  a  significant  amount  of  pay  as  a  result. 

In  some  instances,  hours  included  in 

68. 

Regarding  her  below  standard  evaluation,  Respondent  contends  that  it  was 

subjective  and  that  Lozano  did  not  give  her  any  feedback  after  he  observed  her  in  class. 
Generally,  she  believes  that  Lozano  was  “framing”  her,  Respondent  tried  to  transfer  to 
another  school.  She  testified  that,  when  Lozano  would  not  let  her,  she  went  to  Romero,  and 
then  Lozano  signed  off.  However,  after  Respondent  had  some  good  initial  contacts  and 
interviews,  she  stated  she  learned  that  Lozano  was  providing  negative  information  and  no 
offers  of  positions  at  other  schools  were  made. 

69. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  was  not  provided  the  guidance  and  support 
required  under  section  44938,  subdivision  (a).  This  section  does  not  refer  to  guidance  or 
support,  but  does  prevent  a  district  from  bringing  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  whless  it 
gives  specific  notice  to  the  teacher  at  least  45  days  before  bringing  the  charges  to  allow  her 
to  correct  her  faults  and  overcome  the  charge.  This  contention  is  rejected. 

(a)  As  noted  in  Factual  Findings  4  and  5,  Respondent  was  given  a  written 
notice  of  her  unsatisfactory  services  which  referenced  the  Activity  Logs  on  December  10, 
2010,  and  the  charges  were  filed  May  9,  2012. 

(b)  Lozano  met  with  Respondent  on  April  27,  2009,  concerning  the  incident 
on  April  13,  2009,  when  Respondent  arranged  for  a  substitute  so  she  could  observe  teachers 
at  another  school  and  then  did  not-do  so,  (See  Factual  Finding  45.)  He  provided  advice  and 
numerous  documents  to  her  explaining  various  District  policies  and  procedures  concerning 
keeping  proper  timesheets  and  documents  relating  to  wages  and  complying  with  the  Code  of 
Ethics  and  the  NBC  teacher  program.  This  information  was  reiterated  in  the  Notice  of 

15

Suspension  served  on  Respondent  on  December  10,  2010,  Respondent  did  not  ask  Lozano 

  for  any  Clarification  of  any  of  the  material  given  to  her  in  the  conference. 

  

70. 

Respondent  was  under  stress  due,  in  part,  to  family  illness,  distance,  and 

It  was  expensive  for  Respondent  to 

finances.  Members  of  her  family  in  India  had  been  ill. 
visit  them.  Her  husband  had  taken  a  job  out-of-state  and  she  had  less  emotional  support  as  a 
result.  She  had  difficulty  submitting  properly  prepared  logs  and  there  were  many  activities 
for  which  she  did  not  get  credit.  Lozano’s  hostile  behavior  towards  her  added  to  her  stress. 
She  forged  the  signatures  to  receive  extra  compensation.  Respondent  did  not  believe  there 
was  any  adverse  impact  on  anyone.  Respondent  acknowledged  that  she  used  poor  judgment, 
as  she  was  frustrated  and  highly  stressed,  She  stated  she  failed  herself,  her  husband  and  her 
family  when  she  signed  other  persons’  names,  She  feels  she  has  been  penalized  far  beyond 
the  extent  of  her  wrongdoing,  which  she  characterized  as  not  serious.  Respondent  cited  to 
support  from  parents  and  colleagues  such  as  the  librarian.  She  agreed  to  repay  the  amounts 
claimed  by  the  District,  but  is  concerned  that  the  District  is  deceiving  her  about  the  amounts 
to  be  repaid. 

: 

71. 

The  findings  that  Respondent’s  testimony  was  often  not  credible  are  based  in 

part  on  her  general  demeanor,  the  inconsistencies  in  the  totality  of  the  evidence,  the  likely 
motive  of  Respondent  to  falsify  testimony  so  as  to  retain  her  employment  with  the  District, 
and  the  relative  lack  of  motive  of  the  other  witnesses  to  falsify  their  testimony.  For 
Respondent  to  be  believed,  certain  important  aspects  of  the  testimony  of  the  following 
witnesses  would  have  to  be  disbelieved:  Franklin,  McQueary,  Agee,  Zayas,  Rodriguez, 
Jones,  and  Peaks.  It  was  not  established  that  these  witnesses’  testimony  was  suspect  in  any 
material  way.  Also,  by  design  or  inadvertence,  Respondent  did  not  ask  Lozano  or  others 
about  subjects  they  would  or  should  have  known  about.  This  affects  her  credibility  because 
she  attributes  certain  actions  or  communications  to  these  persons  yet  only  provided  her 
version  of  these  events,  In  many  instances  when  she  did,  in  fact,  inquire  of  others,  they 
either  disputed  that  the  event  occurred  as  suggested  by  Respondent  or  stated  they  could  not 
recall. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944  and  Factual  Findings  1  through  6. 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  standard  of  proof  is 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.  App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

3. 

The  Commission  has  examined  each  alleged  instance  of  conduct  to  determine 
whether  it  was  proven,  and  for  those  which  were  proven,  the  Commission  has  determined,  as 
set  forth  below,  whether  such  charges  were  a  violation  of  one  or  more  of  the  statutory  bases 

16

for  dismissal  as  alleged. 

  

4, 

On  credibility  generally:  Evidence  Code  section  780  relates  to  credibility  of  a 
witness  and  states,  in  pertinent  part,  that  a  court  “may  consider  in  determining  the  credibility 
of  a  witness  any  matter  that  has  any  tendency  in  reason  to  prove  or  disprove  the  truthfulness 
of  his  testimony  at  the  hearing,  including  but  not  limited  to  any  of  the  following:  ...  (b)  The 
character  of  his  testimony;  .. 
motive;  ...(h)  A  statement  made  by  him  that  is  inconsistent  with  any  part  of  his  testimony  at 
the  hearing;  (i)  The  existence  or  nonexistence  of  any  fact  testified  to  by  him...  .” 

.  (f)  The  existence  or  nonexistence  of  a  bias,  interest,  or  other 

The  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject 

another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  ‘(Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  & 
Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  . The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of 
testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth 
out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal, 
App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an 
expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875, 
890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute  substantial  evidence,” 
including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v,  Board  of Medical  Quality  Assurance  (1986)  189 
Cal.App.3d  1040,  1052.)  Discrepancies  in  a  witness’s  testimony,  or  between  that  witness’s 
testimony  and  that  of  others  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  testimony  should  be 
discredited.  (Wilson  v.  State  Personnel  Bd.  (1976)  58  Cal  App.3d  865,  879.)  Positive 
testimony  of  a  witness  may  be  contradicted  by  the  inherent  probabilities  as  to  its  accuracy 
contained  in  that  same  witness’s  own  statement  of  the  transaction.  (Day  v.  Rosenthal  (1985) 
170  Cal.App.3d  1125), 

5, 

The  four-year  rule  limiting  the  evidence  in  this  matter  is  based  on  section 
44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  which  states:  “No  witness  shall  be  permitted  to  testify  at  the 
hearing  except  upon  oath  or  affirmation.  No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence  introduced 
relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the 
notice.  Evidence  of  records  regularly  kept  by  the  governing  board  concerning  the  employee 
may  be  introduced,  but  no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or  suspension  of  any  employee 
shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or  evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters  occurring  more 
than  four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  notice.” 

. 

6. 

This  language  was  interpreted  as  not  creating  an  absolute  bar  to  accepting 

earlier  evidence  in  Atwater  Elementary  School  District  v.  California  Department  of  General 
Services  (2007)  41  Cal.4th  227  (Atwater).  In  that  case  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  had 
granted  the  teacher’s  objections  to  evidence  outside  of  the  four-year  period,  and  no  such 
evidence  was  permitted.  The  school  district  contended  that  four  different  equitable  doctrines 
could  operate  to  extend  the  four-year  rule:  equitable  tolling,  equitable  estoppel,  fraudulent 
concealment,  and  delayed  discovery.  The  Supreme  Court  determined  it  was  not  necessary  to 
examine  all  four  doctrines,  because  the  “conclusion  that  any  one  applies  resolves  whether  the 
four-year  time  limitation  is  absolute.”  (/d.,  p.  232.)  The  Supreme.  Court  focused  on  the 

17

  independent’  of  section  44944(a)’s  time  limitation,  it  could  be 

doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel  and  concluded  that,  “because  equitable  estoppel  is  ‘wholly 

relied  upon  to  prevent  a 
defendant  from  asserting  the  statutory  bar.”  (/bid,)  The  four-year  time  limitation  is  not 
absolute,  “[I]f  the  district  were  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  equitable  estoppel,  it  could 
have  been  allowed  to  introduce  evidence  of,  and  base  its  dismissal  proceedings  on,  incidents 
falling  outside  the  four-year  window.”  (d.,  p.  233.) 

 

7. 

Here,  Respondent’s  objections  to  evidence  beyond  the  four-year  period  were 

overruled  and  the  District  was  permitted  to  submit  evidence  preceding  May  9,  2008. 
However,  for  the  Commission  to  consider  such  evidence,  it  must  determine  if  grounds  exist 
to  employ  any  of  the  three  equitable  doctrines  urged  by  the  District:  delayed  discovery, 
equitable  estoppel,  or  fraudulent  concealment,  Because  these  doctrines  are  usually  utilized  to 
expand  the  time  period  of  a  statute  of  limitations,  the  case  law  discussing  them  often  relates 
to  a  plaintiffs  accrual  of  a  legal  cause  of  action  and  the  bar  of  bringing  a  legal  action  based 
on a  statute  of  limitations. 

8. 

Delayed  discovery:  Under  the  so-called  “discovery  rule,”  the  accrual  of  a 
plaintiff's  legal  cause  of  action  is  postponed  until  the  plaintiff  discovers,  or  has  reason  to 
discover,  the  cause  of  action.  Discovery  occurs  when  the  plaintiff  has  reason  to  suspect  a 
factual  basis  for  the  action.  (Pooshs  y,  Philip  Morris  USA,  Inc.  (2011)  51  Cal.4th  788,  797.) 
““The  policy  reason  behind  the  discovery  rule  is  to  ameliorate  a  harsh  rule  that  would  allow 
the  limitations  period  for  filing  suit  to  expire  before  a  plaintiff  has  or  should  have  learned  of 
the  latent  injury  and  its  cause.’”  (/d.,  pp.  797-798,  citing  Buttram  v.  Owens-Corning 
Fiberglas  Corp.  (1997)  16  Cal.4th  520,  531.)  The  doctrine  of  delayed  discovery  has  been 
applied  to  numerous  types  of  causes  of  action,  such  as  medical  malpractice,  progressive 
industrial  illness,  attorney  malpractice,  defective  drugs,  underground  trespass,  breach  of 
contract,  and  sexual  molestation.  As  explained  in  Evans  v.  Eckelman  (1990)  216  Cal.App.3d 
1609,  1614-1615,  two  common  themes  are  found  in  cases  applying  the  concept  of  delayed 
discovery.  First,  it  may  apply  to  aetions  in  which  it  is  difficult  for  the  injured  party  to 
immediately  detect  the  wrongdoing.  Second,  where  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between 
the  parties  requires  disclosure  of  the  wrongdoing  and a  failure  to  disclose  allows  the 
wrongdoer  to  escape  from  liability.  “Thus,  there  is  an  underlying  notion  that  plaintiffs 
should  not  suffer  where  circumstances  prevent  them  from  knowing  they  have  been  harmed. 
And  often  this  is  accompanied  by  the  corollary  notion  that  defendants  should  not  be  allowed 
to  knowingly  profit  from  their  injuree’s  ignorance.”  (Ibid.) 

9. 

Here,  the  District  had  no  reason  or  opportunity  to  learn  of  the  activities  for 
which  Respondent  would  claim  credit,  and  extra  pay,  until  she  submitted  her  Cover  Sheet 
and  Activity  Logs  on  June  8,  2008,  covering  activities  from  January  through  June  2008,  The 
District  could  reasonably  rely  on  Respondent’s  duty  to  be  honest  and  submit  properly  signed 
Activity  Logs  for  services  actually  performed.  The  delay  in  discovering  the  false  logs  was 
reasonable. 

18 

10. 

Equitable  estoppel:  Atwater  describes  this  doctrine  as  operating  when  the 

circumstances  justify  preventing,  or  estopping,  a  party  from  asserting  a  time  limit  because  his 
conduct  has  induced  another  into  not  making  a  claim  within  that  time  limit.  The  doctrine 
“takes  its  life...  from  the  equitable  principle  that  no  man  [may]  profit  from  his  wrongdoing 
in  a  court  of justice.”  (Atwater,  supra,  41  Cal.4th  at  232,  quoting  Lanizy  v.  Centex  Homes 
(2003)  31  Cal,4th  363,  383.)  “‘Generally  speaking,  four  elements  must  be  present  in  order'to 
apply  the  doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel:  (1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be  apprised  of  the 
facts;  (2)  he  must  intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party 
asserting  the  estoppel  had  a  right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  (3)  the  other  party  must  be 
ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to  his  injury.’ 
[Citation.]”  (  Golden  Gate  Water  Ski  Club  vy.  County  of  Contra  Costa  (2008)  165 
Cal.App.4th  249,  257.) 

ll. 

Here,  the  four  elements  of  equitable  estoppel  have  been  established.  With 

respect  to  the  Activity  Logs  submitted  in  June  2008  for  activities  claimed  from  January  to 
May  8,  2008:  (1)  Respondent  was  aware  of  the  true  state  of  affairs  concerning  signatures 
and  activities  claimed  on  the  logs;  (2)  Respondent  intended  that  the  District  would  rely  on 
the  logs  to  give  her  the  pay  raise;  (3)  the  District  was  ignorant  that  some  of  the  signatures 
were  forged  and  some  of  the  activities  did  not  occur;  and  (4)  the  District  relied  on  the  false 
logs  and  paid  the  raise  to  Respondent. 

12. 

Fraudulent  concealment:  For  this  doctrine  to  apply,  a  defendant,  by  using 
fraud  or  deceit,  has  concealed  material  facts  and  by  misrepresentations  has  hindered  the 
plaintiff  from  bringing  a  legal  action  within  the  statutory  period.  The  defendant  cannot  take 
advantage  of  his  own  wrong,  and  the  statute  of  limitations  will  be  tolled  until  the  wrongdoing 
is  discovered,  (Kimball  v.  Pacific  Gas  &  Elec.  Co.  (1934)  220  Cal.  203;  Pashley  v.  Pacific 
Elec.  Ry,  Co.  (1944)  25  Cal.2d  226.) 

13. 

Here,  Respondent  submitted  fraudulent  Activity  Logs  in  June  2008  including 
activities  dating  back  to  January  2008.  The  District  reasonably  relied  on  these  logs  to  give 
Respondent  a  pay  raise. 

14, 

The  District  had  no  reason  to  suspect  that  the  Activity  Logs  submitted  in  June 

2008  were  fraudulent.  It  reviewed  certain  aspects  of  the  logs,  such  as  the  number  of  hours 
claimed  and  whether  the  tasks  listed  had  any  limits,  and  then  approved  the  claim  for 
payment.  It  was  not  until  a  later  event  that  the  District  was  sufficiently  aware  of 
circumstances  that  would  put  a  reasonably  prudent  person  on  notice  that  Respondent’s 
Activity  Logs  required  further  scrutiny.  After  further  investigation,  the  fraud  in  the  logs  was 
discovered  and  the  District  made  the  decision  to  terminate  Respondent. 

15. 

Respondent’s  Activity  Logs  submitted  in  June  2008  would  have  been 

processed  according  to  the  program’s  policies,  which  did  not  include  a  rigorous  review  of  the 
activity  involved  or  the  signature.  Under  the  circumstances,  including  the  number  of 
teachers  submitting  logs,  the  number  of  activities  claimed  by  each  teacher,  the  teachers’  duty 
to  act  honestly,  and  the  small  staff  reviewing  the  logs,  it  was  reasonable  for  the  District  to 

19

rely  on  the  accuracy  of  the  logs.  When  the  event  concerning  Respondent’s  arrangements  for 

the District 
  a  substitute  teacher  and  her  unexpected  absence  occurred  on  April  13,  2009, 

discovered  the  issue  of  possibly  fraudulent  log  entries  within  ten  days  and  started  a  formal 
investigation,  which  included  many  more  logs  than  were  ultimately  included  in  the 
Accusation.  The  investigation  report  was  issued  July  27,  2010,  a  reasonable  period 
considering  that  the  investigation  included,  among  other  things,  review  of  numerous  logs  and 
identifying,  locating  and  interviewing  numerous  purported  signatories.  The  District  served 
the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  within  five  months  thereafter. 

16. 

There  are  six  causes  for  dismissal  alleged  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of 

Charges:  (1)  unprofessional  conduct,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1);  (2)  immoral 
conduct,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939;  (3)  dishonesty,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(3);  (4)  evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5);  (5)  persistent  violation of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  local  school  district  employing  her,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and  (6)  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school 
district,  under  section  44939, 

17. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a 
temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445  (Woodlana).)  Evident 
unfitness  for  services  requires  that  unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which 
“connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  Gd.  at  1444.) 

18.  .  The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 
unfitness  to  teach,  in  determining  what  constitutes  immoral  conduct,  and  in  deciding  whether 
the  teacher  should  be  sanctioned.  (California  Teachers  Association  v,  State  of  California 
(1999)  20  Cal.4th  327.) 

19, 

“Immoral  conduct,”  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and 

44939,  has  been  defined  to  mean  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct 
showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as 
an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  is  sometimes  used  as 
synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of Education  of the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811 
(Weiland),)  Immoral  conduct  can  be  construed  according  to  common  usage.  “The  term 
‘immoral’  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but 
includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency, 
depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 

20

  

inconsiderate  attitude  toward  Bond  order  and  the  pute  v welfare.” ” Stn  Verde Unified 

  

 

20, 

The  factual  scenarios  in  Weiland  and  Hensey  are  helpful  in  understanding  the 
types  of  actions  that  can  constitute  “immoral  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  as 
bases  to  dismiss  a  teacher.  In  Weiland,  a  teacher  of  an  evening  class  was  aware  that  when 
the  number  of  students  in  a  class  was  down  to  15  participants  in  three  successive  evenings, 
the  class  would  be  automatically  dropped  off  the  roll  and  the  teacher  would  lose  her  position. 
The  teacher  testified  that  she  falsified  records  by  adding  the  names  of  three  persons  who 
were  absent.  Although  the  teacher  argued  that  other  teachers  did  the  same  and  she  did  so  “to 
expose  the  situation,”  nevertheless  her  conduct  was not  justified  and  the  evidence  “that  the 
purpose  of  the  falsification  was  to  secure  appellant’s  continued  employment.  The  evidence 

-  was  Clearly  sufficient  to  support  the  findings”  of  immoral  conduct.  (Weiland,  supra,  179 

Cal.App.2d  at  811.) 

21, 

In  Hensey,  dismissal  was  justified  for  a  junior  college  teacher  who  used  vulgar 

language  and  engaged  in  questionable  acts  in  his  classes.  It  was  not  necessarily  each 
individual  act  or  comment  but,  rather,  the  totality,  He  tore  out  a  loudspeaker  in  his 
classroom.  He  referred  to  the  school’s  bell  system  as  sounding  like  a  worn-out  phonograph 
in  a  whorehouse  and  made  numerous  references  throughout  the  year  to  whores  and 
whorehouses,  He  warned  Mexican-American  students  of  super-syphilis  in  a  town  on  the 
Mexican  border,  He  stated  that  the  district  superintendent  spent  too  much  time  licking  up  the 
board  and  simulated  licking  the  classroom  wall  with  his  tongue.  Although  he  explained  that 
he  meant  “face  licking,”  the  expression  “means  in  common  parlance  licking  an  entirely 
different  portion  of  the  anatomy”  and  was  obviously  so  intended.  He  also  referred  to  the 
school  walls  looking  as  though  someone  had  peed  on  them  and  then  smeared  them  with  baby 
crap.  The  court  stated  “while  it  could  be  assumed  that  both  male  and  female  students  of  that 
age  were  familiar  with  the  words  used,  a  classroom,  even  on  a  junior  college  level,  is  not  the 
time  or  the  place  for  the  use  of  such  language.”  (Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  at  974,  975.) 
The  different  actions  and  statements  were  described  as  creating  a  dangerous  situation 
(loudspeaker),  bearing  on  his  fitness  to  teach  (whorehouse),  humiliating  and  embarrassing  to 
the  Mexican-American  students  and  showing  a  lack  of  restraint  and  a  tendency  to  vulgarity 
and  bad  taste  (super-syphilis),  and  disruptive  conduct,  an  impairment  of  the  teaching  process, 
and  not  an  example  of  the  responsible  dissent  which  should  be  fostered  in  the  classroom 
(licking). 
court’s  determination  that  the  charges  of  ‘immoral  conduct’  and  ‘evident  unfitness  for 
service’  were  true  and  constituted  cause  for  dismissal.”  (/bid.) 

“Al!  of  the  incidents  taken in  the  aggregate  serve  as  a  substantial  basis  for  the  trial 

.. 

22. 

 “Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used in  section  44932,  subdiyision  (a)(),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession in  good  standing.  (Boary  of Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

21 

23, 

|  Even  where  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are  established,  it 

  must  also  be  established  that  such  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  renders  the 
Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 
230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208 
(Fontana);  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at  1444-1445.) 

‘ 

In  general,  the  determination  of  fitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on  the 

factors  set  forth  in  Morrison,  to  determine  whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned 
conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  In  the  Morrison  case,  the  Supreme  Court  of 
California  held  that  the  determination  whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  must  be  based  on  an 
objective  and  analytical  approach.  Under  the  facts  of  that  case,  discussed  in  more  detail 
below,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may 
consider  such  specific  criteria  as: 
students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the 
existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
(6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  discipline 
may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher, 

(1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected 

’ 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the  Commission  has  broad 

discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine 
whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as 
measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach,  (Fontana,  supra,  45 
Cal.3d  at  220.) 

24. 

In  Morrison,  the  Supreme  Court  faced  a  scenario  where  the  state  Board  of 

Education  had  revoked  a  teacher’s  life  diplomas  for  immoral  and  unprofessional  conduct  and 
acts  involving  moral  turpitude.  (In  the  context  of  present  day  licensing,  this  is  the  equivalent 
of a  revocation  of  a  teaching  credential  by  the  Commission  on  Teaching  Credentialing.) 
Marc  Morrison  was  licensed  to  teach  in  public  secondary  schools.  In  April  1963,  while  away 
from  school,  he  had  a  physical  but  non-criminal  homosexual  relationship  with  another 
teacher,  who  reported  it  one  year  later  to  the  school  district.  The  Supreme  Court  determined 
that  the  legal  grounds  for  revocation  were  not  unconstitutionally  vague  as-long  as  the  conduct 
indicated  unfitness.to  teach.  In  examining  and  interpreting  the  law  concefning  these  grounds 
for  revocation,  the  Court  determined  that  the  licensing  agency  “may  consider  such  matters 
as”  the  factors  now  known  as  the  Morrison  factors.  (Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  229.)  In 
applying  the  facts  before  it  to  those  factors,  the  Supreme  Court  concluded-that  the  record 
contained  no  evidence  that  Morrison’s  conduct  indicated  his  unfitness  toteach.  The 
revocation  of  his  diploma  was  overturned. 

25. 

Applying  the  facts  of  this  case  to  the  Morrison  factors lead’  to  the  conclusion 

that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach, 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or 

78 

A 

22

fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  conduct  had  an  adverse 

  effect  on  other  teachers,  as  established  by  their  testimony.  Although  there  was  no  evidence 
of  an  actual  adverse  effect  on students,  several  witnesses  established  that  Respondent  could 
not  function  as  an  effective  role  model  for  students.  In  Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953) 
Al  Cal.2d  546,  552,  the  Court  stated:  “A  teacher,  and  more  particularly  a  principal,  in  the 
public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose 
words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  children  coming  under  her  care  and 
protection.  (Citation.)”  In  Goldsmith  v.  Board  of Education  (1924)  66  Cal.App.  157,  168, 
the  Court  noted:  “[T]he  teacher  is  entrusted  with  the  custody  of  children  and  their  high 
preparation  for  useful  life.  His  habits,  his  speech,  his  good  name,  his  cleanliness,  the  wisdom 
and  propriety  of  his  unofficial  utterances,  his  associations,  all  are  involved.  His  ability  to 
inspire  children  and  to  govern  them,  his  power  as  a  teacher,  and  the  character  for  which  he 
stands,  are  of  major  concern  in  a  teacher’s  selection  and  retention.  ...” 

  

To  be  sure,  teachers  are  not  required  or  expected  to  act  with  perfection  and  rectitude 

in  every  aspect  of  their  personal  and professional  lives,  Nevertheless,  as  noted  in  the  Code  of 
Ethics:  “Everything  we  do  has  an  impact  in  the  classroom.”  (Exhibit  1,  Pe LAUSD  22, 
section  A.) 

* 

There  was  evidence  that  parents  would  be  adversely.  affected,  and'it  was  clear  that 
District  administrators  were  as  well.  Although  Morrison  analyzed  the  adyerse  effects  on 
students  and  fellow  teachers  only,  there is  no  basis in  logic  to  limit  the  analysis  strictly  to 
these  two  categories,  Evidence in  this  matter  of  the  adverse  effects  on  patents-and 
administrators  can,  and  should,  be  considered  as  they  are  also  requisite parts  of  the  school 
community  within  which  teachers  act. 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  &onduct.  The 
Morrison  court  applied  this  factor  by  concluding  it  was  very  attenuated  when  the  complaint 
of  Morrison’s  activity  was  made  one  year  after  the  fact,  Morrison  resigned  the  next  month, 
19  months  later  the  State  Board  held  its  hearing,  the  revocation  was  three'years  after  the  fact, 
and  by  the  time  of  the  Supreme  Court  decision,  the  “incident  had  receded’six  years  into  the 
past.”  (Ud.  at  p.  237.)  Here,  the  District  removed  Respondent  from  the classroom  and  served 
the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  less  than  five  months  after  completing  its  investigation. 
The  hearing  commenced  23  months  after  the  formal  charges  were  served,! 

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  thé teacher.  Respondent 

holds  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential,  which  entitles  her  to  teach  in  classes  typically 
found  at  the  elementary  school  level. 

t 

(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 

publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct.  Extenuating  circumstances  aré  Respondent’s 
stress  caused  by  family  illness  and  physical  distance  and  financial  needs,.as  well  as  the 
numerous  instances  wherein  she  had  difficulty  getting  credit  for  activities.she  performed. 
Aggravating  circumstances  are  that  Respondent  submitted  numerous  forgeries,  the  last  after 
she  had  been  warned  to  carefully  prepare  pay-related  documents.  In addition,  Respondent’s 

23 

my 
ay

activities  supporting  the  pay  raises  were,  with  the  exception  of  grant  writing,  denied  by  the 
Although  there  was  no  evidence  of  publicity  in  the  nature  of  media 

  supposed  signatories, 
coverage,  there  was  evidence  that  teachers  were  aware  of  some  of  the  details  of  the  forgeries, 
and  numerous  District  administrators  were  aware  of  Respondent’s  conduct. 

 

(e)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of:the  motives 

resulting  in  the  conduct. 
Blameworthy  circumstances  are  that  she  did  so  in  a  highly  inappropriate  manner  by 
submitting  fraudulent  documents  to  obtain  pay  raises,  exhibiting  dishonesty  and  an  extreme 
lack  of  good  judgment. 

Respondent’s  desire  to  visit  and  tend  to  her  family  is  praiseworthy. 

(f£)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  Many 

District  witnesses  testified  to  their  concerns  that  Respondent,  having  exercised  such  poor 
judgment  under  the  circumstances  surrounding  the  incidents,  could  not  be  trusted  as  a  teacher 
or  colleague  to  exercise  the  judgment  necessary  under  her  responsibility  to  submit  proper 
documentation  and  serve  as  a  good  role  model. 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 

chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on  constitutional 
rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination  of  Respondent  from 
employment  with  the  District. 

26. 

The  acts  which  were  proven  demonstrate  that  Respondent  is  not  fit  to  teach. 
The  acts  that  were  proven  amount  to  cause  for  dismissal  of  Respondent  under  each  of  the 
legal  bases  charged  by  the  District  except  the  last,  as  discussed  below. 

27, 

There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  3  through  71. 

28. 

There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in 
Factual  Findings  3  through  71. 

29. 

‘There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  dishonesty  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3 
through  71. 

30. 

There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  pursuant 

to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  3  through  71. 

31. 

There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  District  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3  through  71, 

24 

4 

    assignments  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939"  There  was  no  evidence  Respondent 

32. 

There  is  no  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 

willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments.  The  activities  for  which  Respondent 
sought  NBC  credit  were  all  related  to  activities  beyond  Respondent’s  regular  assignments, 
for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3  through  71. 

33. 

In  reaching  these  Conclusions,  the  determinations  that  there  is  cause  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District  were  made  by  unanimous  vote  of  the 
Commission. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Kapila  Bhuta  is  sustained. 

L. 

2. 

The  District  may  proceed  with  its  dismissal  of  Respondent  as  an  employee  of 

the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District.     

DATED:  JunegZ/,  2013. 

ALANA  FAURE,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DATED:  June  ___,  2013. 

\ 
DATED:  Jy 

2013, 

PAMELA  MOULE,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

     DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member, 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

25

  

  

31. 

There  is  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  District  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 44932, 
subdivision  (a)(7),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3  through  71. 

32, — There 

is no cause to dismiss  Respondent for willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 
assignments  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939.  There  was  no  evidence  Respondent 
willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments.  The  activities  for  which  Respondent  sought 
NBC  credit  were  all  related  to  activities  beyond  Respondent’s  regular  assi gnments,  for  the  reasons 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3  through  71. 

33. 

In  reaching  these  Conclusions,  the  determinations  that  there  is  cause  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District  were  made  by  unanimous  vote  of  the 
Commission. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Kapila  Bhuta  is  sustained. 

1. 

2. 

The  District  may  proceed  with  its  dismissal  of  Respondent  as  an  employee  of  the 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  June  ___,  2013. 

DATED:  Junee27  2013, 

DATED:  June  ___,  2013. 

Member, 

Competence

ALANA  FAURE,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(  Voth BD  rp  le 

PAMELA  MOULE,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge, 

Commission  on  Professional 

  

  

