 

RERFORE_LHE 
BEPOURE  TERE 
THE  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of 

OAH  No.  2012050058 

LAKIESHA  MILNER 
Employee  No.  672122 

a  Permanent  Certificated  Employee  of 
the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on 

January  22-24,  28,  and  29,  2013,  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  The  Commission  consisted  of 
members  Deanna  Clark,  Phillip  Anthony,  and  Mark  Harman,  Administrative  Law  Judge 
(ALJ)  of  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who  presided. 

Kristine  E.  Kwong,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Katrina  M.  Campbell,  Assistant  General 

Counsel,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Leo  James  Terrell  and  Yasmin  Youssef,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Lakiesha 

Milner  (Respondent),  who  was  present  throughout  the  proceeding. 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  as  a  special  education 

teacher  and  bridge  coordinator  on  several  grounds.  The  most  serious  allegation  pertains  to 
an  episode  in  which  Respondent  fired  a  handgun,  striking  another  District  employee,  on  the 
evening  of  August  16,  2010.  Complainant  asserts  this  incident  involves  immoral  and 
unprofessional  conduct  and  demonstrates  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Respondent  argues 
that  she  acted  for  her  own  protection  under  unique  circumstances,  the  recurrence  of  which  is 
unlikely,  and  therefore,  the  incident  is  not  substantially  related  to  her  qualifications, 
functions,  or  duties  as  a  special  education  teacher  and  support  provider. 

At  the  start  of  the  administrative  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the  allegations  in 

paragraph  9  of  the  Accusation  as  a  cause  for  dismissal.  Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received  and  the  matter  was  argued.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 
decision  on  January  29,  2013. 

 

On May3,2013; 

Respondent  submitted-a- Request for  Judicial Notice  (RIN) ofa 

letter  received  by  Respondent  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC)  dated 
May  1,  2013.  On  May  7,  2013,  the  ALJ  issued  a  notice  of  ex  parte  communication  and  re- 
opened  the  record  to  give  both  parties  an  opportunity  to  submit  a  brief  regarding  the  RIN. 
Complainant’s  opposition  was  received  and  marked  for  identification  as  exhibit  52.  The  RJN 
and  Respondent’s  reply  were  marked  as  exhibit  “AN”  for  identification.-  (The  ALJ’s  ruling 
on  the  RJN  is  set  forth  in  legal  conclusion  number  1,  post.)  The  matter  was  deemed  re- 
submitted  on  May  17,  2013. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Acting  in  her  official  capacity,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  the  Chief  Human 
Resources  Officer  of  the  District,  signed  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges. 

2. 

Respondent  has  been  a  Disirict  employee  for  17  years  and  has  no  prior  record 
of  discipline.  She  holds  clear  special  education  and  elementary  teaching  credentials,  and  an 
administrative  services  credential.  She  completed  a  master’s  degree  in  Education  in  2010. 
Between  2005  and  2010,  Respondent  was  employed  as  a  special  education  teacher  and 
bridge  coordinator  at  Edison  Middle  School  (Edison).  Respondent’s  duties,  in  addition  to 
teaching,  included:  providing  professional  development  for  general  and  special  education 
teachers,  advocating  and  supporting  full  inclusion  opportunities  for  students,  providing 
evidence-based  interventions,  providing  training  to  parents  on  how  to  educate  their  children 
and  to  resolve  issues,  reviewing  individualized  education  plans,  and  finding  and  securing 
necessary  resources  for  successful  student  outcomes.  Respondent  worked  well  with  students. 
She  has  been  described  as  an  effective  and  efficient  communicator  who  implemented 
programs  to  help  students  achieve  their  potential. 

The  August  16,  2010  Incident 

. 

3. 

On  August  16,  2010,  at  approximately  8:30  p.m.,  Respondent  drove  her 

vehicle  from  her  home  to  a  barbershop  owned  by  her  estranged  husband,  Joel  Payne  (Payne), 
also  a  District  employee.  Respondent’s  purported  reason  for  going  to  Payne’s  barbershop 
was  to  receive  money  that  he  owed  for  a  school  trip  taken  by  their  four-year-old  daughter  and 
for  a  telephone  bill.  Their  daughter  was  with  Respondent  in  the  vehicle. 

4. 

Payne  was  waiting  outside  the  barbershop  when  Respondent  arrived. 

Respondent  parked  on  the  street,  got  out  of  her  vehicle,  and  walked  toward  Payne,  who  was 
standing  in  a  driveway.  Payne  handed  Respondent  some  money,  then  walked  over  to  the 
vehicle  to  see  his  daughter.  Respondent  went  the  other  direction  and  entered  the  barbershop, 
purportedly  because  she  wanted  to  say  hello  to  a  friend,  James  Wilridge.  Three  adults  and 
four  children  were  inside  the  barbershop,  including  Michelle  Bishop  (Bishop),  Bishop’s 
seven-year-old  nephew  and  adopted  son,  Michael  N.,  and  Bishop’s  four-year-old  daughter. 
Bishop  had  brought  Michael  N.  to  the  barbershop  to  have  his  hair  cut  by  Payne. 

  5 

Bishop  isa  Distit employee  She-and  Payne  workedasspecial-eiuetion  ——————} 

trainees  at  Fremont  High  School  (Fremont).  Bishop  and  Payne  had  been  having  a  sexual 
relationship  for  an  unspecified  period.  Respondent  apparently  knew  this  because,  shortly 
after  she  entered  the  barbershop,  she  began  saying  that  some  “bitches”  at  Fremont  were 
“messing”  with  her  husband  and  one  of  them  had  a  birthmark  on  the  side  of  her  cheek,  which 
was  a  clear  reference  to  Bishop,  who  has  a  birthmark  on  her  face.  Bishop  was  sitting  near 
Fred  Littleton  (Littleton),  a  friend  of  Payne’s  and  a  former  employee  at  Edison,  who  knew 
Respondent.  Littleton  testified  that  he  did  not  know  Bishop  at  the  time,  but  as  soon  as 
Respondent  made  the  reference,  Littleton  noticed  a  birthmark  on  Bishop’s  face.  Respondent 
apparently  repeated  her  remark  and  then  exited  the  barbershop,  shortly  followed  by  Bishop. 
Payne  was  still  outside  with  his  daughter. 

. 

6. 

Bishop  maintains  that  she  walked  down  the  driveway  to  retrieve  a  bottle  of 

water  from  her  car,  which  was  parked  on  the  street.  Her  children  remained  in  the 
barbershop.  Respondent  was  standing  in  the  driveway,  near  the  point  where  it  joins  the 
sidewalk  that  runs  between  the  barbershop  and  the  street.  Payne  was  nearby  with  his 
daughter.  Respondent  said  something  to  Payne.  Bishop  and  Respondent  began  arguing. 
Bishop  saw  Respondent  point  a  gun  in  her  direction.  A  fight  quickly  ensued  in  the  driveway  — 
and  down  the  sidewalk,  even  spilling  out  onto  the  street  adjacent  to  Payne’s  barbershop. 

7, 

Shortly  after  Bishop  saw  the  gun  pointed  at  her,  she  tried  to  put  both  of  her 

hands  up  near  her  face  and  head,  as  a  means  of  deflecting  the  gunfire.  A  bullet  struck  Bishop 
near  her  left  pinky  and  traveled  under  the  skin  to  her  wrist  and  along  her  arm  to  within  a  few 
inches  of  her  elbow,  where  it  lodged  (until  it  was  removed  by  surgery  several  months  later). 
Respondent  and  Bishop  then  grappled  and  swung  at  each  other.  Respondent  struck  Bishop 
several  times  in  the  head  with  the  butt  of  the  handgun,  inflicting  small  lacerations  on  the 
forehead  and a  blunt  trauma  to  the  back  of  the  head  that  required  several  stitches.  Payne, 
who  saw  the  whole  episode,  stated  that  he  tried  to  separate  them.  Respondent  fired  two  or 
three  or  more  gunshots  at  Bishop  during  the  altercation. 

8. 

Respondent’s  version  of  events  was  different.  She  denied  she  knew  Bishop 
was  in  the  barbershop.  After  she  exited,  her  back  was  turned  toward  Bishop  when  Bishop 
attacked  her.  She  said  Bishop  kicked  her  in  the  side  of  her  back,  grabbed  her  dreadlocks, 
held  her  head  down,  and  scratched  her  face.  Respondent  felt  threatened,  withdrew  a  handgun 
from  her  right  front  pants  pocket,  aimed  the  gun  away  from  Bishop,  and  fired  twice  as  a 
watning.  Respondent  said  Bishop  grabbed  for  the  gun,  but  let  go  after  the  first  shot  was 
fired.  Bishop,  however,  denied  she  attacked  Respondent  or  put  her  hand  on  the  gun. 

9. 

Littleton  testified  that  he  heard  four  gunshots  while  he  was  still  inside  the 

barbershop.  He  rushed  outside,  and  saw  Bishop  crouched  on  the  sidewalk,  leaning  against  a 
wall.  He  went  to  her  to  provide  assistance.  Blood  was  streaming  down  her  face. 
Respondent  was  standing  a  short  distance  away  holding  the  gun.  Payne  wrapped  his  arms 
around  Respondent  in  a  “bear  hug,”  held  her  arms  upright,  and  attempted  to  take  the  gun 
away  from  her.  Respondent  fired  off  another  round  even  while  Payne  was  holding  her. 
After  Payne  took  the  gun  from  Respondent,  she  got  in  her  car  and  drove  away.

  

N.  was  aware  that  his  mother  and  Respondent  were  fighting.  He  had 

Littleton  testified  he  helped  Bishop  to  her  feet  and  took  her  back  inside  the 

10. 
barbershop.  wi 
heard  gunshots.  He  and  his  sister  began  crying  and  yelling  when  they  saw  their  injured 
mother,  Sheriffs  deputies  arrived.  Bishop  was  taken  by  an  ambulance  to  a  hospital. 
deputies  made  telephone  contact  with  Respondent,  but  she  did  not  cooperate  with  their 
requests.  She  turned  herself  in  to  the  authorities  on  the  following  day  and  was  arrested. 

The 

_ 

 

Credibility  Determinations 

11. 

.  The  stories  told  by  Bishop,  Payne,  Littleton,  and  Respondent  are  not 

consistent.  Their  testimonies  raised  credibility  issues;  however,  it  is  settled  that  the  trier  of 
fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the 
latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.) 
The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly 
contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the 
testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (Id.,  at 
pp.  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.) 

12. 

Immediately  following  the  incident,  Bishop  and  Payne  both  denied  having  a 

sexual  relationship  with  each  other  in  their  interviews  with  law  enforcement.  Bishop 
maintained  this  lie  when  she  testified  under  oath  at  Respondent’s  preliminary  hearing. 
Bishop’s  credibility  was  seriously  compromised  at  Respondent’s  criminal  trial,  when  she 
admitted  she  had  lied  to  sheriffs  deputies  and  during  the  preliminary  hearing.  Bishop 
testified  about  her  reason  for  lying;  she  did  not  want  her  Fremont  colleagues  or  her  family, 
particularly  her  grandmother  who  attended  the  preliminary  hearing,  to  know  about  her  affair 
with  Payne.  Bishop’s  statements  regarding  the  events  of  August  16,  2010,  however,  have 
remained  remarkably  consistent.  She  was  credible  during  much  of  her  testimony  at  the 
hearing,  possibly  because  she  no  longer  has  something  to  hide. 

13. 

Respondent’s  testimony  had  gaps  and  she  appeared  rehearsed,  raising  doubts 
as  to  her  credibility.  She  testified  that  she  brought  her  gun  to  the  barbershop  because  it  was 
in  a  dangerous  part  of  town,  but  she  did  not  explain  why,  after  she  arrived  at  the  barbershop, 
she  took  the  gun  out  of  her  purse  (or  from  her  vehicle’s  glove  compartment),  and  placed  the 
gun  in  her  front  pants  pocket  before  entering  the  barbershop.  A  reasonable  inference  is  that 
Respondent  knew  Bishop  was  in  the  barbershop,  she  expected  a  conflict  between  her  and 
Bishop,  and  she  entered  the  barbershop  with  a  gun  because  she  intended  to  engage  in  a  fight. 

14. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  did  not  recognize  Bishop  in  the  barbershop  as  the 

person  who  was  having  an  affair  with  her  husband.  She  admitted  that  she  told  Littleton 
about  her  husband  “messing”  with  several  “hoes”  at  Fremont,  but  she  denied  that  she  made 
any  reference  to  Bishop’s  birthmark.  Littleton,  Bishop,  and  Michael  N.,  however, 
consistently  testified  that  Respondent  specifically  referred  to  the  birthmark  in  the  barbershop, 
-and  their  testimony  was  more  credible  than  Respondent’s  on  this  issue. 

     

     

15.—Respondent 

gave-details-of the-fight  that  were-inherently-improbable. 

  

i 

 

Respondent  is  five  feet  eight  inches,  at  least  three  or  four  inches  taller  than  Bishop,  and  she 
considerably  outweighs  Bishop.  Respondent  claimed  that,  after  Bishop  was  struck  by  a 
bullet in  the  hand,  Bishop  lifted  Respondent  off  the  ground  and  carried  her  nearly  15  feet,’ 
which is  unlikely.  Ultimately,  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  precisely  what  occurred  that  night, 
yet  Respondent’s  portrayal  of  herself  as  the  victim  is  not  believed:  Respondent  disregarded 
multiple  opportunities  to  avoid  an  altercation.  She  used  a  handgun  to  cause  serious  injury  to 
Bishop  while  in  the  presence  of  her  own  young  daughter.  Respondent’s  use  of  deadly  force, 
under  these  circumstances,  was  shocking,  inexcusable,  and  unjustified. 

16. 

The  District  Attorney  charged  Respondent  with  crimes  in  four  counts,  which 

included  violations  of  the  following  Penal  Code  sections:  Count  1 
-  sections  664/187, 
subdivision  (a)  (attempted  murder)  and  664/192,  subdivision  (a)  (attempted  voluntary 
manslaughter,  a  lesser  included  offense);  Count  2  -  sections  245,  subdivision  (a)(2)  (assault 
upon  the  person  of  another  with  a  firearm),  243,  subdivision  (a)  (battery,  a  lesser  included  © 
offense),  and  240  (simple  assault,  a  lesser  included  offense);  Count  3  -  section  246.3, 
subdivision  (a)  (discharge  of  a  firearm in  a  grossly  negligent  manner);  Count  4 
-  sections 
245,  subdivision  (a)  (assault  by  means  likely  to  produce  great  bodily  injury),  240  (simple 
assault,  a  lesser  included  offense),  and  243  (battery,  a  lesser  included  offense).  Respondent 
was  placed  on  compulsory  leave  from  the  District  during  the  pendency  of  the  criminal 
matter.  On  February  4,  2011,  in  the  Los  Angeles  Superior  Court,  case  number  TA114215, 
Respondent  was  acquitted  by  a  jury  of  all  criminal  charges. 

- 

| 

17. 

After  her  acquittal,  Respondent  obtained  restraining  orders  against  Bishop  and 

Payne.  She  testified  that  she  was  afraid  of  Bishop  and  did  not  want  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  Payne  except  for  matters  involving  their  daughter.  The  incident’s  aftermath  for  Bishop 
was  severe.  Bishop  had  permanent  physical  injuries.  Respondent’s  actions  traumatized 
Bishop’s  two  children,  who  currently  have  nightmares.  MIN.  has  developed  behavior 
problems.  He  has  been  angry  and  defiant,  and  he  acts  out  both  in  school  and  at  home. 

- 

Respondent’s  Problems  When  She  Returned  to  the  District 

18. 

|  Respondent  returned  to  service  with  the  District.  She  was  reassigned  to  the 

Local  District  7  (L.D7)  office  as  a  “housed”?  employee  on  January  14,  2011.  Michael 
Hopwood  (Hopwood),  a  District  administrator  for  employee  relations  who  supervised  the 
housed  employees  in  the  LD7  office,  met  with  Respondent  and  conducted  an  orientation  on 
the  rules  for  housed  employees.  Hopwood  provided  Respondent  a  document,  addressed  to 
Respondent,  which  stated  the  policies  and  procedures  to  be  followed  at  the  LD7  office, 

  

'  Respondent  testified,  “The  girl  came  and  grabbed  me  by  one  side.  [She]  lifted  me.. 

.  and  carried  me  all  the  way  down  the  sidewalk.  She  bit  my  breast,  lifted  me  up.  Turned  me 
around  180  degrees  down  the  sidewalk.” 

*  The  term  “housed”  refers  to  a  temporarily  reassigned  employee  pending  a  District 

investigation  of  alleged  misconduct. 

—ineluding-the-work-hours;the-designated-lunch-period-4-00-to-1:45-a-m-);  the-breale 

times; 

and  the  specific  requirements  for  signing  in  upon  arrival  with  Olga  Rodriguez  (Rodriguez), 
Hopwood’s  secretary,  and  signing  out  upon  leaving  the  location.  Respondent  was  assigned 
to  the  third  floor,  conference  room  C,  and  was  directed  to  remain  there  during  her  assigned 
hours.  At  hearing,  Respondent  maintained  that  Hopwood  failed  to  provide  her  any  document 
regarding  the  check-in/check-out  procedure  on  January  14,  2011.°  The  District’s  document 
(Exh.  1)  does  not  contain  Respondent’s  signature  acknowledging  its  receipt. 

  

19. 

Rodriguez  was  responsible  for  maintaining  the  housed  employees’  attendance 

records  and  ensuring  that  they  signed  in  and  out  appropriately.  The  daily  time  in/time  out 
sheet  was  on  a  counter  near  Rodriguez’s  desk.  Rodriguez,  among  other  duties,  would  write 
down  the  time  in  a  log  book  when  an  employee  arrived  late  to  LD7.  Rodriguez  also 
maintained  sheets  in  a  binder  at  the  main  desk  for  employees  to  sign  out  and  sign  in  for  their 
lunch  periods.  Respondent  testified  that  she  was  never  informed  that  she  was  required  to 
sign  out  and  sign  in  for  the  lunch  period,  and  that  she  was  not  aware  of  any  sheets  maintained 
for  this  purpose.  On  March  9,  2011,  Rodriguez  observed  Respondent  leave  for  lunch  at 
11:10  a.m.  and  return  at  1:00  p.m.,  in  violation  of  Hopwood’s  directives.  Respondent  did  not 
sign  out  when  she  left  for  lunch  and  did  not  sign  in  when  she  returned.  Rodriguez  reported 
this  incident  to  Hopwood.  Hopwood  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  on  March  14,  2011. 
He  told  her  that,  in  the  future,  she  would  not  be  paid  for  time  she  took  in  excess  of  her 
allotted  lunch  time  and  that  she  needed  to  sign  out  and  sign  back  in  for  lunch  periods. 

, 

20. 

Another  rule  prohibited  housed  employees  from  using  computers,  facsimile 

machines,  or  copiers  at  LD7.  They  also  were  not  allowed  to  roam  the  halls  except  to  use  the 
restrooms.  On  June  22,  2011,  Norma  Berryman  (Berryman),  an  administrative  secretary  in 
LD7,  was  in  her  work  area  located  on  the  second  floor  near  the  office  of  LD7  Superintendent 
George  McKenna  (McKenna).  Housed  employees  were  not  supposed  to  be  in  this  area. 
Berryman  saw  Respondent  and  another  housed  employee  walking  in  this  area,  which 
included  District  computer  equipment  and  a  copier.  Berryman  heard  Respondent  say  to  the 
other  employee  “not  this  machine,  the  next  one,”  ostensibly  pointing  in  the  direction  of  the 
copier.  Berryman  saw  the  employee  put  back  a  document  he  had  picked  up  from a printer  in 
the  area.  Berryman  reported  this  episode  to  Hopwood. 

21. 

The  housed  employees  were  not  allowed  to  use  the  employee  lounge,  which 
had  a  television,  except  during  the  designated  lunch  period.  On  October  7,  2010,  Hopwood 
met  Respondent  in  the  lounge  and  instructed  her  to  turn  down  the  volume  on  the  television. 
Respondent  did  not  comply  and,  as  she  was  leaving,  told  Hopwood  something  to  the  effect 
that  “the  only  reason  you  are  here  is  because  your  secretaries  are  always  calling  you  on  us.” 

22. 

On  October  10,  2011,  McKenna’s  administrative  assistant,  Veronica  Aguilar 
(Aguilar),  who  was  familiar  with  Respondent,  heard  Respondent  addressing  Rodriguez  in  a 
loud  and  angry  voice,  saying,  “I  don’t  have  to  listen  to  a  secretary.”  Respondent’s  complaint 

>  Respondent’s  testimony  conflicted  with  a  statement  she  made  on  November  14, 

2011,  in  which  she  acknowledged  receiving  the  “paper  you  originally  gave  me.”  (Exh,  B.) 

6

Rodriquez had-made-on-hertimecard indicating that-she-had 
coneerned-a-disputed-entry-that_ 
arrived  tardy  on  a  date  in  September  2011.  Respondent  told  Rodriguez  that  she  needed  to 
speak  to  an  administrator.  Hopwood  was  not  in  the  office.  Rodriguez  had  looked  for  another 
administrator  to  meet  with  Respondent,  without  success;  Respondent  insisted  that  an 
administrator  be  called.  Aguilar  felt  that  Respondent  was  “out  of  control.”  She  was 
concerned  for  Rodriquez’s  safety.  Rodriguez  also  was  concerned  for  her  safety. 

23. 

Aguilar  approached  Respondent  and  asked  her  to  leave  the  area,  or  she  would 
call  the  police.  McKenna  was  in  a  meeting  with  two  other  administrators  on  another  floor  of 
LD7.  Aguilar  told  Respondent  that  no  administrator  was  available  to  speak  with  her. 
Respondent  did  not  leave  the  area.  Aguilar  went  to  her  desk  and  called  for  McKenna,  who 
left  his  meeting  and  arrived  with  the  two  other  administrators  to  address  the  situation. 
Respondent  told  McKenna  that  Rodriquez  was  always  checking  on  her.  McKenna  took 
Respondent.into  his  office  and  they  were  able  to  resolve  the  matter. 

24. 

On  October  25,  2011,  Hopwood  received  another  complaint  that  the  television 

on  the  third  floor  was  too  loud.  Hopwood  saw  Respondent  and  other  employees  watching 
television  past  1:00  p.m.  and  well  beyond  the  allotted  time  for  lunch.  When  Hopwood  spoke 
to  Respondent,  she  told  him  that  she  had  been  in  the  employee  lounge  because  someone  in 
the  conference  room  had  “bumped”  into  her.  Hopwood  asked  whether  she  had  reported  this 
problem,  and  she  said  no.  She  did  not  want  to  provide  any  more  information  to  Hopwood 
about  the  allegedly  inappropriate  contact.  Hopwood  called  the  school  police  and  reported 
Respondent’s  allegation,  but  she  did  not  cooperate  with  the  police’s  inquiry,  either. 

25. 

On  November  7,  2011,  Hopwood  met  with  Respondent  and  discussed  his 
findings.  He  said  Respondent  had  engaged  in  disrespectful  and  disruptive  behavior,  had 
failed  to  follow  written  directives  and  procedures  on  several  occasions,  and  had  arrived  late 
to  work  12  times.  Respondent  disputed  most  of  their  findings  and  alleged  that  Rodriguez’s 
“mishandling  of  my  timecard  on  a  continual  basis  is  in  my  opinion  harassment.”  (Exh.  B.) 

26. 

While  Respondent  was  temporarily  re-assigned  to  LD7,  Detective  Ray  Jordan, 

a  District  police  officer  with  the  Employee  Relations  Investigations  Unit,  conducted  an 
administrative  investigation  of  the  events  of  August  16,  2010.  He  completed  his  report  on 
July  29,  2011.  McKenna  reviewed  the  report  and  determined  that  Respondent’s  violent  acts 
at  the  barbershop  evidenced  a  substantial  risk  of  harm  to  District  students  and  staff. 
McKenna  recommended  that  Respondent  not  be  reassigned  to  a  work  setting.  (Exh.  6.) 

27, 

Hopwood  reviewed  Detective  Jordan’s  report  and  McKenna’s 

recommendation,  and  prepared  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acis,  which  he  signed  on 
November  15,  2011.  Hopwood  recommended  both  dismissal  and  a  15-day  suspension,  and 
he  issued  a  Notice  of  Suspension  for  15  days  Without  Pay  on  the  same  date.  On  December 
14,  2011,  Hopwood  prepared  a  second  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts,  based  on  his  findings 
that  had  been  discussed  with  Respondent  on  November  7,  2011.  (See  factual  finding  number 
23,  ante.)  This  was  accompanied  by  a  Notice  of  Suspension  for  15  days  Without  Pay.

28.—  On-Aprit10;-2012,  the  Governing  Boarc-of the District took-action-to-dismiss————_ 

Respondent,  and  served  notice  of  this  action  and  a  statement  of  charges  upon  Respondent  on 
April  11,  1012.  Respondent  requested  a  hearing  on  the  charges,  and  this  matter  ensued. 

Mitigation  and  Rehabilitation 

29, 

Coleen  Kaiwi  (Kaiwi)  has  been  principal  of  Edison  for  the  past  six  years.  She 

has  recommended  that  Respondent  retain  her  position  at  the  school  because  “I  value  her  as 
an  educator.  I  felt  she  brought  a  high  quality  to  our  school.”  Kaiwi  was  not  aware  of  many 
of  the  circumstances  of  August  16,  2010.  It  was  her  understanding  that  Respondent  had 
acted  lawfully  and  in  self-defense.  Kaiwi  said  Respondent  was  very  knowledgeable  about 
special  education.  She  said  Respondent  was  passionate  about  her  work  and  had  worked  well 
with  students  and  parents  to  help  students  succeed.  Kaiwi  has  not  seen  Respondent  lose  her 
temper  and  she  does  not  think  Respondent  would  pose a  risk  to  students,  teachers.or  parents. 

30. 

Aaron  Jeffery  is  a  Coordinator  for  the  District  Office  of  Transition  Services. 

He  has  written  a  recommendation  letter,  and  he  testified  at  the  hearing.  He  also  believes 
Respondent  is  well  versed  in  the  law  and  mechanics  of  special  education  and  has  excellent 
skills,  which  she  uses  to  educate  teachers  and  parents  about  all  aspects  of  special  education 
services  at  school. 
letter  of  recommendation,  dated  May  1,  2012. 

Heather  Karuza,  Edison’s  Administrator  of  Curriculum,  also  wrote  a 

31. 

Respondent  has  been  a  volunteer  representative  on  the  school  site  council  at 
her  daughter’s  elementary  school  during  the  2011/2012  school  year.  She  has  often  been  at 
the  school  after  hours,  helping  her  daughter  with  her  homework,  and  some  parents  have 
asked  her  to  tutor  their  children.  Respondent  maintains  that  these  parents  are  aware  of  the 
events  of  August  16,  2010,  and  that  her  presence  at  school  has  not  generated  any  complaints. 

32. 

Linda  M.  Sakurai  (Sakurai),  the  principal  of  the  school  attended  by 

Respondent’s  daughter,  testified  that  she  had  heard  a  rumor  that  Respondent  had  shot 
someone.  She  said  that  Respondent  had  “self-nominated”  herself  to  the  site  council 
committee.  Respondent  lives  across  the  street  from  the  school.  Sakurai  was  afraid  there 
could  be  consequences  if  she  testified  in  this  matter.  She  has  concerns  about  allowing 
Respondent  to  be  on  a  school  site,  because  “firearms  and  children  don’t  mix.” 

The  “Morrison”  Factors 

33. 

Respendent’s  conduct  must  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  her  fitness  to  teach 

pursuant  to  the  pertinent  criteria,  first  set  forth  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison).'  Application  of  the  Morrison 

4  The  Court  set  forth  the  following  factors:  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the 
party  involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 

| ! 
! i 
1 

|

  

i 
i 
i 
i 

i 

i

factors-in-this-matter-indicates-unfitness-to-teach—As-a-special-education-teacher-and- bridge 
coordinator,  Respondent  serves  under  difficult  and  emotional  circumstances,  whether  she 
must  defuse  a  student  on  the  playground  or  mediate  with  parents  of  special  needs  kids  over 
tough  decisions  about  getting  the  best  services  for  their  children.  Respondent  engaged  in  a 
serious  act  of  violence,  which  demonstrates  dangerous  volatility  and  a  lack  of  self-control. 
The  brutality  of  aiming  and  firing  a  gun  at  another  human  being  became  amplified  when  it 
occurred,  as  here,  in  the  presence  of  children.  Her  behavior  caused  extreme  physical  and 
emotional  harm  to  the  victims.  Her  conduct  demonstrated  a  flaw  in  her  temperament. 

34. 

Respondent  continued  to  act  inappropriately  toward  colleagues  and  coworkers 

at  LD7.  She  engaged  in  loud  and  threatening  outbursts  when  she  was  dissatisfied  by  a 
person’s  response  to  her.  She  continued  to  act  in  a  manner  antithetical  to  teaching  by 
flaunting  or  disobeying  school  policies  and  procedures.  She  did  not  question  the  propriety  of 
her  behaviors.  These  behaviors,  by  themselves,  ate  insufficient  evidence  to  dismiss  her.  But 
they  demonstrate  aggravating  circumstances. 

35. 

This  is  unfortunate,  because  Respondent  has  been  a  good  teacher  and  a 
resource  person.  Respondent’s  violent  conduct  arose  under  a  stressful  and  emotional 
situation  with  her  husband.  The  problem  is  that  Respondent’s  behavior  at  LD7  shows  her 
attitude  and  temperament  issues  are  not  confined  to  this  emotional  situation,  which  might 
otherwise  be  termed  an  isolated  incident  or  domestic  dispute.  The  District  is  responsible  for 
protecting  campuses  from  any  person  who  poses a  risk  of  actual  harm  to  the  school 
community. 

36. 

 Respondent’s  acts  were  not  mere  negligence.  Her  violent  behavior  evidenced 
a  conscious  and  selfish  disregard  for  the  law  and  for  the  rights  of  others.  Respondent  did  not 
establish  that  personal  circumstances,  such  as  a  traumatic  event  of  its  aftermath,  precipitated 
her  loss  of  self-control.  Respondent’s  motives  are  largely  unknown;  however,  she  appears  to 
have  reacted  to  intense  feelings  of  jealousy,  anger,  and  betrayal.  Her  behavior  cannot  be 
excused.  Further,  she  does  not  see  any  need  to  make  changes  in  her  behavior.  Based  on 
these  circumstances,  and  in  the  absence  of  substantial  evidence  of  rehabilitation,  it  is  likely 
Respondent  will  react  similarly  in  the  future. 

  

conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the 
likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary 
action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Not  all  factors  may  apply  in  each  case  and  only  the 
pertinent  ones  need  to  be  examined.  (West  Valley-Mission  Community  College  District  v. 
Conception  (1993)  16  Cal-App.4th  1766,  1777;  Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28 
Cal.App.4th  369,  384  (Haar).)  The  determination  of  fitness  for  service  required  by  Morrison 
is  a  factual  one.  (Board of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  C.3d  691,  698,  fn.  3;  Fontana 
Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d.  208,  220-221;  Haar,  supra,  28 
Cal.App.4th  at  p.  384.) 

result-of-an 
37,—Respondent’s-serious-and-violent-misconduetis-evident-and-is-the 

inadequacy  or  defect  in  temperament. 

38. 

Except  for  those  previously  found  to  have  merit,  all  other  allegations  in  the 

Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  all  other  contentions  of  the  parties  at  the  hearing 
are  found  to  lack  merit  or  to  be  surplusage. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Respondent's  Request for  Judicial  Notice 

la. 

Respondent  has  requested  that  judicial  notice  be  taken  of  the  CTC’s  letter 

dated  May  1,  2013,  which  states  that  the  “Committee  of  Credentials,  after  careful  review  and 
consideration  of  the  materials  contained  in  your  file,  has  determined  to  close  its  investigation 
and  to  recommend  no  adverse  action  at  this  time.”  Respondent  argues  that  the  CTC’s 
determination  not  to  discipline  Respondent’s  teaching  credentials  “at  this  time”  reasonably 
infers  that  the  District’s  determination  to  initiate  Respondent’s  dismissal  was  erroneous. 
Having  considered  the  written  arguments,  the  ALJ  has  denied  the  RIN,  because  the  CTC’s 
determination  to  close  its  investigation  without  bringing  any  disciplinary  action  does  not 
have  a  tendency  in  reason  “to  prove  or  disprove  any  disputed  fact  that  is  of  consequence  to 
the  determination”  of  this  administrative  action.  (Evid.  Code,  §§  210  &  350.) 

tb. 

The  inference  proffered  by  Respondent  requires  proof  of  many  facts  that  have 

not  been  established  by  the  record  in  this  proceeding,  not  least  of  which  is  the  different 
jurisdictions  of  separate  government  agencies.  The  CTC  enforces  and  administers  the  law 
with  regard  to  teachers’  credential.  The  CTC’s  letter  is  a  statement  about  its  action,  or  non- 
action,  regarding  Respondent’s  teaching  credentials,  This  action  has  no  binding  effect  on  the 
Commission  in  this  proceeding.  The  CTC’s  Committee  did  not  conduct  a  hearing  on  the 
merits  or  apply  the  standard  of  proof  used  in  this  proceeding.  The  CTC’s  letter  does  not  give 
the  reasons  for  the  Committee’s  determination.  The  CTC’s  letter  does  not  describe  the 
evidence  the  Committee  reviewed.  The  mere  fact  that  the  CTC,  following  its  review  of 
unspecified  material,  determined  not  to  initiate  disciplinary  proceedings  “at  this  time”  has  no 
direct  or  indirect  connection  with  a  determination  of  the  disputed  facts  of  this  administrative 
proceeding.  In  sum,  the  CTC’s  determination  is  not  probative  of  the  matters  at  issue. 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof.  The  standard  of  proof  is  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 
Cal.  App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

Burden  of Proof 

Definitions 

10

  3 

“Immoral-conduct,-of-which-Respondent-has-been-accused;has-been-defined.   

_to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good 
morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or 
shameless,  or  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of 
the  community,  or  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 
(Board  of Education  vy.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland).) 

4, 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  requires  that  the  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  a  defect  or 
inadequacy  in  temperament,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  the 
teacher’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.  (Woodland 
Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Zuber)  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.) 

  

Cause  for  Dismissal 

5. 

Cause  for  dismissal  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivisions 
(a)(1)  and  (a)(5),*  for  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,  and  evident  unfitness  for  service. 
The  District  has  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  as  this  term  is 
defined  by  Weiland.  Respondent’s  volatile  and  violent  natures,  and  her  indifference  to  the 
consequences  of  her  actions,  indicate  a  defect  or  inadequacy  of  temperament.  Further,  her 
violent  action  is  sufficient  to  establish  her  “unfitness  to  teach”  under  the  Morrison  principle. 

°  The  District  has  alleged  five  grounds  for  discipline  under  Education  Code  section 

44932,  which  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as  follows: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more 

of  the  following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

[q]...  [1] 

[ny]...  [9 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools 
by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

11

Other-Matters   

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal.does  not  exist  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivisions  (a)(4)  and  (a)(7).  Although  Respondent  was  unwilling  to  obey  the  reasonable 
policies  and  procedures  of  the  District  while  she was  assigned  to  LD7,  and  her  behaviors  at 
times  were  disruptive and  intimidating  to  ‘other  dmployees,  these  behaviors  were  not 
sufficiently  serious  to  establish  her  “unfitness  to  teach”  under  the  Morrison  principle,  and  are 
insufficient  by  themselves  to  warrant  her  dismissal.  Similarly,  the  District  has  failed  to 
establish  cause  for  dismissal  tinder  Education  Code  section  44939,  for  willful  refusal  to” 
perform  regular  assigntnents without  réasoriable  cause, -  Respondent’  $  failuté  to  act 
appropriately  at  LD7,  however, is  an  agsravating  factor,  because  it  tends  to  show  that 
Respondent  has  a  temperatnental  défect.  Further,  Respondent’s  behaviors  at  LD7  indicate  a 
lack  of  rehabilitation;  which makes  her  unsuitable  for  return to  the  classroom. 

7. 

In  sum,  Respondent’s  violent  behavior  significantly  affected  the  adults  and 

children  who  were  present  on  the  evening  of  the  incident.  Almost  all  of  them  Wete  District 
employees  ot  students.  Respondent  by  physical  force  inflicted  serious  bodily harm  upon 
Bishop,  arid  caused  émotional trunia  to  her  children,  who  have  continued  to  stiffer 
nightmares  and  to  engage  inacting-out-  behaviors.  "The  altercation  with  Bishop,  although  off- 
camipus,  indicates  that  Respondent:canhot be  expected  to  lise  260d  judgment  and  self-control 
in  extrenie  tircuimstancés  involving  conflicts.  “Réspondent’s  behavior  at  LD7  ahd  her  lack  of 
remotse  further  show  that  her  conduct  on  August16,;  2010;  was  not  an  isolated  évent. 

8. 

Dismissal  of  Respondent  from  her  position  as  a  special  education  teacher  and 

bridge  coordinator  is  warranted. 

Phe-Accusation’  and  Statément  of  Charges  ate  sustained.  Respondent  Lakiesha 
Milner  is  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permatient  certificated:employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

Dated:  June_//_,  2013 

Dh Gorman 
Mark  Harman,  Commission  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

Dated:  June 

,  2013 

  

Deanna  Clark,  Commission  Member 

Dated:  June_@-,  2013 

| 

ie Adicheny. 

Phillip  Anthony,  Commissiof’  Me 

ORDER 

12

Other Matters   

 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal.  does  not  exist  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivisions  (a)(4)  and  (a)(7).  Although  Respondent  was  unwilling  to  obey  the  reasonable 
policies  and  procedures  of  the  District  while  she  was  assigned  to  LD7,  and  her  behaviors  at 
times  were  disriiptive  and: intimidating  to  other  employees,  these  behaviors  Were  not 
sufficiently  serious  to’  establish  her  “unfitness  to'teach”  tnder  the  Morrison  principle,  and  are 
insufficient  by  themselves  to  warrant  her  dismissal.  Similarly,  the  District  has  failed  to 
establish  cause  for  dismissal  under  Education  Code  séction  44939,  for  willful  refusal  to 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasoitable  cause.  Respondent’s  failure  to  act 
appropriately  at  LD7,  however,  is  an  ‘aggravating  factor,  because  it tends  to  show  that 
Respondent  has  a  tempetainental  défect..  Fiirther,  Respondent's  behaviors  at LD7  indicate  a 
lack  of  rehabilitation;  which  makes  her  unsuitable  for  return  to  the classroom. 

7. 

In  sum,  Respondent’s  violent  behavior significantly  affected  the  adults  and 

children  who  were  present  on  the  evening  of  the  incident.  Almost  all  of  thém  ‘were  District 
employees  or  students.  Respondent  by  physical  force  inflicted  serious  bodily harm  upon 
Bishop,  atid  caused  ‘emotional ‘trauma  to  her  children,  who  have  cotitinued  to  suffer 
nightmares  and  to erigage  in  dcting-out  béliaviors.”  The  altercation  with  Bishop,  although  off- 
campus,  indicates  that  Respondent’  carinot  be  expected  to  use  good  judgment  and  self-control 
in  éxtremé  circumstances  itivolving  Conflicts.  Respondent's behavior  at  LD7  and  her  lack  of 
remorse fiirther  show. that  her  conduct  on  August  16,  2010; was  not  an isolated  event. 

8. 

Dismissal  of  Respondent  from  het  position  as  a a  special  education  teacher  and 

bridge  coordinator  is  warranted. 

-ORDER. 

The  Accusatiori  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  sustained.  Respondent  Lakiesha 
Milner  is  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

Dated:  June 

,  2013 

  

Mark  Harman;  Commission  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

- 

Dated:  Junep  f)_,  2013 

ay, 

Ra  fe 

—— 

Deanna  Clark,  Commission  Member 

Dated:  June,  2013 

  

Phillip  Anthony,  Commission  Member 

12 

