BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

FRANCISCO ARELLANO (EN 623166), a
permanent certificated employee,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2012040389

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in
Cerritos, California, on February 11-15, March 11-14, 2013, and thereafter held
deliberations.
The Commission consisted of Miriam Chapa, Luciano Ortiz, and
Administrative Law Judge Amy Yerkey, State of California, Office of Administrative
Hearings, who presided.

Michele M. Goldsmith, Attorney at Law, of Bergman Dacey Goldsmith, represented

Complainant Los Angeles Unified School District (District).

Ronald C. Lapekas, Attorney at Law, represented Francisco Arellano (Respondent),

who was present throughout the hearing.

The District employed Respondent as a third-grade elementary teacher. The District
alleged that Respondent demonstrated unprofessional conduct,
immoral conduct, evident
unfitness for service, and persistent violation of school laws and regulations, based on multiple
incidents that occurred from 2007 through 2008. Respondent denied the alleged causes for
dismissal and the underlying charges upon which they were based.

Based on the evidence presented,

the District
established its allegations in the Accusation and Statement of Charges. Accordingly,
Respondent’s dismissal is upheld, as explained below.

the Commission determined that

Jurisdictional Findings

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

2.

On March 14, 2012, the District gave notice to Respondent of its intent to
dismiss him. At the same time, the District notified Respondent of his immediate suspension.
Respondent thereafter made a request for hearing.

3.

On April 16, 2012, the District served an Accusation and Statement of Charges
(Accusation) seeking Respondent's dismissal. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense
and requested an administrative hearing.

Vivian K. Ekchian, Chief Human Resources Officer, made and filed the

Accusation and Statement of Charges in her official capacity.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The October 27, 2008 Incident

4.

5.

6.

Mary Mendoza (Mendoza) is an administrator who has been employed with
In the 2008-2009 school year, Mendoza was the Principal at San
the District for 34 years.
Fernando Elementary School. On October 27, 2008, Mendoza made unannounced visits to
classrooms throughout the school. When she walked into Respondent’s classroom, Mendoza
observed two female third-grade students, Child Numbers 1 and 21, sitting on Respondent’s
lap, one on each leg. Mendoza had a clear line of sight to Respondent’s desk, and the
evidence demonstrated that she accurately viewed the girls sitting with their buttocks on
Respondent’s upper thigh. When Respondent noticed Mendoza, he stood up and the children
came off his legs. He then asked the girls to return to their seats. Mendoza observed that the
girls had a matter-of-fact response to Respondent’s direction to go back to their seats, and
she opined that this was not the first time that they had sat on his lap. Mendoza thought that
this could be a regular occurrence because the girls did not seem embarrassed or surprised.

Student Testimony

7.

Ten students testified at the hearing. Each had Respondent as their third grade
teacher. As established by their testimony, during the 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 school year,
Respondent had female third grade students in his class sit on his lap on numerous occasions.
Child number 9, who is currently 13 years old and in seventh grade, was a student in
Respondent’s class during the 2008-2009 school year. She recalled observing that Child
number 1 and 2 sat on Respondent’s lap multiple times, both during school time and free
time. Child number 9 did not sit on Respondent’s lap because she thought it was wrong for a
student to sit on a teacher’s lap.

1 Students’ names are confidential; they will be referred to by the corresponding

number on the “Confidential and Sealed Student Witness List,” which is under seal.

2

8.

Child number 4 was a student in Respondent’s class during the 2008-2009
school year. She observed Child numbers 1 and 2 sit on Respondent’s lap on numerous
occasions. As established by her testimony and the testimony of the other student witnesses,
both Child numbers 1 and 2 sat on Respondent’s lap on a regular basis, almost daily. Any
time the female students had a question, Respondent would tell them to sit on his lap. She
also observed Child numbers 1 and 2 giving Respondent a kiss on the cheek. Respondent
told Child number 4 to sit on his lap. She felt “weird” and uncomfortable about the situation,
and she did not want to be in Respondent’s class.

9.

As established through the testimony of Child number 14, Respondent allowed
his female third-grade students to kiss him on his cheek. Child number 14 saw Child number
12 give Respondent a kiss on the cheek after school. Child number 14 felt “weird” when he
witnessed that interaction.

10.

Child number 14 recalled that when the female students in Respondent’s class
would approach Respondent to report that they were done with their work, Respondent
grabbed the girls around their waist or hips and pulled them into his lap. Child number 14
saw this happen to several different girls on numerous occasions. Child number 14 heard
Respondent complimenting the female students, telling them that they looked pretty. He
observed that Respondent
touched the hair and face of the female students, and saw
Respondent caress a female student’s face.

11.

Child number 11 was a student in Respondent’s class during the 2007-2008
school year. She remembered seeing female students sit on Respondent’s lap during class.
She observed Respondent kissing female students on their cheek, more than one time, during
class time.

12.

As established through the testimony of the student witnesses, Respondent
conducted inappropriate activities during class time. He allowed his students to play Xbox
video games and board games during class time. Child number 9 specifically recalled
playing car racing games. Child number 9 stated that Respondent taught salsa dance to the
class, and she remembered the class dancing around the table. Child number 4 also recalled
that Respondent allowed the students to play video games during class time, and that he
would trade toys with the students. She stated that instead of learning, the students in
Respondent’s class played video games and danced. Respondent taught the students to salsa
dance, by standing on a table and demonstrating the salsa steps. Respondent used the female
students as his dance partners.

13.

Child number 9 recalled that Respondent had a closet filled with pictures and
toys. The pictures included scantily clad women, some in bikinis.
She specifically
referenced the Latin band “RBD.” The female members of this band were typically pictured
in tight, revealing clothing, including short-shorts and low-cut, tight-fitting tops, half-shirts
with their midriff exposed. Child number 9 felt offended by their appearance. Child number
9, along with other students in the class, viewed the pictures when Respondent opened his
closet. Sometimes Respondent left the closet door open, and the pictures were on display.

3

She remembered that the boys would sometimes comment that the girls in the photos were
sexy. Child number 9 did not like the pictures because she did not like seeing the women in
bikinis. She thought that sitting on Respondent’s lap and having those pictures “wasn’t
right.”

14.

Child number 4 recalled seeing posters of bikini-clad women hanging up in
Respondent’s classroom. She felt uncomfortable in Respondent’s class because she was
afraid that he was going to touch her, since she saw the other girls sitting on his lap. She
stated that Respondent did not have the female students sit on his lap when the teaching
assistant was present. She thought that it was wrong for Respondent to have students sit on
his lap, and to have the pictures of women in bikinis displayed in his classroom.

15.

Child number 14 also described the inappropriate pictures in Respondent’s
classroom. Child number 14 stated that Respondent had pictures of girls in bikinis in his
closet, and when Respondent opened the closet, it was visible to the students. He also
recalled that Respondent talked about girls, and encouraged the students to bring in pictures
of women in bikinis. Respondent told the students that if they brought in pictures, he would
give them extra credit, or more free time, no homework, more time to go on the computer or
video games, and also gave the students toys as a reward. Child number 14 remembered that
Child numbers 13 and 5 would use the Google search engine to look for “girls or naked
girls” on the computer. When they successfully obtained images, they printed the pictures
and gave them to Respondent. Child number 14 thought that the images were disturbing and
inappropriate. He now knows that Respondent’s behavior of having female students sit on
his lap was also inappropriate conduct.

16.

Child number 14 acknowledged that

initially when he was asked about
viewing inappropriate conduct in Respondent’s classroom, he denied seeing anything. He
explained that at the time, he panicked because he thought he was in trouble. He also cited
his young age at that time. Child number 14 emphatically verified that the testimony that he
provided at the hearing was truthful.

17.

Child number 5 was a student in Respondent’s class during the 2007-2008 and
2008-2009 school years.
Significantly, he recalled seeing female students sit on
Respondent’s lap during both school years. During 2007-2008, he specifically named Child
number 3 as having sat on Respondent’s lap. In the 2008-2009 school year, Child number 5
saw Child number 1 sit on Respondent’s lap many times. He observed that when the female
students sat on Respondent’s lap, Respondent put his arms around their waist. Child number
5 described male students looking at girls in bikinis on the classroom computer. He
described how the female students would pass by and see the male students looking at the
bikini-clad women on the computer. He remembered pictures of women in bikinis in
Respondent’s closet, and that Respondent used to joke that the bikini-clad women were his
“girlfriends.” Child number 5 played video games in Respondent’s class. Child number 5
recognized that playing video games during class time was not a good way to learn, but he
admitted that he liked it.

4

18.

As established by the testimony of Child number 2, she was sitting on
Respondent’s lap on the day that Mendoza walked into the classroom. She explained that
she had a question, and when she approached Respondent, he motioned for her to sit on his
lap. Child number 2’s testimony, as well as the other student witnesses’ testimony,
established that
this was a common practice for Respondent. Child number 2 saw
Respondent use the technique of motioning for a female student to sit on his lap with Child
number 1 and Child number 7. During the 2008-2009 school year, Child number 2 observed
Child number 1 sitting on Respondent’s lap about 15 to 20 times, and she saw Child number
7 sit on his lap about 10 times. Child number 2 also observed Child number 1 kiss
Respondent, and she saw Respondent kiss Child number 1. She saw Respondent rub the
shoulders of about five female students, including herself. Child number 2 felt confused
about sitting on Respondent’s lap because on the one hand, she thought that it showed care,
but she also knew it was wrong because a teacher is not supposed to do that. Initially, she
was unsure about the appropriateness of sitting on his lap; she did not know better. She was
especially concerned that Respondent would try to make her sit on his lap again. She did not
feel comfortable in his class, and lost motivation to complete her schoolwork. Child number
2 did not want to ask questions of Respondent, because she did not want to sit on his lap
again. Child number 2 also recalled being teased by other students after Respondent was
removed from the classroom. The other students blamed her and Child number 1. Child
number 2 did not say anything about it because she wanted to forget about it, since she did
not like having bad memories. The teasing upset Child number 2 and made her feel even
worse about the incident.

19.

Child number 2 recalled that Respondent had videogames in his classroom,
and that students played on the computer during class time. She also remembered seeing
pictures of women in bikinis hanging in his closet. Child number 2 specifically recalled that
Respondent showed the pictures to the boys as she walked by, and that the boys enjoyed
looking at the photos. She also saw pictures of the Latin band “RBD” wearing provocative
mock school uniforms. She thought it was “gross” and made her feel uncomfortable,
because a teacher should not have those pictures in class or show them to students.

20.

Child number 2 described another incident where Respondent administered the
California Standard Test (CST) and gave the answers to students by blinking once for “A”
and twice for “B.” She recalled that Child number 5 kept looking back at Respondent, and
then he yelled out “you’re giving us the answers!” After that, Child number 5 got almost
the answers from
every question on that section right. Child number 2 did not get
Respondent, but she witnessed him blinking. She also stated that Respondent would often
assign homework but would not check it, because he did not put a stamp on it. Child number
2’s mother was concerned that Respondent was not following through by reviewing
homework.

21.

Child number 10 testified at the hearing. She had Respondent as a third-grade
teacher in the 2008-2009 school year. She recalled that female students sat on Respondent’s
lap during class, and that they also gave him kisses on his cheek. Child number 10 also
recalled that the female students played with Respondent’s earring because they thought it

5

was “cool.” She admitted that one time she kissed Respondent’s ear and he laughed. Child
number 10 sat on Respondent’s lap about four times. While sitting on Respondent’s lap, he
placed his arms around her waist. She remembered that Respondent had a video game
system and recalled other students playing games during class time. Child number 10 does
not think it is appropriate to have sat on Respondent’s lap, because “we were just supposed
to be there to learn, and not doing other stuff with the teacher, so I don’t think it was right.”
She now thinks that it is “weird” and “gross” that she kissed her teacher. Child number 10
spoke about how she initially trusted Respondent, and that as a teacher, he should be trusted
not to act inappropriately with his students, but he failed in that respect.

22. When asked to describe how he felt in Respondent’s classroom, Child number
14, along with many of the other student witnesses, stated they felt “weird.” Child number
14 noted that he did not learn anything in Respondent’s class.

23.

Child number 1 testified at the hearing. She sat on Respondent’s lap on many
occasions, more than five times, at Respondent’s instruction. Every time she sat on his lap, it
was when she had a question. Respondent would then tell her to sit on his lap. She did not
recall other students besides herself and Child number 2 sitting on Respondent’s lap. When
she sat on his lap, her legs were around his thighs. She described that Respondent would pull
her toward his body and rub his hand on her leg; he massaged and rubbed her leg.
Respondent also had his arms draped over her shoulders and at times would put his arm
around her waist. Respondent talked about how pretty she was, telling her things such as
“You look really pretty with your hair down.” Respondent also offered her and Child
number 2 candy to sit on his lap. On several occasions, Respondent pulled Child number 1
so close to him that her buttock was sitting close to his genital area. She recalled once or
twice he pulled her up to sit on his private area. She could feel that Respondent had an
erection and that his penis was hard. Child number 1 had never mentioned this to anyone
prior to her testimony at the hearing, because she felt weird, and she was shy. Respondent
asked Child number 1 on two occasions if he could kiss her on the cheek, and she declined.
He used to whisper to her that if she sat on his lap every day, he would give her candy.
These comments made her feel “weird.” Child number 1 acknowledged that sometimes
when she had physical contact with Respondent, she felt “fine,” but now that she is older, she
feels really “weird” and “embarrassed.” She felt especially bad because she was afraid the
other students were going to make fun of her, and it hurts her feelings. Child number 1
explained that after Respondent was removed from the classroom, the other students blamed
her, saying that she got him fired. This made her feel sad. Even after Mendoza warned the
other students not to tease her, the teasing continued. Child number 1 had a specific
recollection of Child numbers 5 and 7 saying “it’s your fault that he left, why did you have to
go snitching?” She now knows that it is inappropriate to sit on a teacher’s lap. Notably,
Child number 1 recalled sitting on Respondent’s lap at least one or two times after Mendoza
had entered the classroom.

24.

Child number 1 also recalled seeing pictures of wrestlers and the band “RBD.”
She did not recall seeing a girl in a bikini. She remembered that Respondent traded wrestling
cards, and that he would tell the boys to bring in cards of their own. Respondent had cards

6

with female wrestlers dressed in sports bras and “booty” shorts, and he would give them to
the boys. When Child number 1 saw the pictures of the female wrestlers, she felt “weird.”
She remembered that Respondent allowed the students to play video games, and that he let
the male students play on the computer.

25.

Child number 17 testified at the hearing. She had Respondent as her third-
grade teacher during the 2007-2008 school year. She recalled that Respondent treated the
boys differently from the girls, in that the boys were allowed to play games, while the girls
surrounded Respondent. Child number 17 witnessed female students sit on Respondent’s lap
approximately two times per week. She saw Respondent put his arms around their waist and
rub their legs while they were sitting on his lap. She also observed Respondent tell female
students to give him a kiss on the cheek, and she saw the female students comply with his
request, specifically Child number 10, among others. She also saw Respondent hugging
female students. Child number 17 recalled that Respondent taught salsa dance every Friday.
Respondent danced with the female students and held their hands. During one incident,
Respondent told Child number 3 to open her legs, and they were not open far enough, so he
told her to spread them open even more, and then Respondent went on the floor and passed
in-between Child number 3’s legs. Respondent was on his back, with his face up toward
Child number 3’s private parts. Child number 17 was “grossed out” that Respondent did that
because they were little girls. She recalled the other female students questioning why
Respondent would do something like that. Child number 17 remembered seeing Child
numbers 13 and 14 looking at girls in bikinis on the internet. Overall, she felt that she did
not learn anything in Respondent’s third grade class.

26.

Child number 8 testified at the hearing. She was a student in Respondent’s
class during the 2008-2009 school year. She remembered seeing Child numbers 1 and 2
sitting on Respondent’s lap almost every day. She heard Respondent ask other female
students in the class; some said yes, and others said no. Respondent asked Child number 8 if
she wanted to sit on his lap on two occasions. She declined because she did not feel
comfortable sitting on a teacher’s lap. Afterward, Child number 8 did not want to ask
Respondent any questions, because she feared that he might convince her to sit on his lap.
She was less likely to ask questions because of her concern that he would put her on his lap.
She recalled that Respondent put his arms around the waist and shoulders of the female
students who sat on his lap. She saw Respondent kiss Child number 1 on the forehead. She
saw Respondent kiss Child number 1 at least twice, and she saw Child number 1 kiss
Respondent on at least five different occasions, on the cheek, forehead and chin. When
asked how she felt about seeing female students sit on Respondent’s lap, Child number 8
explained that she felt “weird” because Respondent had a wife, and Child number 8
perceived Respondent’s actions as “cheating or flirting.”

27.

Child number 8 recalled that Respondent had pictures of naked girls taped to
the closet door in the classroom; some showed women covering their private parts with their
hands and arms, others wore bikinis. She also remembered that Respondent gave trading
cards of wrestlers to the boys. When asked if she remembered anything else about
Respondent’s class, Child number 8 echoed the sentiments of many students before her: she

7

said they did not learn anything. She also described how Respondent taught salsa dancing in
the classroom. Respondent stood on the table to show the students some moves, and then he
got down and asked a female student to dance salsa with him. During the dance, Respondent
put his hands on the students’ shoulders and waist. When Respondent stood on the table, it
made Child number 8 feel “awkward and weird” because his buttocks were shaking in the
faces of the female students. Looking back, Child number 8 feels bad that she did not tell the
principal or another adult about Respondent’s inappropriate conduct in the classroom.

28.

The ALJ spent significant time with each student establishing their ability to
testify. Each student understood the difference between the truth and a lie, and all promised
to tell the truth. The students ranged in age from 12 to 14 years old. All understood the oath
they took, and were able to respond intelligently to all questions asked. Their testimony was
remarkably consistent. They had appropriate recall, and no motive to lie. Although there
were minor differences in their recollection, overall their testimony was consistent with each
The
other, and with the testimony of the District administrators and investigators.
discrepancies in their testimony were not significant, and there were reasonable explanations
offered by the District’s expert testimony, as enumerated below. When the students testified
at the instant hearing, they understood that they had sworn to tell the truth, and they affirmed
that their testimony at the hearing was truthful. Accordingly, the testimony of all of the
students was deemed credible.

Substantiation of Student Testimony

29.

Viviana Barrondo Asencion (Asencion) testified at the hearing. She served as
the permanent substitute after the District removed Respondent from the classroom. Her
testimony corroborated the student
testimony with regard to the risqué pictures that
Respondent kept in his classroom. Asencion explained that she found a bookmark with
pictures of actors from the popular Mexican soap opera, “Rebelde,” about teenage rebels.
In fact, there are
The girls depicted on the bookmark were dressed “very sexy.” (Ex. 53.)
four separate images that show women scantily clad and some in compromising positions.
For example, the first frame depicts a woman wearing a bikini bottom, which partially
exposes her buttocks, bent over in a submissive position in front of a man who is holding a
whip or other object. The man appears as though he is about to strike her on her backside.
Asencion was surprised to find the bookmark in the classroom, because she thought it was
improper to expose the children to this kind of material. Although she acknowledged that she
did not know who the bookmark belonged to, she found it in a dictionary located in the front
of the classroom with other teaching materials. The logical conclusion was that it belonged
to Respondent.

30.

Asencion recalled one of Respondent’s students with a trading card of a
female wrestler who was dressed very provocatively. The image depicted a woman in very
short shorts and a small top. Asencion told the student to take the card home or she would
take it away from him, to which the student replied that Respondent had given him the card.
Again, Asencion was surprised to learn that Respondent had given such as seductive image
to a child. She thought it was wrong because third-graders should not be exposed to such

8

images, and especially not at school. Ascension also remembered that when she allowed the
same student to use the classroom computer, he printed out pictured of wrestlers wearing
small clothing or bikinis that were not appropriate for third-grade students. The student told
her that Respondent allowed them to print whatever they wanted. Ascension forbade the
students to print any more images, and eventually stopped letting the students use the
computer.

Subsequent Investigation

31. Mendoza thought that Respondent’s actions were inappropriate, but she was
uncertain at that time whether Respondent’s conduct constituted child abuse. Mendoza
spoke to Child Number 1 and 2, at the first available opportunity. Mendoza learned that
Child Number 1 sat on Respondent’s lap many times, and sometimes she gave Respondent
“besitos,” which is Spanish for “little kisses.” Mendoza subsequently filed a “Suspected
Child Abuse Report” (SCAR) with the San Fernando Police Department (SFPD).

32.

As established by the testimony of multiple witnesses, the District conducted a
thorough and timely investigation regarding Respondent’s misconduct. Jane Sierra (Sierra),
former District Staff Relations Field Director, testified at the hearing. She explained that the
investigation went through various agencies, because San Fernando is a smaller community
and was less familiar with the procedures for school abuse investigation practices. There
was no evidence of undue delay. Although she did not initially agree with Respondent’s
removal from the classroom, at the conclusion of the investigation, she thought Respondent
should be dismissed because of his inappropriate physical touching of students, among other
factors.

33. Mercedes Velazquez (Velazquez), who was the District Director and Principal
Leader in 2008, testified at the hearing. She explained that it is not appropriate for
Respondent to have a female student sitting on his lap because it involves inappropriate
contact in close proximity to the genital areas that does not involve instructional activity.
There is no legitimate purpose to having students sit on a teacher’s lap. When Velazquez
first learned of the incident, she instructed Mendoza to investigate further. Mendoza had
difficulty reaching the SFPD, and Velazquez personally spoke with a SFPD detective to
determine who would conduct the investigation. The SFPD told Velaquez that the District
should handle the matter administratively.
The SFPD made this decision without
interviewing any of the students. At Velaquez’s instruction, Mendoza interviewed other
children and discovered that five out of six female students had sat on Respondent’s lap.
Velazquez informed Mendoza to contact the school police. She explained that if she had this
information sooner, she would have immediately removed Respondent from the classroom,
instead of allowing him to remain for several days after Mendoza’s initial observation.

34.

Velazquez instructed Mendoza to secure Respondent’s classroom computers.
She and Mendoza viewed the history of those computers and discovered two inappropriate
websites: hotgirls@ratemybody.com and tinyassxxx@porngirls.com. Although it was not
established whether Respondent personally viewed those websites, or whether he allowed

9

students to view the websites, either conduct violates the District policies and is cause for
discipline. Velaquez next instructed Respondent to return his District-issued laptop, which
she properly secured. Velazquez kept the laptop until a representative of the Office of the
Inspector General, George Tillman (Tillman), picked it up. Through Velazquez’s and
Tillman’s testimony, the chain of custody for the laptop computer was established at the
hearing. At a later point in time, Velaquez learned that explicit pornography, digital images
of adults engaged in sexual acts, had been discovered on Respondent’s laptop. This was an
absolute violation of the District’s acceptable use policy because it was explicit pornography.
Subsequently, Velazquez participated in a personnel
review meeting, where it was
unanimously decided that Respondent should be dismissed from the District. Velaquez
explained her reasons for recommending Respondent’s dismissal were because his conduct
was sexual and inappropriate in terms of modeling professional behavior with them. She
lacked confidence that the conduct would not reoccur. Velaquez opined that Respondent had
committed child abuse because he had inappropriate sexual conduct based on close proximity
of the genital areas, for which there was no instructional purpose. Respondent’s conduct was
a clear violation of the District’s Code of Conduct.

35.

Earl Perkins (Perkins), Assistant Superintendent, School Operations, testified
at the hearing. Perkins has been employed by the District since 1978. Perkins was a third-
grade teacher during his tenure with the District, and he never had students sit on his lap. He
is concerned with Respondent that it would happen again, and that the school would be
exposed to great liability. Perkins unequivocally stated that the touching Respondent engaged
in was not appropriate, not professional, and should not be tolerated. The District expects
teachers to be role models, and Respondent’s behavior did not live up to that expectation.
Perkins explained that the Board of Education makes the final decision whether or not to
initiate dismissal proceedings, and he was involved in the ultimate decision to dismiss
Respondent from the District. Perkins considered all available information, including that
some students did not see inappropriate touching, but that did not change his opinion that
Respondent’s touching of students was inappropriate and is cause for dismissal. Perkins also
opined that Respondent’s conduct violated the District’s child abuse policies and codes of
conduct. Perkins opined that Respondent exercised extremely poor judgment. Perkins
explained that the students are affected by the conduct of their teachers, especially third-
graders who are impressionable. Perkins thinks that young students have severe reactions to
malevolent incidents; they fail to understand why it happened, and it can affect them for
years.

36.

Erin Robles (Robles), testified at the hearing. Robles is a Los Angeles School
Police Department Officer. She was assigned to patrol in the San Fernando Valley, and was
assigned to interview students regarding the incident on October 27, 2008. Robles had
proper training and experience to conduct student interviews. There was no evidence that
Robles engaged in suggestive questioning. Robles interviewed Child Numbers 1, 4 and 7,
and discovered that Respondent frequently gestured for the children to sit on his lap. She
opined that all of the children were truthful. Robles’ recollection of what the children told
her was consistent with the testimony of the children given at
the hearing, further
demonstrating the credibility of the children.

10

37.

Tillman is an Inspector with the District Office of the Inspector General
(OIG). He also worked in the District’s Human Resources Employee Investigation Unit.
Prior to joining the District, Tillman served as a Los Angeles County Sheriff. He has
received formal training on how to interrogate children, and he has conducted hundreds of
interviews of children and juveniles. He was called to San Fernando Elementary School,
where he met with Mendoza and received Respondent’s classroom computers and laptop. As
noted earlier, a proper chain of custody for Respondent’s laptop computer was established in
part through Tillman’s testimony. The laptop was locked in the evidence room and remained
in the evidence room even during data analysis. Nick Lee (Lee) is the District data analyst
who performed the analysis on Respondent’s computer. Lee received computer forensic
training from the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Lee found pornographic images and
showed them to Tillman.
Tillman reviewed the images on Lee’s computer with
Respondent’s hard drive attached. He then asked Lee to print the images, and attached them
to his investigation file. At the hearing, Tillman confirmed that the images produced at
District’s Exhibit 62 are the same images that he viewed from Respondent’s computer.
Exhibit 62 contains 55 pages, with most pages containing multiple graphic images of adult
pornography. Because the classroom computers were not password protected, a forensic
scan was not performed on them.

38.

Tillman interviewed Respondent, with Respondent’s union representative,
Steve Klein (Klein), present. Respondent initially denied having any knowledge of the
pornographic images found on his laptop. Tillman described Respondent’s demeanor during
the interrogation as “arrogant” and “overconfident.” His observation was consistent with
Respondent’s behavior throughout the hearing, as described in greater detail below. After
Respondent denied knowledge of the pornography on his laptop, Tillman showed the images
from Exhibit 62 to Respondent. At that point, Klein requested a recess, where he and
Respondent left the room for a brief period of time. When they returned, Respondent
changed his story and said that he was aware of the pornographic images on his computer.
Respondent blamed them on his son. He said that he observed his son viewing pornography
on his laptop, and that he disciplined his son for it. Respondent also claimed that he tried to
erase the images from the laptop. Tillman did not believe Respondent’s story that his son
had accessed the pornographic images, stating that “it seemed too convenient.” Respondent
was responsible for the images regardless of how they got on there, because it was a District-
issued laptop, issued to Respondent. Among other violations, Tillman determined that
Respondent had violated the acceptable use policy (Ex. 91) by removing his laptop from the
school premises.

39.

Tillman also interviewed some of the students. His testimony confirmed that
there was no evidence of suggestive questioning by anyone involved in the investigation.
Tillman acknowledged that there were some discrepancies in two of the student’s statements.
He attributed the differences to the fact that they may have felt responsible for Respondent’s
absence from the classroom. By the time that Tillman interviewed the students, Respondent
had been removed, and the students likely felt that it was their fault. Another student likely
changed his story because his parents were present. Although he considered all evidence, the

11

minor discrepancies in student statements did not affect Tillman’s ultimate findings. Based
his investigation, Tillman concluded that female students in Respondent’s class had been
sitting on Respondent’s lap without justification. He also determined that the student had
viewed inappropriate materials.

40.

Nicolas Arellano (Nicolas), Respondent’s son, testified at the hearing. Nicolas
lives with his father and their family, and currently attends college. He recalled that in 2007-
2008, which was his senior year of high school, Respondent had a District-issued laptop at
home. Nicolas used the laptop on occasion, primarily for school work, with his father’s
permission. He denied that he ever tried to access, purposely or inadvertently, any
pornographic websites. At one time, Nicolas’ friend “Willie P.” lived with their family.
Nicolas saw Willie looking at about five pornographic images on Respondent’s computer.
Nicolas testified that Respondent never saw Nicolas looking at the images, and he did not
recall telling his father that he or Willie looked at pornographic images on Respondent’s
laptop. Nicolas was not aware that Respondent had told District officials that Respondent
had seen Nicolas viewing pornography on the District-issued laptop. Notably, Nicolas said it
was not true that Respondent saw Nicolas on his laptop. Nicolas denied that Respondent had
disciplined him for viewing pornography on the laptop. Nicolas had no motive to lie when
responding to those questions, and thus his testimony regarding whether Respondent saw
him viewing pornography on the District laptop and whether Respondent disciplined him for
it, is deemed credible.

41. Mendoza reviewed the District’s policies (See Exhibits 80-86 and 88-91). Her
testimony established that Respondent received thorough training on all relevant District
policies. As established by her testimony and the testimony of the students, Respondent’s
conduct repeatedly violated the District’s rules and policies.

Expert Testimony

42.

the District

to show that

In an attempt

improperly questioned students,
Respondent called Joseph Bongiovanni (Bongiovanni), Ph.D., to testify at the hearing.
Bongiovanni is an emergency response worker for Contra Costa County. Although he has
some training and experience in child interviews, his opinions were given little weight for
several reasons. He opined that “contamination” occurred during the questioning of the
students, because there were several people present during the interviews, and some leading
questions were asked. On cross-examination, Bongiovanni acknowledged that before his
deposition, he had never previously been retained as an expert witness, has never held any
faculty positions, does not belong to any professional organizations, and has never been
published on the standards in interviewing student witnesses. He was also not familiar with
teacher dismissals, and had never viewed the Accusation and Statement of Charges against
Respondent. Significantly, Bongiovanni was not aware that there is no agreement among
professionals on the standards on how to interview children witnesses, and he was not aware
of the protocols which are endorsed by the National Prosecutor’s Association. Thus, he
could not opine on how the protocols differ concerning how to interview student witnesses.
In his capacity as an emergency response worker, Bongiovanni is not the person who

12

conducts in-depth interviews. Rather, he conducts an initial interview, and if there is cause
for concern, he refers to other professionals to conduct forensic interviews. Significantly,
Bongiovanni had not reviewed the student testimony, or testimony from any of the witnesses
at the hearing. He did not know what Mendoza or Robles had asked the students. He never
saw the police report that Robles provided. He is not a licensed psychologist, and he has
never examined Respondent. He never interviewed Mendoza, Robles, Tillman or any of the
students. He could not speak to the accuracy of the student testimony. He was not familiar
with any of the District policies regarding touching students. He acknowledged that
sometimes leading questions are appropriate, and that just because an interviewer asked a
leading question, that does not mean that the answer was inaccurate. He also acknowledged
that it was appropriate for Mendoza to be present when the students were being interviewed
by Robles. He agreed that there was no evidence that the students gave answers to please
Mendoza or because they were afraid of her, and there was no evidence that Mendoza
intimidated the students in order to evoke certain responses. He also agreed that statements
can be inconsistent as to immaterial facts and still be true, and found no evidence that
students had deliberately changed their testimony here.
In short, Bongiovanni’s testimony
did not establish that
the District conducted suggestive questioning or an improper
investigation.

43.

The District presented the testimony of Gail S. Goodman, Ph.D. (Goodman) as
an expert in cognitive memory development, children’s eyewitness memory and children
witnesses. Goodman is a Distinguished Professor of Psychology at U.C. Davis, the Director
of the Center for Public Policy Research at U.C. Davis, and also a Consultant for the Special
Assault Forensic Evaluation Center for Sacramento County Child Protective Services.
Goodman’s Curriculum Vitae spans 54 pages, detailing her extensive education, professional
experience, professional memberships, honors and awards, teaching and research grants,
committee work, other professional contributions, hundreds of publications, amicus briefs,
papers and presentations. She has been cited by the United States Supreme Court. Goodman
is one of the first in her field to study children’s roles in the legal system. She is highly
qualified and her opinions were given great weight.

44.

Goodman explained the factors that affect the accuracy of a child’s reporting
of an incident. These include the age of a child; for example, a child who is very young,
from two to four years old, has a noticeable drop in their accuracy compared to testing the
memory of a child even five or six, and certainly eight, nine and ten. Older children have a
much more substantial and robust memory and are more resistant to suggestion. Their
memories tend to last longer. Another factor is the time delay between when the event
occurred and when the child is first interviewed; memory is strongest soon after an event.
The timing of the first interview is important for completeness of recollection, and for the
child’s ability to resist suggestive influences. If you have an initial first interview soon after
the event, it can help bolster the child’s memory even over the longer term. A third factor is
the centrality of the information that the child is being asked about; that is, central actions
tend to be central information. And those memories are often recalled well and are more
resistant to suggestion than more preferential details. Also, if it is distinctive information, if

13

it is consequential, and if it is taboo, those factors help support memory in both children and
adults.

45.

Specifically with regard to the memories of children who are eight and nine
years old, as the students were in this case while in Respondent’s class, Goodman opined, as
supported by her research, that they can have very accurate memories, because the mental
structure is in place and they gain more knowledge over the years, which can help to support
their memory. With regard to the facts of this case, Goodman opined that “one would expect
that a teacher’s actions would be pretty central to a child. And if a teacher is doing
something distinctive and unusual and possibly a little taboo,
that [sic] would
obvious[ly] pique the children’s interests, and they may remember that well.”

that

46.

Dr. Goodman explained that eight and nine year old children are quite resistant
to suggestion, and that even if asked leading questions, it would not necessarily contaminate
their memory. The fact that Mendoza first interviewed the students within days of the
incident occurring indicates that their memory would still be strong for what occurred. Dr.
Goodman further opined that older children; i.e., eight or nine years old, can hold onto
memories for years. She explained that it’s generally accepted that distinctive, consequential
events are retained particularly well, and opined that here, where the students had their
teacher removed from the classroom, it was a consequential event that affected their daily
lives, and could bolster their memories.

47.

Dr. Goodman gave several reasons why students who testified at the hearing
provided new information that they had not previously revealed. Sometimes a child will not
report something that is embarrassing, especially if the child feels self-implicated. For
instance, a child who willingly got on someone’s lap might feel self-implicated. The child
might recall the information because of the feeling of implication, guilt and embarrassment.
Goodman explained that a child will not necessarily disclose matters of importance at a
younger age, because with age a child’s memory is improving, and also their social
awareness is improving. So they can start to realize some topics are taboo or embarrassing
that they did not realize before, and that can have the opposite effect of dampening their
reports. Research shows that multiple interviews are needed to get information from
children, because children will recall more later that is accurate.
In addition, the fact of
repeated interviewing can help get more information and keep memory alive.

48.

Dr. Goodman’s testimony was well-supported by research and given her
extensive credentials, was deemed credible. Her opinions and explanations further served to
bolster the credibility of the students’ testimony.

Aggravating Factors

49.

Respondent’s conduct throughout the proceeding, from depositions through
the conclusion of the hearing, was disobedient, disrespectful, uncooperative and obnoxious.
For example, the panel learned that Respondent had behaved in a juvenile manner during
Nicolas’ deposition. Specifically, Respondent placed the parking garage ticket on his

14

forehead and left it there during the remainder of the deposition. Nicolas thought that this
behavior by his father was inappropriate.

50.

the
Respondent had to be admonished on multiple occasions throughout
hearing for
inappropriate behavior, and for violating specific rulings made by the
administrative law judge. His repeated misbehavior was so severe that he would have been
removed from the courtroom had it not been during his own testimony.

Evidence Offered in Mitigation

51.

Respondent testified at the hearing. He denied the majority of the allegations
against him. Specifically, he denied that Child numbers 1 and 2 were sitting on his lap when
Mendoza walked in. He denied having pictures of scantily clad women in his closet or
anywhere in his classroom. He denied trading cards of women. He admitted to teaching
salsa dancing in the classroom, and to standing on the table to demonstrate the moves, but
denied that he slid through the legs of his female student. He admitted that sometimes he
complimented the students. He denied that students ever sat on his lap, that he rubbed their
shoulders, and kissed them, and he agreed that it would be appropriate to terminate a teacher
who committed this conduct. He denied letting students play games during instructional
time, and denied that he let students view inappropriate websites. When asked on cross
examination, how was it that 10 students testified during the hearing that they either sat on
his lap, or saw other students sit on his lap, Respondent replied “I don’t believe that they are
lying, they have a tainted memory.” He later said that all of the students were inaccurate.
Significantly, he changed his story several times about whether he told Tillman that he saw
his son viewing pornography on his computer. He blamed his son, and said that his son lied
about having his privileges taken away. There were numerous inconsistencies throughout
Respondent’s entire testimony. All of Respondent’s testimony was deemed not credible.

52.

Respondent admitted to posting an interview of himself on “You Tube”
regarding the allegations in this Accusation. The Administrative Law Judge viewed the
video outside the presence of the panel, and noted that it contained information directly
related to the instant proceeding. At the time this decision was rendered, the video remained
accessible to the public and had received more than 50 “views.” Respondent also posted the
video on an internet blog entitled “Per Daily.”

53.

Respondent presented the testimony of two colleagues: Anna Acvez-Funes
(Funes), and Victor Ponce (Ponce). Funes and Ponce taught third grade classes in the same
building as Respondent. They testified that they had never observed students sitting on
Respondent’s lap; however, they were teaching during the times when Respondent had
students sit on his lap, and thus the fact that they never witnessed it holds little weight.
Funes’ classroom adjoined Respondent’s and she often entered after lunch to ask Respondent
to cover her class while she went to the bathroom, but her testimony indicated that her visits
were predictable and brief, and thus would account for why she never observed students
sitting on his lap.

15

54.

Richard Casaletta, Jr. (Casaletta), testified at the hearing. He is a fifth-grade
teacher at San Fernando Elementary School, and in 2008, he was Chapter Chair of the union.
He attended the meeting with Mendoza and Respondent in October 2008. Casaletta taught
third grade for several years. He testified that it would not be appropriate for a teacher to
kiss or be kissed by students, or to have students sit on his lap. He acknowledged that if
Respondent committed the acts as set forth in the Accusation, then he should be dismissed
from employment with the District.

55.

Except as set forth in this decision, all other allegations and contentions raised by

the parties lack merit or constitute surplusage.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Evident Unfitness for Service

1.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “evident unfitness for service.” Evident unfitness for service under this provision is
established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” Woodland Joint
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429,
If the teacher is found unfit for service, “the next step is to determine whether the
1444.
‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’;
in
temperament.” (Id. at p. 1445.)

i.e., whether the offensive conduct

is caused by a defect

in Morrison v. State Board of Education

As a threshold matter, Courts require evaluation of a teacher's alleged misconduct in
terms of its impact on fitness for service utilizing the following criteria first enunciated by
the Supreme Court
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214
the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow
(Morrison):
teachers; the degree of such adversity anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the
conduct; the type of teaching certificate held by the party involved; the extenuating or
the praiseworthiness or
aggravating circumstances,
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of
the questioned conduct; and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse
impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other
teachers. The determination of fitness for service required by Morrison is a factual one.

if any, surrounding the conduct;

Respondent’s conduct on October 27, 2008, and throughout the 2007-2008 and 2008-
2009 school years indicates unfitness to teach under the Morrison factors. The conduct
involved inappropriate touching of young third grade female students in his class during school
hours. It also involved allowing male students to view and access inappropriate sexual images,
and his own misuse of the District-issued laptop. The students were adversely affected and the
degree of adversity was significant. A teacher’s inappropriate touching of students and
creation of a hostile environment adversely impacts a school’s students, teachers, staff,
parents, and the learning environment. Respondent’s students were emotionally scarred. They

16

felt uncomfortable by his behavior and were subject to a hostile learning environment. District
administrators who observed Respondent’s conduct or heard about it, were also adversely
impacted as the conduct could diminish regard for teachers at the school. There were no
mitigating circumstances.

Recurrence of the misconduct is likely for several reasons. Respondent did not
acknowledge his wrongdoing. Even after hearing the testimony of 10 students who either sat on
his lap or saw other students sit on his lap, Respondent denied that he did anything wrong. He
denied conduct which was credibly established through multiple witnesses. Given his lack of
awareness, the conduct is likely to recur. Respondent’s conduct and apparent lack of insight
about the incidents reveal defects in temperament and character that evidence an unfitness to
serve as a teacher. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429.)

Respondent’s conduct adversely affected students and other District employees, and the
degree of adversity is significant. Respondent has not expressed any remorse for his conduct,
and has not acknowledged the extent of his misconduct and has not fully accepted responsibility
for the incidents.

There was no showing that the imposition of discipline against Respondent would
have an adverse impact or chilling effect upon Respondent’s or other teachers’ constitutional
rights.

The analysis of the Morrison factors demonstrates Respondent’s present unfitness for
service. Respondent’s unfitness is evident, and is caused by his temperament. Respondent’s
existing deficiencies are the result of “temperamental defects or inadequacies.”

Accordingly, as set forth in factual finding number 6 through 41, cause for dismissal has

been established pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

Immoral and Unprofessional Conduct

2.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “immoral or unprofessional conduct.” Section 44939 allows the District to immediately
suspended a permanent employee for “immoral conduct.” Unprofessional conduct has been
defined as conduct, measured by the Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach.
Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697 (Jack M.); Perez v. Commission
on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-74. The term “immoral
conduct” as a basis for dismissal of teachers has long been included in section 44932,
subdivision (a)(1), in its predecessors, and in other provisions pertaining to teachers employed
in community college districts. The term was first discussed in the context of teacher dismissal
in Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808 (Weiland), and the court’s
definition in that case has often been cited by other courts. (See, e.g.: Palo Verde v. Hensey
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967 (Hensey).) The Weiland Court stated:

17

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of
the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency,
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful,
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)

Further, whether conduct is immoral must also be analyzed in terms of the teacher's

fitness for service under the Morrison factors. (Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d at pp. 696-697.)

Respondent engaged in immoral and unprofessional conduct in that his conduct involved
inappropriate touching and showed an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public
welfare.
The students in Respondent’s class were young (eight and nine years old).
Respondent created an hostile and insecure learning environment in his classroom that could
easily have been avoided. Respondent displayed an inconsiderate and disrespectful attitude
toward the welfare of his students. Respondent’s conduct was flagrant and shameless, showing
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community.

The incidents which occurred throughout the 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 school year are
serious. Respondent had sexual contact with an eight-year-old girl, and inappropriately touched
many other female students. He allowed females to be objectified in his classroom. He failed
to take responsibility for the conduct. Dismissal is warranted.

Accordingly, as set forth in factual finding numbers 6 through 41, cause exists to
suspend and discharge Respondent for immoral and unprofessional conduct, pursuant to
Education code sections 44939 and 44932, subdivision (a)(1).

Persistent Violation of Rules

3.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), permits dismissal of a permanent employee
for “persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education
or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.”

A violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be established by reference to
the Morrison factors. If unfitness to teach is shown, then the District must further establish that
Respondent’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and
continuing.”
(San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on Professional
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183; Governing Board of the Oakdale Union High
School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82 (Seaman).)
Isolated incidents or
incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered
“persistent.” (See, e.g.: Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174
Cal.App.3d 317; Seaman, supra).

18

Respondent’s conduct occurred repeatedly throughout the course of two school years.

He repeatedly violated established District policies of which he was well aware.

All evidence presented in mitigation and rehabilitation has been considered. The

District’s dismissal of Respondent is upheld in light of the allegations established.

ORDER

The determination of the Board of Education of the Los Angeles Unified School
District to dismiss Respondent Francisco Arellano as a permanent employee of the District is
affirmed.

Respondent Francisco Arellano is dismissed from his position as a certificated

employee of the Los Angeles Unified School District.

DATED:

DATED:

DATED:

AMY YERKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

MIRIAM CHAPA
Commission Member

LUCIANO ORTIZ
Commission Member

19

