BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE
JURUPA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF RIVERSIDE

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

JEFFEREY NORMAN,

Respondent.

OAH NO. 2012051192

DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional
Competence in Riverside, California on December 10, 17, 18, 19, and 20, 2012. The
Commission consisted of the following members: Administrative Law Judge Roy W. Hewitt;
Ms. Eva Salazar; and Mr. David Mc Phee.

Kerrie Taylor, Esq. represented the Jurupa Unified School District (the district).

Jefferey Norman (respondent) personally appeared and was represented by Richard

Ackerman, Esq.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the record remained open until

January 8, 2013, so that the parties could submit written briefs.

No briefs were received and the matter was deemed submitted on January 8, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters

1.

2.

The Dismissal Accusation was filed by Elliott Duchon, while acting in his

official capacity as Superintendent of the district.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the district and, at all

relevant times was teaching seventh grade mathematics to intervention students1 at Mission
Middle School (the school).

1

Intervention students are students who tested below average or well below average on

1

3.

On April 2, 2012, the Governing Board of the district (the board) approved

service of a Notice of Intent to Immediately Suspend and Dismiss and a Statement of Charges
(charges) against respondent, notifying respondent of his proposed dismissal as a certificated
employee of the district. The board directed the superintendent to serve the charges on
respondent pursuant to Education Code section 44936.

4.

5.

6.

On April 6, 2012, a copy of the charges was served on respondent.

On April 6, 2012, a copy of the charges was served on the president of the

National Educators Association—Jurupa.

Respondent timely appealed the dismissal action by filing a Notice of

Defense/Request for Hearing and the instant hearing ensued.

Factual Findings2 Based on the Testimony and Documents Presented During the Hearing

2008—2009 School Year

7.

The Commission members found that respondent occasionally put Chapstick

on his lips and smacked his lips. Insufficient evidence was presented that respondent did this
to “mock students in a sexual manner,” or that students were “offended by his behavior.”
Respondent was joking around and by unanimous vote the Commission members found that
respondent’s actions were not inappropriate.

8.

By a vote of 2:1, the Commission members found that respondent repeatedly

leered at female students’ buttocks and breasts and that, as a result, female students were
uncomfortable attending his class and requesting assistance from respondent on their math
work.

9.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that on January 21, 2009,

respondent failed to take his students to a school-wide assembly. Instead, respondent spoke
to his math class about President Obama, allowed the class to watch Kung Fu Panda for 30
minutes and to talk amongst themselves. Respondent knew about the assembly and knew
that student attendance was required by the administration; however, respondent elected to
keep his students from attending the assembly because he believed the assembly placed
African-Americans in a negative light. The Commission members agreed that respondent’s
personal beliefs did not excuse his non-compliance with the requirement that he have his
students attend the school-wide assembly.

standardized State tests. Respondent’s students ranged in age from 13 to 15 years old.

2 The findings were made based on a preponderance of the evidence standard.

2

10.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent

frequently yelled at students in his class. Respondent yelled at the class as a whole, and
individual students when he was frustrated with a student’s understanding of math concepts
and/or when a student misbehaved. The majority of respondent’s students were frightened
and intimidated by respondent’s behavior.

11.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent became
upset with a male student (C.G.) and yelled at C.G. to get out of the classroom. By 2:1 vote,
the Commission members found that respondent grabbed C.G.’s folder and papers and threw
them through the doorway and out of the room, and that C.G. was required to retrieve them.
By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that when C.G. left the classroom he
remained outside the classroom, unsupervised, for approximately 20 minutes.

12.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent accessed
the cumulative student files of W.D. and A.V. for the purpose of responding to the Summary
of Allegations, a non-educational purpose, and that pursuant to federal and state laws,
teachers are only permitted to access and disclose student records for “legitimate
educational” purposes.

13.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that on May 13, 2009,
respondent was issued a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct (Notice) which advised him that
it was unprofessional for him to do any of the following: have angry outbursts with staff and
students; yell at students; be dishonest with his supervisors; call students names other than
their given names; fail to comply with general and specific directives of his supervisors;
make seductive statements to his classes; and, access student files for non-legitimate
educational purposes. Respondent was directed in the Notice to immediately modify his
behaviors and to act in a professional manner.

14.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that on June 9, 2009,

respondent received an Evaluation for the 2008—2009 school year in which he received an
“N” (needs improvement) mark in both Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for
Student Learning and Developing as a Professional Educator/Adjunct Duties. Respondent’s
overall evaluation was rated as “N” (needs improvement).

2009—2010 School Year

15.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that even though

respondent had been warned about his behaviors during the 2008—2009 school year, he
continued to repeatedly yell at students in his class. Respondent yelled at the class as a whole,
and individual students, when he was frustrated with the students and when they misbehaved.
Students were frightened and intimidated by respondent’s behavior. Examples of
respondent’s unacceptable and unprofessional conduct were as follows: on September 22,
2009, respondent yelled at a female student (S.L.) because she asked another student for a
piece of paper; and, on October 7, 2009, respondent again yelled at S.L. because she was late

3

for class and when S.L. presented respondent with a late slip, respondent threw it on the floor
and yelled at her.

16.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that in September and

October 2009, respondent required students to stand in the corner of the classroom as a form
of discipline. Such conduct is unprofessional because it is a demeaning and inappropriate
method of correcting students’ behaviors.

17.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that between November
13 and 18, 2009, respondent acted in an unprofessional manner by unplugging his classroom
telephone, thereby preventing the school office from being able to conveniently and quickly
contact him. During an investigation of the incidents respondent told an administrator that
the telephone was broken; however, on November 18, 2009, respondent admitted to a school
custodian that he [respondent] had unplugged the telephone because he did not want his class
disrupted by telephone calls.

18.

By a vote of 2:1, the Commission members found that in December 2009,

respondent called a male student (A.G.) a “stupid ass” in front of other students because the
student did not know where another teacher’s classroom was located.

19.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent called
certain students in his class “lazy” and that such references were inappropriate, demeaning,
and insulting and led the students to give up and not want to attend respondent’s class or to
succeed in math. The Commission members; however, found insufficient evidence in
support of the allegation that respondent called some of his students “crazy” or “stupid.”

20.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent told a

female student (K.N.) to “shut up . . . Get out of class . . . who do you think you are running
your big mouth to?,” and that the comment was unprofessional. The Commission members
further found that when a male student was helping another student with her classwork
respondent told the male student to stop helping the female student because she was “sassy;”
however, the Commission members did not find that particular statement to be inappropriate.

21.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent

repeatedly leered at female students’ buttocks and breasts.3 As a result, female students in

3

While only two of the Commission members found that this same conduct occurred

during the 2008—2009 school year; however, this time the vote was unanimous because the
third member of the Commission believed that although respondent’s actions may have been
misinterpreted during the 2008—2009 school year, respondent was placed on notice when he
received the May 13, 2009, Notice of Unprofessional conduct not to act in a seductive
manner toward his female students. Consequently, the third member voted “yes” this time
because any reasonable teacher in the same or similar circumstances would have been
sensitive to the issue and would not act in any way that could again be misconstrued.

4

respondent’s classes were uncomfortable attending his class and requesting assistance for
respondent on their math work. Additionally, other students, both male and female, who
witnessed respondent’s behavior(s) were uncomfortable.

2010—2011 School Year

22.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that on July 27, 2010, at

approximately 12:57 p.m., respondent downloaded ten images of a topless female and two
images of a naked female leaning over a bed from respondent’s cellular telephone to his
district computer. The images, which were stored on respondent’s district computer, were
discovered on November 25, 2011. This was a violation of district computer use policy and
represented unprofessional conduct; however, the Commission members also found that this
appears to have been an isolated incident and did not represent a pattern of misconduct.

23.

By a vote of 2:1, the Commission members found that on March 24, 2011, a
female student (Z.M.) asked to use the restroom. In front of the class, respondent told Z.M.
that she could not use the restroom and that she could “pee herself” or “pee in her panties,” or
words to that effect. The class laughed, but Z.M. was upset and embarrassed.

24.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent

repeatedly yelled at students in his math classes. Respondent yelled at the class as a whole
and at individual students when he was frustrated with them and when they misbehaved.
Some of respondent’s students were frightened and intimidated by respondent’s behavior(s).

25.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that respondent

frequently told students that he did not want them in his class. Respondent told students
things like, “if you don’t want to be in my class, you can go somewhere else.” Respondent
told students that if they did not want to come to his class they could hang out in the
restroom. Respondent’s behavior resulted in a loss of instructional minutes and adversely
impacted his students’ desires to learn.

26.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that on April 1, 2011,

respondent failed to properly supervise his class. A school administrator observed
respondent outside of his classroom during the instructional period. During this time
respondent’s students were not receiving instruction and they were not being supervised by
an adult.

2011—2012 School Year

27.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found insufficient evidence to

support the allegation that respondent confronted Nancy Magana and student B.T. after an
August 2011 meeting with the principal of Mission Middle School, during which respondent
and the principal discussed respondent’s conduct concerning having confronted B.T. about
cheating on a test/an assignment.

5

28.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found insufficient evidence to

support the allegation that respondent called female students in his class “hot” and “sexy.”

29.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that although respondent

referred to male student J.L. as a “sexy beast” in the presence of other students such a
comment was made in jest and did not, in and of itself, constitute unprofessional conduct.

30.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that during the fall

semester of the 2011—2012 school year, respondent leered at female students’ breasts and
buttocks. Respondent’s actions made the female students feel uncomfortable and nervous.
Respondent’s actions caused female student (A.S.) to fear and dread having to approach
respondent at his desk. The male students in respondent’s classes, who observed
respondent’s behavior(s), were also uncomfortable with respondent’s actions.

31.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that during the fall
semester respondent required students to do push-ups if they failed to obtain the correct
answer to math problems.

32.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that during the fall

semester respondent repeatedly told students that they were “lazy.”

33.

By a vote of 2:1, the Commission members found that respondent berated a

male student (R.C) and called him “retarded” when R.C. asked for assistance and/or when he
incorrectly answered math questions. By unanimous vote, the Commission members also
found that respondent asked R.C. and other students who requested assistance, “Why are you
here? Why don’t you just stay home?”

34.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that during the fall

semester, respondent repeatedly became angry with students and sent them out of class. On
one occasion, when a male student (E.G.) was retrieving his belongings, respondent became
upset with how long it was taking the student to get his belongings and leave the classroom.
By a vote of 2:1, the Commission members found that respondent approached E.G., picked
up his backpack, and threw the backpack out of the classroom.

35.

By unanimous vote, the Commission members found that during the fall

semester, respondent repeatedly yelled at, and intimidated, students in his math class.
Respondent yelled at his classes as a whole and at individual students. At times, respondent
was less than one foot in front of a student’s face when he yelled. At other times, respondent
stood at the front of a student’s desk and leaned over the desk to intimidate the student.
Respondent’s behavior(s) frightened students and adversely impacted the learning
environment. Some of respondent’s students were afraid to come to class and afraid to ask
for help when they did attend class.

Respondent’s Reputation in the School District

6

36.

Over the years, since 2007, respondent’s reputation with the students at the

school was that he was a “perv” [pervert] and a bully, and that students should avoid getting
placed in his class, if possible.4 With the school administrators respondent had the reputation
of being difficult to deal with, not following the rules, and wanting to do things “his way.”

Respondent’s Testimony

37.

Respondent denied the allegations against him and/or had excuses for his
actions; however, for the most part he testified as to his “custom and habit” and avoided
addressing specific incidents of alleged misconduct. In sum, respondent’s testimony was not
credible.

Assessment of the Evidence

38.

Based on all the evidence, considered as a whole, the Commission members
unanimously agreed that respondent “just does not seem to have gotten it, he does not seem
to love his students, and he is not passionate about teaching.” By respondent’s own
admission, he received written notice(s) and was counseled about his repetitive
misconduct/unprofessional behavior(s) on several separate occasions; yet, he continued to
engage in inappropriate conduct, unprofessional conduct, and/or conduct that could
reasonably be interpreted as sexually harassing and demeaning to female students.
Respondent made unwelcome and inappropriate comments to female students, his
inappropriate conduct caused both female and male students to feel uncomfortable, and he
yelled at students and made inappropriate comments to his class and to individual students
thereby creating an intimidating and offensive environment for students. Additionally,
respondent’s conduct is widely known throughout the district and negatively impacts his
ability to function in the district as a teacher. Respondent’s ability to act as a role model for
students, to properly teach and hold students accountable for their actions, to effectively work
with students, to maintain credibility with parents and faculty, and to teach effectively has
been irreparably compromised in the district. Moreover, respondent has repeatedly
disregarded the district’s efforts to change his behavior thereby indicating he is either unable
or unwilling to comport himself to the behavior reasonably expected of a teacher.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

By unanimous vote, the Commission members make the following Legal Conclusions:

1.

Cause exists for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a), subsection (1) because respondent’s conduct, as set forth in Findings 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18,19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35, constituted

4

Because it is a middle school, the student population at the school changed every two

years, however, respondent’s reputation was consistent for several years.

7

unprofessional conduct and his conduct, as set forth in Findings 8, 21, 22, and 30 constituted
immoral conduct.

2.

Cause exists for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a), subsection (7) because respondent’s conduct, as set forth in Findings 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18,19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35, reveal
persistent violations of laws, rules, regulations and policies related to education; including,
but not limited to, California Education Code sections 201, 212.5, 230, and 231.5, California
Code of Regulations, title 5, sections 4914 and 4916, and District Board Policies.

3.

Cause exists for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a), subsection (5) because respondent’s conduct, as set forth in Findings 8, 10,
11, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35, has negatively impacted
his ability to function as teacher in the district; thus, making him unfit for service in the
district, as defined by the California Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (“Morrison”).

In Morrison, the California Supreme Court set forth the factors that must be

considered in assessing a teacher's fitness to continue teaching. The factors are: (1) The
likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the presence of extenuating or
aggravating circumstances; (3) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected
students or fellow teachers and the degree of adversity anticipated; (4) the proximity or
remoteness in time of the conduct; (5) the type of teaching certificate held by the respondent;
(6) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; and, (7)
the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon
the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons. (Morrison v. State
Board of Education (Supra at 229.)

Application of the Morrison factors to the facts of the instant case lead to the
conclusion that the district was, and is, justified in dismissing respondent from employment
as a teacher in the district. Respondent’s conduct had a significant adverse impact upon
district students by creating and encouraging an uncomfortable class room environment for
students; particularly female students. Respondent’s inappropriate conduct is recent: it
occurred as recently as the 2011—2012 school year. In aggravation, respondent was
repeatedly warned about the ultimate consequences of his inappropriate comments and
conduct and he continued to disregard the warnings. Respondent’s continued unprofessional
and immoral conduct in the face of repeated warnings reveal that respondent just does not
seem to comprehend the magnitude of his transgressions; accordingly, there is a very real
likelihood such conduct will recur.

8

ORDER

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ORDER is hereby made:

Respondent's dismissal from employment with the Jurupa Unified School District

is upheld.

Dated: January 17, 2013

Dated: January

, 2013

Dated: January

, 2013

____________________________
ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

____________________________
Ms. Eva Salazar
Commission Member

____________________________
Mr. David McPhee
Commission Member

9

