BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
OCEANSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

OAH No. 2013030214  

 
In the Matter of the First Amended 
Accusation Against: 
 
DALE PALMER, 
 
   

 

 

          Respondent. 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

DECISION   

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on 

Daniel Shinoff, Patrice Cody and William Shinoff, of Stutz, Artiano, Shinoff & 

 
 
Professional Competence (Commission) in Oceanside, California on October 16, 17, 18, 
and November 8, 2013.  The Commission was comprised of the following members:  
Administrative Law Judge Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Philip Ramos and Stephen 
McLaughlin.   
 
 
Holtz, represented the Oceanside Unified School District (the district). 
 
 
Palmer (respondent) who was present throughout the hearing.   
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was received on October 16, 17, 18, and 
November 8, 2013.  On November 19, 2013, the Commission met to deliberate and the 
matter was submitted.   
 
 

Jon Vanderpool, of Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented Dale 

CASE SUMMARY  
 

 
The Commission unanimously determined that a preponderance of the evidence 
failed to establish cause to dismiss respondent from the district.   While the Commission 
did believe that respondent would benefit from additional training and counseling to 
improve his social skills and his classroom management skills, the Commission  
concluded that insufficient evidence was presented to affirm respondent‟s dismissal 
from the district.  The Commission unanimously determined that none of the charges 
alleged were sustained.  The Commission unanimously determined that insufficient 

1 

direct or corroborating evidence was offered to demonstrate that respondent engaged in 
unprofessional conduct, that his actions negatively impacted his ability to function as 
a teacher in the district or made him unfit for service in the district, or that he 
persistently violated laws, rules, regulations and/or policies related to education, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), subsections (1), (5), and 
(7).   The Commission unanimously dismissed the First Amended Accusation.   
 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the district.  He 

possesses a clear single subject teaching credential in physical education and a clear 
adapted physical education specialist credential.  At all relevant times respondent was 
a physical education (PE) teacher who taught in the district at Libby Elementary 
School (2008-2009 school year), Palmquist Elementary School (2009-2010 school 
year), and El Camino High School (2010-2011 school year and from the fall of 2011 
until February 2012 when he was placed on leave).  
 
 
Resources, recommended to the Governing Board of the district that respondent 
should be dismissed as a certificated employee of the district.  The Governing Board 
approved that recommendation.   
 

On January 15, 2013, Shelly Morr, Associate Superintendent of Human 

2. 

3. 

On January 18, 2013, a 30-Day Notice of Intention to Dismiss was 

served on respondent.  Respondent timely appealed the dismissal action and an 
Accusation and Notice of Charges were served on March 29, 2013.   

 
4. 

On November 8, 2013, a redacted First Amended Accusation1 was filed 

Consistent with this court‟s ruling on the motion in limine (Factual Finding 

by Shelly Morr, Associate Superintendent of Human Resources, in her official 
                                                           
1  
No. 5), the district filed a redacted First Amended Accusation (Exhibit R).  The First 
Amended Accusation without redactions and the documents attached thereto were 
received as Exhibit 2.  The Governing Board considered Exhibit 2 when it 
deliberated.  However, many of the documents in Exhibit 2 exceeded the timelines 
proscribed by Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), and were improperly 
considered by the Governing Board.  Consistent with this court‟s ruling (Factual 
Finding No.5), Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and 4, have been sealed and were not considered by 
the Commission during its deliberations.  The Commission only considered the 
charges pled in the redacted pleading and the exhibits relevant to those charges.  The 
exhibits the Commission considered were Numbers 12-19, 22, 27-28, 33-36, 113-114, 
116, 131, 134, 138, 142, 145, 147, 149, 151, 153-156, 158, and A-S.  All other 
exhibits were not offered, were not considered by the Commission, and are sealed.    

 

2 

5. 

Respondent‟s motion in limine to exclude time barred evidence was 

capacity.  The redacted first amended accusation sought to dismiss respondent on the 
grounds of immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation or 
refusal to obey school and/or district rules.  Respondent disputed the allegations and 
denied that grounds for his dismissal existed.   
 
Respondent’s Motions in Limine 
 
 
granted in part and denied in part.  Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), 
provides that, “No testimony shall be given or evidence introduced relating to matters 
that occurred more than four years prior to the date of the filing of the notice” to 
dismiss the employee.  A party may introduce “records regularly kept by the 
governing board concerning the employee.”  However, “no decision relating to the 
dismissal or suspension of any employee shall be made based on charges or evidence 
of any nature relating to matters occurring more than four years prior to the filing of 
the notice.”   
 
 
evidence of incidents occurring before January 18, 2009, inadmissible.  However, 
older evidence may be introduced to impeach a witness‟s testimony or if equitable 
principles apply (Atwater Elementary School District v. California Department of 
General Services (Truitt real party in interest) (2007) 41 Cal.4th 227).  But, for the 
district to assert a claim of equitable estoppel, it must demonstrate that it did not have 
knowledge of facts that would put a reasonable person on notice.  The older 
documents the district sought to introduce were ones either it generated or which were 
in its possession.  Additionally, although the district correctly argued that the totality 
of the circumstances may be considered when determining whether or not respondent 
is fit to teach (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission On 
Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App4th 1429, 1457), that court did not address 
the time limitations issue, or hold that matters beyond the four years can be 
considered when evaluating the “totality,” nor did any of the other cases cited.       
 

The Notice of Intention to Dismiss was served on January 18, 2013, making 

Respondent‟s motion in limine to exclude evidence of misconduct not 

7. 

Respondent‟s motion in limine to exclude hearsay evidence was denied 

pled in the redacted First Amended Accusation was granted pursuant to Education 
Code section 44934.  However, the district was permitted to introduce non-pled 
evidence if it would impeach evidence offered by respondent.   
 
 
without prejudice.  While Evidence Code section 1200, subdivision (b) prohibits 
hearsay evidence from being introduced subject to exceptions identified in the 
Evidence Code, Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d) permits hearsay 
evidence in an administrative proceeding to supplement or explain direct evidence, 
but, by itself, it may not be used to support a finding.  Consequently, the parties were 
permitted to make hearsay objections and the administrative law judge ruled on those 
objections during the hearing.     

 
6. 

 

3 

9. 

8. 

Respondent‟s motion in limine to exclude cumulative evidence was 

 
denied without prejudice.  Government Code section 11513, subdivision (f) 
authorizes the administrative law judge to exclude evidence if its probative value is 
substantially outweighed by the undue consumption of time spent offering the 
evidence.  The parties were permitted to make objections regarding cumulative 
evidence and the administrative law judge ruled on those objections at hearing.   
 
Respondent’s Background 
 
 
Respondent testified that he first decided to become a teacher during 
college where he majored in physical therapy and minored in science.  Respondent 
volunteered to coach children in soccer and tennis for the Special Olympics and he 
found the experience very rewarding.  He decided to switch his career path and 
become an adaptive PE teacher.  Respondent served in the US Navy and was 
honorably discharged before becoming a teacher. 
 
 
eyes light up when they learned new skills.  He enjoyed working at the elementary 
school level.  Due to district layoffs in 2010, respondent was reassigned to El Camino 
High School for the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondent found teaching at the high 
school level very challenging, primarily because he was assigned to teach Team 
Sports classes which had the largest class size, 50 to 80 students per class.  
Respondent found it difficult to implement and organize his lesson plans and keep all 
of his students on task because of the large class sizes.       
 

Respondent enjoyed teaching students because he liked  seeing the children‟s 

Respondent acknowledged that he needs to improve his communication and 
organization skills.   Respondent is aware of his colleagues‟ complaints that he does 
not communicate well, and he is willing to improve.  Respondent explained that he 
has always been a reserved, introverted person, but he believes he is able to receive 
constructive criticism.  He complied with all directives and letters of reprimand he 
received and he tried to improve his teaching.  When respondent received feedback 
from administrators, he took those comments to heart and worked hard to improve in 
those areas.  
 
 
Respondent testified that he wants to continue teaching in the district.  
Respondent is willing to work on improving; but he also feels that the district could 
make some changes by letting him know  of problems before issuing him  a letter of 
reprimand.  Respondent would like an administrator to sit down with him, put things 
in writing, and discuss any issues,  before  initiating disciplinary proceedings.  
Respondent did not appreciate the fact that the district failed to discuss its  
expectations in advance of initiating disciplinary action.  However, respondent does 
not harbor any anger or ill will against the district. 

 

 

 

4 

10. 

The district charged respondent with committing workplace violence in 

Factual Findings Based on the Testimony and Documents Presented at Hearing2 
 
 
April 2009 when he caused two teachers at Libby Elementary School to become 
frightened of him.  The district charged that respondent‟s conduct violated board 
policy 4135, but that policy was not introduced at hearing.  
 
Jean Roche, a second grade teacher at Libby Elementary School, testified that 
 
respondent had been at that site for approximately two years and she had worked with 
him every week when she brought her students to him for PE instruction.  Ms. Roche 
never had any issues with respondent during that time.  Ms. Roche‟s incident with 
respondent occurred when she left a note in his PE box requesting hula hoops.  After 
two or three weeks, she had not received a response, so one morning before school 
started she went to the PE trailer to follow up on her request.  Ms. Roche described 
the PE trailer as a long narrow room.  She knocked on the door and asked respondent 
if he got her note.  Respondent was at the far end when she entered and he came 
towards her at the door and she backed up.  Ms. Roche testified that it “sounds silly,” 
but the way he approached her “was scary.”   Ms. Roche explained that the way 
respondent said her name and was “coming at her,” did not seem to be a rational way 
for him to respond to her inquiry.  Ms. Roche testified that it “sounds crazy” but her 
interaction with respondent really upset her.  Ms. Roche testified that respondent 
walked towards her and said her name “in such a hateful way” that it caused her to be 
afraid.  She just wanted to get out of the PE trailer. 
 
 
However, on cross-examination, she admitted that the discussion with the other 
teacher occurred at lunch time, approximately two and one-half hours later.  That 
teacher stated that she had a similar experience with respondent, but Ms. Roche did 
not know when that other teacher‟s experience with respondent occurred.  The two 
decided to inform the principal at the end of the day.   
 
At the first meeting the principal listened to the two teachers.  Ms. Roche does 
 
not know if this meeting was the first time the other teacher reported her incident with 
respondent because Ms. Roche was “so absorbed with my own experience.”  The 
principal had Ms. Roche come back a second time, alone, to provide more 
information.  At the second meeting the principal took lengthy notes and wanted 
specific information regarding the exact positions of the individuals and the words 
exchanged.  The principal asked many very detailed questions at the second meeting.  
                                                           
2  
The charges pled in the First Amended Accusation and the Notice of Charges  
were not identical.  Accordingly, in order to convey the Commission‟s determination 
that no grounds exist to dismiss respondent from the district, and to demonstrate that 
the Commission considered all charges alleged against respondent, all Education 
Code sections referenced in both documents are included at the conclusion of the 
findings for each charge.   

Ms. Roche testified that after the encounter she went to tell another teacher.  

 

5 

On cross-examination Ms. Roche also acknowledged that she was not aware 

Ms. Roche did not know what the principal did with the information.  She is not 
aware of anything that happened after she filed her complaint but believed there must 
have been an investigation because there was a substitute teacher who replaced 
respondent.  During her later testimony, Ms. Roche recalled that she signed a 
document, a complaint form, but she did not recall with any specificity,   exactly what 
she signed, as it was “four years ago.”  On cross-examination she admitted that she 
must have had a third meeting with the principal where she signed the document.   
 
 
whether anyone offered to meet with respondent.  Ms. Roche testified that, “Honestly, 
I told [the principal] that I do not want to see [respondent] again.”  Ms. Roche did not 
have a meeting with  respondent and was not  established whether a meeting was ever 
offered to him.  Ms. Roche also admitted that she did not know whether respondent 
ever got her note about the hula hoops.  She was not sure whether she opened the door 
to enter the trailer or respondent opened the door.  She was unsure whether the door 
opened in or out.  She was not certain whether respondent was facing her when she 
first observed him.  She was not sure whether he was at the back of the trailer by the 
desk.  She was not sure what respondent did with his hands, if anything, during the 
encounter; he did not touch her, but she was “very clear he came towards” her.  
Although she is certain that she entered the trailer, Ms. Roche admitted that she was 
not sure where she was standing.  However, she  knew “for a fact” that respondent 
was standing at the far end when she asked him about her request and that he walked 
towards her.  However, that testimony contradicted her previous testimony that he 
may have opened the PE door for her.  Ms. Roche admitted that the entire encounter 
lasted less than 30 seconds.  It was “a very fast interaction.” 
 
  
experience, she was scared.  Afterwards she  looked for respondent‟s truck in the 
parking lot because she did not want to see him.  She did not want to come face-to-
face with him.  Ms. Roche would not get out of her car until she saw that respondent‟s 
vehicle was parked and empty.  She told her husband that she was scared and she 
really wanted a metal detector to be installed at the school. 
 
 
the PE trailer.  It was a long narrow, windowless room, a kind of “janitorial closet.”  
He was taking inventory and had all of the equipment in the middle of the room.  
Respondent was in the back of the PE trailer when he heard a knock at the door but 
could not answer it because of all of the equipment in the middle of the room.  Ms. 
Roche opened the door and stuck her head in the PE trailer.  She told respondent 
about her note and he apologized because he had not received it.  Respondent asked 
Ms. Roche when she needed the equipment and she angrily replied, “Right now.”  
Respondent told her he could not do it “right now” because he was doing inventory 
but he would bring them to her classroom and leave them by her door before 
lunchtime.  Respondent testified that Ms. Roche was very angry with that answer.  
Respondent testified that the entire encounter took only a couple of minutes.  He 

Respondent testified  that one morning before school started he was working in 

Ms. Roche agreed that it “seems so ridiculous” but it was a frightening 

 

6 

described Ms. Roche as being very flustered; she was in a “real hurry” for respondent 
to get her the equipment. 
 

Respondent testified that he never got up from the desk area where he was 

sitting.  He never went towards her.  The two were approximately 11 to 12 feet apart 
during their exchange.  Ms. Roche might have stepped into the PE trailer, but she 
stayed in the doorway area.  He stayed at the back of the trailer by his desk where he 
had been when she first knocked on the door.  Later that day respondent left the hula 
hoops at Ms. Roche‟s classroom.  Respondent had no knowledge that Ms. Roche 
complained about their interaction until he was called to the principal‟s office.  The 
principal told him that “one or two teachers” had filed a complaint against him.  The 
principal did not ask respondent any questions and he did not know what the 
complaint was about.  The principal simply asked him to come back later in the day to 
review the complaints, but he was never asked to complete any documents, nor was 
he ever interviewed about what had happened.  
 
 
Respondent testified that his encounters with these two teachers were 
intimidating for him, but that he never felt threatened by them to such an extent that 
he would file a complaint against them.  He did not believe he ever did anything 
during his interaction with either teacher to make them feel threatened or intimidated.  
Respondent was “extremely surprised” that the two teachers had filed complaints. 
 

Thereafter, respondent met with the Associate Superintendent of Human 

On May 20, 2009, the Libby Elementary School principal issued a letter of 

Resources, Luis Ibarra.  During that meeting respondent took notes and recalls 
Associate Superintendent Ibarra telling him that respondent was “innocent until 
proven guilty.”  As a result of the meeting respondent was placed on paid 
administrative leave.  On May 1, 2009, Associate Superintendent Ibarra issued a letter 
to respondent summarizing their April 27, 2009, meeting.  The letter indicated that 
while on leave respondent was still subject to reasonable direction from the district.  
Nothing in the letter referenced anything about the investigation or the teachers‟ 
complaints and Associate Superintendent Ibarra did not testify.   
 
 
reprimand to respondent.  Respondent testified that he was surprised to receive a letter 
of reprimand because the Libby Elementary School principal never met with 
respondent to  discuss the incidents, and he was never given any documents regarding 
the investigation.   
 
 
formal complaints against  respondent because of three separate incidents.  The two 
teachers claimed they “felt fearful of you after having verbal confrontations with 
you.”  The letter of reprimand indicated that after the two incidents with the first 
teacher, the principal spoke with respondent reminding him of the expectation of 
professional conduct when interacting with staff.  The letter of reprimand referenced a 
“Summary of Conversation” but no such document was attached or introduced at 

The letter of reprimand indicated that on April 24, 2009, two teachers filed 

 

7 

Respondent wrote a response to the letter of reprimand, dated May 27 2009. 

hearing.  The letter of reprimand further noted that three days later, the incident with 
Ms. Roche occurred.  An investigation ensued and “the attached report outlines the 
facts and findings,” but no such report was attached or introduced at hearing.  The 
letter of reprimand advised respondent that his conduct violated Board Policy #4135, 
Violence and Threats in the Workplace, and that a copy of the Policy was attached, 
but,  as with the report, no such policy was attached to the letter reprimand or 
introduced at hearing.  Respondent was instructed to conduct himself in a professional 
manner, communicate in a positive, nonthreatening way and told how to behave in the 
future.  Nothing in the letter of reprimand indicated that the Libby Elementary School 
principal ever met with respondent or obtained his version of events. 
 
 
Respondent wrote that the “complaints filed against me are untrue.”  Respondent 
wrote that the two teachers “stated clearly that there were no threats made towards 
them by me at all, at any time.  Therefore, the complaint should not have been written 
or encouraged to be written.”  Respondent noted that the two teachers “demonstrated 
extreme anger towards me and were in my face.  I never exhibited any anger, 
intimidation, or aggression towards them, which is contrary to their false accusations. 
I am being reprimanded, while [the two teachers] are not being reprimanded for their 
actions.  [The two teachers] are not being held accountable for their admitted 
actions.”  Respondent further noted that he has not been “proven guilty of any 
infraction against anyone.  I have stated and will continue to state that I have done 
nothing wrong.  I will continue to work to create a positive learning environment for 
the students.”  Respondent testified that he was saddened by the fact that the principal 
took the two teachers‟ sides of the story over his, and that those two teachers were not 
held accountable for their actions during the exchanges.  
 

Neither the other teacher nor the Libby Elementary School principal testified. 

The only evidence introduced regarding respondent‟s encounter with the other teacher 
was respondent‟s testimony.  No evidence refuted respondent‟s testimony that he was 
not interviewed by Ms. Roche.  In fact, the letter of reprimand corroborated 
respondent‟s testimony that his side of the story was not considered.  Nowhere in that 
letter of reprimand is there any indication that respondent was ever interviewed.  
None of the documents referenced in the letter of reprimand were introduced.  
Additionally, Ms. Roche presented as a histrionic, overly emotional witness.  She was 
unclear of many of the details, making her testimony non-persuasive and non-
credible.   

 
Respondent also testified that he collaborated with staff members while at 

 
Libby Elementary School.  He identified staff members with whom he collaborated.  
Respondent testified about the various programs he introduced and assistance he gave 
to Libby Elementary School teachers.  No evidence to refute respondent‟s testimony 
was introduced. 
 

 

8 

11. 

The Commission unanimously determined that insufficient evidence was 

 
introduced to establish that any workplace violence or threats had occurred.  It also 
appeared as though no “investigation” had been conducted.  Rather, it seemed that the 
Libby Elementary School principal did little more than take the assertions of the two 
teachers as true and issue a letter of reprimand to respondent.  The Commission 
unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish that respondent engaged 
in improper and threatening interactions with students and staff, committed immoral 
conduct, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to complete his professional duties, had 
a history of misconduct, was unfit for service or persistently violated or refused to 
obey school and/or district rules.  The evidence was insufficient to sustain the charges 
alleged.3   
 
 
The district asserted that during the beginning of the 2010-2011 school 
year, El Camino High School Principal Daniel Daris, who was principal at El Camino 
High School for eight years before becoming the district‟s Coordinator of Student 
Services in 2011, received several complaints about respondent.  The complaints 
alleged that respondent would sit in a corner by himself during department meetings, 
was very curt and uncommunicative when department members addressed him,  did 
not make eye contact with colleagues, caused colleagues to fear for their safety as 
they believed respondent‟s temper could explode at any time, did not take personal 
responsibility for his job, missed a lot of Fridays and Mondays, did not attend 
department Professional Learning Communities (PLCs), was unwilling to collaborate 
on assessments or lesson plans, became defensive if members of the department asked 
how he assessed his students and developed his curriculum, did not demand any level 
of physical activity from his students, would leave before the end of the school day, 
did not use the rubrics/assessment with his students, would eat his lunch alone in his 
car, and would not help the other male PE teachers monitor the boys‟ locker room.  
The district asserted that respondent‟s behavior caused the PE department to be 
unable to effectively function.   
 
 
intended to be collaborative meetings focusing on teaching strategies.  It was 
important that all members participate.  Ms. Ferrel detailed the problems that could 
occur if all members did not.  Ms. Ferrel acknowledged that during the first few days 
of school, respondent had a good idea regarding painting the numbers for roll call on 
                                                           
3 
The district also charged that the other teacher felt threatened and filled out a 
workplace violence/threat report.  However, that report was not introduced and that 
teacher did not testify.  Only respondent testified about their encounters and his 
testimony did not establish grounds to support the district‟s charges.  The district also 
alleged that staff members were fearful of respondent and that during his meeting 
with Dr. Ibarra, respondent showed no affect and portrayed himself as a victim, but 
no evidence to support those charges was introduced.  Consequently, those charges 
are dismissed.   
  

Maureen Ferrel, the PE Chairperson at the time, testified that PLCs were 

 

9 

Ms. Ferrel explained that the PE staff thought that respondent would be a good 

the black top and helped with painting.  Ms. Ferrel described respondent as not very 
talkative, he was quiet and reserved.  Ms. Ferrel recalled respondent not having lunch 
with the staff and not interacting socially with them.   He would sit off to the side.  At 
meetings the staff would put the desks in a circle and she recalled respondent sitting 
outside of the circle, even though they would ask him to sit in the circle.  However, 
Principal Daris testified that at the one PLC he attended, respondent was sitting fairly 
close to everyone else. 
 
 
resource because he had taught at other schools and they  asked him questions about 
how his other school did various things, but he was non-responsive.  Respondent‟s 
behavior at PLCs caused difficulties for the PE department because they are a very 
collaborative group and had never encountered someone who did not collaborate with 
them.  Respondent was curt and would not make eye contact.  Ms. Ferrel recalled that 
respondent would write very intensely on his clipboard during meetings.  Ms. Ferrel 
could not recall a time when respondent offered ideas that were dismissed by other 
staff members.  Respondent never shared any difficulties he was having with students.  
Ms. Ferrel had concerns about respondent‟s teaching abilities, based upon his 
behavior at staff meetings.  She worried how respondent would communicate with 
students since he did not communicate with staff.     
 
 
to greetings.  She did not know how to approach respondent.  He placed himself on 
the outside of the group.  She had never encountered someone who resisted 
collaborating with his colleagues as much as respondent did.  Ms. Ferrel shared her 
concerns with the principal and vice principal.  Eventually it became extremely 
uncomfortable to be in the same room with respondent.  Other male PE teachers told 
her that respondent did not talk to them and did not eat lunch with them.  Students 
complained to her about respondent but she told them they needed to talk to him 
about their issues.  No evidence of these “issues” was introduced at hearing.   

Ms. Ferrel felt threatened by respondent‟s behavior because he did not respond 

 
Ms. Ferrel did not see respondent leave school early but she did see him leave 

PLCs early.  Although Teresa Kilpatrick, a PE teacher, testified that respondent 
missed many PLCs, Ms. Ferrel only thought respondent missed one or two.  No 
documents verifying the number of PLCs respondent missed were introduced.  Ms. 
Ferrel also testified that respondent missed a lot of Mondays and Fridays and 
Principal Daris agreed that Ms. Ferrel made those complaints to him.  However, no 
documents to support that claim were introduced even though Ms. Ferrel admitted 
that those records are maintained by the district.  Principal Daris testified that Ms. 
Ferrel also complained that respondent was leaving campus during his prep period, 
but Principal Daris did not know if respondent had a sixth period prep period and no 
documentation regarding respondent‟s schedule was introduced.   

 
 
Principal Daris admitted that he did not issue any sort of formal warning for 
respondent‟s alleged failure to engage in PLCs, comply with the code of conduct, or 

 

10 

Principal Daris testified that it was his custom to meet with all new employees 

collaborate with fellow teachers.  Additionally, he had no documentation regarding 
any of the alleged staff complaints he received about respondent.  Many of the 
complaints were in email form, but he does not know what happened to them after he 
left El Camino High School in 2011.  He was never asked provide any of his emails to 
the district or its attorneys.    
 
 
and go over his expectations with them.  Principal Daris had such a meeting with 
respondent.  Principal Daris admitted that he did not give respondent any written 
expectations but did give him a copy of the California teaching standards.  Principal 
Daris did not give respondent any documentation regarding PLCs.  Principal Daris 
testified that at staff meetings all employees  got a copy of a document describing 
how the PLCs should run.  However, Principal Daris admitted he does not have a 
copy of those PLC documents and does not know what happened to them.  Principal 
Daris admitted that he has nothing in writing directing respondent to sit in the PLC 
circle or make eye contact.   Respondent denied having a meeting with Principal 
Daris and no documentation to verify that a meeting took place was offered.  In fact, 
respondent testified that he did not receive support from the administration when he 
arrived at El Camino High School.  Respondent thought it was strange that he did not 
get any kind of welcome or information regarding what he would be teaching or 
where his classroom was located.  He had to navigate on his own.  Respondent was 
not offended by that, he just thought it was strange.  
 
 
Respondent also had difficulty accessing his email when he first arrived.  He 
brought it to the administration‟s attention but no one offered to help him.  A fellow 
PE colleague came over once to help him but respondent could tell he was bothered 
by trying to help respondent.  Principal Daris testified that when he learned of 
respondent‟s computer issues, he did request the tech department to address the 
problem.  No one ever offered to help respondent, he had to ask for help.  He had to 
ask for access to the computer system.  Respondent testified that he had to ask for the 
keys to the facility.  Respondent‟s October 8, 2010, response to his letter reprimand 
(Factual Finding No 12), corroborated respondent‟s testimony that he was not getting 
any help from the administration or his colleagues.     
 

Ms. Ferrel was critical of respondent‟s teaching, as he was testing students in a 

manner that was not allowed by the testing protocol, because he was letting other 
students assist in the testing.  Ms. Ferrel said nothing to respondent about her 
concerns because he was with students.  The Commission concluded that the evidence 
introduced regarding how respondent tested his students did not establish that he 
violated testing protocols.  In fact, two of the Commission members noted that, as 
described at hearing, respondent was using permissible methods.   

 
Ms. Kilpatrick testified that she taught PE 9A, a classroom-based course and 

 
body dynamics, a cross fit, aerobics, yoga course.  Ms. Kilpatrick discussed the 
collaboration involved in sharing the PE facilities.  In addition to the matrix, the staff 

 

11 

also used emails and professional courtesy to share the facilities.  The staff tried to 
coordinate facility usage.  When respondent first arrived at the school, she recalls that 
he did not participate, although he was sitting in the circle.  They were discussing 
staff birthdays and when they asked him about his, respondent withdrew in his chair, 
shook his head and looked down.  Ms. Kilpatrick recalls specifically thinking that it 
was a strange interaction because respondent was new to the department.  On cross-
examination Ms. Kilpatrick admitted that she was unaware that respondent‟s mother 
had died on his birthday and she agreed that this could affect how he felt about his 
birthday and made her rethink the incident.     
 
Ms. Kilpatrick testified that at a PLC in February or March of 2011, staff was 
 
discussing common assessments for students.  Ms. Kilpatrick asked respondent how 
he assessed students and respondent replied that she was “picking on” him.  
Respondent was very abrasive towards her and she was shocked because she had 
simply been asking him a question.  Respondent stormed out of the room, leaving Ms. 
Kilpatrick shocked.  She testified that the rest the staff all just sat there, bewildered by 
respondent‟s behavior.  Ms. Ferrel also testified about the incident.  She recalled that 
respondent “said something about being bullied,” but she did not feel he was being 
bullied, although he was upset and left the room, she did not see any bullying.  
Respondent‟s actions surprised Ms. Ferrel.  However, Sean Helgesen, a PE teacher, 
who has also been the Athletic Director since the 2009-2010 school year, testified that 
the incident was “not a big blow up.”  The incident had not fazed Mr. Helgesen.  
Douglas Musgrove, the PE teacher that respondent originally replaced, testified that 
Ms. Ferrel was asking respondent a question and respondent replied, “Why are you 
asking me?”  Respondent thought he was being picked on, but respondent did not 
storm out of the meeting.  Mr. Musgrove testified that Respondent felt that he was 
being singled out but it did not go any further than that.   
 

Mr. Helgesen agreed that he stood in the doorway during PE class while 

students were getting dressed, but he did not do it to intimidate respondent, he did it 
to pass out loaner PE clothes and to monitor students.  Mr. Helgesen never had any 
issues with respondent and was not aware of any problems between them or between 
respondent and other staff until the district‟s attorney told him of respondent‟s 
allegations that he was being bullied and intimidated.  Mr. Helgesen denied doing any 
of those things and never observed any staff members bully respondent.   
   
 
Mr. Musgrove testified that because of the 2010 teacher layoffs, he was 
reassigned to a geometry class as a long-term sub.  He taught there approximately five 
or six weeks before he was reassigned to the PE department.  Mr. Musgrove testified 
that there was never a PLC where someone left early.  He recalled that respondent did 
not bring “a whole lot to the table.”  Respondent did not seem happy being there.  
Respondent was very antisocial, but Mr. Musgrove never saw respondent act 
threatening at any PLC or department meetings.  Respondent never raised his voice at 
a PLC.  When questioned about other employees‟ testimony to the contrary, Mr. 
Musgrove testified that, “I think it‟s how it‟s viewed, we all view things differently.”  

 

12 

Ms. Ferrel testified that she could not recall respondent‟s schedule.  She did 

Mr. Musgrove testified that the staff grabbed chairs and pulled them into a circle, but 
respondent did not join the circle.  He never told respondent to join the circle.  Mr. 
Musgrove never conveyed any concerns about respondent to Principal Daris. 
 
 
Respondent testified that he was assigned to teach five classes of Team Sports.  
His classes had at least 10-15 more students in them than in the other PE classes.  The 
administrators and teachers who were questioned about respondent‟s class size at 
hearing, all discussed the many challenges and difficulties encountered with large 
class sizes.  All the witnesses agreed that Team Sports classes had a lot of students to 
monitor and teach.  Respondent testified that on his first day of classes when he 
noticed how much larger his classes were than his colleagues‟ classes, he asked Ms. 
Ferrel about the discrepancy, but she dismissed him.  In January, with the start of the 
new semester, respondent‟s schedule changed so that he was scheduled to teach four 
Weight Training classes and only one Team Sports class.  Respondent discussed his 
relief at having this schedule with another PE teacher.  That teacher became very 
upset, called Ms. Ferrel and she advised that she was unaware of the change.  Ms. 
Ferrel looked at the schedule, got upset, called the counseling office, and the next 
thing respondent knew, he was reassigned to teach five Team Sports classes again for 
the second semester.   
 
 
not recall that respondent‟s schedule was changed after another PE staff member 
complained.  She testified that schedules are set by the counselors and she had no 
ability to change them.  Principal Daris testified that he had the final say on teaching 
assignments.  Principal Daris did not recall respondent complaining about his class 
schedule but typically those matters are handled by the department chairperson.  
Principal Daris did not know what respondent‟s schedule was in the fall of 2010, but 
remembered that one of the other PE teachers complained about teaching the five 
Team Sports classes, which led to that teacher‟s schedule being swapped with 
respondent‟s schedule.  Principal Daris claimed that all of that “took place at the 
department level.”   No evidence to refute respondent‟s testimony about the change to 
his second semester schedule was introduced. 
 
 
Respondent testified that the purpose of PLCs was for staff to collaborate on 
ideas.  He acknowledged missing a few PLCs, but he never stormed out of a PLC.  
Respondent was never given any feedback about his failure to participate at PLCs or 
staff meetings.  He denied ever missing a department meeting and no evidence to 
refute that testimony was introduced.  If respondent left early it was only because of a 
personal appointment.  Any time respondent missed school he arranged for a 
substitute teacher to cover his class.  All of his absences  were accounted for in the 
district records.  However, no documents demonstrating respondent‟s absences were 
introduced.  Respondent testified that when he requested a substitute teacher, he  had 
all of his teaching materials organized in a folder for the substitute teacher.  He 
collaborated with the substitutes who covered his classes when he was out on medical 
leave.   

 

13 

Respondent denied that he sat alone at PLC meetings.  A lot of the times he 

 
was on his computer or writing his class attendance report for the 70+ students he had 
in each of his classes.  Because he had so many students, it took him longer to 
complete his paperwork.  Often he was doing it when the PLCs started.  Respondent 
testified that if he entered the room when the PLC was starting, he would try not to 
disturb the meeting and would sit on the outside of the circle so as not to be 
disruptive.  Respondent‟s explanation was credible.   
 
 
Respondent testified that he initially offered ideas at the PLCs, but his 
suggestions were either dismissed or ignored.  Respondent suggested a better way to 
perform student flexibility tests, but Ms. Ferrel told him that they were going to 
continue doing those tests the way they had always been done.  Respondent was also 
concerned because students were running on the concrete steps, something which can 
cause long-term injuries, and he suggested that students run only on the track.  
Respondent brought research to a PLC to support his position.  Ms. Kilpatrick 
laughingly dismissed his suggestions, claiming this was the way they had always 
done it and no student had ever been injured.  Respondent also inquired as to why the 
gym was not part of the facilities‟ rotation, but that  question went unanswered.  
Respondent also suggested a different way to keep track of students because they 
switched classes so often, but that suggestion was also dismissed.  Respondent 
suggested a different way to perform weight testing to prevent student injury and that 
idea was dismissed. 
 
 
Respondent‟s testimony about being ignored was credible, given his 
presentation at this hearing.  Respondent presented as an extremely quiet, reserved 
witness.  He primarily looked down, making very little eye contact, even when 
testifying.  Respondent presented as a very introverted individual and it was 
conceivable that he would withdraw even further if his suggestions were dismissed. 
 
 
the site.  His erratic behavior, the way he acted around staff, the feeling that he did not 
want to be a teacher, or be part of the team and his unwillingness to communicate 
were troublesome.  It got to the point that she was scared of respondent and did not 
know what he would do.  Ms. Kilpatrick was concerned that if respondent returned to 
school there would be more issues regarding his inability to collaborate with 
colleagues and she did not believe respondent is able to give students what they need 
to succeed.  However, Mr. Helgesen testified that nothing in particular about his 
interactions with respondent stood out other than that he was fairly quiet.  He never 
observed anything out of the ordinary in respondent‟s classes; respondent was not 
doing anything differently from the other PE teachers.  Mr. Helgesen testified that 
respondent had very limited communication with others, but answered direct 
questions asked of him.   
 
 
Ms. Ferrel‟s testimony appeared coached.  Ms. Kilpatrick appeared to be very 
much part of the “in crowd” and had very small class sizes.  It was easy to understand 

Ms. Ferrel testified about her concerns if respondent was allowed to return to 

 

14 

12. 

The district asserted that in September 2010, respondent failed to 

The Commission unanimously determined that although it was unprofessional 

how she would fail to appreciate respondent‟s shy, introverted demeanor or his 
struggles with his large class sizes.  Mr. Helgesen had a very large, athletic stature.  It 
was conceivable that respondent could have mistakenly perceived Mr. Helgesen‟s 
actions as being intimidating even though Mr. Helgesen was not acting that way.  
Principal Daris‟ testimony and impressions were based primarily on second hand 
information and not direct knowledge, making them non-persuasive.   
 
 
for respondent not to immediately seek assistance with his email access issues, the 
evidence did not establish that respondent engaged in improper and threatening 
interactions with students and staff, that any workplace violence or threats had 
occurred,  committed immoral conduct, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, was unfit for service or 
persistently violated or refused to obey school and/or district rules.  The evidence was 
insufficient to sustain the charges alleged.   
 
 
respond to a parent‟s complaint, was rude and disrespectful when he spoke with the 
parent, and acted inappropriately during a meeting with the principal and the parent.  
Although the district also asserted it received other complaints from parents, students 
and counselors, no evidence to support those allegations was introduced and those 
charges are dismissed. 
 
 
complaining that her son reported that respondent told him that he was going to get an 
F in the class.  The mother did not understand how her son could get an F when only 
one-third of the school year had taken place.  The mother claimed she had tried 
numerous times to contact respondent and he had not responded.  Principal Daris 
directed respondent to call the mom.  Principal Daris testified that there is a school 
policy that all parent messages should be returned within 24 hours.  However, 
Principal Daris admitted he did not know when the mother contacted him to complain 
that respondent was not returning her calls.  Thereafter, the mother complained that 
respondent had been very rude, disrespectful and hung up on her during their call.  
The mother was very upset.   
 
Principal Daris spoke to respondent who denied the mother‟s assertions.  
 
Respondent told Principal Daris that the mother accused respondent of numerous 
things and he told her that he was not going to listen.  Principal Daris scheduled a 
parent conference with himself, respondent and the mother.  Respondent brought his 
union representative to the meeting, which Principal Daris found unusual because 
union representatives are typically not at parent conferences.   
 
 
the note he drafted on September 25, 2010, about the incident.  On September 9, 
2010, Principal Daris asked him to call a student‟s mother and respondent did so 

Respondent testified about the phone call with the mother and also introduced 

Principal Daris testified that in October 2010, a parent contacted him 

 

15 

Principal Daris testified that the mother was very assertive, but he felt she was 

during his lunch hour.  When respondent asked the mother what he could do to help 
her, the mother stated that she was not comfortable talking with respondent over the 
phone.  The mother wanted to meet with respondent and the principal.  Respondent 
told her that was fine and then there was a long silence.  Respondent then told the 
mother that he would like to eat his lunch and he was going to hang up.  After more 
silence, the mother hung up the phone and then respondent hung up the phone.  The 
Commission concluded that based upon respondent‟s presentation at this hearing, 
respondent‟s version of what transpired during the call was credible.  Moreover, the 
evidence established that respondent immediately complied with Principal Daris‟s 
directive to contact the mother.  The evidence did not establish that respondent was 
ever aware there was an issue until Principal Daris informed him of the mother‟s 
email attempts.     
 
 
very respectful.  When the union representative began to respond to the mother‟s 
statements, Principal Daris “cut him off” and told him he was merely there to observe.  
Principal Daris recalled that respondent just sat there during the meeting.  Principal 
Daris told respondent to engage since the meeting involved one of his students and 
the student‟s mother.  Principal Daris tried to prompt respondent to participate, but 
respondent did not engage during the meeting.   Respondent testified that during the 
meeting the mother was very rude and disrespectful to him.  She told him that he 
should go to greener pastures and quit teaching if he did not like it.  Respondent 
testified that he said nothing during the meeting, but his union representative told the 
mother that he did not think she should speak to respondent liked that.  Respondent 
felt that the mother was rude to him and that he was being disrespected.  Respondent 
testified that he was not offended that Principal Daris did not step in; he was just 
surprised he did not do so.  The union representative asked Principal Daris why he did 
not step in and Principal Daris stated that he needed to remain impartial at the 
meeting.   
 
 
Principal Daris testified that finally, at the very end of the meeting, respondent 
said that he did not tell the student that he was going to flunk the class and that he did 
not hang up on the mother.  Respondent‟s demeanor at the meeting was not engaging.  
Respondent did not look at the mother.  He was primarily looking at the ground.  
Principal Daris refuted respondent‟s assertion that the mother told respondent that he 
should quit the teaching profession and move on to greener pastures.  Principal Daris 
also refuted respondent‟s assertion that the union representative told the mother that 
she should not speak to respondent in that way and that she was acting disrespectful.   
 

After the parent meeting, Principal Daris issued a letter of reprimand on 

October 8, 2010, to respondent.  Respondent was shocked to receive the letter of 
reprimand.  In it, Principal Daris stated that on September 2, 2010, and again on 
September 6, 2010, a parent e-mailed respondent a request to communicate regarding 
her son, but received no response.  On September 9, 2010, Principal Daris directed 
respondent to contact the parent and respondent did so on that date.  However, during 

 

16 

Respondent wrote a response to the letter of reprimand.  In the response, 

the call, respondent was rude and disrespectful.  Principal Daris stated that 
respondent‟s conduct violated teaching standards and the school‟s commitment to 
communicate with parents as partners in education.  Respondent‟s conduct negatively 
impacted both the parent and student and cast the school in a negative light.  Principal 
Daris directed respondent to be respectful to all parents and to respond to them within 
24 hours.  The letter of reprimand contradicted Principal Daris‟s testimony that the 
emails from the parent were in October and also refuted his testimony that he issued 
the letter of reprimand based on respondent‟s actions at the parent meeting.  Nothing 
in the letter of reprimand referenced that meeting. 
 
 
respondent stated that the reason he did not reply to the mother‟s two emails were 
because he was “getting my bearings at the school and learning where everything was 
around me.”  Respondent claimed that no one offered to help him and still had not 
offered to help him.  Respondent wrote that the letter of reprimand was based solely 
on the parent‟s report of what occurred, a version of the events which respondent 
disputed.  Respondent claimed it was the mother who was disrespectful and that since 
there were no witnesses to the conversation, Principal Daris was simply taking the 
mother‟s word against his.  Respondent also stated that Principal Daris witnessed the 
mother being disrespectful towards respondent during the September 30, 2010, 
meeting and chose to ignore it.  Respondent claimed there was absolutely no evidence 
that respondent was ever disrespectful in the meeting or during the phone 
conversation.  However, respondent concluded by saying he would follow the 
directions in the letter of reprimand and would work to “create a positive learning 
environment for the students.”  Principal Daris testified that he did not recall ever 
seeing this response, but acknowledged he does not always see teachers‟ responses to 
letters of reprimand.  Principal Daris believed the mother showed him her emails, but 
since they are not attached to the letter of reprimand, “We don't have them.”   
 

 
In October of 2010 respondent requested a transfer. He was unhappy at El 

Camino High School because of the way he was being treated by administration and 
coworkers.  He did not feel matters were fully investigated.  He was given a letter of 
reprimand but did not feel that his side of the story had been accepted.  Respondent 
felt it was unfair because he did not  believe that an investigation had ever taken place 
and he felt that the letter of reprimand was inaccurate regarding what had transpired.     

 
The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent engaged in improper and threatening interactions with students and 
staff, committed immoral conduct, was unfit for service, persistently violated or 
refused to obey school and/or district rules, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, or that that any 
workplace violence or threats had occurred.  The evidence was insufficient to sustain 
the charges alleged.  The evidence did not establish that respondent was rude during 
the phone call and Principal Daris‟s letter of reprimand did not mention that 
respondent had been rude during the parent meeting.  Neither the parent who made 

 

17 

the complaint nor the student testified.  Insufficient evidence to establish this charge 
was introduced.   

 
13. 

The district alleged that on November 4, 2010, respondent repeatedly 
, a female student, to lift her sweatshirt to prove she was wearing 
 C

 
asked A
PE clothing, even though the student advised that she had nothing underneath her 
sweatshirt.  The district alleged that when the student refused to lift her sweatshirt, 
respondent grabbed the sweatshirt and tried to lift it.  The district alleged that another 
female student observed the incident and that the two students left PE class and 
reported the incident to the principal.  The district asserted that respondent denied 
responsibility and claimed the student was trying to get him fired.  No other witnesses 
reported the student making that statement. 
 
 
sophomore year, she was a student in respondent‟s PE class.  She was unable to 
participate in PE because she was on medical leave.  On the day of the alleged 
incident, Ms. C
were 50 to 80 other students in the PE class who were in the middle of the track, 
participating in PE.  It was up to the PE teacher whether medical leave students 
should “dress out” for PE and respondent required his students to do so.  Ms. C
was wearing a black hooded sweatshirt and her PE shorts.  She was not wearing 
anything under her sweatshirt.   
 

 testified about her educational background.  During the fall of her 

 was on the football field, standing alone with respondent.  There 

Ms. C

 

Ms. C

 testified that respondent told her that she was not wearing 

appropriate PE clothes and she told him her clothing was dress code appropriate.  
Respondent told her that if she was wearing her school clothing underneath her 
sweatshirt then he wanted her to take the sweatshirt off.  Ms. C
that she had nothing on underneath.  Ms. C
not believe her and he grabbed the bottom of her sweatshirt by the pockets and lifted 
it up, exposing her midriff near her belly button area.  Ms. C
 testified that another 
female student intervened, grabbed Ms. C
going to the office to report the incident.  Ms. C
them they were not allowed to leave, his tone was loud and angry, it frightened Ms. 
C

 told respondent 
 testified that respondent said he did 

 by the arm, and said that they were 
 testified that respondent told 

, but the two girls left the field and headed to the office.   

 
Respondent testified that Ms. C

 insisted she was dressed out for PE. 

 
Respondent told her that he did not believe her because she was wearing the same 
sweatshirt and jeans she had worn to school.   Ms. C
athletic shoes.  Respondent testified he had a problem with Ms. C
dressing out for PE.  Respondent asked her to show him the tag of her shirt or to pull 
down the tail of her shirt to show that she was dressed out for PE. Respondent did not 
ask her to lift her sweatshirt.  Ms. C
 told respondent she was not wearing a shirt 
and that was the end of it.  Respondent agreed that it would be “horrific and totally 
inappropriate” for a male teacher to ask a female student to lift her sweatshirt.  It 
would be “unprofessional and unacceptable at a minimum.”   Ms. C

 was not wearing any type of 

 all year not 

 told 

 

18 

respondent she was going to get him fired and that she was going to say that he told 
her to lift her shirt.  Ms. C
 and the other student had stated in the past that they 
were going to get him fired.  Respondent believed that Ms. C
student were trying to get him in trouble.  Respondent denied ever touching Ms. 
C

‟s sweatshirt or Ms. C

 and the other 

.  

 testified that she did not know the other student before this incident.  

 never observed that student interact with respondent and was unaware of 

Ms. C
that student ever claiming that she would try to get respondent fired.  Ms. C
denied ever making statements that she was going to get respondent fired and never 
heard any students make that claim. 

 

 was “pretty positive” that she spoke with Vice Principal Barry Tyler, but cannot 

 testified that when the two girls arrived at the office they requested 
to see the principal and were told they had to wait until the next day to see him.  Ms. 
C
recall anything the vice principal told her or any direction she was given.  Ms. C
spoke with Vice Principal Tyler by herself.  Ms. C
 was told to stay in the office 
until the bell rang before going to her next class.  This testimony seemed to support 
respondent‟s testimony that Ms. C
 was not dressed for PE, since it did not seem 
plausible that she would go to her next class wearing her PE clothes.   

 

 
Ms. C

 
Ms. C

 
Ms. C

 testified she met with principal Daniel Daris the next morning.  She 
relayed to him the events that took place.  Principal Daris informed her that he would 
take care of it and that she should see the counselor to change her PE class.  Principal 
Daris testified that when the two students came up from respondent‟s class, he met 
with Ms. C
‟s testimony that she did not 
meet with Principal Daris on the day of the incident; she claimed met with him the 
following day.  Principal Daris testified that Ms. C
uncomfortable with respondent‟s actions.  Principal Daris testified that Ms. C
very upset and seemed extremely uncomfortable with the situation.  He assured Ms. 
C

 advised him that she felt very 
 was 

 that he would investigate the incident.   

.  His testimony contradicted Ms. C

 
Principal Daris testified that he was uncomfortable with a male teacher asking 

, he did not recall meeting with the other female student.  However, 

a female student to remove her sweatshirt after she told the teacher that she was 
wearing nothing underneath.  Principal Daris initially could only recall meeting with 
Ms. C
Principal Daris later recalled speaking with the other female student that same day, 
but could not recall her name.  That female student verified that respondent had asked 
 told 
 a number of times to remove her sweatshirt and that Ms. C
Ms. C
respondent she was not wearing anything underneath the sweatshirt.  Although 
respondent testified that the students swore at him, Principal Daris testified that 
respondent never told him that Ms. C

 or the other female student had done so.   

 
When Principal Daris discussed the incident with respondent, respondent told 

 
him that because of the PE uniform guidelines, he was checking to make sure the 

 

19 

 where she threatened to get him fired, but respondent 

 
Respondent testified that Principal Daris never interviewed him regarding his 

student was complying with the PE dress code and that he only asked her to lift her 
sweatshirt one time to verify she was wearing a PE shirt underneath.  When she said 
that she had nothing underneath, he stopped.  Respondent stated that Ms. C
 was 
rude and disrespectful, left class without permission, and he wrote her a referral.  
Principal Daris does not know what happened to respondent‟s referral.  Principal 
Daris testified that respondent told him that the students‟ statements were not true, 
and that respondent appeared very upset and angry when Principal Daris questioned 
him about the incident.  Respondent told Principal Daris that he had had other 
interactions with Ms. C
never told anyone about those threats.  Principal Daris admitted that he did not 
interview anyone else about the incident.  Principal Daris never spoke to any other 
students in respondent‟s PE class to verify what had transpired.   
 
 
version of events.  Principal Daris never spoke with respondent about the incident and 
never told him about any investigation.  This claim was contradicted by Principal 
Daris‟s testimony that he discussed the matter with respondent, although, the length 
of time he spoke with respondent was never established.  Respondent testified that the  
incident with Ms. C
 occurred right after the district found out about respondent‟s 
2007 conviction (Factual Finding No. 14) and respondent believed it was connected 
in some way.  At this point time, respondent felt that there was a concerted effort to 
pile paperwork against him in his personnel file.   
 
 
 and the other female student were credible witnesses and that respondent‟s 
Ms. C
actions were inappropriate, especially at the high school level and especially between 
a male teacher and a female student.  Another reason Principal Daris issued the letter 
of reprimand was because of his observations that Ms. C
 was visibly shaken and  
displayed a “level of uncomfortableness” with what had occurred.  Additionally, 
Principal Daris testified that the PE guidelines were very liberal and when checking 
uniforms, if a student stated that they are not wearing clothing underneath, the male 
teacher should stop and not pursue the issue, nor ask a female student to lift her shirt.  
Principal Daris testified that as long as a student has on “PE type of workout clothes” 
in the proper school colors, that satisfies the PE dress code.  Ms. C
sweatshirt was acceptable PE clothing. 

Principal Daris issued a letter of reprimand after the incident because he felt 

‟s black 

 
Respondent wrote two responses to his letter of reprimand, each one dated 

 
November 15, 2010.  Both responses were similar, except that one contained 
additional assertions.  Respondent wrote that he asked Ms. C
wearing her required PE uniform by showing her the bottom of her shirt.  He 
referenced the PE uniform guidelines.  Respondent denied ever asking the student to 
lift her sweatshirt.  Respondent wrote that Principal Daris indicated that he completed 
an investigation and talked to witnesses.  However, the only other witness with whom 
Principal Daris spoke was the other student and she was not credible because she told 
respondent on several previous occasions that she was going to get him fired.  During 

 to prove she was 

 

20 

the October 21, 2010, disaster drill, that student stood up and swore at respondent and 
she, Ms. C
 and a third student told respondent on several occasions that they were 
going to get him fired.  Respondent wrote that he did not believe that Principal Daris 
“cares about the truth.  He is holding a grudge for the district and wants to pile 
paperwork in my personnel file.”  Respondent concluded by stating that he would 
“follow the directives of the letter of reprimand.  I am working to create a positive 
learning environment for the students.”  In one of the two responses, respondent also 
added that he “never asked a student to do what [Principal] Daris has accused me of.  
I have been teaching in the district honorably for years, mentoring thousands and 
thousands of students.  He has no credible proof of anything and cannot produce 
reliable proof of anything.  I expect this reply to be attached to the letter of reprimand, 
and will be checking my personnel file to see if it is there.”   
 
 
The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent engaged in improper and threatening interactions with students and 
staff, committed immoral conduct, was unfit for service, persistently violated or 
refused to obey school and/or district rules, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, or that that any 
workplace violence or threats had occurred.  There was a lack of urgency displayed 
by Principal Daris in how he conducted his investigation.  He did not immediately 
interview the student or suspend respondent, suggesting that Ms. C
‟s assertions 
were doubtful.  No other witnesses were interviewed.  No other witnesses testified at 
hearing.  The evidence was insufficient to establish that Ms. C
‟s allegations were 
true.  Moreover, given respondent‟s presentation at hearing, her allegations seemed 
inconceivable.  The Commission also did not find Ms. C
given her presentation at hearing.  She appeared to enjoy being in the spotlight and 
her  school background suggested that there were many issues transpiring in her life 
raising doubts as to her credibility.  The evidence was insufficient to sustain the 
charges alleged.   
 

 to be a credible witness 

14. 

In February 2010 Associate Superintendent Shelly Morr received a 

letter from the Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) advising her that CTC 
was considering discipline against respondent for his 2007 misdemeanor battery 
conviction.  The CTC letter was the first notice the district had of that conviction. 

 
On February 26, 2010, CTC issued a letter to respondent, which it copied to 

the district, advising respondent that at its April 2010 meeting it would be considering 
the enclosed investigation report which may result in discipline being issued against 
respondent‟s certificate.  The report noted that on April 5, 2007, respondent was 
convicted, based upon his guilty plea, of violating Penal Code section 242, battery, a 
misdemeanor.  In exchange for his plea, two additional charges for vandalism were 
dismissed.  The report noted that on July 24, 2007, respondent and his neighbor 
became involved in an altercation after having several verbal conflicts in the past.  
The report noted that on the night of the incident, when the neighbor parked his truck 
in the alley, respondent began punching him and swearing at him.  Respondent left 

 

21 

and returned with a 2x4 which he used to strike the neighbor‟s truck.  The report 
indicated that respondent claimed he would “never be done with” the neighbor and 
that the neighbor‟s wife and daughter witnessed part of the incident.  The CTC report 
noted that when interviewed by the sheriff‟s deputy, respondent denied assaulting the 
neighbor and claimed the neighbor was injured when the neighbor attacked 
respondent.  The sheriff‟s report was not introduced and it was unclear from the CTC 
investigation report where the information contained in that CTC report was obtained.   

 
On December 19, 2009, in response to their request for information about the 
conviction, respondent wrote a letter to CTC stating that after years of harassment by 
his neighbor, respondent committed misdemeanor battery on the neighbor.  
Respondent noted that he pled guilty to the misdemeanor battery charges, took 
responsibility for his actions and has obeyed the court‟s order. Respondent wrote:  

 

That day in July 2007 I made a big mistake by 
doing what I did.  I was and am now sorry for my actions.  
I can‟t go back and take away that day from my life, but I 
wish I could.  If I could go back, I would have just walked 
away from him.  
 
I put my family through a tremendous amount of 
pain and sorrow through my actions that day in 2007.  I 
also put my neighbor and his family through a lot of agony 
that they don‟t deserve.  I made a terrible mistake, accept 
the responsibility for [it], and have taken my punishment.  
I have tried to put the whole thing in the past, learn from it, 
and move on with my life.  My family has given me a 
second chance and has moved on.  My family and I wish to 
ask that I am not punished for this again. 

 
Teaching kids is my passion. I have tried to make a 
positive difference in the student‟s life that I see every day 
[sic]. I will continue to work hard towards creating a 
positive learning environment for the students. 

 
Respondent testified that the problems with his neighbor began in 2003-2004.  

Respondent had a shed on his property which formed part of the property line in his 
yard.  Respondent took down the shed and his neighbor came to respondent‟s home 
with a brick in his hand and started screaming and swearing at him for tearing down 
the shed without telling the neighbor.  Respondent called 911 about the neighbor‟s 
behavior and a sheriff‟s deputy took a report from respondent and spoke to the 
neighbor.  Thereafter, for the next several years there were between 50 and 100 times 
when the neighbor would swear at, or make obscene gestures at, respondent.  Once in 
2007, when respondent was driving down the street, the neighbor jumped in front of 
respondent‟s vehicle and started swearing at him to slow down.   

 

22 

 
On the night of the incident that led to respondent‟s conviction, respondent 

was taking his trash to the alley and the neighbor began swearing at him.  At that 
point respondent had enough and struck him with his fist.  Respondent testified that 
he had been building a fence and part of the trash in his hands was a 2x4 which he 
used to strike the neighbor‟s truck.  Respondent denied ever leaving the scene and 
coming back with the 2x4; he was holding it the entire time.  Respondent denied 
swearing at the neighbor or telling the neighbor that he would never be done with 
him.  He never saw the neighbor‟s family present to witness the altercation.  The two 
fought and respondent called the police and he was arrested.  Respondent did not 
contest the criminal charges.  He took responsibility for his actions and pled guilty to 
battery.  Respondent has complied with all criminal probation terms.   

 
Associate Superintendent Morr testified that when she received the CTC‟s letter, 
she schedule a meeting with respondent.  Associate Superintendent Morr had never met 
respondent before that meeting.  Associate Superintendent Morr stated that her concerns 
stemmed from the fact that respondent not only left the scene and returned, but also that 
the neighbor‟s wife and daughter witnessed the incident.  Associate Superintendent Morr 
asked respondent if he had pled guilty to battery of a neighbor and he looked at the floor 
and said, “Yes.”  She informed him that they would need to discuss what would happen 
if CTC revoked or suspended his credential because, he could not be able to teach in the 
classroom, he would not be on paid status, and he would not be allowed to work in the 
district.  Associate Superintendent Morr recalled stopping while talking and getting no 
response and no eye contact from respondent.  She asked respondent if he had any 
questions and he did not.  He asked no questions during their meeting, just listened and 
then left when the meeting was over.  Associate Superintendent Morr found it quite odd.  
Thereafter, CTC suspended respondent‟s credential from September 11-17, 2010, and he 
was on unpaid status with the district from September 13-17, 2010.   
 

 
On cross-examination Associate Superintendent Morr acknowledged that 

 

when she received the CTC letter, respondent was teaching at Palmquist Elementary 
School.  Respondent‟s performance evaluation for the 2009-2010 school year from 
that site, which was the only performance evaluation introduced at this hearing, noted 
that respondent met all six California Standards for the Teaching Profession.  The 
Evaluator‟s Comments section, completed by the principal at Palmquist Elementary 
School, noted that respondent “was successful in defining students‟ fine motor skills 
as outlined by the California standards for P.E.  His attention to detail has been 
evident in expectations he has set forth for his students.”  The Palmquist Elementary 
School principal further noted in her evaluation that respondent “was new to our 
school but has worked with administration to further build our school‟s Peaceful 
Playground program.4  Thank you for your continued hard work!”  Respondent 
                                                           
4  
Palmquist Elementary School to help students attain a peaceful playground.  
Respondent was in charge of implementing the plan for the entire school.   

Respondent testified that he implemented the Peaceful Playground program at 

 

23 

received an overall performance evaluation of satisfactory, the highest rating 
available on the evaluation.   

 
Associate Superintendent Morr admitted on cross-examination that she could 

not recall if she introduced the Palmquist Elementary School evaluation to the 
Governing Board during closed session, but she believed the Governing Board 
members would have asked questions about respondent‟s overall performance in the 
district.  However, upon further questioning, Associate Superintendent Morr admitted 
that she could not recall whether the facts referenced in the Palmquist Elementary 
School evaluation were discussed in closed session.  She further acknowledged that 
she did not hand the evaluation to the Governing Board and did not recall being asked 
about respondent‟s performance at Palmquist Elementary School.  A review of the 
documents presented to the Governing Board indicated that respondent‟s Palmquist 
Elementary School performance evaluation was not provided.  During a break in the 
testimony, the district was given an opportunity to determine whether or not the 
evaluation had been given to the Governing Board, and Associate Superintendent 
Morr testified that it had not been provided.  Associate Superintendent Morr also 
confirmed that respondent‟s letters in response to his letters of reprimand were also 
not provided to the Governing Board.  

 
When questioned why she did not provide the performance evaluation or contact 
 
the Palmquist Elementary School principal to determine whether the behavior that led to 
respondent‟s conviction was being exhibited at school, Associate Superintendent Morr 
testified that “cumulatively we had enough” with the El Camino High School incidents.  
She explained that she felt that the El Camino High School incidents were consistent 
with the CTC report, although she acknowledged that the Palmquist Elementary School 
evaluation was inconsistent with that conclusion.  Associate Superintendent Morr also 
admitted that she never received any complaints about respondent from any staff 
members at Palmquist Elementary School.   
 

Respondent testified that when he met with Associate Superintendent Morr she 
informed him that he was going to be suspended if CTC suspended his credential and 
when she issued her suspension directive, he complied with it.  Respondent explained 
that there was no reason to debate the situation with her, as he knew he was guilty of 
the crime and he accepted his punishment.  During cross-examination, attempts were 
made to impeach respondent with his deposition testimony and the CTC letter.  
However, the questions posed to respondent at his deposition were not identical to 
those posed at trial and respondent‟s responses at trial did not contradict his answers 
given at his deposition.  It was not established that respondent provided inconsistent 
or untruthful testimony at either his deposition or this hearing.  Moreover, the 
neighbor, his family, the sheriff‟s deputy, and the CTC investigator did not testify.  
The sheriff‟s report and the criminal court documents were not introduced.  
Respondent‟s testimony was the only testimony about the incident that was offered 
and there was no direct evidence introduced to refute it.  Moreover, given 
respondent‟s presentation at this hearing - quiet, passive, and reserved - his version of 

 

24 

the events that transpired that evening was credible.  Moreover, even during the very 
vigorous cross-examination that respondent endured for several hours, his demeanor 
did not change, which further supported the Commission‟s determination that he was 
not an aggressive individual.   

 
Respondent testified that while teaching at Palmquist Elementary School, he 

implemented the Peaceful Playground program.  He applied his adaptive PE 
credential and helped students with challenges and in special education classes.  
There were 25 teachers at the school and weekly staff meetings.  There were never 
any complaints from Palmquist Elementary School employees or students about 
respondent. The principal liked respondent‟s work and gave him a good performance 
evaluation.  Respondent testified that he collaborated with staff members while at 
Palmquist Elementary School.  He identified staff members with whom he 
collaborated.  Respondent testified about the various programs he introduced and 
assistance he gave to Palmquist Elementary School teachers.  No evidence refuting 
respondent‟s testimony was introduced. 
 

To his credit, respondent disclosed his conviction on his CTC renewal 
application.  No evidence was introduced to suggest that respondent was required to 
disclose his conviction any time before respondent renewed his credential with CTC.  
While the district‟s position that it would have liked to have known about the 
conviction in 2007 was understandable, no evidence was introduced to suggest that 
respondent was required to notify the district of his conviction.  It simply cannot be 
concluded that respondent ever hid that conviction from the district.  The evidence 
established that respondent honestly disclosed the conviction when he was requested 
to do so, namely, on his CTC renewal application.  Additionally, respondent‟s letter 
to CTC and his demeanor during his meeting with Associate Superintendent Morr 
corroborated respondent‟s testimony that he never denied his conviction nor made 
excuses for it.  In fact, his demeanor while meeting with Associate Superintendent 
Morr demonstrated that he understood that he would receive a consequence for his 
conviction and he never made any attempts to minimalize it, deflect blame, or make 
excuses for it.  He simply quietly accepted his consequences when meeting with 
Associate Superintendent Morr.   

 
 
The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent engaged in improper and threatening interactions with students and 
staff, committed immoral conduct, was unfit for service, persistently violated or 
refused to obey school and/or district rules, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, or that that any 
workplace violence or threats had occurred.  The remoteness in time of the conviction 
was such that the evidence did not establish that respondent is an aggressive 
individual or someone to be feared.  In light of respondent‟s testimony about the 
incident, the evidence did not demonstrate that respondent‟s conduct was immoral.  
No witnesses to the incident testified other than respondent.  His explanation of the 
events was credible.  While it may be beneficial to respondent to receive some anger 

 

25 

management counseling because of the altercation, the passage of time, without any 
further incident, demonstrated that respondent was unlikely to engage in this type of 
behavior again.  Additionally, no evidence was introduced that suggested that the 
circumstances between respondent and his neighbor are in any way similar to the 
circumstances that exist at respondent‟s school sites, making it a tenuous stretch to 
conclude that respondent will be violent in the workplace, especially in light of the 
Palmquist Elementary School performance evaluation praising respondent for his 
Peaceful Playground program. The evidence was insufficient to sustain the charges 
alleged.   

 
15.  On February 1, 2012, El Camino High School Vice Principal Barry 

Tyler met with respondent to go over his mid-year reflections.  During that meeting, 
respondent advised Vice Principal Tyler that he was worried about his personal 
safety.  Vice Principal Tyler reported this to Principal Rowe.  The two administrators 
went to talk to respondent who was unable to provide specific details of why he felt 
unsafe. 
 
Vice Principal Tyler testified that one of his duties was to oversee and support 

 
the PE department.  He testified that he had a meeting with respondent at the 
beginning of the school year to review expectations and goals with respondent.  
However, when he was shown the Professional Growth Plan that was signed on 
November 16, 2011, Vice Principal Tyler admitted that he did not meet with 
respondent  at that time, because respondent was out on medical leave5 when school 
first began.  Vice Principal Tyler could not recall the specifics of that November 
meeting with respondent and nothing in the Professional Growth Plan references 
anything about respondent‟s failure to attend PLCs or collaborate with colleagues.  In 
fact, the only goal listed was, “To make certain that students…are exposed to and 
learning the California Standards for PE.  To assist students in achievement of 
maximum development and growth of gross motor skills for their grade level 
development.”   
 
On February 1, 2012, Vice Principal Tyler met with respondent in the vice 
 
principal‟s office to conduct the mid-year evaluation.  Vice Principal Tyler recalls 
going through the Evaluator‟s Request for Additional Information with respondent.  
Respondent was taking notes; the two had minimal discussions.  Nothing specifically 
about the meeting stood out to Vice Principal Tyler until he got to Step Two, the area 
containing the evaluator‟s specific concerns.  Vice Principal Tyler went over section 
6.5,6 which indicated that respondent “has failed to participate in regularly scheduled 
department and PLC meetings - unless absent, [respondent] must attend and actively 
participate in regularly scheduled PLC and department meetings.”  Respondent 
                                                           
5  
medical leave for several months. 
 
6  

Respondent suffered extensive injuries in a bicycle accident and was out on 

Only section 6.5 was relevant to the charges pled against respondent.  

 

26 

testified that before this meeting, respondent was never told of any alleged failures to 
participate in or, attend PLCs.  Respondent was surprised by the criticism because he 
had attended all PLCs.  Vice Principal Tyler testified that when he went over this 
section with respondent, respondent advised that he had not been going to staff or 
department meetings because no one listened to him or took him seriously.  Vice 
Principal Tyler informed respondent that he would attend the PLC meetings with him 
so that there would be clear expectations of how everyone was to conduct themselves 
at the meetings.  Respondent told Vice Principal Tyler that he was not going to attend 
the meetings even if Vice Principal Tyler attended.   
  

Vice Principal Tyler testified that he believed he attended several PLCs and 
specifically discussed respondent‟s concerns with the PE staff.  Respondent was not 
present at the PLCs that Vice Principal Tyler attended.  Even though respondent said 
he would not go to the February 1, 2012, PLC, Vice Principal Tyler attended it and 
discussed with PE staff the appropriate interaction that should take place at the 
meeting.  Vice Principal Tyler also told the PE staff about respondent‟s safety 
concerns to which the PE staff replied that they had just as many safety concerns 
regarding respondent and theirs were to a much greater degree.  The PE staff 
discussed their concerns regarding the failure to have a relationship, interaction, or 
communication with respondent.7   

 
After respondent advised Vice Principal Tyler of his safety concerns, Vice 

Principal Tyler notified Principal Rowe.  The two administrators decided to go down 
to the track to talk to respondent.  When Principal Rowe asked respondent to explain 
his safety concerns, respondent replied with words to the effect, “Kind of like right 
now how you are making me feel unsafe.  You are stepping in my personal space.”  
Principal Rowe responded with words to the effect, “What do you mean?  What are 
you talking about?”  Vice Principal Tyler recalled that respondent was agitated, he 
was not hostile, but he had an agitated type of response.  Neither respondent nor 
Principal Rowe raised their voices during the discussion.  Vice Principal Tyler 
testified that Principal Rowe was approximately three feet away from respondent 
during the encounter.  Vice Principal Tyler recalled that respondent stepped back 
while they were talking.  Neither Principal Rowe nor Vice Principal Tyler stepped 
towards respondent during the discussion.  Vice Principal Tyler did not recall that 
respondent gave any specific reasons as to why he felt fearful.  Vice Principal Tyler 
was at a follow-up meeting with respondent on February 2, 2012.  The district‟s 
attorney, Dan Shinoff, attended the meeting, during which, they attempted to gain 
some “clarity of understanding” from respondent regarding his safety concerns.  

 

However, based upon Vice Principal Tyler‟s testimony it was clear that many 

                                                           
7  
of the PE staff‟s concerns were based upon their knowledge of incidents that were 
beyond the relevant Education Code time limitations and were excluded by this 
court‟s order.   

 

27 

On cross-examination Vice Principal Tyler testified that he did not know when 

he inserted the sentence in the Evaluator‟s Request for Additional Information 
regarding respondent‟s being fearful for his safety with PE staff.  The document was 
signed by both respondent and Vice Principal Tyler on February 1, 2012, so he may 
have been typing during his meeting with respondent as they were reviewing the 
document.  During that meeting respondent and Vice Principal Tyler also signed the 
Mid-Year Goal(s) Reflection in which respondent noted that he had “attended 
collaborative meetings.”   

 
Vice Principal Tyler testified that Ms. Farrell would specifically email him 

notes regarding those in attendance at meetings.  No formal attendance was taken or 
records maintained.  Vice Principal Tyler testified that if he could look at those emails 
he could determine whether respondent missed “a lot of meetings,” but the emails 
were not produced at the hearing.  Vice Principal Tyler admitted on cross-
examination that none of the goals in respondent‟s professional growth plan required 
him to attend PLCs or collaborate with colleagues.  Vice Principal Tyler also admitted 
that the midyear review is more of an opportunity for reflection.  Vice Principal Tyler 
agreed that he never did any formal observations of respondent‟s classroom; it was 
more an informal type of observation and reflection of things that he saw and 
practices that need to be improved. 

 
The evidence established that the Evaluator‟s Request for Additional 
Information that Vice Principal Tyler was reviewing with respondent when 
respondent made his safety concern allegations, was only used as the beginning step 
in the evaluation process.  It merely requested additional information; it was not a 
final evaluation of respondent.  In fact, at no point was an evaluation of respondent 
ever performed at El Camino High School.  Moreover, in the Mid-Year Goal(s) 
Reflection signed by respondent and Vice Principal Tyler on February 1, 2012, 
respondent noted that he has attended collaborative meetings and he noted ways that 
his teaching had positively impacted his students.   
 

Principal Rowe testified that when he was hired to replace Principal Daris, he 

and Principal Daris met to discuss various school issues.  Principal Daris identified 
respondent as an employee who needed to be monitored.  Principal Rowe admitted 
that respondent was never provided any documentation advising him that they would 
be focusing on him during the school year.  Principal Daris never showed Principal 
Rowe the personnel file maintained at the site regarding respondent and Principal 
Rowe never reviewed such a file.  On cross-examination Principal Rowe agreed that 
there was no documentation of any meetings held with respondent to express the 
goals or expectations that respondent was to meet during the 2011-2012 school year.  
He agreed that he never sat down with respondent to discuss goals or expectations and 
no documentation of any such writings,  purportedly given to respondent, were 
introduced.      
 

 

28 

Principal Rowe testified that one concern was the number of referrals 
respondent was issuing.  Another concern was respondent‟s failure to collaborate with 
colleagues, although there were no specifics, just “a general feeling” of respondent 
not getting along with his colleagues.  Vice Principal Tyler advised Principal Rowe 
about concerns regarding respondent‟s classroom management and a sense that 
students were not being appropriately monitored.  Vice Principal Tyler‟s job was to 
evaluate respondent during the 2011- 2012 school year and they were coming to the 
point where they would be doing formal observations.  During the mid-year review in 
February respondent told Vice Principal Tyler that he did not feel safe.  This was an 
immediate concern to Principal Rowe because he is responsible for the safety of 
everyone on campus.  As soon as Vice Principal Tyler told him about respondent‟s 
comments, Principal Rowe went right down to talk to him to learn firsthand what his 
fears were and to determine why he was concerned about his safety.  Principal Rowe 
thought it was odd that respondent had never expressed those concerns before the 
time that Vice Principal Tyler conducted the mid-year review as part of respondent‟s 
performance evaluation.  Because the evaluation process became sidetracked with the 
safety issue, a written evaluation was never performed and respondent was no longer 
teaching on-site before a written evaluation could be completed.  As such, the only 
performance evaluation this Commission had before it was the Palmquist Elementary 
School one.   
 
Principal Rowe testified that he stood about five to 10 feet away from 

respondent and asked him what his safety concerns were.  That testimony 
contradicted Vice Principal Tyler‟s testimony that Principal Rowe stood three feet 
from respondent.  Respondent was unable to provide any details, which Principal 
Rowe thought was odd.  Principal Rowe wanted to know what he could do to make 
respondent comfortable and respondent‟s inability to verbalize his concerns baffled 
him.  During their meeting Principal Rowe was very aware of the personal space 
between them.  Principal Rowe took a step back while talking because respondent 
appeared so uncomfortable.  Principal Rowe was at least three to five feet away from 
respondent.  He could not touch him with his hands.  Principal Rowe testified that 
there was a PLC meeting that day and he told respondent that he needed to attend it as 
there were going to be important discussions taking place.  Respondent reiterated that 
he was fearful for his safety and advised that he would not attend the PLC. 

 
Principal Rowe testified that at this point he was primarily just trying to 
discern what the issue was for respondent.  He asked respondent to put his concerns in 
writing by the following morning.  Principal Rowe returned to his office to strategize 
about how to proceed.  He and Vice Principal Tyler discussed what to do.  Principal 
Rowe drafted a letter to respondent on February 1, 2012, summarizing what had taken 
place and noting that Principal Rowe found the conversation with respondent and 
Vice Principal Tyler “to be very unusual” because respondent “proceeded to accuse 
me of making you feel unsafe and when I asked you why, you informed me that I was 
in your personal space while standing five feet away on the open track area.”  In the 
letter Principal Rowe confirmed that he needed respondent “to provide a written 

 

29 

statement by 7:30 a.m. tomorrow morning explaining exactly how your personal 
safety is being threaten [sic].”  The letter also noted that during their “brief meeting” 
Principal Rowe offered to have Vice Principal Tyler accompany respondent to the 
PLC that day, but that respondent advised that he was taking time off for personal 
business.  Because of respondent‟s concerns, Principal Rowe arranged for security to 
accompany respondent on campus.  Principal Rowe recalled that at some point there 
was a shift from respondent expressing concern that he was fearful of the students to 
his also being fearful of the staff and administration.   

 
The following morning, respondent provided a note which simply stated, “To 

Whom It May Concern, I have fears for my safety with my physical education 
department members and with students at ECHS.”  Principal Rowe informed 
respondent that this note was insufficient.  It would not help Principal Rowe 
investigate respondent‟s complaints.  Principal Rowe drafted a letter dated February 
2, 2012, advising respondent that his written statement was “very inadequate and 
provides no details on which I can address and/or take action.”  The letter also 
summarized his meeting with respondent on February 2, 2012, where Principal Rowe 
tried to get more details.  Respondent told him that the staff makes him 
“uncomfortable,” that they are “condescending, confrontational and aggressive,” and 
that respondent claimed it was “hard to explain.”  When pressed for specific dates, 
respondent told Principal Rowe that it was hard to describe and then claimed 
Principal Rowe was making respondent feel unsafe.  Principal Rowe‟s letter further 
noted that respondent indicated that he was not attending the PLC because his 
colleagues made him feel unsafe, but in his letter and during the discussions with 
Principal Rowe, respondent only referred to how the students made him feel unsafe.   
Principal Rowe advised that based upon the lack of details and evidence, he was 
denying respondent‟s request for a substitute teacher but had assigned campus 
security to be with or near respondent for the day. 

 
Principal Rowe testified that while he was investigating this issue, Ms. Ferrell 

told Principal Rowe that she felt uncomfortable and was afraid to be around 
respondent.  Ms. Ferrell expressed concern that respondent was inconsistent, that he 
had a lack of eye contact, a lack of participation with colleagues and he was unstable.  
Ms. Kilpatrick also complained to Principal Rowe about the testing on the track 
incident.  Ms. Kilpatrick was frustrated with respondent‟s lack of cooperation 
regarding her attempts to schedule her student testing.  Principal Rowe admitted that 
he has nothing in writing from these teachers regarding their concerns.  He also 
admitted that he never advised respondent that PE staff members had concerns 
regarding him.  Principal Rowe admitted that two weeks before the meeting with Vice 
Principal Tyler, respondent requested a transfer.  Principal Rowe also admitted that he 
never interviewed respondent regarding his job performance, as he was relying on 
input from the vice principal. 

 
Principal Rowe admitted on cross-examination that on February 2, 2012, he 

met with respondent, the district‟s attorney Dan Shinoff, respondent‟s union 

 

30 

representative, and Associate Superintendent Moor.  They were trying to get more 
information from respondent regarding his safety concerns.  However, respondent did 
not provide much information.  He gave short concise responses.  They had to draw 
answers out of him.  Principal Rowe acknowledged that respondent appeared nervous 
and apprehensive during the meeting.  Principal Rowe believed that respondent‟s 
concerns were real.  Respondent was fearful for his safety and fearful of returning to 
the site.  Within three days of  expressing his safety concerns, respondent went on 
leave. 

 
Respondent explained that some of his concerns for his safety were that 

 
students had thrown rocks, Gatorade bottles, shoes, and locks at him.  One time a 
student threw a rock and hit respondent but Vice Principal Tyler would not transfer 
the student out of respondent‟s class.  PE staff did nothing to help respondent with 
these issues.  Respondent testified that he is somewhat passive, and the male PE 
teachers would stand in the doorway and not move out of the way, they would sort of 
square up on him, stare him down, and this intimidated him.  Respondent explained 
that in the summer of 2011 he was in a bicycle accident and broke his hip.  He was on 
medical leave until November.  Respondent felt that the atmosphere had gotten 
stronger against him when he returned from his hip injury rehabilitation in the fall of 
2011 but he did not know why.  Respondent testified that when they met, Vice 
Principal Tyler asked respondent if he wanted to add anything to the mid-year review 
and respondent told him about his safety concerns.   
 
 
Respondent testified that when Vice Principal Tyler and Principal Rowe came 
to his PE class, Principal Rowe stood approximately 18 inches away from respondent 
and told respondent that he had heard that respondent was not attending PLCs and 
was “skipping out.”  Respondent backed up and Principal Rowe stepped towards him 
so that he was approximately three inches away from respondent.  Respondent felt 
uncomfortable and Principal Rowe told him that he wanted see him in his office 
during respondent‟s prep period. Respondent advised that he would be there.  
Respondent felt intimidated by Principal Rowe.  Respondent did not feel that 
Principal Rowe was in his corner.  
 
 
Principal Rowe assigned a security person to follow respondent around 
campus and respondent believes that the individual attended a PLC with respondent. 
Respondent thinks Vice Principal Tyler told him not to go to the PLC on February 1, 
2012.  In any event, a few days later, respondent was placed on leave and February 12 
or 13, 2012, was his last day as a teacher on that campus.  Respondent testified that 
the February 2, 2012, follow-up letter from Principal Rowe contained some 
inaccuracies.  Respondent felt that Principal Rowe was a little aggressive and 
confrontational during their meeting, but respondent did not feel unsafe.  The reason 
respondent‟s letter was so brief was because he only just arrived at work and Principal 
Rowe demanded specific dates and times of incidents even though respondent told 
him he did not have those specifics.  During the 2010-2011 school year respondent 
never felt fear.  It was after he returned from his hip injury that he had concerns for 

 

31 

16. 

The district alleged that respondent had a threatening and improper 

his safety.  He felt that his colleague‟s behavior was getting “stronger” against him, 
making him feel more intimidated.  He admitted he never talked to them about their 
behavior. 
 
 
The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent engaged in improper and threatening interactions with students and 
staff, committed immoral conduct, was unfit for service, persistently violated or 
refused to obey school and/or district rules, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, or that that any 
workplace violence or threats had occurred.  Insufficient evidence was introduced to 
establish that any of the events that transpired regarding the mid-year review process 
rose to the level of constituting grounds for dismissal.  The evidence was insufficient 
to sustain the charges alleged.   
 
 
interaction with Ms. Kilpatrick.  Kilpatrick was doing a final mile test with her 
students and had emailed the PE department that she needed to use the track to time 
the mile.  Respondent did not reply to that email.  When Ms. Kilpatrick arrived at the 
track, respondent‟s students were using it.  Ms. Kilpatrick asked respondent if she 
could use the track, but he did not respond and walked away from her. When she 
approached him a second time and asked again about using the track, respondent 
inquired, “Are you asking me or are you telling me?” When Ms. Kilpatrick stated that 
she was merely asking him, respondent replied, “No,” and walked away.  Ms. 
Kilpatrick felt threatened and intimidated by respondent's behavior.   
 
 
wanted to assess her students on the track.  She did not hear back from respondent but 
when she arrived with her class, respondent‟s class was using the track.  Because so 
many students were on the track, it was difficult for her to assess her students.  After 
class, she went to speak with respondent, and called his name several times but he did 
not respond.  She finally caught up with him and when she asked him if she could 
assess her students on the track, respondent asked if she was asking him or telling 
him.  Ms. Kilpatrick replied that she was asking him and he responded, “No.”  For the 
rest of the day, her students had to dodge respondent‟s students in order for her to 
assess them.  On cross-examination Ms. Kilpatrick admitted that she did not know if 
respondent received her email asking to use the track.  Ms. Ferrel and Principal Daris 
admitted that respondent did not have, or could not access, his emails.   
 

Ms. Kilpatrick testified that she had sent an e-mail to staff advising that she 

Respondent testified that Ms. Kilpatrick asked him if his students could run on 

the concrete instead of the track and because of his concerns of students running on 
concrete, he did not want to do that but he told Ms. Kilpatrick that he would try to 
keep his students out of her way so that she could do her testing.  Respondent testified 
that he thought Ms. Kilpatrick‟s request that he keep his students out of her way so 
that she could test her students was a fair request and he did try to accommodate her.   

 

 

32 

The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent engaged in improper and threatening interactions with students and 
staff, committed immoral conduct, was unfit for service,  persistently violated or 
refused to obey school and/or district rules, exhibited a pattern of willful failure to 
complete his professional duties, had a history of misconduct, or that that any 
workplace violence or threats had occurred.  The evidence did not establish that 
respondent ever received Ms. Kilpatrick‟s email.  The evidence was insufficient to 
conclude that the exchange between the two was improper or threatening.  The 
evidence was insufficient to sustain the charges alleged.   
 
 
interactions with staff and students resulted in an inordinate number of transfers, 
causing disruptions for both students and staff at multiple school sites.  However, no 
evidence to support this allegation was introduced.  This charge was not established.   
 
 
Policy 1313 Civility, 4119.21 Professional Standards, and 5145.3 Students.8  
Associate Superintendent Morr testified that respondent violated these policies due to 
his behavior with students, parents and staff as outlined above.   
 

The district alleged that respondent‟s behavior violated District Board 

The district alleged that respondent‟s improper and threatening 

17. 

18. 

District Board Policy 1313 Civility provides that the district “wishes to 

provide an orderly and safe learning environment in which students and adults feel 
comfortable.”  The policy identifies 11 activities which constitute uncivil conduct.  
The evidence did not establish that respondent engaged in any of these 11 activities.  
Moreover, Ms. Ferrel had never heard of any civility policies in the district.  She had 
never before seen any of the district policies that were introduced at this hearing.  Ms. 
Ferrel never prepared any documents claiming that respondent violated any of these 
policies.  Principal Daris testified that he did not give respondent the district policy 
regarding civility.  The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did 
not establish that respondent violated this policy. 

 
District Board Policy 4119.21 Professional Standards provides that district 

employees are “to maintain the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional 
behavior, follow district policies and regulations, and abide by state and federal 
laws.”  The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 
that respondent violated this policy. 

 
District Board Policy 5145.3 Students provides him that the district desires to 
ensure equal opportunities for all students and prohibits discrimination, intimidation, 
or harassment of any student by any employee.  The Commission unanimously 
determined that the evidence did not establish that respondent violated this policy. 
                                                           
8  
The district also alleged that respondent‟s conduct violated District 
Administrative Regulation 4112 (marked as Exhibit 24) but that regulation was not 
introduced into evidence and no findings were made thereon. 

 

33 

The Commission unanimously determined that the evidence did not establish 

that respondent persistently violated or refused to obey district policies. 

 
19. 

The district alleged that in May 2012, when respondent was on a leave 

of absence, he was unavailable on multiple occasions to the district and its agent, 
Keenan and Associates, an investigation firm hired by the district.  The district 
asserted that this constituted a willful failure by respondent to complete his 
professional duties.   

 
Respondent testified that he was contacted by telephone by an individual who 
claimed to be an investigator.  Respondent rightfully did not want to disclose personal 
information over the telephone.  The Commission unanimously determined that 
respondent‟s actions did not constitute a willful failure by respondent to complete his 
professional duties. 

 

Leave Issue 

 
20.  Associate Superintendent Morr testified that respondent‟s safety 
concerns were taken very seriously.  During this same time-frame respondent also had 
filed a worker‟s compensation claim for stress.  Associate Superintendent Morr 
explained that the district‟s worker‟s compensation broker automatically puts stress 
claims on hold and requires employees to use their sick pay until the claim is accepted 
or denied.  Respondent‟s worker‟s compensation claim was denied but Associate 
Superintendent Morr changed his time to administrative leave with pay instead of sick 
leave because the district was investigating his safety concerns.  After February 2012, 
respondent continued to be out on sick leave with notes from his physician. 
Respondent remained out on leave through the Fall of 2012.  Associate 
Superintendent Morr recalled that January 2013 was the last time respondent was 
eligible for his 50 percent pay and if his physician did not return him to work, he was 
not eligible to return to work.  However, it appeared from the evidence that 
respondent‟s physician did provide the necessary documentation  that would enable 
him to remain on sick leave and/or return to work, and, absent this dismissal action, it 
is unclear why respondent was not returned to work when cleared by his physician.   

 
On cross-examination Associate Superintendent Morr acknowledged that 

respondent was on sick leave during the 2011-2012 school year because he had 
broken his hip in a bicycle accident.  She never checked to see if his medical 
appointments or physical therapy appointments occurred on Mondays or Fridays.  On 
February 13, 2012, she signed the document placing respondent on administrative 
leave for the following reason, “Pending interactive meeting.”  Associate 
Superintendent Morr testified the pending interactive meeting reason was used 
because when an employee claims a disability and needs modifications to perform the 
job, there must be an opportunity to have a discussion with the individual regarding 
reasonable accommodations.  The district wanted to meet with respondent to see if he 
was seeking accommodations.  Associate Superintendent Morr was unaware of 

 

34 

whether there were any documents indicating when respondent‟s leave status was 
changed.   

 
In May 2012, the district sent notices to employees requesting them to indicate 

if they intended to remain in the district employment.  Respondent signed the 
document on June 21, 2012, indicating his intent to remain a district employee. 

 
Respondent filed a request for leave of absence to begin on August 20, 2012, 
due to medical reasons.  He requested paid sick leave which was approved by district 
administrators on August 20, 2012, and August 30, 2012.  On November 16, 2012, 
Associate Superintendent Morr sent a letter to respondent advising him that the 
Governing Board approved his unpaid leave of absence effective August 20, 2012, 
through a date to be determined.  However, at hearing, Associate Superintendent 
Morr testified that the word unpaid was written in error, the Governing Board 
approved respondent being on paid leave of absence.  For the remainder of the 2012-
2013 school year respondent was on administrative leave.   

 
Associate Superintendent Morr testified that the leave request did not factor 

into the district‟s decision to dismiss respondent.  Associate Superintendent Morr 
testified that she recommended respondent‟s dismissal because she is responsible for 
staff and school safety and after the many incidents involving respondent, she had 
concerns.  However, many of the incidents are beyond four year time limitation 
proscribed by the Education Code and cannot be considered by the Commission.  

 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Due Process under the Education Code 
 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a 

dismissal hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44934, and 44944.) 
 

Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b) requires that the dismissal 

hearing be conducted by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence.  
Two members of the Commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the 
employee and one by the district, and the third member of the Commission must be an 
administrative law judge from the Office of Administrative Hearings.  

 
When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may 

only vote for or against it.  The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking 
dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction.  (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. 
(c)(1)-(3).) 
 
 
 

 

35 

Burden and Standard of Proof 
 

2. 

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a 
preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.)  This standard requires a party 
to convince the trier of fact that the existence of a fact is more probable than its 
nonexistence.  (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 
1121, 1128.)   
 

Relevant Statutory Authority  

 

4. 

3. 

Unprofessional Conduct 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 

The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of 

 
permanent employee.  Subdivision (1) authorizes dismissal for immoral or 
unprofessional conduct.  Subdivision (5) authorizes dismissal for evident unfitness for 
service.  Subdivision (7) authorizes dismissal for the persistent violation of or refusal 
to obey the school laws or reasonable regulations.   
 
Relevant Judicial Authority 
 
 
 
 
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  There the Supreme Court held that where charges of 
unprofessional conduct are raised in teacher dismissal cases, the applicable standard is 
whether the person is fit to teach.  The Morrison criteria also apply where “evident 
unfitness for service” is at issue.  The criteria must be analyzed to determine, as a 
threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates an unfitness for service.  (Id., at 
229.)   
 
 
Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by the 
Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach.  (Board of Education v. Jack M. 
(19 70) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697; Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-1174.) 
 
 
 

Evident Unfitness to Teach 

5. 

6. 

The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher discharge cases 

is whether the person is fit to teach.  “Fitness to teach” is probably a question of 
ultimate fact.  (Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 555, 560-561.) 
 

7. 

Evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(5), is established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly 
not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental 
defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on 

 

36 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  As a threshold matter, the 
Morrison criteria must be examined to ascertain whether the conduct in question 
indicates unfitness for service.  “If the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to 
determine whether the „unfitness‟ is „evident,‟ i.e., whether the offensive conduct is 
caused by a defect in temperament.” (Id., at 1445.) 

In Board of Education v. Jack M., supra, the court delineated the 

process to be considered in determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the 
standard established in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness 
hearing in which not only his conduct but also these factors are analyzed:  (1) 
likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances, if any; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of 
teachers‟ and students‟ relationships; (5) disruption of educational process; (6) 
motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of conduct.   

 
Persistent Violation of or Refusal to Obey Laws 
 
9. 

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to 

relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . 
constantly repeated.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. 
Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82.)  Subdivision (7) pertains to unintentional as 
well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature has decreed that a single 
violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal, apparently to allow for correction; “it 
is the persistent disregard” of school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate. 
(Id. at.84.) 
 

10.  A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7) must 

also be established by reference to the Morrison factors.  If unfitness to teach is shown, 
then the District must further establish that employee‟s refusal to follow the laws or 
regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.”  (San Dieguito Union High 
School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 
1176, 1183.)   Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period 
of time are not generally considered “persistent.” (Bourland v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.)  

  

 
8. 

 

11. 

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code 

Cause Does Not Exist to Dismiss Respondent 
 
 
section 44932, subdivision (a), subsection (1), because respondent‟s conduct did not 
constitute unprofessional conduct.  
 
 
 
// 

 

 

37 

