BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FRESNO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2013030567 

KIMBERLEY  COOPER, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  of  the  Fresno  Unified  School  District  on  February  3  through  7,  2014,  in 
Fresno,  California.  The  Commission  members  were  Chester  Stoeckle,  Freda  Russell,  and 
Administrative  Law  Judge  Coren  D.  Wong,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 
California,  chairperson. 

Attorney  L.  Carlos  Villegas  from  the  law  firm  Fagen,  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP, 

represented  complainant  Fresno  Unified  School  District  (District).  Cynthia  Quintana,  the 
District’s  Administrator  of  Human  Resources  for  Certificated  Employees,  also  appeared  on 
behalf  of  the  District. . 

Attorney  Joshua  F.  Richtel  from  the  law  firm  Tuttle  &  McCloskey  represented 

respondent  Kimberley  Cooper,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  Commission  met  in  executive  session  on  February  7, 

8,  and  10,  2014,  after  which  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision. 

SUMMARY 

Respondent  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  in  the  District.  The  District  seeks  to 

terminate  her  employment  due  to  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  District  established  that, 
after  evaluating  respondent  and  giving  her  adequate  assistance  and  opportunity  to  improve 
and  address  identified  areas  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  she  failed  to  bring  her 
performance  up  to a  satisfactory  level.  The  District’s  dismissal  of  respondent  is  therefore 
sustained. 

 

  

Jurisdictional  Matters 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  District’s  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Performance  (Notice)  on  September  4,  2012.  The  District  subsequently  prepared  an 
Amended  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  (Amended  Notice)  on  September  19,  2012,  © 
and  served  it  on  respondent.’ 

2. 

The  Amended  Notice  provided,  in  part: 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44938  and.44932,  this 
letter  constitutes  notice  to  correct  your  unsatisfactory 
performance.  The  statutes  require  the  Fresno  Unified  School 
District  (“District”)  to  provide  the  teacher  with  such  notice  at 
least  ninety  (90)  days  prior  to  initiating  formal  disciplinary 
proceedings  for  dismissal  on  the  grounds  of  unsatisfactory 
performance.  Please  be  advised  that  Section  44938  does  not, 
however,  preclude  the  initiation  of  such  formal  disciplinary 
proceedings  for  causes  other  than  unsatisfactory  performance. 

3. 

The  Amended  Notice  cited  specific  instances  of  respondent’s  unsatisfactory 

The  Amended  Notice  also  said  the  following  about  respondent’s  unsatisfactory 

conduct  and  provided  her  the  following  directives  for  improving  her  performance: 

This  formal  Notice  is  designed  to  provide  you  with  sufficient 
information  to  understand  the  nature  of  your  unsatisfactory 
performance  and  to  illustrate  specific  instances  of  such  behavior 
with  such  particularity  as  to  provide  you  with  an  opportunity  to 
correct  these  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  potential 
dismissal  charges. 

performance  during  the  period  from  September  2,  2010,  through  May  15,  2012,  and  included 
the  relevant  performance  evaluations.  The  unsatisfactory  conduct  identified  fell  under 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  Standards  (CSTP  or  CSTPs)  1  through  5.” 

*  Each  of  the  CSTPs  are  described  further  below.    

Amended  Notice,  along  with  a  copy  of  respondent’s  signature  acknowledging  receipt  of  the 
Notice.  Cynthia  Quintana,  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Administrator  for  Certificated 
Employees,  testified  that  respondent’s  “90-day  notice  period”  began  on  September  4,  2012, 
and  ended  on  December  4,  2012.  Respondent  did  not  dispute  that  testimony  or  argue  that  the 
Notice  was  substantively  different  than  the  Amended  Notice.  All  subsequent  references  to 
“Amended  Notice”  also  include  the  Notice,  unless  otherwise  specified. 

"  A  copy  of  the  Notice  was  not  produced  at  hearing.  Instead,  the  District  produced  the 

  

As  indicated  by  the  foregoing,  your  performance  has  been 
unsatisfactory.  Such  performance  negatively  impacts  your 
students’  ability  to  learn,  undermines  the  District’s  educational 
program,  and  creates  concern  over  your  ability  to  effectively 
teach  the  students  in  your  class.  In  an  effort  to  assist  you  in 
overcoming  these  deficiencies,  you  will  be  expected  to  comply 

-  with  the  following  directives: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Build  upon  instruction,  pacing,  and  checking  for 
understanding  to  ensure  students  have  full  understanding 
of  learning  objectives  of  the  lesson. 

Use  a  variety  of  instructional  approaches  and  strategies 
to  introduce,  explain,  and  restate  subject  matter  so  all 
students  understand  and  the  needs  of  all  students  are 
accommodated. 

Develop  and  consistently  follow  an  instructional 
schedule  that  adheres  to  School  site  and  District 
guidelines  to  support  student  learning.  Use  instructional 
time  effectively  to  optimize  learning  by  pacing  lessons 
appropriately  and  adjusting  pacing  as  needed  to  foster 
understanding  in  all  students. 

Consistently  implement  classroom  procedures  and 
routines  that  support  student  learning.  Use  attention 
getting  [sic]  signals  effectively  and  consistently. 

Establish  and  post  classroom  rules  and  reinforce  daily. 
Respond  to  an  inappropriate  behavior  in  a  fair  manner 
that  focuses  on  the  behavior  and  treats  students  with 
respect.  Establish  a  behavior  management  system  that  is 
clearly  defined  and  consistently  used. 

Clearly  articulate  and  model  goals/objectives  and  include 
students  in  stating  objectives.  Consistently  check  for 
student  understanding  of  objectives. 

Assess  students  to  guide  instructional  planning.  Modify 
and  revise  instruction  based  on  level  of  student 
understanding. 

Follow  all  previous  verbal  and  written  directives  given  to 
you  by  School  site  or  District  administrators. 

 

9. 

Submit  lesson  plans  weekly  on  Monday  mornings  by 
8:00  a.m. 

(Bold  original.) 

4, 

The  Amended  Notice  concluded  with  the  following  warning  to  respondent: 

You  are  hereby  directed  to  correct  your  unsatisfactory 
performance  within  90  days  of  receipt  of  this  Notice.  During 
the  90-day  improvement  period,  your  performance  will  be 
monitored  regularly  by  site  and/or  District  administrators.  If  the 
above-identified  deficiencies  are  not  corrected  within  the 
pertinent  time  periods,  the  District  may  institute  disciplinary 
action  against  you,  up  to  and  including  possible  dismissal. 

5. 

On  January  23,  2013,  the  District’s  governing  board  approved  service  of  a 

Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  on  respondent. 

6. 

On  March  8,  2013,  Kim  Mecum,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  for 

Human  Resources,  signed  the  Accusation  seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  the  District  for 
unsatisfactory  performance.  The  Accusation  alleges  each  of  the  specific  instances  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  cited  in  the  Amended  Notice  and  incorporates  the  relevant  — 
performance  evaluations. 

Respondent’s  Background 

7. 

Respondent  received  her  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  Liberal  Arts  from 

California  State  University,  Fresno,  and  teaching  credential  from  National  University.  She 
holds  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential,  which  allows  her  to  teach  all  subjects  in a  self- 
contained  classroom  and,  as a  self-contained  classroom  teacher,  to  team  teach  or  to  regroup 
students  across  classrooms,  in  grades  12  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes 
organized  primarily  for  adults.  Additionally,  she  is  authorized  to  teach  core  classes 
consisting  of  two  or  more  subjects  to  the  same  group  of  students  in  grades  five  through  eight, 
and  to  teach  any  of  the  core  subjects  she  is  teaching  to  a  single  group  of  students  in  the  same 
grade  level  as  the  core  for  less  than  50  percent  of  her  work  day. 

8. 

Respondent  obtained  her  first  teaching  position  in  2002  with  a  charter  school 
affiliated  with  the  District  and  that  serves  students  who  have  been  expelled  from  traditional 
schools.  At  the  beginning  of  the  2006/2007  school  year,  she  began  teaching  in  the  District  at 
Carver  Academy  Elementary  School.  She  taught  the  following  classes  during  the  following 
school  years: 

a. 

2006/2007:  Fifth  grade  language  arts  and  social  studies. 

b. 

2007/2008:  Seventh  grade  social  studies  and  physical  education. 

  

 
  

  

c. 

d. 

2008/2009:  Eighth  grade  language  arts. 

2009/2010:  Eighth  grade  language  arts  and  social  studies. 

9. 

Respondent  transferred  to  Ayer  Elementary  School,  and  was  assigned  to  teach 

one  of  three  sixth  grade  classes,  at  the  beginning  of  the  2010/2011  school  year. 

10.  _  First  through  sixth  grades  are  often  taught  by  a  single  teacher  in  a  self- 
contained  classroom,  which  means  that  the  same  teacher  teaches  the  same  students  for  the 
entire  school  day.  However,  there  were  two  new  sixth  grade  teachers  at  Ayer  Elementary 
School  at  the  beginning  of  the  2010/2011  school  year,  and  Maria  Lynn  Rocha-Salazar,  the 
principal,  decided  that  the  entire  sixth  grade  would  be  “departmentalized”  to  allow  the  new 
teachers  time  to  learn  the  sixth  grade  curriculum.  Therefore,  each  sixth  grade  teacher  — 
respondent,  Ms.  Chun,  and  Ms.  Rodriquez  —  was  responsible  for  teaching  a  particular  subject 
to  the  entire  sixth  grade  (respondent  was  responsible  for  reading  language  arts,  Ms.  Chun  for 
writing,  and  Ms.  Rodriquez  for  math),  while  also  having  a  group  of  students  assigned  to  her 
as  her  “homeroom”  and  to  whom  she  was  responsible  for  teaching  the  remainder  of  the  sixth 
grade  curriculum.’ 

11. 

Respondent  returned  to  Ayer  Elementary  School  to  teach  sixth  grade  for  the 

2011/2012  and  2012/2013  school  years.  She  continued  to  teach  under  the  departmentalized 
method  of  teaching. 

12. 

The  District  placed  respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave  at  the  conclusion 

of  the  first  semester  of  the  2012/2013  school  year. 

13. 

At  all  times  relevant,  respondent  has  been  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

in  the  District. 

Performance  Evaluations  and  the  CSTPs 

14.  —  The  law  requires  school  districts  to  conduct  regular  performance  evaluations 

of  its  certificated  employees.  Effective  for  the  2001/2002  school  year,  the  District’s 
governing  board  adopted  the  FUSD  Continuum  of  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession 
(Continuum),  which  provides  guidelines  for  evaluating  the  performance  of  certificated 
employees. 

15. 

The  revised  Continuum  that  took  effect  during  the  2010/2011  school  year 

provides  the  following  regarding  its  purpose: 

  

*  Evidence  was  introduced  that  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  had  other  motivations  for 

deploying  sixth  grade,  none  of  which  contradicted  her  testimony  that  she  wanted  to  make  the 
transition  to  teaching  sixth  grade  easier  for  respondent  and  Ms.  Chun.  Ultimately,  her 
reasoning  for  deploying  sixth  grade  is  not  relevant  to  the  outcome  in  this  matter.

  

The  purpose  of  this  handbook  is  to  remove  the  guesswork  from 
knowing  what  makes  an  effective,  inspiring  teacher.  In  1997 
the  State  of  California  first  published  the  California  Standards 
for  the  Teaching  Profession  (CSTP).  Revisions  to  the  CSTP 
(2009),  [sic]  have  been  developed  to  respond  to  the  changes  in 
teaching  and  learning  over  the  past  decade.  Most  importantly, 
the  California  Department  of  Education,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  California  State 
Board  of  Education,  revised  the  CSTP  to  address  the  following 
needs:  an  increasingly  diverse  student  population,  substantial 
innovations  in  technology  and  its  effects  on  instructional 
practices,  updates  in  K-12  curriculum  frameworks,  the 
implementation  of  the  academic  content  standards,  and  the 
effect  that  globalization  of  our  world  has  had  on  teaching  in  the 
22nd  century  classroom.  The  intended  purpose  of  the  CSTP  is 
to  provide  a  “common  language”  for  all  teachers  in  California. 
The  CSTPs  are  organized  around  six  interrelated  domains  of 
teaching  practice.  The  following  are  the  identified  standards  by 
which  California  teachers  are  to  be  measured: 

STANDARD  1:  Engaging  and  Supporting  ALL  Students  in 
Learning 
STANDARD  2:  Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective 
Environments  for  Student  Learning 
STANDARD  3:  Understanding  and  Organizing  Subject  Matter 
for  Student  Learning 
STANDARD  4:  Planning  Instruction  and  Designing  Learning 
Experiences  for  ALL  Students 
STANDARD  5:  Assessing  Students  for  Learning 
STANDARD  6:  Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator 

. 

(Capitalization  original.)’ 

16. 

The  Continuum  provides  for  one  of  two  “ratings”  for  each  CSTP  —  “Meets 

Standards”  and  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  —  and  provides  criteria  for  each  rating.  Within 
the  rating  of  “Meets  Standards,”  the  Continuum  contains  the  subratings  “Highly  effective,” 
“Effective,”  and  “Developing,”  and  specifies  criteria  for  each. 

17. 

The  Certificated  Evaluation  Form  the  District  used  for  respondent’s 

preliminary  and  summary  performance  evaluations  during  the  relevant  time  period  provides 

  

“In  its  forms  and  documents,  the  District  used  both  Roman  and Arabic  numerals  to 

refer  to  the  different  CSTPs.  For  the  sake  of  consistency,  this  decision  will  use  Arabic 
numerals  only. 

   

  

for  the  following  possible  ratings:  “Meet  Standards  Proficient,”  “Meets  Standards 
Minimally,”  or  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards.” 

18. 

The  Lesson  Observation  Form  the  District  used  for  respondent’s  lesson 

evaluations  during  the  relevant  time  period  provides  for  the  same  ratings,  but  abbreviates 
them  as  “MS,”  “MSM,”  and  “DNM,”  respectively.  It  also  provides  for  a  rating  of  “N/O”  for 
those  CSTPs  that  were  not  observed.  Furthermore,  the  ratings  are  of  performance  in 
different  categories  under  the  different  CSTPs,°  which  are  described  as  follows: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

1. 

2. 

Using  knowledge  of  students  to  engage  them  in  learning. 

Connecting  learning  to  students’  prior  knowledge,  backgrounds, 
life  experiences,  and  interests. 

Connecting  subject  matter  to  meaningful,  real-life  contexts. 

Using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies,  resources,  and 
technologies  to  meet  students’  diverse  learning  needs. 

Promoting  critical  thinking  through  inquiry,  problem-solving, 
and  reflection. 

Monitoring  stated  learning  and  adjusting  instruction  while 
teaching. 

Promoting  social  development  and  responsibility  within  a  caring 
community  where  each  student  is  treated  fairly  and  respectfully. 

Creating  physical  or  virtual  learning  environments  that  promote 
student  learning,  reflect  diversity,  and  encourage  constructive 
and  productive  interactions  among  students. 

b. 

CSTP  2: 

  

°  Neither  the  evaluation  form  nor  the  Continuum  indicates  whether  a  rating  of  “Meet 

Standards  Proficient”  is  based  on  the  criteria  for  “Meets  Standards  —  Highly  effective,” 
“Meets  Standards  —  Effective,”  or  a  combination  of  both.  The  Continuum  indicates  that  a 
rating  of  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  is  based  on  the  criteria  for  “Meets  Standards  — 
Developing.” 

°  The  ratings  on  the  Certificated  Evaluation  Form,  on  the  other  hand,  were  based  on 
the  teacher’s  performance  under  each  CSTP  in  general,  rather  than  each  individual  category 
under  each  CSTP. 

 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

1. 

Establishing  and  maintaining  learning  environments  that  are 
physically,  intellectually,  and  emotionally  safe. 

Creating  a  rigorous  learning  environment  with  high  expectations 
and  appropriate  support  for  all  students. 

Developing,  communicating,  and  maintaining  high  standards  for 
individual  and  group  behavior. 

Employing  classroom  routines,  procedures,  norms,  and  supports 
for  positive  behaviors  to  ensure  claimant  in  which  all  students 
can  learn. 

7. 

Using  instructional  time  to  optimize  learning. 

CSTP  3: 

Demonstrating  knowledge  of  subject  matter,  or  academic 
content  standards,  and  curriculum  frameworks. 

Applying  knowledge  of  student  development  and  proficiencies 
to  ensure  student  understanding  of  subject  matter. 

Organizing  curriculum  to  facilitate  student  understanding  of  the 
subject  matter. 

Utilizing  instructional  strategies  that  are  appropriate  to  the 
subject  matter. 

Using  and  adapting  resources,  technologies,  and  standards- 
aligned  instructional  materials,  including  adopted  materials,  to 
make  subject  matter  assessable  to  all  students. 

Addressing  the  needs  of  English  Learners  and  students  with 
special  needs  to  provide  equitable  access  to  the  content. 

CSTP  4: 

Using  knowledge  of  students’  academic  readiness,  language 
proficiency,  cultural  background,  and  individual  development 
plan  instruction. 

2. 

Establishing  and  articulating  goals  for  student  learning. 

 

  

4, 

5. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Developing  and  sequencing  long-term  and  short-term 
instructional  plans  to  support  student  learning. 

Planning  instruction  that  incorporates  appropriate  strategies  to 
meet  the  learning  needs  of  all  students. 

Adapting  instructional  plans  and  curricular  materials  to  meet  the 
_assessed  learning  needs  of  all  students. 

CSTP  5: 

Applying  knowledge  of  the  purposes,  characteristics,  and  uses 
of  different  types  of  assessments. 

Collecting  and  analyzing  assessment  data  from  a  variety  of 
sources  to  inform  instruction. 

Reviewing  data,  both  individually  and  with  colleagues,  to 
monitor  student  learning. 

Using  assessment  data  to  establish  learning  goals  and  to  plan, 
differentiate,  and  modify  instruction. 

Involving  all  students  in  self-assessment,  goal  setting,  and 
monitoring  progress. 

Using  available  technologies  to  assist  in  the  assessment, 
analysis,  and  communication  of  student  learning. 

Using  assessment  information  to  assure  timely  and 
comprehensible  feedback  with  students  and  their  families. 

CSTP  6: 

Reflecting  on  teaching  practice  in  support  of  student  learning. 

Establishing  professional  goals  and  engaging  in  continuous  and 
purposeful  professional  growth  and  development. 

Collaborating  with  colleagues  and  the  broader  professional 
community  to  support  teacher  and  student  learning. 

4. 

Working  with  families  to  support  student  learning. 

 

Engaging  local  communities  in  support  of  the  instructional 
program. 

Managing  professional  responsibilities  to  maintain  motivation 
and  commitment  to  all  students. 

Demonstrating  professional  responsibility,  integrity,  and  ethical 
conduct. 

19. 

During  the  2008/2009  school  year,  the  District  implemented  Skillful 

Teaching/Skillful  Learning,  a  training  program  for  its  administrators,  including  principals 
and  vice  principals,  to  learn  how  to  conduct  performance  evaluations  of  certificated 
employees.  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  explained  at  hearing  that  she  participated  in  that 
training  for  the  first  four  years,  did  not  participate  the  following  year,  and  is  currently 
participating  in  her  fifth  year. 

. 

20. 

During  all  times  relevant,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  performed  the  following 

types  of  performance  evaluations  of  her  teachers,  including  respondent: 

a. 

Informal  classroom walk-through:  generally,  an  impromptu  walk- 

through  the  teacher’s  classroom,  the  reason  for  which  could  be  unrelated  to  evaluating  that 
teacher’s  performance,  such  as  conducting  a  student  “head  count”  to  determine  enrollment. 

Cc. 

b. 

Certificated  evaluation  (preliminary  evaluation):  a  performance 

Formal  lesson  observation:  a  preplanned  visit,  during  which  Principal 

evaluation  that  usually  occurs  toward  the  end  of  the  first  semester  and  is  based  on  Principal 
Rocha-Salazar’s  informal  walk-throughs,  formal  lesson  observations,  conferences,  and 
lesson  plan  reviews  during  the  applicable  semester. 

Rocha-Salazar  observes  the  teacher  teach  a  particular  lesson.  Prior  to  the  observation, 
Principal  Rocha-Salazar  meets  with  the  teacher  to  discuss  the  teacher’s  proposed  lesson  plan 
for  the  observation.  During  the  observation,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  takes  “literal  notes,”’ 
which  she  shares  with  the  teacher  afterward,  usually  within  one  week  of  the  observation  (but 
ideally  later  that  day  or  the  following  day).  After  sharing  her  literal  notes,  Principal  Rocha- 
Salazar  holds  a  post-observation  conference  with  the  teacher  to  discuss  the  observation  and 
provide  strategies  and  techniques  for  addressing  any  concerns  noticed  during  the  observation. 

10    

Certificated  evaluation  (summary  evaluation):  a  performance 
evaluation  that  usually  occurs  toward  the  end  of  the  second  semester  and  is  based  on 
Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  informal  walk-throughs,  formal  lesson  observations,  conferences, 
and  lesson  plan  reviews  during  the  applicable  semester. 

«7 iteral  notes”  are  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  attempt  to  write  down,  verbatim,  what 

the  teacher  and  students  said  when  she  was  observing  the  class. 

d.° 

  

’ 

Evaluations  of Respondent’s  Performance  and  Assistance  Provided  by  the  District  During 
the  2010/2011  School  Year 

21. 

Informal  classroom  walk-throughs:  Every  day  for  the  first  10  days  of  the 

2010/2011  school  year,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  walked  into  every  classroom  at  Ayer 
Elementary  School  and  counted  the  number  of  children  for  purposes  of  determining 
enrollment  and  class  sizes.  During  these  informal  walk-throughs,  she  began  to  notice  that 
respondent  was  off  to  a  “rough  start.”  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  shared  her  concerns  with 
respondent  after  each  walk-through,  and  suggested  strategies  and  techniques  for  solving  the 
perceived  problems. 

22. 

Assistance  provided  by  Elin  Van  Fleet:  Based  on  her  observations  during 

those  10  days,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  developed  concerns  regarding  respondent’s 
classroom  management  and  lesson  planning  skills.  Therefore,  she  asked  Elin  Van  Fleet,  an 
instructional  coach  assigned  to  Ayer  Elementary  School,  to  work  with  respondent. 

23. 

At  the  beginning,  Ms.  Van  Fleet  helped  respondent  gather  the  material  she 

needed  for  classroom  instruction  and  familiarize  herself  with  this  school  site  and  where 
different  things  were  located.  As  the  school  year  progressed,  Ms.  Van  Fleet  provided  more 
strategic  instructional  coach-based  assistance  based  on  the  particular  topic(s)  respondent  was 
teaching  at  the  time  the  assistance  was  provided.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Van  Fleet  estimated  that 
she  observed  respondent  in  her  classroom  approximately  10  times  throughout  the  2010/2011 
school  year.  She  provided  feedback  regarding  respondent’s  performance  after  each 
observation. 

24. 

December  7,  2010  lesson  observation:  Respondent  was  rated  “DNM”  for 

CSTPs  1  (Category  6),  2  (Categories  5  and  7),®  3  (Categories  1,  3,  and  5),  and  5  (Category 
5).  She  received  ratings  of  “MMS”  or  “N/O”  for  CSTP  4  and  “MS”  or  “N/O”  for  CSTP  6. 
The  following  are  some  of  the  deficiencies  observed  during  the  lesson  observation:° 

a. 

CSTP  1:  Respondent  blended  the  “I  Do”  and  “We  Do”  teaching 

methods  together,  rather  than  having  a  clear  break  when  switching  from  one  method  to  the 
other. 

b. 
stated  objective. 

CSTP  3:  The  lesson  objective  actually  achieved  was  different  than  the 

  

*  As  discussed  in  Factual  Finding  71  below,  respondent  improved  her  conduct  under 

CSTP  2  during  the  90-day  notice  period  (September  4  through  December  4,  2012). 
Therefore,  a  detailed  discussion  of  her  prior  unsatisfactory  performance  under  that  standard 
is  not  necessary  for  the  reasons  discussed  in  Legal  Conclusions  4,  5,  and  11. 

”  A  detailed  discussion  of  each  deficiency  noted  is  not  necessary.  (City  of  Carmel-By- 

The-Sea  v.  Monterey  County  Board  of  Supervisors  (1977)  71  Cal.App.3d  84,  91.) 

11 

  

 

» 

c. 

CSTP5:  The  stated  and  posted  objective  was  “students  will  be  able  to 
identify  the  author’s  conclusion  by  using  textual  evidence,  a  graphic  organizer,  and  writing  a 
language  frame.”  The  lived  objective  was  that  some  students  were  able  to  identify  an 
example  of  textual  evidence  to  support  the  author’s  conclusion  by  using  the  language  frame. 
Student  responses  included,  “Evidence  that  supports  this  conclusion  is...  the  water  was 
bubbling,  they  worshiped  gods,  and  bad  things  were  happening  because  the  gods  were  mad.” 
The  stated  and  posted  objective  was  not  met. 

25. 

December  15,  2010  preliminary  evaluation:  Respondent  was  rated  “Does  Not 

Meet  Standards”  for  CSTPs  2,  3,  and  4.  She  was  rated  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  or 
higher  for  CSTPs  1,  5,  and  6.  The  following  are  some  of  the  deficiencies  noted  during  the 
observation: 

a. 

CSTP  3: 

During  the  formal  observation,  students  were  very  well  behaved 
for  the  lesson,  but  the  lesson  finished  five  minutes  early. 
Instead  of  having  a  sponge  activity  or  quiet  reading  established, 
the  students  were  off  task  and  noisy.  We  discussed  during  our 
post  observation  conference  that  the  teacher  needs  to  maintain 
and  reinforce  her  behavioral  expectations  at  all  times.  We  also 
discussed  to  [sic]  need  to  establish  this  level  of  behavior  daily 
with  all  groups  of  sixth  grade  students  that  she  teaches. 

b. 

CSTP  4: 

The  various  phases  of  direct  instruction  are  evident  on a  daily 
basis;  however,  the  quality  of  the  delivery  is  weak.  For 
example,  the  “I  Do,  We  Do,  You  Do”  portion  of  the  lesson 
looked  similar  (9-9-10). 

During  the  “I  Do”  portion  of  the  lesson,  the  teacher  questions 
students  before  the  comprehension  input  is  delivered  or  she 
allows  students  to  ask  questions  (9-14,  11-17). 

26. 

The  December  15,  2010  preliminary  evaluation  included  the  following 

feedback:  “During  a  conversation  with  the  teacher  in  September,  I  asked  her  to  plan  with  the 
instructional  coach  in  order  for  the  teacher  to  focus  on  classroom  management.” 

27. 

Teacher  development  plan  signed  February  16,  2011:  When  a  teacher  receives 

a  rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  on  one  or  more  CSTPs  during  a  preliminary  or 
summary  evaluation,  her  principal  is  required  to  prepare  a  teacher  development  plan.  A 

_  teacher  development  plan  identifies  the  CSTP(s)  needing  improvement  and  contains 

directives  to  the  teacher  about  what  needs  to  be  done  to  improve.  It  also  identifies  specific 
assistance  that  will  be  provided  to  the  teacher  to  help  her  improve. 

12 

 

  

28. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  signed  a  teacher  development  plan  on  February  16, 

2011,  which  identified  CSTPs  2,  3,  and  4  as  the  standards  under  which  respondent  needed  to 
improve.  It  also  identified  the  following  assistance  to  be  provided  to  respondent  during  the 
second  semester  of  the  2010/2011  school  year: 

*  Reflection  of  the  FUSD  Continuum 
*  Conferencing 
*  Observation  checklist  for  reflection 
*  Observations  for  support 
*  Written  feedback 
:  Selective  Scripting 
‘  Verbal  suggestions/comments 
-  Constructive  criticism 
*  Provide  materials/resources/tools/strategies 
*  Model  lessons 
-  Assist  students 
*  Cognitive  Coaching 
*  Collaboration  with  principal 
*  Three  way  [sic]  conferences  (teacher,  coach,  principal 

29.  |  When a teacher  development  plan  is  issued  after  a  preliminary  evaluation,  the 

teacher  has  the  following  options  with  regard  to  who  will  provide  the  assistance  specified:  1) 
no  one,  2)  her  principal,  or  3)  a  teacher  development  coach.  When  one  is  issued  after  a 
summary  evaluation,  however,  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  development  coach  is  mandatory. 
Respondent  chose  to  receive  the  above  assistance  directly  from  Principal  Rocha-Salazar. 

30. 

April  12,  2011  lesson  observation:  Respondent  received  a  rating  of  “DNM” 

for  CSTPs  1  (Category  2),  2  (Categories  2,  4,  and  5),  3  (Categories  2  and  3),  and  4  (Category 
4).  She  received  a  rating  of  “MS”  or  “N/O”  for  CSTPs  5  and  6.  Some  of  the  deficiencies 
noted  during  the  observation  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

During  the  lesson,  the  teacher  asked  students  to  “turn  to  their 
neighbor  and  discuss.  See  if  you  can  come  up  with  an  answer.” 
During  the  comprehensive  input,  the  teacher  asked  students  to 
define  the  word  break,  which  was  the  teacher’s  example  of  a 
multiple  meaning  word.  The  teacher  took  three  student 
responses  and  said,  “I  wrote  some  down  and  wrote  if  they  were 
nouns  or  verbs.”  This  was  an  opportunity  to  make  connection 
with  how  the  meaning  may  change  based  on  the  context  of  the 
sentence.  How  is  the  word  being  used?  The  teacher  asked 
students  to  come  up  with  a  sentence  for  each  of  these  words.  It 
was  unclear  as  to  which  words  were  used  to  define  the  word 
break  and  exactly  what  the  three  sentences  were  that  students 

13

were  to  have  created.  The  teacher  said,  “We  have  used  our  own 
three  different  definitions  of  the  words  break.”  During  the 
question  related  to  the  word  stock,  the  teacher  gave  the  answer. 

b. 

 CSTP3: 

On  4/12,  the  teacher  recognized  that  students  might  need 
assistance  with  the  words  multiple,  meaning,  identify  and 
interpret.  As  such,  she  reviewed  and  defined  each  word.  The 
building  background  component  of  the  lesson  consisted  of  one 
example,  and  that  “students  need  to  know  which  meaning  is 
being  used  for  the  CST.”  It  should  have  included  the  following: 
Many  common  words  have  more  than  one  meaning.  They  can 
be  used  in  different  ways  depending  on  the  surrounding  words, 
known  as  context.  This  portion  of  the  lesson  should  also  have 
included  the  use  of  the  word  homographs.  During  the  “I  DO” 
[sic]  portion  of  the  lesson,  the  teacher  modeled  thinking  aloud 
and  finding  the  correct  answer  by  using  a  process  of  elimination. 
When  answering  for  the  word  finished,  a  student  was  confused 
and  thought  it  meant  ended.  Teacher  clarified.  The  teacher 
said,  “When  I  looked  at  your  test,  I  see  that  you  looked  to  see... 
oh,  finish  means  ended.  It  doesn’t  work  that  way.”  The  teacher 
then  showed  a  picture  of  beautifully  finished  cabinets  and  went 
on  to  the  next  question  of  the  We  Do  portion  of  the  lesson. 
Students  answered  on  their  own. 

Cc. 

CSTP  4: 

On  4/12,  the  teacher  planned  the  lesson  based  on  a  previous 
class  assignment  and  GLAS  results.  The  lesson  was  based  on 
an  appropriate  sixth  grade  standard.  R  1.2  Identify  and  interpret 
figurative  language  and  words  with  multiple  meanings.  The 
objective  was  students  will  be  able  to  identify  the  correct 
definition  of  the  multiple  meaning  words  being  used  by 
displaying  the  correct  answer  on  the  whiteboard.  There  was 
evidence  of I DO  [sic],  We  Do,  You  Do  portions  of  the  lesson, 
however,  during  the  designated  We  Do  portion,  students 
answered  on  their  own  and  the  teacher  moved  directly  into  the 
You  Do  portion.  During  the  You  Do  portion  of  the  lesson, 
students  were  confused  about  the  meaning  of  the  word  crucial. 
The  students  were  unable  to  complete  the  last  two  questions  on 
their  own. 

31. 

April  29,  2011  lesson  observation:  Respondent  received  ratings  of  “MMS”  or 

above  or  “N/O”  for  all  CSTPs. 

14

32. 

May  6,  2011  summary  evaluation:  Respondent  was  rated  “Does  Not  Meet 

Standards”  for  CSTPs  2,  3,  and  4.  She  was  rated  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  for  CSTP  1 
and  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  for  CSTPs  5  and  6.  The  following  are  some  of  the 
deficiencies  noted  during  the  observation: 

a. 

CSTP  3: 

On  4/29,  there  was  a  clear  connection  between  the  identified 
standard  and  the  examples  presented  in  the  lesson.  The 
connection  between  the  presented  CST  release  questions  and 
student  text  was  less  aligned.  The  teacher  gave  an  example  by 
asking  “If  I  was  doing  research  on  what  T-Rex  eats,  I  would 
need  to  be  more  specific.”  The  example  was  specific.  The 
teacher  then  proceeded  to  define/discuss  the  meaning  of 
expository  text.  There  was  an  opportunity  to  make  a  connection 
between  the  need  to  research  dinosaurs  using  expository  text. 

b. 

CSTP  4: 

On  4/12,  the  teacher  planned  the  lesson  based  on  a  previous 
class  assignment  and  GLAS  results.  The  lesson  was  based  on 
an  appropriate  sixth  grade  standard.  R  1.2  Identify  and  interpret 
figurative  language  and  words  with  multiple  meanings.  The 
objective  was  students  will  be  able  to  identify  the  correct 
definition  of  the  multiple  meaning  words  being  used  by 
displaying  the  correct  answer  on  the  whiteboard.  There  was 
evidence  of I  DO  [sic],  We  Do,  You  Do  portions  of  the  lesson, 
however,  during  the  designated  We  Do  portion,  students 
answered  on  their  own  and  the  teacher  moved  directly  into  the 
You  Do  portion.  During  the  You  Do  portion  of  the  lesson, 
students  were  confused  about  the  meaning  of  the  word  crucial. 
The  students  were  unable  to  complete  the  last  two  questions  on 
their  own. 

| 

The  lesson  format  used  is  very  familiar  to  students.  I  would 
recommend  that  the  teacher  remove  the  underlined  sentence  that 
indicates  the  passages  [sic]  main  idea  as  a  means  of  modeling 
critical  thinking  and  problem  solving.  Lessons  have  been 
presented  in  this  manner  many  times  over  the  course  of  the  year 
and  students  should  be  able  to  identify  the  main  idea  on  their 

15

33. 

The  May  6,  2011  summary  evaluation  included  the  following  recommendation 

for  respondent: 

own.  Students  could  be  asked  to  highlight  or  underline  on  their 
own,  especially  now  that  we  are  at  the  end  of  the  year. 

34. 

Teacher  development  plan  dated  May  27,  2011:  Principal  Rocha-Salazar 

‘  signed  a  teacher  development  plan  on  May  27,  2011,  which  identified  CSTPs  2,  3,  and  4  as 
the  standards  under  which  respondent  needed  to  improve.  It  also  identified  the  following 
support  to  be  provided  to  her  during  the  first  semester  of  the  2011/2012  school  year: 

*  Lesson  scripting  for  reflection 
*  Reflection  on  FUSD  Continuum 
*  Three  way  [sic]  conferencing  with  teacher  and  administrator . 

as  needed 
*  TDP  Support 
*  CSTP  Support 
-  Lesson  planning  and  curriculum  support 

35. 

Respondent  was  assigned  Lois  Ortiz,  a  teacher  development  coach  in  the 

District’s  Veteran  Teacher  Support  Program.  While  Ms.  Ortiz  was  originally  assigned  to 
work  with  respondent  for  the  first  semester  of  the  2011/2012  school  year,  her  assignment 
was  eventually  extended  through  the  end  of  that  school  year. 

36. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Ortiz  had  difficulty  remembering  the  specific  details  about  the 
assistance  she  provided  respondent.  She  did  recall,  however,  having  observed  respondent  in 
the  classroom  throughout  the  Fall  Semester.  She  explained  that  she  tried  to  observe 
respondent  at  least  once  each  week.  Ms.  Ortiz  also  explained  that  after  each  observation,  she 
would  discuss  with  respondent  any  concerns  that  had  arisen  during  the  observation,  but  could 
not  recall  any  specific  concerns  discussed. 

37. 

Ms.  Ortiz  also  recalled  having  provided  respondent  strategies  for  improving 
her  classroom  performance,  but  explained  that  respondent  did  not  consistently  implement 
those  strategies. 

38. 

Ms.  Ortiz  explained  that  during  the  2011/2012  school  year,  she  felt  respondent 
initially  showed  improvement  in  her  performance,  reached  a  plateau  at  some  point  during  the 
school  year,  and  then  began  digressing.  She  felt  respondent  ended  the  school  year  “roughly” 
where  she  began  in  terms  of  her  classroom  performance. 

Evaluations  of Respondent’s  Performance  and  Assistance  Provided  by  the  District  During 
the  2011/2012  School  Year 

39. 

December  8,  2011  lesson  observation:  Respondent  was  rated  “DNS”  on 

CSTPs  2  (Categories  4  and  7),  3  (Categories  2,  3,  and  6),  4  (Categories  1,  3,  4,  and  5),  and  5 
(Category  4).  She  was  rated  “MS”  or  higher  or  “N/O”  for  CSTP  1  and  “MS”  or  “N/O”  for 
CSTP  6.  Some  of  the  deficiencies  noted  during  the  lesson  observation  include: 

a. 

CSTP  3: 

16 

 

The  formal  lesson  on  12/8/11,  was  built  around  the  concept  of 
figurative  language.  Students  were  expected  to  identify  and 
interpret  figurative  language.  This  teacher  presented  six  uses  of 
figurative  language  in  a  handout  that  gave  them  the  terms  and 
definitions.  The  students  could  have  met  the  lesson  objective 
had  their  understanding  of  each  type  had  [sic]  been  previously 
established.  This  lesson  would  have  been  a  good  closure  to  a 
unit  on  figurative  language.  It  was  too  early  in  their  experience 
to  move  into  application  of  the  concept. 

b. 

CSTP  4: 

The  teacher  understands  that  instruction  related  to  this  standard 
was  necessary  as  it  is  grade  level  appropriate.  RC  1.2  Identify 
and  Interpret  figurative  language  and  words  with  multiple 
meanings.  The  students  in  this  group  did  not  have  the  academic 
readiness  required  to  meet  the  objective.  For  some  students,  it 
may  have  been a lack  of  language  proficiency.  The  teacher 
clearly  articulated  the  lesson  objective.  The  sequence  of  long 
and  short  term  goals  related  to  this  standard  was  not  evident. 

c. 

CSTP  5: 

The  teacher  referenced  that  data  was  used  as  an  indicator  for  the 
purpose  of  this  lesson,  however,  it  appears  that  the  data  was  not 
read  in  a  way  that  would  have  indicated  the  next  appropriate 
instructional  step  as  students  were  unable  to  meet  the  intended 
objective.  Prerequisite  skills  were  lacking. 

40. 

December  19,  2011  preliminary  evaluation:  Respondent  was  rated  “Does  Not 

Meet  Standards”  for  CSTP  3.  She  was  rated  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  for  CSTPs  1,  5, 
and  6  and  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  for  CSTPs  2  and  4.  Among  the  examples  of  the 
deficiencies  noted  during  the  evaluation  period,  the  preliminary  evaluation  cited  the 
December  8,  2011  lesson  observation,  and  the  deficiency  identified  for  CSTP  3  (Finding  39. 
a). 

41. 

The  teacher  development  plan  created  in  response  to  respondent’s  December 

19,  2011  preliminary  evaluation  was  not  produced  a  hearing.  However,  Principal  Rocha- 
Salazar  testified  that  she  was  “certain”  one  was  created.  Respondent  did  not  dispute  such 
testimony. 

42. 

May  15,  2012  summary  evaluation:  Respondent  was  rated  “Does  Not  Meet 

Standards”  for  CSTPs  3  and  4.  She  was  rated  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  for  CSTP  1  and 

17 

 

“Meet  Standards  Proficient”  for  CSTPs  2,  5,  and  6.  Some  of  the  deficiencies  noted  during 
the  observation  include: 

a. 

CSTP  3: 

On  4-24-12,  the  teacher  identified  shades  of  meaning  as  words 
expressing  the  weakest  meaning  to  the  strongest,  but  did  not 
create  the  context  needed  nor  did  she  provide  examples  of 
writing  that  would  assist  students  with  determining  which  word 
would  be  the  most  effective  word  choice. 

While  teaching  the  concept  “shades  of  meaning,”  practice 
opportunities  were  limited  to  filling  in  the  blank  in  a  given 
sentence.  Any  word  choice  would’ve  fit  appropriately. 

In  the  “We  Do”  section  of  a  lesson  on  shades  of  meaning,  the 
following  sentence  frame  was  provided.  Sally  was  a(n)  ___ 
member  of  her  club.  Students  were  supposed  to  fill  the  blank 
with  three  different  word  choices. 

(W---  [9 

Although  a  student  gave  the  correct  answer  as  C,  they  were 
unable  to  define  the  word  hymn.  The  word  was  also  incorrectly 
read  by  the  student.  The  student  was  unable  to  articulate  that 
hymn  is  another  word  for  song  or  that  the  answer  must  be  c  as 
the  other  answer  choices  were  incorrect.  There  was  no 
conversation  about  the  words  love  ballad  as  opposed  to  hymn  of 
praise.  It  could  have  been  asked,  “Which  type  of  song  would  be 
most  appropriate  when  singing  about  our  country?”  Instead,  the 
teacher  stated,  “I  don’t  know  how  you  know  it  if  you  don’t 
know  what  hymn  is.” 

b. 

CSTP  4: 

The  lesson  objective  on  2-28-12  was  IWBAT’””  find  the  main 
idea  of  text  by  analyzing  details.  The  teacher  attempted  to 
model  note  taking.  Students  were  unfamiliar  with  the  note- 
taking  structure.  Students  asked  such  things  as  “Write  that? 
Right  here?  Where  do  I  write  it?  Do  I  write  the  main  again  next 
to...?  Students  were  unable  to  identify  the  main  idea.  The 
teacher  switched  from  asking  students  to  identify  the  main  idea 
to  identify  details. 

  

 TWBAT  is  an  acronym  for  “I  will  be  able  to.” 

18 

   

[W---  [9 

The  posted  objective  was  IWBAT  identify  the  meaning  of  an 
unknown  word  by  using  the  context  of  the  sentence(s).  There 
was  a  slide  that  was  labeled  “I  Do,”  however,  the  teacher  did  not 
completely  model  how  to  determine  the  word  meaning  using  the 
keywords  she  highlighted.  The  teacher  moved  to  looking  at  the 
answer  choices  before  there  was  clarity  about  the  meaning  of 
the  word  which  led  to  more  confusion.  The  teacher  plugged  in 
three  of  the  four  answer  choices  as  an  attempt  to  assist  students 
with  using  the  process  of  elimination  to  determine  the  meaning 
of  the  word  anthem,  however,  students  failed  to  identify  the 
meaning  as  a  song  of  allegiance  as  the  best  answer  choice  was 
hymn  of  praise. 

43. 

The  following  was  written  in  the May  15,  2012  summary  evaluation: 

In  a  conversation  on  Jan.  25th,  the  teacher  acknowledged  that 
the  students  relied  on  her  to  do  the  work.  She  was  concerned 
about  student  effort  and  work  performance.  I  recommended 
three  actions. 

1.  Be  sure  to  communicate  the  directions  and  expectations 
about  the  assignment. 
2.  Share  the  criteria  for  success. 
3.  Give  specific  feedback  (see  Skillful  Teacher). 

44. 

The  teacher  development  plan  created in  response  to  respondent’s  May  15, 

2012  summary  evaluation  was  not  produced  at  hearing.  However,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar 
testified  that  she  was  “certain”  one  was  created,  and  respondent  did  not  dispute  such 
testimony.  Furthermore,  respondent  testified  that  Rhonda  Day  was  her  teacher  development 
coach  during  the  90-day  notice  period. 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

45. 

As  previously  discussed,  the  District  gave  respondent  written  notice  of  her 

unsatisfactory  performance  on  September  4,  2012,  specifying  the  nature  of  such  performance 
with  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  particularity  in  order  to  furnish  her  with  an  adequate 
opportunity  to  correct  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  allegations.  Included  with 
. 
the  written  notice  were  copies  of  the  relevant  performance  evaluations  of  respondent’s 
conduct  from  September  2,  2010,  through  May  15,  2012,  which  identified  conduct  that  did 
not  meet  the  District’s  criteria  for  acceptable  performance  under  CSTPs  1  through  5.  No 
conduct  constituting  unsatisfactory  performance  under  CSTP  6  was  identified  anywhere  in 
the  Amended  Notice  or  attached  performance  evaluations. 

19

Performance  Evaluations  During  the  90-day  Notice  Period 

46. 

For  the  reasons  explained  in  Legal  Conclusions  4  and  5,  respondent  was 
entitled  to  the  opportunity  to  improve  her  performance  during  the  90  days  immediately 
following  her  receipt  of  the  Amended  Notice.  During  that  period,  which  was  from 
September  4  through  December  4,  2012,  the  District  conducted  regular  performance 
evaluations  to  determine  whether  respondent’s  performance  improved.  While  the  90-day 
performance  evaluation  forms  did  not  include  any  ratings,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  provided 
respondent  with  a  rubric  that  contained  her  ratings  for  each  of  the  six  CSTPs  for  each  of  the 
90-day  performance  evaluations  during  a  three-way  conference  on  October  30,  2012. 

47. 

September  11,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  received  an 

overall  rating  of  “Meets  Standards  Minimally.” 

48. 

September  19,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  received  a 

rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  for  CSTPs  1,  2,  3,  and  4.  She  received a  rating  of  “Not 
Observed”  for  CSTPs  5  and  6.''  Her  overall  rating  was  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards.” 

49. 

Some  of  respondent’s  deficiencies  noted  during  the  evaluation  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

The  teacher  posted  a  graphic  that  illustrated  the  elements  of 
poetry  on  one  of  the  Power  Point  slides.  There  was  a  missed 
opportunity  to  ask  students  to  describe  the  number  of  elements, 
read  or  identify  the  examples  of  each  element,  discuss  or 
hypothesize  about  why  the  word  content  would  be  at  the  center 
of  the  triangle  to  prompt  student  thinking. 

At  various  points  of  the  lesson,  the  teacher  would  ask  student  to 
fill  in  the  outline.  Student  responses  were  “On  number  two?” 
“Where  do  I  write  it?”  Later,  “We  write  that?”  At  one  point, 
the  teacher  said,  “Put  it  right  on  the  line  where  it  says  repetition. 
A  student  said,  “No  one  cares!”  The  teacher  said,  “Write  it 
down.” 

necessary.    

attached  performance  evaluations  identified  any  conduct  that  constituted  unsatisfactory 
performance  under  CSTP  6.  Therefore,  no  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
unsatisfactory  performance  under  CSTP  6  as  a  matter  of  law  as  explained  in  Legal 
Conclusions  4,  5,  and  12,  and  a  discussion  of  her  performance  under  CSTP 6 is  not 

"  As  explained  in  Factual  Finding  45,  neither  the  Amended  Notice  nor  any  of  the 

  

The  teacher  changed  the  objective  of  the  website  lesson  which 
read,  “Students  will  be  able  to  understand  the  concept  of 
poetry.”  The  teacher’s  objective  was:  “Students  will  be  able  to 
identify  elements  of  poetry  by  completing  an  outline.” 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

(.-  [9] 

At  the  end  of  the  lesson,  the  teacher  had  read  through  the  slides 
and  covered  the  areas  of  content  and  language.  When  students 
were  asked  what  they.  learned  today,  three  out  of  seven  students 
read  the  objective  off  the  board.  Four  didn’t  know[,]  couldn’t 
identify  or  articulate  the  learning  for  the  class  period. 

Cc. 

CSTP  4: 

The  objective  written  in  the  lesson  plan  to  start  the  unit  on 
poetry  was:  IWBAT  identify  the  tone  of  a  poem  by  analyzing 
highlighted  feeling  words.  Alone  by  Maya  Angelou. 

Posted  objective  for  lesson  observed:  IWBAT  identify  elements 
of  poetry  by  completing  an  outline.  This  objective  was  not 
included  in  the  lesson  plan. 

1,  Collect  student  work  for  your  review  when  completed. 
2.  Some  of  the  elements  of  poetry  have  been  taught  in  previous 
grades  (4-5).  It  would  be  helpful  to  gather  data  about  what 
students  already  know.  Introducing  all  elements  at  once  can  be 
information  overload.  It  would  be  appropriate  to  read  some 
poetry  aloud  or  for  students  to  read  to  each  other  and  ask 
students  questions  related  to  the  elements  to  determine  their 
level  of  understanding. 
3.  Consider  the  level  of  rigor  in  the  assignments  for  your 
students. 
4.  Planning  lessons  that  engage  students  will  assist  with 
managing  their  behavior. 
5.  Reinstate  CHAMPS  in  your  classroom  to  successfully 
communicate  your  expectations. 

50. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

51. 

September  26,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  received  a 

rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  for  CSTPs  1,  3,  4,  and  5.  She  received  the  rating 

21 

 

“Meets  Standards”  for  CSTP  2  and  “Not  Observed”  for  CSTP  6.  Her  overall  rating  was 
“Does  Not  Meet  Standards.” 

52. 

Some  of  respondent’s  deficiencies  observed  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

Ms.  Cooper’s  questioning  strategies  did  not  facilitate  student 
understanding  of  the  lesson  objective. 

Teacher:  “How  does  that  make  you  feel?”  The  student 
responded,  “Sad.”  Teacher:  “Sad  but  [sic]  what  ...?”  Student 
said:  “Sad  like  there  is  going  to  be  a  funeral.” 

Teacher,  “Who  else?  Anybody?”  Student  said,  “Shouldering  its 
way.”  Teacher  replied,  “What  does  that  make  you  feel  like?” 
Student  replied,  “Upset.” 

The  teacher  asked  students  what  is  the  definition  of  tone  and/or 
meaning  12  times  during  the  lesson. 

Although  students  could  define  the  word  and  site  [sic]  examples 
such  as  those  listed  above,  they  couldn’t  apply  their 
understanding  of  tone  to  the  poem  as  a  whole  nor  how  that  tone 
was  developed  by  the  writer. 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

The  teacher  stated  that  her  intent  was  to  use  the  components  of 
language:  repetition,  rhythm,  rhyme  and  word  choice  to  assist 
students  in  determining  the  content  (tone  and  meaning)  of  the 
poem....  The  example  provided  by  the  teacher  did  not  create  a 
connection  for  students.  Most  students  were  unfamiliar  with  the 
[sic]  Outsiders. 

| 

c. 

CSTP  4: 

The  lesson  plan  for  today  read:  Focus  Standard  RC  3.4/3.7 
Objective:  IWBAT  infer  the  meaning  of  a  poem  by  analyzing 
the  poem  — I,  Too,  Sing  America  by  Langston  Hughes 
Closure:  share  one  thing  learned  with  a  partner 

The  actual  objective  for  today’s  lesson  was  IWBAT  identify  the 
tone  and  meaning  by  identifying  and  analyzing  language  in 
poetry. 

22 

   

Ms.  Cooper  was  aware  that  students  were  not  able  to  determine 
the  tone  of  the  poem  that  was  read  together  and  yet,  [sic]  she 
asked  students  to  read  the  next  poem  for  the  purpose  of 
identifying  the  tone  on  their  own. 

d. 

CSTP  5: 

[T].--[91] 

As  such,  students  were  left  on  their  own  to  apply  a  skill  that  had 
not  yet  been  mastered. 

53. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

1.  Read  over  the  lesson  plan  to  assist  in  your  understanding  of 
what  is  being  taught.  For  example,  identifying  rhyming  words 
in  the  poem:  “Nothing  Gold  Can  Stay”  in  order  to  ensure  your 
understanding  before  sharing  it  with  students. 
2.  Use  the  graphic  organizer  provided  to  support  student 
learning. 
3.  Know  your  intended  outcome. 
4.  Do  not  expect  students  to  work  on  their  own  when  they 
failed  to  meet  the  objective  with  support. 
5.  Adjust  your  lesson  plan  as  needed.  The  lesson  did  not  match 
your  plan. 

54. 

October  3,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  was  rated  “Does 

Not  Meet  Standards”  on  CSTPs  1,  3,  4,  and  5;  “Meeting  Standards  Minimally”  on  CSTP  2; 
and  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  on  CSTP  6.  Her  overall  rating  was  “Does  Not  Meet 
Standards.” 

55. 

Some  of  respondent’s  deficiencies  observed  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

The  teacher  was  going  to  select  a  student  to  read  aloud  and  then 
decided  to  ask  students  to  chorally  read  the  poem  together. 
When a student  asked  if  he  could  read  in  a  funny  voice,  the 
teacher  said,  “If  it  doesn’t  bother  anybody.”  Students  could  not 
successfully  read  the  poem  aloud  together.  The  teacher  decided 
to  read  the  poem  aloud  on  her  own. 

[---(9 

23

There  were  no  clear  directions  on  what  to  do  with  the  first  poem 
from  the  teacher  prior  to  her  leaving  the  room. 

Students  appeared  confused  about  the  questions  being  asked  on 
the  bottom  of  the  page. 

Students  were  confused  by  what  the  teacher  had  said  about  Jim 
Crow  Laws. 

(T.--(91 

Be  more  cognizant  of  what  it  is  you  ask  students  to  do.  When 
you  brought  up  the  idea  of  Jim  Crow  Laws  prior  to  leaving  the 
classroom  without  explanation  or  context,  [sic]  was  almost  like 
throwing  a  bomb  and  walking  out.  The  students  were  confused 
and  unsure  about  what  to  think  say  or  do.  African  American 
students  would  definitely  have  a  strong  reaction  to  the  brief 
information  shared  and  there  was  no  real  place  for  them  to  go 
with  it  after  you  left. 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

Ms.  Cooper  intended  to  focus  on  multiple  meaning  words  and 
the  element  of  content  [sic],  but  did  not  ask  questions  in  a  way 
that  made  meaning  for  students. 

During  vocabulary  practice,  the  teacher  posed  the  following 
question: 

The  deer  left  its  track  in  the  snow  as  he  walked  across  our  front 
yard. 
a)  a  path  along  which  something  moves 
b)  a  course  laid  out  for  running  or  racing 
. 
c)  a  mark  left  by  something  that  is  passing  through 
d)  a  set  of  rails  on  which  railroad  cars  run  on 

T.  What  type  of  word  is  it? 
St.  Idiom 
T.  No 
St.  Personification 
T.  That’s  not  it. 
St.  Idiom  | 
T.  C 
T.. 
St.  A  multiple  meaning  word 

Its  C,  but  what  is  it? 

24 

 

T.  Yes.  I  tried  to  give  you a  hint  by  giving  you  these  choices. 

[Suggestion:  Based  on  the  answer  choices,  what  do  you 
know  about  the  underlined  word  in  the  sentence? 
Response:  it  is  a  multiple  meaning  word.] 

(Bold  in  original.) 

c. 

CSTP  4: 

The  students  were  unable  to  answer  the  four  questions  listed  at 
the  bottom  of  the  page  which  had  the  poem  about  being  in  sixth 
grade.  Students  did  not  understand  two  of  the  three  directions. 

 
e

 R
N
W

.  Highlight  words  that  are  similar  in  meaning. 
.  Can  you  underline  any  figurative  language. 
.  Circle  any  elements  of  poetry. 
.  DoT  have  a  connection? 

d. 

CSTP  5: 

Ms.  Cooper  was  aware  that  students  were  not  able  to  determine 
the  tone  of  the  poem  that  was  read  together  and  yet,  [sic]  she 
introduced  the  next  poem  without  fully  explaining  the 
expectations  for  responding  to  the  first  poem. 

1.  CHAMPS  Suggestion:  Have  it  posted  in  the  classroom. 
Keep  the  expectation  short  and  simple.  For  example: 

Conversation:  Voice  Level  0 
Help:  Raise  your  hand 
Activity:  Read  silently  &  analyze  the  text 
Movement:  None 
Participation:  reading  and  write  silently 
Success:  Correctly  completing  the  assignment  on  your 
own 

 
N
W

Use  homework  to  check  for  student  understanding. 
Use  data  to  assist  with  planning  and  how  best  to  address 
confusion. 

4.  Pre-plan  acceptable  student  responses  to  the  questions  posed 
and  provide  support  to  ensure  student  success  for  assigned 
tasks. 

5.  Check  student  understanding  of  the  four  elements  of  poetry. 

25

56. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

57. 

October  4,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent’s  overall  rating 

was  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards,”  with  ratings  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  on  CSTPs  3, 
and  4,  and  5;  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  on  CSTP  1;  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  on 
CSTP  2;  and  “Not  Observed”  on  CSTP  6. 

58. 

The  following  are  examples  of  deficiencies  noted  during  the  evaluation: 

(Bold  in  original.) 

b. 

CSTP  4: 

a. 

| 

CSTP  3: 

The  teacher  said,  “I  didn’t  get  anything  from  this  group.  Sweet 
scented  stuff...  For  imagery.  What  is  sweet  scented  stuff? 
Imagery  and...” 
St.  Alliteration 
T.  What  is  alliteration? 
St.  The  same  sound. 
St.  Beginning  sounds. 
T.  Eugenia  what  do  you  picture  your  image? 
St.  Flowers 

[In  the  context  of  this  poem,  the  author  was  referring  to  the 
scent  of  saw  dust  [sic].] 

Ms.  Cooper  did  not  ensure  that  each  element  of  poetry  was 
identified  in  a  cohesive  and  logical  manner. 

In  speaking  with  Ms.  Cooper,  I  learned  that  the  following  steps 
were  taken  in  her  planning. 

The  teacher  found  a  video  to  use  with  students. 
The  teacher  identified  figurative  language  as  an  area  of  focus 
while  teaching  elements  of  poetry. 
The  intended  outcome  was  for  students  to  be  able  to  cite 
evidence  in  the  text  to  support  the  students  identification  of  the 
element  used  in  this  piece  of  poetry. 
This  teacher  has  reviewed  SSQ  and  Inspect  test  items  to  see  how 
questions  about  poetry  are  asked. 
The  teacher  then  created  the  following  assignment. 

Follow  the  directions. 
1.  Highlight  words  that  have  similar  meanings  write  the  words 
down  and  tell  me  what  they  mean? 

26 

  

 

2.  Circle  figurative  language  i.e.  (Simile,  metaphor, 
personification,  alliteration,  onomatopoeia).  Write  down  what 
language  is  being  used  and  interpret  what  it  means. 
3.  Underline  language  and  poetry  —  i.e.  Rhyme,  repetition, 
rhythm  —  please  tell  me  what  poetic  device  is  being  used. 
4.  What  is  the  tone  of  the  poem?  Cite  your  evidence. 
5.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  poem?  Cite  your  evidence. 
Is  this  person  [sic]  written  in  first  person?  Cite  your 
6. 
evidence. 

The  teacher’s  goal  was  for  students  to  be  able  to  identify 
elements  of  poetry  by  highlighting  similar  words  in  order  to 
identify  key  ideas.  Identify  the  use  of  figurative  language. 

In  the  post  observation  conference,  the  teacher  identified  the 
objective  as  SWBAT”  identify  and  interpret  the  elements  of 
poetry  and  site  the  evidence. 

The  learning  objective  was  not  explicitly  stated  at  the  beginning, 
during,  or  end  of  the  lesson. 

During  the  lesson,  the  teacher  asked  for  examples  of  figurative 
language,  alliteration,  simile,  metaphor,  personification,  etc. 

As  such,  students  were  not  able  to  successfully  practice  their 
ability  to  identify  the  use  of  figurative  language  in  this  poem. 

Cc. 

CSTP  5: 

Ms.  Cooper  did  not  collect  student  work  or  review  the  answers 
provided  on  the  worksheet  she  created  for  students  to  complete 
after  they  read  the  poem  “Out,  Out”  by  Robert  Frost. 

In  our  post  observation  conference,  the  teacher  was  unsure 
about  the  number  of  students  that  were  able  to  determine  the 
meaning  of  the  poem. 

As  such,  students  will  not  be  able  to  monitor  their  learning  of 
the  elements  of  poetry. 

59. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

  

'?  SWABT  is  an  acronym  for  “Students  will  be  able  to.” 

27 

 

In  the  TDP,  it  was  recommended  that  the  teacher  create  a 
1. 
plan  for  the  semester.  It  was  also  recommended  that  the  [sic] 
Ms.  Cooper  rewrite  the  submitted  plan  because  the  outline 
submitted  did  not  list  specific  learning  outcomes.  The  district 
[sic]  provided  pacing  guide  provided  more  information  than 
what  was  created  by  the  teacher.  A  new  plan  has  yet  to  be 
submitted. 
2.  Today’s  lesson  was  provided  as  an  example  of  how  such  a 
plan  would  assist  the  teacher  in  preparing  lessons  to  successfully 
meet  the  learning  objective.  The  teacher  designated  a  two  week 
[sic]  window  for  teaching  poetry.  It  was  recommended  the 
elements  of  poetry  be  identified  and  sequenced  on  the  plan  with 
specific  poems  identified  that  would  provide  students  with 
examples  of  the  use  of  the  various  elements  of  poetry  that  are  to 
be  taught.  In  this  way,  the  teacher  could  identify  the  appropriate 
examples  of  poetry  and  structure  student  exposure  and  practice 
in  a  meaningful  way. 
3. 
questions  prior  to  assigning  them  to  students  to  ensure  that  they 
are  sequenced  in  a  way  that  will  assist  students  in  making 
meaning  from  the  text.  Had  Ms.  Cooper  identified  the 
responses  to  her  question,  she  would  have  identified  that  there 
was  little  use  of  figurative  language  in  the  Poem  [sic]  "Out, 
Out"  for  students  to  identify.  The  lesson  could  have  gone  in  a 
different  direction.  The  focus  of  the  lesson  could  have  been  an 
extension  or  a  cross  curricular  [sic]  connection  could  have  been 
made  in  Social  Studies.  If  the  teacher  believed  students  needed 
more  practice  on  figurative  language,  a  different  poem  should 
have  been  selected. 
4,  Ms.  Cooper  needs  [sic]  go  back  and  collect  student  work  to 
check  student  understanding  of  the  text  based  on  student 
responses  to  her  written  questions.  Were  students  able  to 
identify  the  tone  ad  [sic]  meaning  of  the  poem? 

I  recommend  that  the  teacher  answer  her  own  written 

© 

60. 

October  8,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  received  an 

overall  rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards.”  She  was  rated  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  on 
CSTPs  1,  3,  and  4;  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  for  CSTP  2;  and  “Not  Observed”  for  CSTPs 
5  and  6. 

61. 

Some  of  respondent’s  deficiencies  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

The  teacher  said,  “On  Friday  I  gave  you  a  note  that  talked  about 
our  Focus  wall  and  our  team...  What  Really  Happened?  I  asked 

28 

 

(Bold  in  original.) 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

(Bold  in  original.) 

Cc. 

CSTP  4: 

you  to  bring  an  artifact.  I  gave  you  two  days  to  bring  itin. 
Julian  do  you  have  a  question.  Julian  said,  “I  have  stones.”  The 
teacher  replied,  “Stones?” 

__ 

(There  was  no  request  for  clarification  or  explanation.  The 
teacher  moved  on.) 

(].--(9] 

Students  spent  15-18  minutes  sharing  various  ghost  stories  with 
the  teacher.  “Ok,  all  the  rest  of  you  are  going  to  have  to  keep 
them.”  The  teacher  rang  her  bell  and  said,  “It’s  my  turn.” 

The  teacher  said,  “We  are  going  to  look  at  real  life  mysteries. 
We  will  also  look  at  some  mysteries  that  are  not  real  life.  Raise 
your  hand  if  you  can  tell  me  what  is  involved  in  a  mystery?” 
Student  responses  included:  death,  murder,  ghosts,  the  devil, 
UFOs,  and  when...  “People  go  somewhere  and  don’t  come 
back.” 

The  teacher  explained  that  “in  a  mystery,  there  is  something 
happening  that  you  need  to  solve.” 

[There  was  a  missed  opportunity  to  clarify  student 
understanding  by  sharing  the  definition  of  mystery: 
anything  secret  or  unknown/unexplained,  not  fully 
understood,  baffled,  and  eludes  understanding.] 

The  teacher  followed  up  with  “Now  that  we  have  talked a  little 
about  mysteries,  were  going  to  talk  a  little  about...  As  you  read 
tonight,  I  want  you  to  read  two  paragraphs  and  write  a  summary 
statement.” 

A  student  asked,  “Can  we  do  this  with  any  book?”  The  teacher 
said,  “You  can,  but  if  you  are  reading  for  30  minutes  already 
anyway,  you  may  want  to  do  more  than  a  paragraph.” 

29 

 

  

_ 

[There  was  a  lack  of  clarity  around  the  amount  of  reading  to 
be  completed  (to  read  two  paragraphs  or  for  thirty  minutes) 
and  the  writing  assignment  (to  write  a  summary  statement 
or  more  than  a  paragraph).] 

(Underline  and  bold  in  original.) 

62. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

1.  Be  mindful  of  the  standard  being  taught  and  the  lesson 
objective.  Review  a list  of  possible  ideas  about  the  activity 
selected  that  will  move  students  closer  to  the  objective.  Think 
through  the  purpose  of  each  before  determining  which  would  be 
the  most  effective. 
2.  When  you  recognize  that  student  sharing  is  moving  students 
away  from  the  purpose,  stop  them.  In  this  particular  case,  after 
one  or  two  quick  personal  experiences,  ask  students  to  raise 
their  hand  if  they  have  had  a  similar  experience  and  move  on. 
Since  almost  every  student  had a  story  to  share,  it  would  have 
been  a  good  idea  for  those  students  that  have  extra  time,  [sic]  to 
do  a  quick  write  [sic]  on  the  topic  at  a  later  time. 
3.  When  collecting  artifacts,  asks  students  to  describe  why  or 
how  that  artifact  is  relevant  to  the  theme  or  new  learning.  "I 
choose  to  bring  in  stone  because  it  reminded  me  about  what  I 
had  heard  about  Stonehenge." 
4.  Use  the  language  of  the  objective  written  in  the  lesson. 
Students  will  be  able  to  determine  which  reference  source  would 
provide  the  best  evidence  to  support  the  main  idea. 
5.  When  teaching  about  reference  sources,  make  them 
available.  Bring  in  the  telephone  directory,  thesaurus, 
dictionary,  Atlas,  Almanac,  Encyclopedia,  Autobiography, 
Biography,  a  copy  of  an  editorial  page,  print  a  large  copy  of  a 
meaningful  quote,  take  a  statement  and  post  it,  post  a  web 
address,  bring  in  a  newspaper  article  and  a  personal  diary  (if 
possible). 

63. 

October  15,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  was  given  an 

overall  rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards.”  For  CSTPs  1,  3,  4,  and  5,  she  was  given  a 
rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards.”  She  was  rated  “Meet  Standards  Proficient”  for  CSTP 
2,  and  “Not  Observed”  for  CSTP  6. 

  

 

30 

64. 

The  following  are  examples  of  deficiencies  noted  during  the  observation: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

Throughout  the  lesson,  students  struggled  to  answer  questions 
related  to  finding  the  main  idea  in  [sic]  story. 

T.  “So  they  took  off,  east  to  west,  then  they  crashed,  then  what 
happened  after  that?” 
S.  “They  tried  it  again.” 
T.  “So  what’s  the  main  idea  in  this  paragraph?” 
S.  “They  couldn’t  fly  east  to  west.” 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

The  teacher  identified  the  key  concept  and  underlying  themes  . 
prior  to  presenting  the  lesson  by  referencing  previous  learning. 

T.  “We  talked  about  main  idea  last  week,  about  finding  the 
main  idea.” 

The  teacher  briefly  introduced  vocabulary  words  contained  in 
the  story.  Students  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  to 
whether  they  had  previous  knowledge  of  the  words  or  if  they 
understood  the  meaning  of  each  word. 

[1]  ---[91 

c. 

CSTP  4: 

As  a  result,  students  were  unable  to  use  the  instructional 
strategies  in  order  to  understand  and  identify  the  key  concepts  of 
the  lesson. 

Ms.  Cooper  was  not  able  to  extend  students  understanding  of  the 
key  concepts  and  model  the  lesson  objective. 

The  objective  of  the  lesson  was  to  determine  which  source  best 
supports  the  main  idea  by  reading  the  text  and  thinking  about 
the  details. 

Students  had  difficulty  understanding  the  main  idea  in  each 
section. 

(---[9] 

31 

 

  

As  a  result,  students  were  not  provided  with  the  academic  rigor 
necessary  to  understand  the  lesson  objective. 

d. 

CSTP  5: 

During  the  post  conference,  I  stated  a  concern  that  students  were 
not  able  to  identify  the  main  idea  of  each  paragraph/section. 
Ms.  Cooper  explained  that  students  still  struggle  with  this 
concept  even  though  it  is  a  standard  throughout  all  grade  levels. 
Students  only  named  two  main  ideas  within  the  hour  lesson,  one 
of  which  was  answered  by  the  teacher.  I  asked  the  reasoning  as 
to  why  students  were  required  to  supply  the  source/reference 
material  and  Ms.  Cooper  stated  that  there  are  many  questions 
related  to  this  concept  on  the  CST  and  GLAS.  I  addressed  the 
fact  that  students  were  not  able  to  supply  the  source  because 
they  didn’t  correctly  identify  the  main  idea.  Students  were 
given  a  frontloading  lesson  on  source/reference  material  prior  to 
_  this  observation.  Ms.  Cooper  was  able  to  engaged  [sic]  students 
during  the  “popcorn”  reading.  During  most  of  the  observation, 
some  students  were  off  task  and  had  to  be  redirected  multiple 
times.  Some  students  did  not  complete  the  assigned  worksheet. 
It  was  unclear  whether  some  students  understood  the  reading 
and  able  to  identify  the  main  idea  due  to  lack  of  response  or 
written  work.  The  objective  was  written  and  stated  although 
students  were  not  able  to  understand  or  complete  the  objective. 
Vocabulary  words  were  introduced  and  defined  but  students 
were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  identify  the  meaning  and  how 
it  corresponded  within  the  reading.  Students  were  not  prepared 
to  complete  the  assigned  tasks  when  stated  by  the  teacher. 

65. 

respondent  with  improving  her  performance: 

It  was  recommended  that  since  students  were  struggling  to 

Vice  Principal  Derrick  Hansen  recommended  the  following  strategies  to  assist 

   

1. 
identify  the  main  idea  in  each  paragraph/section,  the  teacher 
should  reteach  how  to  use  details  in  a  story  to  find  the  main 
idea.  The  teacher  could  use  frontloading  lessons  as  an 
instructional  strategy. 
I  recommended  that  due  to  the  lack  of  comprehension  and 
2. 
understanding  of  the  story  and  main  ideas,  it  would  be  beneficial 
for  students  to  hear  the  story  read  back  to  them,  read  with 
partners,  and  independently  read  themselves.  This  would  give 
students  three  separate  readings  of  the  story. 
3.  Due  to  the  lack  of  all  students  responding  in  small  groups, 
the  teacher  should  offer  incentives  or  points  for  any  student  in 

32 

the  group  to  give  the  correct  answer.  This  would  require  all 
students  to  participate  and  know  the  correct  answer  during 
group  discussion. 
4.  The  teacher  should  provide  examples  of  source/reference 
material  within  the  classroom  based  on  the  story  that  they  are 
reading.  For  example:  an  Encyclopedia,  on-line  website,  and 
biography  on  Amelia  Earhart  would  be  available  for  students  to 
view/use  during  independent  practice. 

66. 

October  25,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation:  Respondent  received  an 

overall  rating  of  “Meets  Standards.” 

67. 

November  7,  2012  lesson  observation:  The  following  are  the  relevant  ratings 

respondent  received: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Category  1:  “DNM.” 

Category  2:  “DNM.” 

Category  3:  “N/O.” 

Category  4:  “N/O.” 

Category  5:  “DNM.” 

Category  6:  “DNM.” 

Category  1:  “DNM.” 

Category  2:  “DNM.” 

Category  3:  “DNM.” 

Category  4:  “DNM.” 

Category  5:  “N/O.” 

Category  6:  “N/O.” 

33 

 

CSTP  4: 

CSTP  5: 

CSTP  6: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Category  1: 

“DNM.” 

Category  2: 

Category  3: 

Category  4: 

“MMS.” 
“N/O.” 

“DNM.” 

Category  5: 

“N/O.” 

Category  1: 

Category  2: 

“N/O.” 

“N/O.” 

Category  3: 

“N/O.” 

Category  4: 

Category  5: 

Category  6: 

“N/O.” 

“N/O.” 
“N/O.” 

Category  7: 

“N/O.” 

Category  1: 

Category  2: 

Category  3: 

“DNM.” 

“DNM.” 

“DNM.” 

Category  4: 

“DNM.” 

Category  5: 

Category  6: 

Category  7: 

“DNM.” 

“DNM.” 

“DNM.” 

34 

 

68. 

Some  of  the  deficiencies  noted  during  the  evaluation  include: 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

Ms.  Cooper  did  not  use  information  regarding  students’  cultural 
‘backgrounds,  prior  knowledge,  life  experiences,  and  interests. 
[]..-[§]  As  such,  students  were  not  able  to  determine  what 
would  be  considered  a  significant  detail  what  how  best  to 
summarize  the  text. 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

Ms.  Cooper  did  not  integrate  key  concepts,  themes  and 
relationships  in  ways  that  ensure  clean  connections  across 
subject  matter  and  relevance  to  students.  [§]...[§]  As  such, 
student  responses  were  low  level  summaries  that  were 
disconnected  from  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  text. 

c. 

-CSTP4: 

Ms.  Cooper  did  not  incorporate  diverse  subject  matter 
perspectives  into  the  planning  [of  a  lesson  involving  the  book 
The  Great  Depression].  [{]...[§]  As  such,  students  fail  to  grasp  | 
the  full  meaning  of  the  boys  [sic]  work,  The  Great  Depression 
[sic],  and  why  the  character  expressed  fear  at  various  points  in 
this  story  related  to  the  plot. 

  

Determination  of  Whether  Respondent’s  Performance  Improved  Sufficiently  to  Avoid 
Dismissal 

69. 

On  December  21,  2012,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  completed  a  preliminary 
evaluation  to  determine  whether  respondent’s  performance  as  a  teacher  had  sufficiently 
improved  during  the  90-day  notice  period  such  that  her  employment  with  the  District  should 
not  be  terminated. 

70. 

The  evaluation  was  based  on  90-day  performance  evaluations  on  September 

11,  19,  26,  October  3,  4,  8,  15,  25,  and  November  1,  2012;  formal  lesson  observations  on 
November  7  and  15,  2012;  conversations  between  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  and  respondent 
on  September  7,  14,  21,  26,  28,  October  8,  12,  16,  23,  30,  November  13,  16,  27,  and  28, 
2012;  and  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  review  of  samples  of  students’  work,  respondent’s 
lesson  plans,  and  a  student  progress  review. 

71.  |  Respondent  was  rated  as  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  for  CSTPs  1  (Engaging 
and  Supporting  Students  in  Learning),  3  (Understanding  and  Organizing  Subject  Matter  for 
Student  Learning),  4  (Planning  Instruction  and  Designing  Learning  Experiences  for  All 

35 

 

  

Students),  5  (Assessing  Student  Learning),  and  6  (Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator). 
She  was  rated  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  for  CSTP  2  (Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective 
Environments  for  Student  Learning). 

72. 
following: 

Some  of  the  deficiencies  noted  in  the  preliminary  evaluation  include  the 

. 

a. 

CSTP  1: 

During  the  first  formal  lesson  observation  on  11-7-12,  the 
teacher  began  by  saying,  “There  was  something  we  talked  about 
that  was  very  important.  What  was  it?”  The  students  said,  “It 
was  the  Great  Depression.”  The  teacher  followed  up  by  saying, 
“Now  that  we  have  activated  what  we  learned  yesterday,  I  will 
read  the  objective.  By  the  end  of  this  lesson  I  will  be  able  to 
construct  a  summary  statement  by  analyzing  details  from  the 
_  text.”  There  was  no  discussion  about  what  was  learned  about 
the  Great  Depression,  or  how  it  related  to  the  new  learning. 

At  the  end  of  the  lesson,  the  teacher  asked  students  to  write  the 
definition  of  the  word  “tone”  at  the  bottom  of  a  poem  that  had 
been  previously  read.  The  teacher  said,  “Go  back  to  your 
outline  and  then  write  it  on  the  bottom  of  your  paper.”  A 
student  said,  “Didn’t  we  just  do  that?”  Students  had  already 
written  the  definition  of  the  word  “tone”  on  the  outline  and 
students  wanted  to  write  their  understanding  of  the  tone  of  the 
poem. 

[1]..-[9] 

[W]---(9] 

During  the  lesson  on  10-8-12,  students  were  asked  to  share  the 
artifact  they  chose  to  bring  to  class  as  part  of  an  extra  credit 
assignment.  Students  were  not  asked  how  this  artifact  related  to 
the  theme  of  the  story  which  was  what  the  teacher  identified  as 
the  purpose  of  the  activity. 

b. 

CSTP  3: 

During  the  following  four  observations,  the  teacher  made  seven 
erroneous  or  confusing  statements  that  led  students  away  from 
the  lesson  objective. 

36 

 

  

  

1.  “We  have  learned  about  different  elements.  Today  we  are 
going  to  start  with  the  language  part. 
It  all  builds  on  each  other. 
We  won’t  forget  that  we  already  looked  at  rhyme  and  repetition. 
We  might  need  those.  Today  we  are  looking  at  parts  of 
language.”  (9-26-12)  [Error:  Rhyme  and  repetition  are  parts 
of  language. ] 

2.  The  teacher  referred  back  to  an  example  she  used  about  an 
earthquake  and  talked  about  using  imagery  —  which  is  a 
component  of  figurative  language.  The  follow  up  question  was 
“Who  can  give  me  the  definition  of  rhythm  from  their  outline?” 
[Error:  Rhythm  is  another  element  of  language.] 

3.  On  10-3-12,  during  vocabulary  instruction,  the  teacher 
presented  a  sentence  and  underlined  the  word  “track.”  The 
students  were  to  identify  the  definition  of  this  multiple  meaning 
word  in  the  context  of  the  sentence.  The  teacher  asked  several 
questions  and  her  follow  up  statements  caused  confusion. 
[Error:  In  the  context  of  this  sentence,  the  answer  cannot  be  all 
of  the  above  as  she  stated  to  students. ] 

4.  On  10-4-12,  the  teacher  asked  students  to  share  examples  of 
figurative  language  from  a  poem  shared  in  class.  A  student 
believed  that  when  the  author  wrote  “Five  mountain  ranges  one 
behind  the  other...”  it  was  an  example  of  personification. 
[Error:  The  mountain  ranges  bowed  down  before  the  sunset, 
would  be  use  of  personification. ] 

5.  The  teacher  said,  “I  didn’t  get  anything  from  this  group. 
Sweet  scented  stuff...  For  imagery.  What  is  sweet  scented 
stuff?  The  teacher  asked  Eugenia.  Eugenia  said,  “Flowers.” 
[Error:  in  the  context  of  this  poem,  the  author  was  referring  to 
the  scent  of  saw  dust  [sic].] 

6.  The  teacher  said,  “The  only  one  we  had — alliteration.” 
Chyna  said,  “So  we  picked  them,  they  and  they.  Because  they 
start  with  the  same  thing.”  [Error:  Alliteration  is  identified  by 
looking  for  words  with  the  same  identical  consonant  sounds. 
For  example,  Kerry’s  cats  clawed  her  couch,  creating  chaos. 
When  the  T  and H  are  used  in  the  words  them  and  they,  they  are 
diagraphs  not  consonants.] 

7.  The  teacher  explained  that  “In  a  mystery,  there  is  something 
happening  that  you  need  to  solve.”  (10-8-12)  [There  was  a 
missed  opportunity  to  clarify  student  understanding  by  sharing 

37 

 

the  definition  of  mystery:  anything  secret  or 
unknown/unexplained,  not  fully  understood,  baffled,  and  eludes 
understanding.]  [Suggestion:  explain  that  this  particular  genre 
is  usually  read  as  a  book,  a  play,  or  movie  about  a  puzzling 
event,  especially  an  unsolved  crime  that  makes  great  use  of 
suspense. | 

The  teacher  briefly  introduced  vocabulary  words  contained  in 
the  story.  Students  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  to 
whether  they  had  previous  knowledge  of  the  words  or  if  they 
understood  the  meaning  of  each  word.  Only  a  few  students 
could  recognize  and  call  out  the  main  idea  of  each  section. 

[---[91 

[.. [1 

Then  the  teacher  asked,  “Do  you  know  what  the  editorial  page 
is?”  A  student  responded  by  saying,  “Newspaper.”  The  teacher 
said,  “It’s  basically  different  stories  that  they  talk  about.  It 
comes  out  a  lot  on  the  opinion  page.  They  are  people’s  view. 
These  are  letters  people  write  to  the  editor...  lots  of  time  they 
are  complaining.  It’s  a  place  to  share  your  opinions  or  thoughts. 
Quotation.  What  is  a  quotation?”  The  teacher  then  proceeded 
to  go  down  the  page  reading  the  various  reference  sources  and 
their  definition.  [Editorial:  an  article  in  a  newspaper  or  other 
periodical  presenting  the  opinion  of  the  publisher,  editor,  or 
editors.  The  statement  broadcast  on  radio  or  television 
represents  the  opinion  of  the  owner,  manager  or  the  like.] 

CSTP  4: 

The  teacher  departmentalizes  with  two  other  sixth  grade 
teachers.  Ms.  Cooper  is  responsible  for  teaching  reading  to  all 
sixth  grade  students.  In  the  first  week  of  school,  the  teacher  did 
not  teach  any  of  the  reading  standards,  nor  have  students  read 
from  the  adopted  curriculum  or  any  supplemental  materials. 
The  teacher  told  me  she  spent  the  week  on  rules  and 
expectations. 

It  was  recommended  in  the  Teacher  Development  Plan  that 
[respondent]  develop  a  semester  plan  for  the  reading  standards 
to  be  taught.  It  was  submitted  in  August.  It  was  recommended 
that  the  plan  be  rewritten.  The  information  provided  was 
minimal.  The  principal  had  provided  district  pacing  guide  and 

38

curriculum  maps  to  provide  guidance.  The  expectation  was  not 
met,  and  the  plan  was  resubmitted  as  requested. 

Lesson  plans  were  submitted  for  11  out  of  15  weeks.  Substitute 
teacher  plans  were  not  included. 

When  time  was  designated  for  GLAS  review  in  the  lesson  plans 
for  the  week,  information  was  provided.  Based  on  formative 
data  results,  the  teacher  should  have  identified  what  standards 
needed  to  be  re-taught.  She  did  not. 

(--.[9] 

CSTP  5: 

There  are  a  minimum  of  15  occurrences  in  the  11  observations 
that  the  teacher’s  instructional  delivery  lacked  alignment  to  the 
objective. 

The  teacher  did  not  collect  the  students’  outlines.  On  the  post 
test,  70%  of  the  students  passed  with  an  A,  B,  or  C.  Eight 
students  failed  the  post  test.  The  eight  students  had  also  failed 
the  pre-test.  The  teacher  did  not  provide  re-teaching  or  specific 
feedback.  (9-11-12) 

The  teacher  did  not  administer  the  pre-assessment  provided  in 
the  unit.  Teaching  three  different  reading  levels,  the  pre- 
assessment  would  have  assisted  the  teacher  in  her  planning  for 
the  various  reading  levels.  (9-19-12) 

In  our  post  observation  conference,  the  teacher  was  unsure 
about  the  number  of  students  that  were  able  to  determine  the 
meaning  of  the  poem. 

[W---(91] 

While  meeting  with  the  teacher  each  week,  I  asked  if  she  knew 
which  students  learned  the  lesson  objective.  Ms.  Cooper 
frequently  said  she  was  unsure. 

73. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  provided  respondent  with  the  following  feedback: 

1.  Model  creating  an  outline  in  order  for  students  to  visualize 
how  to  format  the  page  and  teach  the  skills  of  identifying  main 
topics  and  subtopics. 

39 

 

  

2.  Expand  the  students  learning,  [sic]  by  requiring  students  to 
create  their  own  outline,  extend  student  thinking  by  asking 
students  to  explain.  For  example  ask,  “What  do  you  know  about 
The  Great  Depression?” 
3.  Backwards  map  your  lesson.  Start  with  the  end  in  mind  and 
see  if  your  plan  will  assist  students  in  meeting  objectives. 

Respondent’s  Arguments 

Failure  to  prove  allegations 

74 

The  May  6,  2011  summary  evaluation  criticized  respondent  because  her  class 
was  “very  talkative”  during  a  lesson  on  propaganda  on  February  1,  2011.  But  the  District’s 
witnesses  admitted  at  hearing  that  “students  will  talk.”  And  student  talking  generally  does 
not  become  an  issue  unless  it  interferes  with:  1)  the  teacher’s  ability  to  teach,  or  2)  the 
ability  to  learn  of  (a)  students  who  are  talking,  or  (b)  other  students.  The  District  did  not 
provide  evidence  of  any  such  interference.  Therefore,  there  is  insufficient  contextual 
evidence  to  establish  that  respondent’s  performance  on  February  1,  2011,  was  unsatisfactory 
due  to  students  talking. 

75. 

Respondent  was  criticized  in  the  same  evaluation  for  not  posting  the  lesson 
objective  on  September  14,  2010.  However,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  literal  notes  of  her 
observation  that  day  state:  “Objective.  Students  will  be  able  to  correctly  identify  an  event 
that  comes  before  or  after  a  particular  event  and  create  a  summary  of  the  event  by  taking 
notes  in  using  language  frames.”  Therefore,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that 
respondent’s  performance  on  September  14,  2010,  was  unsatisfactory  due  to  her  failure  to 
post  the  lesson  objective. 

76. 

Respondent  was  criticized  during  her  90-day  performance  evaluation  on 

September  11,  2012,  because  “out  of  the  33  students  in  the  class,  7  students  did  not  complete 
the  outline.  4  out  of  the  7  that  did  not  complete  the  outline  passed  the  test  with  88%.” 
Respondent  explained  at  hearing,  however,  that  several  of  her  students  were  pulled  from  the 
beginning  of  class  that  day  to  attend  “band  class,”  while  others  were  pulled  at  the  end  of 
class  to  attend  “strings.”  There  was  no  evidence  whether  any  of  the  students  who  did  not 
complete  the  outline  were  part  of  the  group  of  students  who  missed  either  the  beginning  or 
end  of  class  that  day.  Therefore,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  respondent’s 
performance  on  September  11,  2012,  was  unsatisfactory  due  to  the  failure  of  some  students 
to  complete  the  assignment. 

77, 

The  September  19,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation  criticized  respondent 
for  “not  establish[ing]  classroom  rules  and  procedures  that  supported  student  learning.”  But 
the  evidence  established  that  she  did  in  fact  establish  such rules,  but  may  not  have 
consistently  or  effectively  enforced  them.  Therefore,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to 
establish  that  respondent’s  performance  on  September  19,  2012,  was  unsatisfactory  due  to 
her  failure  to  establish  classroom  rules  and  procedures  that  supported  student  learning. 

40 

   

Disconnect  between  verbal  and  written  comments  about  respondent’s  performance 

78. 

Respondent  explained  at  hearing  that  there  was  always  a  disconnect  between 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  verbal  comments  after  an  observation  and  her  written  comments  in 
the  subsequent  written  evaluation.  Respondent  felt  that  she  was  being  “railroaded”  and  that 
“nothing  could  be  done.” 

79, 

On a  date  not  established  by  the  evidence,  respondent  sent  the  following  e- 

mail  to  Principal  Rocha-Salazar: 

80. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  responded  to  respondent’s  e-mail  by  including  the 

following  in  her  comments  to  the  October  8,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation: 

Once  again  I  find  myself  in  shock  after  meeting  with  you  to  sign 
one  of  my  evaluations.  We  met  on  Friday  10-12  to  discuss  the 
lesson  and  once  again I  felt  that  you  gave  me  many  positive 
comments,  but  alas  as  I  went  back  on  Monday  there  is  nothing 
but  negative  comments  in  my  evaluation.  I  had  to  share  the  fact 
that  I  am  disappointed.  I  am  not  ineffective,  and  I  feel  that  there 
is  no  way  that  you  will  see  this. 
I  feel  that  all  you  look  for  is  the 
negative.  I’ve  taken  the  literal  notes  and  I  will  be  looking  for 
evidence  that  I  am  passing  3  and  4.  Once  again  I  will  leave  you 
with  the  statement  that  my  students  are  learning  and  I  am  not 
ineffective.  Kim” 

In  our  meeting,  I  felt  it  was  important  for  me  to  listen  to  how 
Kim  was  feeling  about  this  process  to  date.  Kim  expressed 
concern  about  “...  everything  being  negative  and  not  seeing 
anything  positive  in  her  written  observation  forms.”  Kim 
expressed  concern  about  the  fact  that  when  we  meet,  it  feels 
positive,  but  the  written  summary  is  all  negative.  I  felt  it  was 
important  to  clarify  that  although  Kim  is  always  professional  in 
her  demeanor  and  demonstrated  a  desire  to  improve  during  our 
weekly  meetings,  I  have  consistently  provided  examples  of  how 
lessons  had  not  gone  well.  I  cited  examples  from  each  of  the 
last  three  lessons.  Those  examples  included:  asking  students  to 
do  independent  work  when  it  was  clear  to  her  that  they  couldn’t 
do  the  work  during  guided  practice.  I  explicitly  stated  that  that 
instruction  decision  was  a  mistake.  During  another  lesson,  Kim 
brought  up  Jim  Crow  Laws  completely  out  of  context,  another 
poor  instructional  decision.  Students  were  unable  to  identify  the 
use  of  figurative  language  in  a  poem  selected  by  the  teacher.  I 
mentioned  again  spending  15  minutes  listening  to  student  ghost 
stories  is  not  a  good  use  of  instructional  time.  During  our 
conversation  about  this  particular  lesson  (10-8-12)  it  was  clear 

41 

 

_ 

In  light  of  the  evidence,  I  didn’t  feel  I  could  mark  that 

to  Kim  that  I  found  that  she  still  struggles  on  meeting  Standard 
3  &  4. 
she  was  meeting  the  standards.  Kim  took  the  notes  as  stated  in 
her  e-mail  and  said  she  would  look  for  evidence  that 
demonstrates  that  she  has  met  standard  3  &  4  in  that  lesson.  I 
haven’t  received  anything  to  date  that  would  prompt  further 
conversation.  There  was  a  request  for  Kim  to  collect  student 
work  from  the  lesson  on  October  4  to  demonstrate  the  level  of 
student  understanding.  To  date,  that  work  has  not  been 
submitted  for  review. 

81. 

The  following  language  appears  at  the  bottom  of  each  of  respondent’s 

preliminary  evaluations  and  summary  evaluations:  “The  evaluatee’s  signature  does  not 
indicate  agreement.  A  written  response  may  be  submitted  within  ten  (10)  days.” 

82. 

While  respondent  explained  at  hearing  that  she  submitted  written  responses  to 
some  of  her  evaluations,  she  did  not  produce  copies  of  any  of  those  responses  or  provide  any 
other  corroborating  evidence.  Any  written  response  she  submitted  to  one  of  her  performance 
evaluations  would  have  become  a  “permanent  attachment  to  [her]  personnel  file.”  (Ed. 
Code,  §44663,  subd.  (a).) 

83. 

Nor  did  respondent  introduce  any  evidence  that  she  complained  to  anyone 
with  the  District  or  her  union  that  she  was. being  unfairly  evaluated  by  Principal  Rocha- 
Salazar. 

84. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  explained  that  she  views  her  role  when  evaluating  one 
of  her  teachers  as  being  the  same  as  the  role  a  classroom  teacher  plays  with  her  students,  and 
a  Classroom  teacher  would  not  be  effective  if  she  only  tells  her  students  what  they  are  doing 
wrong  without  also  praising  those  things  they  are  doing  right.  In  other  words,  Principal 
Rocha-Salazar  is  concerned  about  the  teacher  not  having  the  motivation  to  improve  if  she 
provides  only  negative  feedback.  Therefore,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  said  she  strives  to 
provide  both  positive  and  negative  feedback  in  her  verbal  and  written  comments  to  teachers 
about  performance  issues. 

Ineffective  assistance 

85. 

Respondent  was  critical  of  the  assistance  provided  by  Ms.  Van  Fleet,  and  said 

she  did  not  find  such  assistance  as  a  whole  to  be  very  helpful.  Respondent  explained  that 
while  Ms.  Van  Fleet  did  a  “great  job”  helping  her  learn  the  teaching  strategy  “I  do,  We  do, 
You  do”  and  providing  other  helpful  resources,  that  was  the  only  help  provided. 

86. 

Respondent  was  also  critical  of  the  assistance  provided  by  Ms.  Ortiz, 

explaining  that  she  found  only  some  of  the  different  teaching  strategies  provided  helpful. 

   

42 

87. 

Respondent  did  not  introduce  any  evidence  that  she  complained  to  Principal 
Rocha-Salazar  or  anyone  else  in  the  District  or  her  union  about  the  assistance  provided  by 
Ms.  Van  Fleet  or  Ms.  Ortiz.  Nor  did  she  introduce  any  evidence  that  she  requested  a  teacher 
development  coach  other  than  Ms.  Ortiz. 

Respondent’s  belief  she  would  be  teaching  fifth  grade 

88. 

Respondent  testified  that  towards  the  end  of  the  2010/2011  school  year, 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  told  her  she  would  be  teaching  fifth  grade  the  following  school 
year.’ She  said  she  spent  the  following  summer  preparing  lesson  plans  for  fifth  grade.  It 
was  not  until  the  last  week  of  summer  that  respondent  learned  she  would  be  teaching  sixth 
grade,  which  she  said  caused  her  concern  since  she  had  been  planning  for  fifth  grade  all 
summer  long. 

89. 

The  significance  of  respondent’s  belief  about  her  teaching  assignment  for.  the 

2011/2012  school  year  is  unclear.  Respondent  admitted  that  she  did  not  say  “no”  to  teaching 
sixth  grade  again  because  that  was  her  preferred  assignment  since  she  taught  it  the  previous 
school  year.  Respondent  further  explained  that  she  was  able  to  prepare  for  teaching  sixth 
grade  during  the  last  week  of  summer  by  pulling  out  the  materials  she  had  used  the  previous 
year  and  contacting  the  other  sixth  grade  teachers. 

Discussion  of Respondent’s  Arguments 

Failure  to  prove  allegations 

90. 

For  the  reasons  discussed  in  Factual  Findings  74  through  77,  the  District  failed 

to  prove  that  respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  on: 
class  was  “very  talkative,”  2)  September  14,  2010,  because  she  did  not  post  the  lesson 
objective,  3)  September  11,  2012,  because  seven  students  did  not  complete  the  outline,  or  4) 
September  19,  2012,  because  she  did  “not  establish  classroom  rules  and  procedures  that 
supported  student  learning.”  Therefore,  no  cause  exists  to  terminate  respondent’s 
employment  with  the  District  based  on  those  allegations.“ 

1)  May  6,  2011,  because  her 

  

'  At  hearing,  the  District  objected  to  such  testimony  on  hearsay  grounds,  and  it  was 

admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision 
(d).  But  whether  there  is  direct  evidence  of  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  statement  for 
respondent’s  testimony  to  supplement  or  explain  ultimately  does  not  matter  because  such 
testimony  was  offered  to  prove  the  effect  of  the  alleged  statement  on  her,  rather  than  the  truth 
of  the  statement  itself.  (People  v.  Jablonski  (2006)  37  Cal.  4th  774,  820  [“To  the  extent  that 
Petersen’s  statement  was  admitted  to  show  its  effect  on  defendant,  the  statement  was  not 
hearsay  because  it  was  not  admitted  for  the  truth  —  that  is,  that  Petersen  was  afraid  of 
defendant.”];  italics  in  original.) 

‘4  But  the  failure  to  prove  those  four  allegations  is  not  fatal  to  the  Accusation  because 
it  alleges  the  “specific  instances  of  behavior”  cited  in  the  Amended  Notice  and  incorporates 

43 

  

 

  

Disconnect  between  verbal  and  written  comments  about  respondent’s  performance 

91. 

The  evidence  established  that  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  was  not  as  clear  as  she 
could  have  been  when  communicating  her  concerns  about  respondent’s  performance  in  the 
classroom  to  her.  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  use  of  “teacher  talk”’>  at  times  when 
communicating  with  respondent  may  have  contributed  to  the  lack  of  clarity. 

92.  |  However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  respondent  took  the  appropriate  steps  to 

seek  clarification  of  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  concerns  or  complained  to  anyone  about  the 
substance  of  her  evaluations.  While  respondent  sent  Principal  Rocha-Salazar  an  e-mail 
raising  concerns  over  apparent  miscommunications,  Principal  Rocha-Salazar’s  comments  in 
her  October  8,  2012  90-day  performance  evaluation  clarified  that  she  never  had  any  concerns 
with  respondent’s  demeanor  being  unprofessional  or  her  lack  of  desire  to  improve.  But  she 
said  she  had  consistently  provided  respondent  with  specific  examples  of  how  lessons  had  not 
gone  well.  Respondent  did  not  dispute  such  contention  or  produce  any  evidence  to  the 
contrary.  (Evid.  Code,  §  413  [a  party’s  failure  to  explain  or  deny  harmful  evidence  creates 
an  inference  that  she  cannot].) 

93. 

Principal  Rocha-Salazar  also  documented  in  her  comments  that  respondent 
said  she  would  provide  evidence  that  she  was  meeting  CSTPs  3  and  4,  but  never  followed 
through.  At  hearing,  respondent  did  not  offer  any  evidence  to  the  contrary. 

94. 

Insum,  any  confusion  created  by  the  lack  of  clarity  in  Principal  Rocha- 

Salazar’s  verbal  and  written  communications  with  respondent  was  outweighed  by 
respondent’s  failure  to  take  appropriate  steps  to  seek  clarification  or  complain  about  the 
substance  of  her  evaluations.  This  is  especially  true  in  light  of  the  fact  that  she  has  been 
receiving  negative  performance  evaluations  since  she  first  arrived  at  Ayer  Elementary 
School.  Respondent’s  lack  of  action  is  inconsistent  with  the  conduct  of  a  teacher  who  is 
being  wrongly  accused  of  unsatisfactory  performance. 

  

the  Amended  Notice  and  attached  performance  of  evaluations.  Therefore,  the  Accusation  is 
interpreted  as  alleging  each  of  the  “specific  instances  of  behavior,”  when  considered  as  a 
whole,  as  constituting  a  single  charge  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance,  rather 
than  as  separate  and  independent  charges  for  dismissal.  (Doe  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (2007) 
42  Cal.4th  531,  551  [a  pleading  must  allege  the  ultimate  facts  that  constitute  the  cause  of 
action,  as  opposed  to  the  evidentiary  facts  by  which  the  ultimate  facts  will  be  proven];  Rhode 
v.  Bartholomew  (1949)  94  Cal.App.2d  272,  279  [“Ultimate  facts  are  the  logical  conclusions 
deduced  from  certain  primary  facts  evidentiary  in  character.”]) 

*  A  method  of  criticizing  someone’s  behavior  by  using  vague  descriptors  that  are  less 
offensive.  For  instance,  describing  someone  as  “social”  instead  of  saying  he  talks  too  much. 

44 

 

    

Ineffective  assistance 

95. 

Respondent’s  criticism  of  the  assistance  provided  by  Ms.  Van  Fleet  was  not 

persuasive.  She  admitted  during  her  testimony  that  Ms.  Van  Fleet  was  not  assigned  to  her  as 
a  teacher  development  coach  and,  therefore,  was  not  tasked  with  helping  respondent  improve 
on  the  CSTPs  she  did  not  meet. 

96. 

Furthermore,  respondent  did  not  produce  any  evidence  that  she  complained  to 
anyone  within  the  District  or  her  union  about  the  assistance  she  was  receiving  from  Ms.  Van 
Fleet  or  Ms.  Ortiz.  Nor  did  she  introduce  any  evidence  that  she  requested  assistance  from 
someone  other  than  Ms.  Van  Fleet  or  Ms.  Ortiz. 

Respondent's  belief  she  would  be  teaching  fifth  grade 

97. 

As  previously  discussed,  the  significance  of  respondent’s  belief  about  her 
teaching  assignment  for  the  2011/2012  school  year  is  unclear.  Besides,  she  admitted  she 
wanted  to  return  to  teaching  sixth  grade,  and  was  able  to  prepare  for  such  assignment  during 
the  final  week  of  summer. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

98.  |  When  considering  respondent’s  performance  as  a  teacher  at  Ayer  Elementary 

School  prior  to  issuance  of  the  Amended  Notice  as  a  whole,  the  persuasive  evidence 
established  that  she  did  not  meet  the  District’s  performance  standards  for  CSTP  3  on  all, 
except  one,  of  her  lesson  observations,  preliminary  evaluations,  and  summary  evaluations, 
and  CSTP  4  on  all,  except  three  of  them.  Additionally,  she  did  not  meet  the  District’s 
performance  standards  for  CSTPs  1  and  5.  And  respondent’s  performance  did  not  improve 
during  the  90-day  notice  period.  She  failed  to  meet  standards  under:  1)  CSTPs  3  and  4  on 
all,  except  two  evaluations;  2)  CSTP  1  on  all,  except  three,  evaluations;  and  3)  CSTP  5  on 
all,  except  four,  evaluations.  Her  overall  rating  for  the  90-day  notice  period  was  “Does  Not 
Meet  Standards.” 

99. 

_Respondent’s  unsatisfactory  performance  under  CSTP  2  prior  to  issuance  of 

the  Amended  Notice  is  irrelevant  because  she  improved  her  performance  during  the 
subsequent  90-day  notice  period.  (Factual  Finding  71.)  Therefore,  no  cause  exists  to  dismiss 
her  from  the  District  based  on  her  performance  under  CSTP  2  as  explained  in  Legal 
Conclusions  4,  5,  and  11. 

100. 

Nor  is  respondent’s  unsatisfactory  performance  under  CSTP  6  during  the  90- 

day  notice  period  relevant  since  no  such  conduct  was  described  in  the  Amended  Notice. 
(Factual  Findings  3  and  45.)  Therefore,  no  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  the 
District  based  on  her  performance  under  CSTP 6 for  the  reasons  explained  in  Legal 
Conclusions  4,  5,  and  12. 

, 

45

  

101. 

The  District  informed  respondent  that  she  was  not  meeting  its  performance 

standards  for  CSTPs  1,  3,  4,  and  5  on  numerous  occasions.  Principal  Rocha-Salazar 
constantly  provided  respondent  with  verbal  feedback  regarding  her  performance  and 
strategies  and  techniques  for  improving  her  performance.  Additionally,  respondent  was 
provided  copies  of  all  her  performance  evaluations,  which  contained  Principal  Rocha- 
Salazar’s,  and  on  one  occasion  Vice  Principal  Hansen’s,  specific  recommendations  as  to 
areas  of  improvement  in  her  performance.  The  teacher  development  plans  respondent 
received  delineated,  in  specific  detail,  the  concerns  the  District  had  with  her  teaching  and 
gave  her  clear  direction  on  the  District’s  expectations.  Additionally,  the  Amended  Notice 
clearly  and  specifically  set  forth  the  District’s  concerns  with  respondent’s  performance  and 
the  steps  she  was  directed  to  take  to  improve  it. 

102. 

Respondent  was  provided  with  adequate  assistance  to  meet  the  District’s 

standards.  She  was  given  sufficient  opportunity  both  before  and  during  the  90-day  notice 
period  to  correct  her  deficiencies.  She  had  the  assistance  of  an  instructional  coach  (Ms.  Van 
Fleet)  and  two  different  teacher  development  coaches  (Ms.  Ortiz  and  Ms.  Day).  Ms.  Van 
Fleet  and  Ms.  Ortiz  observed  respondent  in  her  classroom  on  numerous  occasions,  and  gave 
her  detailed  and  specific  feedback  and  guidance.  Notwithstanding  all  this  feedback  and 
assistance,  respondent  did  not  demonstrate  sufficient  improvement  to  bring  her  performance 
up  to a  Satisfactory  level. 

103. 

There  is  no  dispute  that  respondent  is  well-liked  by  both  her  colleagues  and 
students.  This  matter  is  not  about  whether  she  is  well-liked,  but  rather  her  performance  in 
the  classroom.  During  her  testimony,  respondent  did  not  demonstrate  insight  into  the 
concerns  the  District  repeatedly  raised  about  her  performance.  She  continuously  asserted 
that  she  either  consistently  met  the  District’s  standards  or  sufficiently  improved  her 
performance  under  those  standards  where  she  was  initially  lacking.  Respondent  showed 
little  understanding  of  the  District’s  concerns  about  her  instructional  delivery.  She  also 
failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  took  adequate  steps  to  address  the District’s  concerns,  despite 
the  numerous  opportunities  she  was  provided.  Given  respondent’s  lack  of  improvement  and 
insight,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  the  District’s  students  to  return  her  to  her 
teaching  position.  Except  as  discussed  in  Factual  Findings  74  through  77,  99,  and  100  and 
Legal  Conclusions  11  and  12,  the  District  established,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence, 
that  respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory.  Its  dismissal  of  respondent  must  therefore 
be  sustained. 

Applicable  Burden  of Proof  and  Standard  of Proof 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  respondent’s  unsatisfactory 
performance  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardener  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.)  Evidence  that  is  deemed  to  preponderate 
must  amount  to  “substantial  evidence.”  (Weiser  v.  Board  of Retirement  (1984)  152 

46 

 

Cal.App.3d  775,  783.)  And  to  be  “substantial,”  evidence  must  be  reasonable  in  nature, 
credible,  and  of  solid  value.  (In  re  Teed’s  Estate  (1952)  112  Cal.App.2d  638,  644.) 

Applicable  Law 

Limitations  on  evidence  introduced  at  a  dismissal  hearing 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44944  sets  forth  the  procedures  that  must  be  followed 

when  a  school  district  brings  a  dismissal  action  against  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 
Subdivision  (a)(5),  provides,  in  relevant  part: 

No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to 
matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of 
the  filing  of  the  notice.  Evidence  of  records  regularly  kept  by 
the  governing  board  concerning  the  employee  may  be 
introduced,  but  no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or 
suspension  of  any  employee  shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or 
evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters  occurring  more  than 
four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  notice. 

Dismissal for  unsatisfactory  performance 

3. 

A  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for 

unsatisfactory  performance.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(4).)  When  reviewing  a  school 
district’s  dismissal  action  against  a  certificated  employee  based  solely  upon  unsatisfactory 
performance,  there  is  no  need  to  apply  the  standards  of  fitness  to  teach  set  forth  in  Morrison 
v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1175-1176.) 

4, 

Before  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for 

unsatisfactory  performance,  it  must  give  the  employee  notice  of  her  unsatisfactory 
performance.  And  that  notice  must  specify  the  nature  of  the  unsatisfactory  performance  with 
sufficient  particularity  to  give  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  her  deficiencies. 
Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unsatisfactory  performance  unless  it  acts  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (1)  or  (2): 

(1)  At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  — 
board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 
against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the 
unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with 
such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity 
as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her 

47 

  

   

faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written 
notice  shall  include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to 
the  employee. 

5. 

Providing  the  statutory  notice,  commonly  referred  to  as  a  “90-day  notice,”  is  a 

jurisdictional  prerequisite  to  the  school  district  taking  action  to  dismiss a  certificated 
employee  for  unsatisfactory  performance.  (Tarquin  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1978)  84  Cal.App.3d  251,  259.)  And  if  the  employee  subsequently  corrects  her 
alleged  unsatisfactory  performance,  cause  no  longer  exists  to  dismiss  her  based  on  such 
conduct.  (Crowl  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1990)  225  Cal.App.3d  334, 
350  [concluding  no  grounds  for  discipline  existed  because  there  had  been  “a  total 
remediation.”]) 

6. 

The  District  gave  respondent  written  notice  of  her  unsatisfactory  performance, 

specifying  its  nature  with  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  particularity  as  to  furnish  her 
with  an  adequate  opportunity  to  correct  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the 
allegations,  at  least  90  days  before  it  filed  allegations  of  respondent’s  unsatisfactory 
performance  with  its  governing  board.  The  written  notice  included  the  relevant  performance 
evaluations  of  respondent’s  conduct  from  September  2,  2010,  through  May  15,  2012. 

Performance  evaluations  for  certificated  personnel 

7. 

Each  school  district,  with  the  advice  of  its  certificated  instructional  personnel, 
must  establish  a  uniform  system  of  evaluating  the  performance  of  its  certificated  personnel. 
(Ed.  Code,  §§  44660,  44661.)  The  performance  evaluations  must  be  in  writing,  a  copy  must 
be  given  to  the  employee,  and  the  employee  has  the  right  to  file  a  written  response,  which 
“shall  become  a  permanent  attachment  to  the  employees  personnel  file.”  (Ed.  Code,  § 
44663,  subd.  (a).)  The  school  district  shall  evaluate  the  performance  of  a  certificated 
permanent  employee  with  less  than  10  years  in  the  school  district,  such  as  respondent,  “at 
least  every  other  year  ...  .”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44664,  subd.  (a)(2).)  With  regard  to  areas  of  the 
employee’s  performance  that  need  improvement,  the  law  requires  the following: 

The  evaluation  shall  include  recommendations,  if  necessary,  as 
to  areas  of  improvement  in  the  performance  of  the  employee.  If 
an  employee  is  not  performing  his  or  her  duties  in  a  satisfactory 
manner  according  to  the  standards  prescribed  by  the  governing 
board,  the  employing  authority  shall  notify  the  employee  in 
writing  of  that  fact  and  describe  the  unsatisfactory  performance. 
The  employing  authority  shall  thereafter  confer  with  the 
employee  making  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of 
improvement  in  the  employee’s  performance  and  endeavor  to 
assist  the  employee  in  his  or  her  performance.  If  any  permanent 
certificated  employee  has  received  an  unsatisfactory  evaluation, - 
the  employing  authority  shall  annually  evaluate  the  employee 

48 

   

until  the  employee  achieves a  positive  evaluation  or  is  separated 
from  the  district. 

(Ed.  Code,  §  44664,  subd.  (b).) 

8. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  2001/2002  school  year,  the  District’s  governing  board 

adopted  the  FUSD  Continuum  of  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  for  use  when 
evaluating  the  performance  of  its  certificated  employees. 

9. 

During  the  2010/2011,  2011/2012,  and  the  first  half  of  the  2012/2013  school 

years,  respondent  received  multiple  written  performance  evaluations  from  the  District.  Each 
evaluation  included  recommendations  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  respondent’s 
performance,  and  notified  her  that  she  was  not  performing  her  duties  in  a  satisfactory  manner 
according  to  the  District’s  standards,  giving  specific  examples  of  her  unsatisfactory 
performance.  The  District  thereafter  conferred  with  respondent  and  made  specific 
recommendations  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  her  performance.  It  endeavored  to  assist  her 
with  improving  her  performance. 

Existence  of  Cause  to  Dismiss  Respondent  for  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

10. 

The  Amended  Notice  informed  respondent  of  her  need  to  improve  her 

performance  under  CSTPs  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5  in  order  to  avoid  dismissal  from  the  District. 
Ultimately,  however,  only  that  conduct  which  falls  under  the  CSTPs  for  which  she  received  a 
rating  of  “Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  on  her  subsequent  December  21,  2012  preliminary 
evaluation  may  serve  as a  basis  for  her  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance.  (Crowl  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  225  Cal.App.3d  334,  350.) 

Respondent  improved  her  conduct  under  CSTP  2 

11. 

Respondent’s  conduct  under  CSTP  2  improved  during  the  90-day  notice 

period,  as  evidenced  by  the  “Meets  Standards  Minimally”  rating  she  received  on  her 
December  21,  2012  preliminary  evaluation.  (Factual  Finding  71.)  Consequently,  no  cause 
exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  her  employment  as  a  teacher  with  the  District  for 
unsatisfactory  performance  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4), 
based  on  conduct  under  CSTP  2. 

The  Amended  Notice  did  not  specify  conduct  under  CSTP  6 

12. 

The  Amended  Notice  did  not  specify  any  conduct  under  CSTP  6  that 

constituted  unsatisfactory  performance  by  respondent.  (Factual  Finding  45.)  In  fact,  each  of 
the  performance  evaluations  attached  to  the  Amended  Notice  rated  her  either  “Meets 
Standards  Proficient”  or  “N/O”  for  that  CSTP  (Factual  Findings  24,  25,  30-32,  39,  40,  and 
42),  and  it  was  not  until  her  November  7,  2012  lesson  observation  that  she  received  a  “Does 
Not  Meet  Standards”  rating  (Factual  Findings  47,  48,  51,  54,  57,  60,  63,  66,  and  67). 
Therefore,  no  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  her  employment  as  a  teacher  with  the 

49 

   

  

District  for  unsatisfactory  performance  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(4),  based  on  conduct  under  CSTP  6.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44938,  subd.  (b)(1); 
Tarquin  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  84  Cal.App.3d  251,  259.) 

Respondent  did  not  improve  her  conduct  under  CSTPs  1,  3,  4,  or  5 

13. 

Asset  forth  in  Finding  98,  respondent’s  overall  performance  under  CSTPs  1, 
3,  4,  and  5  was  unsatisfactory  as  set  forth  in  the  Amended  Notice,  and  her  performance  did 
not  improve  during  the  90-day  notice  period,  as  evidenced  by  the  “Does  Not  Meet 
Standards”  rating  she  received  for  each  of  those  CSTPs  on  her  December  21,  2012 
performance  evaluation.  (Factual  Finding  71.)  Therefore,  the  District  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that,  notwithstanding  the  assistance  and  opportunities  it 
provided  to  respondent  to  correct  her  faults  and  address  the  grounds  for  the  unsatisfactory 
performance  allegations  against  her,  she  did  not  improve  her  performance  under  CSTPs  1,  3, 
4,  or  5  to  a  satisfactory  level.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  during  the  hearing  that  she 
has  adequate  insight  into  the  District’s  concerns  about  the  quality  of  her  teaching  to  provide 
sufficient  assurances  that,  if  she  was  returned  to  the  classroom,  her  teaching  would  improve 
to  a  satisfactory  level.  As  a  result,  the  District  established  that  respondent  should  be 
dismissed  from  her  employment  as  a  teacher  with  the  District  for  unsatisfactory  performance 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 

Respondent  Kimberley  Cooper  is  DISMISSED  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

of  the  Fresno  Unified  School  District. 

ORDER 

DATED:  April)  2014 

  

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

\\  naw  DY  } 
CQREN  D.  WONG,  Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

/ 

“ 

50 

  

  

   

