BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

IN  THE  MATTER  OF  THE  DISMISSAL 
OF  JAMES  HILL  (EN  672114),  A 
PERMANENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEE, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2013090951 

 

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  on  November  25,  26,  and  27,  2013,  in  Los 

Angeles,  California,  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  Los  Angeles 
Unified  School  District. 

The  Commission  consists  of  Laura  Learned,  Russell  Harrison,  and  H.  Stuart 
Waxman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (LAUSD  or  District),  was  represented  by 

the  Law  Offices  of  Bergman,  Dacey,  Goldsmith,  by  Michelle  Goldsmith  and  Matthew 
Anderson,  Attorneys  at  Law.  James  Hill  (Respondent)  was  present  and  was  represented  by 
the  Dynasty  Legal  Group  by  Ronald  C.  Lapekas  and  Peter  O.  Tong,  Attorneys  at  Law. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  was  held  open  to  and 
including  December  13,  2013,  for  the  parties  to  submit  closing  briefs  in  accordance  to  a 
specified  briefing  schedule.  “Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District’s  Closing  Brief”  was 
timely  received  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  51.  “Closing  Argument  on  Behalf  of  Respondent 
James  Hill”  was  timely  received  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  P. 

iif 

if 

It 

if 

 

On  December  13,  2013,  Complainant  served  its  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District’s  Rebuttal  Brief  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  52.  However,  Complainant 
simultaneously  served  and  filed  an  uninvited  and  unauthorized  four-page  letter  objecting  to 
portions  of  Respondent’s  closing  brief  and  accusing  Respondent’s  counsel  of  misconduct. 
(Exhibit  53.)'  The  letter  was  received  at  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH)  at 
2:53  p.m.,  two  hours  and  seven  minutes  before  the  record  closed.  The  record  closed  at  5:00 
p.m.  on  December  13,  2013. 

On  December  13,  2013,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  re-opened  the  record  to  and 

including  January  17,  2014,  for  the  parties  to  serve  and  file  further  argument  regarding 
Complainant’s  December  13,  2013  letter.  The  following  were  timely  received:  A  letter  from 
Respondent’s  counsel,  Ronald  Lapekas,  dated  December  17,  2013,  and  received  at  the  Office 
of  Administrative  Hearings  on  December  18,  2013,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  Q;  and  the 
District’s  “Rebuttal  to  Respondent’s  Reply  to  Complainant’s  December  13,  2013  Letter,” 
received  at  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  January  17,  2014,  which  was  marked 
Exhibit  54.  The  record  was  closed  on  January  17,  2014,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 
decision. 

ALLEGATIONS  OF  ATTORNEY  MISCONDUCT  AND 
THE  EX  PARTE  COMMUNICATION 

The  following  issues  were  decided  by  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  sitting  alone. 

The  Ex  Parte  Communication 

On  December  16,  2013,  Attorney  Goldsmith  telephoned  OAH  to  check  on  the  status 

of  her  December  13,  2013  letter  and  to  ask  if  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  wanted  to 
schedule  a  status  conference.  Based  on  the  message  he  received  from  OAH  staff,  the 
Administrative  Law  Judge  issued  a  Notice  of  Ex  Parte  Communication.  In  a  Declaration 
attached  to  Exhibit  54,  Attorney  Goldsmith  admitted  making  the  telephone  call  but  denied 
asking  to  speak  to  the  Administrative  Law  Judge. 

Assuming  the  veracity  of  Attorney  Goldsmith’s  statement,  Attorney  Goldsmith 

nonetheless  engaged  in  an  ex  parte  communication.  Government  Code  section  11430.10, 
subdivision  (a)  prohibits  all  communication,  “direct  or  indirect,  regarding  any  issue  in  the 
.  [a]  representative  of  an  agency  that  is  a  party  or 
proceeding,  to  the  presiding  officer  from  . 
from  an  interested  person  outside  the  agency,  without  notice  and  opportunity  for  all  parties  to 
participate  in  the  communication.”  (Emphasis  added.) 

. 

Hi 

*  Complainant’s  counsel  made  the  same  or  similar  arguments  in  her  rebuttal  brief. 

The  brief,  rather  than  the  unauthorized  letter,  was  the  proper  place  for  those  arguments. 

2 

 

In  Exhibit  54,  Attorney  Goldsmith  states  in  regard  to  the  Notice  of  Ex  Parte 
Communication,  “On  December  16,  2013,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  issued  a  Notice  of 
Ex  Parte  Communication  and  Order  . 
2013  ...  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  considered  the  objection  letter  an  ex  parte 
communication.”  Attorney  Goldsmith’s  statement  is  untrue.  Her  letter  of  December  13, 
2013  was  unauthorized  and  improper,  but  it  was  not  issued  ex  parte.  It  was  her  telephone 
call  to  OAH  on  December  16,  2013  that  triggered  the  Notice  of  Ex  Parte  Communication. 

.  regarding  Complainant’s  Letter  of  December  13, 

. 

Attorney  Goldsmith  is  admonished  for  her  ex  parte  communication  of  December  16, 

2013. 

Misconduct  by  Attorney  Lapekas 

In  her  letter  of  December  13,  2013,  Attorney  Goldsmith  summarized  her  argument 

regarding  Respondent’s  closing  brief  as  follows:  “(1)  Respondent  has  improperly  argued  the 
unavailability  of  witnesses;  (2)  Respondent’s  counsel’s  personal  opinion,  not  based  on  the 
evidence,  has  no  place  in  a  Closing  Brief;  (3)  Respondent  has  referred  to  excluded  evidence 
in  Respondent’s  Brief;  and  (4)  Respondent  has  improperly  characterized  the  District’s 
burden  of  proof.”  (Exhibit  53,  p.  1.)  Attorney  Goldsmith  variously  argued  that  the  portions 
of  Respondent’s  closing  brief  she  found  objectionable  be  amended,  redacted,  and/or  stricken. 

In  Exhibit  Q,  Respondent’s  attorney,  Ronald  Lapekas,  addressed  Complainant’s 

objections  to  his  closing  argument,  but  also  offered  surrebuttal  to  Complainant’s  Rebuttal 
and  further  argument  regarding  Respondent’s  laches  defense.  Attorney  Lapekas’s  surrebuttal 
and  laches  arguments  set  forth  in  Exhibit  Q  were  unauthorized  and  improper.  They  were  not 
considered  by  the  Commission.  However;  the  Commission  did  consider  his  arguments  on 
those  issues  in  properly  submitted  documents  (i.e,  pre-hearing  motions,  closing  argument, 
etc.). 

Attorney  Lapekas  offered  argument.in  response  to  Attorney  Goldsmith’s  objections  to 

Respondent’s  closing  argument.  However,  he  conceded  that  the  District’s  evidentiary 
objections  “may  be  well  taken”  and  offered  to  re-write  his  argument. 

Complainant  timely  responded  to  Respondent’s  Exhibit  Q  with  “Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District’s  Rebuttal  to  Respondent’s  Reply  to  Complainant’s  December  13,  2013 
Letter”  (Exhibit  54).  In  that  document,  Attorney  Goldsmith  appears  to  partially  change  her 
position.  Although,  in  her  letter  of  December  13,  2013,  she  suggested  that  the  objectionable 
portions  of  Respondent’s  brief  be  amended,  redacted  or  stricken,  in  response  to 
Respondent’s  offer  to  re-write  the  objectionable  portions  of  his  closing  brief,  Attorney 
Goldsmith  demanded,  without  legal  authority,  that  they  be  stricken.  She  asserted  that  the 
Commission  would  be  prejudiced  by  Respondent’s  closing  brief  and  that  it  should  therefore 
not  be  shown  to  the  Commission  members.  In  so  doing,  she  did  not  explain  how  or  why  a 
document  intended  to  be  viewed  by  all  three  panel  members  may  properly  be  viewed  by  only 
one,  and  withheld  from  the  others. 

Complainant’s  objections  to  the  specified  portions  of  Respondent’s  closing  brief  are 
sustained.”  However,  Complainant  offered  no  legal  authority  mandating  that  some  or  all  of 
Respondent’s  brief  be  stricken  because  it  contains  assertions  unsupported  by  the  evidence. 
Her  insistence  that  the  Commission  be  shielded  from  the  brief  because  the  Commission  will 
be  prejudiced  by  it  implies  an  inability  of  the  Commission  to  separate  fact  supported  by 
admitted  evidence  from  assertions  unsupported  by  the  evidence.  As  can  readily  be  seen  from 
the  analysis  and  disposition  of  this  case,  the  Commission  suffers  from  no  such  inability. 

Attorney  Lapekas  is  admonished  for  his  misconduct  with  respect  to  his  improper 

references  in  his  closing  brief. 

Misconduct  by  Attorney  Goldsmith 

Attorney  Goldsmith  is  also  guilty  of  misconduct  in  her  own  right. 

The  hearing  took  place  on  November  25,  26,  and  27,  2013,  the  three  days  before  the 
four-day  Thanksgiving  holiday  weekend.  On  the  first  day  of  hearing,  an  eyewitness  to  the 
event  that  resulted  in  this  action  drew  an  illustration  of  the  school  yard  where  the  event  took 
place.  The  hand-drawn  illustration  was  marked  and  admitted  as  Respondent’s  Exhibit  K. 
Attorney  Goldsmith  photographed  Exhibit  K  with  her  cellular  telephone.  However,  that 
photograph  was  not  offered  in  evidence,  and  it  was  not  marked  for  identification. 

The  parties  failed  to  complete  the  hearing  in  the  three  days  allotted  for  it.  Rather  than 

return  for  additional  hearing  days,  the  parties  requested  that  they  be  permitted  to  submit  a 
stipulation  as  to  additional  evidence  and  written  closing  arguments.  The  Administrative  Law 
Judge  granted  those  requests  and  set  a  briefing  schedule.  He  then  adjourned  the  hearing.  At 
the  request  of  the  other  panel  members,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  left  the  hearing  room 
with  the  other  panel  members  to  discuss  future  procedure.  When  he  returned  to  the  hearing 
room  a  few  minutes  later,  no  one  was  present,  and  Exhibit  K  had  been  removed  from  its 
easel  and  taken  from  the  hearing  room.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge’s  laptop  computer 
and  the  official  exhibit  book  remained  in  the  room  undisturbed. 

 

Hf 

Hf 

Hi 

Mf 

?  Attorney  Goldsmith  is  correct  in  her  December  13,  2013  letter  that  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  excluded  evidence  of  possible  child  abuse  against  the  victim  in 
this  case.  However,  evidence  was  received  that  the  victim  and  Respondent  had  developed  a 
rapport  over  time,  and  that  the  victim  had  confided  in  Respondent.  That  evidence  is  not 
excluded. 

   

Although  Attorney  Goldsmith  telephoned  Attorney  Lapekas  informing  him  that  she 
had  the  exhibit,  she  did  not  call  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  or  fax a  letter  to  him.  When 
the  Administrative  Law  Judge  returned  to  OAH  following  the  four-day  holiday  weekend, 
there  was  still  no  word  from  Attorney  Goldsmith  advising  him  that  she  had  taken  the  marked 
and  admitted  exhibit.  It  was  not  until  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  requested  his  staff  to 
contact  both  attorneys  in  an  attempt  to  locate  the  exhibit  that  Attorney  Goldsmith  admitted 
she  had  taken  it.  She  returned  Exhibit  K  to  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  along  with  a  letter 
stating  that  she  thought  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  had  forgotten  to  take  the  exhibit,  and 
that  the  OAH  front  desk  had  closed  by  the  time  she  took  it  from  the  hearing  room.  Attorney 
Goldsmith  failed  to  explain  in  her  letter  why  she  thought  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  had 
forgotten  to  take  it  when  his  laptop  computer  and  all  of  the  other  exhibits  were  still  in  the 
hearing  room,  why  she  failed  to  call  or  fax  a  letter  to  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  advising 
him  of  what  she  had  done  as  she  did  for  Attorney  Lapekas,  and  why  she  failed  to  notify  the 
Administrative  Law  Judge  on  the  Monday  following  the  holiday  weekend  that  she  had  taken 
and  was  still  in  possession  of  Exhibit  K. 

Attorney  Goldsmith  is  admonished  for  her  misconduct  with  respect  to  her  improperly 
filing  of  the  December  13,  2013  letter,  and  for  her  improperly  removing  an  original  admitted 
exhibit  from  the  hearing  room  without  notifying  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  and  failing  to 
return  it  for  several  days. 

THE  DECISION  OF  THE  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  considered  the  matter  in  executive 
session.  After  due  consideration  of  the  entire  record  herein,  the  Commission  makes  the 
following  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  was  employed  by  the  District  and  is  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  of  the  District.  He  is  presently  suspended  from  the  District  without  compensation. 

2. 

A  Notice  of  Board  of  Education  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on 

Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension  was  issued  by  the  District  on  September  18,  2013.  The  action 
was  taken  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  City  of  Los  Angeles  at  a  meeting  on  September 
17,  2013.  Respondent  was  timely  served  with  the  Notice,  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of 
Charges  in  “tn  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of James  Hill  (EN  672114),  a  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee.” 

3. 

In  the  Notice  of  Board  of  Education  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on 

Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension,  Respondent  was  informed  that  the  dismissal  would  be 
effective  in  30  days  from  the  date  of  the  service  of  the  Notice  unless  he  requested  a  hearing 
“as  provided  in  Section  44930  through  44988  of  the  Education  Code  of  the  State  of 
California.”  (District’s  Exhibit  2.) 

   

4. 

In  the  Notice  of  Board  of  Education  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on 
Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension,  Respondent  was  also  informed  that  he  had  been  suspended 
from  his  employment  without  remuneration. 

5. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  before  the  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  (OAH). 

6 

On  October  25,  2013,  Respondent  served  “Respondent’s  Special  Notice.of 

Defense  and  Request  That  the  OAH  Dismiss  the  Proceeding  Sua  Sponte  on  the  Ground  that 
the  OAH  Lacks  Jurisdiction  to  Proceed.”  In  that  document,  he  raised  objections  and 
affirmative  defenses.° 

7. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties,  and 

jurisdiction  for  the  proceedings  does  exist. 

Respondent's  Background 

8. 

Respondent  graduated  from  Harvard  University  in  1976  with  a  degree  in 

economic  development.  Following  graduation,  he  worked  in  sales  and  served  in  the 
Massachusetts  State  House  in  the  Black  Legislative  Caucus,  in  which  he  worked  on  political 
campaigns  and  performed  community  work. 

9. 

Respondent  came  to  California  in  1989.  After  a  period  of  unemployment,  he 
worked  for  Target  and  for  the  United  States  Postal  Service  as  a  mail  processor.  He  attended 
school  at  night,  receiving  a  teaching  credential  through  National  University.  He  began  his 
teaching  career  as  a  substitute  with  the  Compton  School  District.  He  moved  to  LAUSD  in 
1995  and  taught  various  grades.  Beginning  in  2009,  he  taught  fourth  grade  at  Broadous 
Elementary  School  (Broadous)  where  he  became  the  school’s  Chapter  Chair  for  the  United 
Teachers  of  Los  Angeles  (UTLA).' 

10. 

 Atall  relevant  times,  Respondent  was  familiar  with,  and  was  regularly  trained 

in,  the  District’s  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  (Policy  Bulletin 
BUL-1347.2),  the  resolution  of  the  District’s  Board  reaffirming  the  District’s  commitment  to 
respectful  treatment  of  all  persons,  the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  the 
District’s  Ethics  Policies  (BUL-4748.0),  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  and  the 
District’s  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  (BUL-5046.0).  The  gravamen  of  each  of  those 
documents  was,  among  other  things,  a  strict  prohibition  against  corporal  punishment  against 
students,  and  a  prohibition  against  taking  students’  belongings. 

Mf 

3  Respondent’s  request  that  OAH  dismiss  the  action  on  grounds  of  lack  of  jurisdiction 

was  denied  on  the  first  day  of  hearing. 

‘UTLA  is  the  teachers’  union  in  Los  Angeles. 

6 

 

11. 

Respondent  ran  a  quiet  classroom  in  which  he  assigned  his  students  certain 

classroom  responsibilities  according  to  his  criteria.  He  had  a  signal  system  according  to 
which  his  utterance  of  “one”  required  the  students  to  stand,  “two”  required  them  to  move, 
and  “three”  required  them  to  sit.  The  school’s  principal,  Stannis  Steinbeck  (Steinbeck), 
visited  Respondent’s  classroom  during  the  2011-2012  school  year  as  part  of  her  plan  to  visit 
all  of  the  classes  that  were  “going  backwards.”  (Steinbeck’s  term.)  She  found  the  children 
quiet  but  inattentive  and  unengaged.  On  at  least  two  occasions  during  her  visit,  Respondent 
seemed  aggravated  and  he  raised  his  voice  when  a  student  was  not  paying  attention  or  was 
unable  to  answer  a  question.  Respondent  sounded  angry  when  that  occurred. 

12. 

Respondent  shouted  at  Steinbeck  on  at  least  two  occasions.  On  September  20, 
2011,  Respondent  initiated  and  continued  an  altercation  with  Steinbeck  during  a  professional 
development  meeting  over  the  scheduling  of  a  Local  School  Leadership  Council  vote. 
Respondent  lost  his  temper  and  shouted  at  Steinbeck,  causing  the  teachers  present  at  the 
meeting  to  feel  uncomfortable.° 

13. 

Although  Respondent  and  Steinbeck  had  a  good  relationship  for  the  most  part, 
Steinbeck  found  that  Respondent  had  certain  weaknesses  as a  teacher,  and  that  he  would  not 
abide  by  any  of  the  well-established  standards,  instead  taking  the  position  that  those 
standards  did  not  apply  to  him.  Steinbeck  believes  that,  by  refusing  to  work  with  the 
administration  to  improve  instruction,  Respondent  was  unprofessional  and  incompetent. 
Following  the  incident  of  September  20,  2011,  she  held  a  conference  with  him  and  his  UTLA 
representative.  Respondent  did  not  speak  at  the  conference,  deferring  entirely  to  his 
representative.  On  September  26,  2011,  Steinbeck  wrote  a  conference  memo  stating  that 
Respondent’s  unprofessional  conduct  constituted  insubordination.  She  required  “decided. 
improvement”  in  his  professional  conduct  beginning  with  treating  everyone  with  whom  he 
worked  with  appropriate  respect,  and  she  referred  him  to  the  Board  resolution  mandating 
respectful  treatment  to  all  persons.  In  the  same  memo,  Steinbeck  offered  to  continue  to  work 
with  Respondent  on  the  “ongoing  problems  which  have  occurred  due  to  your  unacceptable 
conduct.  There  must  be  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  your  behavior.”  (Exhibit 
38.) 

14. 

At  all  relevant  times,  Respondent  ambulated,  and  continues  to  ambulate,  with 

a  single-footed  cane.  He  held  and  holds  the  cane  in  either  hand,  depending  on  the  location  of 
his  long-standing  and  ongoing  pain. 

Hf 

Mf 

>  At  the  administrative  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  it  was  Steinbeck  who  “blew 

up”  (Respondent’s  term)  during  the  meeting,  and  that  Steinbeck  then  attempted  to  make  it 
appear  that  Respondent  “blew  up.”  That  claim  was  belied  by  both  Steinbeck’s  testimony  and 
that  of  Roberto  Batres,  a  Coordinator  and  Categorical  Program  Advisor,  who  was  present  at 
the  meeting. 

 

The  Incident  of February  3,  2012 

bo. 

JE  iim  a  |  Li 

was  a  student  in  Respondent’s  fourth  grade  class 

during  the  2011-2012  school  year.  He  was  smaller  than  most  fourth-graders.  He  had 
transferred  from  another  school  during  the  previous  school  year.  He  resided  with  his  mother, 
step-father  and  sister.  JMB  LB occasionally  misbehaved  in  school,  and  he  was  sent  to" 
   
Steinbeck’s  office  on  three  or  four  occasions.  Steinbeck  found  that,  although  J 
blamed  others  for  .  He  and/or  claimed  that  others  were  as  guilty  as  h €, 
  
While  at  Broadous, 
his  problems  and  concerns  to  Respondent. 

im  developed  a  rapport  with  Respondent,  and  im  ‘fi 

ever  lied. 
  
contica 

16. 

During  the  2011-2012  school  year,  JI  Lj  was  enrolled  in  the  Youth 

Services  program,  an  after-school  program  in  which  students  were  permitted  to  play  on  the 
school’s  playground  after  school  until  their  parents  could  pick  them  up. 

For  a  few  days  before  February  3,  2012,  Respondent  unsuccessfully  attempted 
parents  at  least  three  times  to  discuss  J ||  i  disruptive  classroom 
Li 

17. 
to  reach  J 
behavior.  Steinbeck  encouraged  the  school’s  teachers  to  come  to  her  when  they  were  unable 
to  reach  parents  because  she  could  employ  strategies  that  made  her  “99  percent”  effective  in 
   
reaching 
them.’  Respondent  did  not  take  advantage  of  that  invitation  in  attempting  to  reach 
i  ony  parents.  Instead,  after  school  on  February 
Respondent  entered  the  playground  where  i 
picked  up  J ||  TE 
backpack  that  was  on  the  ground,  put  the  strap  over  his  shoulder,  and 
walked  away  with  it,  shouting  across  the  playground  at im  LEB to  tell  his  mother  to  come 
and  pick  up  the  backpack. 

3,  at  approximately  3:05  p.m., 
had  just  finished  playing  basketball, 

   

. 

18.  J  LR  ran  after  Respondent  and,  upon  catching  up  to  him,  attempted  to  pull 
the  backpack  from  Respondent’s  shoulder.  Respondent  refused  to  release  it.  He  turned  and 
LM  on  the  back  and  buttocks  three  to  five  times  with  his  metal  cane  while 
struck 
shouting  “Let  go,  let  go!”  JE  UB  released  his  grip  on  the  backpack  after  receiving 
Respondent’s  final  blow.  He  returned  to  the  basketball  area  angry  and  crying.  Respondent 
continued  to  walk  back  toward  his  classroom  with  the  backpack. 

iif 

iif 

Mf 

parents. 

  

order  to  protect  their  privacy. 

°  Initials  are  used  in  lieu  of  surnames  of  all  students  referenced  in  this  Decision  in 

”  Steinbeck  credibly  testified  that  she  never  had  any  trouble  reaching  JU 

| 

| 

8 

  

  

19. 

The  incident  was  witnessed  by  at  least  three  other  students  who  had  an 

unobstructed  view.  One  of  those  students,  MIL,  testified  at  the  administrative  hearing. 
Her  testimony  was  consistent  and  highly  credible.  It  appeared  to  MEL.  that  Respondent 
intentionally  struck y  Um  Although,  before  the  incident,  she  considered  Respondent  to 
be  “nice,”  “chill,”  and  “a  little  bit  scary”  (MIBL.’s  terms),  following  the  incident,  she 
|  im 
would  not  want  him  as  her  teacher  because  of  what  she  witnessed  him  do  to 

20. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  report  the - 
incident  to  his  administrator  because  he  did  not  believe  the  incident  had  involved  a  struggle. 
However,  he  did  report  the  incident  to  hi  parents.”  Respondent’s  statement  that  he 
did  not  believe  there  had  been  a  physical  struggle  undermines  his  earlier  version  of  the  facts 
and  is  inconsistent  with  his  hearing  testimony. 

The  Investigation 

21. 

Upon  receiving  notification  of  the  incident  from im  LE  step-father, 

Principal  Steinbeck  promptly  followed  District  policy  by  informing  Susan  Brandt,  the  Local 
District  2  Operations  Support  Coordinator,  writing  a  child  abuse  report  and  placing  it  into  the 
system,  and  filing  a  suspected  child  abuse  report  with  the  District  and  the  Los  Angeles  Police 
Department.  An officer  with  the  police  department  instructed  her  to  handle  the  matter 
administratively  if  there  were  no  bruises  on  the  victim.  Steinbeck  then  obtained  statements 
from  im  im  the  Youth  Services  Program  supervisor,  and  the  three  witnesses  to  the 
incident.  The  statements  of  Jil 
credible  in  their  statements.  On  February  7,  2012,  Respondent  was  reassigned  to  the  district 
office  and  assigned  a  substitute  to  his  class.  Shortly  thereafter,  Steinbeck  interviewed  the 
three  witnesses  again  to  ensure  their  versions’  accuracy  over  time.  All  three  witnesses  were 
interviewed  separately  each  time,  and  all  of  their  reports  remained  consistent  and  credible. 

were  consistent,  and  Steinbeck  found  all  four  to  be 

Hf 

  

*  Considerable  time  was  spent  during  the  three-day  administrative  hearing  on  whether 
Respondent  was  holding  the  cane  in  his  right  hand  or  his  left,  whether  he  struck  JIU  on 
the  back,  buttocks,  or  other  part  of  his  body,  and  other  details  relating  to  the  physical 
altercation.  Not  all  of  the  testimony  was  consistent,  but  it  could  not  be  expected  to  be 
consistent.  This  was.a  sudden  and  fluid  situation.  The  two  individuals  were  constantly 
moving  and  changing  position.  Although  the  specific  details  could  have  greater  relevance  in 
a  criminal  trial,  in  which  the  standard  of  proof  is  that  of  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt,  the 
standard  of  proof  in  this  administrative  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  It  is 
the  fact  that  Respondent  inappropriately  touched  a  student  by  striking  him  with  his  cane  that 
constitutes  cause  for  dismissal,  rather  than  the  precise  manner  in  which  it  occurred. 

>  The  record  is  silent  as  to  how  Respondent  was  able  to  contact  J|LAQP  parents 

concerning  the  incident  following  his  earlier  unsuccessful  attempts  to  reach  them  regarding 
his  classroom  behavior, 

| 

a 

  

 

22. 

During  a  June  19,  2012  conference  between  Respondent,  Steinbeck,  Susan 

Brandt,  and  Scott  Mandel,  UTLA  Representative,  relating  to  the  subject  incident, 
Respondent  read  the  following  written  statement:  | 

I  categorically  deny  all  of  the  allegations.  I  produced  written  evidence  that  the 
allegations  were  false,  evidence  which  this  principal  purposely  and  unethically 
ignored,  as  she  manufactured  and  manipulated  evidence  in  this  case—which 
the  LAPD  threw  out  immediately.  This  was  the  epitome  of  her  campaign  of 
terror  against  a  UTLA  chapter  chair  with  whom  she  has  attempted  to  rid 
herself  of  for  years.  I  demand  to  be  reinstated  back  to  Broadous  and  that  this 
principal  be  held  accountable  for  her  unprofessional  and  unethical  actions 
against  me. 

(Exhibit  25.) 

23. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  conference,  Steinbeck  provided  Respondent  with 

guidance  and  instruction,  and  she  offered  him  a  book  entitled  Diffusing  Disruptive  Behavior, 
by  Geoff  Colvin. 

: 

24. 

On  February  24,  2012,  Respondent  provided  a  written  statement  of  his  version 
of  the  incident.  In  that  statement,  he  blamed  Zz  LIM  for  the  occurrence.  Respondent  wrote 
that  he  informed  the  Youth  Services  coach  that  he  intended  to  remove  the  backpack  and  that, 
when  he  did, im  LE  “rammed”  into  him  from  behind,  “seemingly  trying  to  knock  me  over 
or  knock  the  backpack  off  my  shoulder  with  great  force.”  Respondent  wrote  that,  while  J 7 
LBB  was  “loudly  demanding”  the  return  of  his  backpack,  Respondent  “explained”  to  him  that 
he  had  asked  for  it  before,  and  that  he  would  hold  it  until  5:00  when  JI 
arrived.  According  to  Respondent’s  statement,  J p Lf  then  “reared  back  as  if  to  charge 
me  again.  He  then  said  something  to  the  effect  that  I  was  going  to  hit  him  with  my  cane  and 
that  he  was  going  to  tell  Dr.  Steinbeck  that  I  had  hit  him  with  my  cane.  I  empathically  said  I 
was  not,  but  apparently  as  he  began  to  menace  me,  I  may  have  held  it  defensively  in  front  of 
me.  At  that  point,  he  went  running  round  in  half  circles  and  towards  the  playground  shouting 
that  I  had  hit  him  with  the  cane.”  (Exhibit  D.)  At  the  administrative  hearing,  Respondent 
testified  that,  after  striking  Respondent  in  the  back,  im  Liispun  Respondent  around  with 
such  force  that  Respondent  turned  180  degrees  so  that  they  were  facing  each  other.  That  . 
testimony  was  not  credible  given  the  discrepancy  in  size  and  weight  between  the  small  child 
and  the  full-grown  man  and  the  contrary  descriptions  of  the  witnesses. 

LEP  mother 

25. 

No  witness  or  exhibit  offered  at  the  administrative  hearmg  corroborated 

Respondent’s  version  of  the  subject  incident,  and  his  characterization  of im 
demanding  aggressor  and  himself  as  calmly  explaining  why  he  had  taken  the  backpack  was 
not  credible  in  light  of  the  heat  of  the  moment  and  the  witnesses’  observations. 
Respondent’s  statement  that  he  informed  the  YS  coach  of  his  intent  to  take  the  backpack  is 
not  credible  in  light  of  the  fact  that  Respondent  was  unable  to  explain  how  TL  earned 
that  Respondent  had  taken  the  backpack  without  being  so  informed  by  Respondent  shouting 
the  information  to  him. 

as  the 

   

10 

  

  

 

  

q

 
e
e
h
t

 
s
e

 
,
u
o
v

26. 

Based  on  her  investigation  of  the  incident,  Steinbeck  came  to  believe  that 

Respondent  was  not  a  good  role  model  for  his  students,  and  she  lost  confidence  in  his  ability 
to  serve  as  a  teacher. 

27. 

Students  who  were  referred  to  the  office  with  a  behavior  slip  were  sent  to  a 

coordinator  instead  of simply  sitting  in  the  office.  Steinbeck  maintained  every  behavior  slip 
for  every  such  student  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  the  school’s  efforts  with  respect  to  each 
child.  She  noticed  that  Jf  Llfstopped  receiving  behavior  slips  after Respondent  was 
reassigned  and  the  substitute  was  assigned  to  his  class. 

- 

28.  —  Principal  Steinbeck  retired  in  June  2012  and  was  succeeded  by  Maribel  Luna 

(Luna).  In  August  of  2012,  Luna  and  Andriette  Keele-Gibson,  a  District  Operations 
Coordinator,  continued  the  investigation  by  re-interviewing  hn  and  two  of  the 
witnesses.  All  three  remained  consistent  with  their  earlier  statements.  Based  on  the  totality 
of  the  investigation,  Luna  made  the  recommendation  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  the  District 
and,  on  November  30,  2012,  she  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act. 

29. 

 Anadministrative  review,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44932  and 

44939  (Skelly  hearing)  was  scheduled  for  February  6,  2013.  Due  to  scheduling  conflicts  for 
Respondent  and  his  representative,  the  meeting  was  postponed  four  times,  but  was  eventually 
on  March  8,  2013.  During  the  Skelly  hearing,  Respondent  again  denied  striking  im 
held 
with  his  cane.  However,  in  light  of  all  the  evidence  and  the  District’s  zero-tolerance 
Li 
policy  toward  child  abuse,  Linda  Del  Cueto  (Del  Cueto),  the  Instructional  Area 
Superintendent  who  presided  over  the  hearing,  concluded  that  the  proposed  disciplinary - 
action  of  dismissal  should  be  forwarded  to  the  Board  of  Education  for  disposition.  In  so 
doing,  Del  Cueto  considered  Respondent’s  conduct  on  February  3,  2012  to  have  been 
unprofessional  because  of  his  failure  to  exercise  good  judgment,  his  failure  to  model 
appropriate  behavior,  his  violation  of  District  policy  against  corporal  punishment  and 
inappropriate  touching,  and  his  violation  of  the  District’s  ethics  policy.  She  was  concerned 
that  Respondent’s  conduct  could  recur  because  of  his  denials  concerning  the  subject  incident. 

30. 

In  May  2013,  a  telephone  conference  took  place  between  Katrina  Campbell, 

Assistant  General  Counsel  for  the  District,  and  Benjamin  Hill,  Respondent’s  brother  who  is  a 
legal  assistant  in  a  local  law  firm.  During  that  conference,  Ms.  Campbell  informed  Mr.  Hill 
that  the  Board  of  Education  would  decide  whether  to  dismiss  Respondent.  They  discussed 
whether  that  event  would  be  placed  on  the  Board’s  May  2013  agenda  or  on  the  next  available 
agenda  in  September  2013.  If  it  were  the  latter,  Respondent  would  remain  in  paid  status  at 
least  until  the  Board  made  its  decision  in  September.’  Ms.  Campbell  recalls  that  she  and 
Mr.  Hill  agreed  to  have  the  matter  postponed  until  September.  Mr.  Hill  recalls  a  discussion 
in  that  regard  but  does  not  recall  reaching  an  understanding  with  Ms.  Campbell  on  it. 
Regardless  of  whether  the  two  reached  an  agreement,  the  matter  was  decided  in  September, 
and  Respondent  remained  in  paid  status  throughout  the  summer  months. 
  

©  The  parties  do  not  dispute  that  a  teacher  may  not  be  dismissed  during  the  summer 

months  when  school  is  not  in  session. 

11 

 

31. 

 Atthe  administrative  hearing,  Respondent  neither  identified  nor  produced  the 

evidence  referred  to  in  his  statement  of  June  19,  2012.  At  the  administrative  hearing,  he 
vacillated  between  denying  he  struck  J a LE  with  his  cane,  claiming  he  did  not  intend  to 
do  so,  and  stating  that  he  did  not  recall  doing  so. 

32. 

Respondent  did  not  establish  that  any  action  taken  against  him  was  taken 

because  he  was  a  UTLA  Chapter  Chair. 

33. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  a  teacher  is  expected 

to  maintain  high  ethical  standards,  to  set  an  example  for  students,  and  that  he/she  is  bound  by 
the  code  of  conduct.  He  admitted  that  he  failed  to  comply  with  those  standards  when  he  took 
mi  backpack.  Respondent  also  acknowledged  that  the  LAUSD  policy  abolishing 
corporal  punishment  was  in  effect  the  entire  time  he  was  at  Broadous  Elementary  School. 
Respondent  further  admitted  that  the  School  Causative  Behavioral  Support  Policy  does  not 
permit  a  teacher  to  confiscate  a  student’s  personal  property,  but  he  did  not  believe  it  was 
impermissible  to  take  im  LEP  backpack.  He 
did  not  explain  the  distinction  between  the  school 
testified  that,  although  he  did  not  recall  striking 
could  have  hit  something  behind  him.  That  statement  belies  his  earlier  statement  that  Jj 

| 
and  his  belief.  Lastly,  Respondent 
with  his  cane,  if  he  did  so,  the  cane 

policy 
Lim 

spun  him  around  so  that  they  were  facing  each  other. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  Respondent,  James  Hill,  exists  by  reason  of 

unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and 
persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  and/or  regulations,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  (4),  (5),  and  (7),  and  44939,  as  set  forth 
in  factual  findings  1  through  33. 

- 

| 

fff 

ff] 

ff 

Hf 

{ff 

{if 

{ff 

Hy 

12 

  

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  states  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

[t]...  [9] 

[N]...  [9] 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

3. 

The  standard  of  proof in  this  matter  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

(Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Respondent’s  Laches  Defense 

4. 

Before,  during,  and  after  the  hearing,  Respondent  argued  that  the  action  should 

be  dismissed  on  the  basis  of  laches.  He  argued  that  the  District  engaged  in  unreasonable 
delay  in  its  investigation  of  the  facts  underlying  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges, 
and  that  the  unreasonable  delay  precluded  the  appearance  of  certain  witnesses  at  the  hearing. 
Respondent’s  argument  is  not  persuasive. 

5. 

A  successful  laches  defense  requires  the  establishment  of  two  elements:  An 
unreasonable  delay  in  bringing  the  action,  and  resulting  prejudice  to  the  responding  party. 
(Mt.  San  Antonio  Community  College  District  v.  Public  Employment  Relations  Board  (1989) 
210  Cal.App.3d  178. 

Prejudice  is  never  presumed;  rather  it  must  be  affirmatively  demonstrated  by 
the  defendant  in  order  to  sustain  his  burdens  of  proof  and  the  production  of 
evidence  on  the  issue.  (Miller  v.  Eisenhower  Medical  Center  (1980)  27  Cal.3d 
614,  624.) 

6. 

Respondent  argued  that  the  District  so  delayed  its  investigation  that  it  resulted 
in  his  inability  to  locate  and  call  two  witnesses,  one  of  whom  is  the  victim  in  this  matter,  and 
the  other,  an  eyewitness  to  the  event  that  led  to  the  filing  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  the 
Accusation. 

13

 

7. 

Respondent  failed  to  establish  that  the  length  of  the  investigation  was  due  to 
an  unreasonable  delay  on  the  District’s  part.  On  the  contrary,  the  District  responded  to  the 
subject  incident  and  began  its  investigation  in  a  timely  manner,  and  it  proceeded  through  the 
investigation  at  a  reasonable  pace.  To  the  extent  that  any  delay  occurred,  it  was  partly  due  to 
the  passing  of  the  summer  months,  during  which,  by  law,  a  teacher  may  not  be  dismissed, 
Respondent’s  possible  involvement  in  postponing  the  Board’s  decision  to  dismiss  from  May 
to  September  2013  in  order  for  him  to  remain  in  paid  status  over  the  summer  months,  and  to 
Respondent’s  own  delay  in  convening  the  Skedly  hearing. 

8. 

Further,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  that,  had  a  delay  by  the  District  been 

unreasonable,  he  was  prejudiced  by  that  delay.  He  failed  to  demonstrate  what  efforts,  if  any, 
he  made  to  locate,  interview,  or  subpoena  either  witness  who  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 
Instead,  he  criticized  the  District  for  not  producing  the  victim.  Although,  after  his 
suspension,  Respondent  had  the  right  to  request  to  return  to  the  campus  to  interview 
witnesses,  he  made  no  such  request. 

9. 

Respondent’s  failure  to  establish  an  unreasonable  delay  by  the  District  and 

prejudice  due  to  an  unreasonable  delay  defeats  his  laches  defense. 

Exclusivity  of  the  Pleadings 

10. 

Respondent  argued  that  Complainant  brought  the  Accusation  exclusively 

under  Education  Code™  section  44939,  thereby  waiving  all  other  grounds  for  dismissal  under 
section  44932.  Respondent  is  incorrect. 

11. 

Inits  Rebuttal  Brief,  the  District  correctly  explained  the  statutory  scheme 

under  which  the  charges  in  this  case  were  properly  alleged.  That  explanation  is  set  forth,  in 
part,  below: 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 
employee  if  one  or  more’ of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Section  44932, 
subdivision  (a),  is  established.  In  addition,  a  governing  board  may 
immediately  suspend  a  certificated  employee  without  pay  pursuant  to  Section 
44939  upon  the  filing  of  a  statement  of  charges  alleging  immoral  conduct. 

Hil 

Hf 

if 

Hl 

"|  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  indicated. 

14 

(1) 

Understanding  the  Education  Code  Statutory  Scheme 

The  Education  Code  provisions,  as  they  apply  to  a  teacher  dismissal 

. 

.  (4) 

.  (5)  Evident  Unfitness  for  Service  .. 

matter,  are  found  in  Article  3  entitled  “Resignations,  Dismissal  and  Leaves  of 
Absence”  and  commence  at  Education  Code  §44930.  The  Section  that 
specifies  the  sum  total  of  all  grounds  for  dismissal  is  Section  44932.  That 
Section  enumerates  the  eleven  grounds  that  the  District  may  move  to  dismiss  a 
. 
teacher  [under],  including  “(1)  immoral  or  unprofessional  misconduct . 
Unsatisfactory  performance  . 
.  (7) 
Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws.  ..  .”  Should  the 
Board  file  an  Accusation  to  dismiss  a  teacher  based  on  any  cause(s)  “as 
specified  in  44932,”  Section  44934  then  requires  the  District  to  give  notice  to 
the  teacher  of  its  intention  to  dismiss.  Section  44934  further  provides  that  the 
teacher  will  be  dismissed  if  the  teacher  does  not  object  within  30  days. 
Section  44939  is  a...  provision  that—-when  a  teacher  is  charged  with  certain 
specific  causes  under  Section  44932—permits  the  District  to  suspend  the 
teacher  without  pay  while  the  teacher  dismissal  hearing  is  pending.  Causes 
under  Section  44932  that  warrant  suspension  without  pay  under  44939  include 
immoral  conduct  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause.  Whether  or  not  there  is  reason  to  suspend  the  teacher 
without  pay  under  Section  44939,  the  teacher  may  still  ultimately  be  dismissed 
for  any  of  the  causes  under  Section  44932  that  are  alleged  in  the  Accusation. 

(2) 

The  District...  Moved  to  Dismiss  Respondent  Under 

Various  Causes  Enumerated  in  Section  44932 

It  is  untrue  that  the  District  elected  to  proceed  under  Education  Code 
section  44939  only.  (Resp.  Brief,  1:10-15;  12:26-13:10.)  The  Statement  of 
Charges,  filed  with  the  Board  of  Education,  clearly  indicated  that  the  District 
proceeded  to  dismiss  and  suspend  Respondent  under  Sections  44934  and 
44939; 

“WHEREFORE,  under  the  provisions  of  Education  Code 
section  44934  and  44939,  the  undersigned  asks  that  the  Board 
of  Education  give  notice  to  Hill  of  its  intention  to  immediately 
suspend  without  pay  and  dismiss  him  at  the  expiration  of  thirty 
(30)  days  from  the  date  of  service  of  this  notice,  and  that  he  be 
dismissed  at  the  expiration  of  those  thirty  (30)  days,  unless  he 
demand  a  hearing  as  provided  under  Education  Code  section 
44937  and  44939.  ...”  (Emphasis  added.)  (Exhibit  1,  2:19-24.) 

And,  as  stated  above,  Section  44934  outlines  the  procedure  for  the  District  to 
give  notice  to  the  teacher  before  dismissing,  and  Section  44939  allows  the 
District  to  take  the  extra  step  of  suspending  the  teacher  without  pay  for  only 
some  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Section  44932. 

15 

  

i 
4 

 

 

The  District...  moved  to  dismiss  Respondent  under  Section  44934  for 

the  following  five  causes  enumerated  in  Section  44932:  (1)  unprofessional 
conduct,  (2)  unsatisfactory  performance,  (3)  immoral  conduct,  (4)  evident 
unfitness  for  services,  and  (5)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him.  (Exhibit  1,  1:22-28; 
Exhibit  6,  1:25-2:5.)  In  addition  to  dismissing  Respondent  for  these  five 
causes,  the  District  elected  to  suspend  him  without  pay  under  Section 
44939['7]  This  clear  statement  of  the  District’s  intent  to  dismiss  Respondent 
for  these  five  causes  is  found  in:  each  of  the  subject  lines  on  the  Skelly 
meeting  notice  letters  read[s]  “Administrative  Review  —  Education  Code 
44932  and  44939”;  every  notice  letter  states  in  the  body  of  the  letter  that  the 
District  is  moving  under  “Education  Code  44932  and44939”  (Exhibits  35,  36, 
39  and  40)  (footnote  omitted);  the  Skelly  response  letter’s  subject  line  reads 
“Recommendation  for  Dismissal  —  Education  Code  §44932  and  §44939” 
(Exhibit  41);  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  the  Statement  of  Charges 
attached  thereto  (Exhibits  1  and  2)  state  that  the  District  is  proceeding  under 
sections  44934  and  44939,  and  the  causes  for  dismissal  are  listed  and  made 
pursuant  to  Section  44932  and  44939  (Exhibit  1,  1:22-28).  The  same  exact 
bases  for  dismissal  are  included  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 
that  was  requested  to  be  filed  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 
(Exhibit  6,  1:25-2:5.) 

| 

(Complainant’s  Rebuttal  Brief,  Exhibit  52,  page  1,  line  10  —  page  3,  line  12.) 

The  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

12. 

13. 

The  District  proved  the  charging allegations  in  the  Accusation. 

The  Commission  specifically  finds  that  Respondent  wrongfully  took  J 

Li  backpack,  and  that  he  intentionally  struck  J 
with  his  cane.  However,  Respondent  struck  i 
response  to 

LE 

running  up  behind  him  and  grabbing  the  backpack. 

    

epeatedly  (three  to  five  times) 
with  his  cane  without  premeditation  in 

  

_™  Complainant  inserts  its  Footnote  1  at  this  point,  which  reads:  “Respondent  attempts 

to  confuse  the  issue  by  arguing  that  ‘Section  44939  provides  that  the  following  grounds 
permit  the  Board  to  dismiss  a  teacher.’  (Resp.  Brief,  12:38.)  The  ‘grounds’  that  he  then  lists 
from  Section  44939  are  those  that  permit  immediate  suspension  without  pay.  Some  of  the 
44939  immediate  suspension  ‘grounds’  are  also  found  as  a  basis  for  dismissal  in  Section 
44932.  Respondent’s  dismissal  is  based  on  the  five  grounds  from  Section  44932;  it  is  only 
his  immediate  suspension  without  pay  that  is  based  on  Section  44939.”  Although 
Complainant  correctly  interprets  the  law  in  its  Footnote  1,  the  Commission  does  not  find  that 
Respondent  deliberately  attempted  to  confuse  the  issue  in  his  argument. 

16 

  

 

Unprofessional  Conduct-Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1) 

14. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may 

be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such 
conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount 
to  unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

15. 

Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct.  He  wrongfully  took im 

i  backpack  despite  his  acknowledged  awareness  of  the  school’s  policy  against 
confiscation  of  students’  personal  property.  When  J p  Li  attempted  to  retrieve  his 
property,  Respondent  intentionally  struck  him  three  to  five  times  with  his  metal  cane  while 
repeatedly  shouting,  “Let  go,  let  go!”  instead  of  attempting  to,  by  other  peaceful,  non-violent 
means,  diffuse  the  situation  he  alone  had  created.  He  then  walked  away  from  his  angry  and 
in  distress.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  made  even  more 
crying  student  who  was  obviously 
egregious  by  the  fact  that  J a 
had  developed  a  rapport  with  Respondent  and  had 
confided  in  Respondent  before.  Respondent’s  violent  act  on  J || 

betrayed  that  rapport. 

    

16. 

Respondent’s  unprofessional  conduct  was  further  evidenced  by  his  raising  his 
voice  at  students,  peers,  and  the  school  principal,  by  his  failure  or  refusal  to  adhere  to  school 
and  district  standards,  and  by  his  failure  or  refusal  to  cooperate  with  the  administration  to 
improve  classroom  education  and  performance. 

| 

| 

Unsatisfactory  Performance-Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4) 

17. 

—_ Respondent  engaged  in  unsatisfactory  performance  in  the  same  manner  that 

constitutes  his  unprofessional  conduct.  In  addition,  he  engaged  in  unsatisfactory 
performance  by  failing  to  timely  notify  the  administration  that  he  had  been  involved  in  a 
violent  altercation  with  a  fourth-grade  student. 

Hf 

Hf/ 

Hf] 

Hf] 

Hif 

Hf} 

if 

17 

Immoral  Conduct-Sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  and  44939 

18. 

Immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  as  follows: 

“The  term  ‘immoral’  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not 
been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with 
rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as 
wilful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.  (See  also,  Orloff  v.  Los  Angeles 
Turf  Club  (1951)  36  Cal.2d  734,  740  [227  P.2d  449]  (quoting  Words  and 
Phrases,  permanent  edition,  volume  20,  pages  159-160).) 

19. 

Respondent  did  not  engage  in  immoral  conduct  as  that  term  is  defined  above. 
Although  the  definition  could  apply  to  his  conduct  on  February  3,  2012,  Respondent  did  not 
have  time  to  reflect  and  contemplate  his  actions.  Although  his  striking  J 
LE  with  his 
cane  three  to  five  times  was  certainly  improper  and  unprofessional,  it  did  not  reflect  the 
wilful  corruption  and  depravity  associated  with  immorality. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service-Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5) 

20. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a 
temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445  (Woodland).)  Evident 
unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which 
“connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Ud.  at  1444.)  There 
is  no  set  formula  or  definite  technical  meaning.  Rather,  “due  consideration  must  be  given  to 
the  circumstances  of  the  case  at  hand.”  (Oakland  Unified  School  District  v.  Olicker  (1972) 
25  Cal. App.  3d  1098,  1108.) 

21. 

Although  the  incident  involving  im  LU 

was  the  only  known  violent  act 

Respondent  committed,  his  history  of  anger,  raising  bis  voice,  and  his  failure  or  refusal  to 
adhere  to  applicable  standards,  establish  the  fixed  character  trait  referenced  in  Woodland, 
supra,  that  demonstrates  an  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

Hf 

Hf 

Hf] 

18 

  

 

Persistent  Violation  of  or  Refusal  to  Obey  the  School  Law  of  the  State  or 
Reasonable  Regulations  Prescribed  for  the  Government  of  the  Public  Schools  by  the  State 
Board  of Education  or  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  School  District  employing  Respondent- 
(Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7) 

22.  ~  During  his  time  at  Broadous  Elementary  School,  Respondent  violated  the 

District’s  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements,  the  Board’s  resolution 
reaffirming  its  commitment  to  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons,  the  District’s  Code  of 
Conduct.  With  Students,  the  District’s  Ethics  Policies,  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics,  and  the  District’s  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment.  He  angrily  shouted  at  students 
and  Principal  Steinbeck.  In  so  doing,  he  failed  to  respect  applicable  school,  District,  and 
State  standards. 

23. 

However,  the  fact  that  the  Commission  has  found  that  Respondent  engaged  in 

unprofessional  conduct  does  not  end  the  inquiry.  In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  [82  Cal.Rptr.  175],  the  Court  stated: 

. 

We...  conclude  that  the  Board  of  Education  cannot  abstractly  characterize  the 
conduct  in  this  case  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral 
turpitude”  . 
.  unless  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  petitioner  is  unfit  to  teach. 
In  determining  whether  the  teacher’s  conduct  thus  indicates  unfitness  to  teach 
the  board  may  consider  such  matters  as  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may 
have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers,  the  degree  of  such 
adversity  anticipated,  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct, 
[footnote  omitted]  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved, 
[footnote  omitted]  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 
surrounding  the  conduct,  [footnote  omitted]  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct,  [footnote  omitted] 
the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  the  extent  to 
which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 
the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  [footnote 
omitted]  These  factors  are  relevant  to  the  extent  that  they  assist  the  board  in 
determining  whether  the  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach,  i.e.,  in  determining  whether 
the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and  overall  impact  on  his  students 
are  likely  to  meet  the  board’s  standards. 

24. 

An  analysis  of  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison,  supra,  evinces  Respondent’s 

unfitness  to  teach  at  this  time. 

Hf 

Hf 

Hf 

19 

  

t 
i 
a 
1 
1 
i 

} 

 

a. 
fellow  teachers 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 

There  is  more  than a  likelihood  that  Respondent’s  conduct  adversely  affected  students 

3,  2012  had  an  actual  adverse  effect  on  J 
and  fellow  teachers.  The  incident  of  February 
Cand  MUL.  at  the  very  least.  i 
was  hurt  and  betrayed  by  the  teacher  in  whom 
he  had  confided  and  developed  a  rapport.  MU§MBL.  testified  that  she  would  be  reluctant  to  be 
in  Respondent’s  class  after  witnessing  what  Respondent  did  to  J]  Li 

   

In  addition,  Respondent’s  violent  attack  on  JNUBMMis  likely  to  have  had  an  adverse 

effect  on  other  students  in  at  least  two  ways:  First,  it  increased  the  risk  that  they  would  be 
fearful  of  Respondent  and/or  other  teachers,  even  if  they  only  heard  about  the  incident  and 
did  not  directly  view  it.  Secondly,  as  a  teacher  at  the  school,  Respondent  was  required  to  set 
a  proper  example  for  the  students.  Children  at  the  elementary  level  of  education  are  highly 
impressionable.  Respondent’s  striking  a  student  with  his  cane  wrongfully  condones  on- 
campus  violence.  It  increases  the  likelihood  of  student-instigated  violence  against  other 
.  students,  faculty  and  staff,  and  is  likely  to  engender  other  problems  borne  of  an  insensitivity 

to  violence  such  as  bullying. 

Further,  Respondent’s  outburst  at  Principal  Steinbeck  during  a  faculty  meeting  made 
Steinbeck  and  at  least  one  attendee  uncomfottable,  and  his  refusal  to  be  bound  by  applicable 
standards  had,  at  minimum,  a  likely  adverse  effect  on  the  remainder  of  the  faculty  who  could 
have  difficulty  reconciling  their  obligations  and  responsibilities  to  Respondent’s  attitudes. 

b, 

The  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated 

An  episode  of  on-campus  violence  by  a  teacher  against  an  elementary  school  student 

is  sufficiently  anomalous  as  to  prompt  strong  reactions  in  students  and  teachers  if 
Respondent  continues  to  teach  at  Broadous.  Thus,  the  likelihood  of  anticipated  adversity  is 
high  and  could  easily  result  in  parents  seeking  to  avoid  having  their  children  placed  in 
Respondent’s  class  or  their  requesting  transfers  if  their  children  are  already  assigned  to  his 
class. 

C. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct 

   

Approximately  two  years  have  passed  since  the  incident  between  Respondent  and 
The  event  is  temporally  recent  in  that  it  is  likely  that  some  students  who  were 

enrolled  at  the  school  in  February  2012  are  still  enrolled  there  and  may  have  knowledge  of 
the  incident.  The  same  is  true  for  faculty  and  staff. 

iff 

iif 

Hif 

20 

  

 

  

e
e

 
k
e
e

d. 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved 

Respondent  holds  an  elementary  school  teaching  credential.  In  addition  to  having 

received  training  in  school,  district,  and  state  rules  of  teacher  conduct,  he  has  learned 
pedagogical  techniques  designed  to  address  the  needs  and  behaviors  of  children  of 
elementary  school  age.  Therefore,  he  should  have  been  better  prepared  to  address  and  handle 
the  confrontation  with  a  fourth  grade  student  after  he  took  the  student’s  backpack,  and  he 
should  have  been  able  to  avoid  creating  the  confrontation  in  the  first  place  by  selecting 
another  course  of  conduct  than  taking  the  student’s  backpack  without  consent  and  shouting  at 
the student  across  the  playground  to  have  his  mother  come  get  it.  Further,  his  conduct 
occurred  in  an  elementary  school  where  he  was  licensed  to  teach.  Respondent  knew  or 
should  have  known  that  an  act  of  violence  against  a  student  could  be,  and  probably  would  be, 
more  traumatic  to  the  victim  and  the  witnesses  than  if  those  individuals  were  of  high  school 
age. 

é. 
conduct 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 

The  only  extenuating  circumstance  attaching  to  the  matter  is  the  fact  that y  | im 

assault  on  Respondent  to  retrieve  his  backpack  came  as  a  surprise  to  Respondent. 

Aggravating  circumstances  include  the  following:  (1)  Respondent  took im  im 

    

‘ 

’  parents,  or  the  schoo!  administration.  (2) 

Respondent  continually  pulled  on  JIUP  backpack 

backpack  without  the  consent  of 
Upon  being  confronted  by  J a 
while  repeatedly  shouting  “Let  go,  let  go!”  instead  of  letting  go,  returning  the  backpack  to  Jj 
im  diffusing  the  situation,  and  more  appropriately  dealing  with  the  problems  he  was  having  in 
trying  to  reach  J 
fourth  grade  student.  (4)  Respondent  struck  the  student  with  his  cane  multiple  times.  (5) 
Following  the  attack,  Respondent  walked  away  from  the  student  who  was  angry,  crying,  and 
clearly  in  distress.  (6)  The  student  and  Respondent  had  previously  developed  a  rapport,  and  the 
student  had  confided  in  Respondent. 

my  parents.  (3)  Respondent  used  his  metal  cane  as  a  weapon  against  a 

f. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct 

The  only  praiseworthiness  of  Respondent’s  motives  was  that  he  took  the  backpack  in 

an  effort  to  reach JR  UEP  parents  in  order  to  enlist  their  assistance  in  improving  their 
child’s  in-school  behavior  and  progress. 

Hf 

fff 

Hf 

21 

The  blameworthiness  of  Respondent’s  motives  include  the  following:  (1)  Respondent 

failed  to  utilize  Principal  Steinbeck  as  a  resource  in  reaching 
assuming  the  truth  of  his  testimony  that  he  asked  Steinbeck  for  that  assistance  and  that  she 
told  him  to  handle  it  himself,’?  he  should  have  returned  to  her  when  his  continued  efforts 
were  unsuccessful  rather  than  involving  the  student  and  provoking  a  confrontation  by  taking 
the  student’s  backpack.  (2)  Instead  of  approaching im  LEB in  class  or  on  the  playground 
and  explaining  that  he  intended  to  take  the  backpack  and  return  it  to 
Respondent  took  the  backpack  and,  as  he  walked  away  with  it,  shouted  across  the  playground 
to 

to  have  his  mother  pick  it  up. 

i  parents.  Even 

mother, 

If 

UL 

g. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct 

The  evidence  did  not  disclose  why,  after  a  17-year  history  of  no  known  violent  acts, 

Respondent  suddenly  and  repeatedly  struck  his  fourth-grade  student  with  a  metal  cane. 
However,  his  conduct  is  consistent  with  his  long-standing  history  of  angry  outbursts  at 
students  and  co-workers,  and  his  failure  or  refusal  to  comply  with  applicable  behavioral 
standards.  Those  factors,  coupled  with  what  appeared  to  be  a  complete  lack  of  remorse  and  a 
failure  to  accept  responsibility  for  his  misconduct,  evince  a  substantial  likelihood  of 
recurrence. 

| 

h, 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact 

or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other 
teachers. 

This  action  does  not  involve  any  constitutional  rights  of  Respondent  or  other  teachers. 

Credibility  Issues 

25. 

Several  credibility  issues  militate  against  Respondent. 

a. 

The  testimony  of  a  number  of  witnesses,  including  but  not  limited  to 

Steinbeck  and  MI  L.,  was  both  credible  and  consistent.  Their  testimony  contradicted 
Respondent’s  testimony  which  lacked  credibility  for  the  reasons  set  forth  above  and  below. 

Hf 

Hf 

  

?  Respondent’s  testimony  in  that  regard  was  of  doubtful  credibility  in  light  of 

Steinbeck’s  credible  testimony  that  (1)  she  maintained  an  “open  door”  policy  by  which 
teachers  were  encouraged  to  come  to  her  when  having  trouble  reaching  parents  because  she 
had  techniques  and  strategies  that  were  99  percent  effective  in  reaching  parents;  and  (2)  that 
Respondent  did  not  take  advantage  of  her  attempts  to  help  him  improve  in  his  effectiveness 
and  that  he  refused  to  adhere  to  accepted  standards. 

22 

  

e
o

 
a
e

 r
n
e

 

b. 

In  cross-examination,  Respondent’s  attorney  continually  questioned 

witnesses  on  matters  Respondent  ultimately  did  not  dispute.  Perhaps  the  most  significant  of 
those issues  was  whether  the  witnesses  to  the  attack  on im [ff had  a  clear,  unobstructed 
view  of  the  incident.  Respondent’s  counsel  repeatedly  raised  the issues  of  weather,  lighting, 
and  obstructions  that  could  have  hindered  or  completely  obstructed  the  witnesses’ 
observations.  However,  when  Respondent  testified,  he  did  not  assert  that  any  of  those 
conditions  existed,  and  he  did  not  dispute  the  witnesses’  ability  to  clearly  observe  the  event. 
It  is  unclear  whether  Respondent  was  attempting  to  hide  the  truth  of  the  incident  or,  in  some 
manner,  obfuscate  the  issue. 

C. 

Respondent  was  inconsistent  and  equivocal in  his  testimony  and 

written  statement  (Exhibit  D.).  He  variously  denied  the  incident  ever  occurred;  admitted  it 
could  have  occurred;  and  claimed  he  may  have  raised  his  cane  defensively. 

d. 

Respondent’s  version  of  the  facts  is  inconsistent  with  that  of  y 

z= 

and  the  three  eyewitnesses,  all  of  whom  agree  that  Respondent  appeared  to  intentionally 
strike 
with  his  cane  rather  than  accidentally  strike  him  as  the  cane  came  around  his 
body,  or  that  Respondent  simply  held  the  cane  in  a  defensive  manner.  None  of  the  witnesses 
saw  im TPB  let  go  of  the  backpack,  and  rear  back in  preparation 
Respondent. 

for  a  second  attack  on 

c. 

The  wording  Respondent  chose  for  his  written  statement  (Exhibit  D) 

made  it  appear  that  J a UBwas  the  perpetrator  who  was  completely  at  fault,  and  that 
Respondent  reacted  to  the  attack  in  a  calm  and  reasonable  manner,  “explaining”  why  he  took 
the  backpack  while  the  much  smaller  fourth-grader  violently  attacked  and  then  reared  back 
for  a  second  attack.  The  more  credible  evidence  is  to  the  contrary. 

f. 

Respondent’s  claim  that  J¥jjUfjsuddenly  terminated  his  attack  on 
Respondent  and  developed  a  scheme  to  report  that  Respondent  struck  him  with  his  cane  is 
difficult  to  accept  given  the  situation  in  which  Jj 
struggle  with  an  older  and  larger  teacher  whom  he  had  previously  grown  to  trust. 

was  upset  and  involved  in  a  physical 

Hf 

Hf 

Hf 

Hf] 

Hf 

Hf 

Hf 

23 

  

Denial  of Responsibility 

26. 

Instead  of  accepting  responsibility  for  his  conduct,  Respondent  chose  to  blame 

his  victim,  a  fourth-grader,  for  the  physical  altercation,  and  he  chose  to  blame  his  former 
ptincipal  for  the  problems  he  alone  created  involving  the  faculty  and  administration. 
Although  artificial  acts  of  contrition  are  not  required  in  a  case  such  as  this  one  (Calaway  v. 
State  Bar  (1986)  41  Cal.3d  743,  747-748;  Hall  v.  Committee  of Bar  Examiners  (1979)  25 
Cal.3d  730,  744-745),  one  would  expect  a  dedicated  and  compassionate  teacher  to  feel  at 
least  some  remorse  for  the  event,  the  effect  it  must  have  had  on  his  victim  who  had 
previously  trusted  him  enough  to  confide  in  him,  and  his  failure  to  have  handled  the  situation 
in  a  more  appropriate,  non-violent  manner.  Respondent’s  denial  of  responsibility  and 
complete  lack  of  remorse  bode  poorly  for  present  and  future  students,  parents,  faculty  and 
staff. 

ORDER 

The  District  may  dismiss  Respondent,  James  Hill,  as  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

 

COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 

Wx. 

DATED: 

A4/  W  IY 

H.  STUART  WAXMAN,  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  LAURA  LEARNED,  Member 

  

RUSSELL  HARRISON,  Member 

-  DATED: 

DATED: 

Denial  of Responsibility 

26. 

Instead  of  accepting  responsibility  for  bis  conduct,  Respondent  chose  to  blame 

his  victim,  a  fourth-grader,  for  the  physical  altercation,  and  he  chose  to  blame  his  former 
principal  for  the  problems  he  alone  created  involving  the  faculty  and  administration. 
Although  artificial  acts  of  contrition  are  not  required  in  a  case  such  as  this  one  (Calaway  v. 
State  Bar  (1986)  41  Cal.3d  743,  747-748;  Hall  v.  Committee  of Bar  Examiners  (1979)  25 
Cal.3d  730,  744-745),  one  would  expect  a  dedicated  and  compassionate  teacher  to  feel  at 
least  some  remorse  for  the  event,  the  effect  it  must  have.  had  on  his  victim  who  had 
previously  trusted  him  enough  to  confide  in  him,  and  his  failure  to  have  handled  the  situation 
in  a  more  appropriate,  non-violent  manner.  Respondent’s  denial  of  responsibility  and 
complete  lack  of  remorse  bode  poorly  for  present  and  future  students,  parents,  faculty  and 
staff. 

, 

ORDER 

The  District  may  dismiss  Respondent,  James  Hill,  as  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 

      

H.  STUART  WAXMAN,  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge  . 
Office  gf  Administrative 

-  DATED: 

; 

, 

_ 
pl 
; 

  

DATE 

Ly  botws 

Bex  of 

  RUSSELL  HARRISON,  Member 

DATED: 

| 

24

  

  

i 

! 

| 
| 

  

, 
i 
: 

! 

| 

| 

1 

  

Denial  of Responsibility 

26, 

Instead  of  accepting  responsibility  for  his  conduct,  Respondent  chose  to  blame 

his  victim,  a  fourth-grader,  for  the  physical  altercation,  and  he  chose  to  blame  his  former 
principal  for  the  problems  he  alone  created  involving  the  faculty  and  administration, 
Although  artificial  acts  of  contrition  are  not  required  in  a  case  such  as  this  one  (Calaway  v. 
State  Bar  (1986)  41  Cal.3d  743,  747-748;  Hall  v.  Committee  of Bar  Examiners  (1979)  25 
Cal.3d  730,  744-745),  one  would  expect  a  dedicated  and  compassionate  teacher  to  feel  at 
least  some  remorse  for  the  event,  the  effect  it  must  have-had  on  his  victim  who  had 
previously  trusted  him  enough  to  confide  in  him,  and  his  failure  to  have  handled  the  situation 
in  a  more  appropriate,  non-violent  manner.  Respondent’s  denial  of  responsibility  and 
complete  lack  of  remorse  bode  poorly  for  present  and  future  students,  parents,  faculty  and 
staff. 

ORDER 

The  District  may  dismiss  Respondent,  James  Hill,  as  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 

 

 
e
e

 
e
e
m

  

H.  STUART  WAXMAN,  Member 
Administrative  Law  Judge  . 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DATED: 

DATED: 

  

LAURA  LEARNED,  Member 

Katte  Hnrison— 
  RUSSELL  HARRISON,  Member 

parep:  2/7/14 

a4 

  

