 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal 
of: 

CRUZ  CERDA, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

. 

OAH  No.  2013051093 

  

Respondent. 

ORDER 

On  February  20,  2014,  the  undersigned  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  (OAH)  conducted  a  jurisdictional  hearing  and  a  hearing  on  an  Order 
to  Show  Cause.  Complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented 
by  Susan  Hyman,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  Office  of  General  Counsel.  Respondent  Cruz 
Cerda  was  not  present  or  represented  at  the  hearing. 

Procedural  Background 

On  or  about  April  26,  2013,  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  made  and  filed  with  the 

Board  of  Education  (Board)  of  the  District,  seeking  the  suspension  without  pay  and  the  dis- 
missal  of  respondent,  a  permanent  certificated  employee,  for  unprofessional  conduct,  immor- 
al  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  schoo!  laws 
or  regulations,  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  On  May  21,  2013,  re- 
spondent  submitted  a  Request  for  Hearing  to  the  District,  acknowledging  receipt  of  the  No- 
tice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  requesting  a  hearing. 

On  May  23,  2013,  the  District  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges  with  OAH  with  a  re- 

quest  to  set  the  matter  for  an  administrative  hearing.  OAH  scheduled  a  telephonic  trial  set- 
ting  conference,  which  was  later  continued  to  July  12. 

On  June  17,  2013,  the  District  filed  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  for  the 

dismissal  of  respondent  and  respondent’s  Request  for  Hearing  with  OAH.  On  June  19,  2013, 
the  District  filed  the  parties’  stipulation  waiving  the  statutory  time  for  commencement  of  the 
hearing.  On  July  1,  2013,  respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  On  July  12,  2013,  respond- 
ent’s  counsel  filed  a  notice  of  representation. 

t  All  section  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  indicated  otherwise. 

 

On  July  12,  2013,  OAH  conducted  a  telephonic  trial  setting  conference.  The  hearing 
on  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  was  set  and  scheduled  for  six  days  beginning  on 
.  February  20,  2014.  The  District’s  and  respondent’s  counsel  appeared  for  the  telephonic  con- 
ference.  The  Trial  Setting  Order  was  served  on  both  parties.  On  July  19,  2013,  respondent’s 
counsel  filed  a  formal  notice  of  representation  and  an  Amended  Notice  of  Defense.  On  July 
23,  2013,  the  District  served  a  Notice  of  Hearing  and  Notice  to  Appear  at  Hearing  upon  re- 
spondent’s  counsel  and  filed  the  notices  with  OAH.  On  September  13,  2013,  respondent’s 
counsel  filed  a  notice  with  OAH  and  the  District  that  she  no  longer  represented  respondent. 

On  November  21,  2013,  the  District  filed  a  Notice  of  Resignation  by  Respondent 

Cruz  Cerda  and  Request  for  Status  Conference.  The  District  also  filed  a  Certificated  Resig- 
nation/Retirement  Form  that  was  signed  by  respondent  on  August  21,  2013.  The  prehearing 
and  mandatory  settlement  conferences  previously  scheduled  for  January  10,  2014,  were  can- 
celled. 

On  February  7,  2014,  the  Presiding  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  OAH  issued  an  Or- 
der  to  Show  Cause  re  Dismissal  and  Notice  of  Jurisdictional  Hearing  and  Hearing  on  Order 
to  Show  Cause  (Order),  which  was  served  upon  the  parties.  The  Order  noted  that  respondent 
had  resigned  from  the  District  and  had  retired  and  the  parties  had  not  taken  action  to  appoint 
panel  members  for  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  However,  on  February  7, 
2014,  respondent  had  called  OAH  and  stated  he  wanted  to  go  forward  with  the  hearing  on  the 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  provided  his  new  address.  Accordingly,  under  the 
Order,  the  parties  were  directed  to  each  file  a  written  statement  indicating  why  this  matter 
should  or  should  not  be  dismissed  for  lack  of  jurisdiction. 

On  February  18,  2014,  the  District  filed  a  Position  Statement  Re  Order  to  Show 
Cause.  Respondent  did  not  file  a  written  statement.  At  the  February  20,  2014  jurisdictional 
hearing  and  hearing  on  the  Order,  the  District  appeared  and  was  represented  by  its  Assistant 
General  Counsel.  Respondent  did  not  appear  and  was  not  represented  at  the  hearing,  but  he 
had  been  served  with  the  Order  at  his  new  address  in  West  Hollywood  and  given  information 
about  the  hearing  on  the  Order  when  he  called  OAH. 

Discussion 

At  the  hearing  on  the  Order,  the  District  contended  that  respondent’s  voluntary  resig- 
nation  and  retirement  in  May  2013  caused  him  to  cease  being.an  employee  and  thus  divested 
the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  of  jurisdiction  to  hear  his  appeal  of  the  dismis- 
sal  charges  filed  against  him.  The  District  asked  that  the  Accusation  be  dismissed. 

Provisions  of  the  Education  Code  set  forth  the  procedures  for 

the  dismissal  or 
suspension  of  a  certificated  employee  of  a  school  district. 
Section  44932,  provides,  in 
pertinent  part,  that  no  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
causes,  which  include  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  and  unsatisfactory 
eleven 
performance,  among  other  causes.  Sections  44934  and  44939  set  forth  the  two  processes  by 
which  a  governing  board  of  a  school  district  can  initiate  the  dismissal  and/or  suspension  of  a 

written  charges  duly  signed  and  verified  must  be  filed 
certificated  employee  and  teacher: 
with  the  governing  board  or  a  written  statement  of  charges  must  be  formulated  by  the 
governing  board. 

Section  44944  provides,  in  pertinent  part, 

a  dismissal  or  suspension 
proceeding  initiated  pursuant  to  section  44934,  the  hearing,  if  requested  by  the  employee, 
must  be  commenced  within  60  days  from  the  date  of  the  employee’s  demand  for  a  hearing. 
The  hearing  must  be  initiated,  conducted,  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 
(commencing  with  section  11500)  of  the  Government  Code,  However,  section  44944  also 
provides  that  the  hearing  date  must  be  established  after  consultation  with  the  employee  and 
the  governing  board,  or  their  representative. 

that, 

in 

Section  44944,  subdivision  (b)(1),  states  that  the  hearing  must  be  conducted  by  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission). 
Under  subdivision  (a)(1),  the 
Commission  has  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  in  Chapter  5  of  the  Government  Code, 
except  that  parties  have  the  right  of  discovery  available  to  a  party  in  a  civil  action.  Under 
subdivision  (c)(1),  the  decision  of  the  Commission  must  contain  a  disposition  that  is  solely 
that  the  employee  be  dismissed;  that  the  employee  should  be 
one  of  the  following: 
suspended  for  a  specific  period  of  time  without  pay;  or  that  the  employee  should  not  be 
dismissed  or  suspended. 

Section  44930,  subdivision  (a),  further  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  governing 
boards  of  school  districts  shall  accept  the  resignation  of  any  employee  and  shall  fix  the  time 
when  the  resignation  takes  effect,  which  shall  not  be  later  than  the  close  of  the  school  year 
Section  44907  provides  that 
during  which  the  resignation  has  been  received  by  the  board. 
the  retirement  of  any  employee  of  a  school  district  under  the  provisions  of  any  retirement 
law,  except  for  employees  retiring  for  disability  under  the  Teachers’  Retirement  Law,  shall 
automatically  effect  the  dismissal  of  the  employee  from  the  employ  of  the  school  district  at 
the  end  of  the  current  school  year. 

Case  law  in  this  area  provides  some  guidance.  In  Zuniga  v.  Los  Angeles  County  Civil 
Service  Commission  (2006)  137  Cal-App.4th  1255,  the  court  held  that  the  county  civil 
service  commission  lost  jurisdiction  in  a  case  involving  a  county  employee’s  appeal  of  a 
disciplinary  suspension  upon  the  employee’s  retirement.  That  commission’s  jurisdiction,  as 
set  forth  in  the  county  charter  and  the  commission’s  rules,  was  limited  to  resolving  disputes 
involving  “employees.”  Once  the  appellant  retired,  he  was  no  longer  an  employee  and  the 
commission  had  no  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  the  validity  of  his  suspension. 

In  County of Los  Angeles  Department  of  Health  Services  v.  Civil  Service  Commission 
(2009)  180  Cal.App.4th  391,  the  court  held  that  the  Zuniga  case  stands  for  the  bright  line 
proposition  that,  where  an  employee  retires  during  the  pendency  of  a  civil  service  appeal,  his 
or  her  future  status  as  an  employee  by  definition  is  no  longer  at  issue.  The  court  added  that 
the  civil  service  commission  has  authority  to  address  only  matters  involving  a  member  of  the 
civil  service,  and  a  person  who  has  retired  is  no  longer  a  member  of  the  civil  service. 

  

 

   

Here,  respondent  was  served  with  the  Notice  of  Intention  and  the  Statement  of  Charg- 

es  that  was  filed  with  the  Board.  Respondent  was  duly  notified  of  the  District’s  intention  to 
suspend  and  dismiss  him  from  his  employment  and  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing.  Subsequent- 
ly,  the  District  filed  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  with  OAH  and  caused  a  hear- 
ing  to  be  set  on  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  As  such,  jurisdiction  was  con- 
ferred  on  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  under  sections  44934,  44939,  and 
44944  to  hear  and  adjudicate  the  proposed  dismissal  of  respondent  as  a  permanent  certifi- 
cated  employee  of  the  District. 

After  the  initiation  of  the  present  disciplinary  proceeding,  respondent  submitted  a 

Certificated  Resignation/Retirement  Form  to  the  District.  He  resigned  as  a  certificated  em- 
ployee  of  the  District  on  May  30,  2013,  and  retired  on  May  31,  2013.  Under  section  44930, 
subdivision  (a),  the  District  was  required  to  accept  respondent’s  resignation  and  his  resigna- 
tion  became  effective  at  the  close  of  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Under  section  44907,  re- 
spondent’s  retirement  automatically  effected  his  dismissal  from  the  District’s  employ  at  the 
end  of  the  school  year.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that  the  last  day 
of  the  2012-2013  school  year  for  the  District  was  June  30,  2013. 

Accordingly,  due  to  his  submission  of  the  Certificated  Resignation/Retirement  Form, 
respondent’s  resignation  became  effective  and  he  was  deemed  dismissed  and  ceased  being  an 
employee  of  the  District  on  June  30,  2013,  under  the  provisions  of  sections  44930,  subdivi- 
Whereas,  the  Commission  in  a  dismissal  proceeding  under  sections 
sion  (a),  and  44907. 
44934,  44939,  and  44944  can  decide  only  whether  a  certificated  employee  should  be  dis- 
missed,  suspended,  or  not  be  dismissed  or  suspended  and  whereas  respondent  is  no  longer  a 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  due  to  his  resignation  and  retirement,  jurisdiction  no 
longer  exists  for  the  Commission  under  these  same  sections  to  hear  and  adjudicate  the  pro- 
posed  disciplinary  action  in  this  matter.  (See  Zuniga,  supra,  137  Cal.App.4th  1255,  County 
of Los  Angeles  Department  of Health  Services,  supra,  180  Cal.App.4th  391.) 

ORDER 

Jurisdiction  does  not  exist  in  this  matter  under  Education  Code  sections  44934, 
44939,  and  44944.  The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  OAH  Case  No.  2013051093, 
is  hereby  dismissed. 

IT  IS  SO  ORDERED  this  21st  day  of  February  2014. 

Vel  Nafarrete 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

