BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Amended  Accusation 
and  Statement  of  Charges  Against: 

OAH  No.  2013101081 

GABRIEL  GALLAND, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  in  Los  Angeles  on  April  14  —  17  and  20  —  22, 
2015. 

Pursuant  to  a  Joint  Stipulation  Regarding  Waiver  of  Commission  Member,  the  parties 
waived  their  rights  to  have  this  matter  heard  by  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1).  The  parties  further  stipulated 
that  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  shall  have  all  of  the  powers  granted  to  a  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  and  could  hear  and  decide  this  matter  sitting  alone. 

Complainant  Board  of  Education  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  was 

represented  by  Michele  M.  Goldsmith,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondent  Gabriel  Galland  was 
present  throughout  the  hearing  and  represented  by  Ronald  C.  Lapekas,  Attorney  at  Law. 

During  the  hearing,  complainant  presented  documentary  evidence  and  the  testimony 

of  several  administrators,  teachers,  staff,  and  students.  Complainant  also  moved  to  amend 
the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  to  conform  to  the  proof  presented  during 
the  hearing.  Complainant’s  motion  was  granted  and  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement 
of  Charges  was  amended  on  page  2,  at  paragraph  1(c),  line  16,  by  adding  the  word  “hitting” 
between  the  words  “door”  and  “almost  hitting.”  Respondent  testified  and  presented 
documentary  evidence. 

At  the  request  of  respondent’s  counsel  for  written  argument,  the  Administrative  Law 

Judge  directed  the  parties  to  file  written  arguments  by  certain  dates.  On  May  18,  2015, 
complainant  timely  filed  a  Closing  Brief,  which  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  87. 
On  June  8,  2015,  respondent  timely  filed  a  Closing  Argument,  which  was  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  AA.  On  June  12,  2015,  complainant  timely  filed  a  Rebuttal,  which 
was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  88. 

 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  oral  argument  heard,  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  submitted  this  matter  for  decision  on  April  22,  2015,  and  finds  as 
follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  November  1,  2013,  the  Accusation,  Case  Number  2013101081,  was  made 

and  filed  by  Vivian  K.  Ekchian  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  Chief  Human  Resources 
Officer  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District).  On  June  13,  2014,  the 
Amended  Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by  Michele  M.  Goldsmith  in  her  capacity  as  the 
attorney  for  the  District  and  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District.  With 
administrative  offices  Jocated  at  333  South  Beaudry  Avenue  in  Los  Angeles  and  schools 
throughout  the  Los  Angeles  area,  the  District  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  diverse 
comprehensive  school  districts  in  the  nation. 

2. 

At  all  times  relevant  herein,  respondent  has  been  employed  as  a  permanent 
certificated  employee  of  the  District.  He  attended  El  Camino  College  and  California  State 
University  Long  Beach  where  he  majored  in  fine  arts  and  art  education.  He  obtained  his 
Cross-Cultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development  certificate  after  completing  classes  at 
the  University  of  Phoenix.  In  or  about  1999,  respondent  was  hired  by  the  District;  he  began 
teaching  art  and  industrial  arts  for  the  District  at  Carson  High  School.  Later  in  1999,  and 
continuing  through  June  2012,  he  taught  art  at  Manual  Arts  High  School.  For  the  fall 
semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent  transferred  to  and  taught  art  at  South 
Region  High  School  12-B  (South  Region  High  School). 

District  Policies 

3. 

In  September  1998,  the  District  adopted  an  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  The 

District  revised  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  in  December  2000  and  February  2003.  Under 
the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  the  District  is  committed  to  three  core  ethical  principles: 
commitment  to  excellence,  district  and  personal  integrity,  and  responsibility.  For  the  core 
ethical  principle  of  commitment  to  excellence,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  committed 
to  being  the  best  school  district  and  to  educating  students  to  their  maximum  potential.  The 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  provides  that  everything  employees  do  has  an  impact  in  the 
classroom.  Employees  must  be  committed  to  creating  an  environment  of  trust,  care,  and 
respect.  Discriminatory  or  harassing  behavior  of  students  or  colleagues  is  not  tolerated.  For 
the  core  ethical  principle  of  integrity,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  committed  to 
ensuring  that  employee-student  relationships  are  positive,  professional,  and  non-exploitative. 
For  the  core  ethical  principle  of  responsibility,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  responsible 
for  their  performance.  The  District  and  its  employees  must  ensure  that  power  and  authority 

are  used  in  an  appropriate  and  positive  manner  that  enhances  the  public  interest  and  trust.    

The  goal  of  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  is,  in  part,  to  create  a  culture  that  fosters  trust, 
commitment  to  excellence  and  responsibility,  and  personal  and  institutional  integrity. 

4. 

On  July  1,  2010,  the  District  promulgated  a  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  in 
which  the  District  resolved  that  the  most  important  responsibility  of  all  District  employees  is 
to  ensure  the  safety  of  its  students.  While  the  cultivation  of  positive  relationships  with 
students  is  encouraged,  employees,  and  all  individuals  who  work  with  or  have  contact  with 
students,  are  expected  to  use  good  judgment  and  are  cautioned  to  avoid  situations,  including 
engaging  in  any  behaviors  with  students  or  in  the  presence  of  students,  which  are 
unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative.  District  employees  are  also 
cautioned  against  making  statements  or  comments  in  the  presence  of  students  which  are  not 
age-appropriate,  professional,  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual  in  nature,  harassing,  or 
demeaning. 

5. 

In a  Resolution  adopted  on  October  10,  1988  (Board  Resolution  for  respectful 

treatment  of  all  persons),  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  reaffirmed  its  policy  that 
students  and  adults  in  both  schools  and  offices  should  treat  all  persons  equally  and 
respectfully  and  should  refrain  from  the  willful  or  negligent  use  of  slurs  against  any  person 
on  the  basis  of  race,  language  spoken,  color,  sex,  religion,  handicap,  national  origin, 
immigration  status,  age,  sexual  orientation,  or  political  belief. 

6. 

(A)  In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  March  27,  2007,  and  entitled  “Discipline 

Foundation  Policy,  School-  Wide  Positive  Behavior  Support,”  the  District  established  a 
framework  for  developing  and  implementing  a  culture  of  discipline  conducive  to  learning 
and  teaching  by  requiring  a  consistent  school-wide  positive  behavior  support  and  discipline 
plan.  School-wide  positive  behavior  support  is  based  on  research  that  indicates  the  most 
effective  discipline  system  uses  proactive  strategies  designed  to  prevent  discipline  problems. 
A  school-wide  positive  behavior  support  and  discipline  plan  is  to  include  teaching  school 
rules  and  social-emotional  skills,  reinforcing  appropriate  student  behavior,  and  using 
effective  classroom  management  and  positive  behavior  support  strategies  that  provide  for 
early  intervention  for  misconduct  and  appropriate  use  of  consequences. 

(B)  The  implementation  of  this  policy  contemplates  participation  by  every 

person  in  the  District.  For  example,  students  are  expected  to  learn  and  follow  all  school  and 
classroom  rules  and  to  demonstrate  appropriate  social  skills  when  interacting  with  both 
adults  and  peers.  When  behavioral  expectations  are  not  met,  students  are  expected  to  work 
to  improve  behavior.  Students  are  also  encouraged  to  take  leadership  roles  in  modeling 
appropriate  behaviors  and  attitudes  for  peers.  Under  this  policy,  teachers  have  a  fundamental 
role  in  supporting  a  positive  classroom  and  school,  including  utilizing  effective  classroom 
management  strategies  to  create  an  environment  conducive  to  learning  and  to  prevent 
misconduct.  Teachers  are  required,  in  part,  to  acknowledge  and  reinforce  appropriate  student 
behavior,  provide  corrective  feedback  and  re-teach  the  behavioral  skill  when  misconduct 
occurs,  and  report  behavior  to  the  school  administrator  or  person  responsible  for  discipline 
of  a  student  who  engages  in  ongoing  misconduct.

7. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  May  18,  2009,  entitled,  “Ethics  Policies,”  the 

District  stated  that  all  certificated  and  classified  employees  are  to  be  knowledgeable  about 
the  District’s  ethics  policies  and  must  take  an  active  role  in  promoting  an  organizational 
culture  that  encourages  ethical  conduct.  The  District  has  four  ethics  policies  approved  by  the 
Board  of  Education,  including  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  Each  District  employee  is 
responsible  for  setting  a  good  example  of  ethical  conduct  in  his  or  her  work,  being  familiar 
with  the  ethics  policies  and  participating  in  annual  training  activities,  contributing  to  a 
proactive  and  transparent  management  of  potential  ethics  concerns,  seeking  guidance  from  a 
supervisor  or  other  trustworthy  source  if  unsure  of  the  most  ethical  and  responsible  course  of 
action,  and  recognizing  that  he  or  she  is  a  role  model  to  peers  but,  equally  important,  to  the 
students  of  the  District, 

8. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  February  23,  2010,  entitled,  “Abolition  of  Corporal 
Punishment,”  the  District  reaffirmed  its  policy  prohibiting  the  use  of  corporal  punishment,  in 
any  form,  as  a  disciplinary  option  or  measure  at  any  grade  level  and  with  any  student. 
Corporal  punishment  is  defined  as  the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction 
of,  physica]  pain  on  a  pupil.  Under  this  policy,  corporal  punishment  refers  to  the  intentional 
application  of  physical  pain  as  a  method  of  changing  behavior.  In  this  Policy  Bulletin,  the 
District  encourages  the  use  of  positive  approaches  to  discipline  and  classroom  management 
to  ensure  that  students  conform  to  proper  and  expected  standards  of  behavior  so  that  they 
may  derive  greater  benefits  from  the  educational  program. 

9. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  June  25,  2010,  entitled,  “Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy 

(Student-to-Student,  Adult-to-Student,  and  Student-to-Adult)”,  the  District  reaffirmed  its 
policy  against  bullying  in  all  areas  of  the  District’s  jurisdiction  and  its  commitment  to 
providing  a  safe  and  civil  learning  and  working  environment.  The  District  takes  a  strong 
position  against  bullying,  hazing,  or  any  behavior  that  infringes  on  the  safety  or  well-being  of 
students,  employees,  or  any  other  persons  within  the  District’s  jurisdiction  or  interferes  with 
learning  or  the  ability  to  teach.  Bullying  is  defined  as  a  comprehensive  term  that 
encompasses  the  deliberate  antagonistic  action  or  creation  of  a  situation  with  the  intent  of 
inflicting  emotional,  physical,  or  psychological  distress. 

10. 

=‘ The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  the 
Board  Resolution  for  respectful  treatment,  Discipline  Foundation  Policy,  Ethics  Policies,  the 
policy  for  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment,  and  the  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy 
constitute  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the  schools  of  the  District 
by  its  governing  board. 
As  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  respondent 
was  required  to  abide  by  these  policies  or  regulations  of  the  District.  As  established  by  his 
testimony  and  the  testimony  of  administrators,  respondent  has  receiving  training  in  and  is 
familiar  with  these  District  policies  at  all  times  relevant  herein. 

i 
i 
if

Manual  Arts  High  School 

11. 

From  the  1999-2000  through  the  2011-2012  school  years,  respondent  taught  at 
Manual  Arts  High  School.  Manual  Arts  High  School  is  a  large,  urban  secondary  school  with 
approximately  3,000  pupils  and  130  teachers.  It  is  a  diverse  campus  with  Latinos 
constituting  75  percent  and  African  Americans  constituting  25  percent  of  the  pupil 
population.  At  the  beginning  of  each  school  year,  Manual  Arts  High  School  had  a  faculty 
meeting  where  teachers  receive  training  and  information  on  the  District’s  policies  and  were 
given  a  handbook  containing  the  policies.  Teachers  were  reminded  to  behave  appropriately 
and  respectfully  around  students  and  school  staff  and  not  to  make  disrespectful  comments. 
Respondent  attended  the  training  sessions  every  year  that  he  was  assigned  to  the  school. 

12. 

Respondent  taught  five  or  six  periods  of  art  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  each 

semester.  He  had  generally  “good  skills”  and  academic  knowledge  as  an  art  teacher. 
Students  completed  art  projects  in  his  classes  and  were  generally  on  task  with  their 
assignments  when  observed  by  administrators.  On  the  other  hand,  respondent  was  known  by 
Assistant  Principal  Todd  Engle  to  have  a  temper  and  anger  management  issues.  Engle 
supervised  respondent  during  the  2009-2010  school  year.  Engle  found  that  respondent  was 
easily  provoked  or  agitated  by  students  and  would  get  mad  and  upset  with  them.  The 
assistant  principal  observed  respondent  become  red-faced  and  angry  with  students  in  his 
classes  and  speak  to  them  in  a  “strong  voice.”  The  assistant  principal  could  hear 
respondent’s  voice  from  outside  his  classroom.  Many  students  complained  to  the  assistant 
principal  that  respondent  yelled  and  cursed  at  them  in  class  and  had  confrontations  with 
students.  Respondent  disputed  the  students’  complaints  and  stated  to  the  assistant  principal 
on  several  occasions  that  the  students  were  the  ones  who  confronted  him.  Engle  had  ongoing 
issues  with  respondent  having  confrontations  with  students,  removing  students  from  his 
classroom  and  sending  them  to  the  school  office,  and  calling  the  school  office  for  assistance 
or  security  to  help  manage  his  classroom.  Engle  advised  respondent  not  to  let  the  students 
“to  get  to  him”  and  not  to  respond  to  the  students. 

13. 

(A)  On  November  3,  2010,  when  student  AR.  refused  to  put  away  a 

ruler,  respondent  called  student ARV.  “lazy.”  Respondent  then  made  fun  of  or  mocked 
student ARV .S  weight  by  puffing  up  his  cheeks  and  spreading  his  arms  apart  to  simulate 
the  student’s  appearance  or  physique. 
incident. 
was  inappropriate  and  disrespectful. 

.  was  upset  and  insulted  by  respondent’s  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct 

Student  AV.  and  another  student  reported  the 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  called  student  AR.  “fat.”  Nor 
was  it  established  that  respondent  told  the  student,  “Get  the  fuck  out,  you  fucking  shit”  after 
the  student  purportedly  cursed  at  him.  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  on  these 
allegations. 

  

"  Students’  last  names  are  omitted  to  protect  their  privacy. 

 

(C)  On  November  4,  2010,  Assistant  Principal  Engle  held  a  formal  conference 

V.  Respondent  denied  the 

with  respondent  to  discuss  his  interaction  with  student 
allegations.  Engle  offered  respondent  the  following  assistance:  attend  anger  management 
classes,  do  not  enter  into  verbal  exchanges  with  students,  and  do  not  respond  with  profanity 
or  inappropriate  comments  when  students  make  inappropriate  remarks  to  him.  The  assistant 
principal  also  gave  respondent  copies  of  the  Board  Resolution  for  the  respectful  treatment  of 
all  persons,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  and  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  Respondent  was 
also  directed  not  to  use  profanity  during  work  hours  under  any  circumstances  and  not  to 
make  comments  or  gestures  belittling  students.  The  assistant  principal  kept  student 
V.  and  the  other  student  who  reported  the  incident  in  his  office  for  a  couple  of  days  until 
respondent  “had  time  to  cool  down  from  this  incident.”  Two  months  later,  in  January  2011, 
respondent  completed  the  anger  management  classes. 

14. 

(A)  On  January  25,  2011,  respondent  had  an  argument  or  altercation  with  a 
member  of  the  campus  security  staff  at  Manual  Arts  High  School.  Respondent  called  the 
security  staff  member  a  “Big  Gorilla.”  The  security  member  is  African-American. 
Respondent’s  comment  was  offensive,  inappropriate,  and  disrespectful. 

(B)  On  February  4,  2011,  Joni  Boykins,  another  Assistant  Principal  at  Manual 
Arts  High  School,  held  a  conference  with  respondent  to  discuss  his  argument  with  the  school 
security  staff  member.  Respondent  did  not  deny  making  the  inappropriate  comment  to  the 
security  staff  member.  He  was  remorseful  and  indicated  that  he  wished  that  he  had  handled 
the  situation  differently.  The  assistant  principal  directed  respondent  to  maintain  a  high  level 
of  professionalism  in  his  conversations  and  exchanges  with  persons  on  the  school  campus,  to 
avoid  altercations  with  adults  and  students  at  all  times,  and  to  refrain  from  any  negative 
interactions  with  the  school  security  staff  member.  The  assistant  principal  also  told 
respondent  to  read  and  follow  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students. 

15. 

(A)  In  January  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Mistie  Ann  Barela  became 

respondent’s  supervisor  at  Manual  Arts  High  School.  On  her  first  day  as  assistant  principal, 
Barela  met  respondent  in  a  school  hallway.  Respondent  was  upset  and  loudly  complained  to 
her  about  a  fellow  teacher.  The  assistant  principal  took  respondent  into  her  office  so  that 
students  would  not  hear  respondent’s  complaints.  In  the  office,  respondent  asserted  that  the 
colleague  should  not  be  teaching  history  about  the  Olmecs,  the  ancient  Mexican  civilization, 
because  the  teacher  is  black.  Respondent  raised  his  voice  and  said  that  the  teacher  did  not 
know  history  and  should  not  be  teaching  Latino  students.  The  assistant  principal’s  first 
impression  of  respondent  was  concerning  to  her. 

(B)  Over  the  course  of  the  remainder  of  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Barela 
found  respondent  was  disrespectful  of  her.  He  did  not  respond  to  her  greetings  when  they 
passed  each  other  at  school.  In  class,  the  assistant  principal  also  found  that  respondent  was 
not  warm  or  welcoming  to  his  students  and  that  he  tended  to  raise  his  voice  at  students.  On 
one  occasion,  she  heard  him  yelling  in  his  classroom  and  informally  counseled  him  to  speak 
respectfully  to  the  students.  He  tended  to  remove  students  from  his  classroom  and, 

 

sometimes,  he  did  not  want  the  students  to  return.  The  assistant  principal  reminded 
respondent  that  the  students  were  entitled  to  an  education.  Barela  also  found  that  students 
did  not  want  to  return  to  respondent’s  class  and  complained  to  her  that  respondent  was 
disrespectful  to  them. 

16. 

(A)  On  January  7,  2012,  a  fight  broke  out  between  two  male  students  during  a 

passing  period  in  the  second  floor  hallway  of  Doolittle  Hall  near  respondent’s  classroom. 
Respondent  was  standing  at  the  door  to  let  pupils  into  his  classroom  when  pupils  started 
screaming  and  running  to  the  fight.  One  student  had  the  other  in  a  headlock  and  began 
hitting  the  other  student  in  the  head  with  an  object,  causing  the  other  student  to  bleed. 
Respondent  yelled  at  the  boys  and  stopped  the  fight.  There  was  blood  on  the  floor  of  the 
hallway. 

(B)  When  students  began  stepping  on  the  blood,  respondent  grabbed  and 

opened  a  packet  of  paper  towels  and  a  bottle  of  Windex  glass  cleaning  solution.  He  poured 
the  Windex  solution  on  the  blood  on  the  floor  and  began  cleaning  up  the  blood  with  the 
paper  towels.  Assistant  Principal  Barela  was  present  in  the  hallway  at  the  time.  When  she 
saw  respondent  cleaning  up  the  blood,  the  assistant  principal  directed  respondent  to  stop 
what  he  was  doing  and  to  return  to  his  classroom.  Barela  opened  or  was  going  to  open  the 
door  to  respondent’s  classroom.  The  passing  period  was  over  and  instructional  time  had 
begun.  Students  were  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Barela  also  told  respondent  that  she  would 
handle  the  clean-up  of  the  blood.  The  assistant  principal  was  aware  that  teachers  had 
received  training  that  they  were  not  to  touch  blood  for  health  and  safety  reasons  and  that  the 
school’s  custodial  staff  was  required  to  perform  this  task.  The  assistant  principal  again 
directed  respondent  to  return  to  his  classroom.  In  response  to  Barela’s  directive,  respondent 
yelled  at  the  assistant  principal  in  a  loud  voice,  stating,  “Don’t  touch  my  door.  Don’t  talk  to 
me.”  Students  were  present  when  respondent  yelled  at  the  assistant  principal.  Respondent 
failed  to  abide  by  Barela’s  directive  and  continued  cleaning  the  blood  for  two  more  minutes. 
Barela  was  shocked  by  respondent’s  comments  and  reported  his  conduct  to  the  principal. 
Respondent’s  conduct  in  refusing  to  follow  the  assistant  principal’s  directive  and  his  yelling 
and  making  of  comments  to  her  were  insubordinate  and  disrespectful. 

17. 

(A)  On  January  30,  2012,  Robert  Whitman,  Principal  of  Manual  Arts  High 

School,  held  a  conference  with  respondent  to  discuss  respondent’s  conduct  and  statements  to 
the  assistant  principal  in  the  aftermath  of  the  student  fight,  as  set  forth  in  Finding  16  above. 
Respondent  was  present  for  the  conference  along  with  a  representative  from  the  teachers’ 
association.  Assistant  Principal  Barela  was  also  present.  Respondent  denied  telling  Barela 
not  to  touch  the  door  to  his  classroom  or  not  to  speak  to  him. 

(B)  At  the  conference  on  January  30,  2012,  Principal  Whitman  provided 

respondent  with  copies  of  the  Board  Resolution  for  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons  and 
the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  advised  respondent  that  he  could  seek  assistance  from  the 
principal  and  the  Employee  Assistance  Program.  Respondent  was  directed  not  to  be 
aggressive  or  disrespectful  to  any  student  or  employee  and  was  told  that  he  had  a 

   

professional  responsibility  to  treat  all  persons  with  respect  and  to  follow  the  District’s 
policies 

18. 

It  was  not  established  that,  on  or  about  March  15,  2012,  while  instructing 
pupils  in  his  classroom,  respondent  used  his  cellular  telephone  to  make  a  loud  and  shrill 
sound  of  a  dog  whistle  and  refused  to  turn  off  the  sound  after  several  students  complained 
and  asked  him  to  stop  making  the  sound.  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that 
it  was  respondent,  rather  than  a  student  or  another  person,  who  caused  or  made  the  sound.  It 
was  not  explained  or  demonstrated  how  such  a  sound  could  be  emitted  from  a  cellular 
telephone. 

19. 

(A)  On  or  about  March  16,  2012,  student  i.  entered  respondent’s 
classroom  and  delivered  a  summons  for  students  from  the  College  Center,  The  College 
Center  is  a  program  or  office  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  that  assists  pupils  in  obtaining 
admission  to  and  financial  aid  from  colleges.  Student  IfJA.  was  a  student  helper  at  the 
College  Center. 

(B)  On  or  about  March  16,  2012,  student  a.  gave  the  summons  to 
respondent  and  asked  whether  the  students  named in  the  summons  were  present  in  the 
classroom.  In  response,  respondent  told  mm.  to  get  out  of  his  classroom. 
asked  respondent  again  if  the  students  named in  the  summons  were  there  because  he  had  to 
take  the  summons  back  to  the  College  Center.  Respondent  stated  to  the  student,  “Just  get  out 
of  my  class.”  Student  IJA.  then  told  respondent  that  he  was  a  “rude  white  ass”  and  he 
walked  out  of  the  classroom.  As  student  I 
made  and  directed  sounds  imitating  a  monkey  or  gorilla  at  the  student,  who  is  African 
American.  The  student  heard  the  sounds  and  became  mad.  Respondent’s  conduct  in  making 
the  sounds  was  offensive,  inappropriate,  and  disrespectful. 

.  was  leaving  his  classroom,  respondent 

   

20. 

(A)  On  or  about  May  14,  2012,  respondent  removed  student  As.  from 

his  classroom.  While  doing  so,  respondent  muttered  under  his  breath,  and  was  heard  by 
another  student  J 
.  to  say,  that  student ARs.  was  a  “mayate.”  Mayate  is  a 
derogatory  term  or  slang  used  by  Mexican-Americans  or  Latinos  in  reference  to  black  or 
dark-skinned  persons.  In  addition,  respondent  yelled  at  AS.  as  the  student  was 
walking  the  hallway  that  he  “was  not  going  to  make  it  in  life.”  Respondent’s  remarks  to 
student ARs.  were  Offensive,  inappropriate,  and  disrespectful. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  or  about  May  14,  2012,  respondent  told  the 

student  that  he  was  a  “shit”  or  a  “piece  of  shit”  or  that  the  student  “would  never  amount  to 
anything  because  he  is  black.”  These  allegations  were  not  established  by  the  statement  of 
Student  J 

.  and  were  not  corroborated  by  any  other  student. 

21. 

On  undetermined  date  in  or  about  March  2012,  student  ER.  entered 

respondent’s  class  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  after  the  bell  had  already  r 
was  late  to  respondent’s  art  class  but  he  had  a  tardy  slip  from  the  office. 
in  his  chair.  Upon  seeing  the  student,  respondent  yelled,  “Why  are  you  wasting  your  time 

The  student 
C.  sat  down 

  
   

  

coming  to  school.  All  you  are  going  to  do  is  sell  oranges  on  the  street.”  Student  Ec. 
was  made  to  feel  insulted  and  upset  by  respondent’s  comment  and  left  the  classroom.  He  did 
not  return.to  respondent’s  class.  Student  EC.  is  Latino.  Respondent’s  comment  to 
student  E 

.  was  Offensive,  inappropriate,  and  disrespectful. 

22. 

Onor  about  May  1,  2012,  and  during  his  first  period  art  class,  respondent 

made  fun  or  light  of  Assistant  Principal  Barela  by  referring  to  her  as  “the  mi  hija  lady”  to  the 
students  and  stating  that  she  should  not  disturb  his  class  again.  In  Spanish,  “mi  hija”  means 
my  daughter.  Barela  apparently  was  known  to  use  the  term  when  referring  or  talking  with 
female  students  at  the  high  school.  Respondent’s  description  or  comment  about  the  assistant 
principal  to  his  classroom  of  pupils  was  inappropriate  and  disrespectful.  It  was  not 
established  that  respondent  stated  to  his  classroom  that  the  assistant  principal  should  be 
selling  tamales. 

23. 

(A)  On  May  21,  2012,  Principal  Whitman  held  a  conference  with  respondent 

to  discuss  students’  complaints  about  his  conduct  described,  in  part,  in  Findings  18  —  23 
above.  Respondent  was  present  for  the  conference  along  with  a  representative  from  the 
teachers’  association.  Respondent  asserted  that  all  of  the  students’  complaints  were  false  and 
that  he  would  not  make  denigrating  remarks  to  a  Latino  student  because  he  himself  was 
undocumented  person  when  he  first  came  to  this  country. 

(B)  On  May  21,  2012,  Principal  Whitman  provided  respondent  with  copies  of 

the  Board  Resolution  on  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons  and  the  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics  and  advised  respondent  that  he  could  seek  assistance  from  the  principal  and  the 
Employee  Assistance  Program.  Respondent  was  directed  not  to  be  aggressive  or 
disrespectful  to  any  student  or  employee  and  was  told  that  he  had  a  professional 
responsibility  to  treat  all  persons  with  respect 

24. 

At  the  end  of  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent  was  not  among  the 

teachers  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  who  were  rehired  or  re-elected  to  teach  at  the  high 
school  for  the  following  school  year.  Respondent  began  searching  for  a  new  teaching 
position  within  the  District.  He  applied  for  an  opening  for  an  art  teacher  at  the  District’s 
South  Region  High  School  Number  12A,  a  new  high  school  for  technology,  arts,  and  design 
that  was  opening  in  the  fall  2012  semester. 

25. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  14,  16,  and  22  above,  respondent  engaged  in 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  when  he  called  a  campus  security 
staff  member  a  “Big  Gorilla,”  yelled  at  and  refused  to  follow  the  directives  of  the  assistant 
principal  in  the  aftermath  of  a  student  fight,  and  referred  to  the  assistant  principal  as  the  “mi 
hija  lady”  to  the  students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent’s  conduct  constituted  violations  of 
the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  Ethics  Policies,  and  the  Board  Resolution  for  the 
respectful  treatment  of  all  persons. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  13(A),  19,  20(A),  and  21  above,  respondent 
inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  when  he  mocked  student 

_— 

in 

       

directed  inappropriate  and  offensive  sounds  at  student  i.  yelled  at  and  made  a  racial 
comment  about  student AR..  and  yelled  at  and  disparaged  student 
Respondent’s  conduct  constituted  violations  of  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Code 
of  Conduct  with  Students,  Ethics  Policies,  and  the  Board  Resolution  for  the  respectful 
treatment  of  all  persons. 

South  Region  High  School 

26. 

In  July  2012,  the  District  assigned  Candace  Lee  to  be  the  principal  of  South 

Region  High  School  Number  12A  (South  Region  High  School).  Lee  was  the  sole 
administrator  for  the  new  high  school  and  had  to  hire  a  certificated  staff  of  13  teachers  and  a 
counselor  as  well  as  classified  staff  before  instruction  began  in  approximately  six  weeks  on 
or  about  August  14,  2012.  Lee  received  respondent’s  resume  and  interviewed  him  on  the 
high  school  campus.  She  offered  the  position  of  art  teacher  to  respondent  and  he  accepted 
the  job.  Lee  did  not  obtain  respondent’s  personnel  file  or  any  of  his  evaluations  from 
Manual  Arts  High  School.  Nor  did  she  speak  to  Principal  Whitman  at  Manual  Arts  High 
School  about  respondent  before  offering  a  position  to  him. 

27. 

On  July  24,  2012,  respondent  signed  a  Mutual  Consent  Agreement  2012-2013 

to  teach  at  South  Region  High  School  for  the  2012-2013  school  year.’  By  signing  this  so- 
called  election  agreement,  respondent  acknowledged  that  he  read  all  of  its  provisions  and 
agreed  to  all  of  its  terms.  South  Region  High  School  was  described  as  a  small  campus  within 
the  District  that  was  bound  by  District  and  union  policies.  Among  the  core  values  of  the  high 
school  was  the  promotion  of  respectful  relationships  among  all  “stakeholders”  and  the  focus 
on  continuous  improvement  and  accountability.  Teachers  were  expected  to  create  an 
environment  that  was  safe  and  secure  for  all  students,  staff,  and  community  members  and  to 
maintain  respectful  relationships  among  alli  stakeholders.  Teachers  were  also  expected,  in 
part,  to  establish  a  progressive  discipline  protocol  in  their  classrooms  that  supported  positive 
student  behavior  and  adhered  to  school  discipline  policies. 

28. 

(A)  South  Region  High  School  had  13  classrooms  and  approximately  300 

pupils.  Sixty-five  percent  of  the  pupils  were  Latino  and  35  percent  of  the  pupils  were 
African  American, 

(B)  On  August  6  through  8  and  August  13,  2012,  professional  development 

was  provided  to  the  new  teachers  and  staff  at  South  Region  High  School.  Training  was 
given  in  the  areas  of  curriculum,  instruction,  and  operations.  Respondent  attended  all  four 
days  of  professional  development. 

(C)  Beginning  on  August  14,  2012,  respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  five 

periods  of  art  and  had  a  homeroom  period.  The  high  school  had  a  staggered  class  schedule 

  

*  After  the  2012-2013  school  year,  South  Region  High  School  Number  12A  was 
merged  with  South  Region  High  Schoo!  Number  12B  to  form  Mervyn  Dymally  High  School. 

10 

  
 

wherein  teachers  taught  the  three  odd  periods  (1,  3,  5)  on  Mondays  and  Thursdays,  the  even 
periods  (2,4,  6)  on  Tuesdays  and  Fridays,  and  the  seventh  period  every  day.  Respondent  had 
approximately  35  to  42  pupils  in  each  of  his  classes 

(D)  Respondent  taught  at  South  Region  High  School  from  August  14,  2012, 
until  September  7,  2012,  of  the  fall  2012  semester.  During  these  four  weeks,  Principal  Lee 
visited  respondent’s  classroom  approximately  two  or  three  times  per  week.  The  principal 
was  also  summoned  to  respondent’s  classroom  because  respondent  was  having  problems 
with  students.  The  principal  had  to  take  the  students  from  respondent’s  classroom  to  the 
school  office  to  have  discussions  with  them. 

(E)  When  she  observed  respondent’s  classroom,  Principal  Lee  found  that  there 

was  more  disruptive  behavior  by  students  in  his  classroom  than  in  other  classrooms. 
Students  were  talking  with  each  other  and  were  not  on  task  with  the  class  assignments.  It  did 
not  appear  to  the  principal  that  respondent  had  a  behavior  support  plan  in  place,  an  effective 
classroom  management  style,  or  control  of  the  pupils.  Principal  Lee  assigned  a  special 
education  aide  to  help  respondent  in  his  classroom. 

29, 

(A)  Florida  Herrera,  also  known  as  Florida  Morales  (Morales),  was  the  school 
counselor  at  South  Region  High  School  for  the  first  three  weeks  of  the  fall  2012  semester  and 
assigned  pupils  to  classes.  Respondent  had  approximately  34  to  42  pupils  in  each  of  his  art 
classes.  Respondent’s  classes  were  full,  like  all  of  the  other  classes  at  the  high  school,  but 
were  not  crowded.  On  four  or  five  occasions  during  the  first  three  or  four  weeks  of  school 
that  fall  semester,  Morales  was  called  by  respondent  or  dispatched  by  the  school  secretary  to 
go  to  respondent’s  classroom  to  provide  him  with  support.  On  one  occasion,  Morales  found 
students  in  respondent’s  classes  to  be  “out  of  contro!”  and  she  told  the  students  to  respect 
respondent.  Almost  every  day,  respondent  removed  students  from  his  classroom.  He  sent 
them  to  the  Counselor  Morales  or  the  school  office  frequently  without  referral  slips.  Morales 
reminded  respondent  several  times  to  give  signed  referral  slips  to  the  students  if  he  was 
going  to  remove  them  from  his  classroom.  Students  complained  to  the  counselor  about  being 
assigned  to  respondent’s  classes. 

(B)  Anthony  Andrada  (Andrada)  became  the  school  counselor  at  South  Region 

High  School  after  Morales  was  re-assigned  to  another  school  site.  Andrada  observed 
respondent  interact  with  students  in  his  classroom  and  found  that  respondent  had  a  difficult 
time  with  them.  He  tried  to  take  charge  of  his  classroom  but  had  arguments  with  the 
students.  On  two  occasions,  Andrada  heard  respondent  speak  harshly  to  students. 

30. 

(A)  In  August  2012,  Shquita  Williams,  also  known  as  Shquita  Thomas 

(Williams),  a  special  education  assistant,  was  assigned  by  Principal  Lee  to  be  an  aide  in 
respondent’s  classroom  so  that  she  could  help  him  to  maintain  order  and  calm  as  well  as 
manage  the  students’  behaviors.  Williams  assisted  respondent  two  or  three  times  per  week 
for  part  or  all  of  his  teaching  periods.  She  found  that  respondent  always  had  an  assignment 
or  lesson  plan  on  the  board  but  he  did  not  have  all  of  the  necessary  art  supplies  to  teach  his 

11 

   

Classes.  In  Williams’  view,  respondent  tended  to  vent  his  frustrations  by  yelling  at  the 
students. 

(B)  On  the  first  day  in  respondent’s  classroom,  Williams  observed  that 

respondent  appeared  unhappy  and  aggravated  by  his  teaching  assignment.  Two  students 
approached  respondent  and  asked  him  for  help  on  an  assignment.  Respondent  refused  to 
help  them  or  to  explain  the  assignment.  He  stated  to  the  two  students,  “I’m  not  going  to  help 
you.  I’m  not  doing  anything  else.”  The  two  students  returned  to  their  seats  and  looked 
discouraged,  stating  to  their  peers  that  they  had  tried.  Respondent  refused  to  help a  third 
student. 
students  that  he  was  dissatisfied  and  frustrated  with  the  state  of  the  new  high  school  due  to 
the  lack  of  art  supplies  and  what  he  perceived  as  over-crowded  classrooms  and  unruly 
students.  In  Williams’  presence,  respondent  raised  his  voice  and  yelled  at  the  students.  The 
special  education  aide  found  that  the  students  in  respondent’s  classes  were  likewise  frustrated 
by  the  lack  of  instruction. 

He  had  an  unpleasant  tone  to  his  voice.  He  did  not  try  to  hide  from  Williams  or  the 

(C)  On  an  undetermined  date  in  August  2012,  and  while  Williams  was  in  his 

IL.  was  sitting  quietly 

LL.  who  was  not  doing  the  work  that  had 
at  his  desk  or  table  area. 

classroom,  respondent  confronted  student  D 
been  assigned  to  the  class. 
Respondent  asked  the  student  what  he  was  doing. 
nothing.  Respondent  became  upset.  He  pointed  his  finger  at  the  student’s  face  and  stated  to 
the  student,  “You  are  not  going  to  sit  there  and  do  nothing.”  Student 
respondent  to  take  his  finger  away  from  his  face.  Respondent  became  more  upset  and  began 
yelling  at  the  student  while  continuing  to  point  his  finger  at  him.  Student  D 
L.  became 
angry.  He  got  up  from  his  chair  and  stood  face-to-face  with  respondent.  He  told  respondent 
to  take  his  finger  out  his  face  and  to  stop  yelling  at  him.  At  that  moment,  Principal  Lee 
walked  into  the  classroom  and  shouted  out  the  student’s  name,  ending  the  confrontation.  The 
principal  removed  the  student  from  the  class. 

L.  replied  that  he  was  doing 

L.  told 

31. 

On  August  24,  2012,  Principal  Lee  held  an  informal  conference  with 

respondent  to  discuss  his  classroom  management  and  lesson  planning.  The  principal 
recommended  to  respondent  that  he  prepare  lesson  plans  beforehand  by  downloading  lesson 
plans  from  the  school  computer,  that  he  divide  the  lesson  plans  into  shorter  time  segments  to 
keep  the  students’  attention,  and  that  he  shorten  his  lectures.  The  principal  also 
recommended  that  respondent  greet  students  as  they  entered  his  classroom  before  each 
period  and  rearrange  the  desks  and  chairs  in  his  classroom  so  that  the  students  faced  the  front 
of  the  classroom. 

32. 

On  or  about  September  4,  2012,  respondent  had  a  confrontation  in  his 

classroom  with  student  JL.  during  a  fourth  period  class.  The  student  was  sitting  in  the 
class  and  then  got  up  from  his  seat  just  before  the  bell  was  going  to  ring  to  signal  the  end  of 
the  period.  While  standing,  the  student  began  putting  items  into  his  backpack.  Respondent 
told  J§BL.  to  sit  back  down  in  his  seat,  grabbed  the  student  by  his  shirt  collar,  and  forced 
him  to  sit  down.  JBL.  stated  to  respondent,  “Don’t  touch  me.”  Respondent  then  yelled  at 
the  student,  “Stop  bitching  like a  little  girl.”  Respondent  continued  shouting  at  the  student. 

12 

  
 

     

  

TL.  got  up  again  and  left  the  classroom.  Other  students  in  the  class  appeared  shocked  by 
the  incident.  Respondent’s  physical  contacting  student  JEL.  and  yelling  at  him  in  an 
insulting  manner  was  inappropriate  and  disrespectful. 

33. 
.,  a  pupil  in  his  seventh  period  art  class.  L 

(A)  On  or  about  September  5,  2012,  respondent  lost  his  temper  with  student 
C.  was  a  freshman  and  had  a  less 

Li 
than  an  ideal  attitude  about  school  and  authority  figures.  On  this  date,  she  was  not 
performing  the  art  project  assigned  to  the  class.  Respondent  asked  her  why  she  was  not 
doing  the  assignment  and  told  her  to  take  out  her  paper.  L 
C.  replied  that  she  was 
getting  out  her  paper.  Respondent  stated  to  the  student  that  she  was  not  retrieving  her  paper. 
The  student  said,  “Yes,  Iam.”  Respondent  then  yelled  at  L 

C.  to  get  out  of  his  class. 

(B)  Next,  student  LIB.  stood  up  from  her  chair  and  began  walking  to  the 

rear  door  to  the  classroom  which  was  closer  to  her  seat.  Respondent  grabbed  the  student’s 
left  arm  and  stated,  “Not  that  way.”  While  holding 
student  towards  the  front  door  of  the  classroom. 
by  respondent’s  physical  action.  She  pulled  her  arm  away  from  respondent’s  grip  and  stated 
to  him,  “Don’t  put  your  hands  on  me.” 
She  turned  and  walked  to  the  back  door  to  exit  the 
class.  As  she  was  leaving,  respondent  imitated  the  student’s  reply  or  voice  so  as  to  mock  or 
make  fun  of  her.  Respondent’s  physical  conduct  in  grabbing  the  student’s  arm  and  his  verbal 
mocking  of  the  student  were  inappropriate  and  disrespectful. 

C.  became  embarrassed  and  upset 

onto  her  arm,  respondent  pushed  the 

34. 

(A)  On  September  7,  2012,  which  was  a  Friday,  respondent  had  an  altercation 
in  his  classroom  with  student  A.  during  the  seventh  period  art  class._The  student  had 
a  history  of  behavioral  problems  in  the  classroom.  On  this  particular  day, 
|  C.  kept 
moving  around  the  classroom  and  talking  with  other  pupils.  He  did  not  heed  respondent’s 
instructions  to  sit  down  in  his  chair  and  work  on  a  drawing.  Respondent  told 
C. 
several  times  to  sit  down.  Finally,  respondent  became  fed  up  and  lost  his  patience  with 

C.  He  yelled  at  the  student,  grabbed  his  arm,  and  told  him  to  leave  the  classroom. 
   
ABB.  yelled  back  at  respondent  and  left  the  class  through  the  door  at  the  front  of  the 
classroom. 

(B)  Shortly,  i.  returned  to  the  front  door.  From  outside  the  classroom 

and  through  the  window  in  the  front  door,  the  student  began  looking  into  the  classroom  and 
making  faces.  Students  in  respondent’s  classroom  saw AR  c.  acting  silly  through  the 
door  window  and  were  distracted  by  him.  Respondent  looked  at  the  window  in  the  front 
door  and  became  angry  when  he  saw  the  student  there.  He  went  to  the  door  and  pushed  the 
metal  bar  to  the  door  with  force.  As  a  result  of  respondent’s  action  in  forcibly  pushing  the 
door  bar,  the  door  swung  open  into  the  hallway  and  struck ARI.  in  the  face.  Students 
in  the  classroom  did  not  see 
door  was  opened.  NN 
@  became  upset  and  yelled  out.to  respondent,  “Why  did  you  hit 
me!”  Respondent,  who  was  standing  in  the  area  of  the  door,  stated  to  the  student  that  he  did 
not  hit  him.  ARI.  then  hit  or  punched  respondent  in  the  shoulder  or  chest  three  times. 
Students  in  the  class  heard  respondent  and ARC.  arguing  just  outside  the  classroom. 
Afterwards,  AMC.  left  the  area  and  went  to  the  counselor’s  office  where  he  made  a 

@  being  hit  by  the  door  but  heard  a  loud  bang  when  the 

NY 

13 

   

  

    

  

complaint  and  wrote  a  statement  about  the  incident.  Respondent  re-entered  the  classroom 
and  continued  teaching  the  assignment  or  lesson. 

35. 

It  was  not  established  that,  on  September  7,  2012,  respondent  left  student 
C.  outside  of  his  classroom  unsupervised  for  15  minutes.  Nor  was  it  established  that 

respondent  pushed  the  student  in  the  chest  after  opening  the  classroom  door  or  hitting  the 
student  with  the  door. 

36. 

On  September  7,  2012,  the  counselor  at  South  Region  High  School  informed 
C.  Principal  Lee 

Principal  Lee  about  the  incident  involving  respondent  and  student 
filed  a  suspected  child  abuse  report  with  the  police  and  the  social  services  department  and 
directed  the  counselor  to  obtain  statements  from  other  pupils  in  respondent’s  seventh  period 
art  class  about  the  incident.  That  same  day,  the  counselor  spoke  to  respondent  about  the 
incident.  Respondent  reported  to  the  counselor  that  he  accidentally  hit AR 
c.  with  the 
door  and  that  he  had  a  rough  day.  Respondent  added  that  he  wanted  to  file  charges  against 
the  student  for  hitting  him  in  the  shoulder  area.  The  counselor  advised  respondent  to  file  a 
report  with  the  school  police  of  the  District. 

37. 

On  the  morning  of  the  following  Monday,  September  10,  2012,  when 

respondent  came  to  South  Region  High  School  to  begin  teaching  his  classes,  Principal  Lee 
directed  respondent  not  to  go  to  his  classroom  but  to  report  to  a  school  office.  Instead, 
respondent  went  to  the  office  of  the  Los  Angeles  School  Police  Department  at  South  Region 
High  School  and  reported  that  student  A 
C.  had  hit  him  on  the  shoulder  and  ribs  after 
respondent  had  accidentally  hit  the  student  with  a  door.  Respondent  reported  to  the  school 
police  that  he  had  told  the  student  that  he  had  not  seen  him.  Respondent  told  the  school 
police  that  he  wanted  the  student  to  be  prosecuted. 

The  school  police  interviewed  student 
C.  and  other  students.  It  was  not  established  whether  criminal  charges  were  filed 

against  the  student.  Subsequently,  Principal  Lee  investigated  the  incident  involving 
C.,  conferred  with  the  field  director  of  the  District’s  Office 
respondent  and  student 
of  Staff  Relations,  and  reviewed  the  statements  obtained  from  ten  students  in  respondent’s 
class.  Upon  the  recommendation  of  the  principal  and  with  concurrence  by  the  District, 
respondent  was  not  allowed  back  into  his  classroom  and  directed  to  stay  in  a  District  office. 
Respondent’s  last  day  teaching  students  in  a  classroom  at  South  Region  High  School  was 
Friday,  September  7,  2012. 

38. 

On  November  30,  2012,  Principal  Lee  conducted  a  conference  with  respondent 

to  discuss  his  conduct  with  students  Di. .,  J  i ..  Lc.  and ARI c. 
A 
representative  from  the  teachers’  association  was  also  present.  During  the  conference, 
Principal  Lee  advised  respondent  that  he  had  the  professional  responsibility  to  use 
appropriate  disciplinary  techniques  and  that  it  was  against  the  District’s  policy  to  use 
corporal  punishment.  The  principal  reviewed  the  Board  Resolution  on  the  respectful 
treatment  of  all  persons  and  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  directed  respondent  not  to 
forcefully  open  a  door  “into  a  student”  or  to  push  or  grab  a  student  on  the  chest  or  arm. 
Respondent stated  that  he  would  file  a  written  response  to  the  allegations  after  the  conference 
but  he  did  not  do  so. 

14 

  
 

  

39. 

(A)  Three  months  later,  on  March  5,  2013,  Principal  Lee  held  a  conference 

with  respondent  and  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  to  him, 
which  stated  that  respondent’s  services  were  considered  to  be  unsatisfactory  based  on  his 
conduct  with  students  DEL.  HL.  Lic.  and  Ac.  in  August  and  September 
2012  at  South  Region  High  School.  Principal  Lee  recommended  that  respondent  be 
dismissed  from  the  District.  The  principal’s  recommendation  was  approved  by  the  Director 
of  Operations  for  the  District.  The  causes  for  dismissal,  charges,  and  the  assistance  and 
guidance  given  to  respondent  were  outlined  in  a  Revised  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  dated 
March  26,  2013. 

(B)  At  the  conference  on  March  5,  2013,  Principal  Lee  also  issued  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  to  respondent,  indicating  that  respondent  was  to  be 
suspended  for  15  days  without  pay  based  on  his  conduct  with  students DEL...  1... 
LSC...  and 
C.  in  August  and  September  2012  at  South  Region  High  School. 
The  causes  for  suspension,  charges,  and  the  assistance  and  guidance  given  to  respondent 
were  outlined  in  a  Revised  Notice  of  Suspension  dated  March  26,  2013.  Sergio  Franco,  Field 
Director  of  Employee  Performance  Accountability,  was  also  present  at  the  March  5,  2013 
conference  and  took  notes. 

(C)  Respondent  received  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated 

Employee  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  on  March  5,  2013.  On  the 
notices,  he  wrote  that  he  “categorically  denied]  and  refute[d]  absolutely  everything  in  [the] 
document{s}.”  Respondent  appealed  the  dismissal  and  suspension  decisions. 

40. 

Ina  letter  dated  March  7,  2013,  the  District’s  Administrator  of  Operations 

notified  respondent  that  a  meeting  had  been  scheduled  for  March  18  to  discuss  his  appeal  of 
his  possible  dismissal  and  suspension.  Respondent  was  notified  that  the  purpose  of  the 
meeting  was  to  permit  him  to  present  statements  or  documents  in  response  to  the  charges 
contained  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  and  Notice  of 
Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  and  to  explain  why  he  should  not  be  suspended  and 
dismissed  from  his  employment  with  the  District.  Respondent  was  later  notified  that  the 
appeal  meeting  had  been  re-scheduled  to  March  21. 

41. 

On  March  21,  2013,  Alfredo  Montes,  District  Operations  Coordinator, 

Intensive  Support  and  Innovation  Center,  met  with  respondent  and  his  former  counsel  to 
discuss  respondent’s  appeal  of  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee 
and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee.  Sergio  Franco,  Field  Director  of 
Employee  Performance  Accountability,  was  also  present  on  behalf  of  the  District  and  took 
notes  of  the  meeting.  Respondent’s  conduct  in  connection  with  the  classroom  incidents 
involving  students  D 
discussed  during  the  appeal  meeting.  Respondent  read  from  a  prepared  statement  and  denied 
all  of  the  charges  contained  in  the  notices.  He  stated  that  he  apologized  to AR  c.  after 
opening  the  door  and  told  the  student  that  he  did  not  see  him.  He  stated  that  he  did  not  push 
or  grab  student  Li 
L.  and DEL.  Respondent  added  that  many  of  his  students  were  upset  due  to  the  lack  of 

c.  but  moved  her.  He  denied  the  allegations  regarding  students  J 

i  Lic.  and  ARI c.  were  reviewed  and 

i 

15 

   

instructional  materials  and  complained  that  his  classroom  was  overcrowded  and  lacked  basic 
classroom  equipment  and  supplies.  Based  on  his  review  of  the  information  and  documents, 
Operations  Coordinator  Montes  issued  a  letter  dated  March  26,  2013,  in  which  he  sustained 
the  determination  of  Principal  Lee  to  dismiss  and  suspend  respondent.  Montes  found  that, 
based  on  his  outbursts,  respondent  was  a  poor  role  model  and  had  created  a  negative  and 
hostile  school  environment. 

42. 

(A)  By a 

letter  April  5,  2013,  the  District  notified  respondent  that  an 

administrative  review  meeting  or  hearing  on  his  proposed  dismissal  was  to  be  held  on  April 
17th.  Respondent  was  subsequently  notified  that  the  date  of  the  administrative  review 
meeting  or  hearing  was  changed  to  April  22nd. 

(B)  On  April  22,  2013,  the  District  conducted  an  administrative  review 

meeting  or  hearing  on  the  recommendation  to  dismiss  and  suspend  respondent  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  Administrator  of  Operations  Daryl  Narimatsu 
conducted  the  meeting.  Respondent  was  present  along  with  a  representative  from  the 
teachers’  association.  Field  Director  Franco  was  present  and  took  notes. 
During  the 
administrative  review  meeting,  the  teachers’  association  representative  presented  argument. 
Regarding  the  incident  involving  student  A.  respondent  stated  that  he  reported  the 
incident  to  the  counselor  and  a  school  police  officer  and  filed  an  act  of  violence  report. 
Respondent  contended  that  there  were  racial  problems  between  African  American  and  Latino 
students  at  South  Region  High  School  and  that  the  high  school  was  “out  of  control.”  He  also 
asserted  that  he  did  not  hit  the  student  with  the  door  and  read  from  the  summary  of  the 
November  30,  2012  conference  prepared  by  Principal  Lee. 

(C)  On  April  29,  2013,  Administrator  of  Operations  Narimatsu  issued  a 

written  letter.  Based  on  his  review  of  respondent’s  statements  and  concerns  and  the 
documentation,  Narimatsu  concluded  that  the  recommended  disciplinary  action  of  dismissal 
should  be  forwarded  to  the  Board  of  Education.  Respondent  was  notified  that,  if  the  Board 
of  Education  approved  the  recommendation,  then  he  would  be  immediately  suspended 
without  pay  and,  within  30  days  of  his  receipt  of  the  notice  of  the  Board  of  Education’s 
decision,  he  would  be  dismissed  from  the  District,  unless  he  exercised  his  rights  under 
Education  Code  section  44939.° 

43. 

(A)  On  September  27,  2013,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources 

Officer,  made  and  issued  the  Statement  of  Charges,  seeking  the  immediate  suspension 
without  pay  and  the  dismissal  of  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District.  Ekchian 
verified  on  information  and  belief  that  the  charges  were  true  and  correct. 

  

*  Because  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  request  a 

decision  on  the  suspension  without  pay  and  neither  party  addressed  the  issue  of  the 
suspension  during  the  hearing,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  no  legal  conclusions  or 
order  regarding  the  District’s  suspension  of  respondent  from  his  employment. 

16 

 

(B)  On  October  8,  2013,  the  Board  of  Education  considered  the  Statement  of 

Charges  and  determined  to  immediately  suspend  without  pay  and  to  dismiss  respondent.  On 
October  9,  2013,  respondent  was  notified  of  the  Board  of  Education’s  intention  to  place  him 
on  immediate  unpaid  suspension  and  to  dismiss  him  from  the  District.  Respondent  was 
advised  that  he  would  be  dismissed  within  30  days  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing  and  was 
served  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  a  blank  Request  for  Hearing  form. 

(C)  On  October  18,  2013,  respondent’s  counsel  filed  a  Notice  of 
Representation  and  Request  for  Hearing.  Respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  Notice  of 
Intention  to  Dismiss  and  the  Statement  of  Charges,  demanded  a  hearing  on  the  Statement  of 
Charges,  and  requested  certain  information  from  the  District. 

(D)  On  May  2,  2014,  respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Inability  to  Designated 

Panel  Member  and  Request  for  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  to  Designate  Panel 
Member.  On  May  2,  2014,  complainant  filed  a  Notice  of  Non-Designation  of  Panel 
Member.  On  June  13,  2014,  the  Amended  Accusation  was  made  and  filed.  On  September  2, 
2014,  the  scheduled  hearing  on  the  Amended  Accusation  was  continued  because  the  Los 
Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  was  unable  to  designate  panel  members  for  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  under  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision 
(b)(1). 

(E)  On  February  10,  2015,  complainant  filed  a  Notice  of  Inability  to  Designate 
Panel  Member  for  the  continued  hearing.  On  February  10,  2015,  respondent  filed  a  Notice  of 
Inability  and  Request  that  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  Designate  a  Panel  Member. 
On  March  26,  2015,  the  parties  filed  an  Amended  Joint  Stipulation  re:  Waiver  of 
Commissioner  Member  wherein  both  complainant  and  respondent  agreed  that  an 
administrative  law  judge  from  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  could  hear  this  matter 
and  render  a  decision  in  lieu  of  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1).  The  hearing  in  this  matter  then  ensued. 

44. 

Based  on  Findings  31(C),  33,  34,  and  36  —  39  above,  respondent  engaged  in 

L.; 

C.;  and  hit  student  AJC.  with  the  classroom  door. 

grabbed,  pushed,  and  yelled  at  student  a .:  grabbed,  pushed,  and 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  when  he  yelled  and  pointed  a  finger 
at  student  D 
mocked  student 
Respondent’s  conduct  with  these  students  constituted  violations  of  the  District’s  Employee 
Code  of  Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  and  Ethics  Policies  and  the  Board 
Resolution  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons.  In  addition,  respondent’s  conduct  in 
hitting  student  _,  with  the  classroom  door  constituted  a  violation  of  the  District’s 
Policy  for  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment.  Respondent  willfully  inflicted  physical 
pain  on  the  student  NN 
door  and  thereby  precipitating  a  physical  altercation  with  the  student. 

o@  by  forcibly  opening  and  hitting  the  student  with  the  classroom 

// 
i} 
Hf 

17 

 

  

Respondent’s  Evidence 

45. 

(A)  In  this  matter,  respondent  has  argued  that  he  is  not  prejudiced  against 

African  American  students  or  staff.  He  claimed  that  he  was  born  in  Venezuela  to  a  mixed 
race  family  and  that  he  has  descendants  who  were  of  Yoruba  or  African  descent. 
Respondent’s  testimony  did  not  mitigate  or  excuse  his  conduct  when  he  made  gorilla  sounds 
to  student  IA.  when  he  referred  to  a  student  as  a  “mayate,”  or  when  he  called  the 
security  staff  member  a  “Big  Gorilla.” 

(B)  On  an  Employment  Information  form  that  he  completed  in  August  1999 

under  penalty  of  perjury  near  the  time  when  he  was  first  hired  by  the  District,  respondent 
identified  his  ethnicity  as  “White,  not  Hispanic,”  and  not  as  “Black,  not  Hispanic”  and  not  as 
“Hispanic.”  Regardless,  however,  of  his  background  or  ethnicity  or  how  he  may  classify 
himself,  respondent’s  making  of  the  sounds  and  comment  to  the  African  American  students 
and  security  staff  member  were  offensive  and  disrespectful.  His  actual  conduct  carries  more 
weight  than  his  testimony  and  belies  a  lack  of  sensitivity  and  understanding  of  what  a  teacher 
can  do  or  say  in  this  diverse  and  multi-cultural  society  that  is  California.  That  a  teacher  may 
have  or  share  a  similar  ethnicity  or  background  with  students  or  other  persons  is  irrelevant 
and  does  not  mean  that  the  teacher  is  allowed  to  make  or  may  be  excused  for  making  racially 
inflammatory  and  inappropriate  comments  to  students  or  staff. 

46. 

Respondent  also  explained  that  he  told  students  that  they  would  end  up  selling 

oranges  or  fruit  in  the  streets  in  order  to  motivate  them.  Respondent  testified  that,  when  he 
was  17  years  old  and  had  been  in  this  country  for  three  years,  he  had  to  live  in  a  car  and  ina 
garage  and  sold  oranges  and  cherries  on  the  street  to  earn  money.  When  students  in  his 
classes  did  not  do  their  assignments,  respondent  testified  that  he  spoke  about  his  own 
hardships  and  warned  that  they  would  be  selling  fruit,  like  he  did,  if  they  did  not  get  an 
education.  However,  respondent’s  purportedly  cautionary  tales  were  negative  and  insulting 
to  the  pupils  who  also  heard  the  loud  and  disrespectful  tone  of  respondent’s  tirades  in  the 
classroom.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  always  spoke  very  loudly  in  class  in  the  manner  of 
an  athletic  coach.  As  they  testified  in  the  hearing,  students  found  that  respondent  yelled  at 
them  a  lot. 

47. 

(A)  Respondent  testified  that  he  was  “shocked”  by  the  incident  with  student 

He  admitted  that  he  shouted  at  the 

Ac.  He  admitted  that  he  sent  the  student  out  of  the  classroom  because  the  student  was 
moving  around  the  class  and  would  not  stop  talking. 
student  “like  a  drill  sergeant.”  He  admitted  that  he  hit  the  student  with  the  door  but  that  he 
did  not  purposely  or  intentionally  push  the  classroom  door  into  the  student.  Respondent 
further  testified  that  a  female  student  asked  to  go  to  the  restroom  and  he  opened  the  door  for 
her  because  it  was  hard  to  open  the  door.  As  he  had  previously  stated  in  conferences  and 
meetings  with  the  District,  respondent  implied  that  he  accidentally  hit  AIC.  when  he 
opened  the  door.  Respondent  testified  that ARI.  then  hit  or  punched  him  five  times 
“like  a  boxer.”  Respondent  added  that  he  said  to  the  student,  “You’re  hitting  me.  You’re 
hurting  me.”  Respondent  testified  that,  after  the  incident  was  over,  the  female  student  stated 
that  she  did  not  have  to  go  to  the  restroom  any  longer  and  he  tried  to  use  the  telephone  in  the 

18

classroom. 

Respondent  further  contended  that  students  in  his  classroom  could  not  have  seen 

C.  at  the  front  door  because  their  views  were  blocked  by  an  emergency  shower 

fixture  or  wall. 

(B)  Respondent’s  testimony  was  not  credible.  No  other  witness  or  student 

testified  that  it  was  difficult  to  open  the  classroom  door  or  that  a  female  student  had  asked  to 
go  to  the  restroom  at  the  time  of  this  incident.  His  admission  that  he  shouted  at  the  student 
C.  showed  that  he  was  upset  with  him  and  was  likely  to  retaliate  against  the  student 
for  peering  into  the  classroom  and  disrupting  the  class.  Finally,  respondent  did  not  relate  or 
mention  many of those  additional  details  about  the  incident  with  student  AJC.  set  forth 
in  Finding  49  (A)  above  in  any  earlier  meetings  with  the  District  or  school  police.  His 
embellishment  of  the  incident  had  a  tendency  in  reason  to  lessen  his  credibility.  Finally, 
there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  respondent’s  contention  that  the  shower  fixture 
blocked  the  students’  views  of  the  front  door  or  window.  The  students’  statements  and 
.’§  reaction  and  comment  after 
testimony  about  the  incident  were  persuasive. 
respondent  opened  the  classroom  door  have  a  tendency  in  reason  to  show  that  he  was,  in  fact, 
hit  by  the  classroom  door. 

48. 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  is  aware  of  the  District’s  Bullying  and  Hazing 
Policy  and  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment.  He  watched  videos  and  received  training  in 
these  policies.  Respondent  testified  that  he  was  given  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and 
Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  by  Assistant  Principal  Engle  at  Manual  Arts  High  School. 
He  acknowledged  that  he  has  read  and  is  familiar  with  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students 
and  that  students  are  entitled  to  a  safe  learning  environment  at  school.  Respondent  further 
acknowledged  that  he  received  the  conference  memoranda  prepared  by  the  school 
administrators  following  his  formal  conferences  with  them. 

49. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  apologized  to  the  school  security  staff  member  for 
his  offensive  comment.  He  did  show  remorse  to  the  assistant  principal  for  his  comment.  On 
the  other  hand,  during  the  hearing  in  this  matter,  respondent  did  not  acknowledge  or  admit 
any  other  wrongdoing  and  did  not  admit  that  he  violated  any  of  the  District’s  policies. 
Moreover,  respondent  did  not  express  any  remorse  for  his  conduct  or  the  statements  that  he 
made  to  students  and  staff  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  and  South  Region  High  School.  He 
did  not  demonstrate  that,  since  he  was  removed  from  the  classroom  on  September  10,  2012, 
he  has  undertaken  any  training  or  coursework  to  improve  his  classroom  demeanor,  classroom 
management  and  pupil  disciplinary  skills,  or  skills  and  knowledge  about  teaching  and  ethics. 
Respondent  presented  no  letters  of  reference  in  which  he  is  commended  for  his  teaching 
ability  and  classroom  demeanor. 

50. 

(A)  On  June  10,  2010,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory  Final  Evaluation  of 

Instructional  Personnel  for  the  2009-2010  school  year  from  the  principal  at  Manual  Arts 
High  School.  He  met  the  standards  of  performance  for  the  support  of  student  learning, 
planning  and  designing  instruction,  classroom  performance,  developing  as  a  professional 
educator,  and  punctuality,  attendance,  and  record-keeping.  The  principal  noted  that 

_ 

19 

   

respondent  needed  to  continue  developing  his  skills  in  non-confrontational  conflict 
resolution. 

‘ 

(B)  On  June  26,  2009,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory  Final  Evaluation  of 

Instructional  Personnel  for  the  20008=2009  school  year  from  the  assistant  principal  at 
Manual  Arts  High  School.  He  met  the  standards  of  performance  for  the  support  of  student 
learning,  planning  and  designing  instruction,  classroom  performance,  developing  as  a 
professional  educator.  In  the  area  of  punctuality,  attendance,  and  record-keeping,  he  needed 
improvement  in  the  performance  standard  of  regularly  arriving  on  time  and  starting  class  on 
schedule  and  met  the  standard  for  regular  attendance  and  maintaining  accurate  and  timely 
records,  The  assistant  principal  noted  that  respondent  should  continue  to  post  a  daily  agenda 
in  his  classroom  that  was  complete  and  met  teaching  standards. 

(C)  On  or  about  May  23,  2007,  respondent  received a  satisfactory  Final 

Evaluation  of  Instructional  Personnel  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  from  Assistant  Principal 
Engle  at  Manual  Arts  High  School.  He  met  the  standards  of  performance  for  the  support  of 
student  learning,  planning  and  designing  instruction,  classroom  performance,  and  developing 
as  a  professional  educator.  In  the  area  of  punctuality,  attendance,  and  record-keeping,  he 
needed  improvement  in  the  performance  standard  of  regularly  arriving  on  time  and  starting 
class  on  schedule  and  met  the  standard  for  regular  attendance  and  maintaining  accurate  and 
timely  records.  The  assistant  principal  commented  that  respondent  should  have  student  work 
on  display  in  his  classroom,  reduce  the  number  of  complaints  by  parents,  and  reduce  the 
number  of  times  that  he  was  tardy  in  arriving  at  school. 

(D)  Respondent’s  evaluations  carry  less  probative  weight  in  this  matter  than 
the  evidence  presented  by  the  District  showing  that  he  violated  the  District’s  policies  in  the 
school  years  in  question. 

51. 

Allegations  contained  in  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

or  raised  during  the  hearing  for  which  there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this  Decision  were 
deemed  unproven  or  considered  irrelevant  or  surplussage  upon  consideration  of  all  of  the 
evidence. 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  makes  the  following  determination  of  issues: 

1. 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  the  District  is 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  standard 
of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Kok  eR  RO  OK 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

20 

 

Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than, 
the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314, 
325.) 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  his  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the  schools  of  the 
District  by  its  governing  board,  based  on  Findings  3  —  10,  11  —  14,  16  —  20,  21  —  23,  25,  26  — 
33,  34,  36  —  39,  and  44  above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events 
or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered 
persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito 
Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
1176,  1180-1181.) 

On  a  number  of  occasions  over  the  course  of  two  school  years,  from 

November  3,  2010,  through  September  7,  2012,  respondent  violated  the  District’s  policies  at 
two  high  schools  despite  having  been  counseled  and  directed  in  conferences  with 
administrators  to  follow  the  District’s  policies.  For  example,  at  Manual  Arts  High  School, 
respondent  violated  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  requiring  that  teachers  create  an 
environment  of  trust,  care,  and  respect  and  ensure  positive  relationships  with  students  and  the 
Board  Resolution  calling  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons  as  follows:  respondent 
mocked  student ABV .’s  weight  or  appearance,  he  called  a  security  staff  member  a  “Big 
Gorilla,”  he  angrily  yelled  at  an  assistant 
gorilla  or  monkey  sounds  at  student  | 
a  Spanish-language  slang  word  that  was  pejorative  and  demeaning,  denigrated  a  Latino 
student  by  saying  he  would  sell  oranges  on  the  street,  and  mocked  an  assistant  principal  in 
front  of  students  by  referring  to  her  by  an  unflattering  nickname. 

principal  in  the  presence  of  students,  he  made 
A.,  he  referred  to  an  African-American  student  by 

Furthermore,  at  South  Region  High  School,  from  August  14,  2012,  through 

September  7,  2012,  respondent  violated  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  requiring  that  teachers 
create  an  environment  of  trust,  care,  and  respect  and  ensure  positive  relationships  with 
students,  the  Board  Resolution  calling  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons,  and  other 
District  policies  in  the  following  respects:  respondent  yelled  and  pointed  a  finger  at  student 
DEL.  and  caused  a  confrontation  with  the  student;  grabbed  the  shirt  collar  of  student 
JHB.  and  forced  him  to  sit  down,  and  directed  inappropriate  language  at  the  student; 
grabbed  student  LI c.’s  arm  and  mocked  her  reply  or  voice;  and  yelled  at  student 

AR  c..  forcibly  opened  the  classroom  door  and  hit  student  with  the  classroom,  causing  a 
physical  confrontation  with  the  student. 

| 

| 

21 

   

Respondent’s  conduct  also  constituted  violations  of  the  District’s  Ethics 

Policies,  which  requires  that  all  school  staff  take  an  active  role  in  promoting  an 
organizational  culture  that  encourage  ethical  conduct. 
His  conduct  was  not  ethical.  In 
addition,  respondent’s  conduct  did  not  comply  with  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students 
inasmuch  as  respondent  failed  to  ensure  the  safety  of  students  when  he  physically  handled 
the  students  and  had  confrontations  with  students. 

On  the  other  hand,  respondent’s  conduct  did  not  necessarily  constitute 

violations  of  the  District’s  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy.  Respondent  is  not  necessarily  a 
bully  but  a  man  who  has  anger  management  issues  and  tends  to  lash  out  verbally  at  students 
and  staff  and  sometimes  handles  students  physically  and  inappropriately.  Nor  was  it 
established  that  respondent  violated  the  District’s  Discipline  Foundation  Policy,  School- 
Wide  Positive  Behavior  Support. 

Respondent’s  violations  of  the  aforementioned  policies  and  regulations  of  the 
District  were  persistent  and  ongoing  during  the  2010-2011  and  2011-2012  school  years  and 
the  first  month  of  the  2012-2013  school  year.  He  continued  disregarding  and  violating  these 
policies  and  regulations  despite  having  been  counseled  and  directed  to  comply  with  the 
policies  and  regulations  in  conferences  with  school  site  administrators.  Respondent  did  not 
comply  with  the  administrators’  guidance  and  directives  and  the  fact  that  he  continued  to 
violate  the  District’s  policies  showed  that  he  is  unable  to  reform  his  conduct. 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  unprofessional  conduct, 
based  on  Conclusion  of  Law  2  and  Findings  3  —  10,  11  —  14,  16  —  20,  21  —  23,  25,  26  —  33, 
34,  36  —  39,  and  44  above. 

In  this  matter,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent 

engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  at  South  Region  High  School  by  yelling  at  student  im 
L.  grabbing 
student  L 
classroom  door  at  and  hitting  the  student  with  the  door.  Respondent’s  physically  aggressive 
and  disrespectful  treatment  of  these  three  students  constituted  unprofessional  conduct. 

his  shirt  collar,  and  pushing  him  to  his  seat;  by  yelling  at  and  grabbing  the  arm  of 
.  and  by  yelling  at  student AR  c.,  grabbing  his  arm,  and  pushing  the 

Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  provides  that  the  governing 

board  of  a  school  district  shall  not  act  upon  any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct,  unless  at 
least  45  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  governing  board  or  its  authorized 
representative  has  given  the  employee  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such 
particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  Thus,  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a), 
requires  a  school  district  to  give  a  45-day  written  notice  of  the  charges  of  unprofessional 
conduct  against  a  permanent  certificated  employee.  Here,  the  District  gave  respondent  the 
requisite  prior  written  notice  of  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  in  the  March  5,  2013 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee,  which  set  forth  charges  of 

22

unprofessional  conduct  and  specific  instances  of  respondent’s  behavior  at  South  Region  High 
School.  Respondent  did  not  receive  prior  written  notice  of  any  charges  of  unprofessional 
conduct  in  connection  with  his  conduct  or  assignment  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  for  the 
2011-2012  school  year  or  for  any  other  school  year  as  required  by  Education  Code  section 
44938,  subdivision  (a). 

4. 

As  one  of  the  specific  grounds  for  which  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
may  be  dismissed  from  employment  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  unprofessional 
conduct  has  a  broad  import,  for  it  refers  generally  to  conduct  demonstrating  unfitness. 
However,  a  particular  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  not  only 
unprofessional  conduct  but  also  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  a  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  prescribed  rules  and  regulations.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174-1175;  Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953) 
41  Cal.2d  546,  551.)  Unprofessional  conduct  may  be  viewed  as  a  lesser  included  form  of 
proscribed  behavior  within  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Conduct  constituting  evident 
unfitness  for  service  will  often  constitute  unprofessional  conduct,  but  the  converse  is  not 
true.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1445.) 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  in  that 
respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit  to  be  a  teacher  due  to  a 
defect  in  temperament  that  cannot  be  remedied,  based  on  Findings  3  —  10,  11  —  14,  16  —  20, 
21  —  23,  25,  26  —  33,  34,  36  —  39,  and  44  above. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1444- 
1445.)  Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes a  fixed 
character  trait,  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(Ud.  at  p.  1444.) 

In  general,  the  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  to  decide 
whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  696.) 
If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  unfitness  is 
evident,  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.) 

In  the  Morrison  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 

immorality  or  unprofessional  conduct  are  raised  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case,  the  applicable 
standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra, 
1  Cal.3d.  at  p.  229.)  The  terms  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  have  been  held  too  vague, 
standing  alone,  and  must  be  applied  to  a  specific  occupation  and  given  context  by  reference 

23 

   

The 

to  fitness  for  the  performance  of  that  occupation.  (Basset  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1988)  201  CalApp.3d  1444,  1453.) 
Morrison  case  requires  that  the  determination  whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  be  based  on  an 
objective  and  analytical  approach  consisting  of  a  review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an 
assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  criteria  which  include:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  respondent;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity, 
if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7) 
the  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher.  These  factors  assist  a  board  of  education  in  determining  whether  a 
teacher’s  fitness  to  teach,  and  whether  the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and 
overall  impact  on  his  or  her  students  are  likely  to  meet  the  standards  of  the  board  of 
education.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp.  229-  230.) 

Based  on  the  mandatory  application  of  the  Morrison  standard,  a  Commission 

on  Professional  Competence  has  broad  discretion  in  matters  of  teacher  discipline  and 
dismissal.  The  role  of  a  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged  conduct 
in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison 
criteria,  demonstrates  a  teacher’s  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman 
(1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220.) 

| 

6. 

Discussion—The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that,  during  the  2010- 

2011  and  2011-2012  school  years  at  Manual  Arts  High  School  and  the  first  month  of  the 
2012-2013  school  year  at  South  Region  High  School,  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate 
and  disrespectful  conduct  with  students,  a  school  staff  member,  and  an  administrator,  which 
violated  the  District’s  policies  and  codes  for  ethical  and  respectful  conduct  towards  others. 
Respondent  engaged  in  his  unprofessional  conduct  on  multiple  occasions  at  two  schools  and 
even  after  he  was  given  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  by  administrators  not  to  engage 
in  such  conduct  and  to  follow  the  District’s  ethical  and  code  of  conduct  policies. 

A  review  of  respondent’s  acts  under  the  Morrison  factors  demonstrates  that  his 

conduct  was  unprofessional  and  that  he  is  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher  with  the  District. 
First,  respondent’s  conduct  in  the  classroom  adversely  affected  students.  For  example, 
student  ARV .  became  upset  and  was  insulted  when  respondent  mocked  his  weight  or 
physique.  Student 
him.  Student. 
.  became  embarrassed  and  upset  when  respondent  grabbed  her  arm 
and  pushed  her  to  the  front  door.  An  assistant  principal  was  shocked  by  respondent  yelling 
at  her  and  found  him  to  be  insubordinate.  Students  complained  about  respondent  and  were 
made  to  feel  sad  and  scared  by  respondent’s  yelling. 

.  became  mad  when  he  heard  respondent  direct  gorilla  sounds  at 

Second,  respondent’s  conduct  was  proximate  in  time,  having  occurred  over  the 

course  of  three  school  years  from 
incident,  which  involved  student 

ber  2010  through  September  2012.  His  last 
C.,  was  approximately  three  years  ago. 

 

24 

  

Third,  respondent  holds  a  credential  to  teach  art  at  the  secondary  school  level,  which  allows 
him  to  continue  to  teach  and  affect  students.  Fourth,  there  were  aggravating  factors  to 
respondent’s  conduct.  He  made  racially  discriminatory  or  insensitive  comments  to  or  about 
African  American  students  and  staff,  which  were  inflammatory  and  not  conducive  to  creating 
a  respectful  and  positive  environment  for  learning. 
student’s  weight  or  their  responses  to  him  and  by  telling  them  that  they  had  no  future.  He 
yelled  at  and  made  fun  of  an  administrator,  which  constituted  insubordination.  Respondent 
made  students  feel  bad  about  themselves  and  their  chances  to  learn  and  improve  their  lot  in 
life. 

He  denigrated  students  by  mocking  one 

Fifth,  respondent’s  motives  for  engaging  in  his  unprofessional  conduct  were 
not  at  all  praiseworthy  but  self-centered  and  short-sighted.  At  South  Region  High  School, 
respondent  received  a  second  chance  to  redeem  himself  after  he  was  not  elected  to  return  to 
Manual  Arts  High  School  after  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Rather  than  being  helpful  and 
cooperative  at  the  new  high  school,  which  only  had  a  principal  and  a  counselor  as 
administrators  and  lacked  art  supplies,  and  instead  of  showing  that  he  could  follow  District 
policies  as  previously  directed,  respondent  chose  to  display  and  vent  his  frustrations  and 
unhappiness  with  the  state  of  the  school  and  the  behaviors  of  the  students.  He  continued  his 
conduct  of  yelling  and  belittling  students.  He  frequently  removed  students  from  his 
classroom  and  had  confrontations  with  them.  He  physically  handled  three  students  and  got 
embroiled  in  a  confrontation  with  a  student  that  led  to  that  student  hitting  respondent.  In  just 
short  four  weeks  at  the  new  high  school,  respondent  succeeded  in  coming  under  the  scrutiny 
of  the  new  principal  for  his  classroom  style  and  inability  to  deal  with  problematic  students. 
He  then  demonstrated  by  his  confrontations  with  students  that  he  could  not  control  his 
frustrations  or  anger.  He  allowed  himself  to  become  angry  and  disrespectful  towards  the 
students  when  he  was  required  as  a  matter  of  District  policies  to  be  respectful  and  a  role 
model  for  pupils. 

Sixth,  it  is  very  likely  that  respondent’s  unethical  and  disrespectful  conduct 
would  recur  or  continue  despite  the  passage  of  time  or  even  with  additional  assistance  and 
guidance  or  professional  development.  On  four  occasions  at  Manual  Arts  High  School, 
respondent  had  formal  conferences  with  administrators  and  was  given  guidance  and 
assistance.  On  November  4,  2010,  Assistant  Principal  Engle  advised  respondent,  in  part,  not 
to  make  comments  or  gestures  belittling  students  and  ordered  that  he  complete  anger 
management.  On  February  4,  2011,  Assistant  Principal  Boykins  directed  respondent  to  be 
professional  in  his  interactions  with  persons  on  campus,  avoid  altercations,  and  follow  the 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students.  On  January  30,  2012,  and 
May  21,  2012,  Principal  Whitman  gave  respondent  copies  of  the  Board’s  Resolution  for  the 
respectful  treatment  of  all  persons  and  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  told  him  not  to  be 
aggressive  or  disrespectful  to  any  student  or  employee.  At  each  of  those  conferences  and  in 
the  hearing  in  this  matter,  respondent  denied  the  complaints  and  allegations  and  did  not  take 
responsibility  for  his  actions.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  remorse  for  his  conduct  and 
failed  to  show  any  understanding  of  the  effect  that  his  conduct  had  on  students  and  staff. 
Moreover,  he  did  not  show  that  he  has  changed  in  the  three  years  that  he  has  been  out  of  the 
classroom  or  how  he  would  change  his  demeanor  if  given  another  chance  to  teach  children. 

25 

 

Seventh,  it  was  not  shown  that  disciplinary  action  would  have  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling 
effect  on  respondent’s  constitutional  rights. 

Based  on  the  foregoing  analysis  under  the  factors  set  forth  in  the  Morrison 

case,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent’s  conduct  was 
indicative  of  unfitness  for  service  as  a  teacher  for  the  District.  By  his  conduct,  respondent 
showed  that  he  is  prone  to  angry  outbursts  and  physical  reactions  in  response  to  students’ 
behaviors  and  has  no  compunction  to  yelling  at,  mocking,  and  physically  handling  students 
and  insulting  teachers  and  school  staff.  He  lacks  patience  and  sensitivity.  He  shows  no 
understanding  how  his  conduct  adversely  affects  students  and  reflects  badly  on  his  abilities 
and  disposition  to  be  an  effective  teacher  in  a  diverse  society,  such  as  the  one  served  by  the 
District.  In  other  words,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to 
serve  as  a  certificated  employee  for  the  District  and  must  be  terminated  from  his  employment 
with  the  District. 

7. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  in  that  it  was  not  established 
that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  based  on  Findings  1  —  51  above. 

In  general,  immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters  but  also  includes  conduct  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness,  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  towards 
good  order  in  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d 
808,  811.)  Respondent  yelled  at  students  and  made  inappropriate  and  offensive  comments 
and  sounds  to  students  and  school  staff.  He  did  grab  two  students  by  the  arms,  grab  another 
student  by  his  shirt  collar  and  pushed  him,  and  forcibly  pushed  open  a  door  that  almost  hit 
another  student.  While  these  instances  of  respondent’s  conduct  were  certainly  inappropriate 
and  disrespectful,  the  conduct  did  not  constitute  immoral  conduct.  Rather,  the 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent  engaged  in  his  inappropriate  conduct, 
not  because  he  is  corrupt,  indecent,  depraved,  immoral,  or  violent,  but  because  he  has 
problems  with  his  temperament  and  controlling  his  anger. 

8. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the 

District  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  449339,  in  that  it  was  not  established  that 
respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District,  based  on  Findings  1  —  51 
above.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  respondent  refused  to 
perform  his  regular  teaching  assignments  at  two  District  high  schools.  Respondent  did  not 
manage  his  classrooms  or  the  students’  behaviors  well,  allowed  his  temper  to  get  the  better  of 
him,  and  failed  to  follow  administrators’  directives  to  follow  District  policies  and  treat 
persons  with  respect,  but,  nevertheless,  he  did,  in  fact,  perform  his  assignment  or  duties  in 
teaching  art.  The  conferences  that  respondent  had  with  his  school  site  administrators  and  the 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  involved  respondent’s  inappropriate 

26 

   

conduct  with  students  and  school  staff  and  not  with  his  performance  of  his  regular 
assignment  as  an  art  teacher.  Respondent  received  satisfactory  evaluations  of  his  teaching 
performance  at  Manual  Arts  High  School. 

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Order: 

HR  Re ok OR ok 

ORDER 

Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  Case  Number  2013101081,  filed 

against  respondent  Gabriel  Galland,  is  sustained,  based  on  Conclusions  of  Law  1  —  6  above, 
jointly  and  for  all.  Respondent  Gabriel  Galland  is  therefore  dismissed  or  terminated  as  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

Dated:  July  24,  2015 

Upp 

Vincent  Nafarret 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

27

