BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

ALDO  GARBELLINI,  A  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  Case  No.  2013050545 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  the  above- 

captioned  matter  in  Los  Angeles  on  June  23through  27,  June  30,  and  July  1,  2014.  The 
Commission  members  were  Miriam  Chapa,  Vanessa  Chavez,  and  Joseph  D.  Montoya, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH).  Complainant 
was  represented  by  Jeffery  A.  Morris,  Stutz,  Artiano,  Shinoff  &  Holtz,  assisted  by  Lynn 
Ibara,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  Counsel.  Respondent  Aldo  Garbellini  appeared 
with  his  attorney,  William  J.  Trejo,  Leal  Trejo,  LLP,  assisted  by  Liara  A.  Silva  and  Sandra  J. 
Garcia. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  July  1,  2014.  The  Commission  hereby 

makes  its  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order. 

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

In  this  proceeding  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  seeks  the 
termination  of  one  of  its  tenured  teachers,  Respondent  Aldo  Garbellini.  Five  statutory 
grounds  were  asserted  as  justifying  termination,  although  one,  unprofessional  conduct,  was 
dismissed  near  the  outset  of  the  case.  In  essence,  Complainant  asserts  that  on  several 
occasions  between  2009  and  early  2012,  Respondent  acted  aggressively  toward  elementary 
school  children  that  he  was  teaching.  The  two  most  recent  events  arose  in  late  2011  and 
February  2012,  while  Respondent  was  assigned  to  52nd  Street  School  in  Los  Angeles. 

Respondent  denied  the  bulk  of  the  allegations,  acknowledging  that  he  did,  in 
September  2010,  improperly  leave  his  classroom  unattended  to  use  the  restroom.  He 
provided  evidence  to  refute  most  of  the  charges  against  him,  excepting  one  claim,  and  he 
otherwise  adduced  evidence  in  support  of  his  retention  by  the  District. 

1 

 

As  detailed  below,  the  District  has  failed  to  prove  the  bulk  of  its  claims,  and  the 

Commission  concludes,  unanimously,  that  Respondent  shall  not  be  terminated. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

The  District  commenced  this  proceeding  on  March  29,  2013,  when  Vivian  K. 

Ekchian,  then  the  District's  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  executed  a  Statement  of 
Charges  against  Respondent.  That  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed  with  the  District's 
governing  board,  which  thereafter  determined  to  terminate  Respondent. 

2. 

On  April  17,  2013,  the  District  gave  Respondent  written  notice  of  its  intent  to 
terminate  him,  and  served  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent 
made  a  timely  request  for  hearing,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of  the  Accusation.  He  then  filed 
a  Notice  of  Defense. 

3. 

Complainant's  counsel,  Mr.  Morris,  executed  and  filed  the  First  Amended 

Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  (FAA)  on  September  19,  2013.  This  hearing  ensued. 
All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

4, 

Respondent  has  been  an  elementary  school  teacher  in  the  District  for 

approximately  24  years.  During  the  events  in  question,  he  was  assigned  first  to  Miles 
Avenue  Elementary  School  and  then  to  52nd  Street  School. 

Findings  on  the  Allegations  Against  Respondent 

Background  to  the  Events  At  52nd  Street  School 

5. 

Respondent  was  assigned  to  52nd  Street  School  (52nd  Street)  prior  to  the 

2011-2012  school  year.  Respondent  had  experience  teaching  fourth  and  fifth  graders.  When 
he  was  assigned  to  the  school,  he  went  to  the  site  ahead  of  time  so  that  he  could  familiarize 
himself  with  the  school. 

6. 

According  to  the  school's  principal  at  the  time,  Mr.  Osbaldo  Jimenez 

(Jimenez),  52nd  Street  had  suffered  from  neglect  for  a  period  of  years.  At  hearing  he 
described  that  prior  to  his  assignment  there  in  2011,  a  culture  of  disrespect  had  arisen,  where 
all  the  main  groups  tended  to  disrespect  others.  That  is,  he  perceived  that  the  students 
disrespected  the  teachers,  and  teachers  disrespect  students.  He  attested  that  he  wanted  to 
change  that  culture.  He  had  openings  on  his  fifth  grade  team,  which  taught  in  four 
classrooms.  To  be  sure,  Respondent  was  not  part  of  the  alleged  culture  of  disrespect  at  52nd 
Street,  because  he  had  not  taught  there  prior  to  Jimenez's  assignment  as  principal. 

Mt

  

7. 

Respondent  and  another  teacher  new  to  the  school  were  assigned  to  the  fifth 
grade  team,  joining  two  teachers  who  had  been  at  the  site  for  some  time.  It  was  recognized 
by  the  other  members  of  the  fifth  grade  team  and  by  Jimenez  that  one  of  the  four  classes  had 
a  substantial  number  of  students  with  significant  behavior  problems,  and  those  students,  and  _ 
others,  were  known  to  be  under-performers. 

8. 

Respondent  told  Jimenez  that  he  was  willing  to  teach  the  class  of  students  with 

behavior  challenges.  He  told  Jimenez  that  he  had  child  with  autism,  and  that  he  had  learned 
to  cope  patiently  with  his  child's  behaviors,  and  he  believed  he  was  up  to  the  challenge. 
Jimenez  assigned  Respondent  to  teach  that  class. 

9. 

The  teachers  in  the  fifth  grade  team  told  Jimenez  that  they  would  need 

administrative  support.  It  appears  that  he  gave  them  some  discretion  in  handling  problems 
among  themselves.  One  tactic  that  was  arrived  at  was  for  the  teachers  to  take,  temporarily, 
problem  students  from  other  classes,  and  especially  Respondents.’ 

10. 

The  class  to  which  Respondent  was  assigned  to  was  a  relatively  small  one 

because  of  the  issues  presented  by  the  children;  there  were  approximately  25  students  in  the 
class.  It  was  well-known  by  the  staff  that  there  were  students  in  the  class  who  had  been  poor 
performers  in  prior  years.  It  was  also  well  known  that  five  or  six  of  the  students  posed 
significant  behavior  problems.  Two  of  them,  im and Ha.  had  a  history  and  reputation 
for  posing  problems,  including  eloping  from  class  and  running  around  the  school  building. 
When  they  ran  around,  they  would  often  knock  on  classroom  doors  and  engage  in  other 
disruptive  acts.  Jimenez  acknowledged  that  they  might  do  that  two  or  three  times  per  week 
and  one  of  the  two  boys  admitted  that  amount  of  elopement  during  the  hearing.  Both  y  | 
and  Hf were  receiving  psychological  counseling  on  the  campus  by  counselors  employed 
to  come  to  the  school  and  work  with  the  two,  on  a  weekly  basis.  The  counselors  were  not 
District  employees,  instead  employed  by  a  firm  under  contract  with  the  District.  is 
counselor  was  Gissele  Lopez. 

WE 

tended  to  be  a  leader  of  the  problem  group,  and  he  often  convinced 

11. 
to  leave  the  room,  or  engage  in  other  stunts.  During  the  hearing,  Jimenez  described 
|  as  a  boy  who  had  a  tough  time  with  the  parameters  of  school,  and  Jimenez  described 

J | 
him  as  a  boy  who  would  one-up a  teacher,  and  if  cornered  would  come  out  swinging; 
Jimenez  did  not  appear  to  mean  this  in  a  physical  sense.  Jimenez  acknowledged  that  other 
teachers  had  problems  with  J a.  Jimenez  was  aware  that  Respondent  was  trying  to  build 
rapport  with JE 
continued  in  the  behavior  of  leaving  the  classroom  and  wandering  the  hallways  after 
Respondent  started,  as  Jimenez  had  caught  the  boy  1n  the  hallways  on  more  than  one 
occasion. 

by  not  writing  him  up  for  his  antics.  Jimenez  was  also  aware  that  J 

  

  

' 

There  was  some  limit  to  the  support,  as  Mr.  Tellez,  another  fifth-grade  teacher, 

testified  that  the  teachers  were  told  that  they  could  not  put  incidents  involving  black  students 
into  the  computer  system  because  the  District  had  received  complaints  that  too  many  African 
American  students  were  being  suspended. 

 

  

The  Alleged  November  2011  Incident 

12. 

(A)  It  was  not  established,  as  alleged,  that  on  November  17,  2011, 

Respondent  “grabbed  and  pulled  student  iH.  from  under  the  desk,  causing 
his  head  on  the  desk.”  (FAA  p.  2,  lines  10-11.) 

to  hit 

(B)  On  the  day  in 

question,  Respondent  had  his  students  lined  up,  so  that  they 
was  acting  up,  refusing  to  get  into  line,  and  at  some 

were  ready  to  leave  for  the  day.  J 
point  had  gone  under  a  desk.  Respondent  was  speaking  to  the  boy,  trying  to  get  him  to  come 
out,  and  Respondent  reached  under  the  desk,  not  to  grab  and  pull  JI,  but  to  bring  him 
along.  J 
began  to  come  to  Respondent,  and  while  making  his  way  out  from  under  the 
desk,  he  bumped  his  head.  Respondent  did  not  engage  in  some  sort  of  rough  or  violent  or 
otherwise  untoward  treatment  of  JJ  in  this  incident.  Respondent  was  not  acting  in  a 
disciplinary  way,  but  instead  was  trying  to  obtain  Js  cooperation;  Respondent  was 
offering  a  helping  hand,  something  that Ha 
stated  during  his  deposition. 

who  had  been  in  the  classroom  at  the  time, 

(C)  It  should  be  noted  that 

mz  at  some  point  told  Jimenez  that  he  bumped 

his  head  accidently.  His  other  statements  as  to  how  the  accident  occurred,  were  often 
inconsistent. 

13, 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  paragraphs  3a  and  3b  of  the  FAA,  that 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  directives  previously  issued  to  him.  Respondent  in  fact  was 
speaking  with  J a.  trying  to  persuade  him  to  stop  his  disruptive  behavior,  and  to  get  into 
line  with  the  other  children.  He  did  not  need  to  call  an  administrator  for  help  at  the  time, 
because  he  was  able  to  persuade  Jj  to  come  out  from  under  the  desk;  therefore, 
Respondent  did  not  fail  to  follow  prior  advice  or  directives  to  the  effect  that  he  should  call 
for  an  administrator  in  some  situations  where  a  student  was  acting  up. 

The  Alleged  February  2012  Incident 

14. 

On  February  16,  2012,  Jfjand  HU  left  Respondent's  classroom  without 

permission  and  began  roaming  the  hallways  of  the  school.  At  some  point  they  wanted  to 
come  back  in,  and  Respondent_would  not  let  them  in. 
Respondent  of  pushing  him; Ha  claimed  that  Respondent  pushed  him  as  well.  The  latter 
claims  by  the  boys  were  not  proven  in  this  case. 

fell  down,  and  accused 

mz 

15. 

___It  was  alleged  that  on  February  16,  2012,  Respondent  locked  his  classroom 

door  after JME 
and  Heft  the  room  without  his  permission.  That  claim,  standing  alone 
was  proven;  the  door  was  locked  behind  the  boys.  However,  Respondent  was  obligated  by  a 
directive  given  by  the  principal,  Jimenez,  that  all  the  classroom  doors  were  to  be  locked 
during  class. 
Jimenez  required  that  the  classroom  doors  remain  shut  and  locked  while  class 
was  in  session  as  a  security  measure  against  possible  intrusion  onto  the  campus  by  outsiders 
who  might  do  harm  to  the  children  or  staff.  Therefore,  Respondent  did  not  act  improperly 
when  he  left  the  door  locked  after  the  boys  left  the  classroom  without  permission. 

4 

 

  

16. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  on  February  16,  2012,  Respondent  used  his  body  to 
and HEE  to  return 

block  the  doorway  to  his  classroom,  as  part  of  his  refusal  to  allow  J 
to  class.  However,  it  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  paragraph  6  of  the  FAA,  that 
Respondent  pushed  JI 
on  his  buttocks.  And,  it  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  paragraph  8  of  the  FAA,  that 
Respondent  failed  to  contact  the  main  office  or  a  site  administrator  when  the  students  left  the 
classroom  without  permission. 

as  the  student  tried  to  reenter  the  classroom,  causing  the  boy  to  fall 

(B)  JM  and HE 

eloped  from  Respondent's  classroom,  without 

permission,  while  class  was  in  session.  As  previously  noted,  the  two  students  had  a  long 
history  of  such  behavior,  going  back  to  prior  school  years.  On  the  day  in  question— 
February  16,  2012—they  ran  out,  and  then  began  running  up  and  down  the  hallway.  As 
found  above,  Respondent  was  obligated  to  keep  his  door  locked  by  direction  of  the  school 
principal. 

| 

(C)  Respondent  called  the  main  office  to  advise  them  that  the  two  boys  were 
on  the  loose.  Jimenez,  the  school's  principal,  was  not  available.  The  two  boys  knocked  on 
the  door.  Respondent  went  to  the  door,  and  the  boys  ran  away.  They  knocked  again,  and 
started  to  push  in.  Respondent  spoke  to  them,  asking  them  if  they  were  ready  to  behave  and 
return  to  class,  but  they  did  not  assent  to  that;  they  just  wanted  back  in  on  their  own  terms, 
and  on  their  own  time.  Respondent  did  not  deem  this  to  be  acceptable. 

: 

(D)  J 

tried  to  push  in,  and  instead  stumbled  and  fell.  Just  after  he  fell,  his 

    

counselor,  Ms.  Lopez,  arrived  on  the  second  floor,  where  Respondent's  classroom  was 
located.  She  saw  J§Msitting  on  the  floor,  and  Respondent  in  the  doorway  of  the  classroom. 
She  did  not  at  first  see HET coarby,  but  when  she  got  closer  to  the  classroom,  she  saw  him 
further  down  the  hallway,  at  the  end  of  the  hall  opposite  of  the  one  from  which  she  was 
coming.  When  she  got  closer  to  the  scene,  J BB said  to  her  that  Respondent  pushed  him,  or 
words  to  that  effect,  and  J WR  appeared  to  want  her  to  verify  that.  However,  she  did  not  see 
how  he  came  to  be  on  the  floor.  She  described  Respondent  as  calm  and  collected,  and  he 
said  to  her,  in  an  even  voice,  that  he  did  not  push  the  boy.  When  ran  off  with  Hi 
Ms.  Lopez  went  downstairs  to  find  J}-—she  had  come  up  for  a  counseling  session—and 
he  eventually  found  her  in  the  main  office. 

(E)  J§iater  made  written  statements  about  the  incident,  which  were 

obtained  by  the  efforts  of  Jimenez.  J[stated,  in  one  of  his  written  statements,  that  he  had 
just  made  up  the  story  that  he  was  pushed,  while  also  stating  that  he  stepped  on  Respondent's 
foot,  and  then  fell  back.  At  the  hearing,  Htestified,  and  this  part  of  his  testimony  was 
accepted,  that  WE 
walking  home  from  school,  that  he  had  made  up  the  story  that  Respondent  had  pushed  him. 
Thus,  Js  statements  and  testimony 
to  the  effect  that  Respondent  pushed  him  down  are 
not  credited.  At  the  same  time, 
ae  statements,  at  various  times,  about  what  happened  in 
the  doorway,  are  inconsistent,  and  do  not  establish  that  Respondent  pushed y  |  causing 
him  to  fall. 

told  Hi.  at  some  time  after  February  16,  and  while  the  two  were 

 

  

  

17. 

After  this  event,  Respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom  by  Jimenez. 

On  or  about  February  17,  2012,  another  fifth  grade  teacher,  Ms.  Spottville,  whose  classroom 
was  next  door  to  Respondent's  saw  that  Respondent  was  not  there,  and  she  asked  the  students 
where  he  was.  At  least  two  of  the  children  she  associated  as  the  group  of  problem  students 
yelled  out,  “we  got  him  fired!”  She  told  the  students  that  was  not  so,  but  some  students 
repeated  it  in  the  hallways  thereafter.  This  gives  credence  to  the  inference  that  Jf 
had  a 
‘motive  to  falsely  accuse  Respondent  of  pushing  him,  a  claim  he  made  to  the  counselor,  and 
that  he  at  times  maintained  to  the  principal. 

The  Allegations  of Misconduct  in  2009  and  2010  at  Miles  Avenue  Elementary  School 

18. 

Prior  to  his  assignment  to  52nd  Street,  Respondent  was  a  teacher  at  Miles 

Avenue  Elementary  School  (Miles),  During  the  relevant  time  period,  2009  and  2010, 
Respondent  taught  fourth  grade  students. 

19. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  on  September  10,  2010,  Respondent 

left  his  classroom  for  a  few  minutes  to  use  the  restroom,  and  that  action  was  against  District 
policy.  However,  it  was  not  established,  as  was  alleged,  that  some  of  the  children  engaged  in 
inappropriate  games  of  a  sexual  nature  while  he  was  out  of  his  room. 

(B)  When  his  supervisor  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the  matter, 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  he  had  acted  improperly.  He  was  counseled  not  to  leave  his 
class  unattended  again,  and  he  promised  that  he  would  not.  He  has  not  done  so  since  the 
September  2010  incident. 

20. 

(A)  On  July  10,  2010,  Respondent  was  subbing  for  Mr.  Dowty.  It  is 

~ 

undisputed  that  Dowty  had  left  a  hammer  in  his  classroom.  What  is  disputed  is  whether 
Respondent  struck  a  student’s  desk  with  it,  while  making  a  statement  with  threatening 
overtones. 

, 

(B)  The  student,  KI  testified  at  the  hearing  that  Respondent  had  picked  up 
the  hammer,  and  that  Respondent  came  up  the  row  the  student  was  sitting  in,  and  then  struck 
the  hammer  on  the  desk  two  or  three  inches  from  his  hand.  The  student  testified  that  he 
thinks  Respondent  did  this  because  KJ was  talking  to  another  student  and  should  not  have 
been. 

| 

: 

(C)  Respondent  denied  doing  anything  of  the  sort,  both  when  he  ws 

interviewed  by  his  supervisor  at  Miles,  and  at  the  hearing.  He  stated  he  had  found  the 
hammer  and  put  it  away.  He  attested  that  Kj  was  asleep,  leading  to  the  inference  that 
something  else  startled  the  boy. 

(D)  At  the  hearing, KBwas  visibly  upset  while  testifying.  He  testified  that 

since  the  incident  he  has  been  afraid  of  noises  like  a  hammer  hitting  something,  and  that 
walking  by  a  construction  site  would  scare  him.  His  mother,  however,  testified  that  she  has 
not  seen  such  fear  in  the  nearly  four  years  since  the  incident. 

6 

   

(E) Km  did  not  testify  to  Respondent  making  any  statement  to  him  when 

the  latter  hit  the  desk,  and  that  allegation  was  not  established.  (See  FAA,  p  3,  line  18.) 

(F)  Based  very  much  on  KIB s  demeanor,  the  Commission  finds  that 

Respondent  struck  the  boys  desk  in  some  way  with  the  hammer.  However,  it  is  not  found 
that  he  did  so  to  threaten  or  intimidate  the  student. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  on  April  29,  2009,  Respondent  hit  student 

21. 
S.  with  paper,  and  called  him  a  jerk,  as  asserted  in  the  FAA  at  page  3,  lines  26-27. 

(B)  The  testimony  of  Dowty,  and  Respondent,  established  that  when  one  or 

the  other  had  a  student  who  was  acting  up  in  some  way,  the  student  would  be  sent  to  the 
other  teacher’s  classroom.”  On  the  day  in  question,  LIJS.,  one  of  Dowty’s  students,  was 
sent  by  Dowty  to  Respondent’s  classroom  because  of  some  behavior  issue.  Respondent  tried 
working  with  the  boy,  asking  him  about his  interests  for  a  career.  When  the  student  said  he 
was  interested  in  becoming  a  fireman,  Respondent  was  able  to  print  out  some  information 
about  firemen,  and  he  handed  it  to  the  student.  Respondent  may  have  inadvertently  brushed 
the  student's  body  with  the  papers.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  struck 
the  boy,  despite  LI s  claims. 

(C)  In  this  case  the  Commission  reviewed  the  deposition  testimony  of  the 

student,  and  heard  Respondent’s  testimony  about  the  matter.  Even  on  paper,  the  student’s 
testimony  was  not  convincing,  and  it  appeared  as  if  designed  to  get  back  at  Respondent  for 
some  vaguely  remembered  slight. 
apparently  thought  he  had  been  subpoenaed  to 
testify  regarding  some  claim  about  graffiti,  it  was  only  with  some  questioning  that  he 
realized  the  matter  had  to  do  with  one  interaction  with  Respondent  several  years  before.)  It 
appears  from  the  entire  record  that  when  Respondent  handed  the  boy  the  papers  that 
Respondent  had  generated,  he  may  have  brushed  them  against  the  boy’s  body,  but  even  the 
alleged  victim’s  testimony  does  not  establish  he  was  hit  by  Respondent  in  some  way.  Any 
contact  was  inadvertent  and  not  intended  to  harm  or  intimidate. 

CL 

(D)  As  to  the  claim  that  Respondent  called  La  jerk,  it  is  noted  that  there 

was  no  testimony  about  that,  despite  reasonably  open-ended  questions  by  the  attorneys 
during  direct  and  cross-examination,  until  the  former  student’s  redirect  examination, 

(E)  It  was  alleged  that  Respondent  refused  to  apologize  over  the  alleged 

incident,  despite  a  recommendation  to  Respondent  by  his  supervisor  that  Respondent  do  so; 
his  supervisor  was  intent  on  managing  perceptions.  However,  the  claimed  failure  to 
apologize  was  contradicted  by  L's  mother  in  her  deposition  testimony. 

Ul 

  

*  Dowty  testified  that  the  two  did  this  instead  of  sending  the  students  to  the 
“opportunity  room”  because  the  students  had  learned  that  if  they  misbehaved,  they  would  be 
sent  there  and  not  have  to  do  any  work. 

 

  

22. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  at  page  3,  lines  27-28,  that  Respondent 

ridiculed  a  boy  named  BUfin  front  of  the  class.  The  only  testimony  offered  to  establish 
such  was  some  less-than-clear  testimony  by  LIB  during  his  deposition.  Since  .  was 
in  Dowty’s  class,  and  BI 
such  behavior  by  Respondent  would  be  limited. 

was  in  Respondent’s  class,  Lis  opportunity  to  observe 

Credibility 

23. 

(A)  Respondent  was  credible  in  his  testimony,  both  in  terms  of  his  demeanor, 
and  in  the  overall  content  of  the  testimony.  His  credibility  was  bolstered  by  the  testimony  of 
fellow  teachers.  They  painted  the  picture  of  a  calm,  gentle,  and  caring  teacher,  who  has  been 
willing  to  work  in  schools  that  need  experienced  teachers,  schools  that  are  located  in 
economically  challenged  areas  within  the  District.  He  volunteered  to  take  on  the  toughest  of 
the  fifth  grade  classes  at  52nd  Street  School,  believing  he  could  handle  the  children  with  the 
problem  behaviors.  In  this  he  may  have  overestimated  his  skills,  or  underestimated  the 
extent  of  the  challenge,  or  the  support  he  could  or  would  receive  from  the  administration,  but 
he  was  well  into  the  second  semester  with  the  class  when  he  was  removed  from  the 
classroom  primarily  due  to  charges  that  have  not  been  established  here.*>_He  made  a  point  of 
's  mother.’  His 
visiting  the  parents  of  his  students,  often  more  than  once;  this  included  J 
colleague,  Tellez,  made  clear  in  his  testimony  that  he  was  impressed  with  Respondent’s 
efforts  to  reach  out  to  the  parents  of  his  students,  in  part  Tellez  described  the  neighborhood 
as  one  a  stranger  should  avoid  walking  around  after  dark.  Tellez  also  noted  that  while 
Respondent  did  not  find  well-decorated  bulletin  boards  to  be  especially  important,  he  did 
find  getting  up  in  front  of  students  and  instructing  them  to  be  very  important,  and 
Respondent  tried  to  concentrate  on  that. 

, 

(B)  Both  J po  and  Ha  admitted  to  liking  Respondent  as  a  teacher,  and  to 
,  Respondent  encouraged  him  to 

some  benefits  from  being  in  his  class.  According  to 
better  behavior,  and  to  not  let  others  goad  him.  JI 
stay  calm,  and  that  as  a  math  teacher  Respondent  helped  the  boy  to  learn. 

testified  that  Respondent  helped  him  to 

(C)  Ms.  Spottville,  whose  classroom  was  next  to  Respondent’s,  is  a  special 

education  teacher  with  about  24  years  of  teaching  experience,  12  with  the  District.  She  also 
had  a  small  class,  and  had  aides,  because  she  was  teaching  special  education  students.  She 

  

> 

Mr.  Tellez,  another  fifth  grade  teacher  at  52nd  Street,  explained  to  the  Commission 

that  after  Respondent's  removal,  it  took  time  to  get  a  permanent  teacher  to  replace  him. 
When  one  became  available,  she  could  not  handle  the  class,  which  was  then  reduced  in  size 
to  18  students,  so  that  she  could  handle  it. 
and  HI  were  separated  and  moved  into 
JE 
other  fifth  grade  classrooms.  This  supports  the  inference  that  Respondent’s  teaching  and 
classroom  management  skills  were  better  than  Jimenez  would  have  the  Commission  believe. 

*  Respondent  and  Js  mother  agreed  that  Respondent  would  call  her  at  the  end 
of  every  week  with  a  progress  report,  and  that  he  did  so  up  until  the  week  he  was  removed 
from  the  classroom. 

 

  

credibly  testified  that  Respondent  routinely  stayed  after  school,  and  would  consult  with  her 
about  teaching  strategies,  and  ways  to  handle  the  problem  behaviors.  She  gave  insight  into 
the  nature  of  his  class,  and  she  indicated  that  she  had  less  challenging  behaviors  from  her 
students  than  Respondent  did  with  his. 

| 

24. 

Asset  forth  above,  JIEs  claims  of  being  pushed  by  Respondent  were  not 
credited.  Not  only  did  he  tell  Jimenez,  in  writing,  that  he  had  lied  about  being  pushed,  his 
friend  Hi  impeached  him  during  the  latter's  direct  testimony.  That  impeachment— 
explaining  that 

said  he  lied  about  being  pushed—was  volunteered  spontaneously  by 

during  his  direct  examination,  and  reiterated  by  him  on  cross  examination. 

25. 

(A)  Jimenez's  credibility  suffered  as  the  case  went  on,  although  his  demeanor 
was  not  the  issue.  His  story  of  not  reading  JI's  written  statement  (where  the  student  said 
he  lied)  lacked  credence,  as  did  his  claim  that  he  gave  that  statement  to  Mr.  Franco.  The 
document  did  not  get  scanned  into  the  District's  data  base,  as  it  should  have  been,  and  it  is 
more  likely  that  it  did  not 
FRE  rather  than  that  F 
asking  Respondent  to  give  him  a  written  statement  regarding  the  events  involving  the  alleged 
pushing  of  J,  asserting  that  Respondent  volunteered  a  statement;  it  appears  Jimenez  was 
concerned  that  he  had  violated  the  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  by  asking  for  the 
written  statement  to  begin  with.  However,  Respondent’s  statement,  e-mailed  to  Jimenez, 
states  that  it  was  response  to  Jimenez’s  request  for  a  written  statement. 

get  scanned  into  the  system  because  Jimenez  did  not  give  it  to 
failed  to  have  it  scanned  into  the  system.  Jimenez  denied 

(B)  Jimenez  made  efforts,  during  his  testimony,  to  denigrate  Respondent's 

teaching  skills,  even  though  Respondent  is  not  charged  with  substandard  teaching.  Indeed, 
the  FAA  alleges  that  Respondent's  2011  evaluation  provided  that  he  met  standards.’  (FAA, 
p.  4,  line  14.)  None  of  the  teachers  who  worked  with  Respondent  had  a  negative  perception 
of  Respondent’s  teaching;  Dowty  had  observed  him  while  both  were  at  Miles  and  thought 
_  Respandent  was  a  good  teacher.  All  attested  to  his  dedication,  his  efforts  to  reach  out  to  the 

students  and  their  parents,  and  to  improving  his  skills.  Near  the  beginning  of  his  direct 
testimony,  Jimenez  stated  that  one  of  the  key  things  he  took  away  in  some  early  training  was 
that  a  principal  had  to  protect  himself;  he  had  learned  self-preservation.  It  appears  that  he 
came  to  conclusions  about  Respondent,  and  then  handled  the  claim  about  the  boy  being 
pushed  with  an  eye  on  that  goal. 

Ml 
Hf 
Hf 

  

>  Jimenez  testified  that  if  young  students  were  engaged  by  their  instruction,  then  they 

would  not  become  behavioral  problems;  he  indicated  Respondent  was  not  engaging  the 
problem  students,  subtl 
and  H 
especially JG 
behavioral  challenges  long  before  they  were  placed  with  Respondent.  It  appears  more  likely 
that  they  were  not  readily  engaged  by  any  teacher.  (See  fn.  3.) 

presented.  However,  it  was  clear  that  the  students  had  been 

ing  to  blame  Respondent  for  the  problems  the  students, 

9 

  

 

The  Morrison  Factors 

26. 

Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an 

examination  must  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  teacher  in 
question  is  unfit  to  teach.  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Moryison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  several  factors  that 
tend  to  indicate  fitness  to  teach  should  be  examined.  This  includes  the  likelihood  that  the 
conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such 
adversity  anticipated;  and,  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  teacher's  conduct. 
Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting 
in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct in  question  will  recur;  and  the  extent  that 
discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher 
involved,  or  of  other  teachers. 

27. 

(A) 

(i)  Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the  degree 

As  to  the  fact  that  Respondent  left  his  classroom  for  a  short  period  of  time,  no 

thereof. 
adverse  consequences  were  established  for  any  other  teachers.  Nor  was  any  established  for 
any  students.  While  it  was  claimed  in  2010  that  some  of  the  children  engaged  in  games  that 
had  sexual  overtones,  there  was  no  direct  evidence  on  that  point;  a  former  supervisor  had 
memorialized  those  claims,  but  that  does  not  establish  that  such  misbehavior  occurred,  only 
that  it  was  reported.  (No  investigation  was  conducted.) 

(ii)  Regarding  the  incident  with Ki.  there  was  no  evidence  of 

adverse  consequences  for  other  teachers,  but  some  evidence  of  adverse  consequences  for  the 
student.  During  his  testimony,  he  was  visibly  upset  about  the  incident.  He  asserted  that  he  is 
scared  of  noises  similar  to  a  hammer  blow,  although  his  mother  testified  she  had  not  seen  the 
adverse  effects  described  by  the  student. 

(B)  Proximity  in  time:  The  act  of  leaving  the  classroom  unattended  occurred 
in  September  2010,  and  the  incident  with  KJalso  occurred in  2010.  Thus,  the  incidents 
are  not  especially  proximate  in  time. 

credential. 

(C)  Type  of certificate  held  by  Respondent:  He  holds  a  multi  subject 
| 

(D)  Likelihood  of recurrence:  The  chance  of  recurrence  is  low.  Respondent 
has  not  left  his  classroom  unattended  since  the  single  incident  in  2010.  There  has  not  been 
any  other  untoward  behavior  since  that  year. 

(E)  Implication  of constitutional  rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of  either 

Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated. 

Ml 

10 

  

 

(F)  Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances: 
Respondent’s  need  to  use  the  restroom’  was  compelling,  an  extenuating  fact. 

It  is  inferred  that 

28. 

Under  all  the  circumstances,  it  is  determined  that  Respondent  has  not  been 

shown  as  unfit  to  teach. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Conclusions  Generally  Applicable  To  All  Claims: 

1, 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944,°  and  Factual  Findings  1  through  3. 

2. 

(A)  “Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1), 

may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such 
conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount 
to  unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

(B)  The  allegations  of  unprofessional  conduct  were  dismissed  at  the  outset  of 

the  case,  because  Respondent  was  not  given  an  opportunity  to  cure  any  defects  in  teaching 
after  he  was  removed  from  the  classroom;  he  was  “housed”  for  a  period  of  months.  This 
created  a  jurisdictional  defect.  (Tarquin  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1978) 
84  Cal.  App.3d  251,  259;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1446.) 

3. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 

means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,”  “evident  unfitness 
for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of 
notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 

4. 

“Immoral  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  is  not 

confined  to  sexual  matters.  It  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of 
the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with 
rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  It  can  be 
conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 

6 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

11

  

   

good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of the  San  Francisco  Unified  School 
District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland);  San  Diego  Unified  School 
Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

5. 

In  order  for  a  teacher  to  be  terminated  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7), 

for  persistent  disobedience  of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  it  must  be  established  that 
there  has  been  continuous  and  constant  refusal  to  obey,  or  behavior  motivated  by  an  attitude 
of  continuing  insubordination;  a  single  instance  of  disobedience  is  insufficient.  (Governing 
Bad.  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 

6. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 

service,  or  refusal  to  follow  rules  and  regulations  is  or  are  established,  it  must  also  be 
established  that  such  conduct  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Zuber)  (1992)  4  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445; 
see  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

7. 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9.Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence,”  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  That  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in 
support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.  (Hutchinson  v. 
Contractors’  State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal.App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v. 
Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.295,  304.) 

Legal  Conclusions  Pertaining  to  the  Specific  Allegations  of the  Accusation: 

8. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  based  on 

the  foregoing.  Essentially,  it  was  established  that  Respondent  once  left  his  classroom 
unattended  for  a  few  minutes,  and  that  he  is  some  way  frightened  a  student  in  2010.  The 

  

12    

  

 

  

former  does  not  constitute  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  the  term  (Legal 
Conclusion  4),  The  evidence  of  the  other  incident  does  not  establish  that  Respondent  acted 
in  a  way  that  was  depraved  or  indecent. 

9. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to  teach.  In  fact,  the 
evidence  is  to  the  contrary,  Factual  Findings  19  and  20  notwithstanding.  The  testimony  of 
other  teachers  established  that  Respondent  is  firmly  committed  to  teaching  and  mentoring 
young  students,  and  to  assisting  their  growth  and  progress,  in  the  classroom  and  outside  of  it. 
Even  Hj  and  JJ  thought  that  Respondent  was  a  good  teacher.  (Factual  Finding  19.) 

10. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  persistent  violations  of 
school  laws  or  regulations,  nor  has  there  been  persistent  refusal  to  obey  them.  To  be  sure,  he 
admitted  that  he  should  not  have  left  his  classroom  unattended  in  2010;  he  admitted  it  at  the 
time  of  the  incident  and  during  the  hearing,  and  such  has  not  happened  again.  As  to  the  other 
incident,  it  stands  in  isolation  as  well. 

11. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments, 

as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District.  Again,  the  District 
established  two  incidents  had  occurred,  several  years  before  the  hearing,  and  the  conduct  in 
question  has  not  been  repeated. 

12. 

Notwithstanding  the  two  claims  that  were  established,  Respondent  is  not  unfit 

to  teach  within  the  meaning  of  Morrison,  based  on  Factual  Findings  26  to  28. 

13. 

Any  allegations  or  claims  upon  which  findings  are  not  made  are  deemed  not 

proven,  or  surplusage.  This  includes  claims  asserted  by  Respondent  that  the  applicable 
provisions  of  the  Education  Code  were  not  followed,  as  well  as  claims  that  the  District  did 
not  comply  with  applicable  provisions  of  the  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  between  the 
District  and  its  teachers. 

14.  _  Based  on  all  the  foregoing,  Respondent  shall  not  be  terminated  as  a 

certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Hl 

Ht 

Ml 

Hl 

Hf 

ff 

13

    ORDER 

Respondent  Aldo  Garbellini  shall  not  be  terminated  by  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District. 

DATED:  September  ___,  2014 

  

Miriam  Chapa 

  

Vanessa  Chavez 

DATED:  September  -29 ,  2014 

   

DATED:  September  ___,  2014     
  

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

ORDER 

Respondent  Aldo  Garbellini  shall  not  be  terminated  by  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District. 

DATED:  September  2? _,  2014 

DATED:  September  __,  2014 

DATED:  September“,  2014 

Cc  den  > 

TNyape 

Miriam  Chapa 

  

Vanessa  Chavez 

  

fice  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

14 

  

