BEFORE  A  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FRESNO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

BARBARA  FLORES, 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2013030274 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (CPC)  of 
the  Fresno  Unified  School  District  in  Fresno,  California,  on  December  16,  17,  18,  and  20, 
2013.  The  CPC  members  were  Kathryn  Blackburn,  Robert  Jackson,  and  Karen  J.  Brandt, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

David  A.  Moreno,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Fresno  Unified  School  District 

(District). 

James  F.  McBrearty,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Barbara  Flores  (respondent),  who 

was  present  for  the  entire  hearing. 

This  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  when  the  CPC  concluded  its  deliberations  on 

December  23,  2013. 

SUMMARY 

Respondent  is  an  elementary  school  teacher.  The  District  seeks  to  terminate  her 

employment  due  to  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  District  established  that,  after 
evaluating  respondent  and  giving  her  adequate  assistance  and  opportunity  to  improve  and 
address  the  charges  against  her,  she  failed  to  bring  her  performance  up  to a  satisfactory  level. 

The  District’s  dismissal  of  respondent  is  therefore  sustained.  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  in  the  District.  She  has  a 

multiple  subject  teaching  credential  that  authorizes  her  to  teach  grades  kindergarten  through 
eight.  Since  1988,  she  has  worked  for  the  District  as  an  elementary  school  teacher.  From 
1988  through  2008,  respondent  was  rated  as  meeting  expectations  on  all  her  performance 
evaluations. 

Evaluations  and  Standards 

2. 

The  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  between  the  District  and  the  Fresno 

Teachers  Association  relating  to  the  evaluation  and  professional  standards  to  be  used  when 
the  District  evaluates  a  teacher  stated: 

The  parties  endorse  a  high  level  of  professional  preparation  and 
competence  for  all  members  of  the  bargaining  unit.  Attaining 
and  maintaining  high  professional  standards  requires  a  joint 
commitment  to  provide  the  assistance,  support,  and  proper 
teaching  environment  needed  for  the  success  of  the  bargaining 
unit  member.  Standards  shall  be  clear  and  consistent. 
Beginning  with  the  2000-2001  school  year,  the  parties  shall  use 
the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (CSTP),  or 
otherwise  mutually  agreed-to  modifications  of  the  CSTP.  A 
jointly  developed  continuum  of  professional  standards,  based  on 
the  CSTP,  will  serve  as  a  guide  for  reflective  practice, 
continuous  improvement,  and  evaluation. 

“Meets  Standards-Proficient”  means  that  the  evaluatee  has 
through  observation  of  his/her  professional  practices,  met  the 
standards  in  the  CSTP  in  a  proficient’  manner. 

('  “Proficient,” from  Webster’s  New  Collegiate 
Dictionary:  well  advanced  in  an  art,  occupation,  or 
branch  of  knowledge;  having  or  manifesting  the 
knowledge  and  experience  needed  for  success  in  a  trade 
or  profession.) 

3. 

At  all  times  relevant  to  the  charges  in  the  Accusation,  the  Collective 

Bargaining  Agreement  defined  the  ratings  to  be  used  when  the  District  evaluated  a  teacher  as 
follows: 

“Meets  Standards-Minimally”  means  that  the  evaluatee  has, 
through  observation  of  his/her  professional  practices,  met  the 
standards  in  the  CSTP  at  a  level  of  basic  competency,  as

  

opposed  to  proficiency  defined  above.  As  such,  the  evaluatee 
must  improve  his/her  standards  of  professional  practice  in  order 
to  achieve  a  level  of  proficiency. 

“Does  Not  Meet  Standards”  means  that  the  evaluatee  has  not 
met  standards  of  professional  practice  as  specified  in  the  agreed- 
upon  CSTP  standards  as  determined  by  the  direct  observation  of 
professional  practices. 

. 

4, 

The  six  CSTP  Standards  in  effect  at  all  times  relevant  in  this  matter  stated:' 

Standard  I 

Engaging  and  supporting  all  students  in  learning. 

Standard  II 

Creating  and  maintaining  effective  environments  for 
learning. 

Standard  III 

Understanding  and  organizing  subject  matter 
knowledge. 

StandardIV 

Planning  instruction  and  designing  learning  experiences 
for  all. 

Standard  V__ 

Assessing  student  learning. 

Standard  VI 

Developing  as  a  professional  educator. 

5. 

For  each  of  these  six  CSTP  Standards,  the  District  developed  a  continuum  of 

professional  standards  upon  which  teachers  were  evaluated. 

6. 

In  or  about  2008,  the  District  implemented  Skillful  Leader,  a  training  program 
for  District  administrators,  including  principals  and  vice  principals.  One  of  the  goals  of  this 
program  was  to  help  principals  and  vice  principals  provide  exact,  data-based  feedback  for 
teachers  to  use  to  improve  their  instruction  delivery.  As  part  of  this  program,  principals  and 
vice  principals  observed  teachers  in  the  classroom,  took  literal  notes  of  what  the  teachers  and 
students  said  and  did,  and  provided  recommendations  to  teachers  based  upon  the 
observations  and  literal  notes. 

7. 

Under  the  Skillful  Leader  program,  the  District  began  conducting  more 

evaluations  and  lesson  observations  of  teachers.  For  respondent,  beginning  in  the  2009/10 
school  year,  the  District  conducted  two  annual  evaluations:  the  first,  a  preliminary  evaluation 

  

‘Tn  its  forms  and  documents,  the  District  used  both  Roman  and  Arabic  numerals  to 

number  the  CSTP  Standards.  This  decision  will  use  Roman  numerals.  

at  the  end  of  the  first  semester,  and  the  second,  a  summary  evaluation  at  the  end  of  the 
second  semester.  The  District  also  observed  respondent’s  classroom  instruction  on  a  more 
regular  basis  during  pre-arranged  formal  observations  and  on  multiple  other  occasions  during 
classroom  observations  and  walk-throughs. 

8. 

As  detailed  below,  during  these  evaluations  and  observations,  respondent’s 
principal  or  vice  principal  noted  serious  concerns  with  respondent’s  instruction  delivery, 
which  generally  included,  but  was  not  limited  to,  that:  (1)  her  instruction  did  not  align  with 
her  teaching  objectives;  (2)  she  did  not  adequately  demonstrate  or  model  the  lessons  she  was 
teaching  to  ensure  her  students  would  understand;  (3)  she  appeared  to  lack  sufficient 
knowledge  of  the  curriculum  content;  (4)  she  did  not  adequately  check  for  student 
understanding;  (5)  she  did  not  adjust  her  instruction  when  her  students  indicated  they  were 
confused;  (6)  her  lessons  did  not  contain  the  required  rigor  for  her  students’  grade  level;  and 
(7)  she  released  her  students  for  independent  practice  too  soon  after  direct  instruction  without 
working  with  them  to  ensure  that  they  understood  what  they  were  supposed  to  do.  As 
described  in  the  Findings,  the  District  repeatedly  shared  these  concerns  with  respondent  and 
offered  her  assistance  from  instructional  and  peer  coaches.  Respondent  did  not,  however, 
sufficiently  improve  her  instruction  delivery  to  raise  her  performance  to a  satisfactory  level. 

Lesson  Observations  and  Performance  Evaluations  —  2009/10  and  2010/11  School  Years 

9. 

Larry  Petersen  worked  for  the  District  for  33  years,  until  his  retirement  in 

2010.  For  the  last  three  years  before  he  retired,  he  was  the  principal  at  Figarden  Elementary 
School  (Figarden). 

10. 

‘In  the  2009/10  school  year,  respondent  was  a  third  grade  teacher  at  Figarden. 

Mr.  Petersen  was  respondent’s  supervisor. 

11. 

October  13,  2009  Preliminary  Conference.  On  October  13,  2009,  Mr.  Petersen 
  

and  respondent  met  for  a  preliminary  conference  and  signed  a  Certificated  Preliminary 
Conference  form.  As  set  forth  on  the  form,  the  purpose  of  the  preliminary  conference  was  to 
“reach  agreement  on  an  evaluation  plan,  which  shall  include  the  individual  plan  for 
advancement  of  professional  practice  by  the  bargaining  unit  member  and  the  number  of  types 
of  observations  by  the  evaluator.”  The  form  listed  the  six  CSTP  Standards.  Standards  IV 
and  VI  were  checked.  The  form  noted  that  there  would  be  two  observations  of  performance 
by  the  principal.  Handwritten  in  the  box  for  teacher  goals  related  to  the  selected  standards 
was: 

Developing  and  sequencing  instructional  activities  and 

4.3 
materials  for  student  learning 

4.5 

Modifying  instructional  plans  to  adjust  for  student  needs  |

  

Reflecting  on  teaching  practice  and  planning 

6.1 
professional  development 

Handwritten  in  the  box  for  “Implementation  Plan  (Steps  for  improvement  of  selected 

teacher  goals)”  was: 

Using  class  data  and  curriculum  to  plan  lessons. 
Attend  inservices  on  best  teacher  practices  and  implement  them 
in  class. 

12. 

Mr.  Peterson  testified  that  the  Preliminary  Conference  form  was  used  at  the 

beginning  of  the  evaluation  process  to  determine  the  priorities  in  that  process.  As  Mr. 
Petersen  explained,  the  completed  form  “sets  the  agenda.”  According  to  Mr.  Petersen,  he 
and  respondent  jointly  selected  the  two  CSTP  Standards  identified  for  primary  consideration 
on  respondent’s  October  13,  2009  form.  Mr.  Petersen  recommended  that  respondent  focus 
on  Standard  IV  because  respondent’s  performance  in  the  classroom  and  her  delivery  of 
instruction  were  areas  of  concern,  as  reflected  in  Standard  4.3.  Mr.  Petersen’s  concern 
regarding  Standard  4.5  related  to  the  need  for  differentiation  in  respondent’s  instruction.  As 
Mr.  Petersen  explained,  respondent  had  some  students  whose  proficiency  in  English  was 
limited.  He  wanted  respondent  to  be  able  to  modify  her  instructional  plans  to  accommodate 
all  her  students’  needs.  Mr.  Petersen  was  concerned  about  respondent’s  instruction  delivery 
because  his  review  of  the  standardized  test  scores  indicated  that  the  scores  of  respondent’s 
students  showed  the  lowest  rate  of  growth  when  compared  to  the  other  three  third  grade 
classes. 

13. 

November  10,  2009  Lesson  Observation.  On  November  10,  2009,  Mr. 

Petersen  observed  a  math  lesson  delivered  by  respondent  and  completed  a  Lesson 
Observation  Form.  Mr.  Petersen  explained  that  the  purpose  of  the  lesson  observation  was  to 
give  respondent  feedback  on  the  CSTP  Standards  and  how  she  was  doing  on  the  objectives 
listed  on  the  October  13,  2009  Certificated  Preliminary  Conference  form.  During  the  lesson 
observation,  Mr.  Petersen  took  literal  notes  of  respondent’s  math  lesson. 

14. 

On  the  November  10,  2009  Lesson  Observation  Form,  Mr.  Petersen  rated 
respondent  as  “Meets  Standards-Proficient”  on  all  subsections  of  the  first  five  of  the  six 
CSTP  Standards,  except  four.  He  noted  that  he  did  not  observe  two  subsections:  HI-5  “Uses 
materials,  resources  and  technologies  to  make  subject  matter  accessible  to  students,”  and  IV- 
5  “Modifies  instructional  plans  to  adjust  for  student  needs.”  He  rated  respondent  as  “Meets 
Standards-Minimally”  on  two  subsections:  I-4  “Engages  students  in  problem  solving,  critical 
thinking  and  other  activities  that  make  subject  matter  meaningful,”  and  II-5  “Plans  and 
implements  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  support  learning.”  He  noted  that  he  did 
not  observe  any  of  the  subsections  under  Standard  VI. 

  

*  The  District  did  not  submit  any  evidence  that  showed  the  tests  scores  of 

respondent’s  students  as  compared  to  other  students. 

   

  

(a)  |  With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  “[t]eacher  talk 

-  consumed  first  30  minutes  of  lesson,”  except  when  a  student  sharpened  her  pencil, 
another  needed  to  find  his  page,  and  three  students  gave  “single  response  answers.” 
Mr.  Petersen  suggested  that  respondent  “[m]ight  work  in  use  of  elbow  partners,  more 
checking  for  understanding.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  “[p]rocedures 

appeared  to  be  inconsistently  implemented.  Teacher  referred  to:  question,  operation, 
process,  several  times  but  no  indication  of  it  charted  in  the  room.  POD*/objective  was 
pasted  in  the  journals  but  only  for  the  day  of  the  lesson  observed.  Good  strategies 
should  be  consistently  used  throughout  instructional  planning.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  the  lesson 

“followed  MLD.”  He  also  noted  that  respondent  “demonstrated  modeling,  guided 
practice,  consensus  with  presentation.”  He  noted  further  that,  during  closure, 
respondent  “reread  what  the  students  learned.”  He  stated  that,  “[i]f  learning  is  to  be 
internalized  what  strategies  will  help  to  get  the  closure  from  the  students  themselves.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Mr.  Petersen  noted,  “not  observed  — 

discuss  universal  access,”  and  “Standard  for  student  neatness  and  numbering  was 
inconsistent.” 

16. 

15. 

March  10,  2010  Preliminary  Evaluation.  On  March  12,  2010,  respondent  and 

At  hearing,  Mr.  Petersen  stated  that  the  math  lesson  he  observed  took 

approximately  45  minutes  to  one  hour.  He  thought  that  30  minutes  of  teacher  instruction  was 
“excessive,”  and  that  a  maximum  of  10  minutes  would  have  been  what  he  expected  to  have  a 
“better  balance”  of  student  interaction  in  the  lesson  and  more  checking  for  student 
understanding.  He  commented  on  a  student  sharpening  her  pencil  because  he  thought  that 
respondent  should  have  had  procedures  in  place  to  address  this  “routine”  conduct  so  that  it 
would  not  interrupt  a  lesson.  Mr.  Petersen  testified  that,  when  he  gave  respondent  ratings  of 
“Meets  Standards-Minimally,”  it  indicated  that  her  performance  required  improvement  in 
those  areas. 

°  “BBF”  journals  were  “Beyond  the  Basic  Facts”  journals  kept  by  the  students.    

Mr.  Petersen  signed  a  Preliminary  Evaluation  dated  March  10,  2010.  The  Preliminary 
Evaluation  was  prepared  by  Mr.  Petersen  and  rated  respondent  as  “Meets  Standards- 
Proficient”  on  all  six  CSTP  Standards.  The  Preliminary  Evaluation  indicated  that  it  was 
based  on  the  following  data  sources:  (1)  classroom  visitations  on  October  22  and  November . 
20,  2009;  (2)  formal  observation  on  November  10,  2009;  and  (3)  “BBF  journal  review.” 

*“  “MLD”  stands  for  math  lesson  design. 

*  “POD”  stands  for  problem  of  the  day. 

  

The  classroom  visitations  were  unannounced,  while  the  formal  observation  was  preplanned 
with  respondent. 

(a) 

With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Mr.  Petersen  found  that  respondent  used  “a 
variety  of  instructional  techniques  in  order  to  support  learner  styles.”  He  noted  that 
respondent  modeled  “tally  marks,  pictorial  representations,  journals  and  verbal  drill 
and  journaling.”  He  also  noted  that  students  “were  allowed  to  work  with  elbow 
partners  and  small  groups  for  support,”  and  that  providing  “multiple  ways  to  input 
information  increases  student  learning.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  respondent 

“demonstrated  engagement  strategies  by  asking  many  higher  level  questions  of 
students,”  and  that  respondent’s  questions  “encouraged  mental  engagement  yet  some 
students  were  off  task  when  not  following  procedures  for  bathrooming,  pencils  and 
following  along  with  the  materials.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II],  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  respondent’s 

“lesson  indicated  that  she  has  been  utilizing  lesson  design  format,  MLD,”  that 
students  “utilized  journals  in  an  organized  formatted  way,”  that  respondent  “was  clear 
on  objective  and  students  knew  what  they  were  to  be  learning,”  that  students 
“participated  in  consensus  building  and  presentation  portions  of  lesson  design,”  and 
that  respondent  “incorporated  a  variety  of  activities  during  guided  practice.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Mr.  Petersen  noted  that  an  “increase  in 

posted  charts  and  didactic  materials  is  indicated  to  help  draw  on  student’s  [sic]  past 
knowledge.”  He  also  noted  that  while  student  “work  and  commercially  prepared 
materials  [were]  posted  in-the  room,”  there  was  “an  absence  of  learning  charts  and 
teaching  bulletin  boards  posted.”  He  noted  further  that  teaching  “time  and  reviews 
[could]  be  reduced  and  positively  impact  learning  by  posting  important  learning 
concepts  in  the  classroom  for  reference.” 

17. 

Athearing,  Mr.  Petersen  recognized  that  respondent  had  volunteered  to  teach 

students  who  were  English  Language  Learners  (ELL)  during  two  of  the  three  years  he  was 
principal.  He  also  recognized  that  respondent  had  volunteered  to  attend  the  Math  Academy 
offered  by  the  District,  and  that  math  was  an  area  in  which  respondent  had  “expertise.” 
According  to  Mr.  Petersen,  respondent  was  “always  helpful  and  cooperative,”  but  at  times  he 
was  concerned  about  her  “motivation.”  He  was  not  concerned  about  respondent’s  ability,  but 
he  thought  that,  “from  time  to  time,”  her  implementation  was  “a  little  cloudy.” 

18. 

May  10,  2010  Summary  Evaluation.  Lisa  Shipman  was  the  Vice  Principal  of 

Figarden  during  the  2009/10  and  2010/11  school  years.  On  May  10,  2010,  respondent 
received  a  Summary  Evaluation  prepared  by  Ms.  Shipman,  the  designated  evaluator,  and 
signed  by  Mr.  Petersen,  respondent’s  primary  evaluator.  The  Summary  Evaluation  indicated 
that  the  data  sources  were:  (1)  informal  observations  on  October  22,  November  20,  and 

   

December  3,  2009,  and  January  13,  February  12,  March  17,  and  April  26,  28,  and  30,  2010; 
(2)  formal  observations  on  November  10,  2009,  and  April  30,  2010;  (3)  BBF  journals  on 
October  5,  2009,  and  April  29,  2010;  and  (4)  reflective  conversations  on  December  4,  2009, 
and  March  17,  2010. 

19. 

In  the  May  10,  2010  Summary  Evaluation,  Ms.  Shipman  rated  respondent  as 

Meets  Standards-Proficient  on  Standards  I,  IV,  and  V.  She  rated  respondent  as  Meets 
Standards-Minimally  on  Standards  I,  III,  and  VI. 

(a) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“connects  students’  prior  knowledge,  life  experience,  and  interests  with  learning 
goals.....  [As  a]  result  students  are  likely  to  connect  previous  lessons  with  current 
activities  leading  to  greater  understanding  of  the  standards  covered  in  class.”  But  she 
also  found  that  respondent  “minimally  uses  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and 
resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs,”  and  that,  as  a  result  “students  are 
less  likely  to  learn  or  be  able  to  apply  the  information  presented  during  the  lesson.” 
Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  “[t]eacher  talk  took  up  more  than  30  minutes  of 
[respondent’s]  lesson  during  2  formal  observations,”  and  that  “[d]uring  several  walk- 
through  visits  [respondent]  has  been  in  the  back  of  the  room,  on  the  computer  while 
students  work  independently.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 
“promotes  social  development  and  group  responsibility,”  and  that,  “as  a  result 
students  are  more  likely  to  feel  comfortable  working  in  both  pairs  and  small  group 
collaboratively  which  can  lead  to  deeper  understanding  of  content.”  In  addition,  Ms. 
Shipman  found  that  respondent  was  “working  towards  using  instructional  time 
wisely.”  But  Ms.  Shipman  also  noted  that:  (1)  during  a  walk-through  visit  to  the 
library,  respondent  was  observed  “raising  her  voice  to  her  class”  and  “using  her 
instructional  time  reminding  students  to  stop  talking”;  (2)  during  “several  walk- 
through  visits  students  have  been  observed  off  task  and  not  listening  and  [respondent] 
has  had  to  take  her  instructional  time  to  re-direct  those  students”;  (3)  during  a  “formal 
observation  on  4/30  [respondent]  did  not  have  all  of  the  instructional  materials 
prepped  for  her  lesson,  therefore,  students  had  to  wait  in  their  groups  for  up  to  4 
minutes  and  40  seconds  for  their  colored  tiles  to  begin  their  probability  experiment”; 
and  (4)  “during  a  walk  through  lesson  on  4/28  [respondent]  talked  over  the  students 
that  were  conducting  side  conversations  and  then  had  to  take  additional  time  to  get 
them  to  stop  talking.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that,  “as  a  result  valuable  time  is  lost 
and  students  are  missing  out  on  instruction.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  Shipman  described  how  respondent 
organized  the  “curriculum  to  support  student  understanding  of  subject  matter.”  Ms. 
Shipman  noted  that  respondent:  (1)  conducted  “[d]aily  review  of  previous  day’s 
topic”;  (2)  built  in  “time  for  students  to  work  with  partners,  allowing  for  deeper 
understanding  of  the  objective”;  (3)  “used  core  curriculum  and/or  supplemental 

 

materials  to  heighten  student  understanding”;  (4)  posted  “[c]lear  objectives”  and 
“reviewed  to  ensure  that  students  know  what  they  are  learning”;  and  (5)  gave 
instructions  that  were  “clear  and  students  knew  what  they  were  going  to  be  learning 
and  what  the  expected  outcome  would  be.”  But  Ms.  Shipman  also  noted  that:  (1)  a 
review  of  students’  BBF  journals  “reflected  inconsistent  form  and  lengthy  gaps  in 
usage”;  (2)  lessons  observed  “do  not  show  that  the  MLD  format  is  being  consistently 
utilized”;  (3)  although  respondent  had  “made  progress  in  getting  students  more 
actively  engaged  in  group  activities,”  she  “was  in  the  back  of  the  room  or  on  the 
computer  and  was  unable  to  see  or  hear  what  conversations  her  students  were 
engaged  in”;  and  (4)  “[d]ata  indicate[d]  that  respondent’s  students  are  not  working  to 
the  same  level  of  proficiency  as  the  other  students  in  3rd  grade.”  Ms.  Shipman 
concluded  that,  “[a]s  a  result,  students  do  not  always  benefit  from  consistent  structure 
and  may  not  perform  to  the  level  of  achievement  they  are  capable  of.” 

(d) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  respondent 

“modified  instructional  plans  to  adjust  for  student  needs.”  As  a  result,  “students  who 
did  not  understand  initially  are  more  likely  to  close  the  knowledge  gap  and  access  the 
information  to  complete  further  analysis.” 

(e) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  V,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“involved  and  guided  all  students  in  informally  assessing  their  own  learning.”  As  a 
result,  “students  are  more  likely  to  make  connections  in  future  lessons.”  In  addition, 
Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  used  “results  from  multiple  assessments  to  guide 
her  instruction.” 

(f) 

With  regard  to  Standard  VI,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“should  continue  to  work  with  colleagues  to  improve  her  professional  practice  as  well 
as  establish  professional  goals  and  pursue  opportunities  to  grow  professionally.”  Ms. 
Shipman  noted  that  the  “required  coaching  cycle  has  not  yet  been  completed.”  Ms. 
Shipman  also  noted  that  respondent  “regularly  communicates with families  and  peers 
in  a  timely  manner”  and  that  her  “participation  in  site  leadership  and  grade  level 
meetings  continues  to  be  collaborative  and  professional.”  Ms.  Shipman  stated  that 
“[o]ngoing  parent  communication  needs  [to  be]  consistent  and  tie[d]  to  student 
learning  goals,”  and  that  “[c]ommunication  with  students  who  are  not  meeting 
learning  goals  needs  to  be  documented,  ...  evidenced  by  weekly  communications 
folders  as  well  as  Individual  Student  Learning  Plans.” 

20. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Shipman  testified  that  she  discussed  the  May  10,  2010 

Summary  Evaluation  with  both  Mr.  Petersen  and  respondent.  She  told  respondent  that 
respondent  was  on  the  “borderline”  of  not  meeting  standards.  She  testified  that  a  “site 
coach”  (also  called  an  “instructional  coach”)  was  available  to  Figarden  teachers  to  help  plan 
lessons,  provide  feedback,  facilitate  a  lesson,  and  give  on-the-spot  assistance.  According  to 
Ms.  Shipman,  respondent  did  not  complete  a  full  “coaching  cycle”  with  the  site  coach.  A 
“coaching  cycle”  consisted  of  the  site  coach  preplanning  a  lesson  and  modeling  it  for  a 
teacher,  and  then  the  teacher  preplanning  a  lesson,  delivering  it,  and  obtaining  feedback  from 

   

  

the  site  coach.  According  to  Ms.  Shipman,  respondent  did  not  teach  a  lesson  for  the  site 
coach  and  obtain  feedback  on  it.  Respondent  asserted  that,  contrary  to  Ms.  Shipman’s 
testimony,  she  completed  the  coaching  cycle  with  the  instructional  coach. 

21. 

At  the  start  of  the  2010/11  school  year,  Michiko  English  was  the  assigned 

principal  of  Figarden. 

22. 

January  18,  2011  Preliminary  Evaluation.  On  January  21,  2011,  respondent, 

  

Ms.  Shipman,  and  Ms.  English  signed  a  Preliminary  Evaluation  dated  January  18,  2011. 
This  Preliminary  Evaluation  was  prepared  by  Ms.  Shipman.  It  was  based  upon:  (1)  informal 
observations  on  August  25,  September  10,  October  12  and  20,  November  4  and  9,  and 
December  3,  2010;  (2)  a  formal  observation  on  December  10,  2010;  (3)  a  BBF  journal  check 
on  December  17,  2010;  (4)  reflective  conversations  on  December  9  and  10,  2010;  (5)  walk- 
through  visits  on  August  16,  19,  23,  and  27,  September  1,  13,  16,  18,  20,  22,  27,  and  29,  and 
October  7,  18,  26,  27,  and  29,  2010;  and  (6)  email  correspondence  about  lessons  observed 
dated  August  26,  September  10  and  20,  October  12,  and  December  3,  2010. 

23. 

Inthe  January  18,  2011  Preliminary  Evaluation,  Ms.  Shipman  rated 

respondent  as  Meets  Standard-Proficient  on  Standards  I,  III,  V,  and  VI.  She  rated  respondent 
as  Meets  Standard-Minimally  on  Standards  II  and  IV. 

(a) 

(b) 

On  Standard  I,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  “connects  students’ 

|  On  Standard  II,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  “struggles  to  pace 

prior  knowledge,  life  experience,  and  interests  with  learning  goals”  and  that,  as  a 
result,  “students  are  likely  to  connect  previous  lessons  with  current  activities  leading 
to  greater  understanding  of  the  standards  covered  in  class.”  Ms.  Shipman  also  found 
that  respondent  “engages  students  in  a  variety  of  ways  that  promote  student  learning” 
and  that,  as  a  result,  “students  are  given  multiple  ways  to  learn  the  content.” 

lessons  appropriate  for  her  grade  level  and  is  working  to  establish  consistent 
classroom  routines.”  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that:  (1)  respondent  “had  objectives  written 
and  consistently  reviewed  her  objectives  for  the  day”;  (2)  during  a  walk-through  visit 
on  October  10,  respondent  had  “her  students  coloring  a  Fresno  Emblem”;  (3)  during 
walk-through  visits,  “students  were  off  task  and  not  listening  and  instructional  time 
was  used  to  re-direct  these  students”;  and  (4)  during  observations  on  September  20, 
October  12  and  20,  November  9,  and  December  10,  “math  lessons  went  over  70 
minutes  with  students  not  able  to  complete  independent  practice.”  Ms.  Shipman 
concluded  that,  as  a  result,  “students  are  missing  out  on  instructional  opportunities.” 

topic”;  (2)  respondent  “used  core  curriculum  and/or  supplemental  materials  to    

On  Standard  ITI,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  “continues  to 
work  towards  organizing  curriculum  to  support  student  understanding  of  subject 
matter.”  She  noted  that:  (1)  there  was  “[c]onsistent  daily  review  of  previous  day’s 

(c) 

heighten  students  understanding”;  (3)  “MLD  and  BBF  journals  reflect  consistent  form 
however  show  a  number  of  days  that  indicate  the  use  of  math  academy  lessons  took 
the  place  of MLD  and  or  BBF”;  (4)  the  observed  lessons  did  “not  show  that  MLD 
format  is  being  consistently  utilized  to  the  stage  of  consensus  and  presentation”;  (5) 
respondent  showed  that  she  had  “made  progress  in  getting  students  more  actively 
engaged  [in]  group  activities  through  the  use  of  grouping”;  and  (6)  respondent  used 
“Math  Academy  Strategies  in  conjunction  with  Math  Lesson  Design.”  Ms.  Shipman 
concluded  that,  as  a  result,  “students  may  not  always  have  a  consistent  structure  and 
not  perform  to  the  level  of  achievement  they  are  capable  of.” 

(d) 

On  Standard  IV,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  was  “working 

towards  developing  and  sequencing  long-term  and  short-term  instructional  plans  to 
support  student  learning.”  Ms.  Shipman  noted,  among  other  things,  that:  (1)  on 
September  22,  although  respondent  noticed  that  a  number  of  students  did  not 
understand  the  lesson,  she  did  not  modify  it;  (2)  on  October  22,  when  students  had 
finished  the  independent  practice  problems,  she  asked  them  to  wait  patiently,  “with  no 
other  direction  or  activity  assigned”;  and  (3)  during  visits  on  September  10  and  22, 
“when  closing  the  lessons,  students  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  reflect  upon 
their  learning.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that,  as a  result,  “students  who  did  not 
understand  initially  may  not  be  able  to  access  the  information  to  complete  further 
analysis  without  additional  framing.” 

(e) 

On  Standard  V,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  used  “results  from 

multiple  assessments  to  guide  her  instruction.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that,  as  a 
result,  “student  achievement  receive  [sic]  a  more  prescriptive  academic  program.” 

(f) 

On  Standard  VI,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  “should  continue 

to  work  with  colleagues  to  improve  her  professional  practice  as  well  as  establish 
professional  goals  and  pursue  opportunities  to  grow  professionally.”  Ms.  Shipman 
noted  that:  (1)  respondent  “regularly  communicates  with  families  and  peers  in  a 
timely  manner”  and  that  her  participation  in  grade  level  meetings  was  “collaborative 
and  professional”;  (2)  at  site  meetings,  respondent  engaged  in  “professional 
collaboration  with  the  grade  level”;  (3)  respondent’s  “[c]ommunication  with  students 
who  are  not  meeting  learning  goals  [was]  documented,  as  evidenced  by  Individual 
Student  Learning  Plans.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that,  as  a  result,  “families  are 
given  opportunities  to  be  engaged  in  supporting  student  learning  and  grade  level  staff 
is  open  to  cooperatively  engage  in  grade  level  planning.” 

24. 

May  6,  2011  Summary  Evaluation.  Ms.  Shipman  prepared  and  signed  a 

Summary  Evaluation  dated  May  6,  2011.  On  May  9,  2011,  respondent  and  Ms.  English 
signed  the  Summary  Evaluation.  The  Summary  Evaluation  was  based  upon:  (1)  informal 
observations  on  August  25,  September  10,  October  12  and  20,  November  4  and  9,  and 
December  3,  2010,  and  March  14,  and  April  4  and  7,  2011;  (2)  formal  observations  on 
December  10,  2010,  and  March  30,  and  April  4  and  28,  2011;  (3)  a  BBF  journal  check  on 
December  17,  2010;  (4)  reflective  conversations  on  December  9  and  10,  2010,  and  March  24, 

11 

 

and  April  12,  2011;  (5)  walk-through  visits  on  August  16,  19,  23,  and  27,  September  1,  13, 
16,  18,  20,  22,  27,  and  29,  October  7,  18,  26,  27,  and  29,  2010,  and  February  14  and  28,  and 
March  17  and  31,  2011;  and  (6)  email  correspondence  about  lessons  observed  dated  August 
26,  September  10  and  20,  October  12,  and  December  3,  2010. 

25. 

Inthe  May  6,  2011  Summary  Evaluating,  Ms.  Shipman  rated  respondent  as 

Meets  Standards-Proficient  on  Standards  V  and  VI,  Meets  Standards-Minimally  on 
Standards  I  and  III,  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standards  II  and  IV. 

(a) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“connects  students’  prior  knowledge,  life  experience,  and  interests  with  learning 
goals”  and,  as  a  result,  “students  are  likely  to  connect  previous  lessons  with  current 
activities  leading  to  a  greater  understanding  of  the  standards  covered  in  class.”  But 
Ms.  Shipman  also  found  that  respondent  “struggles  to  engage  students  in  a  variety  of 
ways  that  promote  student  learning.”  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  respondent  “frequently 
rel[ied]  on  lecturing  about  subject  matter  without  requiring  any  types  of  note  taking  or 
activities  to  reinforce  the  information.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that,  as  a  result, 
“students  are  less  likely  to  have  maximum  access  to  the  content.”  Ms.  Shipman  also 
found  that,  during  multiple  observed  lessons,  respondent  “had  her  students  working 
with  partners  and  sharing  their  answers  and  process  for  getting  their  answers,”  but 
“students  were  having  side  conversations  and  drawing.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded 
that,  as  a  result,  “students  are  given  multiple  ways  to  learn  the  content  but  are  at  times 
distracted  and  not  able  to  engage  in  the  lesson.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“struggles  to  pace  lessons  appropriate  for  her  grade  level  and  is  working  to  establish 
consistent  classroom  routines.”  Ms.  Shipman  noted,  among  other  things,  that:  (1) 
“(during  multiple  walkthrough  visitations  objectives  that  were  written  on  the  board 
were  from  the  prior  week  and  no  new  objective  was  present  for  the  students  to 
review”;  (2)  “students  were  observed  off  task  and  not  listening  and  instructional  time 
was  used  to  re-direct  these  students”;  (3)  on  five  occasions,  “math  lessons  went  over 
70  minutes  with  students  not  able  to  complete  independent  practice,  consensus,  or 
presentation”;  and  (4)  during  one  lesson,  “students  transitioned  from  a  language  arts 
activity  to  math  with  no  closure  activity.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that  respondent 
“struggles  to  maintain  student  engagement  and  focus  throughout  the  lesson.”  In 
addition,  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that:  (1)  during  one  lesson,  respondent  “stopped  her 
instruction  mid-sentence  five  times  and  addressed  three  or  four  students  directly  for 
their  off  task  behavior”;  (2)  during  another  lesson,  “students  were  re-directed  17  times 
during  9  minutes  of  her  instruction”;  and  (3)  “[d]uring  multiple  lessons,  ...  students 
continued  to  talk  through  instruction  and  or  teacher  directions.”  Ms.  Shipman 
concluded  that,  as  a  result,  “students  are  missing  out  on  targeted  instruction.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  respondent 

“continues  to  work  towards  organizing  curriculum  to  support  student  understanding 

  

12

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

7 

of  subject  matter.  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  during  a  math  lesson  on  April  28,  students 
“were  not  able  to  answer  teacher  questions”  and  that  during  lessons  on  April  4  and  28, 
“students  were  confused.”  But  Ms.  Shipman  also  noted  that  there  was  “[c]Jonsistent 
daily  review  of  previous  day’s  topic,”  and  that  respondent  had  “made  progress  in 
getting  students  more  actively  engaged  [in]  group  activities  through  the  use  of 
grouping.”  Ms.  Shipman  stated  that  students  “may  not  always  perform  to  the  level  of 
achievement  they  are  capable  of.”  But  she  also  stated  that,  “Through  the  use  [of] 
organized  curriculum,  multiple  resources  and  materials,  [respondent]  ensure  all 
students  understand  subject  matter.”  In  addition,  she  stated  that,  “During  most 
walkthrough  visitations  as  well  as  informal  and  formal  observations,  ...  [respondent] 
incorporated  the  use  of  available  technology  such  as  the  ELMO  to  enable  students  to 
be  a  part  of  the  lesson  and  see  the  curriculum  in  a  new  way.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded 
that,  as  a  result,  “students  have  opportunities  both  to  master  fundamental  skills  and  to 
challenge  themselves  to  apply  new  learning  to  a  variety  of  increasingly  rigorous 
academic  tasks.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  was 

“working  towards  adapting  instructional  plans  and  curricular  material  to  meet  the 
assessed  learning  needs  of  all  students.”  Ms.  Shipman  noted  that  on  five  classroom 
visits,  “when  closing  the  lessons,  students  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  reflect 
upon  their  learning.”  Ms.  Shipman  concluded  that  “students  who  did  not  understand 
initially  may  not  be  able  to  access  the  information  to  complete  further  analysis 
without  additional  framing.” 

(e) 

With  regard  to  Standard  V,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent  “uses 

results  from  multiple  assessments  to  guide  her  instruction.”  As  a  result,  “student 
achievement  receive  a  more  prescriptive  academic  program.”  Ms.  Shipman  also  found 
that  respondent  “involved  and  guided  all  students  in  assessing  their  learning.”  Asa 
result,  “students  are  more  likely  to  monitor  their  understanding  and  ability  during 
independent  math  activity.” 

(f) 

With  regard  to  Standard  VI,  Ms.  Shipman  found  that  respondent 

“should  continue  to  work  with  colleagues  to  improve  her  professional  practice  as  well 
as  establish  professional  goals  and  pursue  opportunities  to  grow  professionally.”  She 
also  found  that  respondent  “regularly  communicate[d]  with  families  and  peers  in  a 
timely  manner,”  “engage[d]  in  professional  collaboration  with  the  grade  level,”  and 
documented  “[c]ommunication  with  students  who  [were]  not  meeting  learning  goals.” 
As  a  result,  “families  are  given  opportunities  to  be  engaged  in  supporting  student 
learning  and  grade  level  staff  is  open  to  cooperatively  engage  in  grade  level 
planning.” 

26. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Shipman  testified  that  she  was  concerned  with  the  low  level  of 

rigor  in  respondent’s  classes.  She  was  also  concerned  that  respondent  was  lecturing  too 
much  and  students  were  not  given  sufficient  time  to  work  independently  or  reflect  upon  their 
learning.  And  the  number  of  times  respondent  had  to  redirect  her  students  to  get  them  to  pay 

13 

   

attention  took  away  from  valuable  teaching  time.  In  addition,  Ms.  Shipman  was  concerned 
that  respondent  was  not  able  to  modify  her  instruction  or  switch  her  teaching  method  when 
students  did  not  understand  what  respondent  was  teaching,  and  did  not  appear  to  have 
planned  ahead  to  be  able  to  address  these  challenges  when  they  arose.  Respondent  appeared 
to  be  “thrown  off’  when  students  asked  questions,  and  did  not  have  sufficient  ways  to  assess 
whether  students  understood  the  material.  According  to  Ms.  Shipman,  she  met  with 
respondent  and  emailed  her  on  multiple  occasions  to  address  these  issues.  Before  the  formal 
observations,  she  gave  respondent  suggestions  to  implement  in  order  to  address  her  concerns. 
But  Ms.  Shipman  did  not  observe  respondent  implementing  her  suggestions. 

. 

Change  from  Third  Grade  to  Sixth  Grade  —  2011/12  School  Year 

27. 

At  the  end  of  the  2010/11  school  year,  the  teachers  at  Figarden  were  asked  if 

they  were  willing  to  change  grade  levels  or  accept  combination  classes  for  the  2011/12 
school  years  in  light  of  changes  in  student  enrollment  numbers.  Respondent  thought  the 
change  might  be  beneficial  for  her  and  notified  the  school  of  her  willingness  to  change. 

28. 

Ms.  English  contacted  respondent  and  told  her  that  she  would  be  switching 
from  the  third  grade  to  the  sixth  grade  for  2011/12  school  year.  Ms.  English  believed  that 
respondent’s  performance  in  the  third  grade  had  become  “stagnant,”  and  that  the  change 
would  “reinvigorate”  her. 

29. 

Respondent  thought  that  the  change  from  third  to  sixth  grade  was  “quite  a 

large  jump”  but  “not  uncommon,”  and  recognized  that  she  had  changed  grade  levels  before. 
But  respondent  expressed  her  reluctance  to  the  change  to  Ms.  English  given  her  recent 
evaluations.  Respondent  told  Ms.  English  that  she  was  concerned  that  being  able  to  both 
learn  a  new  curriculum  and  improve  her  teaching  at  the  same  time  would  be  difficult.  Ms. 
English  told  respondent  that  given  her  ongoing  training  in  Math  Academy,  her  content 
knowledge,  and  the  support  she  had  from  family  members,  including  her  sister  who  was  a 
sixth  grade  teacher  in  the  District,  respondent  would  be  able  to  teach  the  sixth  grade  math 
content  and  help  the  other  sixth  grade  teachers.  Notwithstanding  respondent’s  initial 
reluctance,  Ms.  English  made  the  final  decision  to  move  respondent  to  the  sixth  grade  for  the 
2011/2012  school  year. 

30. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  English  recognized  that  respondent  was  initially  not  “happy” 

with  the  move  to  sixth  grade,  but  accepted  it  as  a  “professional.” 

Assistance  from  Instructional  Coaches  During  2011/12  School  Year 

31. 

Assistance  from  Gayle  Spencer.  In  the  2011/12  school  year,  Gayle  Spencer 

was  employed  by  the  District  as  a  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  (BTSA) 
provider.  She  also  worked  with  veteran  teachers,  providing  them  with  instructional  support. 

14

32. 

Ms.  Spencer  was  respondent’s  teacher  development  coach  during  the  2011/12 

school  year.  She  provided  support  to  respondent  from  September  through  May.  Using  the 
areas  for  growth  specified  in  the  Teacher  Development  Plans  served  on  respondent  (see 
Findings  below),  Ms.  Spencer  observed  respondent  teaching  her  class  for  about  one  hour, 
two  to  three  times  a  month.  Ms.  Spencer  made  notes  and  provided  suggestions  in  italics 
about  what  she  observed  during  each  class  session.  The  purpose  of  Ms.  Spencer’s 
observations  was  to  offer  respondent  suggestions  to  improve  her  instructional  practices. 
After  observing  her  classes,  Ms.  Spencer  debriefed  with  respondent.  Ms.  Spencer  did  not 
help  respondent  compose  her  lesson  plans,  but  she  gave  respondent  suggestions  about 
respondent’s  lessons  based  upon  her  observations. 

33. 

Twice  during  the  first  semester  and  three  times  during  the  second  semester, 

Ms.  Spencer  met  with  respondent  and  Ms.  English  to  discuss  what  Ms.  Spencer  had 
observed.  Ms.  Spencer  would  provide  written  summaries  of  the  discussions  and  send  the 
summaries  to  Ms.  English  and  respondent.  For  each  semester,  Ms.  Spencer  also  noted  on  an 
observation  template  when  she  observed  respondent  providing  instruction  that  fell  within  the 
areas  identified  for  growth  on  respondent’s  Teacher  Development  Plans.  Ms.  Spencer  did 
not  evaluate  the  quality  of  respondent’s  teaching  on  these  observation  templates,  but  merely 
noted  if  she  observed  any  instruction  that  fell  within  the  areas  identified  for  growth. 

34. 

Ms.  Spencer  testified  that,  although  it  was  not  her  job  to  evaluate  respondent’s 
performance,  she  saw  evidence  of  improvement.  According  to  Ms.  Spencer,  respondent  tried 
“very  hard  to  do  what  was  asked  of  her.” 

35. 

Assistance  from  Paula  Zamorski.  Paula  Zamorski  is  an  Instructional  Coach  in 
the  District.  During  the  2011/12  school  year,  Ms.  Zamorski  worked  with  respondent  to  assist 
her  to  implement  new  teaching  strategies  and  to  help  her  improve  her  instructional  practices. 
Ms.  Zamorski  focused  primarily  on  Write  Tools,  a  new  program  the  District  had 
implemented  to  teach  students  to  write.  To  assist  respondent,  Ms.  Zamorski  demonstrated 
lessons  to  teach  a  particular  skill.  Ms.  Zamorski  gave  respondent  teaching  charts  and 
PowerPoint  presentations  that  Ms.  Zamorski  had  created.  Ms.  Zamorski  helped  plan  lessons 
with  respondent  a  “couple  of  times.”  Ms.  Zamorski  and  respondent  “talked  through”  lesson 
plans  and  discussed  what  respondent  wanted  students  to  accomplish.  Ms.  Zamorski  worked 
with  respondent  on  “chunking”  her  instruction  into  smaller  pieces.  ° 

36. 

Ms.  Zamorski  visited  one  of  respondent’s  classes.  She  thought  respondent  did 
a  “great”  job  getting  an  RSP  student,’  who  had  not  previously  spoken  in  class,  to  speak.  Ms. 

  

°  At  hearing,  the  term  “chunking”  was  defined  as  dividing  a  lesson  up  into  subparts. 

According  to  Ms.  English,  in  order  to  ensure  that  students  could  absorb  and  understand  a 
lesson,  it  was  often  helpful  for  a  teacher  to  divide  it  up  into  subparts,  and  not  try  to  teach  “too 
much”  at  once. 

7“RSP”  stands  for  resource  specialist  program. 

15 

 

Zamorski  testified  that,  although  she  did  not  visit  respondent’s  class  “a  lot”  and  was  not  there 
to  evaluate  respondent’s  instructional  practices,  she  did  not  notice  anything  “glaring”  or  “that 
bad”  in  respondent’s  instructional  practices. 

Lesson  Observations,  Teacher  Development  Plans,  and  Performance  Evaluations  —  2011/12 
School  Year 

37. 

November  17,  2011  Lesson  Observation.  On  November  17,  2011,  Ms. 

English  observed  a  sixth  grade  math  class  taught  by  respondent,  and  completed  a  Lesson 
Observation  Form  that  rated  respondent  on  each  subpart  of  the  CSTP  Standards.  In  the 
Comments  section  after  each  CSTP  Standard,  she  included  specific  and  detailed  examples 
from  respondent’s  teaching  to  support  her  ratings. 

On  the  November  17,  2011  Lesson  Observation  Form,  Ms.  English  gave  respondent 

Meets  Standards-Minimally  ratings  on  three  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  I,  two  of  the 
seven  subparts  of  Standard  II,  three  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  III,  four  of  the  five 
subparts  of  Standard  IV,  and  one  of  the  seven  subparts  of  Standard  V. 

She  rated  respondent  as  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standard  II-7.  “Using 
instructional  time  to  optimize  learning”;  Standard  III-2.  “Applying  knowledge  to  student 
development  and  proficiencies  to  ensure  student  understanding  of  subject  matter”;  and 
Standard  III-4.  “Utilizing  instructional  strategies  that  are  appropriate  to  the  subject  matter.” 
With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  had  not  explained  to  her 
students  the  “math  behind”  a  certain  problem,  and  that  “[n]o  more  than  10  problems  were 
completed  by  the  teacher  and  the  students  in  an  approximate  2  hour  block  of  time.” 

38. 

December  7,  2011  Lesson  Observation.  On  December  7,  2011,  Ms.  English 

observed  a  sixth  grade  math  class  taught  by  respondent,  and  completed  a  Lesson  Observation 
Form  that  rated  respondent  on  each  subpart  of  the  CSTP  Standards.  In  the  Comments  section 
after  each  CSTP  Standard,  she  included  specific  and  detailed  examples  from  respondent’s 
teaching  to  support  her  ratings. 

On  the  December  7,  2011  Lesson  Observation  Form,  Ms.  English  gave  respondent 

Meets  Standards-Minimally  ratings  on  five  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  I,  three  of  the 
seven  subparts  of  Standard  II,  three  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  III,  one  of  the  five 
subparts  of  Standard  IV,  and  one  of  the  seven  subparts  of  Standard  IV. 

She  rated  respondent  as  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standard  I-4.  “Using  a  variety 

of  instructional  strategies,  resources,  and  technologies  to  meet  students’  diverse  learning 
needs”;  Standard  III-2.  “Applying  knowledge  to  student  development  and  proficiencies  to 
ensure  student  understanding  of  subject  matter”;  Standard  III-3.  “Organizing  curriculum  to 
facilitate  student  understanding  of  the  subject  matter”;  Standard  III-5.  “Using  and  adopting 
resources,  technologies,  and  standards-aligned  instructional  materials,  including  adopted 
materials,  to  make  subject  matter  accessible  to  all  students”;  Standard  IV-1.  “Using 

  

16

knowledge  of  students’  academic  readiness,  language,  proficiency,  cultural  background,  and 
individual  development  to  plan  instruction”;  Standard  VI-3.  “Developing  and  sequencing 
long-term  and  short-term  instructional  plans  to  support  student  learning”;  Standard  IV-4. 
“Planning  instruction  that  incorporates  appropriate  strategies  to  meet  the  learning  needs  of  all 
students”;  Standard  IV-5.  “Adapting  instructional  plans  and  curricular  materials  to  meet  the 
assessed  learning  needs  of  all  students”;  and  Standard  V-4.  “Using  assessment  data  to 
establish  learning  goals  and  to  plan,  differentiate,  and  modify  instructions.” 

With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  English  noted  that  “[n]o  number  line  or  teaching  charts 

to  support  math  displayed,”  and  “[s]tudents  completed  6  math  problems  in  1.5  hours  of 
instruction.” 

39. 

August  —  December  2011  Teacher  Development  Plan.  On  December  14, 

2011,  respondent,  Ms.  English,  and  Ms.  Spencer  signed  a  Teacher  Development  Plan  (TDP). 
TDPs  are  completed  when  a  certificated  employee  receives  a  Does  Not  Meet  Standards 
rating  on  an  evaluation.  The  TDP  covered  the  time  period  from  August  to  December  2011. 
It  stated  that  respondent  required  improvement  in  Standards  II  and  IV.  It  also  stated  that 
respondent  was  to  receive  the  assistance  of  a  teacher  development  coach  (Ms.  Spencer)  and 
her  principal  (Ms.  English).  The  particular  Standard  II  areas  noted  on  the  TDP  were: 

(a) 

“2.2  Creating  physical  or  virtual  learning  environments  that  promote 

student  learning,  reflect  diversity,  and  encourage  constructive  and  productive 
interactions  among  students.”  The  TDP  included:  “Classroom  arrangement  for 
student  interaction  i.e.,  cooperative  groups,  elbow  partners.” 

(b) 

“2.4  Creating  a  rigorous  learning  environment  with  high  expectations 

and  appropriate  support  for  all  students.”  The  TDP  included:  “Various  ways  of 
monitoring  students  for  differentiation  of  instruction.” 

(c) 

“2.7  Using  instruction  time  to  optimize  learning.”  The  TDP  included: 

“Lesson  is  paced  appropriately’  [sic]  phases  of  lesson  design  are  easily 
distinguishable.” 

The  particular  Standard  IV  areas  noted  on  the  TDP  were: 

(a) 

“4,3  Developing  and  sequencing  long-term  and  short-term  instructional 

plans  to  support  student  learning.”  The  TDP  included:  “Evidence  of  student 
knowledge  of  objective.” 

(b) 

“4.4  Planning  instruction  that  incorporates  appropriate  strategies  to 

meet  the  learning  needs  of  all  students.”  The  TDP  included:  “Use  of  math 
manipulative  to  gain  greater  knowledge  of  content.” 

   

17 

40. 

Onthe  December  14,  2011  TDP,  with  regard  to  Standard  II,  it  was  noted  that — 

there  was  “[n]o  evidence  observed  of  cooperative  learning  structure  or  strategies.”  In 
addition,  “[m]Jonitoring  consists  of  teacher  moving  from  group  to  group  re-teaching  the 
lesson,”  and  “[c]heck  for  understanding/questioning  consist[s]  of  whole  class  question  and 
answer  format.  Use  of  random  name  calling  by  number  and  desk.”  The  TDP  also  noted  that, 
“Lessons  on  8/31,  9/23,  9/28,  10/5  went  into  recess  and  closure  and  assessment  were  not 
observed.” 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  the  TDP  noted  that,  “Lessons  are  planned  but  are  not 

chunked  appropriately  for  maximum  student  understanding.”  The  TDP  also  noted  that,  when 
“students  were  asked  the  objective  of  the  lesson  their  responses  were  inconsistent  with 
written  or  stated  objectives.”  In  addition,  the  TDP  noted  that  during  eight  observations,  the 
“Smart  Board  is  utilized  predominantly”  and  “no  other  strategies  were  observed.” 

41. 

December  16,  2011  Preliminary  Evaluation.  On  December  16,  2011, 

respondent  and  Ms.  English  signed  a  Preliminary  Evaluation  prepared  by  Ms.  English.  The 
Preliminary  Evaluation  stated  that  the  data  sources  on  which  the  Preliminary  Evaluation  was 
based  included:  (1)  formal  observations  on  November  17  and  December  7,  2011;  (2) 
classroom  observations  on  August  31,  September  13,  23,  and  28,  October  5,  and  November 
15,  2011;  (3)  classroom  walk-throughs  on  August  22,  25  and  29,  September  7,  October  13, 
and  21,  November  7,  9,  and  30,  2011;  (4)  conversations  on  October  13,  November  14  and  16, 
and  December  6,  2011. 

42. 

In  the  December  16,  2011  Preliminary  Evaluation,  Ms.  English  rated 

respondent  as  Meets  Standards-Proficient  on  Standard  VI;  Meets  Standards-Minimally  on 
Standards  I,  II,  and  V;  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standards  III  and  IV. 

(a) 

With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  “uses  a 

limited  number  of  engagement  strategies  and  has  difficulty  adjusting  her  teaching 
during  a  lesson  to  meet  the  needs  of  her  students.”  As  a  result,  “students  are  given 
limited  ways  to  connect  with  the  content  and  have  a  hard  time  connecting  what  they 
already  know  to  the  new  content.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  had 
“arranged  her  classroom  to  promote  student  collaboration,  but  still  had  difficulty 
pacing  her  lessons  for  maximum  growth  and  had  few  to  no  teaching  charts  up  to  assist 
students  while  they  work.”  Ms.  English  noted  that  lessons  observed  on  four  days 
“went  into  recess  and  no  closure  or  assessment  was  completed.”  Ms.  English  also 
observed  that,  during  a  formal  observation,  “students  completed  6  problems  in  1.5 
hours  of  instruction.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that  the  “pacing  of  the  instruction  limits 
students  and  their  ability  to  think,  draw  conclusions  and  apply  their  learning.” 

(c) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  had 

“difficulty  organizing  the  content  for  maximum  learning;  lack  of  clarity  and  focus  on 

18 

 

appropriate  instructional  ‘chunks’  of  content  are  impeding  student  achievement.”  Ms. 
English  noted  that:  (1)  on  September  28,  the  “stated  directions  did  not  match  the 
written  directions  on  the  practice  page”;  (2)  on  September  13  and  23,  October  5,  and 
November  15  and  17,  “after  direct  instruction,  students  had  multiple  questions”  and 
“it  was  necessary  for  respondent  to  go  from  group  to  group  to  explain  the  lesson 
again”;  (3)  “[v]ocabulary  development  was  not  consistently  observed”;  and  (4) 
respondent  “made  confusing  statements.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  as  a  result,  the 
“content  [was]  not  organized  in  a  meaningful  way  and  students  are  not  able  to  build 
their  academic  knowledge.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  had 

“difficulty  aligning  her  instruction  to  a  planned  objective.”  As  a  result,  students  did 
“not  get  a  clear  understanding  of  what  they  are  suppose[d]  to  learn  and  are  not  able  to 
comprehend  the  content.” 

| 
| 
| 

(ec) 

With  regard  to  Standard  V,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  was 

“developing  her  skills  to  use  assessment  data  to  plan  lessons  and  determine  learning 
gaps  in  student’s  [sic]  understanding  of  the  content.”  As  a  result,  “students  and 
parents  are  kept  informed  of  their  progress,  but  assessment  data  is  not  used 
consistently  to  guide  instructional  decisions.” 

(f) 

With  regard  to  Standard  VI,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  worked 

“as  a  professional  toward  improving  student  achievement  in  her  grade  level  and 
school-wide.”  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  had  “[p]rofessionally  embraced  a 
grade  level  change  (3rd  to  6th)  and  has  been  working  to  familiarize  herself  with  the 
content.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  as  a  result,  respondent  “is  working  to  improve 
her  instructional  practice.” 

43. 

The  Preliminary  Evaluation  stated  that,  if  an  employee  was  rated  as  not 

meeting  standards,  she  could  choose  one  of  three  options  set  forth  in  the  Collective 
Bargaining  Agreement.  Respondent  chose  Option  2.  As  set  forth  in  the  Collective 
Bargaining  Agreement,  Option  2  stated  that  an  employee  could  “request  structured 
administrative  intervention  and  support,  with  optional  peer  assistance  through  the 
Professional  Assistance  Program”  outlined  in  the  agreement. 

44. 

Ms.  English  met  with  respondent  often  before  completing  the  December  16, 

2011  Preliminary  Evaluation.  At  hearing,  Ms.  English  testified  that  she  gave  feedback  to 
respondent  on  multiple  occasions  about  her  concerns  with  respondent’s  teaching,  including 
that  respondent:  (1)  provided  “too  much”  in  a  lesson  and  did  not  “chunk”  the  information 
into  subparts  that  students  could  understand;  (2)  failed  to  vary  the  way  she  checked  for 
students’  understanding  to  ensure  that  all  students  understood  the  material;  (3)  failed  to 
model  and  work  together  with  students  after  direct  instruction  to  ensure  that  they  understood 
what  was  expected  of  them  before  they  were  released  for  independent  practice;  (4)  too  often 
had  to  re-teach  students  after  they  were  released  for  independent  practice  because  her 

19 

   

delivery  had  been  so  confusing  and  disorganized  that  students  did  not  understand  what  was 
expected  of  them;  (5)  failed  to  post  “visual  supports”  in  the  classroom  that  would  help 
students  understand  the  content  and  remind  them  of  the  steps  to  follow  to  complete  a  lesson; 
(6)  lacked  content  knowledge  and  organizational  skills  to  allow  for  maximum  student 
understanding;  (7)  failed  to  adjust  her  teaching  methods  to  respond  to  students’  questions  and 
confusion;  (8)  failed  to  teach  at  a  rigorous  enough  level  for  the  sixth  grade;  and  (9)  failed  to 
assess  students’  understanding  and  provide  closure  at  the  end  of  each  lesson. 

45. 

January  to  May  2012  Teacher  Development  Plan.  On  February  23,  2012, 

respondent,  Ms.  English  and  Ms.  Spencer  signed  a  TDP  for  the  January  to  May  2012  time 
period.  The  TDP  specified  that  respondent  required  improvement  in  Standards  III  and  IV.  It 
provided  that,  with  the  assistance  of  respondent’s  teacher  development  coach  (Ms.  Spencer) 
and  her  principal  (Ms.  English),  respondent  would  do  the  following  with  regard  to  Standard 
It: 

e 

e 

e 

e 

Use  knowledge of  subject  content  to  reach  students  at 
different  developmental  levels  by  using  a  variety  of 
strategies  to  present  and  differentiate  instruction,  (I.e.,  access 
prior  knowledge,  frontload  information,  use  a  variety  of 
questioning  techniques,  small  group  instruction,  review, 
repetition,  one  on  one  assistance,  chunking  information, 
monitoring  through  close  proximity,  etc...) 

Use a  variety  of  resources,  materials,  and  technologies 
(Smart  Board,  computers,  CD  player,  student  white  boards, 
H.M.  practice  book  pages,  phonics  cards,  visuals,  journals, 
etc.)  to  promote  enthusiasm  and  to  allow  students  access  to 
subject  content. 

Adjust  presentation  of  lessons  to  foster  understanding  in  all 
students  and  capitalize  on  “teachable  moments”,  (I.e.,  ask 
questions,  clarify,  review,  restate,  class  discussions, 
dialogue,  TPR,  gestures,  visuals,  realia,  provide  more  time, 
KWL  charts,®  graphic  organizers,  revisit  focus  wall,  revisit 
objective,  etc.) 

Use a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  to  accommodate  the 
needs  of  all  students,  including,  but  not  limited  to: 
»  SDAIE/Marzano  strategies  (provided) 
» 

Small  group  instruction/cooperative  grouping 

  

A  “KWL  chart”  tracks  what  a  student  knows  (K),  wants  to  know  (W),  and  has 

learned  (L)  about  a  topic 

20

» 

Scaffolding  —  step  by  step  instruction  and  visuals 

displayed  for  easy  access 

> 

Differentiated  instruction/support  (ongoing) 

The  TDP  stated  that  respondent  would  do  the  following  with  regard  to  Standard  IV: 

Integrate  into  lesson  delivery  a  “set”  to  include 
goals/objectives,  motivation  and  connection  to  prior 
knowledge  at  the  beginning  of  each  lesson.  Revisit 
objectives  throughout  the  lesson  to  allow  students  to  gain  a 
clear  understanding  of  subject  matter  being  presented. 

2 

Clearly  articulate  and  model  goals/objectives  and  include 
students  in  stating  objectives  through  chanting,  reciting, 
repeating  in  small  voice/big  voice,  etc.  Check  for 
understanding  by  asking  individuals/groups/boys/girls,  to 
tell  teacher  what  they  will  be  learning. 

Write  weekly  lesson  plans  in  the  content  area  of 
mathematics  using  Classroom  Foundations  format. 

Submit  weekly  lesson  plans  to  principal/vice  principal  on 
Monday  morning,  prior  to  start  of  school,  for  feedback. 

Make  connections  and  frontload  information  for  student 
between  what  they  have  studied  and  what  they  are  studying 
by  way  of  KWL  charts,  accessing  prior  knowledge, 
questioning  techniques,  think-pair-share,  etc. 

Modify  and  revise  instruction  based  on  the  level  of  student 
understanding,  (i.e.  Differentiate  instruction,  condense 
content,  slower  pace,  restate  questions  to  check  for 
understanding,  scaffold/chunk  instruction,  etc.). 

Develop  and  sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials 
for  student  learning: 
>» 
>» 
> 

Instruction  to  support  individual  learning  needs 
School  adopted  curriculum  incorporated 
Activities  logically  sequenced  for  meaningful  learning 

Establish  short  and  long  term  instructional  goals  that  are 
based  on  curriculum  content  standards. 

21 

 

e 

Develop a  plan  for  the  complete  course  and  know  what 
content  the  students  should  master  by  the  end  of  the  course. 
(i..  Utilize  “Backward  mapping”  —  “What  do  I  want  my 
students  to  know  by  the  end  of  the  first 
trimester/quarter/year?”’). 

The  TDP  also  stated  that  additional  assistance  would  be  provided  to  respondent  on: 

(1)  “Lesson  scripting  for  reflection”;  (2)  “Reflection  on  FUSD  Continuum”;  (3) 
“Conferencing”;  (4)  “3  Way  conferencing  with  teacher  and  administrator  as  needed”;  (5) 
“TDP  Support”;  (6)  “CSTP  Support”;  and  (7)  “Lesson  planning  and  curriculum  support.” 

46. 

May  14,  2012  Summary  Evaluation.  On  May  14,  2012,  respondent  and  Ms. 

English  signed  a  Summary  Evaluation  dated  May  14,  2012.  Ms.  English  prepared  the 
Summary  Evaluation,  which  stated  that  it  was  based  on  the  following  data  sources:  (1) 
formal  observations  on  November  17  and  December  7,  2011,  and  March  14,  and  May  1  and 
3,  2012;  (2)  classroom  observations  on  August  31,  September  13,  23,  and  28,  October  5,  and 
November  15,  2011,  and  January  24,  February  1,  9,  10,  22,  and  28,  March  9,  and  April  23, 
2012;  (3)  classroom  walk-throughs  on  August  22,  25  and  29,  September  7,  October  13  and 
21,  and  November  7,  9  and  30,  2011,  and  January  26,  March  6,  8,  and  20,  and  April  19, 
2012;  and  (4)  conversations  on  October  13,  November  14  and  16,  and  December  6,  2011, 
and  February  23,  March  20,  April  13,  and  May  14,  2012. 

— 

47. 

In  the  May  14,  2012  Summary  Evaluation,  Ms.  English  rated  respondent  as 
Meets  Standards-Proficient  on  Standard  VI;  Meets  Standards-Minimally  on  Standards  I,  II, 
and  V;  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standards  III  and  IV. 

(a) 

With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  “uses  a 

limited  number  of  engagement  strategies  and  has  difficulty  adjusting  her  teaching 
during  a  lesson  to  meet  the  needs  of  her  students.”  After  providing  a  number  of 
examples  from  her  observations,  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  “[a]s  a  result,  students 
are  given  limited  ways  to  connect  with  the  content  and  have  a  hard  time  connecting 
what  they  already  know  to  the  new  content.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  had 

“arranged  her  classroom  to  promote  student  collaboration  and  has  made 
improvements  in  displaying  teaching  charts  on  her  walls  to  better  assist  her  students.” 
After  giving  a  number  of  examples  from  her  observations,  Ms.  English  concluded  that 
“students  have  some  opportunities  to  strengthen  their  learning  through  collaboration 
and  are  given  visual  supports  to  assist  them  during  lessons.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  had 

“difficulty  organizing  the  content  for  maximum  learning;  lack  of  clarity  and  focus  on 
appropriate  instructional  ‘chunks’  of  content  are  impeding  student  achievement.” 
After  giving  examples  from  her  observations,  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  “[a]s  a 

  

22

result,  the  content  is  not  organized  in  a  meaningful  way  and  students  are  not  able  to 
build  their  academic  knowledge.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  has 

“difficulty  aligning  her  instruction  to  a  planned  objective.”  Ms.  English  gave  a 
number  of  examples  from  her  observations.  She  noted  that  respondent’s  “[l]esson 
objectives  do  not  consistently  align  with  the  instruction,”  and  that  “[l]esson  objectives 
chuck  many  concepts  into  one  lesson  and  this  causes  confusion.”  Ms.  English 
concluded  that  “students  do  not  get  a  clear  understanding  of  what  they  are  suppose[d] 
to  learn  and  are  not  able  to  comprehend  the  content.  Students  are  given  multiple 
concepts  to  learn  in  one  lesson  and  get  confused.” 

(ce) 

With  regard  to  Standard  V,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  was 

“developing  her  skills  to  use  assessment  data  to  plan  lessons  and  determine  learning 
gaps  in  her  student’s  [sic]  understanding  of  the  content.”  Ms.  English  noted  that 
“[sJome  lessons  end  abruptly  without  closure.”  But  Ms.  English  also  noted  that 
respondent  “[c]ommunicates  the  progress  of  her  students  to  parents  through 
parent/teacher  conferences  and  informally  when  needed.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that 
“students  and  parents  are  kept  informed  of  their  progress,  but  assessment  data  is  not 
used  consistently  to  guide  instructional  decisions.” 

(f) 

With  regard  to  Standard  VI,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  “works 

as  a  professional  toward  improving  student  achievement  in  her  grade  level  and 
school-wide.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  “[a]s  a  result,  [respondent]  is  working  to 
improve  her  instructional  practice.” 

90-Day  Notice  —  September  4,  2012 

48. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44938  and  44932,°  on  September  4, 

2012,  the  District  personally  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance 
(90-Day  Notice).  The  90-Day  Notice  stated  that  it  was  “designed  to  provide  [respondent] 
with  sufficient  information  to  understand  the  nature  of  [her]  unsatisfactory  performance  and 
to  illustrate  specific  instances  of  such  behavior  with  such  particularity  as  to  provide  [her] 
with  an  opportunity  to  correct  these  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  potential  dismissal.” 
Attached  to  the  90-Day  Notice  were  all  of  the  Lesson  Observations,  Preliminary  Evaluations 
and  Summary  Evaluations  summarized  above,  except  for  the  March  10,  2010  Preliminary 
Evaluation.  In  an  effort  to  assist  respondent  in  overcoming  her  performance  deficiencies,  the 
90-Day  Notice  stated  that  respondent  was  expected  to  comply  with  the  following  directives: 

  

”  The  relevant  portions  of  these  statutory  provisions  are  set  forth  in  the  Legal 

Conclusions  below. 

23 

 

Use  knowledge  of  subject  content  to  reach  students  at 
different  developmental  levels  by  using  a  variety  of 
strategies  to  present  and  differentiate  instruction. 

Use  a  variety  of  resources,  materials  and  technologies. 

Adjust  presentation  of  lessons  to  foster  understanding  in 
all  students. 

Make  sure  each  lesson  has  time  for  closure  and 

assessment. 

Clearly  articulate  and  model  goals  and  objectives  and 
include  students  in  stating  objectives  through  chanting, 
reciting,  repeating  in  small/big  voice,  etc. 

Write  weekly  lesson  plans  in  the  content  area  of 
mathematics  using  the  Classroom  Foundations  format. 

Make  connections  and  frontload  information  for  students 
between  what  they  have  studied  and  what  they  are 
studying  by  way  of  KWL  charts,  accessing  prior 
knowledge,  questioning  techniques,  think-pair-share,  etc. 

Modify  and  revise  instruction  based  on  level  of  student 
understanding. 

Develop  a  plan  for  the  complete  course  and  know  what 
content  the  students  should  master  by  the  end  of  the 
course. 

The  90-Day  Notice  notified  respondent  that  she  was  expected  to  correct  her 
unsatisfactory  performance  within  90  days,  and  that,  if  her  deficiencies  were  not  corrected 
within  this  time  period,  the  District  may  institute  disciplinary  action  against  her,  up  to  and 
including  possible  dismissal.  Respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  90-Day  Notice  on 
September  4,  2012. 

Assistance  from  Peer  Support  Coach 

Kelli  Eoff  was  assigned  as  respondent’s  peer  support  coach  during  the  90-Day 

Notice  period.’”  During  the  time  Ms.  Eoff  was  respondent’s  peer  support  coach,  she  also 

  

'°  Ms.  Eoff  was  described  by  different  titles  during  the  hearing.  During  her 
testimony,  Ms.  Eoff  described  herself  as  respondent’s  “peer  support  coach.”  In  the  exhibits, 

  

24

worked  full  time  as  an  Intervention  Teacher  at  Del  Mar  Elementary  School.  As  a  peer 
support  coach,  Ms.  Eoff’s  duties  were  to  support  respondent  in  the  areas  designated  for 
improvement  in  her  TDP,  including  previewing  upcoming  topics  for  instruction  and 
providing  information  to  help  respondent  develop  and  present  lesson  plans,  and  to  observe 
respondent’s  teaching  performance  in  the  classroom  and  provide  suggestions  and  resources. 

50. 

During  the  90-Day  Notice  period,  Ms.  Eoff  assisted  respondent in  creating 

lesson  plans.  She  also  observed  classes  respondent  taught,“and  emailed  respondent  resources _ 
on  topics  such  as  closure  and  checking  for  understanding.  Ms.  Eoff  helped  respondent  make 
an  “objective  poster”  to  help  remind  students  of  the  focus  of  a  lesson.  Ms.  Eoff  testified  that 
respondent  did  not  use  this  poster  in  the  lessons  that  Ms.  Eoff  observed  because  she  helped 
respondent  make  it  after  those  lessons  were  completed. 

51. 

In  order  for  Ms.  Eoff  to  observe  respondent’s  lessons,  she  had  to  obtain  release 

time  and  a‘substitute  to  teach  her  classes.  Ms.  Eoff  was  allowed  three  release  days  to 
observe  respondent.  Upon  request,  she  was  granted  an  additional  one-half  release  day. 
Because  of  a  delay  in  obtaining  the  number  to  process  a  request  for  substitute,  Ms.  Eoff  was 
unable  to  observe  respondent  in  her  classroom  until  October  4,  2012,  one  month  after  the  90- 
Day  Notice  went  into  effect. 

| 

52. 

During  the  90-Day  Notice  period,  Ms.  Eoff  met  with  respondent  and  Ms. 

English  about  every  other  week. 

53. 

Based  upon  her  work  with  respondent,  Ms.  Eoff  felt  that  respondent  was 
“moving  in  the  right  direction”  in  “planning  areas.”  She  believed  that  the  lesson  plans 
prepared  by  respondent  that  she  reviewed  were  well-written.  But  Ms.  Eoff  did  not  see 
respondent  deliver  the  lessons  relating  to  the  lesson  plans  she  reviewed.  When  Ms.  Eoff 
observed  respondent’s  classes,  it  was  with  the  idea  of  providing  feedback  to  respondent  for 
delivering  instruction.  For  example,  Ms.  Eoff  observed  a  lesson  respondent  taught  during 
which  there  was  student  confusion  about  integers.  Ms.  Eoff  suggested  to  respondent  more 
effective  ways  to  confirm  student  understanding. 

54. 

Ms.  Eoff  kept  a  log  of  the  time  she  spent  working  as  respondent’s  peer  support 

coach. 

(a). 

Ms.  Eoff’s  log  for  August  2012  indicates  that  she  spent  five  hours  and 

50  minutes  working  as  respondent’s  coach,  including  attending:  (1)  a  one-hour 
meeting  with  respondent  on  August  14,  during  which  she  gave  respondent  a  binder 
and  had  an  informal  conversation  to  explain  the  purpose  of  a  peer  coach;  (2)  a  one- 
and-one-half-hour  three-way  conference  with  Ms.  English  and  respondent  on  August 

  

she  was  sometimes  referred  to  as  the  “district  support  provider.”  She  was  also  sometimes 
referred  to  as  “veteran  support.” 

  

25

24;  and  (3)  a  two-hour  planning  meeting  with  respondent  on  August  30,  during  which 
they  discussed  checking  for  understanding  strategies,  “how  to  get  all  students 
involved  during  Math  Student  Presentation,”  “ways  to  check  for  understanding  (non- 
volunteers:  sticks,  etc.),”  and  “‘Big  Ideas’  in  ELA”  to  focus  on  R.  2.4  and  R2.3.” 
Ms.  Eoff  also  helped  with  a  lesson  on  ordering  decimals  and  a  PowerPoint 
presentation  on  elements  of  foundation. 

(b) 

Ms.  Eoff’s  log  for  September  2012  indicates  that  she  spent  eight  hours 

and  50  minutes  working  as  respondent’s  coach,  including  attending:  (1)  a  two-hour 
planning  meeting  with  respondent  on  September  13,  to  work  on  math  lessons;  (2)  a 
one-hour  meeting  with  Ms.  English  and  respondent  on  September  14  to  discuss  lesson 
observations  for  the  week;  (3)  a  one-hour  meeting  with  Ms.  English  and  respondent 
on  September  20’  regarding  lesson  observations  for  the  week;  (4)  a  two-hour 
planning  meeting  with  respondent  on  September  25  during  which  notes  from  all  the 
principal’s  evaluations  were  summarized  to  “find  common  themes:  Content 
Vocabulary,  Student  Engagement  other  than  Smartboard,  Rigor  in  lessons  (what  will  I 
do  when  my  kids  know  it,  What  will  I  do  if  they  do  not  know  it),  Use  of  pre- 
assessments,  Objective  and  taught  curriculum  are  aligned.”;  and  (5)  a  one-hour 
meeting  with  Ms.  English  and  respondent  on  September  27  regarding  the  lesson 
observations  for  the  week,  with  discussion  points  on: 
(a)  “Work  on  proper  chunking 
of  grade  level  standards  (ex:  chunk  figurative  language)”;  (b)  “Focus  on  rigor”;  and 
(c)  Instruction  and  Assessment  should  always  align  to  the  objective.”  Ms.  Eoff  also 
spent  one  hour  on  September  30,  reviewing  math  lessons  that  respondent  sent  for  the 
upcoming  week. 

. 

(c) 

Ms.  Eoff’s  log  for  October  2012  indicates  that  she  spent a  total  of  12 

hours  working  as  respondent’s  peer  support  coach,  including:  (1)  six  hours  on 
October  4,  observing  respondent’s  class  in  the  morning  and  planning  with  respondent 
in  the  afternoon;  (2)  two  hours  on  October  8  meeting  with  Ms.  English  and 
respondent  to  review  respondent’s  math  lessons  for  the  week  “that  were  turned  in  via 
email  over  the  weekend”;  (3)  one  hour  planning  an  evaluation  lesson  for  Ms. 
English’s  evaluation  on  October  17;  and  (3)  three  hours  observing  respondent’s  class. 

(d) 

Ms.  Eoff’s  log  for  November  2012  indicates  that  she  spent  a  total  of 

12.5  hours  working  as  respondent’s  peer  support  coach,  including:  (1)  six  hours  with 
respondent  on  November  1,  planning  the  upcoming  week’s  math  lessons,  talking 
about  the  focus  areas  in  ELA  for  the  second  grading  period,  looking  at  the  social 
studies  and  science  curriculum  and  discussing  “how  to  incorporate  Write  Tools  as 
well  as  all  areas  of  foundations,”  and  making  “an  objectives  poster  to  display  daily 

  

"'  “ELA”  stands  for  English  Language  Arts. 

"  This  date  may  be  a  typo.  This  meeting  may  have  occurred  on  September  21.  (See 

Findings  below.) 

  

26

objectives  in  all  content  areas”;  (2)  one  hour  going  over  the  continuum  in  preparation 
for  the  three-way  conference  on  November  8;  (3)  one  and  one-half  hours  on 
November  8  at  a  meeting  with  Ms.  English,  respondent,  and  respondent’s  union 
representative;  (4)  three  hours  on  November  14  planning  with  respondent;  and  (5)  one 
hour  on  November  29  meeting  with  Ms.  English  and  respondent  to  go  over 
observations  from  the  week. 

55. 

Ms.  Eoff  believed  that  the  number  of  hours  she  spent  working  as  respondent’s 

peer  support  coach  was  sufficient  for  the  task  she  had. 

56. 

|  Teresa  Marie  Morales- Young  was  the  District’s  Director  of  Teacher 
Development  during  the  2012/13  school  year.  She  assigned  Ms.  Eoff  to  work  with 
respondent  as  a  peer  support  coach.  In  addition,  on  October  16,  2012,  at  respondent’s 
request,  Ms.  Morales-Young  observed  respondent’s  math  class  for  one  hour  and  gave  her 
feedback  for  30  minutes  following  the  lesson.  During  that  observation,  Ms.  Morales-  Young 
observed  that  the  students  appeared  to  be  “confused”  and  “not  on  task.”  There  appeared  to 
be  a  “lack  of  classroom  management,”  and  students  were  “blurting  out.”  It  seemed  to  Ms. 
Morales- Young  that  respondent  did  not  understand  the  “conceptual  idea”  behind  the  math 
property  she  was  teaching.  At  the  debriefing  after  the  lesson,  respondent  recognized  that  the 
lesson  “went  terrible.”  Ms.  Morales-  Young  discussed  teaching  strategies  with  respondent  in 
an  effort  to  help  her  improve. 

Observations  and  Evaluations  During  90-Day  Notice  Period 

57. 

September  21,  2012  Observation  Logs.  Ms.  English  observed  respondent’s 
class  on  September  5,  11,  12,  17,  and  19,  2012.  Ms.  English  provided  respondent  with  the 
literal  notes  from  these  observations  shortly  after  her  visits.  Ms.  English  completed 
Observation  Logs  for  these  visits.  She  met  with  respondent  and  Ms.  Eoff  on  September  21, 
2012,  to  discuss  her  observations  and  provide  respondent  with  copies  of  the  logs.  The 
Observation  Logs  include:  (1)  the  CSTP  Standard  to  be  addressed  and  corrected;  (2)  the 
directives  given  to  respondent  “so  that  the  CSTP  [could]  be  addressed  and  corrected”;  (3)  the 
prior  strategies  provided  to  respondent  in  order  to  meet  the  directives;  and  (4)  Ms.  English’s 
observations  from  her  classroom  visits. 

(a)  |  With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  English’s  commented  that  on  September 
5,  for  an  ELA  lesson,  “[l]imited  strategies  were  used  to  engage  students  and  there  was 
no  attempt  to  connect  them  with  their  own  writing  or  what  they  already  know.”  Ms. 
English  found  that  “students  did  not  get  the  opportunity  to  engage  in  the  content  in  a 
meaningful  way  (connect  to  any  prior  or  new  learning).”  For  the  September  11,  2012 
lesson,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  “used  3  strategies  to  engage  her  students” 
so  they  “had  opportunities  to  engage  in  the  content.”  For  the  September  17  lesson, 
Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  “modeled  the  Addition  Property  of  Equality  and 
students  were  following  along,  but  the  activity  planned  to  reinforce  this  property  was 

27  

not  aligned.  Therefore  students  did  not  get  an  Opportunity  to  practice  the  skill  they 
were  being  taught.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  English’s  commented  that  on 

September  5,  respondent  did  “not  create  an  environment  with  visuals  that  support 
student  learning.”  She  noted  that  while  the  focus  wall  displayed  the  current  theme, 
there  were  no  other  visuals  or  teaching  charts  on  the  walls.  She  found  that  “[a]s  a 
result,  students  have  no  way  to  access  information  in  a  visual  context.”  On 
September  11,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  had  added  one  teaching  chart, 
which  students  were  able  to  refer  to  “when  completing  problems  with  multiple 
operations,  but  not  able  to  access  any  other  content.”  On  September  17,  Ms.  English 
noted  that  “students  have  limited  access  to  teaching  charts  and  visual  aids”  but  they 
did  have  the  “opportunity  to  engage  in  conversation  with  their  peers  to  help  deepen 
their  knowledge  of  the  content.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  on  September  5,  Ms.  English  noted  that 

respondent’s  “lesson  on  simple  and  complete  predicates  lacked  the  appropriate  rigor 
and  connection  to  6™  grade  standards.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  “[a]s  a  result, 
students  spent  45  minutes  on  a  lesson  that  did  not  connect  with  6"  grade  standards  nor 
did  it  connect  with  student’s  [sic]  prior  understanding  or  new  learning.”  On 
September  11,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  “confused  the  definition  of  evaluate 
as  it  relates  to  an  expression  and  an  equation.”  On  September  12,  Ms.  English  noted 
that  respondent  “confused  math  properties  and  missed  an  opportunity  to  show 
students  how  to  write  a  pattern  in  algebraic  terms.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that 
“students  get  mis-information  about  important  math  concepts  and  are  unable  to  get  a 
clear  idea  of  the  math  concepts  being  taught  and  students  are  not  challenged  to  think 
critically  about  the  patterns  (math).”  For  the  lesson  observed  on  September  17,  Ms. 
English  noted  that  the  “[iJnstruction  was  not  aligned  to  the  objective.”  For  the 
September  19  lesson  on  writing,  Ms.  English  noted  that,  contrary  to  the  instructions  of 
the  writing  program  used  in  the  District,  “the  concept  of  writing  a  plan  before 
students  write  their  sample,  is  not  being  taught  or  re-enforced.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  for  the  September  5  lesson,  Ms.  English 

noted  that  respondent’s  lesson  plans  “included  ELA  lessons  that  were  not  appropriate 
for  6"  grade  and  were  not  listed  in  the  [District]  curriculum.”  Ms.  English  concluded 
that,  as  a  result,  “students  spent  more  than  45  minutes  of  their  instructional  day  on 
content  that  was  at  a  lower  academic  level  (3"  grade).”  For  the  September  11  and  12 
lessons,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  articulated  the  lesson  objective  at  the 
beginning  of  the  lesson,  but  the  September  12  lesson’s  “lack  of  rigor  limited  students 
ability  to  access  grade  level  content.”  On  September  17,  Ms.  English  found  that 
respondent  “planned  an  objective  that  was  grade  level  appropriate,  but  her 
instruction/activity  was  not  aligned  to  that  objective.” 

  

28

(e) 

On  Standard  V,  on  September  5,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent 

“failed  to  pre-assess  her  students  before  delivering  her  lesson  on  complete  and  simple 
predicates,”  and  “[n]o  closure  was  observed.”  On  September  11,  Ms.  English  noted 
that  respondent  “checked  for  understanding  during  their  lesson  but  it  was  not  evident 
that  a  pre-assessment  was  used  to  determine  if  there  were  any  gaps  in  student  learning 
or  if  students  already  knew  the  content.”  Ms.  English  also  noted  that  students  “were 
not  given  problems  of  appropriate  rigor  and  were  not  challenged  at  their  grade  level.” 
On  September  12,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  “checked  for  understanding 
throughout  the  lesson”  and  that  “student  progress  toward  mastering  the  objective  was 
monitored.”  On  September  17,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent’s  closure  activity 
“did  not  assess  whether  or  not  the  students  know  and  can  apply”  the  math  property 
taught. 

(f) 

For  Standard  VI,  on  September  5,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent 
attended  all  site  meetings.  As  a  result,  respondent  was  “given  opportunities  to  share 
and  learn  from  her  colleagues  to  better  meet  the  needs  of  her  students.”  On 
September  17,  Ms.  English  noted  that  respondent  “continue[d]  to  work  to  improve  her 
practice.” 

In  the  “Summary/Comments  of  conference  regarding  this  document”  section,  the 

Observation  Log  advised  respondent  to: 

Read  all  background  information  in  the  teacher’s  edition  before 
you  plan  and  teach.  Make  sure  to  align  your  instruction  to  your 
objective;  especially  align  your  instruction  to  the  practice 
problems  you  give  your  students.  Pre-assessment  must  be  used 
to  determine  what  concepts  need  to  be  taught  and  to  what  depth. 
Hang  teaching  charts  on  the  wall. 

In  the  “Strategies  provided:  (to  be  used  for  future  observations)”  section,  the 

Observation  log  stated: 

Support  in  planning  with  instruction  coach  and  peer  coach  to 
develop  lesson{s]  that  are  aligned  to  objectives  and  chunked 
appropriate[ly].  Access  to  Oars  is  being  worked  on.  Look  and 
see  how  to  hook  Elmo  to  projector. 

58. 

September  27,  2012  Observation  Log.  Ms.  English  observed  respondent’s 

class  on  September  25,  26,  and  27,  2012.  Ms.  English  provided  respondent  with  her  literal 
notes  shortly  after  these  observations.  Ms.  English  prepared  an  Observation  Log  for  these 
observations.  On  September  27,  2012,  respondent  met  with  Ms.  English  and  Ms.  Eoff  to 
discuss  Ms.  English’s  observations.  Respondent  signed  and  received  a  copy  of  the 
Observation  Log.  In  the  Summary/Comments  section,  the  log  stated: 

 

29 

Written  objective  did  not  match  lived  objective.  Chunk  content 
into  appropriate  instructional  lessons  so  that  students  have  a 
greater  opportunity  to  learn.  Align  you[r]  objective  to  the 
lessons  and  the  practice  you  give  students.  Ms.  English  to 
preview  lesson  plans  and  point  out  any  discrepancies  in 
alignment. 

59. 

October  1,  2012  Formal  Lesson  Observation.  On  October  1,  2012,  Ms. 

English  observed  a  sixth  grade  math  class  taught  by  respondent,  and  completed  a  Lesson 
Observation  Form  that  rated  respondent  on  each  subpart  of  the  CSTP  Standards.  In  the 
Comments  section  after  each  CSTP  Standard,  she  included  specific  and  detailed  examples 
from  respondent’s  teaching  to  support  her  ratings. 

~ 

On  the  October  1,  2012  Lesson  Observation  Form,  Ms.  English  gave  respondent 
Meets  Standards-Minimally  ratings  on  two  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  I,  three  of  the 
seven  subparts  of  Standard  IJ,  three  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  IH,  two  of  the  five 
subparts  of  Standard  IV,  two  of  the  six  subparts  of  Standard  V,  and  two  of  the  seven  subparts 
of  Standard  VI. 

She  rated  respondent  as  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standard  I-1.  “Using  knowledge 

of  students  to  engage  them  in  learning”;  Standard  I-5.  “Promoting  critical  thinking  through 
inquiry,  problem  solving,  and  reflection”;  Standard  II-4.  “Creating  a  rigorous  learning 
environment  with  high  expectations  and  appropriate  support  of  all  students”;  Standard  III-1. 
“Demonstrating  knowledge  of  subject  matter,  academic  content  standards,  and  curriculum 
frameworks”;  and  Standard  III-2.  “Applying  knowledge  of  student  development  and 
proficiencies  to  ensure  student  understanding  of  subject  matter.” 

On  Standard  I,  Ms.  English  commented  that,  although  respondent  “attempted  to  use 

several  engagement  strategies,”  “student  opportunities  were  limited  and  did  not  allow 
student[s]  to  be  engaged  in  a  meaningful  way,  connect  to  the  content  or  think  critically.” 
On  Standard  II,  Ms.  English  stated  that  “[a]lthough  the  classroom  has  additional  visuals  and 
is  arranged  for  positive  student  interaction,  students  are  not  given  the  opportunity  to 
consistently  interact  and  solve  problems  at  the  academic  rigor  of  the  6"  grade.”  On  Standard 
Il,  Ms.  English  noted  that  “student  instruction  on  conceptual  understanding  was  inconsistent 
and  lacked  the  clarity  needed  to  provide  students  with  [an]  understanding  of  the  content.” 
On  Standard  IV,  Ms.  English  commented  that  “students  were  given  problems  to  practice 
their  new  learning,  but  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  exten[d]  their  learning  through 
problems  given  in  context.”  On  Standard  V,  Ms.  English  stated  that  “student  progress  was 
monitored  throughout  the  lesson  and  student[s]  received  feedback  on  their  progress.”  And 
on  Standard  VI,  Ms.  English  commented  that  respondent  was  “working  to  improve  her 
instructional  practice,”  and  that  “minimal  improvements  have  been  made.” 

60. 

October  3,  2012  Lesson  Observation.  On  October  3,  2012,  Tina  Rodriguez, 

Figarden’s  Vice  Principal,  observed  a  class  on  similes  and  metaphors  taught  by  respondent. 

  

30

| 
| 
| 
| 

Ms.  Rodriguez  took  literal  notes  of  her  observation  and  prepared  an  Observation  Log.  On 
October  8,  2012,  respondent  met  with  Ms.  English  and  Ms.  Rodriguez  to  discuss  the 
observation.  Ms.  Rodriguez  noted  that,  although  the  objective  of  the  lesson  was  to  learn 
about  similes  and  metaphors,  respondent  used  a  PowerPoint  presentation  that  also  discussed 
idioms,  which  were  not  taught.  During  the  class,  one  student  pulled  out  her  earlier  notes  on 
the  topic,  but  the  other  students  did  not  pull  out  their  notes,  and  respondent  did  not  ask  them 
to  do  so.  Students  identified  words  in  sentences,  but  not  in  the  poems  they  were  asked  to 
read.  Ms.  Rodriguez  concluded  that  an  “opportunity  to  extend  learning  to  a  more  rigorous 
level  was  missed  when  students  did  not  identify  similes  and  metaphors  in  the  context  of  the 
poems  read  after  the  lesson.”  Ms.  Rodriguez  also  commented  that,  because  respondent 
delivered  the  lesson  orally  and  did  not  provide  a  teaching  chart,  “strategies  to  ensure  all 
students  would  meet  their  learning  goals  were  not  utilized.”  Ms.  Rodriguez  concluded  that 
“Ta]s  a  result  of  the  lesson  presented,  students  did  not  achieve  mastery  of  the  lesson 
objective.” 

61. 

October  and  November  2012  Lesson  Observations.  Ms.  English  observed 

respondent’s  class  on  October  23,  November  15  and  November  26,  2012.  She  took  literal 
notes  of  these  observations  and  prepared  Observation  Logs.  On  October  29,  2012,  Ms. 
English  met  with  respondent  to  review  Ms.  English’s  October  23  observation.  On  November 
29,  Ms.  English  met  with  respondent  and  Ms.  Eoff  to  review  Ms.  English’s  November  15 
and  26  observations.  In  these  observations,  Ms.  English  commented  on  respondent’s:  (1) 
failure  to  model;  (2)  failure  to  “provide  direct  instruction  to  engage  her  students  in  the 
lesson”;  (3)  use  of  a  “limited  number  of  strategies”  to  “engage  students  and  connect  them  to 
the  content”;  (4)  lack  of  “lesson  organization,  direct  instruction,  and  modeling”  which 
“limited  students’  ability  to  connect  to  and  make  sense  of  the  content”;  (5)  lack  of  “planning 
and  a  clearly  stated  objective”  which  “resulted  in  mistakes  in  the  direct  instruction”;  (6) 
failure  to  “make  adjustments  to  the  instructional  time  so  that  all  students  remained  engaged 
and  challenged”;  and  (7)  failure  to  have  “visual  support[s]  to  assist  [students]  in  their 
learning.” 

62. 

December  3,  2012  Preliminary  Evaluation.  On  December  3,  2012,  Ms. 

English  gave  respondent  a  Preliminary  Evaluation.  The  data  sources  on  which  the 
Preliminary  Evaluation  was  based  included:  (1)  the  meeting  with  the  administrator  of  Human 
Resources  to  deliver  the  90-Day  Notice  on  September  5,  2012;  (2)  the  literal  notes  taken  on 
visits  on  August  20  and  30,  September  9,  11,  12,  17,  26,  and  27,  October  2,  23,  and  24,  and 
November  15  and  26,  2012;  (3)  literal  notes  taken  by  Ms.  Rodriguez  on  October  3,  2012;  (4) 
walk-through  notes  taken  on  September  25,  and  October  12  and  31,  2012;  (5)  “Debrief 
notes”  with  Ms.  Rodriguez  and  “district  support  provider”  on  October  8,  2012;  (6) 
conferences  with  “district  support  provider  —  Weekly  Logs  discussed  and  feedback  given”  on 
September  14,  21  and  27,  October  29,  and  November  29,  2012;  (7)  “Formal  Observation 
debrief”  on  October  4  and  19,  2012;  and  (8)  “Three  way  conference  with  district  support 
provider”  on  August  24  and  November  8,  2012. 

   

31 

63. 

On  the  December  3,  2012  Preliminary  Evaluation,  Ms.  English  rated 

respondent  as  Meets  Standards-Minimally  on  Standards  II,  V,  and  VI.  She  rated  respondent 
as  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  on  Standards  I,  II,  and  IV.  In  the  Comments  sections,  Ms. 
English  included  specific  and  detailed  examples  from  her  observations  to  support  her  ratings. 

(a) 

|  With  regard  to  Standard  I,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  “fails  to 

consistently  provide  her  students  with:  strategies  that  connect  her  students  to  the 
content,  a  variety  of  effective  ways  to  explain  and  introduce  new  content,  and 
instructional  strategies  that  promote  student  learning.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  as 
a  result, “students  who  receive  instruction  in  [respondent’s]  classroom  struggle  to 
make  sense  of  the  content  presented  and  are  not  given  the  opportunity  to  attach  their 
new  learning  to  what  they  already  know.  Student  progress  is  limited  due  to  the  lack 
of  connections  to  content  presented  and  use  of  instructional  strategies  that  promote 
student  learning.” 

(b) 

With  regard  to  Standard  II,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  was 

“working  to  create  a  positive  classroom  environment  that  includes  visual  supports  and 
positive  student/teacher,  student/student  integration;  however,  some  lessons  lack[ed] 
the  rigor  necessary  for  students  to  learn  grade  level  content.”  Ms.  English  concluded 
that,  while  “students  have  a  safe  environment  in  which  to  learn,”  at  times  “learning 
expectations  are  not  rigorous  enough  to  challenge  students  to  a  higher  level  of 
achievement.” 

(c) 

With  regard  to  Standard  III,  Ms.  Flores  found  that  respondent  “lacks 
the  content  knowledge  and  the  skills  to  consistently  organize  and  prepare  lessons  to 
meet  the  needs  of  her  students.”  She  found  that  respondent’s  “[l]ack  of  content 
knowledge  created  confusion  [for]  students.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that,  as  a  result 
of  respondent’s  “lack  of  organization,  direct  instruction,  and  correctly  modeling  the 
content,  students  are  not  making  the  academic  gains  necessary  to  be  successful  in 
their  current  grade.” 

(d) 

With  regard  to  Standard  IV,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  “fails  to 

plan  and  organize  lessons  that  link  the  learning  objective  to  the  instruction  and  to 
make  connections  that  build  on  and  extend  students[’]  knowledge.”  Ms.  English 
concluded  that,  “[a]s  a  result  of  instruction  that  is  not  aligned  to  clear  learning  goals 
and  sequential  logical  planning,  students  cannot  build  on  and  construct  their  own 
knowledge  to  effectively  learn  the  content.” 

(ec) 

With  regard  to  Standard  V,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent  was 
“developing  her  skills  to  use  assessment  data  to  make  instructional  decisions  that 
support  her  students’  academic  achievement;  however  she  needs  to  examine  how  to 
utilize  grading  to  include  a  multitude  of  sources  that  reflect  student  learning.”  Ms. 
English  concluded  that  “[a]s  a  result  of  [respondent’s]  developing  skills  with  using 
assessment  to  improve  and  inform  her  instruction,  students  are  beginning  to  monitor 
and  reflect  on  their  learning.” 

32

(f) 

With  regard  to  Standard  VI,  Ms.  English  found  that  respondent 
“participates  in  a  variety  of  professional  learning  opportunities  to  assist  her  in 
developing  her  skills  as  a  professional.”  Ms.  English  concluded  that  while  respondent 
was  making  efforts  to  improve  her  “professional  practice,”  respondent  had  not  made 
“consistent  and  sustained  improvements.” 

64. 

The  December  3,  2012  Preliminary  Evaluation  was  respondent’s  final 

evaluation  before  she  was  placed  on  administrative  leave. 

Respondent’s  Testimony 

65. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  has  lived  in  Fresno  her  entire  life.  She  attended 

the  District’s  public  schools  through  high  school.  She  then  attended  Fresno  City  College  and 
Fresno  State  College,  graduating  in  1987.  She  has  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential, 
which  allows  her  to  teach  grades  kindergarten  through  eight.  She  began  teaching  in  the 
District  in  1988.  Her  family  is  “immersed”  in  teaching.  She  has  two  brothers  who  are 
school  administrators,  and  a  sister  who  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  the  District. 

66. 

Respondent  began  her  teaching  career  in  the  Distinct  teaching  in  the  third 

grade.  She  then  taught  first  grade  for  two  years,  a  third/fourth  grade  combination  class,  and  a 
fifth/sixth  grade  combination  class.  When  she  was  assigned  by  Ms.  English  to  teach  the 
sixth  grade  in  the  2011/12  school  year,  she  had  not  taught  sixth  grade  for  19  years. 

67. 

Respondent  engaged  in  professional  development.  She  attended  the  Math 

Academy  offered  by  the  District  for  three  years,  until  the  2011/12  school  year.  This  program 
met  for  two  weeks  in  the  summer  and  two  Saturdays  during  the  school  year,  and  respondent 
attended  a  monthly  meeting  with  the  lead  coach.  The  purpose  of  Math  Academy  was  to 
supplement  the  District’s  existing  math  teaching  program.  Respondent  volunteered  to  attend 
this  program  and  Mr.  Petersen  approved  it. 
respondent  attended  Algebra  University,  a  District-wide  program  to  help  train  sixth  grade 
teachers. 

In  addition,  during  the  2012-13  school  year, 

68. 

_  Respondent  testified  that,  although  she  expressed  her  willingness  at  the  end  of 

the  2010/11  school  year  to  change  grade  levels,  when  Ms.  English  asked  her  to  teach  the 
sixth  grade  in  the  2011/12  school,  she  was  initially  reluctant.  She  was  concerned  that  it 
would  be  difficult  for  her  to  grasp  the  more  rigorous  sixth  grade  curriculum  at  the  same  time 
she  was  trying  to  improve  her  teaching.  Ms.  English  told  her  that  the  move  would  benefit 
her  and  she  would  receive  assistance  from  her  sixth  grade  colleagues.  Ms.  English  told  her 
that  the  decision  to  move  her  to  the  sixth  grade  was  “final.”  Respondent  testified  that,  at 
many  meetings  during  the  2011/12  school  year,  she  told  Ms.  English  that  she  was  trying  to 
“wrap”  herself  around  the  sixth  grade  curriculum  in  order  to  understand  it  enough  to  teach  it, 
and  asked  for  Ms.  English’s  help  to  do  so.  According  to  respondent,  Ms.  English  told  her 
that  she  did  not  need  to  “wrap  herself  around”  the  curriculum,  she  just  needed  to  know  it. 

33 

 

Ms.  English  expected  respondent  to  be  able  to  “go  right  in”  and  teach  sixth  grade  at  a 
proficient  level  immediately  given  her  K-8  teaching  credential. 

69. 

Respondent  attended  in-services  at  the  school  site  and  throughout  the  District 

to  learn  about  “best  teaching  practices.”  She  asserted  that  she  tried  to  implement  these 
practices  in  a  manner  that  would  best  help  her  students  achieve  levels  of  proficiency.  She 
believed  that  it  was  important  to  get  to  know  her  students  academically.  Before  a  school 
year  began,  she  would  review  the  testing  data  from  the  previous  school  year  to  determine 
where  each  of  her  students  stood  academically,  and  would  note  the  academic  levels  and 
needs  of  each  student.  She  contacted  parents  to  introduce  herself  and  obtain  additional 
background  information  on  her  students. 

70. 

Before  2009,  all  of  respondent’s  performance  evaluations  indicated  that  she 

met  all  the  District’s  standards.  During  her  testimony,  respondent  disputed  the  criticisms  set 
forth  in  the  evaluations  and  lesson  observations  she  received  starting  in  2009.  Respondent 
disagreed  with  all  the  Meets  Standards-Minimally  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  ratings  she 
received.  She  believed  that  she  always  met  the  District’s  standards  proficiently.  In 
summary,  her  testimony  in  response  to  the  negative  comments  included  in  the  evaluations 
and  lesson  observations  she  received  during  the  2009/10,  2010/11,  and  2011/12  school  years, 
was  as  follows: 

(a) 

Inresponse  to  the  criticism  that  “teacher  talk”  consumed  too  much 

class  time,  respondent  believed  that  she  instructed  for  the  amount  of  time  necessary  to 
teach  each  lesson,  and  took  the  time  that  was  needed  for  students  to  grasp  the 
concepts. 

(b) 

She  disagreed  that  she  did  not  have  charts  or  visuals  to  assist  the 

students  in  understanding  lessons.  She  asserted  that  there  were  charts  and  visuals  in 
her  classroom,  and  she  pointed  them  out  to  her  supervisors. 

(c) 

She  disputed  that  her  lessons  were  not  rigorous  enough  for  her  students. 

She  asserted  that,  sometimes,  in  order  for  students  to  grasp  new  material,  a  teacher 
has  to  “go  back  to  go  forward,”  and  re-teach  an  earlier  standard  at  a  lower  grade  level 
before  moving  to  the  more  rigorous  grade-level  standard.  She  believed  that  she  was 
“doing  a  good  job”  of  presenting  the  curriculum  so  that  her  students  would 
understand  it. 

(d) 

She  disputed  that  she  was  not  using  a  sufficient  variety  of  instructional 
strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  She  believed  that  she 
had  learned  new  strategies  for  teaching  math  when  she  attended  Math  Academy  and 
was  using  those  strategies  effectively. 

  

34

  

(ec) 

She  admitted  that  during  the  2010/11  school  year  some  of  her  students 
were  off-task  and  had  to  be  redirected,  but  testified  that  she  had  several  students  that 
school  year  with  behavior  problems,  including  one  student  who  was  eventually 
diagnosed  as  deaf.  She  asserted  that,  although  she  informed  Ms.  Shipman  about  this 
issue,  Ms.  Shipman  did  not  offer  assistance. 

(f) 

She  disputed  the  criticisms  regarding  planning  instruction  and 

designing  learning  experiences  for  all  students.  She  believed  that  she  was  using 
specific  data  about  her  students  to  plan  her  instruction,  and  had  both  long  and  short- 
term  goals  to  help  her  students  succeed. 

(g)  |  She  acknowledged  Ms.  English’s  criticisms  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
2011/12  school  year,  when  she  was  first  assigned  to  teach  the  sixth  grade,  she  did  not 
have  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  sixth  grade  curriculum  or  ability  to  engage  students 
in  sixth  grade  math  lessons.  But  she  testified  that  the  first  semester  of  that  school 
year  she  tried  “very  hard”  to  better  understand  the  sixth  grade  curriculum.  She  was 
obtaining  help  from  her  sister  and  her  colleagues  who  taught  sixth  grade.  She  tried  to 
become  more  proficient  by  accessing  lesson  plans  online  and  utilizing  the  services  of 
Ms.  Zamorski.  She  was  doing  her  best  to  “embrace”  the  new  sixth  grade  curriculum 
while  trying  to  improve  upon  her  teaching  practices.  She  believed  that  she  was 
utilizing  all  the  resources  and  support  materials  available  to  teach  the  sixth  grade. 
She  was  trying  to  grasp  how  to  best  “chunk”  the  learning  for  her  students.  She 
believed  that  she  needed  more  time  to  transition  from  the  third  grade  to  the  sixth 
grade  to  be  able  to  grasp  the  sixth  grade  “mentality.”  But  she  believed  that  she  was 
working  diligently  on  grasping  that  mentality  and  obtaining  help  from  Ms.  Zamorski, 
who  provided  files  for  learning  the  subject  matter  and  strategies  for  organizing  the 
curriculum. 

(h) 

She  disputed  Ms.  English’s  criticisms  that  she  failed  to  create  a 

learning  environment  that  promoted  student  learning.  She  prided  herself  on 
conducting  a  class  that  was  geared  to  helping  all  students  at  all  levels  understand  the 
material. 

(i) 

She  disputed  that  she  failed  to  understand  and  organize  the  subject 

matter  for  student  learning,  and  that  she  was  not  doing  enough  to  plan  her  instruction. 
She  was  using  information  she  learned  from  Math  Academy,  the  online  planning 
information  made  available  to  the  District’s  teachers,  and  information  in  the  teachers’ 
manual  to  plan  her  lessons. 

(j) 

She  tried  “very  hard”  to  maintain  the  rigor  of  the  sixth  grade 

curriculum.  She  tried  to  pace  her  instruction  to  meet  the  needs  to  the  students, 
slowing  down,  referring  back  to  earlier  lessons  and  re-teaching  as  needed  to  address 

35

  
  

students’  questions.  In  addition,  she  used  both  the  Smartboard  and  the  students’ 
white  boards  to  help  explain  lessons. 

(k) 

|  She  used  both  pre-assessment  and  post-assessment  data  to  determine 
whether  her  students  understood  the  concepts  she  was  teaching.  She  discussed  the 
assessments  at  the  weekly  grade-level  meetings  with  her  colleagues,  and  worked  with 
her  colleagues  on  lesson  planning. 

, 

71.  |  Respondent  received  the  first  Teacher  Development  Plan,  which  focused  on 
Standards  II  and  IV,  at  the  beginning  of  the  2011/12  school  year.  She  received  the  second 
Teacher  Development  Plan,  which  focused  on  Standards  III  and  IV,  one  month  into  the 
second  semester.  Respondent  testified  that  she  attempted  to  comply  with  the  requirements 
set  forth  in  both  Teacher  Development  Plans.  She  utilized  the  assistance  of  Ms.  Spencer. 
She  believed  her  objectives  were  clearly  written  and  posted.  During  the  lessons,  she  referred 
to  the  objectives  to  make  sure  that  the  students  knew  where  they  were  going.  They  engaged 
in  chanting  and  repeating  to  reinforce  the  lessons.  She  had  students  work  with  partners  to 
share  and  discuss  the  objectives. 

72. 

Respondent  received  the  Summary  Evaluation  on  May  14,  2012,  that  rated  her 

as  not  meeting  Standard  III,  understanding  and  organizing  the  subject  matter  for  student 
learning,  and  Standard  IV,  planning  instruction  and  designing  learning  experiences  for  all 
students.  She  disagreed  with  Ms.  English’s  evaluation  that  she  used  a  limited  number  of 
engagement  strategies.  She  believed  that  she  used  a  variety  of  strategies  to  meet  the  needs  of 
her  students.  She  also  believed  that  Ms.  English  had  not  observed  enough  of  her  lessons  to 
see  all  the  strategies  she  was  using.  By  the  end  of  the  2011/12  school  year,  respondent  had 
developed  the  notion  that  Ms.  English  would  be  dissatisfied  with  anything  that  respondent 
did. 

— 

73. 

Ms.  English  did  not  tell  respondent  that  she  would  be  getting  a  90-Day  Notice 
when  she  received  the  May  14,  2012  Summary  Evaluation.  But  respondent  was  called  into 
the  office  of  Maria  Mazzoni,  the  District’s  Human  Resources  (HR)  Administrator, 
approximately  two  to  three  weeks  before  the  end  of  the  school  year  and  informed  that  she 
would  be  getting  a  90-Day  Notice  at  the  beginning  of  the  2012/13  school  year.  Ms.  Mazzoni 
explained  what  a  90-Day  Notice  was  and  the  reason  for  it.  She  stated  that  respondent  would 
be  given  90  days  to  make  improvements.  At  the  end  of  the  90  days,  she  would  either  be 
given  an  additional  90  days  to  make  further  improvements,  taken  out  of  the  process  because 
she  had  improved  sufficiently,  or  dismissed. 

74. 

Respondent  believed  that,  by  the  beginning  of  the  2012/13  school  year,  she 

had  made  improvements  in  the  delivery  of  her  lessons.  It  was  her  second  year  teaching  sixth 
grade.  She  understood  the  areas  on  which  she  should  concentrate  for  further  improvement. 
She  had  contacted  her  family  members  and  colleagues  for  materials  to  help  her.  She  felt 
more  confident  that  she  could  deliver  the  sixth  grade  lesson  content.  Although  Ms.  Zamorski 

36

had  been  reassigned  from  Figarden,  she  was  still  available  to  assist  respondent  with  lesson 
planning  briefly  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  but  due  to  her  new  duties,  she  soon 
became  unavailable. 

75. 

During  the  90-Day  Notice  period,  respondent  utilized  the  services  of  Ms.  Eoff 

as  her  peer  support  coach.  Ms.  Eoff  met  with  respondent  weekly  to  plan  lessons  for  the 
following  week.  Ms.  Eoff  reviewed  Ms.  English’s  concerns,  the  sixth  grade  standards,  and 
pre-  and  post-assessments,  and  chose  certain  areas  and  lessons  that  needed  more  emphasis. 
Ms.  Eoff  assisted  respondent  in  providing  students  with  a  variety  of  ways  to  access  content. 
Respondent  described  Ms.  Eoff  as  “definitely  helpful.”  With  Ms.  Eoff’s  help,  respondent 
believed  that  she  was  addressing  Ms.  English’s  concerns,  but  she  believed  that  it  did  not 
make  any  difference  in  the  way  Ms.  English  felt  about  her.  Respondent  asserted  that, 
although  Ms.  English  included  both  positive  and  negative  comments  in  her  written 
evaluations  and  observations,  during  their  face-to-face  meetings,  Ms.  English  was  unerringly 
negative,  and  did  not  provide  constructive  feedback. 

76. 

As  required  by  the  second  semester  Teacher  Development  Plan,  respondent 

submitted  her  math  lesson  plans  to  Ms.  English.  According  to  respondent,  she  worked  four 
to  six  hours  every  weekend  on  her  lesson  plans  and  emailed  them  to  Ms.  English  on  Sunday. 
Ms.  English  did  not,  however,  review  the  lesson  plans  and  complained  to  respondent  about 
receiving  them  on  Sunday.  Although  the  Teacher  Development  Plan  required  respondent  to 
submit  her  math  lesson  plans  to  the  principal  or  vice  principal  on  “Monday  morning,  prior  to 
[the]  start  of  school,  for  feedback,”  Ms.  English  told  respondent  that  receiving  them  on 
Sunday  was  too  late  for  her  to  review  them,  given  the  press  of  her  other  duties  as  principal, 
and  asked  for  them  by  Thursday  of  the  week  before. 

77. 

Respondent  also  sent  her  lesson  plans  to  Ms.  Eoff.  She  incorporated  into  her 
lesson  plans  the  feedback  she  received  from  Ms.  Eoff.  The  only  time  that  Ms.  English  gave 
respondent  any  feedback  on  her  lesson  plans  was  at  the  meetings  she,  Ms.  English  and  Ms. 
Eoff  had  on  Thursdays.  Respondent  did  not  receive  any  other  feedback  on  her  lesson  plans 
from  Ms.  English.  Respondent  contended  that  Ms.  English  could  not  complain  that  the 
teaching  activities  she  conducted  with  the  students  did  not  align  to  the  lesson  objective  if  she 
had  included  those  activities  in  the  lesson  plans  that  she  had  earlier  submitted  to  Ms.  English, 
when  Ms.  English  did  not  review  them.  If  Ms.  English  had  reviewed  the  lesson  plans  ahead 
of  time  and  provided  feedback,  respondent  believed  that  she  could  have  adjusted  the  planned 
activities  to  better  align  with  the  lesson  objectives.  According  to  respondent,  without  such 
feedback,  she  could  not  improve  on  alignment. 

78. 

During  the  90-Day  Notice,  respondent  completed  reports  regarding  her 

adherence  to  the  directives  set  forth  in  the  90-Day  Notice.  At  hearing,  respondent  submitted 
three  such  reports.  Those  reports  were  for  the  periods  from  October  1  through  3,  October  8 
through  12,  and  October  15  through  19,  2012.  They  were  all  dated  November  27,  2012,  and 
indicated  that  they  were  received  by  HR  on  December  3,  2012.  These  reports  stated  that  it 
was  respondent’s  belief  that  she  has  “adhered  to  each  and  every  directive  placed  upon  [her] 

  

¥ 

37

by  the  District....”  They  requested  that  the  District  put  any  questions  or  concerns  in  writing 
and  respondent  would  do  her  “best  to  address  them.” 

79. 

At  hearing,  respondent  disputed  the  criticisms  Ms.  English  included  in  her 
observation  logs  during  the  90-Day  Notice  period.  She  asserted  that  when  she  taught  at  a 
level  lower  than  the  sixth  grade  curriculum,  she  was  doing  so  to  support  the  students  at  the 
“lower  end  of  the  spectrum”  and  bring  them  up  to  sixth  grade  standards.  She  also  disputed 
that  she  confused  math  definitions  or  failed  to  take  an  opportunity  to  bring  in  algebra 
concepts.  According  to  respondent,  she  was  using  definitions  she  learned  in  Math  Academy 
and  did  not  believe  that  her  students  were  ready  to  learn  algebra  concepts.  She  testified  that 
she  sometimes  taught  lessons  at  a  less  rigorous  level  to  “build  students’  confidence”  before 
moving  to  the  next  level.  Respondent  also  disputed  Ms.  English’s  criticism  that  she  did  not 
conduct  pre-assessments.  According  to  respondent,  she  did  not  need  to  conduct  formal  pre- 
assessments  if  she  was  aware  of  her  students’  level  of  understanding  based  on  prior  lessons. 

80. 

|  With  regard  to  the  criticism  that  she  still  did  not  post  “visuals”  to  assist 
students,  she  explained  that  she  had  “major  foot  surgery”  in  July  2012  and  was  using  a 
scooter  to  get  around  during  the  first  five  weeks  of  the  semester.  As a  result,  she  could  not 
get  into  the  classroom  to  put  up  any  visuals.  When  respondent  explained  to  Ms.  English  why 
she  could  not  put  up  any  visuals,  Ms.  English  stated  that  she  would  get  someone  to  assist  her. 
But  that  assistance  was  not  provided,  even  after  repeated  requests. 

81. 

|  Respondent  criticized  Ms.  English’s  delay  in  providing  formal  feedback  on  her 

observations  on  September  5,  11,  12,  17  and  19  until  September  21,  2012.  Although  Ms. 
English  provided  her  literal  notes  shortly  after  these  observations,  respondent  asserted  that 
she  did  not  find  the  literal  notes  helpful.  According  to  respondent,  the  literal  notes  did  not 
include  sufficient  concrete  feedback  that  she  could  reflect  and  act  upon.  Respondent  was 
also  concerned  that  Ms.  Eoff  was  not  released  to  observe  her  class  until  October  4,  one 
month  after  the  start  of  the  90-Day  Notice  period. 

82. 

Respondent  testified  that  her  students  reacted  negatively  to  Ms.  English’s 

frequent  presence  in  her  classroom.  According  to  respondent,  it  was  a  “difficult”  time  for 
them.  They  became  quiet  and  did  not  respond  to  questions  as  easily.  They  were  more  timid 
doing  activities  that  they  would  normally  do  automatically. 

In  sum,  respondent  asserted  that  she  was  prepared  for  every  lesson,  and  that  she 

understood  the  content  sufficiently  to  ensure  that  her  students  would  meet  every  lesson’s 
objective.  She  denied  that  she  lacked  confidence  in  her  teaching,  but  admitted  that  she  was 
not  afraid  to  tell  her  students  when  she  made  mistakes.  She  disagreed  with  Ms.  English’s 
criticism  that  she  often  re-taught  the  lesson  during  independent  practice,  asserting  that  she 
would  use  that  time  to  provide  clarity  and  give  the  students  the  support  they  needed.  She 
asserted  that  when  she  was  criticized,  she  tried  “even  harder”  to  do  a  better  job. 

  

38

Discussion  of Respondent's  Arguments 

83. 

Respondent  argued  that:  (1)  Ms.  English  was  biased  against  her;  (2)  the 

District  did  not  provide  her  with  adequate  and  timely  feedback  and  support  during  the  90- 
Day  Notice  period  to  give  her  a  sufficient  opportunity  to  correct  her  deficiencies;  (3)  the 
District  improperly  reassigned  her  from  the  third  grade  to  the  sixth  grade  at  a  time  when  she 
was  struggling  to  improve  her  teaching;  (4)  Ms.  English  did  not  review  her  lesson  plans  as 
required  and  agreed  in  the  Teacher  Development  Plan;  and  (5)  respondent  worked  hard  to 
meet  the  District’s  expectations  and  improve  her  teaching.  Each  of  these  arguments  is 
addressed  below. 

84. 

Ms.  English’s  Alleged  Bias  Against  Respondent.  Respondent  argued  that  once 

Ms.  English  decided  that  respondent  “couldn’t  pass  muster,”  she  “went  out  of  her  way”  to 
document  that  respondent  was  incompetent.  Respondent  argued  further  that  Ms.  English  was 
“unerringly  negative”  in  her  feedback  and  criticisms.  Respondent’s  arguments  were  not 
persuasive. 

85. 

While  Ms.  English  appeared  to  be  a  tough  and  demanding  principal,  the 

evidence  did  not  support  that  she  harbored  any  bias  against  respondent.  Respondent  did  not 
explain  what  she.  believed  to  be  the  source  of  Ms.  English’s  alleged  bias.  There  was  no 
evidence  to  provide  any  reason  for  Ms.  English  to  be  biased  against  respondent.  All  of  Ms. 
English’s  evaluations  and  observations  contained  both  positive  and  negative  feedback.  Her 
feedback  was  supported  by  specific  examples  from  her  classroom  visits  during  respondent’s 
lessons.  The  number  of  times  Ms.  English  visited  respondent’s  classroom  and  met  with  her 
to  provide  feedback  demonstrated  strong  dedication  and  effort  on  Ms.  English’s  part  to 
provide  respondent  with  substantial  and  helpful  input  to  improve  her  teaching. 

86. 

Feedback  and  Support  During  the  90-Day  Notice  Period.  The  90-Day  Notice 
was  served  on  respondent  on  September  4,  2012.  Ms.  English  did  not  meet  with  respondent 
to  discuss  her  first  five  observations  until  September  21,  2012.  Ms.  Eoff  did  not  get  release 
time  to  observe  respondent’s  class  until  October  4,  2012.  Respondent  argued  that  these 
delays  deprived  her  of  an  adequate  opportunity  to  improve  her  performance  during  the  90- 
Day  Notice  period.  Respondent’s  argument  was  not  persuasive. 

87. 

|  While  these  delays  raise  some  concerns,  they  do  not  establish  that  respondent 

was  deprived  of  an  adequate  opportunity  during  the  90-Day  Notice  period  to  correct  her 
deficiencies.  Ms.  Eoff  began  working  with  respondent  beginning  in  August  2012.  While  her 
first  classroom  observation  was  not  until  October  4,  she  provided  respondent  with  adequate 
other  support  during  the  90-Day  Notice  period  to  afford  respondent  a  reasonable  opportunity 
to  address  the  deficiencies  noted  in  the  90-Day  Notice  and  improve  her  teaching. 

88. 

The  17-day  delay  between  when  the  90-Day  Notice  was  served  and  Ms. 

English  first  met  formally  with  respondent  to  discuss  her  classroom  observations  also  did  not 

39  

deprive  respondent  of  an  adequate  opportunity  to  correct  her  deficiencies  during  the  90-Day 
Notice  period.  Ms.  English  gave  respondent  copies  of  her  literal  notes  from  her  classroom 
observations  soon  after  she  conducted  those  observations.  While  respondent  testified  that 
she  did  not  find  the  literal  notes  useful,  a  review  of  these  notes  indicates  that  Ms.  English 
wrote  comments  that  could  be  utilized  to  apprise  respondent  of  Ms.  English’s  concerns  and 
guide  her  toward  improvement. 

89. 

Respondent  pointed  to  other  factors  that  she  asserted  showed  that  the  District 
had  already  made  up  its  mind  to  dismiss  her  when  it  served  the  90-Day  Notice:  (a)  incorrect 
language  in  the  90-Day  Notice  to  indicate  that  the  March  10,  2010  Preliminary  Evaluation 
contained  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  ratings  and  the  failure  of  the  District  to  include  that 
evaluation  as  an  attachment;  and  (b)  an  email  from  Ms.  English  to  Ms.  Mazzoni  dated 
August  6,  2012,  indicating  that  Ms.  English  was  making  plans  to  replace  respondent  if  she 
were  dismissed. 

(a)  |  While  the  incorrect  information  about  the  March  10,  2010  Preliminary 
Evaluation  included  in  the  90-Day  Notice  and  the  failure  to  include  that  evaluation  as 
an  attachment  were  unfortunate,  they  do  not  indicate  that  the  District  had  made  up  its 
mind  before  it  served  the  90-Day  Notice  to  dismiss  respondent.  Given  all  the  time 
and  effort  Ms.  English  dedicated  to  observing  respondent’s  classroom  and  writing  her 
observations,  and  the  support  provided  by  Ms.  Eoff  to  assist  respondent,  it  cannot  be 
found  that  the  District  had  definitively  decided  to  dismiss  respondent  before  it  gave 
her  the  90-Day  Notice.  The  District’s  failure  to  attach  the  March  10,  2010 
Preliminary  Evaluation  to  the  90-Day  Notice  was,  at  most,  harmless  error. 

(b) 

‘In  addition,  the  August  6,  2012  email  from  Ms.  English  to  Ms.  Mazzoni 

does  not  demonstrate  that  the  District  had  decided  to  dismiss  respondent  before  it 
served  the  90-Day  Notice  on  her.  Instead,  the  email  indicated  that  Ms.  English  was 
just  making  contingency  plans  in  the  event  that  respondent  was  ultimately  dismissed, 
in  order  to  ensure  that  she  would  have  adequate  teacher  coverage  for  her  students. 

90. 

Insum,  respondent  did  not  establish  that  the  District  deprived  her  of  an 

adequate  opportunity  to  improve  her  performance  during  the  90-Day  Notice  period. 

91. 

Reassignment  from  the  Third  to  the  Sixth  Grade.  Respondent  argued  that  Ms. 

  

English’s  reassignment  of  respondent  from  the  third  to  the  sixth  grade  at  a  time  when  she 
was  struggling  to  improve  her  teaching  added  undue  pressure  and  made  her  performance 
more  difficult.  While  this  defense  raised  serious  concerns,  respondent’s  own  testimony  at 
hearing  undermined  her  argument.  Respondent  admitted  that  she  volunteered  for  a  change  in 
classroom  assignment  at  the  end  of  the  2010/11  school  year,  believing  that  it  might  be  of 
benefit  to  her.  She  testified  that,  although  she  expressed  her  reluctance  about  the 
reassignment  to  Ms.  English,  she  accepted  it.  She  also  testified  that,  by  her  second  year  of 
teaching  in  the  sixth  grade,  she  was  feeling  more  confident  about  her  ability  to  teach  the  sixth 

  

40

grade  curriculum.  She  conceded  that,  while  the  grade  change  from  third  to  sixth  was  a 
challenge,  she  believed  that  she  was  still  able  to  meet  proficiently  the  CSTP  Standards,  and 
that  the  reassignment  did  not  negatively  impact  her  performance.  Given  respondent’s  own 
testimony,  it  cannot  be  found  that  respondent’s  reassignment  from  third  to  sixth  grade  caused 
her  to  be  unable  to  meet  the  District’s  standards  for  proficient  teaching. 

92. 

Ms.  English’s  Failure  to  Review  Respondent’s  Lesson  Plans.  The  Teacher 

Development  Plan  signed  on  February  23,  2012,  stated  that  respondent  would  submit  weekly 
math  lesson  plans  to  the  principal  or  vice  principal  on  Monday  morning,  prior  to  the  start  of 
school,  for  feedback.  Respondent  complied  with  this  directive.  Ms.  English  did  not  review 
respondent’s  lesson  plans.  Her  reason  for  not  doing  so  was  not  convincing.  Respondent’s 
argument  that  Ms.  English  could  not  validly  criticize  her  for  presenting  an  activity  that  did 
not  align  to  a  lesson  objective  if  she  had  described  that  activity  in  her  lesson  plans  was 
persuasive. 

93. 

But  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  English’s  failure  to  review 

respondent’s  lesson  plans  as  agreed  caused  respondent  to  be  unable  to  respond  adequately  to 
the  District’s  concerns  with  her  teaching.  Respondent  submitted  a  sampling  of  the  lesson 
plans  she  prepared  during  the  90-Day  Notice  period.  None  of  these  lesson  plans  were  for  the 
lessons  that  Ms.  English  observed.  Because  respondent  did  not  present  any  lesson  plans  for 
the  lessons  Ms.  English  observed,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  whether  and  to  what  extent 
respondent  described  in  her  lesson  plans  the  unaligned  activities  that  Ms.  English  observed 
such  that  Ms.  English  may  have  been  able  to  give  respondent  feedback  and  an  opportunity  to 
change  the  lessons  before  their  delivery  had  she  timely  reviewed  the  plans. 

94. 

In  addition,  as  the  District  argued  during  the  hearing,  respondent’s  lesson 

plans  were  not  a  primary  focus  of  the  District’s  concerns  about  respondent’s  performance. 
The  primary  focus  was  the  nature  of  respondent’s  instruction  delivery.  Thus,  while 
respondent’s  argument  regarding  the  lesson  plans  was  persuasive,  it  was  not  of  sufficient 
relevance  to  address  the  primary  concerns  raised  by  the  District  about  respondent’s  teaching. 

95. 

Respondent’s  Efforts  to  Comply  with  the  District’s  Feedback  and  Directives. 

All  of  the  District’s  witnesses  agreed  that  respondent  accepted  the  criticisms  that  she  was 
given  and  made  an  effort  to  comply  with  her  supervisors’  directives.  There  was  agreement 
that,  throughout  the  four  years  prior  to  the  District’s  filing  the  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss 
against  her,  respondent  acted  professionally.  The  only  allegation  against  respondent  in  this 
matter  was  unsatisfactory  performance.  There  were  no  allegations  that  respondent  engaged 
in  any  unprofessional  conduct  or  was  unfit  to  teach. 

41

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

96. 

The  evidence  established  that  for  the  first  20  years  she  was  employed  by  the 

District  as  an  elementary  school  teacher,  all  of  her  performance  evaluations  rated  her  as 
meeting  expectations.  It  was  not  until  the  District  implemented  the  Skillful  Leader  program 
and  changed  the  way  it  evaluated  teachers  that  respondent’  s  performance  as  a  teacher  came 
under  criticism. 

97. 

|  With  the  implementation  of  the  Skillful  Leader  program,  administrators  visited 

classrooms  on  a  more  regular  basis.  They  took  literal  notes  of  what  they  observed,  and 
provided  specific  and  direct  feedback  to  the  teachers.  The  amount  of  detailed  information 
included  in  the  evaluations  respondent  received  after  the  implementation  of  the  Skillful 
Leader  program  was  significantly  greater  than  the  information  included  in  her  earlier 
evaluations.  The  newer  evaluations  were  also  based  on  significantly  more  classroom  — 
observations  and  visitations. 

- 

98. 

During  the  four  years  prior  to  receiving  the  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss, 

respondent  was  repeatedly  advised  of  the  concerns  the  District  had  with  the  way  she  was 
delivering  her  instruction  to  her  students.  On  numerous  occasions  the  District  informed 
respondent  that:  (1)  her  instruction  did  not  align  with  her  objectives;  (2)  she  did  not 
adequately  model  the  lessons  she  was  teaching;  (3)  she  lacked  sufficient  content  knowledge; 
(4)  she  did  not  adequately  check  for  student  understanding;  (5)  she  did  not  adjust  her 
teaching  when  her  students  indicated  that  they  were  confused;  (6)  her  lessons  did  not  contain 
the  required  rigor  for  her  students’  grade  level;  and  (7)  she  released  her  students  for 
independent  practice  too  soon  after  her  direct  instruction  without  working  through  problems 
with  them  to  ensure  that  they  understood  what  they  were  supposed  to  do. 

99. 

In  the  evaluations  and  lesson  observations  given  to  respondent,  her  principals 
and  vice  principals  repeatedly  made  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in 
her  performance  and  endeavored  to  assist  her.  The  Teacher  Development  Plans  she  received, 
in  specific  detail,  delineated  the  concerns  the  District  had  with  her  teaching  and  gave  her 
clear  direction  on  the  District’s  expectations.  The  90-Day  Notice  also  clearly  and 
specifically  set  forth  the  District’s  concerns  with  respondent’s  performance  and  the  steps  she 
was  directed  to  take  to  improve  it. 

100. 

Respondent  was  provided  with  adequate  assistance  to  meet  the  District’s 

standards.  She  was  given  a  sufficient  opportunity  both  before  and  during  the  90-Day  Notice 
period  to  correct  her  deficiencies.  She  had  the  assistance  of  two  instructional  coaches  (Ms. 
Spencer  and  Ms.  Zamorski)  and  a  peer  support  coach  (Ms.  Eoff).  Ms.  Shipman  and  Ms. 
English  observed  her  classroom  on  numerous  occasions,  and  gave  her  detailed  and  specific 
feedback  and  guidance.  Notwithstanding  all  this  feedback  and  assistance,  respondent  did  not 
demonstrate  sufficient  improvement  to  bring  her  performance  up  to  a  satisfactory  level. 

  

42

101. 

There  is  no  dispute  that  respondent  acted  professionally  and  made  an  effort  to 

comply  with  the  District’s  directives.  During  her  testimony,  however,  she  did  demonstrate 
insight  into  the  concerns  the  District  repeatedly  raised  about  her  teaching.  She  asserted  that 
she,  at  all  times,  met  the  District’s  standards  proficiently.  She  showed  little  understanding  of 
the  District’s  concerns  about  her  instruction  delivery.  She  also  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she 
took  adequate  steps  to  address  the  District’s  concerns,  despite  the  numerous  opportunities 
she  was  provided.  Given  respondent’s  lack  of  improvement  and  insight,  it  would  be  contrary 
to  the  best  interests  of  the  District’s  students  to  return  respondent  to  her  teaching  position. 
The  District  established,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  respondent’s  performance 
was  unsatisfactory.  It’s  dismissal  of  respondent  must  therefore  be  sustained. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  a  school  district 

may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  unsatisfactory  performance.  When 
reviewing  a  school  district’s  dismissal  action  against  a  certificated  employee  based  solely 
upon  unsatisfactory  performance  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4), 
there  is  no  need  to  apply  the  standards  of  fitness  to  teach  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board 
of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1175-1176.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44944  sets  forth  the  procedures  that  must  be  followed 

when  a  school  district  brings  a  dismissal  action  against  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 
Subdivision  (a)(5),  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to 
matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of 
the  filing  of  the  notice.  Evidence  of  records  regularly  kept  by 
the  governing  board  concerning  the  employee  may  be 
introduced,  but  no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or 
suspension  of  any  employee  shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or 
evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to  matters  occurring  more  than 
four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  notice. 

3. 

Education  Code  sections  44660  through  44665  set  forth  the  requirements  with 

which  a  school  district  must  comply  when  evaluating  certificated  employees.  Education 
Code  section  44662,  in  relevant  part  provides: 

(b)  The  governing  board  of  each  school  district  shall  evaluate 
and  assess  certificated  employee  performance  as  it  reasonably 
relates  to: 

(1)  The  progress  of  pupils  toward  the  standards  established 

43 

   

pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  and,  if  applicable,  the  state  adopted 
academic  content  standards  as  measured  by  state  adopted 
criterion  referenced  assessments. 

(2)  The  instructional  techniques  and  strategies  used  by  the 

employee. 

(3)  The  employee’s  adherence  to  curricular  objectives. 

(4)  The  establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  suitable  learning 
environment,  within  the  scope  of  the  employee’s  responsibilities. 

Education  Code  section  44664,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

(b)  The  evaluation  shall  include  recommendations,  if  necessary, 
as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  the  performance  of  the  employee. 
If  an  employee  is  not  performing  his  or  her  duties  in  a 
satisfactory  manner  according  to  the  standards  prescribed  by  the 
governing  board,  the  employing  authority  shall  notify  the 
employee  in  writing  of  that  fact  and  describe  the  unsatisfactory 
performance.  The  employing  authority  shall  thereafter  confer 
with  the  employee  making  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas 
of  improvement  in  the  employee’s  performance  and  endeavor  to 
assist  the  employee  in  his  or  her  performance.  If  any  permanent 
certificated  employee  has  received  an  unsatisfactory  evaluation, 
the  employing  authority  shall  annually  evaluate  the  employee 
until  the  employee  achieves  a  positive  evaluation  or  is  separated 
from  the  district. 

(1)  At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the 
board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 
against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the 
unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with 
such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity 
as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her 
faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written 
notice  shall  include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to 
the  employee. 

44 

4. 

Before  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for 

unsatisfactory  performance,  it  must  comply  with  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision 
(b),  which,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

 

5. 

Within  the  four-year  period  prescribed  by  Education  Code  section  44944, 
subdivision  (a)(5),  the  District  evaluated  respondent  in  accordance  with  Education  Code 
sections  44660  through  44665.  Its  evaluations  included  recommendations  as  to  areas  of 
improvement  in  respondent’s  performance.  It  notified  respondent  that  she  was  not 
performing  her  duties  in  a  satisfactory  manner  according  to  the  District’s  standards  and 
described  her  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  District  thereafter  conferred  with  respondent 
and  made  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  her  performance.  It 
endeavored  to  assist  respondent  in  her  performance.  After  respondent  received  an 
unsatisfactory  evaluation,  the  District  annually  evaluated  her.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44664,  subd.  (b). 
Findings  6  through  45.) 

6. 

At  least  90  days  before  it  served  a  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss,  the  District  gave 

respondent  written  notice  of  her  unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  its  nature  with 
specific  instances  of  behavior  and  particularity  as  to  furnish  her  with  an  adequate  opportunity 
to  correct  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charges.  (Findings  46  through  62.) 
The  written  notice  included  all  the  evaluations  the  District  had  given  to  respondent  since 
November  10,  2009,  except  the  preliminary  evaluation  she  received  on  March  12,  2010.  The 
District’s  failure  to  include  that  preliminary  evaluation  was,  at  most,  harmless  error. 

7. 

When  all  the  evidence  is  considered,  the  District  established  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that,  notwithstanding  the  assistance  and  opportunity  it 
provided  to  respondent  to  correct  her  faults  and  address  the  grounds  for  the  unsatisfactory 
performance  charges  against  her,  respondent  did  not  improve  her  performance  to  a 
satisfactory  level.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  during  the  hearing  that  she  has  adequate 
insight  into  the  District’s  concerns  about  the  quality  of  her  teaching  to  provide  sufficient 
assurances  that,  if  she  were  returned  to  the  classroom,  her  teaching  would  improve  to  a 
satisfactory  level.  As  a  result,  the  District  established  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed 
from  her  employment  as  a  teacher  with  the  District  for  unsatisfactory  performance  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 

// 

// 

   

45 

ORDER 

Respondent  Barbara  Flores  is  DISMISSED  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of 

Fresno  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  +  er  vac  4  5429  { Be 

Hortun  Lblwklyy> 
KATHRYNBLACKBURN,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

ROBERT  JAGKSON,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

   

BRANDT,  Chairperson 

KAREN  J. 
Commission  oh 

Professional  Competence 

 

  

46 

