BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

OAH No. 2013070054

ALVARO NOVOA,
A Permanent Certificated Teacher,

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter was heard on October 14, 15, 16 and 17, 2013, in Los Angeles,

California, before the Commission on Professional Competence, Los Angeles Unified School
District (Commission). The Commission consisted of Kathy Jarvey, Araceli Torres and Julie
Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings,
State of California. The Los Angeles Unified School District was represented by Michelle
K. Meek, with Liebert, Cassidy, Whitmore. Alvaro Novoa (Respondent) appeared and was
represented by Daniel J. Kolodziej and Mogeh Tala-Ahmari, with Trygstad, Schwab &
Trygstad.

Prior to presentation of the evidence, the parties made several motions in limine. The

ALJ considered and ruled on those motions in limine as reflected on the record. Oral and
documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard. The matter was submitted for
decision on October 17, 2013. The Commission on Professional Competence considered the
matter in executive session on October 17, 2013. After due consideration of the entire record
herein, the Commission makes the following factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction

1.

2.

School District (District).

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the Los Angeles Unified

On May 31, 2013, the Accusation and Statement of Charges, setting forth the

grounds for dismissal, was brought by Vivian K. Ekchian in her official capacity as Chief
Human Resources Officer of the District.

3.

On June 19, 2013, Respondent was served with: a Notice of Board of

Education Intention to Dismiss and Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension (Notice of
Intent to Dismiss); a copy of the Accusation and Statement of Charges; a blank Request for
Hearing; and copies of the relevant Education Code and Government Code sections. The
Notice of Intention to Dismiss informed Respondent that the Board of Education intended to
dismiss him in 30 days unless he requested a hearing.

4.

On August 7, 2013, Respondent filed and served a Notice of Defense

requesting a hearing.

Allegations of Sexual Abuse

5.

During the 2010-2011 school year, Respondent was a preschool teacher at

Nora Sterry Early Education Center (Nora Sterry).1 During that school year, G
J

V. were students in Respondent’s classroom.2

M. and

6.

The Accusation contends that Respondent should be dismissed from his

V., and threatened to harm G

employment with the District for immoral conduct, dishonesty and evident unfitness for
service. These contentions are based on factual allegations that, between September 1, 2010
M.
and May 2011, Respondent sexually and physically abused preschool students G
and J
M. or his mother if they reported the abuse.
The details of the alleged sexual abuse and threats are specifically set forth in paragraphs 1
through 11 of the Accusation. Paragraph 12 of the Accusation alleges that, on several
occasions, Respondent called G
M. a “crybaby.” As more fully set forth below,
Complainant failed to establish any of the factual allegations in paragraphs 1 through 12 of
the Accusation.

7.

In its case-in-chief, Complainant called only G

M. to testify.3 G

M. is five years old. At the time of his testimony, he was able to distinguish between truth
and a lie and between reality and fantasy. Consequently, he was deemed competent to
testify. However, his testimony regarding his recollection of events that transpired when he
was three years old was not credible for the reasons set forth below in Factual Findings 8, 9,
10 and 11.

1 Nora Sterry has since been closed due to budget cuts.

2 Students’ last initials are used in lieu of their surnames in order to protect their

privacy.

3 Pursuant to a pretrial motion and order, Respondent viewed the testimony of

M. by closed circuit video/audio feed in another room. Commission panel members

G
were instructed that nothing should be inferred from Respondent’s absence from the
courtroom during this witness’s testimony.

2

8.

G

M.’s testimony, by itself, lacked credibility because it became

embellished to the point of implausibility. Initially, G
M. testified that while he was in
school, Respondent “put coins in [his] butt,” “put a robot in [his] butt,” and “peed and threw
M., the robot was miniscule (indicated the size by
up in [his] mouth.” According to G
placing his index finger and thumb together), and was blue with red tentacles on its head, red
arms and red legs. G
also testified that Respondent told his preschool friends, J
G
when expounding on these statements, both on direct and cross examination, the details
became less credible. For example:

M.’s “butt,” and that he saw Respondent hurting his preschool friends. However,

M. recalled that the coin had a picture of Beethoven on it. He

to place coins in

and H

(a).

G

M. testified that Respondent put a coin in his “butt,” in “a lot of spots

in the school,” and when he was asked on direct examination if Respondent put the coin in
his “butt” more than once, he voluntarily testified that Respondent did that same thing to
everyone every day at school. On cross examination, he affirmed that Respondent put a coin
in G
J
J
“butt.”

M.’s “butt” every day. He also affirmed that he saw Respondent place a coin in
’s “butt” every day. He further affirmed that Respondent made

, and “all the kids in the class” put coins in G

’s “butt” and H
, H

M.’s

, N

, J

(b).

G

recalled seeing Respondent place a robot in J
, G

’s “butt.” When
M. responded that

asked on direct examination what else Respondent did to J
Respondent “did the same thing that happened to [G
examination, the story expanded further. G
in all the other kids’ “butts” and that he did so every day.

M.] to everybody.” On cross

M. affirmed that Respondent put a robot

(c).

G

M. stated that Respondent “threw up” in his mouth and “peed” in his
M. affirmed

mouth more than once. On cross examination, the story magnified, and G
saw Respondent “pee” in G
and J
that H
“peed” and “threw up” in G

M.’s mouth every day.

M.’s mouth and that Respondent

9(a). G

M.’s testimony also lacked credibility because it was contrary to

credible evidence indicating that Respondent had no opportunity to be alone with G
M. or the other children in order to commit the multiple acts alleged.

9(b). G

M. insisted that there were no other adults in the room when

Respondent placed the coin and the robot in his “butt” or when Respondent “peed” or “threw
up” in his mouth. Although he admitted that there were three adults in the classroom, two
M. testified that the “ladies” were only with him before
women and Respondent, G
lunch time, and that they were not present after lunch time. He also testified that, when he
had to go to the restroom, Respondent took him, at least some of the time. This testimony
was inconsistent with the credible testimonies of former Nora Sterry Principal, Johanna

3

Fletes Curd, and former teacher’s assistants (TAs) Maria Contreras and Manika Herron,
along with other corroborating evidence, including the declarations of former TAs Lisa Love
and Sima Ghonsulaisa.4

9(c). The evidence from Ms. Curd, Ms. Contreras, Ms. Herron, Ms. Love, Ms.

Ghonsulaisa, and other supplemental evidence established the following:

(1). Ms. Curd was the Principal of Norry Sterry during the 2010-2011
school year. As the principal, she very clearly communicated her expectations and the
District policies and procedures to her employees. She sought to ensure that everyone
followed protocol. Staff was trained on policies and protocols at staff meetings.

(2).

Per school policy, teachers were not permitted to be left alone with

students. A teacher was required to be constantly accompanied by a TA in the classroom.
The ratio used was one teacher and two TAs per a classroom of 24 students. This policy was
enforced during the 2010-2011 school year.
always take their place.

If a TA was absent, a substitute TA would

(3).

If students went outside to the playground, the teacher and a TA

accompanied them. The playground was visible from the street, and there was heavy traffic
on the street, making the playground an unlikely place to sexually abuse a child.

(4).

During the 2010-2011 school year, at least four regular TAs worked in

Respondent’s classroom. Maria Contreras worked from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Sima
Ghonsulaisa worked from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Manika Herron worked in Respondent’s
classroom from approximately 2:00 to 4:30 p.m. Lisa Love was the closing TA. Her start
time was 9:00 a.m., and after 4:30 p.m., she brought all the remaining children to
Respondent’s room to assist him with closing, and she stayed there until the last child was
picked up. Although 5:45 is the latest time for pick up, the teacher and closing TA were
required to remain at the school until the last child was picked up. Additionally, from
January 17, 2011, TA Esmeralda Baza worked with Respondent from 11:00 a.m. until 5:00.

(5).

A TA’s duties included watching the children at all times. There were
no obstructions in Respondent’s classroom to prevent the TAs from continually viewing the
entire classroom. The classroom included a children’s restroom which could be observed by
others in the classroom. There were stalls for privacy, but no doors on the stalls. The door to
the restroom remained open at all times when students were present.

4 Following objection, these declarations were admitted as “administrative hearsay,”

pursuant to Government Code sections 11514, subdivision (a), and 11513, subdivision (d),
for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but not to independently
establish any factual finding .

4

(6).

A TA’s duties included taking the students to the restroom. The TAs

never saw Respondent escorting students to the restroom. This would have been noted, since
this duty was designated for the TAs only.

(7).

None of the TAs ever observed Respondent alone with any student,
M. This would have been noted, since school policy forbade him from

including G
being alone with any student.

(8).

Parents arrived at varying times during the day to pick up their children

from Nora Sterry. When picking up their children, the parents walked directly into the
classroom without knocking, and there were parents going in and out of the classroom freely.

10.

G

M.’s testimony also lacked credibility because investigations

conducted by three separate agencies (the Department of Social Services, the Los Angeles
Police Department and the District) failed to uncover any physical evidence or other
corroborating evidence to indicate that G
M. had suffered sexual abuse or that
Respondent had abused him. Senior Investigator Tiffany Brunelli with the Department of
Social Services (DSS), Detective Lucy Nunez with the Los Angeles Police Department
(LAPD), and Detective Ray Jordon with the District all testified credibly at the hearing.
Their combined testimonies, along with supplemental evidence, established the following:

(a).

In May and June of 2011, G

M., underwent two forensic examinations

by a trained interviewer at Stuart House, affiliated with the Rape Treatment Center at the
Santa Monica -UCLA Medical Center. Stuart House is a facility which specializes in
handling cases of suspected child sexual abuse and works in conjunction with law
enforcement and child protection agencies. In both of the interviews, G
M. did not
qualify as a witness because he was unable to tell the difference between a truth and a lie.
Although a second interview is highly unusual, it was conducted after G
reported that G
his penis in G
such disclosures of sexual abuse by Respondent.

M. had informed her of new allegations that Respondent had placed

M.’s “butt.” During the second interview, G

M.’s mother

M. did not make any

(b).

Several of the students named by G

M. as Respondent’s purported

and J

victims, including H
The LAPD investigator interviewed five of the children, and none of them knew of the
and
alleged incidents or reported any abuse. The DSS investigator interviewed H
J
The students disclosed only positive experiences with Respondent.

disclosed any abuse or witnessed abuse by Respondent.

, were questioned by the DSS and LAPD investigators.

. Neither H

nor J

(c).

The TAs were interviewed, and none of them observed Respondent

committing any sexual or physical abuse or saw him do anything inappropriate. Parents
were interviewed and none of them expressed any concerns regarding Respondent.

5

(d).

The investigations confirmed that there were clear sightlines throughout
Respondent’s classroom, so nothing could obstruct the occupants’ views of the entire
classroom. The restroom was located in the classroom, visible to those in the classroom,
contained stalls with no doors, and the restroom door was left open at all times. The totality
of the interviews with Norry Sterry staff indicated that it is the TA’s responsibility to take
children to the restroom and they had never seen Respondent take a child to the restroom.
The staff confirmed that teachers must always have a TA with them and are never left alone
with the children, even on the playground. They confirmed that they never observed
Respondent alone with the children. The DSS investigator observed that parents were
continually and freely going in and out of Respondent’s classroom to pick up children. She
also observed that the playground was visible from a heavily traveled street, making the
playground an unlikely place to sexually abuse a child.

(e).

Respondent was interviewed by the DSS investigator, LAPD investigator and

District investigator. He denied abusing G
investigator found Respondent to be credible during the interviews.5

M. The DSS investigator and District

(f).

Physical examination of G

M. at the Rape Treatment Center produced

no physical evidence of sexual abuse.

11(a). G

M.’s testimony also lacked credibility because he identified another
M.
individual as the perpetrator of the sexual abuse. During his cross examination, G
was shown a picture of registered sex offender, Arthur Novoa, taken from the Megan’s Law
website. Arthur Novoa is not the same individual as Respondent. In 2011, G
mother had mistakenly asserted that Respondent was the individual pictured on the Megan’s
Law website, and continued to make this assertion even after being told by the LAPD
investigator that Respondent was not the individual pictured on the Megan’s Law website.
G
M. admitted that his mother had shown him the picture of Arthur Novoa “on the
computer.” G
Respondent, and that the man in the picture was the man who hurt him. He admitted that his
mother told him that the man in the picture was the man who hurt him.

M. testified that the picture of Arthur Novoa was a picture of

M.’s

11(b). G

M. was not asked by Complainant to identify Respondent as the
M.’s testimony. (See

perpetrator because Respondent was not present during G
footnote 3, above.)

12(a). In an effort to examine why G

M. would consistently repeat such

appalling allegations despite their implausibility, Respondent presented the testimony of
Mitchell Eisen, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology, and Director of the Forensic Psychology
Program at the University of California Los Angeles. Dr. Eisen, an expert in memory and
suggestibility, provided an explanation of suggestibility and false memory in children.

5 The LAPD investigator did not opine about Respondent’s credibility.

6

12(b). Dr. Eisen explained that, without adults to help them define reality, children

cannot distinguish between what is real and what is not. Preschoolers are very susceptible to
suggestibility. One type of suggestibility involves a child responding to a leading question,
which may result in the immediate acceptance of misinformation. The other type of
suggestibility involves delayed misinformation and retrieval errors, such as false memories.
A false memory is a false narrative which someone has been convinced is true and becomes
part of their memory. It is impossible for outside observers to tell the difference between the
truth and a false memory because the person holding the false memory truly believes it.
With children, it is easier to suggest that a non-existent event actually occurred, and when the
suggestion comes from a parent, it is more powerful. When later retrieving their memories,
they confuse elements of the false event with their autobiographical memory. The false
event can then become part of their autobiographical memory even though they did not
believe the story when they first heard it.

M.’s testimony. It was noted that G

12(c). Respondent presented several pieces of evidence which hinted at the possible
impetus and driving force behind G
M.’s
older brother had previously swallowed a coin and passed it through his anus. It was also
noted that G
scenes with “naked people” who were “shaking.” It was further noted that G
mother had filed a civil lawsuit against the District and was quite vehement in her campaign
against Respondent. It was not established that any of these were the genesis of G
M.’s assertions.

M. had admitted watching movies with his older brother containing

M.’s

12(d). To make a finding regarding the origin of G

M.’s memories of sexual

abuse would speculative. Such a finding is also unnecessary since Complainant bore the
burden of proving its allegations of sexual abuse by Respondent and has failed to meet its
burden.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Pursuant to the foregoing factual findings, the Commission on Professional

Competence makes the following Legal Conclusions:

Jurisdiction

Burden of Proof

1.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter pursuant section

44944. (Factual Findings 1 through 4.)

2.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter since it is seeking to dismiss

Respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The standard of proof is
preponderance of the evidence. (Gardiner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040.)

7

Causes for Dismissal

4.

Cause for dismissal of Respondent, Alvaro Novoa, does not exist under

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), based on immoral conduct, as set forth in
Factual Findings 5 through 11.

5.

Cause for dismissal of Respondent, Alvaro Novoa, does not exist under
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), based on dishonesty, as set forth in
Findings 5 through 11.

6.

Cause for dismissal of Respondent, Alvaro Novoa, does not exist under

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), based on evident unfitness for service, as
set forth in Findings 5 through 11.

7.

Given that Complainant has failed to prove any of the factual allegations in the
Accusation, no cause for discipline exists and the factors set forth in Morrison v. State Board
of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 need not be considered.

Respondent, Alvaro Novoa, shall not be dismissed.

ORDER

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

DATED: October 27, 2013

________________________________
JULIE CABOS-OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above:

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

DATED: October ___, 2013

________________________________
KATHY JARVEY
Commission Member

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above:

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

DATED: October ___, 2013

_________________________________
ARACELI TORRES
Commission Member

9

