BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

SHANE CARNIVAL (EN 760776),

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2013110085

Respondent.

DECISION

On September 14-17, 21-24, 2015, and February 29 through March 2, 2016,
Michael A. Scarlett, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter in Los Angeles, California on behalf of the 
Commission on Professional Competence (Commission).1

Michelle Meek, Attorney at Law, Liebert Cassidy Whitmore, and Meredith 

Karasch, Assistant General Counsel, Los Angeles Unified School District represented
complainant, Justo H. Avila, Chief Human Resources Officer, Los Angeles Unified 
School District (LAUSD or District).

Daniel J. Kolodziej and Rosty Gore, Attorneys at Law, Trygstad, Schwab & 

Trygstad, represented respondent Shane Carnival (respondent), a permanent
certificated employee of the District, who was present throughout the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the record was closed and

submitted for decision on March 2, 2016. The Commission finds as follows:

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction and Allegations

1.

On September 27, 2013, Vivian K. Ekchian, then Human Resources 
Officer for the District issued the Statement of Charges, and on October 29, 2013, 

ÿ

ÿ

1 ÿOn September 14, 2015, the parties stipulated to have this matter heard by

the ALJ sitting alone.  (Ed. Code § 44944, subd. (c)(1).)

1

respondent submitted a request for hearing.2 On November 20, 2013, respondent 
submitted a Notice of Defense. On November 21, 2013, complainant made and filed 
the Accusation in her official capacity, and on October 10, 2014, complainant filed an 
Amended Accusation. All jurisdictional requirements were met to proceed to hearing
before the Commission.

2.

The District alleges that respondent is subject to dismissal from his 

employment as a permanent certificated employee of the District for unprofessional
conduct, in violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) 3; immoral
conduct, in violation of sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939; dishonesty, in 
violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(3)4; unsatisfactory performance, in 
violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(4)5; evident unfitness for service, in 
violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) 6; persistent violation or refusal to obey
the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 
the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the Governing Board of the 
school district, in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(7) 7; and willfull refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, in violation of section 
44939.

3.

The District’s Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges alleged

following charges: that respondent watched pornography on his personal laptop 
computer in classroom at John Burroughs Middle School (Burroughs) and a 
pornographic image was inadvertently viewed by one of his students; that he forged a 
school administrator’s signature on multiple documents without the administrator’s 

ÿ

ÿ

2 ÿOn March 20, 2013, the District issued a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service or 
Acts of Certificated Employee to respondent specifying allegations and charges that 
ultimately constituted the September 27, 2013, Statement of Charges.  On March 20, 
2013, the District also issued a Notice of Suspension to respondent suspending 
respondent for a period of 15 days without pay.

3 ÿAll further statutory references shall be to the Education Code unless 

otherwise specified.

4 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), was changed to 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).

section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

section 44932, subdivision (a)(6).

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).

5 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), was changed to 

6 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), was changed to 

7 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), was changed to 

2

knowledge or authority and submitted the documents to California State University
Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) for his administrative credential; he possessed a 3-3 1/2 
inch locking blade pocket knife on school grounds in violation of school policy; he
touched female students in an inappropriate manner in the classroom; he made
inappropriate statements and gestures to, and in the presence of, students in his
classroom; he allowed a picture of a topless woman to appear on the smart board in
his classroom during class instruction; and respondent showed a picture of two naked 
children to students in the classroom.

Background

4.

Respondent is a 47 year-old teacher who taught sixth grade 

mathematics and science with the District from 2002 until 2012. Respondent
received a Bachelor of Science degree in psychology from CSUDH in 1997.  He was 
hired as an intern by LAUSD in 2002.  In September 2010, he was involuntarily
transferred from Daniel Webster Middle School to Burroughs.  Respondent filed a 
grievance with the District objecting to the transfer to Burroughs.  In 2010, 
respondent attended CSUDH to obtain an administrative credential. Respondent is 
married and has two children, a 10 year-old boy and a 12 year-old girl.  He is very
active in his children’s activities and enjoys an outdoor lifestyle, including 
participating in the Boy Scouts with his son.  Respondent also serves as a chaperone 
for many of his children’s activities.

5.

At all times relevant to the Amended Accusation and Statement of 

Charges the following District policies or guidelines were in effect: the LAUSD Code 
of Conduct with Students (CCS); the LAUSD Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting 
Requirements Policy Bulletin; the LAUSD Employee Code of Ethics (ECE); the
LAUSD Ethics Policy Bulletin; the LAUSD Sexual Harassment Policy; the LAUSD 
Student and Employee Security Policy; the LAUSD Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) for 
District Computer Systems; and the LAUSD Software Policy and Code of Ethics .
Respondent was familiar with, and received annual training on, these policies and 
guidelines. At the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year respondent received the 
John Burroughs Middle School Faculty Handbook which contained copies of all of 
the aforementioned LAUSD policies and guidelines.  Respondent signed a Faculty
Handbook Distribution List acknowledging receipt of the faculty handbook, and on 
September 6, 2011, attended a Burroughs faculty meeting during which these policies 
and guidelines were discussed, disseminated and/or made available to all teachers in 
attendance.

Charge No. 7 (C

 G. Allegations)

6.

In approximately November or December 2011, C

 G., a sixth 

grade student in respondent’s class, ran into respondent’s classroom during lunch 
break to get his physical education (PE) shorts from his backpack. He ran into the 
classroom unannounced and noticed respondent sitting at his (respondent’s) desk.
C

 G. got his PE shorts from his backpack and walked towards respondent’s

3

desk to tell him why he was in the classroom.  As he walked up to respondent’s desk 
C
 G. saw what he described as a pornographic picture of two naked women 
on respondent’s personal laptop computer. D
with him but waited just outside the classroom door.

 G.’s friend, came 

, C

7.

C

 G. was shocked when he saw respondent watching 

 or his

 G. told his parents about the 

pornography on his laptop computer. He did not immediately tell D
parents about the incident. A few days later, C
incident because he believed it was inappropriate for respondent to watch
pornography in the classroom. On December 13, 2011, C
complained to Dr. Steve Martinez, the principal at Burroughs, about the incident. Dr.
Martinez reported the incident to the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) who 
instructed Dr. Martinez to handle the investigation administratively within LAUSD.
Dr. Martinez temporarily removed respondent from the classroom pending an
 G. wrote
investigation. In a written statement dated December 13, 2011, C
that he and Deangelo walked into respondent’s classroom to get their PE shorts when 
they saw respondent watching pornography on the laptop. (Exh. 31.)  Deangelo’s 
written statement, however, indicated that he did not remember walking into 
respondent’s classroom with C

 G. or seeing anything. (Exh. 32.)

 G.’s parents 

8.

At hearing, C

 G. admitted that his written statement was 

inaccurate because D
credibly testified that he included D
with him, and he assumed D
head into the classroom door and asked whether he had gotten his PE shorts.

 did not come into the classroom with him. However, he
 in his statement because D

 saw the pictures because D

 stuck his 

was

9.

Respondent testified that he was not watching pornography on his 

laptop and denied that C
 G. saw pornography on his laptop computer. He
testified that he could not have accessed pornography on his laptop computer in the
classroom because the District has an internet filter which blocked access to 
pornographic websites when using the District’s internet server.  Respondent stated he
would have had to use the District’s internet server to access the internet. Dr.
Martinez confirmed that the District used software which blocked access to 
pornographic websites when using its internet server. Sean Sievers, a LAUSD 
Computer Forensic Specialist, conducted a test of the LAUSD web-content filtering 
technology on September 15, 2015, using a personal laptop computer.  Seivers 
confirmed that the LAUSD internet filter successfully blocked access to pornographic 
websites using the District’s server. Sievers opined, however, that respondent could
nevertheless have viewed pornography on his laptop computer if the pornographic 
material was already stored in respondent’s laptop, negating the requirement to access 
the internet.

10.

Respondent did not complete and submit a LAUSD Property

Registration Form (Exh. 4, pg. 21) to use his personal laptop computer in the 

4

classroom, which is required by the District. 8 Dr. Martinez asked respondent to 
allow the District to inspect his personal laptop but respondent refused, telling Dr. 
Martinez that the burden of proof was on the District to prove the C
 G. 
allegations. Respondent testified that he was uncomfortable allowing the District to 
inspect his personal laptop and he did not believe it was necessary. Because the 
District was not allowed to inspect respondent’s personal laptop, which he was not 
authorized to use in the classroom, the District could not confirm that respondent had 
pornographic materials on his personal laptop.  In January 2012, respondent was 
returned to the classroom after the Christmas break and C
from respondent’s class.

 G. was removed 

11.

C

 G.’s version of this incident is credited over respondent’s 

 G. reported the incident to his parents a 

denial that the incident occurred. C
few days after it occurred. Dr. Martinez testified that he did not believe C
G. had any reason to lie or fabricate the incident, and Dr. Martinez believed the 
student was being truthful. Prior to the District concluding the investigation into this 
incident, respondent donated his personal laptop computer to Goodwill, making the 
computer unavailable for inspection by the District. Respondent’s refusal to allow the
District to inspect the lap and his disposal of the laptop prior to conclusion of the 
investigation shows that respondent did not cooperate with the District’s investigation 
of the incident raises a reasonable inference of guilt or lack of credibility on this 
allegation.  Respondent was also not authorized to use his personal laptop computer in 
the classroom showing that respondent had no instructional related purposes for 
having his personal laptop in the classroom.

 

Charge No.s 15 through 21 (Unauthorized Use of Asst. Principal Helen Yoon’s 
Signature)

12.

On or about December 16, 2011, during an inspection of the LAUSD 

 G. incident investigation, Dr. Martinez discovered three documents that

desktop computer assigned to respondent’s classroom in connection with the 
C
had purportedly been signed by “Dr. Helen Yoon”, the Assistant Principal at 
Burroughs and the Sixth Grade Administrator, in December 2010.9 The documents 
revealed that respondent was enrolled at CSUDH in the Educational Administration 
Program (EAP) during the Fall semester of 2010 seeking his administrative 
credential.  The three documents: a Field Based Project Proposal (Exh. 11); a CSUDH 
EAP Communication Log (Exh. 12); and a “Shadowing Log” (Exh. 13), all had Dr.
Yoon’s forged signature on them. These documents related to a Parent Academic 

ÿ

ÿ

8 ÿA LAUSD Property Registration Form is required for insurance coverage to 

allow teachers who use their personal equipment for instructional or work-related
duties to obtain reimbursement if the equipment is damaged during use in the 
classroom.

9 ÿDr. Yoon testified as Dr. Helen Yoon-Fontamilas.

5

Night Field Project Proposal respondent submitted to his EAP advisor for his 
administrative credential at CSUDH.

13.

At hearing respondent admitted that he forged Dr. Yoon’s signature on 
the documents and that Dr. Yoon had not authorized his use of her signature or served
as his Field Mentor in the field project. Respondent testified that he forged Dr.
Yoon’s signature because he was under a lot of stress trying to complete the CSUDH 
field project, which was complicated and delayed when he was involuntarily
transferred in September 2011 from Webster to Burroughs.  He tried to use the 
Burroughs Parent Academic Night to complete the project but had difficulty getting
his CSUDH advisor to approve his Field Based Project Proposal.  Respondent 
testified that he made a poor choice in forging Dr. Yoon’s signatures and submitting 
documents without her authorization.  Respondent also admitted that entries he made 
on the “Shadowing Log” (Exh. 13, pg. 2) were and that he never enlisted Dr. Yoon to
mentor him for the field project. Dr. Yoon testified that she was not aware of 
respondent’s CSUDH field project or that he was working on his administrative 
credential.  She confirmed that the signatures on the documents were not her 
handwriting and that she had not authorized respondent to submit these documents to 
CSUDH with her signature.

14.

Respondent testified that in January 2011, he withdrew from the 

CSUDH EAP program because the transition from Webster to Burroughs was too 
difficult.  He stated that he did not benefit from forging Dr. Yoon’s signature because 
he did not complete the administrative credential program.  However, respondent 
completed the Fall 2010 semester at CSUDH and received academic credit for his 
field project. Respondent did not disclose to his CSUDH EAP advisor that he had 
forged Dr. Yoon’s signature on documents submitted for the field project or that Dr. 
Yoon had not participated as his mentor in the project.

Charge No.s 13 and 14 (Knife Incident)

15.

On January 19, 2012, Tomas H. Juarez, Burroughs School Safety

Officer. He contacted Dr. Martinez and informed him that respondent had a pocket 
knife clipped to his pants in the school eating area..  Dr. Martinez encountered 
respondent walking towards him and observed a metallic clip on one of respondent’s 
pants pockets contacted Los Angeles School Police Department (LASPD) officer G.
Kim, who was already on the Burroughs school campus.  Dr. Martinez advised officer
Kim that respondent was in possession of a pocket knife on the school campus.

16.

Officers Kim and Juarez located respondent just outside the Burroughs
front school entrance talking on his cell phone.  Officer Kim approached respondent
and asked him if he had a knife and respondent replied “yes.” (Exh. 20, pg. 2.)
Respondent took a folding knife out of his right front pants pocket and handed the 
knife to officer Kim.  Officer Kim informed respondent that it was against the law for 
him to have a knife on the school campus.  Respondent indicated that he did not know 
that it was illegal to possess the knife he possessed on school grounds because he 

6

thought the length of the knife determined its illegality, suggesting that he believed 
his knife was not illegal because of the blade length.  Respondent also told officer 
Kim that he used the knife to open packages and cut things in his classroom and that 
he had brought the knife on campus on multiple occasions.

17.

Officers Kim and Juarez took respondent into custody and escorted him 

to the Burroughs main office where they met with Dr. Martinez.  Dr. Martinez took 
pictures of the pocket knife and observed that the knife had a serrated edge.  (Exh. 
17.) LASPD officer T. Estrella issued respondent a citation for violating Los Angeles 
Municipal Code (LAMC) section 55.10 (carrying a knife in plain view), a 
misdemeanor.  Section 55.10 defines “knife” to include any knife that has a blade of 
three inches or more in length.  (Exh. DD, pg. 1.) Officer Estrella’s LASPD Release
From Custody Report and the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) Property
Report both indicated that the knife confiscated from respondent was a “folding knife, 
approx. 3” blade” (Exh. 20, pp. 2-3). Respondent was reassigned to the local district 
office during the investigation of the knife incident.

18.

Dr. Martinez convened a LAUSD Threat Assessment Team to 

determine whether respondent’s possession of the knife on school grounds posed a 
safety threat to students.  The threat assessment team included Dr. Martinez, Dr. 
Margaret Kim (Dr. Kim), LAUSD Director of Secondary Schools, Local District 3, an 
LASPD officer, a representative from the LAUSD general counsel office, and a 
representative from the LAUSD Mental Health Department.  The threat assessment 
team concluded that respondent was a low threat risk and not a danger to students.
Dr. Kim and Superintendent of Schools Dr. Brenda Manuel interviewed respondent 
after the threat assessment team had met. Respondent was cooperative and appeared
apologetic for bringing the knife on school grounds. He told Dr. Kim that he brought 
the knife to school to open packages, specifically stating that he had difficulty
opening boxes and Student Periodic Assessment (SPA) test packages.  Respondent 
also told Dr. Kim that he that he carried the pocket knife for his personal protection as 
a member of his Neighborhood Watch group.  Dr. Kim believed that respondent had
brought the knife to school on only one occasion. She was not aware that respondent 
had brought the knife to school on multiple occasions. Had Dr. Kim known
respondent had the knife on school grounds on more than one occasion, it would have 
impacted the threat assessment team’s determination that respondent did not pose a 
safety threat to students. Respondent told Dr. Kim that he understood the LAUSD
weapons policy and assured her that he would not bring the pocket knife to school 
again.

19.

The January 19, 2012 citation against respondent based on LAMC, 

section 55.10 was dismissed.  However, the record is unclear regarding the
circumstances surrounding dismissal. The evidence established that the pocket knife
was at least three inches in length.  Dr. Martinez testified that LAUSD school policy
prohibited any weapons on the school campus, including the pocket knife confiscated 
from respondent.  There is signage on the Burroughs school campus clearly notifying
visitors, students, and employees that weapons of any sort are prohibited on school 

7

grounds. Respondent’s pocket knife constituted a weapon prohibited by LAUSD
school policy.

Charge No.s 1 and 2 (R

 D. Allegations)

20.

 D., S

 B., T

 J., and N  H., students in respondent’s 2011-2012

On March 22, 2012, four students came to Dr. Yoon’s office and 
expressed concerns about inappropriate conduct by respondent in the classroom.
R
sixth grade class at Burroughs, came as a group to Dr. Yoon’s office.  Ms. Yoon did 
not interview the students, but instead asked them to prepare written statements 
describing their complaints.  Although the students were in the same room while 
writing their statements, Ms. Yoon observed the students and did not allow them to 
talk to each other or discuss their complaints.  Dr. Yoon informed Dr. Martinez about 
the students’ complaints and gave him their written statements.  Dr. Yoon believed 
the students were telling the truth in their written statements.

21.

In her written statement dated March 22, 2012, R

 D. stated that 
respondent always stared at her and other female students in class and asked them
 D. complained that 
questions like “how was your weekend.” (Exhs. 35 & 61.) R
respondent stared at her constantly in class and spoke to her in a whisper-like tone of 
voice that was creepy and scary.  She felt really uncomfortable and scared in 
respondent’s class.  (Exh. 67.) On one occasion respondent stared at R
and told her to button her shirt.  (Exh. 35.) In February 2012, respondent rubbed
R
This made R
whispered the comment.  In February 2012, respondent also said to R
R
comment.  (Id.) R
and spoke to her.  She stated that respondent “freaks” her out because he watched 
porn videos on his computer. R
 D. stated that she “felt scared” (Exh. 35) and 
“weird” (Exh. 61) as a result of respondent’s conduct.

 D.’s back and whispered to her “how was your weekend?” (Exhs. 35 & 61.)

 good girl,” which she did not like because of the way respondent said the

 D. was uncomfortable with the way respondent stared at her 

 D. uncomfortable and scared because of the way respondent

 D. “Hello 

 D.’s chest

S

22.

 B. and T

 J. observed respondent’s conduct towards R
 B. stated that respondent said “hi” to 

 D. was a “good girl,” and
 D.’s breast.  (Exh. 37.)  She believed respondent “mostly

D., but did not say “hi” to any other students.  (Exh. 36.) T
 D. how her day was, say that R

D. in class.  (Exhs. 36, 37, & 76.)  S
R
respondent ask R
saw him staring at R
says hi only to R
statements and conduct towards R
break.  (Exh. 76.)  N  H. also stated that respondent “touches” R
“hi” to her in class, and also stares at R
respondent looked at children’s bodies in class and talked to students in a “creepy
voice,” describing respondent’s voice as a “whisper like voice.”  (Id.)

 D. during the first semester before the winter 

” in the classroom.  (Id.) T

 J. observed respondent’s 

 D.’s chest. (Exh. 38.) N  H. stated that 

 D. and says

 J. heard

23.

R

 D. was interviewed by LAPD officers C. Cornell Stefan (Ofc.

Stefan) on March 22, 2012, and Melissa Lynch on May 29, 2012.  Consistent with her 

8

 D. told both officers that 
written statements to Ms. Yoon and Dr. Martinez, R
respondent constantly stared at her in class and during stretching exercises which
made her feel very uncomfortable. She told both officers that respondent rubbed her 
back in a circular motion, and told Ofc. Stefan that respondent touched her in this 
manner approximately three times per week beginning in November 2011. R
told Ofc. Lynch that respondent made her feel uncomfortable because “he looks at me 
weird sometimes and the way he talks to me.”  (Exh. 26, p. 1.)  She told Ofc. Lynch
, good girl,” in a tone of voice that was “strange” 
that respondent said “Oh Hi R
and “freaks me out.”  (Id.) R
D. told both officers that in February 2012, she 
began to feel uncomfortable with the way respondent spoke to and touched her in 
class because she heard from other students that respondent watched pornography on
his computer.  She also described an incident in which respondent walked up behind 
her while she was seated at her desk placed his hands on her shoulder and she moved 
away, requiring him to put his hand on her chair.

 D. 

24. When interviewed by Ofc. Lynch on May 10, 2012, respondent denied 
 D. in a different or weird manner or that he had touched or rubbed 

 D. on one occasion when he saw her crying in class and she discussed with him 

speaking to R
her lower back or shoulder.  Respondent told Ofc. Lynch that he had approached 
R
difficulty she was having identifying with her “sexuality.”  R
school administrator, (Ms. Schwartz) that she had spoken with respondent about her 
sexuality.  Ms. Schwartz referred R

 D. to the school counselor, Ms. Bradley.

 D. later told a 

25.

Consistent with the written statements she provided to Ms. Yoon and 

 D. testified that she did 

 D’s attitude towards respondent

 good girl.” Respondent rubbed R

Dr. Martinez, and her statements to the LAPD officers, R
not become concerned or uncomfortable with respondent’s conduct until the second
semester of the 2011-2012 school year.  R
changed when she found out he watched porn on his computer in class.  R
credibly testified that respondent rubbed her back in class and made comments to her 
such as “hi R
motion which made her feel uncomfortable, and he did not touch any other student’s 
back in a similar manner.  R
 D. said respondent’s “weird” tone of voice made her 
very uncomfortable and she believed he spoke to her differently compared to other 
students in the class. She described respondent’s tone of voice as being 
“pedophilish,” and stated that he sounded like a “rapist or pedophile” that she had 
seen on television. She was genuinely disturbed by respondent touching and speaking 
to her in this sexual manner. R
staring at her and standing behind her desk for long periods during class.

 D. was also very uncomfortable with respondent

 D.’s back in a massaging 

 D. 

R

26.
 B. and N  H. S

 D.’s allegations were further supported by the testimony of 
 B. observed respondent rubbing R

S
back in the classroom on multiple occasions but could not recall exactly when the 
incidents occurred.  She believed it was during the first semester of the 2011-2012
school year, but stated she did not report the incidents until March 2012. S
felt awkward and uncomfortable when she saw respondent touching R
 B. believed respondent spoke to R
manner.  S

 D. in a very personal way,

 B. 
 D. in this 

D.’s lower 

9

which was different than how he spoke to other students.  She also believed
respondent would ask female students how their day was, but he never asked male 
students about their day.  According to S
students in a “creepy way,” and she believed his personal conduct in class was 
offensive and inappropriate. Even though she did not complain about respondent’s 
conduct until March 2012, S
respondent being “creepy” well before she made her complaint.

 B. stated that she and her classmates talked about 

 B., respondent spoke to her and other 

27.

N  H. testified that respondent stared at R

 D. in a sexual way,
 D. than he did any other

 D. about her vacation 

 D. was uncomfortable when respondent touched her in that 

 D. on the shoulders when he asked her about her vacation.
 D.’s shoulders, and 

and she believed respondent paid more attention to R
student in the class.  She recalled that respondent asked R
while neglecting to ask any other students about their vacation.  She observed 
respondent touching R
N  H. was disgusted by respondent putting his hands on R
believed that R
manner. Although N  H.’s written statements indicated that she saw respondent 
looking at R
 D.’s breast and she did not recall this incident at hearing.  She also 
did not recall stating that she “felt like I was about to be raped” (Exh. 38) in 
respondent’s class, but she believes she wrote this comment because she was 
disturbed after observing respondent touching R
scared in respondent’s class which made her believe that she could have been raped in 
his class.  In hindsight, however, she testified she probably would not include that 
statement in her written statement today. N  H. maintained that her written
statements otherwise accurately reflected what she observed in respondent’s class and 
that she still believed respondent spoke to R
inappropriate and made her feel very uncomfortable.

 D.  N  H. was nervous and 

 D. in a sexual way that was 

28.

 D.’s back, 

Respondent testified that he did not remember rubbing R
but admitted that he could have done so.  He stated he did not believe he rubbed her 
back in a circular motion but he may have touched her back, and the student 
misunderstood the touching.  Respondent admitted that he could have asked R
how her weekend was or words to that effect, but he denied that he stared at the 
 D.’s and other 
student in class. He admitted that he may have whispered in R
students’ ears at times, but he did this so that he would not disturb other students 
when he was speaking to a student. Respondent denied that he intentionally stood
behind R
the best vantage point to observe the entire class when the students were doing work 
or testing and it allowed him to monitor or prevent talking in class. Respondent
suggested that he may have treated R
she was experiencing difficulty identifying her sexuality.

 D.’s desk in class, but stated that he stood in that location because it was 

 D. differently because he was aware that 

 D. 

29.

In March 2012, respondent had a conversation with R

 D. about her 

sexuality. Respondent approached R
asked her what was wrong. R
regarding her sexuality. R
respondent regarding her sexuality and but she did not recall the specifics of the 

 D. admitted that she had a conversation with 

 D. in class after he saw her crying and 

 D. disclosed to respondent that she had questions 

10

 

 D. differently than

 D. to the school counselor after this 

conversation.  Respondent referred R
conversation. Although respondent denied that he treated R
any other student, he admitted that after this conversation, he may have given R
D. a “little more special attention” because he was trying to be supportive of her after 
their discussion about her sexuality. The evidence, however, established that 
respondent began touching and rubbing R
inappropriate and sexual manner as early as November 2011.  R
especially sensitive to respondent’s conduct in February 2012, well before her
conversation with respondent her sexuality in March 2012. To the extent respondent 
attempts to suggest that R
sexuality with him, it is important to note that R
to engage in this conversation, but that respondent approached the student after he 
saw her crying in class. Consequently, respondent’s assertion that he treated R
differently because he knew she was experiencing difficulty with her sexuality is not 
credible.

 D. was comfortable enough with him to discuss her 

 D.’s back and speaking to her in an 

D. did not approach respondent 

 D. became 

 D. 

30.

Dr. Martinez and Dr. Yoon testified that they believed R

 D. was 

 D.’s written statements.  Both Ofc. 

telling the truth about the allegations in R
Stefan and Ofc. Lynch testified at hearing.  They both believed R
truthful when she was interviewed by the officers.  Although Ofc. Stefan was 
concerned that R
 D. may have been influenced by rumors that respondent 
 D.’s 
watched pornography on his computer, Ofc. Stefan was satisfied that R
statements were not unduly influenced by such rumors because of the manner in 
 J. and 
which the interview was conducted.  Ofc. Lynch believed R

 D., T

 D. was being 

|
P

 B. were all being truthful when they described respondent’s conduct toward 
 D.  Although Ofc. Lynch was aware that the students had heard rumors about 
respondent’s conduct in class she believed that their statements were credible.  Ofc. 
Lynch did not believe respondent was telling the truth when he denied ever touching 
 D.  Respondent was fidgety during the interview with Ofc. Lynch and did not 

make eye contact.  Ofc. Lynch submitted respondent’s case for prosecution to the 
District Attorney twice, but it was rejected both times.

31.

The evidence established that respondent inappropriately touched R

D., spoke to her in a whisper-like sexual tone of voice, treated her differently that he 
treated other students in his class, and that this conduct made the student feel very 
uncomfortable.

Charge No. 3 (I

 V. Allegation)

32.

In October 2012, I

 V. complained that respondent rubbed his 

 V.’s hand on three occasions while the

“pickle” (referring to penis) up against I
student’s hand was resting on his desk in class.  (Exh. 66.) These incidents occurred 
 V. told Ofc. Stefan that respondent
between September 2011 and January 2012.  I
rubbed his penis up against his hand as respondent walked through the aisles in the 
classroom, and that the aisles in the classroom were wide enough for respondent to 
walk through without rubbing up against I

 V.’s hand. (Exh. 24.)

11

33.

At hearing, I

 V. testified that respondent rubbed his genitals up 
against his hand, estimating that this occurred approximately four times.  He was 
surprised, freaked out, and felt weird as a result of respondent’s conduct.  I
 V. 
testified that respondent intentionally touched him in this manner the first two times, 
and admitted that on one occasion respondent accidently rubbed up against his hand
and apologized. I
 V. described respondent as being “creepy” and stated that entire 
sixth grade class also felt this way about respondent. He admitted that he and most of 
the students were aware of the rumors that respondent had been caught watching 
“porn” on his laptop computer in class.  I
was “perverted” and “sexually gross” and this impacted how he felt about being in 
respondent’s class.

 V. heard students saying that respondent 

34.

I

 V. admitted, however, that the rumors about respondent made him 

believe that respondent intentionally rubbed his genitals against his hand. In
hindsight, I
 V. believes that respondent accidently rubbed up against his hand.  He 
is also not sure that respondent’s genitals, as opposed to his thigh or leg, had pressed
up against his hand. Contrary to his statements to LAPD officers, I
that the aisles between the desks in the classroom were narrow, which may have
caused respondent to rub up against his hand accidently.

 V. admitted

35.

I

 V. told M

 M. that respondent had rubbed up against his hand 

 M. saw 

M. recalled that I

 V.’s fingers which were on his 

and that he was uncomfortable and freaked out by the incidents. M
respondent press the “front” of his “hip” up against I
desk. She could not be sure if respondent’s “private parts” touched I
M
occurred.  She did not know whether respondent pressed up against I
intentionally or not, but she testified that it did not appear that respondent intended to 
make I
though the incident was odd or weird, she remembered she thought it was funny at the 
time and I
occurred during the first semester of the 2011-2012 school year.

 V. looked shocked and uncomfortable when the incident 

 V. uncomfortable by respondent’s actions. M

 V. laughed about it as well. M

 M. recalled that this incident 

 M. recalled that even 

 V.’s hand 

 V.’s hand.

36.

Respondent denies that he intentionally rubbed his genitals up against 

I
 V.’s hand, but admitted that it was possible that his lower body may have touched 
the student as he walked through the aisles in the classroom.  He stated that the aisles 
were only two feet wide in the classroom and I
 V.’s desk was next to the projector 
table which made the passage next to I
 V.’s desk even narrower. Students’ books 
and backpacks that were also frequently in the aisles. Thus, it is possible
respondent’s lower body could have touched I
aisles during classroom instruction. However, given I
respondent genitals rubbed up against his hand, the student’s admission that he now 
believes respondent accidently rubbed against his hand, and respondent’s the 
plausible explanation that his lower body may have accidently touched the student’s 
hand because of the narrowness of the aisles in the classroom, there is insufficient 
evidence to substantiate I

 V.’s hand as he walked through the 

 V.’s lack of certainty that

 V.’s allegation.

12

Charge No. 8 (Christmas Carol Incident)

37.

In December 2011, respondent and his sixth grade class was singing a 

Christmas carol along with song lyrics that were scrolling on the classroom smart
board. Respondent was using his personal laptop computer and playing his guitar 
with a computer program that scrolled the song lyrics on the classroom smart board.
At some point an image of a scantly clothed or naked woman popped up on the smart
board (Christmas carol incident). Several students witnessed the Christmas carol 
incident but the students’ description of the female image varied.  The general 
description of the image was that of a female scantly clothed, or was either naked or 
covering her breasts with her hands. Respondent immediately turned the image off
after it appeared.  However, several students saw the image and began laughing about 
the incident.

R

38.
 D. described the image as a naked girl covering her breasts.
 B. saw an image of a “completely naked” girl pop up on the smart board

S
(Exh. 36.), but at hearing described the image as a woman in her underwear and bra.
J. saw an image of a naked “woman showing her breast with nipples.”  (Exh. 
T
37, p.2.)  N  H. said the image showed a woman’s “nipples” (Exh. 38, p. 2), and
she referred to the image as “porn” (Exh. 63.)  However, at hearing, N  H. admitted 
that she did not see the female image and that her written statement was based on 
other students’ statements. The students generally believed that the image appeared 
accidently as an advertisement pop-up and stated that respondent took the image 
down immediately. They all generally thought the incident was funny.

39.

Respondent admitted that an image of a female popped up while the 
students were singing Christmas carols in class, but he recalled the image was of a 
female wearing a bikini. He stated that he accessed a website called “Ultimate 
Guitar” through the LAUSD school server and he used the Christmas carol song 
lyrics from the website for the students to sing the carol.  Respondent had never seen 
any inappropriate material on this website.  Respondent was surprised when a picture 
of a scantly clothed female popped up on the smart board and he closed his laptop 
computer immediately. Respondent admitted the students started snickering and 
laughing when they saw the image of the female.

40.

Although the recollections of the students and respondent vary as to the 

description of the female image that appeared on the smartboard, the evidence 
conclusively established that the image was of a female who was scantly clothed or
partially naked. The image was inappropriate for a classroom of sixth graders as was 
evidenced by respondent immediately closing his laptop to prevent his students from 
seeing the image. Respondent did not intend for the image to be shown to his 
students. The students did not believe that respondent intentionally displayed the
female image. The students all believed the image popped up as part of an 
advertisement. However, respondent again was using his unauthorized personal 
laptop computer for instructional purposes in the classroom.  He is responsible for 

13

exposing students to inappropriate images as a result of using his personal laptop in 
the classroom.

41.

Because the District’s internet blocking software prevented access to 
websites that would display such an image, Siever, the District’s Computer Forensic 
Specialist, believed that the female image popped up on respondent’s laptop computer 
as a “residual browser artifact.” He explained the image was probably already on
respondent’s laptop as a result of respondent previously visiting “blacklisted 
websites” off-line from the District’s internet server.  He opined that the image 
popped up even though the District’s internet filtering software blocked access to 
such websites because the image was already stored in respondent’s laptop.  Because 
respondent refused to allow the District to inspect his personal laptop, it could not be 
confirmed how the female image appeared and from what source it originated. Siever
admitted that residual browser artifacts could appear with any teacher’s use of a 
computer that is used off-line from the District’s internet server and that there was no 
technology that could prevent residual browser artifacts from popping up. Siever
admitted that respondent could have unintentionally and unknowingly visited a
blacklisted or porn website, and consequently stored adult images in the residual 
browser artifacts on his computer without his knowledge.

42.

Respondent used his unauthorized personal laptop computer for 

instructional purposes in the classroom.  As a result, an inappropriate female image 
was exposed to his students during the Christmas carol incident.  Although 
respondent did not intend to expose his student to this image, he is responsible 
nevertheless because he used an unauthorized computer for instructional purposes.
The evidence established that the District’s internet filtering software was working 
properly and that the inappropriate female image was stored in respondent’s personal 
laptop computer, and did not appear as a result of a failure of the District’s internet 
blocking software.

Charge No.s 4, 5, 9, 10, 11 and 12 (Respondent’s Inappropriate Gestures and 
Statements In Class)

43.

Several students described gestures and statements by respondent in the 

classroom during the 2011-2012 school year that were weird, strange and
inappropriate.

44.

S

 B. stated that respondent “lifts his shirt up in kid’s faces and 

rubs his back” in class, and “when he bends over his butt is in children’s face.” (Exh.
36.) She testified that respondent lifts his shirt and scratches himself and bends over 
exposing his underwear while performing stretching exercises with students.
Although she admitted that she did not think respondent purposefully did this during 
stretching exercises, she stated that he exposed himself to students in this manner on
multiple other occasions not involving stretching exercises.

14

45. M

 J. observed respondent touching his “private parts” between his 

legs in the classroom and felt uncomfortable every time respondent did this.  (Exh. 
65.)  He testified that respondent would scratch himself in the genital area frequently
during class and that this conduct shocked him and made him feel scared in 
respondent’s class.

46.

Respondent referred to “M

,” a student in respondent’s sixth grade 

class during the 2011-2012 school year, as “honey” and frequently called M
and other students in the class “sweetie.”

 M. 

47.

S

 B. and T

 J. heard respondent use the term “decimal porn” 

in class (Exhs. 36 & 37.), and N  H. stated respondent said “porn” in class on at 
least one occasion (Exh. 38). Respondent denied ever using the term “decimal porn”
in class, but instead admitted that he frequently used the phrase “decimal form” 
referring to a mathematic phrase.  He denies ever using the word porn in class or 
talking about sex or pornography in class. S
respondent said “decimal porn” instead of “decimal form” in class and N  H. 
testified that she could not recall whether respondent ever used the word “porn” in 
class.

 B. testified that she was certain 

48.

T

 J., who did not testify at hearing, alleged in January 2012 she 

 B. observed the incident and said 

 B. testified that respondent was definitely staring at T

dropped her pencil box next to her desk, and respondent picked up the case and “came 
up very slowly” while looking at her legs (pencil box incident). (Exhs. 37 and 62.)
When she thanked him for picking up her pencil box, respondent said “your well-well
in a soft sensual tone”.  (Exh. 62.)  S
respondent came up “really slow” while looking at T
S
 J.’s legs when he 
picked up the pencil box.  N  H. also observed the pencil box incident and believed 
respondent was staring at T
disturbed when she noticed respondent intentionally looking at T
Respondent denied he looked at T
back problems which explained why he may have come up slowing from picking up 
the pencil box.

 J.’s legs (Exhs. 63 & 69), and she testified she was 

 J.s legs but stated that he was having lower 

 J.’s legs.  (Exh. 36, p. 2.)

 J.’s legs.

49.

N  H. recalled an incident in which she was eating food in class and 

hiding the food in her lap.  Respondent saw N  H. eating the food and came over 
and took the food from her.  (Exhs. 63 and 69.) The District alleges that respondent 
took the food directly from N  H.’s lap. At hearing, however, N  H. admitted 
that she handed the food to respondent and that he did not take the food from her lap.

50.

Students described these gestures and statement by respondent as being

“creepy or “weird” and respondent’s conduct made the students fearful and
uncomfortable in his class. Many of the students stated that respondent stared at 
students in a manner that was uncomfortable. The students were uncomfortable with 
respondent calling them “honey or “sweetie” in class and believed respondent was 

15

creepy and a perverted.  They expressed feeling unsafe, scared, nervous and shocked 
by things respondent would do and say in class.

51.

Respondent testified that many of the complaints by the students were 

 G. 
taken out of context because of the rumors associated with the C
incident. He admitted that he that he stared at students in class for classroom 
management purposes.  He stated that he would frequently stare at students when they
were goofing off and he wanted to signal to the student to get back on task. He
admitted that he led stretching exercises with his students but denied that he looked at 
students’ butts or touched any student during such exercises. He admitted that his 
shirt may have lifted during these stretching exercises but that it was not intentional.
Respondent also admitted that he may have unconsciously scratched or touched his 
genitals or bent over and exposed his underwear in the classroom during instruction.
But he denies that any such incident was intentional.  Respondent denied that he made 
sexual jokes or statements in class. He stated that the complaints by his students 
raised his awareness of his in-class conduct and that he probably will do a lot things 
differently going forward.

52.

 G., respondent believed that the students were genuinely expressing how 

Respondent admitted that after hearing his students’ testimony, he 
understood how and why the students could make these allegations. Except for 
C
they felt about his conduct in the classroom. He believed that C
allegations influenced several of the students’ opinions about him and contributed to 
many of the students taking his statements and gestures out of context.  Respondent 
testified that he regretted what his students had gone through during the investigation 
and stated that he would apologize to each student if given the opportunity.

 G.’s

53.

The evidence established that the students in respondent’s class were

 

 G. and R

 G. incident.  Several students also observed respondent 
 D. and treating her differently than other female 

aware of the C
inappropriately touching R
students in the class. Not unexpectedly, students’ perceptions of respondent were 
influenced by what they heard and observed regarding the C
D. incidents. As a result, students’ fears, discomfort and concerns regarding
respondent’s conduct may have contributed to them misinterpreting benign or 
otherwise innocuous gestures and statements by respondent. However, the evidence 
established that respondent in fact did make several of the gestures and statements 
attributed to him by the students.  Respondent stared at his students in an 
inappropriate manner, he exposed himself by lifting his shirt and scratching himself, 
and bending over and showing his underwear, he frequently touched his genitals in an 
inappropriate manner in the presence of his students, used the term “decimal porn” in 
class, and referred to his students as “honey” and “sweetie” in class. Even if 
respondent was unaware and did not intend to make these gestures and statements,
such conduct by a teacher is inappropriate in the classroom. It was not established 
that respondent took food directly from N  H’s lap or that he intentionally looked at 
T
by the evidence.

 J.’s legs. These complaints by N  H. and T

 J. were not substantiated 

16

Charge No. 6 (Naked Picture of Respondent’s Two Children)

 J. and M

54. M

 complained that in September or October 2011, 
respondent showed the class a slide show that included a photo of two naked children
that were between five and seven years of age. M
statement (Exh. 73) that he felt very strange and awkward after seeing the photos of 
 J. indicated that he felt shocked and uncomfortable after 
the naked children.  M
seeing the photos.  (Exh. 65.) M
 J. testified that respondent showed students a 
slide show of students from respondent’s previous classes.  He stated that the photo of 
the naked children was odd or weird and that he was “shocked” by the photo. M
J. initially thought that the photo of the naked children was inappropriate, but he 
testified that he now does not think the photo was inappropriate.  M
 did not 
testify at hearing.

 indicated in his written 

55.

Respondent admitted that the photo was a picture of his two young 

children naked who were less than two years old at the time the pictures were taken, 
not five and seven years old as alleged in the District.  He showed the slides of his 
former students and his family at the beginning of the school year as an icebreaking 
exercise to introduce himself to his new students. Respondent stated that the students 
laughed when they saw the naked pictures of his children.  He admitted that he should 
not have included the naked photo of his children in the slide show.

56.

Respondent’s decision to include the naked photograph of his children 
in the slide show, as he now admits, was not a prudent decision.  However, the naked 
photo of respondent’s very young or infant children cannot be construed as 
pornography or sexually motivated. The children were not five or seven years old as 
alleged by the District and respondent’s motive in showing the photos was
reasonable. Including the naked photo of his infant children, although not advisable, 
was not inappropriate conduct.

Conference Meetings and Performance Evaluations

57.

G. allegation was not discussed at this meeting.  At the meeting

On January 24, 2012, Dr. Martinez convened a conference meeting 
with respondent to discuss the January 19, 2012, knife incident, the December 16, 
2011 discovery of Dr. Yoon’s forged signatures on documents submitted for 
respondent’s administrative credentials, and respondent’s use of the classroom 
desktop computer during class for personal reasons unrelated to instruction.  The 
C
respondent asserted that he used the knife to open boxes and SPA packages and that 
he did not know the knife was prohibited by the LAUSD weapons policy.
Respondent declined to answer questions regarding his forging Dr. Yoon’s signatures 
on CSUDH EAP documents, or his use of the classroom desktop to access internet 
websites for personal use during classroom instruction time.  Dr. Martinez counseled 
respondent that it was illegal to bring a knife or any type of weapon to the school 
campus, that it was inappropriate for respondent to sign an administrator’s signature 

17

on documents without their approval, and that it was inappropriate for respondent to 
use District’s computers for personal use during class.  Following the January 24,
2012, conference meeting respondent was returned to the classroom.

58.

On May 11, 2012, respondent was given his Personnel Final Evaluation 

for the 2011-2012 school year. Although respondent questioned the validity of the 
evaluation at hearing, both Dr. Martinez and respondent signed the evaluation on May
11, 2012. Respondent was evaluated as having a “Below Standard Performance” for 
the 2011-2012 school year and identified several specific deficiencies including: 

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Failure to follow District policy on the use of audio-visual
materials.  Audio-visual materials are used without adequate 
evaluation or regard for appropriateness and effectiveness.
Inappropriate use of instructional time.
Violation of the Acceptable Use Policy when viewing 
inappropriate materials on the computer.
Failure to adhere to the District policy Code of Conduct with 
Students.
Your inappropriate conduct with a student in the classroom has 
resulted in a lack of continuity in the instructional program.
Failure to follow District policy and the Education Code.  Your 
possession of a locking-blade knife on school grounds without 
adequate evaluation or regard for appropriateness.

Dr. Martinez made recommendations to respondent for improving his performance, 
counseled respondent on his strengths and weaknesses, and referred respondent to the 
appropriate District policies and guidelines for his review.

59.

Other than the May 11, 2012 Personnel Final Evaluation, respondent 
received satisfactory performance evaluations from the District indicating an overall 
evaluation that he “Meets Standard Performance.”

60.

On December 11, 2012, Dr. Martinez convened a conference meeting 
with respondent to discuss the District’s administrative investigation into complaints 
made by students in his 2011-2012 sixth grade class at Burroughs. The District 
convened this conference meeting after the investigation revealed additional student 
complaints arising from interviews conducted between June and October 2012.
Respondent was advised of the multiple allegations made by several students in his 
2011-2012 sixth grade class at Burroughs, including the allegations by C
G., R
essentially denied all of the allegations against him and suggested that R
not credible because the student was seeing a psychologist a few times per week.
Respondent was counseled regarding the alleged conduct and provided pertinent 
LAUSD policies and guidelines related to respondent’s conduct with students.

 V., N  H., T

. Respondent

 J., and M

 D. was 

 J., M

D., I

18

61.

Respondent was removed from the classroom on March 22, 2012, 

pending the LAUSD administrative investigation into the students’ complaints. On
March 20, 2013, the District provided respondent with a Notice of Unsatisfactory
Service or Act(s) and a Notice of Suspension on the basis of the allegations in 
subsequently alleged in the District’s Amended Accusation.

62.

Respondent has no prior history of disciplinary action taken by the

District.  By all accounts, prior to the Statement of Charges and Amended Accusation
in this case, respondent had met all of the performance standards required by the
District.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Burden and Standard of Proof

1.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter and the standard of 
proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner
v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-
1040.) Proof by a preponderance of the evidence requires a showing that it is more 
likely than not to be true. In other words, the evidence is more convincing than that 
which is offered in opposition.  (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC 
(2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a 

dismissal hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) When a school board 
recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on Professional Competence may
only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge 
seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction.  (Ed. Code, §
44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)10 The Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final 
decision of the District’s governing board.  (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.) “The Commission has broad discretion in 
determining what constitutes unfitness to teach . . ., and whether dismissal or 
suspension is the appropriate sanction.”  (Id. at pp. 343-344.) Thus, even where cause 
for dismissal has been established, a Commission still has broad discretion to 
determine whether such discipline is actually warranted.  (Fontana Unified School 
Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)

ÿ

ÿ

10 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44944, subdivision (c)(1-3), was changed 

to section 44944, subdivision (d). 

19

Determination of Charges

I.

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT &UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE

3.

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for unprofessional conduct 
pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), or unsatisfactory performance pursuant 
to section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).

4.

Unprofessional conduct as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), 

may be defined as conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is 
unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of Ed. v. Swan 
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled in part, on another ground, in Bekiaris v. Board 
of Ed. (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.)

5.

The term “unsatisfactory performance” is not specifically defined in the 

Education Code or case law.  Inasmuch as there is separate cause for dismissal for 
unprofessional conduct in subdivision (a) of section 44932, and we are not to presume 
the Legislature intended to enact completely duplicative statutes (In re Maes (2010)
185 Cal.App.4th 1094, 1110), unsatisfactory performance must mean something 
different from unprofessional conduct.  In fact, section 44938, subdivision (c), 
specifies that “unsatisfactory performance” does not include any other cause for 
dismissal specified in section 44932.

6.

While unprofessional conduct can be determined by analyzing a 
teacher’s conduct relative to the broader educational community, unsatisfactory
performance must be analyzed with an eye toward the teacher’s performance as 
evaluated by his or her employing school district.  Section 44938 supports this 
proposition. Section 44938 requires a charge of unsatisfactory performance to be 
preceded by a written notice of unsatisfactory performance, and refers to section 
44660 et seq., which in turn establish guidelines for how school districts should 
evaluate and assess the performance of their certificated employees. Thus, cause for 
discipline may be established if a certificated employee performs unsatisfactorily to
his employing school district. 

7.

However, the purpose of the statute giving tenure to teachers is to 

insure an efficient permanent staff of teachers whose members are not dependent on 
caprice for their positions as long as they conduct themselves properly and perform 
their duties efficiently and well.  (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. 
Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1293, fn 20, citing 56 
Cal.Jur.3d (2003) Schools, § 411, p. 757.)  Therefore, a reasonable limitation is that 
an employing school district cannot be arbitrary or capricious in making decisions 
regarding whether a certificated employee has performed unsatisfactorily.

8.

Section 44938, subdivision (a), provides that “[t]he governing board of 
any school district shall not act upon any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at 
least 45 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the board or its authorized 

20

representative has given the employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice 
of the unprofessional conduct, specifying the nature thereof with such specific 
instances of behavior and with such particularity as to furnish the employee an 
opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. …”

9.

Section 44938, subdivision (b), provides that the governing board shall 

not act upon any charges of unsatisfactory performance unless it acts in accordance 
with the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2):

(1) At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the 
board or its authorized representative has given the employee
against whom the charge is filed, written notice of the 
unsatisfactory performance, specifying the nature thereof with 
such specific instances of behavior and with such particularity
as to furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her 
faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. …”

(2) The governing board may act during the time period composed of 
the last one-fourth of the schooldays it has scheduled for purposes of 
computing apportionments in any fiscal year if, prior to the beginning 
of that time period, the board or its authorized representative has given 
the employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice of the
unsatisfactory performance, specifying the nature thereof with such 
specific instances of behavior and with such particularity as to furnish 
the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome 
the grounds for the charge. …”

10.

Here, although respondent’s conduct as alleged in Charge No.s 1, 2, 4, 

5, 7, 8, 9, and 12 through 21 may have constituted unprofessional conduct or 
unsatisfactory performance, the District failed to provide respondent the required 
notice under section 44938, subdivisions (a) and (b), and an opportunity to correct or
cure his unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance after he received notice 
of such conduct.  The evidence established that the District provided respondent a 
Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts or Services on March 20, 2013, and issued the 
Statement of Charges in this case on September 27, 2013.  However, respondent was 
removed from his classroom and placed at one of the District’s administrative offices 
on March 22, 2012, where he remained until he received the Notice of Unsatisfactory
Acts or Services and his Notice of Suspension on March 20, 2013. Consequently,
respondent was not provided an opportunity to correct his faults and overcome the 
grounds for the charges giving rise to the causes for dismissal based on 
unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance after receiving the March 20, 
2013 notice. (See Tarquin v. Commission on Professional Competence (1978) 84 
Cal.App.3d 251; Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1446.) This jurisdictional defect is fatal to 
the District’s causes for dismissal on the grounds of unprofessional conduct and 
unsatisfactory performance.

21

II.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

11.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct pursuant to 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), by reason of Factual Findings 4 through 14 and 20 
through 31.

12.

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 

44939, has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.  It is sometimes used as synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of 
unfairness.  (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. 
Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)  Immoral conduct can be construed 
according to common usage.  “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that 
which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.
Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent 
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as 
willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. 
Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)

13.

The Commission may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and 
reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens v. 
Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact, here the Commission, 
may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted,
and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the 
testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.”
(Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)
And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence,” 
including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance, 
supra, 189 Cal.App.3d at 1052.)

14.

A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent’s conduct 

as alleged in Charge No.s 1, 2, 7, and 15 through 21 of the Amended Accusation 
constituted immoral conduct.

15.

Respondent admittedly forged Dr. Yoon’s signature on multiple 

documents that he submitted to CSUDH for academic credit for an administrative 
credential.  Dr. Yoon did not authorize respondent to use her signature or have any
knowledge of his actions.  Respondent’s unauthorized use and forging of Dr. Yoon’s 
signature was willful, flagrant and shameless and evidenced dishonesty and a moral 
indifference to opinions of respectable members of the community. (Board of 
Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland, supra, 179
Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)

22

16.

G.’s version of this incident is found to be more credible than

Respondent watched pornography on his personal laptop computer in 
 G. inadvertently seeing pornographic images.
 G. saw pornography on his laptop, 

the classroom, resulting in C
Although respondent denied that C
C
respondent’s denial.  Respondent refused to allow the District to his inspect his 
personal laptop computer and discarded the computer before the District could 
complete the investigation of the incident.  Evidence Code section 413 provides that 
the trier of fact may consider a party’s willful suppression of evidence relating to a 
case and draw an inference from the evidence or facts in the case against the party
suppressing such evidence.  (See Thor v. Boska M.D. (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 558, 567 
[“that a party’s . . . suppression of evidence by . . . spoliation . . ., is receivable against 
him as an indication of his consciousness That his case is a weak or unfounded one; 
and from that consciousness may be inferred the fact itself of the cause’s lack of truth 
and merit].)  Respondent’s unwillingness to allow the District to inspect his personal 
laptop during the investigation into C
 G.’s allegation that the student saw 
pornography on respondent’s laptop allows an inference that the student’s allegation
was true.  This inference, coupled with respondent’s proven propensity for dishonesty
as evidenced by his unauthorized use of Dr. Yoon’s signature, severely damages
respondent’s credibility on this incident, which was witnessed by only he and the 
student.

17.

Respondent also touched and spoke to R

 D. special because he was aware she was having difficulty with her 

 D. in an inappropriate 
sexual manner on multiple occasions and treated her differently than other female 
students in his class.  Respondent’s conduct towards R
 D. made her and other 
students in the class very uncomfortable. Although respondent claimed that he 
treated R
sexuality, the evidence showed that respondent’s discussion with R
 D. about her 
sexuality occurred towards of the end of March 2012.  The evidence established that 
respondent rubbed R
differently than he treated other students as early as November 2011.  R
credibly testified that she became concerned about respondent’s conduct in February
2012.  Thus, respondent’s explanation for why he treated R
credible.

 D.’s back, spoke to her in sexual tones and treated her
 D. 

 D. “special” is not 

18.

Respondent’s conduct in allowing an inappropriate picture of a scantly
clothed or naked female to appear on the classroom smartboard during the Christmas
carol incident, his bringing a 3-31/2 inch locking blade pocket knife on school 
grounds on multiple occasions in violation of the LAUSD weapons policy, and
making inappropriate gestures and statements to and in the presence of his students, 
was ill-advised, in poor judgment, and in violation of school policies.  However, this
conduct does not meet the definition of immorality as specified by the courts in 
Weiland and Palos Verdes.  These actions were not flagrant, shameless, indecent, or 
corrupt or morally indifferent to respectable members of the community.

23

III.

DISHONESTY

19.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for dishonesty pursuant to section 

44932, subdivision (a)(3), by reason of Factual Findings 12 through 14.

20.

“Dishonesty” has been defined as conduct that “connotes a disposition 

to deceive” and “necessarily includes the element of bad faith.” It means “fraud,
deception, betrayal, faithlessness,” and “denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition 
to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray.” (Midway School District v. 
Griffith (1946) 29 Cal.2d 13.)

21.

Respondent signed Dr. Yoon’s signature on multiple documents for

purposes of obtaining an administrative credential and submitted to the documents to 
CSUDH without Dr. Yoon’s knowledge or authorization. This conduct clearly
constituted dishonesty.

IV.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

22.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for evident unfitness for service

pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), by reason of Factual Findings 5 through
31, 37 through 47, 50 through 53, and 57 through 62.

23.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), provides that the District may

suspend or dismiss a permanent employee for “evident unfitness for service.”
“Evident unfitness for service,” within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(5), means clearly not fit or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of a 
temperamental defect or inadequacy.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445
(Woodland).)  Evident unfitness for services requires that unfitness be attributable to a 
defect in temperament which “connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not
remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 
employing school district.”  (Id.)

24.

Here, respondent committed multiple acts of misconduct which 

established that he is evidently unfit for service.  In December 2011, C
 G. 
observed respondent watching pornography on his laptop computer in the classroom 
and that same month, during the Christmas carol incident, respondent’s students were 
exposed to a pop-up image of a naked or scantly clothed woman on respondent’s 
classroom smart board, again while using his personal laptop computer.  In December 
2011, the District also discovered that respondent had forged Dr. Yoon’s signature on 
multiple documents submitted for academic credit for his administrative credential.
The very next month, on January 19, 2012, respondent was discovered in possession 
of 3-31/2 inch pocket knife on school grounds in violation of the LAUSD weapons 
policy, which he admitted that he brought on school grounds on multiple occasions.
On January 24, 2012, Dr. Martinez counseled respondent about forging Dr. Yoon’s 
signature and the knife incident.  Thereafter, between March 2012 and October 2012, 

24

 D. inappropriately and spoke to her in a 

respondent committed multiple acts of inappropriate conduct with students in his 
classroom.  Respondent touched R
sexual, whisper-like tone of voice, and made inappropriate statements and gestures to, 
and in the presence of, multiple other students in his class.  These gestures and 
statements included: calling students “honey” and “sweetie”; staring at students in a 
weird and inappropriate manner; stating “decimal porn” in classroom; inappropriately
exposing his body and underwear in class; and inappropriately touching his genitals in 
class. Respondent’s students described him as being perverted, creepy and weird, and 
they all expressed that they fearful, uncomfortable, nervous, and felt unsafe in 
respondent’s class.

25.

Based on these multiple incidents of misconduct, the District has 

established that respondent suffers from a temperamental defect and inadequacy that
connotes a fixed character trait that is presumed not remedial. Accordingly, the 
District established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent is evident
unfit for service.

V.

APPLICATION OF THE MORRISON FACTORS

26.

To terminate the teacher on grounds of immoral conduct, dishonesty, or 

evident unfitness for service, it must also be established that the conduct renders the 
teacher unfit to teach.  (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
229-230.) The Morrison analysis does not apply to causes for dismissal for 
unsatisfactory performance or persistent violation of school rules, laws or policies 
because such causes of action, by definition, have a direct nexus to teaching. (Id., at 
pp. 227-230.) ÿ“[A]n individual can be removed from the teaching profession only
upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm 
to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as 
a teacher.”  (Id., at p. 235.) Thus, a determination of unfitness requires an analysis
based on criteria set forth in Morrison.

27.

In Morrison, the Supreme Court of California held that the 

determination of whether a person is fit to teach must be based on an objective and 
analytical approach, consisting of a review of the teacher’s conduct and an assessment 
of a variety of specific factors.  “In determining whether the teacher’s conduct thus 
indicates unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as the likelihood that 
the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, the degree of 
such adversity anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the 
type of teaching certificate held by the party involved, the extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the 
recurrence of the questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may 
inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.” (Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d 
at pp. 227-230.) In reaching a conclusion that grounds exist to dismiss a certificated 
employee on the basis of evident unfitness for service, not all Morrison factors need 

25

be examined, only the pertinent ones.  (Governing Board of ABC School District v.
Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) Moreover the Morrison analysis need not be 
conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the 
accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.)

28.

In this case, application of the Morrison factors demonstrate that 

respondent engaged in conduct that is related to teaching and render him unfit to teach
as follows:

(1)

The likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow 

teachers: The evidence showed that respondent’s conduct adversely affected students 
in his sixth grade class at Burroughs.  Several students expressed that they were 
uncomfortable and feared being in respondent’s class as a result of his conduct 
towards R
classroom.  The students also were negatively impacted by respondent’s inappropriate 
gestures and statements made to, and in the presence of, students in his classes.

 D. and knowing that he watched pornography on his computer in the 

(2)

The degree of such adversity anticipated: Two students, R
 G. were removed from respondent’s classroom because of his 

 D. and 

C
inappropriate conduct.

(3)

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct: Respondent’s

conduct occurred between September 2011 and March 2012. Thus, it is not remote in 
time within the meaning of Morrison.

(4)

The type of teaching credential held by the party involved: This factor 

has no application to this case.

(5)

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 
conduct: Respondent’s forgery of Dr. Yoon’s signature on several documents that he 
submitted to CSUDH for an administrative credential shows that he is dishonest and 
untrustworthy.  Respondent is entrusted with academic grading responsibilities for his 
students.  His conduct in forging Dr. Yoon’s signature raises serious doubt whether 
the District is able to entrust with such duties going forward. Respondent denied that 
he benefitted from the forged documents submitted to CSUDH.  However, the 
evidence established respondent received academic credit from CSUDH based in part 
on the forged documents he submitted for his credential. Respondent also brought a 
prohibited weapon on school grounds on multiple occasions.  Although the District 
initially determined that this conduct did not propose a threat to student safety, Dr. 
Kim testified that this threat assessment was based on the District’s belief that 
respondent had brought the knife on campus on only one occasion.  Respondent was
not credible in asserting that the purpose he brought the weapon to school was to open
test packages and boxes in the classroom.  Respondent’s conduct in bringing a
weapon on school grounds in violation of school policy is an aggravating factor in 
 D. on multiple occasions, and 
this case.  Respondent inappropriately touched R

26

spoke to the female student in a sexual, whisper-like tone of voice, which made her
feel very uncomfortable.  He asserted that he gave her special treatment because he 
was aware this student was a having difficulty identifying her sexuality.  However, 
evidence showed respondent committed multiple inappropriate acts with this student 
before he ever had any discussions with her about her sexuality.  Finally, respondent 
watched pornography on his personal laptop in his classroom, inadvertently resulting
in a sixth grade student seeing pornographic images.  Respondent violated District 
policies when he did not register his personal laptop with the District for use in the 
classroom, and he refused to allow the District to inspect the laptop in connection 
with the into the C

 G. allegations.

(6)

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in 

the conduct: Respondent’s conduct is blameworthy and he attempted to establish 
legitimate motives for his actions, motives which were not found to be credible.

(7)

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct: It is highly

likely that respondent would again engage in inappropriate activity in the future.
Respondent accepted very little responsibility for his conduct, denying many of the 
charges and providing incredible explanations for other conduct.

(8)

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers:
This factor is not at issue.  Respondent’s conduct involved forgery, violating the 
District’s weapons policy, inappropriately touching a female student, watching 
pornography in the classroom, and making inappropriate statements to, and gestures 
in the presence of, his sixth grade students.  There is no constitutional right that would 
be adversely affected by the District imposing discipline for respondent’s conduct.

VI.

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OR REFUSAL TO OBEY SCHOOL LAWS OR 
REGULATIONS

29.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for persistent violation of or refusal 

to obey school laws or regulations pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), by
reason of Factual Findings 5 through 31, 37 through 53, and 57 through 62.

30.

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or regulations

under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), requires that the violation be either 
“persistent” or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.” (Governing
Bd. of Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.)
Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are 
generally not considered persistent.  (Bourland v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) Cases interpreting section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(7), require a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to 
cooperate.” (San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.)  Cause for discipline 
may be based on the violation of school rules.  (San Dieguito Union High School 

27

Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-
1181.)

31.

Here, respondent was aware of the school policy prohibiting bringing a 

weapon onto school grounds.  The evidence established that on multiple occasions 
respondent brought a 3-3 1/2 inch locking blade pocket knife onto school grounds and 
into the classroom.  Even though respondent asserted he was unaware this knife 
violated school policy, it was established that the District’s policies were
disseminated to respondent annually, and well visible signs were posted at the 
entrances to the school grounds notifying respondent and others of the prohibition 
against bringing weapons on to the school campus.  Respondent also inappropriately 
touched a female student on multiple occasions from November 2011 through March 
2012, in violation of the LAUSD Code of Conduct with Students, the LAUSD 
Employee Code of Ethics, and the LAUSD Sexual Harassment Policy. Respondent
also violated the LAUSD Code of Conduct with Students and the LAUSD Employee
Code of Ethics on multiple occasions during the 20911-2012 school year by making 
inappropriate statements and gestures to, and in the presence of, his students in the 
classroom. Finally, respondent violated the LAUSD Acceptable Use Policy for the 
District’s Computer System by storing multiple documents with Dr. Yoon’s forged 
signature on the District’s classroom desktop in respondent’s class.  Respondent also 
utilized his personal laptop in the classroom for instructional purposes in violation of 
the District’s requirement that a teacher complete a LAUSD Property Registration
Form before using personal computer equipment for instructional purposes or 
otherwise in the classroom.

Disposition

32.

Respondent’s conduct in this case is of particular concern to the District 

because of its severe nature.  Respondent forged an administrator’s signature on 
multiple documents, brought a prohibited weapon onto school grounds, 
inappropriately touched a female student, watched pornography in the classroom on 
his personal laptop, and made inappropriate statements and gestures to, and in the 
presence of, his students in his classroom.  Respondent’s students were adversely
impacted by his conduct, ultimately requiring the removal of two students from his 
classroom.  Although respondent had no prior history of disciplinary action prior to 
the charges alleged in this proceeding, respondent’s conduct clearly shows that he is 
unfit to continue teaching with the District.  Under these circumstances respondent’s 
dismissal from the District is the appropriate disposition in this case.

////

////

////

////

28

ORDER

The determination of the Governing Board of the Los Angeles Unified School 

District in the Amended Accusation to dismiss respondent Shane Carnival (760776)
pursuant to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939 is upheld. Accordingly,
respondent shall be dismissed as a certificated employee of the District.

DATED: June 10, 2016

Dacusigned  by: 

Mecteel  A,  Seartett 

S24BACOS  320402...

MICHAEL A. SCARLETT
Administrative Law Judge,
Office of Administrative Hearings,

29

