 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FOR  THE  LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against, 

JACINTA  PLAZA, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2013050170 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 

Angeles,  California,  on  August  26,  27,  28,  and  29,  2013.  The  Commission  consisted  of 
Nancee  Fine,  Hilda  Rodriguez,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Emest  Bell,  Bryan  Park,  and  Woody  Kochwain,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Lawrence  Trystad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Jacinta  Plaza 

(Respondent). 

The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  August  29,  2013. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  to  teach  fifth 

grade  at  Sheridan  Street  Elementary  School  (Sheridan).  District  alleged  that  Respondent 
demonstrated  immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939)‘,  dishonesty 
(sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5)),  willful  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)),  and 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  (section  44939),  all 
arising  out  of  Respondent’s  students  taking  the  California  State  Test  (CST)  in  May  2011.  The 
essence  of  the  charging  allegations  is  that  Respondent  violated  State  and  District  testing  policies 
during  the  administration  of  the  2010-2011  CST  by  (1)  inappropriately  providing  hints  to  some 
of  her  students  during  testing  of  the  CST;  (2)  reviewing  for  accuracy  the  answers  provided  by 
some  of  her  students  on  their  examinations  during  testing  of  the  CST;  (3)  instructing  and/or 
indicating  to  some  of  her  students  to  recheck  and/or  reexamine  specific  questions  and/or 
answers  during  testing  of  the  CST;  (4)  permitting  some  students  to  use  their  science  textbooks 
during  testing  of  the  CST;  and  (5)  withholding  some  of  her  students  in  her  classroom  during 

{ 

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

 

recess  and/or  lunch  to  allow  them  to  continue  working  on  the  CST  examinations.  District  seeks 
Respondent’s  dismissal. 

, 

As  more  fully  set  forth  below,  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating 

Respondent  committed  the  acts  described  in  the  Accusation.  Accordingly,  District’s 
Accusation  is  dismissed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

I. 

On  May  24,  2013,  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  and 

Statement  of  Charges  executed  by  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer, 
acting  in  her  official  capacity.  On  April  23,  2013,  Respondent  executed  a  request  for 
hearing,  and  on  June  6,  2013,  served  her  Notice  of  Defense. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  permanent  employee  of  the  District,  who  began 

teaching  for  District  at  Sheridan  in  1998.  The  student  body  at  Sheridan  is  mainly  Latino,  and 
many  students  come  from  families  of  lower-economic  status.  Respondent,  who  immigrated 
to  the  United  States  as  a  child  from  Ecuador  with  her  single  mother  and  younger  siblings, 
identified  with  the  students  at  Sheridan,  and,  like  she  had  done  in  the  past  as  a  volunteer 
teacher  in  Columbia  and  in  Mexico,  made  it  her  mission  to  help  the  underprivileged  students 
at  Sheridan.  With  the  exception  of  sixth  grade,  Respondent  has  taught  every  grade  at 
Sheridan,  and  has  taught  fifth  grade  for  the  last  three  years.  She  has  and  continues  to  operate 
under  the  premise  that,  with  hard  work,  her  students  can  succeed. 

3. 

Over  the  years  as  a  teacher  at  Sheridan,  Respondent  has  received 

approximately  nine  or  ten  trainings  from  District  on  how  to  administer  the  CST.  The 
trainings  generally  consisted  of  watching  training  videos  and  reviewing  instructions  on  how 
to  administer  the  test. 

4, 

In  2009,  and  again  in  2010,  when  Respondent  taught  fourth  grade  and  fifth 

grade,  respectively,  the  Los  Angeles  Times,  based  on  her  students’  progress  on  the  CST  in 
math  and  English,  compared  Respondent’s  “value-added”  rating  of  test  score  improvement  to 
other  District  teachers,  and  ranked  Respondent  in  the  most  effective  overall  category,  the 
most  effective  in  math  category,  and  the  most  effective  in  English  category. 

5. 

On  May  20,  2010,  Respondent  received  her  2010  District  evaluation,  executed 

by  Sheridan’s  principal  Genaro  Carapia,  according  to  which,  Respondent  met  standard 
performance.  Mr.  Carapia  noted  that  Respondent  devoted  “countless,  extra  unselfish  hours 
to  address  student  learning.”  Mr.  Carapia  indicated  that  Respondent  did  not  need  to  be 
evaluated  the  following  year. 

: 

6. 

On  April  26,  2011,  Respondent  signed  a  2010-2011  STAR  Test  Security 

Affidavit,  which  stated  that  Respondent  (1)  would  not  divulge  the  content  of  the  tests  to  any 
other  person;  (2)  would  not  copy  any  part  of  the  tests  or  test  materials;  (3)  would  keep  the 
tests  secure;  (4)  would  limit  access  to  the  tests  and  test  materials  to  the  actual  testing  periods; 

(5)  would  collect  and  account  for  all  materials  following  each  period  of  testing;  (6)  would 
not  review  any  test  questions,  passages,  or  other  test  items  independently.  or  with  pupils  or 
with  any  other  person  before,  during,  or  following  testing;  (7)  would  not  develop  scoring 
keys,  review  any  pupil  responses,  or  prepare  answer  documents  except  as  required  by  the  test 
administration  manuals;  (8)  would  return  all  test  materials  to  the  designated  STAR  test  site 
coordinator;  (9)  would  keep  all  test  materials  locked  in  secure  storage  except  when 
administering  the  tests;  (10)  would  administer  the  tests  in  accordance  with  the  directions  for 
test  administration  and  test  administration  manuals;  and  (11)  would  acknowledge  she  had 
been  trained  to  administer  the  tests. 

7. 

In  preparation  for  the  2010-2011  CST,  scheduled  to  occur  in  May  2011, 

Respondent  began  training  her  students  on  the  first  day  of  school  in  September  2010,  and 
intensified  the  preparation  one  month  before  the  test.  Approximately  one  month  after  the 
start  of  school,  she,  as  she  had  done  in  previous  years,  began  holding  a  math  club  and  a 
reading  club  after  school,  two  times  a  week  each,  to  help  the  students  prepare  for  the  math 
and  language  arts  portion  of  the  CST.  She  encouraged  her  students’  parents  to  permit  her 
students  to  participate  in  the  math  a  reading  clubs.  Of  the  21students  in  her  fifth  grade  class, 
approximately  10  to  15  students  participated  in  her  math  club  and  reading  club,  each. 

8. 

In  addition,  Respondent,  who  described  herself  as  a  stringent  and  focused 
teacher,  routinely  assigned  a  large  homework  load  to  help  the  students  with  areas  on  the 
CST,  and  would  require  students  to  remain  in  her  classroom  during  recess  if  they  failed  to 
complete  the  homework  as  assigned.  She  established  firm  classroom  rules,  including  telling 
the  students  they  were  responsible  for  completing  their  own  work,  not  cheating,  not  lying, 
working  hard,  and  taking  pride  in  being  a  hard  worker. 

9. 

Throughout  the  school  year,  but  especially  during  the  month  preceding  the 

test,  she  administered  a  series  of  practice  tests,  shared  test-taking  strategies,  and  set  aside  at 
least  one  and  one-half  hours  per  day  for  CST  preparation.  The  practice  tests  generally 
occurred  in  the  afternoon,  and  during  the  practice  tests,  she  set  up  testing  conditions  similar 
to  those  the  students  could  expect  to  find  on  the  actual  CST.  Respondent,  who  described 
herself  as  the  “sticky  note  queen,”  checked  her  students’  answers  for  accuracy,  and  routinely 
placed  sticky  notes  on  her  students’  work  and  practice  tests  with  instructions,  reminders  for 
them  to  check  their  work,  and  directives  for  her  students  to  see  her  to  discuss  their  work. 
Respondent  routinely  held  individual  conferences  with  her  students  to  ensure  they 
understood  the  concepts  on  the  practice  tests.. 
Respondent  forewent  her  recesses  and  lunches  to  tutor  students,  stayed  at  work  late,  prepared 
extensive  lesson  plans,  developed  visual  aids  with  animation,  used  theatrical  and  performing 
arts,  made  up  songs,  developed  academic  games  based  on  “Who  Wants  to  Be  a  Millionaire” 
and  “American  Idol,”  created  vocabulary  competitions,  developed  handouts,  provided 
checklists,  created  power  point  presentations,  made  posters,  and  provided  students  with 
highlighters  and  manipulatives,  to  name  a  few. 

In  order  to  help  her  students  grasp  concepts, 

10. 

Because  many  of  Respondent’s  students  were  English  language  learners,  she 

believed  they  required  many  visual  aids.  In  that  regard,  Respondent  often  relied  on  her 

  

 

 

friend  of  nine  years,  William  Roche,  who  was  a  CFO  of  a  manufacturing  company,  to  print 
posters  found  or  created  by  Respondent,  as  well  as  maps  and  handouts.  Mr.  Roche,  who 
testified  at  hearing,  and  his  company,  “adopted”  Respondent’s  class  as  a  way  to  give  back  to 
the  community,  and  sponsored  transportation  for  school  trips,  in  addition  to  providing 
printing  and  materials  for  Respondent’s  students. 

11. 

From  May  10,  2011  to  May  19,  2011,  Respondent  administered  the  CST  to  her 

fifth  grade  class,  with  the  assistance  of  her  proctor,  Aaron  Perez.  The  CST  consisted  of 
questions  in  the  areas  of  math,  English  language  arts,  and  science. 

12. 

Respondent  received  her  Academic  Growth  over  Time  (AGT)  report  for  2011, 
based  on  the  results  of  the  2011  CST,  which  provided  Respondent’s  overall  AGT  results  for 
her  work  with  all  of  her  students.  Respondent’s  students  scored  in  the  5.2  range  for  English 
language  arts,  and  in  the  6.3  range  for  math.  Four  students  received  a  perfect  score  of  600  on 
the  math  portion  of  the  CST.  Ten  of  Respondent’s  25  students  who  took  the  2011  CST 
increased  their  performance  levels  in  math  from  the  previous  years,  and  eleven  had  increased 
their  performance  levels  in  English  language  arts.  The  2011  AGT  report  showed  that 
Respondent  was  in  the  “blue”  category,  which  was  the  highest  category,  in  that  Respondent’s 
students  scored  “far  above  projected  growth”  in  the  areas  of  English  language  arts  and  math. 

13. 

In  2012,  Respondent’s  class  met  or  exceeded  Sheridan’s  goal  of  attendance  for 

the  first  semester.  Consequently,  Sheridan’s  new  principal,  Isaias  Martinez,  presented 
Respondent  with  a  certificate  for  inspiring  her  students  to  attend  school  and  for  teaching 
them  the  importance  of  good  attendance. 

14. 

In  May  2012,  Mr.  Martinez  received  a  verbal  report  from  one  of  Sheridan’s 

sixth  grade  teachers,  Ms.  Ly,  that  there  had  been  some  irregularities  concerning 
Respondent’s  administration  of  the  2011  CST,  based  on  information  disclosed  to  her  by  three 
of  her  sixth  grade  students,  who  had  been  students  in  Respondent’s  class  when  they  were  in 
fifth  grade.  Mr.  Martinez,  who  testified  at  hearing,  summoned  the  three  students  and 
discussed  with  them  the  substance  of  their  disclosures  to  Ms.  Ly.  The  students  told  Mr. 
Martinez  that  Respondent  talked  to  them  about  questions  they  had  missed  on  the  CST,  and 
then  told  them  to  redo  the  questions. 

15. 

After  his  discussion  with  the  three  students,  Mr.  Martinez  located  all  of  the 
sixth  grade  students  who were  in  Respondent’s  fifth  grade  class,  with  the  exception  of  the 
few  who  were  no  longer  enrolled  at  Sheridan.  Mr.  Martinez  told  the  students  they  were  not 
in  any  trouble,  and  that  he  wanted  them  to  write  an  answer  to  the  following  question:  “Has 
If 
there  ever  been  a  teacher  that  you  feel  helps  you  during  the  CST?  If  yes,  tell  me  about  it. 
no,  tell  me  how  you  feel  about  the  CST.  Everyone  will  write  at  least  one  paragraph.”  Seven 
students  reported  that  Respondent  had  helped  them  during  the  administration  of  the  2011 
CST. 

16. 

Mr.  Martinez  interviewed  the  seven  students,  and  they  alleged  that  during  the 

math  portion  of  the  test,  Respondent  (1)  told  the  students  which  questions  were  answered 

 

incorrectly  and  asked  them  to  try  to  answer  the  questions  again;  (2)  gave  the  students  the 
correct  answers  at  times;  and  (3)  allowed  them  to  use  a  book  while  taking  the  science  portion 
of  the  CST. 

17. 

Four  of  the  seven  students  testified  at  hearing.  Student  B,  who  is  now  13- 
years-old  and  in  the  eighth  grade,  was  in  Respondent’s  fifth  grade  class  during  the  2010- 
2011  school  year,  and  took  the  CST  under  Respondent’s  instruction.  Student  B  explained 
that,  after  completing  a  testing  session,  he  took  his  answer  sheet  to  Respondent,  who  checked 
Student  B’s  answers.  For  the  questions  Student  B  answered  incorrectly,  Respondent  marked 
the  incorrect  answers,  and  then  gave  the  test  back  to  Student  B  for  him  to  redo  the  incorrect 
answers.  He  also  witnessed  Respondent  do  the  same  with  other  students  in  the  class. 
Student  B  reported  that  Respondent  also  kept  some  students  in  at  lunch  and  recess  to 
continue  taking  the  CST,  including  Student  B,  and  never  removed  examples  on  the 
classroom  wall,  such  as  multiplication  charts.  Student  B  also  advised  that  in  preparation  for 
the  CST,  Respondent  “worked  [the  class]  hard”  over  a  period  of  months,  and  Respondent 
required  the  class  to  take  a  number  of  practice  tests. 
incorrectly  on  the  practice  tests,. Respondent  would  tell  each  student  which  questions  they 
answered  incorrectly,  and  then  have  the  students  correct  their  answers.  During  the  course  of 
his  testimony,  Student  B  appeared  uncertain  about  the  series  of  events  during  the  testing  of 
the  CST,  and  repeatedly  had  to  have  his  memory  refreshed  by  a  declaration  prepared  at  the 
behest  of,  and  written  by,  District’s  counsel.  As  such,  Student  B’s  testimony,  as  it  pertained 
to  CST  testing,  was  afforded  minimal  weight. 

If  the  students  had  answered  questions 

18. 

Respondent  disputed  Student  B’s  testimony,  stating  that  while  she  put  marks 

on  her  students’  work,  it  only  occurred  during  practice  testing,  and  on  other  school  work 
performed  in  class.  Whenever  she  placed  a  mark'on  a  student’s  work,  she  would  direct  the 
student  to  correct  the  wrong  answer,  and  often  held  conferences  with  her  students  to  ensure 
comprehension  of  certain  concepts,  especially  during  the  weeks  preceding  the  CST.  During 
the  administration  of  the  CST,  cach  test  started  with  one  or  two  sample  questions,  which  she 
went  over  with  the  students,  pursuant  to  CST  instructions,  and  then  discussed  the  correct 
answers  to  the  sample  questions,  pursuant  to  a  script  provided  in  the  CST  testing  materials. 
She  engaged  in  no  other  discussions  with  the  students  regarding  answering  questions  on  the 
CST,  and  closely  followed  all  CST  procedures.  In  addition,  in  regard  to  recess  and  lunch, 
Sheridan’s  administration  advised  the  teachers  to  use  their  discretion  during  the  CST  in  terms 
of  when  to  dismiss  the  students  for  recess  and  lunch,  as  they  were  not  required  to  follow  the 
official  recess  time  during  the  testing  period,  and  the  school  provided  a  modified  lunch 
period.  Moreover,  Respondent’s  classroom  walls  were  bare  during  the  administration  of  the 
CST,  as  one  week  prior,  Sheridan’s  administrators  instructed  the  teachers  to  remove  their 
posters,  which  she  did. 

19. 

Student  J,  who  is  now  13-years-old  and  in  the  eighth  grade,  was  in 

Respondent’s  fifth  grade  class  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  and  took  the  CST  under 
Respondent’s  instruction.  Student  J  explained  that  after  she  completed  the  math  testing 
session,  she  took  her  answer  sheet  to  Respondent,  who  checked  Student  J’s  answers,  put  a 
sticky  note  on  the  incorrect  answers,  and  instructed  Student  J  to  change  the  designated 

 

answers.  After  changing  the  answers  on  her  test,  Student  J  gave  her  test  back  to  Respondent, 
who  checked  it  again,  and  asked  Student  J  to  return  to  her  seat  and  correct  the  answers  she 
still  had  wrong.  Ultimately,  Student  J  received  a  perfect  score  of  600  on  the  math  portion  of 
the  CST,  Student  J  also  reported  that  Respondent  kept  about  five  students  in  the  classroom 
during  recess  to  continue  taking  the  CST,  including  Student  J,  who  also  had  to  sometimes 
stay  in  during  lunch  period  to  finish  the  CST.  Student  J  also  advised  that  the  class  “studied 
really  hard”  in  preparation  for  the  CST.  Specifically,  Respondent  gave  the  class  homework 
and  practice  tests,  and  placed  great  emphasis  on  getting  prepared  for  the  CST.  Respondent 
required  her  class  to  begin  studying  for  the  CST  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  in 
September  2010,  and  did  not  end  their  studying  until  the  time  of  the  CST,  in  May  2011. 

20. 

Respondent  disputed  Student  J’s  testimony.  While  Respondent  often  used 
sticky  notes  to  point  out  mistakes  and  to  give  instructions,  she  did  not  do  so  on  the  CST. 
However,  she  did  use  sticky  notes  on  the  practice  tests,  and  taught  her  students  the  strategy 
of  “when  in  doubt,  Charlie  out,”  meaning  to  pick  Answer  C  when  students  were  unsure  of 
the  correct  answer.  She  never  sent  Student  J  or  any  other  student  to  their  seats  to  correct 
incorrect  answers  during  the  CST,  but  she  did  do  so  during  the  practice  testing. 

21. 

Student  W,  who  is  now  12-years-old  and  in  the  eighth  grade,  was  in 

Respondent’s  fifth  grade  class  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  and  took  the  CST  under 
Respondent’s  instruction.  Student  W  testified  that  during  Respondent’s  administration  of  the 
CST,  Respondent  checked  Student  W’s  answers  to  the  math  questions.  Respondent  did  not 
identify  the  answers  Student  W  had  gotten  incorrect,  but  told  him  to  recheck  his  answers  and 
make  corrections.  After  Student  W  made  corrections,  Respondent  checked  his  answers 
again,  and  then  sent  him  back  to  make  more  corrections.  Student  W  waited  in  line  with 
about  10  other  students  to  turn  in  his  test.  The  line  moved  slowly  because  Respondent  went 
over  each  student’s  test,  and  then  told  them  to  make  corrections.  Student  W  received  a  score 
of  584  on  the  math  portion  of  the  CST.  Student  W  advised  that  there  was  no  science  part  of 
the  CST  when  he  took  the  test  as  a  fifth  grader  in  Respondent’s  class.  Student  W  and  the  rest 
of  the  students  in  Respondent’s  class  worked  very  hard  to  get  prepared  for  the  test,  as 
Respondent  was a strict  teacher  and  demanded  the  students  to  work  hard. 

22. 

Respondent  disputed  Student  W’s  testimony.  While  it  is  true  that  Respondent 

often  told  her  students  to  go  back  and  double  check  answers,  she  did  not  do  so  during  the 
administration  of  the  CST.  After  taking  practice  tests,  students  would  sometimes  form  a  line 
so  that  Respondent  could  review  their  practice  tests  for  accuracy.  Also,  Student  W  testified 
that  there  was  no  science  part  on  the  CST,  but  there  was,  indeed,  a  science  portion  on  the 
CST. 

‘ 

23. 

Student  Z,  who  is  now  13-years-old  and  in  the  eighth  grade,  transferred  to 

Sheridan  in  the  beginning  of  May  2011,  one  week  prior  to  the  administration  of  the  CST,  and 
was  assigned  to  Respondent’s  class.  Because  she  had  already  taken  the  CST  at  her  previous 
school,  she  did  not  have  to  take  the  CST  when  she  began  attending  Sheridan.  However, 
Student  Z  remained  in  Respondent’s  class  during  Respondent’s  administration  of  the  CST, 
and  noted  that  students  could  not  turn  in  their  answers  until  the  answers  were  correct, 

 

Student  Z,  testified  that  most  of  the  answers  Respondent  had  students  re-check  were  in  the 
areas  of  English  and  science,  and  saw  her  classmates  use  their  science  textbooks  during  the 
science  part  of  the  CST.  Student  Z’s  testimony  was  inconsistent  with  the  testimony  of  the 
other  students,  in  that  Student  Z  stated  that  Respondent  had  provided  help  in  the  areas  of 
English  and  science,  while  the  other  students  advised  that  Respondent  had  asked  them  to 
recheck  their  answers  in  the  area  of  math. 

24. 

Respondent  disputed  Student  Z’s  testimony.  Respondent  did  not  recall 

Student  Z  in  the  class  during  the  administration  of  the  CST,  but  she  was  there  during  the 
practice  testing  given  days  before  the  CST.  During  the  practice  testing,  Respondent  did 
require  students  to  recheck  their  answers,  but  not  during  the  actual  CST.  In  addition, 
Respondent  never  permitted  any  students  at  any  time  during  the  CST  to  use  their  science 
textbooks.  However,  during  practice  tests,  she  allowed  students  to  use  the  periodic  table 
from  their  science  books. 

25. 

On  May  10,  2012,  Mr.  Martinez  executed  Respondent’s  2012  District 

evaluation,  which  showed  that  Respondent  had  met  standard  performance.  Mr.  Martinez 
noted  that  Respondent  provided  “her  students  with  additional  academic  support  outside  of 
regular  work  hours.”  Mr.  Martinez  indicated  that  Respondent  did  not  need  to  be  evaluated 
the  following  year.  At  the  time  he  signed  Respondent’s  evaluation,  Mr.  Martinez  was  aware 
of  the  children’s  allegations,  as  he  was  investigating  the  allegations. 

26. 

On  May  21,  2012,  Mr.  Martinez  sent  Respondent  a  written  conference  request 

to  discuss  the  allegations  made  by  students  regarding  her  administration  of  the  2011  CST. 
Mr.  Martinez  indicated  that  Respondent  could  bring  a  representative  to  the  meeting,  because 
Respondent  could  face  disciplinary  action. 

27.  |  On  May  23,  2012,  Respondent  met  with  Mr.  Martinez,  and  brought  her  union 

During  the  meeting,  Mr.  Martinez 

representative,  Anastasia  Gonzalez,  to  the  meeting. 
advised  that  he  had  become  aware  that  some  of  her  students  from  the  2010-2011  school  year 
had  alleged  that  she  had  helped  them  on  the  CST.  He  further  advised  he  had  conducted  an 
investigation  where  he  took  statements  from  her  students  from  her  2010-2011  class,  and  that 
seven  of  the  students  indicated  that  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  2010-2011  STAR 
Security  Affidavit.  Mr.  Martinez  provided  Respondent  with  copies  of  the  statements  from 
the  seven  students,  and  a  copy  of  the  2010-2011  STAR  Test  Security  Affidavit  that 
Respondent  had  signed  on  April  26,  2011.  Respondent  said  nothing  at  the  meeting,  as  her 
union  representative  advised  her  not  to  respond.  Mr.  Martinez  advised  that,  as  a  result  of  the 
students’  allegations,  he  filed  a“STAR  Program-Irregularity  Report  Form,”  and  that  the 
Student  Testing  &  Assessment  Office  may  conduct  its  own  investigation. 

28, 

On  May  23,  2012,  Mr.  Martinez  wrote  a  memorandum  to  Respondent  that 

memorialized  what  he  discussed  at  the  meeting.  Mr.  Martinez  also  stated  in  the 
memorandum  that  as  part  of  his  investigation,  after  the  students  had  submitted  their 
statements,  that  he  had  asked  two  of  the  students  if  their  allegations  applied  to  all 
components  of  the  CST.  Both  students  said  that  their  allegations  applied  to  only  the 

mathematics  sections,  and  that  Respondent  had  allowed  them  to  use  their  science  textbooks 
during  the  science  portion  of  the  CST.  Mr.  Martinez  stated  in  the  memorandum  that,  if 
Respondent  wished  to  respond,  to  do  so  in  writing  by  May  31,  2012. 

29. 

|  Mr.  Martinez  never  interviewed  Mr.  Perez,  who  served  as  a  proctor  every  day 

during  Respondent’s  administration  of  the  2011  CST.  Mr.  Perez,  who  testified  at  hearing, 
denied  that  Respondent  engaged  in  any  inappropriate  conduct  during  the  administration  of 
the  2011  CST.  Specifically,  Mr.  Perez  stated  Respondent  never  provided  hints  to  any 
students  during  the  testing  of  the  CST,  never  reviewed  for  accuracy  any  questions  provided 
by  any  students  on  their  examinations  during  testing  of  the  CST,  never  instructed  or 
indicated  to  any  of  her  students  to  recheck  or  re-examine  specific  questions  and/or  answers 
during  testing  of  the  CST,  and  never  permitted  any  students  to  use  their  science  textbooks 
during  the  CST.  Mr.  Perez  also  stated  that  the  CST  was  not  a  timed  test,  so  if  he  had 
witnessed  students  remaining  in  class  during  recess  or  lunch,  he  would  not  have  considered  it 
an  irregularity.  *  Had  he  witnessed  Respondent  committing  any  irregularities,  he  would  have 
reported  them.? 

30. 

On  May  29,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr.  Martinez’ 

memorandum,  wherein  she  denied  all  of  the  accusations.  Specifically,  Respondent  denied 
reviewing  students’  answers  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  correct,  and  denied  instructing 
the  students  to  change  their  answers.  However,  she  did  instruct  students  to  show  their  work 
on  the  test  so  that  there  was  justification  for  their  answer  choices.  Respondent  also  denied 
explaining  or  translating  questions  for  any  students.  In  regard  to  the  student  that  remained  in 
the  classroom  during  the  lunch  period,  Respondent  reminded  Mr.  Martinez  that  the  CST  was 
an  untimed  test,  and  the  student  was  extremely  slow  in  completing  the  test  and  required 
additional  time.  Respondent  reiterated  that  she  was  in  complete  compliance  with  the  STAR 
Test  Security  Affidavit. 

31. 

In  May  2012,  Respondent  administered  the  CST  to  her  fifth  grade  class,  with 

the  assistance  of  three  proctors:  Mr.  Martinez,  the  vice-principal,  and  another  proctor. 

32. 

OnJune  12,  2012,  Ms.  Ly  sent  a  letter  to  Mr.  Martinez  memorializing  what 

she  had  reported  to  him  in  May  2012  concerning  Respondent  and  the  2011  CST  testing. 
Specifically,  Ms.  Ly  outlined  the  information  three  of  her  students  had  disclosed  to  her.  One 

2 

3 

Mr.  Perez  submitted  a  declaration  stating  that  he  did  not  witness  Respondent 

withholding  students  in  her  classroom  during  recess  or  lunch. 

At  hearing,  Mr.  Perez  stated  that  he  sometimes  read  test  questions  to  students 

when  they  had  a  question  on  the  CST,  and  that  he  witnessed  Respondent  do  the  same. 
Respondent  denied  that  she  read  questions  to  students  during  the  CST,  with  the  exception  of 
the  sample  questions.  Because  the  Accusation  did  not  charge  Respondent  with 
inappropriately  reading  questions  to  the  students  during  the  course  of  the  CST,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  make  a  factual  finding  concerning  this  issue.  In  addition,  Mr.  Perez’  statement 
in  this  regard  did  not  serve  to  discredit  Respondent’s  testimony. 

    

I 
4 
| | 
i 
i 

    
 

   

student  reported  that  Respondent  had  told  her  to  check  over  her  problems,  specifically  the 
ones  she  had  gotten  wrong.  The  second  and  third  students  confirmed  the  first  student’s 
account,  and  the  second  student  added  that  Respondent  pointed  out  wrong  answers,  and 
wouldn’t  let  students  turn  in  the  tests  until  the  answers  were  correct. 

33. 

On  June  19,  2012,  District  issued  Respondent  a  notice  of  suspension  and  a 

notice  of  unsatisfactory  service  or  acts,  pursuant  to  Mr.  Martinez’s  recommendation,  because 
Mr.  Martinez  concluded  that  Respondent’s  alleged  acts  were  purposeful.  Mr.  Martinez 
further  concluded  that  Respondent’s  actions  resulted  in  inflated  CST  scores  for  her  students. 
The  Student  Testing  &  Assessment  Office  never  responded  to  the  Irregularity  Report  Form 
Mr.  Martinez  filed,  and,  to  his  knowledge,  conducted  no  investigation  regarding 
Respondent’s  administration  of  the  2011  CST  test.  Respondent  filed  a  grievance  to 
challenge  the  suspension,  which  is  still  pending. 

34, 

Respondent  received  her  AGT  report  for  2012,  based  on  the  results  of  the  2012 
CST,  which  measured  Respondent’s  impact  on  the  academic  growth  of  her  students  for  CST 
test  subjects.  Specifically,  while  the  average  score  for  other  fifth  grade  students  was  in  the 
3.6  range,  students  in  Respondent’s  class  scored  in  the  4.2  range  for  English  language  arts, 
and  in  the  4.3  range  for  math.  These  scores  were  lower  than  the  5.2  range  and  the  6.3  range 
scores  for  English  language  arts  and  math,  respectively,  on  the  2011  CST.  Despite  this,  the 
2012  AGT  report  showed  that  Respondent  fell  into  the  blue  category,  as  her  students  scored 
“far  above  projected  growth”  in  the  areas  of  English  language  arts  and  math. 

35.. 

When  questioned  at  hearing  why  her  students’  scores  dropped  in  2012, 

Respondent  explained  that  she  had  a  very  different  class  for  the  2011-2012  school  year  than 
her  students  in  her  2010-2011  class.  Her  2010-2011  students  were  higher  performers  in 
general,  higher  than  in  her  previous  year  as  a  fifth  grade  teacher,  and  higher  than  the 
subsequent  year.  In  addition,  during  the  2012  CST,  she  believed  her  students  were  tense  and 
anxious  as  result  of  all  the  proctors  in  the  room,  including  Mr.  Martinez  and  the  vice- 
principal.  Despite  this,  21  of  her  29  students  who  took  the  2012  CST  increased  their 
performance  levels  in  math  from  the  previous  years,  and  eight  had  increased  their 
performance  levels  in  English  language  arts. 

District's  Expert 

36. 

Dr.  Cynthia  Lim,  Executive  Director  of  District’s  Office  of  Data  and 

Accountability,  testified  at  hearing.  Dr.  Lim  carned  her  bachelor’s  degree in  experimental 
psychology  from  the  University  of  California  at  Santa  Barbara in  1978.  She  earned  her 
master’s  degree  in  social  work  from  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  in  1981,  and 
earned  her  doctorate  in  social  welfare  from  the  University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles  in 
1998.  She  has  several  publications  and  has  served  as  a  presenter  on  the  topics  of  data 
decisions,  literacy,  adoption,  health  and  social  services,  and  establishing  school-based 
collaborative  teams.  Since  2002,  Dr.  Lim  has  provided  data  statistical  analysis  for  District. 
In  her  current  position  as  an  executive  director,  Dr.  Lim’s  duties  include,  but  are  not  limited 
to,  gathering  data  about  District  students,  overseeing  the  administration  of  all  District,  State, 

 

and  federal  mandated  testing  programs,  and  measuring  the  academic  growth  over  time  (i.e., 
AGT)  of  students. 

37. 

Dr.  Lim  explained  that  the  purpose  of  the  AGT  is  to  be  able  to  track  the 

performance  of  a  student  over  time.  In  addition  to  considering  CST  results,  the  AGT 
considers  demographic  factors  about  students,  such  as  gender,  ethnicity,  socio-economic 
status,  whether  they  are  English  language-learners,  migrants,  or  homeless,  whether  they 
receive  free  or  reduced  price  lunches,  and  a  number  of  other  factors,  and  then  uses  these 
factors  to  compare  like  students  with  like  students.  AGT  data  can  also  be  reviewed  to 
identify  the  individual  impact  of  teachers  and  schools  on  student  learning. 

38. 

Pursuant  to  District’s  request,  on  August  19,  2013,  Dr.  Lim  prepared  a 

memorandum  addressing  AGT.  Dr.  Lim  explained  that  District  contracted  with  the 
University  of  Wisconsin’s  Value-Added  Research  Center  (VARC)  to  develop  the  AGT 
model  and  calculate  scores  for  schools  and  teachers.  The  AGT  metric  uses  a  value-added 
approach  where  a  student’s  prior  year  achievement  on  the  CST  in  English  language  arts  and 
math,  along  with  other  demographic,  classroom  and  school  variables,  is  used  to  predict  future 
performance  on  the  CST.  The  difference  between  the  “predicted”  and  “actual”  score  is 
considered  the  value-added  “residual.”  If  the  residual  is  positive,  it  means  the  student 
performed  better  than  predicted.  If  the  residual  is  negative,  it  means  the  student  performed 
worse  than  predicted.  If  the  residual  is  at  or  near  zero,  it  means  the  student  performed  as. 
well  as  predicted. 

, 

39. 

Dr.  Lim  reported  that  the  value-added  residuals  aggregated  across  students  in  a 

teacher’s  classroom  can  help  identify  anomalies  or  unusual  patterns  in  student  test  scores 
over  multiple  years.  For  example,  if  a  student’s  residuals  show  a  spike  one  year 
(performance  higher  than  expected)  and  a  substantial  decrease  the  following  year 
(performance  lower  than  expected),  it  would  be  useful  to  investigate  whether  the  spikes  or 
dips  were  far  higher  or  lower  than  all  other  students  in  comparable  classrooms.  Anomalies  in 
the  pattern  of  residual  scores  may  point  to  situations  where  test  scores  do  not  accurately 
represent  the  student’s  actual  skills  and  abilities  at  the  conclusion  of  the  school  year, 

40. 

Dr.  Lim  explained  that  growth  estimates  were  provided  for  each  teacher, 

school,  and  grade  level,  compared  to  the  District  average,  which  was  set  at  “3”,  and  then  the 
results  were  categorized  as  follows: 

 
E
N
W
R
W

Far  Above  Predicted  AGT  (Blue) 
Above  Predicted  AGT  (Green) 
Within  the  predicted  range  (Gray) 
Below  Predicted  AGT  (Yellow) 
Far  Below  Predicted  (Red) 

41. 

The  2011  teacher  AGT  report  for  Respondent  categorized  her  as  a  “blue” 

teacher,  meaning  that,  on  average,  students  in  her  classroom  had  far  above  average  growth, 
with  an  AGT  estimate  above  “4.”  An  examination  of  the  residuals  for  the  21  students  in 

10 

 

Respondent’s  fifth  grade  class  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  showed  that  the  students  made 
gains  higlier  than  expected  in  English  language  arts  (residuals  =  .58)  and  in  math  (residuals  = 
1.27).  Data  for  the  same  students  was  examined  for  the  previous  school  year  (2009-2010) 
when  they  were  in  fourth  grade,  and  the  year  after  (2011-2012)  when  they  were  in  the  sixth 
grade.  When  Respondent’s  students  were  in  fourth  grade,  their  residuals  averaged  -.03, 
meaning  they  scored  slightly  lower  than  predicted  in  the  fourth  grade.  Their  fourth  grade 
classmates  who  did  not  have  Respondent  in  the  fifth  grade,  scored  slightly  higher  than 
predicted,  with  residuals  averaging  .09  in  English  language  arts. 
noted.  Specifically,  students  later  linked  to  Respondent  scored  higher  than  predicted  in 
fourth  grade  math,  compared  to  other  students  who  did  not  have  Respondent  for  fifth  grade. 

In  math,  the  reverse  was 

42. 

Respondent’s  fifth  grade  students  from  the  2010-2011  school  year  were  also 
followed  for  the  next  school  year  as  they  completed  the  sixth  grade.  Their  average  value- 
added  residual  was  lower  than  the  average  value-added  residual  for  other  students  in  these 
classrooms.  For  students  who  had  Respondent  in  fifth  grade,  English  language  arts  and  math 
scores  were  much  lower  than  predicted,  based  on  the  students’  prior  year  test  scores.  The 
value-added  residual  for  Respondent’s  students  was  on  average  -0.74  in  English  language 
arts,  while  other  students  in  the  same  sixth  grade  classroom  who  did  not  have  Respondent  in 
fifth  grade  averaged  -.08.  In  math,  students  from  Respondent’s  classroom  had  average 
residuals  of  -.84,  while  other  sixth  graders  in  the  same  classroom  had  residuals  of  .01.  Dr. 
Lim  opined  that  the  test  scores  of  Respondent’s  fifth  grade.class  in  2010-2011  may  not  have 
served  as  an  accurate  predictor  of  performance  in  the  sixth  grade  and  did  not  represent  the 
student’s  actual  skills  and  abilities  at  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

~ 

43. 

Dr.  Lim  also  noted  that  in  the  2010-2011  school  year,  there  were  37  fifth  grade 

teachers  with  the  categorization  of  “blue”  in  English  language  arts,  meaning  their  average 
residuals  indicated  far  above  average  growth,  with  an  AGT  estimate  above  “4.”  On  average, 
the  654  students  in  their  classrooms  had  residuals  at  .73,  higher  than  the  average  residual  for 
Respondent  in  the  same  year.  The  residuals  from  the  year  prior  (fourth  grade)  were  near 
zero,  meaning  there  was  little  difference  between  the  students  who  later  had  “blue”  teachers. 
versus  those  who  did  not.  When  these  students  went  to  sixth  grade,  the  average  residuals  of 
the  students  from  “blue”  teachers  was  -.50.  In  contrast,  students  in  Respondent’s  classroom 
had  average  residuals  of  -.74.  Therefore,  Dr.  Lim  concluded  there  was  no  statistically 
significant  difference  between  Respondent’s  average  residuals  and  all  other  “blue”  teachers 
in  English  language  arts. 

44, 

In  math,  however,  there  was a  statistically  significant  difference  between 

Respondent’s  average  residuals  and  all  other  “blue”  teachers.  Specifically,  Dr.  Lim 
explained  that  there  were  101  fifth  grade  teachers  with  the  categorization  of  “blue”  in  math. 
The  1,880  students  in  the  “blue”  classrooms  in  the  2010-2011  school  year  had  residuals 
averaging  .80,  far  higher  than  what  would  be  predicted  based  on  their  fourth  grade  scores.  In 
the  following  year,  those  students  performed  lower  than  predicted,  with  an  average  residual 
of  -.36.  The  students  in  Respondent’s  classroom  performed  lower  than  the  average  of  all 
students  of  “blue”  teachers,  with  average  residuals  of-.84.  The  difference  in  the  average 

i1 

  

residuals  between  Respondent  and  all  other  “blue”  teachers  was  statically  significant, 
meaning  this  result  was  most  likely  not  due  to  chance. 

45. 

|  While  Dr.  Lim  could  not  state  whether  the  statically  significant  difference  in 

math  was  due  to  cheating,  she  did  state  that  cheating  would  result  in  inflated  scores,  and 
higher  residuals.  However,  Dr.  Lim  noted  that  she  did  not  look  at  the  quality  of  the  teachers 
the  students  had  in  sixth  grade,  whether  students  had  parents  who  had  divorced  since  their 
fifth  grade  CST,  whether  a  parent  had  died,  or  whether  a  parent  had  been  accused  of  a  crime, 
or  any  other  possible  variables  within  students’  lives  that  could  have  caused  them  not  to 
perform  as  well  on  the  CST  in  sixth  grade  as  they  did  in  fifth  grade.  Dr.  Lim  also  noted  that 
it  is  possible  that  Respondent  was  a  “great  teacher,”  which  could  have  resulted  in  the  higher 
residual  scores.  In  addition,  there  could  have  been  good  classroom  dynamics,  good 
preparation,  a  good  learning  environment,  and  a  host  of  other  possibilities  that  could  explain 
Respondent’s  high  residual  scores. 

Character  Testimony 

46. 

Respondent’s  colleague  and  fellow  fifth  grade  teacher  at  Sheridan,  Bernardino 
Mercado,  testified  at  hearing.  Mr.  Mercado  has  known  Respondent  for  nearly  14  years,  ever 
since  he  began  teaching  at  Sheridan.  Mr.  Mercado  described  Respondent  as  a  very  good, 
highly  qualified,  honest,  professional  teacher,  who  works  very  hard  for  her  students.  Mr. 
Mercado  holds  Respondent  in  high  esteem,  because  she  focuses  on  improving  the 
instructional  needs  of  her  students,  collaborates  regularly  with  other  teachers,  and 
demonstrates  a  passion  for  working  in  the  community  and  in  the  school.  Respondent  is 
highly  respected,  held  in  high  esteem  by  her  colleagues,  is  hardworking,  and  honest.  Based 
on  his  high  regard  for  Respondent,  Mr.  Mercado  believes  Respondent  did  not  commit  the 
violations  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  In  addition,  Respondent,  along  with  all  other  teachers, 
had  received  detailed  training  on  how  to  administer  the  CST,  and  advised  that  administrators 
routinely  walked  through  the  classrooms  during  CST  testing  to  ensure  compliance  with  CST 
rules. 

47. 

Another  colleague  and  teacher,  Anastasia  Gonzalez  Zimara,  who  also  served 

as  Respondent’s  union  representative  at  the  May  23,  2012  meeting  with  Mr.  Martinez, 
testified  at  hearing.  Ms.  Zimara  has  been  a  teacher  for  the  District  for  approximately  14 
years,  and  has  been  at  Sheridan  for  six.  years.  Ms.  Zimara  worked  closely  with  Respondent 
from  2009  through  2012  as  a  fellow  fifth  grade  teacher,  and  often  collaborated  together  to 
develop  lesson  plans,  review  grade  level  data,  and  share  best  practices.  She  always 
considered  Respondent  as  honest,  fit,  committed,  and  a  model  teacher.  As  a  rule, 
Respondent  arrived  to  school  early  in  the  mornings,  often  stayed  late,  and  routinely  went 
above  and  beyond  the  call  of  duty  for  the  benefit  of  her  students.  Respondent  had  the 
reputation  for  being  a  very  strict  teacher.  Ms.  Zimara  believes  Respondent  did  not  commit 
the  violations  set  forth  in  the  Accusation,  because  Respondent  would  not  risk  everything  to 
cheat,  especially  given  how  hard  she  worked  to  get  her  students  prepared  for  the  CST,  and 
how  Respondent  truly  believed  in  her  students  to  achieve.  Like  Respondent’s  class,  Ms. 
Zimora’s  class  took  an  “extra  long  time”  to  complete  certain  portions  of  the  CST,  which 

12

 

resulted  in  their  classes  going  past  their  regular  lunch  time  before  the  students  were  allowed 
to  leave  for  lunch.  During  the  CST,  Sheridan  provided  extra  lunch  sessions  in  order  to 
accommodate  students’  potential  late  release  for  lunch.  Ms.  Zimara  also  noted  that  while 
many  teachers  generally  want  their  students  to  do  well  on  the  CST,  most  teachers  at  Sheridan 
do  not  consider  the  CST  “the  end  all,  be  all.”  Teachers  are  not  paid  extra  money  if  their 
students  perform  well  on  the  CST. 

48. 

Janice  Ormand,  a  fourth  grade  teacher  who  worked  collaboratively  with 
Respondent  when  Respondent  taught  fourth  grade,  provided  a  reference  letter  lauding 
Respondent  as  an  active  team  player  who  developed  many  valuable,  innovative  lesson  plans 
that  met  the  needs  for  low,  middle,  and  high  functioning  students.  Ms.  Ormand  considered 
Respondent  an  extremely  hard  working  teacher,  who  expected  her  students  to  be 
academically  successful  through  hard  work. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Absent  a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 
Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden of  proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations. 

, 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  isa  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  y.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.”  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (Sections  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4, 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two  members  of 
the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  respondent  and  one  by  the 
district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

5. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission 
may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of 
dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Section  44944,  subdivision 
(QMG)) 

13 

 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(a) 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

more  of  the  following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

[].. 

19] 

(3)  Dishonesty. 

(a...  [1] 

[TN]...  [9] 

["]  ...  [1] 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

7. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  a  district  may  suspend  a 
permanent  employee  without  pay  for  a  specific  period  of  time  if  it  follows  the  same 
procedures  as  for  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee. 

8. 

Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
_  filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 

statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
.  the 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 
the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 

.  with  willful  refusal  to 

. 

. 

14 

 

30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

9. 

Here,  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)), 
immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),  dishonesty  (section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  willful 
refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)),  or  willful  refusal 
to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  (section  44939).  All  of  District’s 
charges  stem  from  allegations  of  cheating,  based  on  the  testimony  of  four  of  seven  students 
who  claimed  that  during  Respondent’s  administration  of  the  exam,  she  marked  or  placed 
sticky  notes  on  incorrect  answers  on  the  studerits’  exams,  according  to  Student  B  and  Student 
J,  or  simply  asked  students  to  recheck  answers  after  students  stood  in  line  for  her  to  review 
their  answers,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Student  W,  or  would  not  allow  students  to  turn 
in  their  exams  without  correcting  certain  answers,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Student  Z,  or 
permitted  students  to  use  their  science  textbooks  during  the  exam,  according  to  the  testimony 
of  Student  Z,  or  would  not  allow  students  to  leave  during  recess  or  lunch  so  that  they  could 
continue  taking  their  tests,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Student  B  and  Student  J.  However, 
given  Respondent’s  credible  testimony  about  how  she  administered  a  number  of  practice 
tests,  routinely  checked  her  students’  answers  on  the  practice  tests,  required  them  to  correct 
their  incorrect  answers  on  the  practice  tests,  and  permitted  them  to  use  the  periodic  chart  in 
their  science  textbooks  on  the  practice  tests,  it  appears  that  Students  B,  J,  W,  and  Z,  confused 
Respondent’s  actions  on  the  practice  tests  for  those  that  occurred  on  the  actual  CST.  This 
notion  is  supported  by  the  sheer  number  of  students  who  did  not  claim  that  Respondent  had 
engaged  in  any  inappropriate  behavior  during  her  administration  of  the  CST.  In  other  words, 
had  Respondent  actually  engaged  in  the  alleged  misconduct  during  the  CST,  and  in  such  a 
public  way,  as  the  four  students  had  testified,  it  naturally  follows  that  substantially  more  than 
seven  of  the  21  students  would  have  supported  those  claims  in  their  own  statements 
submitted  to  Mr.  Martinez.  Surely,  if  there  had  been  approximately  10  students  in  line 
waiting  for  Respondent  to  review  their  answers  on  the  CST,  as  Student  W  testified,  more 
students  would  have  advised  Mr,  Martinez  of  that  fact,  including  the  other  three  students  who 
provided  testimony  at  hearing.  In  addition,  if  Respondent  had  permitted  students  to  use  their 
science  textbooks  during  the  CST,  certainly  there  would  have  been  other  students  who 
conveyed  such  information  to  Mr.  Martinez.  Moreover,  if  Respondent  had  required  students 
to  remain  in  class  during  recess  and  lunch,  District  failed  to  show  that  such  action  was 
inappropriate,  given  Ms.  Zimara’s  testimony,  who  engaged  in  a  similar  practice,  the 
provision  of  an  extra  lunch  period  to  accommodate  the  students  taking  the  CST,  and  the  fact 
that  the  CST  was  not  a  timed  test,  as  supported  by  the  testimony  of  Respondent,  Mr.  Perez, 
Mr.  Mercado,  and  Ms,  Zimara.  Given  these  factors,  District  failed  to  meet  its  burden. 

10. 

Notwithstanding  the  above,  District  contends  that  its  expert,  Dr.  Lim, 

established  that  the  high  scores  achieved  by  Respondent’s  students  on  the  2011  CST  in  math, 
which  resulted  in  a  statistically  significant  difference  between  Respondent  and  all  other 
“blue”  teachers,  was  most  likely  not  due  to  chance.  As  such,  it  argues  that  the  anomaly  in 
Respondent’s  test  results  demonstrated  that  Respondent  cheated,  or  otherwise  engaged  in 

15 

inappropriate  conduct  that  artificially  inflated  her  students’  scores,  supported  by  the  students’ 
less  than  stellar  performance  in  math  in  the  following  year.  However,  this  position  is  not 
persuasive,  given  the  number  of  possible  and  reasonable  variables  that  could  have  impacted 
the  students’  performance  as  fifth  graders  on  the  2011  CST,  and  as  sixth  graders  on  the  2012 
CST, 

. 

11. 

Specifically,  as  Respondent  credibly  testified,  she  engaged  in  extensive  work 

preparing  her  students  for  the  2011  CST,  such  as  holding  a  math  club  and  a  reading  club  after 
school,  two  times  a  week  each,  to  help  the  students  prepare  for  the  math  and  language  arts 
portion  of  the  CST;  routinely  assigned  a  large  homework  load  to  help  the  students  with  areas 
on  the  CST;  required  students  to  remain  in  her  classroom  during  recess  if  they  failed  to 
complete  the  homework  as  assigned;  administered  a  series  of  practice  tests;  shared  test- 
taking  strategies;  set  aside  at  least  one  and  one-half  hours  per  day  for  CST  preparation; 
routinely  held  individual  conferences  with  her  students  to  ensure  they  understood  the 
concepts  on  the  practice  tests;  Respondent  forewent  her  recesses  and  lunches  to  tutor 
students;  stayed  at  work  late;  prepared  extensive  lesson  plans;  developed  visual  aids  with 
animation;  used  theatrical  and  performing  arts,  made  up  songs;  developed  academic  games 
based  on  “Who  Wants  to  Be  a  Millionaire”  and  “American  Idol;”  created  vocabulary 
competitions;  developed  handouts;  provided  checklists;  created  power  point  presentations; 
made  posters;  and  provided  students  with  highlighters  and  manipulatives.  In  addition, 
Respondent  had  a  history  of  demonstrating  CST  effectiveness,  evidenced  by  her  “value- 
added”  rating  noted  in  the  Los  Angeles  Times  in  2009  and  2010,  based  on  her  students’ 
progress  on  the  CST  in  math  and  English,  ranking  Respondent  in  the  most  effective  overall 
category,  the  most  effective  in  math  category,  and  the  most  effective  in  English  category. 

12. 

Respondent’s  hard  work  is  supported  by  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Mercado  and 

Ms.  Zimara,  who  described  Respondent  as  a  very  good,  hard-working,  highly  qualified, 
honest,  fit,  committed,  professional  teacher,  who  works  very  hard  for  her  students,  and  who 
Ms.  Zimara  considered  a  model  teacher.  Both  acknowledged  that  Respondent  was  held  in 
high  esteem,  because,  as  Mr.  Mercado  testified,  Respondent  focuses  on  improving  the 
instructional  needs  of  her  students,  collaborates  regularly  with  other  teachers,  and 
demonstrates  a  passion  for  working  in  the  community  and  in  the  school.  Even  Respondent’s 
2010  District  evaluation,  executed  by  Sheridan’s  principal  Genaro  Carapia,  noted  that 
Respondent  devoted  “countless,  extra  unselfish  hours  to  address  student  learning.” 

13. 

Indeed,  even  District’s  expert,  Dr.  Lim,  noted  that  it  is  possible  that 

Respondent  was  a  “great  teacher,”  which  could  have  resulted  in  the  higher  residual  scores. 
In  addition,  Dr.  Lim  acknowledged  there  could  have  been  good  classroom  dynamics,  good 
preparation,  a  good  learning  environment,  and  a  host  of  other  possibilities  that  could  explain 
Respondent’s  high  residual  scores. 

14. 

The  fact  that  the  same  students  did  not  perform  as  well  on  the  CST  in  sixth 

grade  could  be  attributed  to  just  as  many  factors  and  variables  as  the  reasons  for  their  stellar 
performance  in  fifth  grade.  Specifically,  as  Dr.  Lim  testified,  she  did  not  look  at  the  quality 
of  the  teachers  the  students  had  in  sixth  grade,  whether  students  had  parents  who  had 

16

divorced  since  their  fifth  grade  CST,  whether  a  parent  had  died,  or  whether  a  parent  had  been 
accused  of  a  crime,  or  any  other  possible  variables  within  students’  lives  that  could  have 
caused  them  not  to  perform  as  well  on  the  CST  in  sixth  grade  as  they  did  in  fifth  grade. 
Moreover,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent’s  fifth  grade  students  who  took  the  2012 
CST,  though  they  did  not  perform  as  well  as  her  2010-2011  fifth  grade  class,  still  scored  high 
enough  for  District  to  again  classify  Respondent  as.a  “blue”  teacher.  Such  “blue” 
categorization  for  2009,  2010,  2011,  and  2012,  without  any  allegations  of  cheating  during 
those  years  prior  or  the  year  subsequent  to  2011,  suggests  that  Respondent  is  simply  an 
effective  teacher  who  knows  how  to  help  her  students  reach  their  full  potential,  and  not  one 
who  engages  in  inappropriate  conduct  during  the  administration  of  the  CST.  The  District 
simply  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  the  acts  alleged  in  the 
Accusation. 

15. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (Id.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct.  _ 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  December A)  2013 

DATED:  December  _,  2013 

DATED:  December  __,  2013 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

NANCEE  FINE 
Commission  Member 

HILDA  RODRIGUEZ 
Commission  Member 

  

17

divorced  since  their  fifth  grade  CST,  whether  a  parent  had  died,  or  whether  a  parent  had  been 
accused  of  a  crime,  or  any  other  possible  variables  within  students’  lives  that  could  have 
caused  them  mot  to  perform  as  well  on  the  CST  in  sixth  grade  as  they  did  in  fifth grade, 
Moreover,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent’s  fifth  gtade  students  who  took  the  2012 
CST,  though  they  did  not  perform  as  well  as  her  2010-2011  fifth  grade  class,  still  scored high 
enough  for  District  to  again  classify  Respondent  as  a  “blue”  teacher.  Such  “blue” 
categorization  for  2009,  2010,  2011,  and  2012,  without  any  allegations  of  cheating  during 
those  years  prior  or  the  year  subsequent  to  2011,  suggests  that  Respondent  is  simply  an 
effective  teacher  who  knows  how  to  help  her  students  reach  -heir  full  potential,  and  not  one 
Who  engages  in  inappropriate  conduct  during  the  administration  of  the  CST.  The  District 
simply  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  should  be  disinissed  for.  the  acts  alleged  in  the 
Accusation, 

- 

13. 

In  Morrison  v,  State  Board  of Education  (1966!)  1  Cal. 3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  tight  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  ateacher.”  ‘The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
| 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “iavolving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (id,  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  ‘proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  taat  conduct, 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed, 

DATED:  December” _,  2013 

 

DATED:  December],  2013 

DATED:  December  __,  2013 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Adniinistrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

, 

NWANCEE  FINE 
Commission  Member 

HILDA  RODRIGUEZ 
‘Commission  Member 

17 

  

  

 

of the  teachers  the  students  had  in  sixth  grade,  whether  students had  parents who  had 
divorced  since  their  fifth  grade  CST,  whether  a  parent  had  died,  or  whether  a  parent  had  been 
accused  of  a  crime,  or  any  other  possible  variables  within  students’  lives  that  could  have 
caused  them  not  to  perform  as  well  on  the  CST  in  sixth  grade  as  they  did  in  fifth  grade. 
Moreover,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent’s  fifth  prade  students  who  took  the  2012 
CST,  though  they  did  not  perform  as  well  as  her  2010-2011  fifth  grade  class,  still  scored  high 
enough  for  District  to  again  classify  Respondent  as  a  “blue”  teacher.  Such  “blue” 
categorization  for  2009,  2010,  2011,  and  2012,  without  any  allegations  of  cheating  during 
those  years  prior  or  the  year  subsequent  to  2011,  suggests  that  Respondent  is  simply  an 
effective  teacher  who  knows  how  to  help  her  students  reach  their  full  potential,  and  not  one 
who  engages  in  inappropriate  conduct  during  the  administration  of the  CST.  The  District 
simply  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  the  acts  alleged  in  the 
Accusation. 

15. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held that “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unproféssional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (/d,  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  December __,  2013 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of Administrative  Hearings 

NANCEE  FINE 

Commission  Member 

“ 

tilda)  Redigue) 

HILDA  RODRYGUE: 

Commission  Member 

DATED:  December  _, 2013 

ned 

DATED:  December 3),  2013 

7 

