BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against, 

RYOGO  MATSUO, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2013101048 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 

Angeles,  California,  on  April  20,  21,  22,  and  23,  2015.  The  Commission  consisted  of 
Deanna  Clark,  Tammi  DiGrazia,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Meredith  Karasch,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District  (District).  Rosemary  Ward  and  Deborah  Eshaghian,  Attorneys  at  Law, 
represented  Respondent  Ryogo  Matsuo  (Respondent).  The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for 
decision  on  April  23,  2015. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  to  66th  Street 

Elementary  School  (66th  Street).  District  alleged  that  Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional 
and  immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),"  evident  unfitness  for 
service  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)),  all  arising  from  an  allegation  dating  back  to 
the  1990’s,  prior  to  Respondent  becoming a  teacher,  that  Respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate 
sexual  behavior  in  the  presence  of  a  child.  District  seeks  Respondent’s  dismissal. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

District  served  Respondent  with  a  Statement  of  Charges  and  an  Accusation  on 

September  18,  2013  and  November  15,  2013,  respectively,  both  executed  by  Vivian  K. 
Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  acting  in  her  official  capacity.  On  September  27, 
2013,  Respondent  served  his  Notice  of  Defense. 

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

  

2 

In  the  summer  of  1987,  when  Respondent  was  16  years  old,  Respondent  came 

to  the  United  States  from  Japan  as  a  foreign  exchange  student,  and  was  housed  at  the  home 
of  the  Ci  family  for  three  weeks.  The  Cf  family  consisted  of J 
Ci,  who  was — 
the  matriarch  of  the  family,  her  husband  GI  Ci,  their  oldest  daughter  A  KR, 
who  was a teenager,  their  son  Ci  CH,  who  was  six  or  seven-years-old,  and  their 
daughter  EE  “Beli”  CH,  who  was  three  or  four-years-old.  In  August  1987,  at  the 
completion  of  his  foreign  exchange  program,  Respondent  returned  to  Japan. 

3. 

In  April  1988,  Respondent  returned  to  the  United  States,  but  not  as  a  foreign 

exchange  student.  Rather,  Respondent  returned  to  lived  permanently  with  the  Ci 
Respondent  enrolled  in  Alta  Loma  High  School. 

family. 

4, 

In  July  1988,  AM  KR  (AB)  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,  BR  KR 

(BEB).  In  April  1989,  A,  who  had  a  tumultuous  relationship  with  her  mother  J 
CH).  moved  out  of  the  house  with  BI.  The  discord  in  the  relationship  between  AJ 
   
  
  
and  Ms.  Ci 
stemmed,  in  part,  from  Aff s  belief  that  Ms.  CJ  had  begun  an  emotional 
affair  with  Respondent.  In  1990,  Aj  and  BU  relocated  to  Iowa,  where  AI,  after 
completing  college,  became  a  teacher. 

5. 

Between  1993  and  1996,  when  she  was  between  the  ages  of  five  and  eight- 

spent  her  summers  in  California  in  the  Cf 

years-old,  BI 
BE,  along  with  other  members  of  the  household,  including  Respondent,  often  viewed 
movie  videos  in  the  living  room.  Respondent  also  had  a  television  and  video  player  in  his 
bedroom,  where  he  also  viewed  movie  videos,  Pursuant  to  the  rules  of  the  house,  no  children 
(i.€.,  CH,  Bc,  and  BEB)  were  permitted  to  enter  or  spend  time  in  the  bedroom  of 
Respondent  or  any  other  foreign  exchange  student  hosted  by  the  Ci 

houschold.  During  that  time, 

family. 

6. 

In  1999  or  2000,  Ms.  Cif  moved  out  of  the  house  and  into  the  home  of  her 
friend,  and  Respondent  had  moved  into  his  own  apartment.  Ms.  Ci  and  Respondent  then 
began  a  romantic  relationship.  They  have  maintained  that  relationship  ever  since. 

7 

On  October  30,  2001,  District  offered  Respondent  a  position  as  a 

probationary  elementary  school  teacher,  to  commence  on  November  19,  2001,  and  provided 
Respondent  with  written  information  concerning  its  policies,  including  child  abuse  policies. 
Respondent  accepted  the  offer  and  began  his  employ  with  District  on  November  19,  2001. 

8. 

Prior  to  May  2011,  when  BI 

was  22-years-old,  she  reported  to  her  life- 

partner  during  a  discussion  concerning  family  dynamics,  that  between  1996  and  1998,  on  one 
occasion  during  one  of  her  summers  in  the  Cf 
household,  her  grandmother  (JI  Ci) 
sent  her  into  Respondent’s  bedroom  to  watch  a  movie  with  Respondent.  No  other  family 
members  were  home.  Bj  told  her  partner  that  she  and  Respondent  had  lain  on  his  bed 
together,  with  BIPs  back  to  Respondent,  and  that  Respondent  was  wearing  boxer  shorts 
only.  BI 
understand  at  the  time,  but  later  understood  as  Respondent  masturbating.  bm”  conveyed

recounted  she  felt  a  rapid  motion  against  her  back,  which  she  did  not 

  

that  Ms.  Cif  banged  on  the  bedroom  door,  prompting  Respondent  to  get  up  from  the  bed, 
and  begin  an  argument  with  Ms.  Ci.  BI  ran  down  the  hall  into  Bes  room. 

9, 

On  May  16,  2011,  BI 

told  her  mother  (Af)  about  the  masturbation 

incident.  The  news  upset  A,  which  resulted  in  Af  disclosing  the  incident  to  her 
personal  psychologist.  Als  psychologist,  as  a  mandated  reporter,  alerted  the  authorities. 

10. 

On  May  17,  2011,  Detective  Lynn  Silvey  of  the  San  Bernardino  County 

Sheriffs  Department,  pursuant  to  a  report  initiated  by  the  Child  Protection  Service,  was 
assigned  to  investigate  BA's  matter.  Because  BI 
now  resided  in  North  Carolina, 
Detective  Silvey  contacted  the  Charlotte  Mecklenberg  Police  Department  (CMPD)  and 
requested  one  of  its  detectives  to  interview  BU. 

11. 

On  August  1,  2011,  Detective  Dave  Conn  of  CMPD  interviewed  BU. 

advised  that  Respondent 
During  the  course  of  the  interview,  which  was  videotaped,  BI 
would  walk  around  the  house  in  his  boxers  with  an  unsecured  fly  that  exposed  his  genitals. 
Additionally,  BIJ  reported  Respondent,  dressed  in  boxers  only,  would  encourage  her  to 
lay  her  head  on  his  lap,  which  felt  “weird  and  wrong”  to  BU,  as  her  head  was  so  close  his 
genitals.  BI 
seen  his  penis,  but,  after  Respondent  had  gotten  up  to  argue  with  Ms.  Ci,  she  had  put  her 
hand  into  something  wet  on  the  bed,  which  she  later  concluded  was  Respondent’s  semen 
from  where  he  had  ejaculated.  BI 
room. 

further  reported  the  masturbation  incident,  and  conveyed  that  she  had  not 

became  frightened,  and  ran  down  the  hall  into  Belfs 

12. 

Detective  Conn  forwarded  the  videotaped  interview  to  Detective  Silvey,  who 

reviewed  it.  Detective  Silvey  did  not  interview  BI,  but  concluded,  based  on  BUrs 
body  language  and  statements,  BI 
hearing. 

was  credible.  Detective  Conn  did  not  testify  at 

13. 

At  hearing,  BI 

repeated,  in  essence,  the  same  account  she  stated  during  her 

videotaped  interview,  but  clarified  she  was  not  sure  whether  Respondent  had  ejaculated  or 
not,  or  whether  she  had  placed  her  hand  in  semen.  BU  could  not  state  with  specificity 
which  one  of  the  summers  between  1993  and  1996  Respondent  allegedly  masturbated  in  her 
presence.  BU  felt  motivated  to  testify  against  Respondent  because  she  wanted  to  prevent 
him,  as  a  teacher  of  small  children,  from  sexually  abusing  any  students. 

14. 

Detective  Silvey  interviewed  AJ,  who,  at  hearing,  explained  that  Ms.  Ci 

told  her  that  she  would  only  consider  reconciling  their  tumultuous  relationship  if  Respondent 
could  have  access  to  As  children  alone,  including  BI.  AM  also  reported  that  she 
had  expressed  previously  to  Ms.  Ci,  that  it  was  wrong  for  Ms.  CJ  to  be  engaged  ina 
sexual  relationship  with  Respondent.  Al  also  stated  she  never  got  along  with  Respondent, 
mainly  because  of  the  inappropriate  relationship  she  felt  Respondent  was  having  with  her 
mother,  who  was  a  married  woman.

15. 

Immediately  following  her  interview  of  A,  Detective  Silvey  conducted  a 
“pretext”  telephone  call  between  Alf  and  Ms.  Ci.  During  the  telephone  call,  to  which 
Detective  Silvey  listened  and  recorded,  but  said  nothing,  Detective  Silvey  prompted  Ajj  to 
discuss  allegations  BJ  made  against  Respondent.  During  the  discussion,  as  stated  by 
Detective  Silvey  in  her  September  14,  2011  report,  Ms.  Cif  did  not  deny  that  Respondent 
had  watched  a  movie  with  BJ  in  his  bedroom,  but  did  deny  that  Respondent  had  been 
physical  with  BI.  AIM  asked  Ms.  Cj  whether  she  believed  BI 
which  Ms. Cf 
September  14,  2011  report  also  included  her  summary  of  Detective  Conn’s  videotaped 
interview  of 

replied,  “[T]hat’s  what  happened  in  [BPs]  eyes.”  Detective  Silvey’s 

was  lying,  to 

16. 

Detective  Silvey  concluded  she  had  probable  cause  to  arrest  Respondent.  In 

that  regard,  on  September  14,  2011,  Detective  Silvey  and  other  deputies  from  the  San 
Bernardino  Sheriff's  Department,  as  well  as  Detective  Ray  Jordan  of  the  Los  Angeles  School 
Police  Department,  entered  the  campus  of  66th  Street  during  school  hours,  located 
Respondent,  escorted  him  into  a  room,  and  advised  him  he  had  engaged  in  lewd  or  lascivious 
acts  involving  a  child,  in  violation  of  Penal  Code  section  288.  The  deputies  handcuffed 
Respondent  and  took  him  to  the  sheriffs  station.  Detective  Silvey  questioned  Respondent, 
who  denied  masturbating  in  the  presence  of  BU,  and  denied  walking  around  the  house  in 
his  boxer  shorts. 

| 

17. 

Detective  Silvey  interviewed  none  of  Respondent’s  past  or  current  students. 

While  Detective  Silvey  was  not  certain,  she  believed  she  tried  to  locate  other  potential 
victims  through  a  press  release  issued  to  local  newspapers  that  included  Respondent’s 
photograph,  a  description  of  the  alleged  crime,  the  date  and  time  of  his  arrest,  and  a  request 
that  other  alleged  victims  of  Respondent  come  forward.  No  one  came  forward. 

18. 

Detective  Silvey  submitted  her  report  to  the  District  Attorney’s  Office,  which 
declined  to  prosecute.  At  hearing,  Detective  Silvey  stated  that  the  District  Attorney’s  Office 
decline  to  prosecute  Respondent  because  the  statute  of  limitations  had  expired,  and  the  facts 
of  the  case  failed  to  fall  under  any  exception  to  the  statute  of  limitations,  “because  the  abuse 
was  not  substantial  enough.”  However,  neither  party  submitted  any  independent  evidence 
setting  forth  the  District  Attorney’s  rationale  for  not  prosecuting  the  case  against 
Respondent. 

19. 

On  September  16,  2011,  the  San  Bernardino  County  Sheriff's  Department 
released  Respondent  from  custody.  Upon  his  release,  Respondent  received  a  “detention 
certificate”  from  the  San  Bernardino  County  Sheriff's  Department  certifying  that  “the  taking 
into  custody  of  [Respondent]  on  09/14/2011,  by  the  Rancho  Cucamonga  [division],  was  a 
detention  only,  not  an  arrest.” 

20. 
interview  of BI 

Thereafter,  the  investigation  file  was  destroyed,  including  the  videotaped 

and  the  pretext  call  recording  of  Af  and  Ms.  Ci.

  

21. 

 InJanuary  2012,  Detective  Ray  Jordan  conducted  a  separate  administrative 

investigation  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  and  interviewed  Ajj  and 
Respondent,  but  was  not  able  to  interview  BU.  Detective  Jordan  also  interviewed 
students  and  staff  members  from  66th  Street,  who  reported  they  had  witnessed  no 
inappropriate  behavior  from  Respondent,  and  all  reported  they  were  comfortable  with 
Respondent.  Detective  Jordan  also  talked  to  Detective  Silvey  and  read  her  report.  Detective 
Jordan  did  not  testify  at  hearing,  but  rather  submitted  an  affidavit  which  included  an 
investigation  report  he  drafted,  which  was  comprised,  primarily,  of  a  summary  of  Detective 
Silvey’s  report.  Detective  Jordan  noted  in  his  report  that  Respondent  remained  consistent  in 
his  denial  of  the  allegations  leveled  by  BU,  and  stated  Respondent  had  no  prior  criminal 
history  and  no  complaints  or  disciplinary  records  in  his  personnel  file. 

. 

22. 

 Athearing,  Respondent  continued  to  deny  BUPs  allegations,  and  contended 
he  never  engaged  in  inappropriate  activity  with  BU,  and  did  not  walk  around  the  house  in 
his  boxer  shorts,  except  when  walking  a  few  feet  from  his  bathroom  after  a  shower  to  his 
adjacent  bedroom,  after  ensuring  no  one.  was 
in  the  hallway  to  see  him.  Respondent  also 
denied  ever  directing  BI 
to  place  her  head  in  his  lap  while  he  wore  boxer  shorts.  Ms. 
CHE  and  her  son,  CM,  corroborated  Respondent’s  statements  at  hearing.  Specifically, 
neither  Ms.  Cj  nor  CH  witnessed  Respondent  walk  around  the  house  wearing  only  his 
boxer  shorts,  and  never  witnessed  Respondent  with  BIPs  head  on  his  lap.  Additionally, 
both  reported  the  house  rules  prohibited  children  from  going  into  Respondent’s  bedroom  or 
into  the  bedroom  of  any  foreign  exchange  students  the  Cf 
years.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ci  denied  sending  BI 
movie,  and  denied  that  she  would  reconcile  her  relationship  with  AI  only  if  As 
children,  including  BI,  could  spend  alone  time  with  Respondent.  Neither  Ms.  Ci  nor 
CHM  has  maintained  a  relationship  with  Al  or  BIR  because  of  the  allegations  they 
have  leveled  against  Respondent. 

into  Respondent’s  room  to  watch  a 

family  had  hosted  over  the 

23. 

On  May  11,  2012,  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC) 

sent  Respondent  a  leter  advising  that  it  was  conducting  an  investigation  into  the  allegations 
made  by  BJ.  On  May  30,  2012,  Respondent  sent  CTC a  letter  stating  that  the  allegations 
leveled  against  him  were  false,  and  that  he  had  not  been  arrested  or  charged  with  any  crime. 
Rather,  as  Respondent  explained  in  his  letter,  he  had  been  detained,  questioned,  and  then 
released.  On  July  25,  2012,  the  CTC  sent  Respondent  a  letter  stating  that  it  had  closed  its 
investigation  and  would  recommend  no  adverse  action  at  this  time. 

24. 

On  January  8,  2013,  District  issued  Respondent  a  notice  of  unsatisfactory  acts 

and  a  notice  of  suspension  as a  result  of  the  allegations  leveled  by  BU. 

25. 

On  January  16,  2013,  Dr.  James  Noble,  who  served  as  District’s  Administrator 
of  Operations  and  Skelly  respondent,  sent  Respondent  a  letter  advising  that  he  had  scheduled 
a  meeting  with  Respondent  for  January  30,  2013  to  discuss  Respondent’s  possible  dismissal 
and  immediate  suspension.  Dr.  Noble  indicated  in  the  letter  that  following  the  meeting,  he 
would  recommend  whether  or  not  District  should  move  forward  with  Respondent’s 
dismissal.  On  January  27,  2013,  Respondent  sent  Dr.  Noble a  letter  stating,  among  other

things,  the  allegations  were  false,  and  that  the  District  Attorney’s  Office  had  rejected  the  case 
because  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the  allegations. 

26. 

On  February  14,  2013,  after  meeting  with  Respondent  and  his  representative 

on  January  30,  2013,  Dr.  Noble  sent  Respondent  a  letter  stating  that  he  had  carefully 
considered  the  matter,  including  statements  made  by  Respondent  and  letters  submitted  by 
Ms.  Ci  and  CM  asserting  the  allegations  leveled  against  Respondent  were  false. 
Noble  concluded  he  would  uphold  the  recommendation  for  immediate  suspension.  At 
hearing,  Dr.  Noble  explained  that  he  had  reached  that  conclusion  because  Respondent  had 
been  accused  of  an  act,  which  had  “later  been  found  credible.”  Dr.  Noble  found  compelling 
had  nothing  to  gain  by  making  the  allegations  against  Respondent.  Additionally, 
that  BI 
credible  because  she  gave  a  very  detailed  account.  Dr.  Noble  considered  the 
he  found  BI 
fact  that  Respondent  was  teaching  children  in  the  same  age  range  as  BU 
Respondent  had  allegedly  engaged  in  inappropriate  acts  in  her  presence.  Dr.  Noble  added 
that  had  the  crime  been  reported  properly  when  it  happened,  Respondent  would  have  never 
become  a  teacher. 

was  when 

Dr. 

Character  Testimony 

27. 

Twenty-nine  staff  members  from  66th  Street  signed  an  undated  document  in 

support  for  Respondent.  Specifically,  the  document  stated  they  had  worked  with  Respondent 
for  many  years,  and  in  their  daily  interactions  and  observations,  had  at  no  time  witnessed 
inappropriate  conduct  with  any  students,  The  document  further  stated  that  they  had  observed 
Respondent  to  be  responsible,  caring,  and  professional  at  all  times,  and  they  were  “outraged 
and  appalled  by  the  false  accusations  that  were  made  against  him.”  While  it  is  unclear  the 
basis  underlying  the  following  statement,  “It  is  our  understanding  that  these  erroneous 
accusations  have  been  proven  false  by  the  authorities,”  the  document  stated  that  the  staff 
members  were  standing  by  Respondent  “with  unwavering  confidence  that  he  will  be 
reinstated  to  his  rightful  position  within  the  district.” 

28. 

One  of  the  staff  members,  Sonsere  Taylor,  who  is  a  fourth  grade  teacher, 
testified  at  hearing.  Ms.  Taylor,  who  has  been  employed  with  District  for  16  years,  has 
known  Respondent  for  nine  years,  and  had  found  him  to  be  very  professional,  concerned 
about  the  education  of  students,  honest,  and  focused.  Ms.  Taylor  believes  the  allegations 
leveled  against  Respondent  are  false,  based  on  the  professional  behavior  she  has  witnessed  in 
Respondent. 

29. 

Julia  Lynn  Olsen  served  as  a  character  witness,  who  has  been  employed  as  a 

teacher  with  the  Alta  Loma  Unified  School  District  for  the  last  18  years.  Ms.  Olsen  met 
in  the  late  1980’s,  when  Respondent  was  a  foreign 
Respondent  through  her  friend  Ms.  Ci 
exchange  student.  Her  son,  who  was  three  or  four-years-old  when  she  first  met  Respondent, 
has  spent  a  substantial  amount  of  time  with  Respondent  over  the  years,  because  they  share  a 
mutual  interest:  computers.  She  has  never  felt  hesitant  about  her  son  spending  time  with 
Respondent,  and  her  son  has  never  expressed  that  he  has  felt  uncomfortable  with 
Respondent.  Additionally,  Ms.  Olsen  had  an  opportunity  to  observe  Respondent  in  a

professional  setting  when  he  served  as  a  student  teacher  at  the  same  elementary  school  in 
which  Ms.  Olsen  worked.  Ms.  Olsen  found  Respondent  to  be  very  engaging  with  the 
students  and  demonstrate  a  great  demeanor  with  the  children.  Ms,  Olsen  disbelieves  the 
allegations  leveled  against  Respondent,  and  believes  Respondent  has  upstanding  character, 
and  is  extremely  direct  and  truthful. 

30. 

CHS  Cl  also  served  as  a  character  witness.  Mr.  Cif  has  never  known 
Respondent  to  lie,  and  has  always  felt  comfortable  allowing  his  own  children  to  interact  with 
Respondent  without  supervision. 

Credibility  Findings’ 

31. 

|  The  Commission  concluded  that  BU 

believed  that  Respondent  had  engaged 

in  the  acts  that  she  had  described,  given  her  straight-forward  demeanor  when  testifying,  and 
her  detailed  account  of  the  events.  However,  the  Commission  identified  problems  with  her 
credibility,  given  the  more  than  two  decades  it  took  her  to  raise  the  allegations,  the  lack  of 
specificity  concerning  the  summer  in  which  Respondent  had  allegedly  committed  the  act  of 
masturbation  in  her  presence,  and  the  retraction  of  her  statement  that  Respondent  had 
ejaculated. 

32. 

Af  and  Ms.  Ci,  who  both  admitted  they  did  not  have a  positive 

relationship  with  each  other,  offered  diametrically  opposed  testimony.  Specifically,  Al 
asserted  and  testified,  among  other  things,  that  Ms.  Ci 
had  told  her  the  only  way  she 
would  consider  reconciling  their  tumultuous  mother-daughter  relationship  is  by  permitting 
Respondent  to  have  alone  time  with  AlPs  children,  including  BI.  Ms.  Ci 
emphatically  denied  Als  claim.  Arguably,  both  had  motive  for  presenting  their  respective 
accounts.  Specifically,  A,  who  admittedly  did  not  like  Respondent  because  of  what  she 
perceived  as  his  improper  romantic  relationship  with  Ms.  Cf,  could  have  offered  the 
testimony  to  help  ensure  Respondent  would  be  disciplined.  Such  a  result  would  also  hurt 
Ms.  CH,  because  she  is,  and  has  been,  in  love  with  Respondent  for  a  number  of  years.  For 
that  same  reason,  Ms.  Cif  had  a  motive  to  provide  testimony  which  supported  Respondent. 
For  these  reasons,  the  Commission  considered  the  testimony  from  each  on  this  point  equally 
unpersuasive. 

  

*  In  this  matter,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses  pursuant  to 
the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the  demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witness 
while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the  capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events 
occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty,  the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other 
statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the 
existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness  testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness 
toward  the  proceeding  in  which  the  testimony  has  been  given.  The  manner  and  demeanor  of 
a  witness  while  testifying  are  the  two  most  important  factors  a  trier  of  fact  considers  when 
judging  credibility.  The  mannerisms,  tone  of  voice,  eye  contact,  facial  expressions  and  body 
language  are  all  considered,  but  are  difficult  to  describe in  such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly 
understands  what  causes  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  or  disbelieve  a  witness.

33. 

The  Commission  found  credible  Respondent’s  testimony  asserting  he  did  not 

commit  any  of  the  acts  alleged  by  BI,  given  the  clear,  straight-forward,  unequivocal 
manner  in  which  he  testified.  Additionally,  CPs  testimony,  which  the  Commission 
found  credible,  as  well  as  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Ci,  corroborated  Respondent’s  testimony 
that  he  did  not  walk  around  the  house  wearing  his  boxer  shorts  only.  Detective  Silvey’s 
testimony  and  Detective  Jordan’s  affidavit  and  report  supported  the  notion  that  Respondent 
did  not  have  the  propensity  for  engaging  in  sexual  acts  with  a  child,  because  no  one  came 
forward  in  response  to  the  press  releases  likely  issued  by  Detective  Silvey,  and  no  student  or 
staff  member  advised  Detective  Jordan  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  inappropriate 
conduct.  Additionally,  the  Commission  found  compelling  that  Respondent  was  neither 
charged  nor  convicted  of  any  crime,  and  found  problematic  that  the  evidence  the 
Commission  could  have  used  to  evaluate  the  veracity  of  the  statements  made  by  BR, 
ABB,  and  Ms.  Cj  in  the  presence  of  law  enforcement,  had  been  destroyed. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

dL; 

Absent  a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 
Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden of  proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations. 

ps 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  “such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (Sections  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4. 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two  members  of 
the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  respondent  and  one  by  the 
district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

>: 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission 
may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of

dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Section  44944,  subdivision 
(\MG).) 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(a)  |  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

more  of  the  following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

i]...  [9] 

(]...  [9] 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 
[s]---  [9] 

Ts. 

Unprofessional  conduct  as  used  in  Education  Code,  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1),  may  be  defined  as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of 
a  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of 
Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled  in  part,  on  another  ground,  in 
Bekiaris  v.  Board of  Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588,  fn.  7.) 

8. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

9. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Id.) 

10. 

|  Even  where  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are  established,  it 

must  also  be  established  that  such  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  renders  the 
Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  vy.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-

230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208 
(Fontana);  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at  1444-1445.)  In  Morrison,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  set  forth  guidelines  (8  factors)  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in 
question  indicates  such  unfitness: 

(1)  —  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students, 
fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such 
adversity  anticipated 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct 

The  type  of  credential  held  by  the  person  involved 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct 

(6) 

The  likelihood  of  the  reoccurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct. 

(7)  _  The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 

chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or 
other  teachers. 

(8) 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct 

11... 

Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 

satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 
Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established, 
but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.) 

12. 

“Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,”  which 
concerns  Education  Code,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  requires  a  “showing  of 
intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

13. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  a  district  may  suspend  a 
permanent  employee  without  pay  for  a  specific  period  of  time  if  it  follows  the  same 
procedures  as  for  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee. 

14. 

Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

10

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 
statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
.  the 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 
the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 
30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

.  with  willful  refusal  to 

. 

. 

15.  —  Section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  which  sets  forth  a  four-year  statute 
of  limitations,  states:  “No  witness  shall  be  permitted  to  testify  at  the  hearing  except 
upon  oath  or  affirmation.  No  testimony  shall  be  given  or  evidence  introduced  relating 
to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the 
notice.  Evidence  of  records  regularly  kept  by  the  governing  board  concerning  the 
employee  may  be  introduced,  but  no  decision  relating  to  the  dismissal  or  suspension 
of  any  employee  shall  be  made  based  on  charges  or  evidence  of  any  nature  relating  to 
matters  occurring  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  filing  of  the  notice.” 

16. 

This  language  was  interpreted  as  not  creating  an  absolute  bar  to  accepting 

earlier  evidence  in  Atwater  Elementary  School  District  v.  California  Department  of  General 
Services  (2007)  41  Cal.4th  227  (Aawater).  In  that  case  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  had 
granted  the  teacher’s  objections  to  evidence  outside  of  the  four-year  period,  and  no  such 
evidence  was  permitted.  The  school  district  contended  that  four  different  equitable  doctrines 
could  operate  to  extend  the  four-year  rule:  equitable  tolling,  equitable  estoppel,  fraudulent 
concealment,  and  delayed  discovery.  The  Supreme  Court  determined  it  was  not  necessary  to 
examine  all  four  doctrines,  because  the  “conclusion  that  any  one  applies  resolves  whether  the 
four-year  time  limitation  is  absolute.”  (Id.,  p.  232.)  The  Supreme  Court  focused  on  the 
doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel  and  concluded  that,  “because  equitable  estoppel  is  ‘wholly 
independent’  of  section  44944(a)’s  time  limitation,  it  could  be  relied  upon  to  prevent  a 
defendant  from  asserting  the  statutory  bar.”  (/bid.)  The  four-year  time  limitation  is  not 
absolute.  “[I|f  the  district  were  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  equitable  estoppel,  it  could 
have  been  allowed  to  introduce  evidence  of,  and  base  its  dismissal  proceedings  on,  incidents 
falling  outside  the  four-year  window.”  (Id.,  p.  233.) 

17. 

In  the  instant  matter,  Respondent’s  Motion  in  Limine  No.  4  seeking  to  exclude 

evidence  beyond  the  four-year  period  was  denied,  and  District  was  permitted  to  submit 
evidence  preceding  September  2011,  because  the  doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel  applied. 
Atwater  described  this  doctrine  as  operating  when  the  circumstances  justify  preventing,  or 
estopping,  a  party  from  asserting  a  time  limit  because  his  conduct  has  induced  another  into 
not  making  a  claim  within  that  time  limit.  The  doctrine  “‘takes  its  life  ...  from  the  equitable 
principle  that  no  man  [may]  profit  from  his  wrongdoing  in  a  court  of justice.””  (Atwater, 
supra,  41  Cal.4th  at  232,  quoting  Lantzy  v.  Centex  Homes  (2003)  31  Cal.4th  363,  383.) 

11

““Generally  speaking,  four  elements  must  be  present  in  order  to  apply  the  doctrine  of 
equitable  estoppel:  (1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be  apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he  must 
intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party  asserting  the 
estoppel  had  a  right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  (3)  the  other  party  must  be  ignorant  of  the 
true  state  of  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to  his  injury.’  [Citation.]”  (  Golden 
Gate  Water  Ski  Club  v.  County  of  Contra  Costa  (2008)  165  Cal.App.4th  249,  257.) 

18. 

Here,  District  alleged  in  its  Accusation  the  four  elements  of  equitable  estoppel. 

Specifically,  District  alleged  (1)  Respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  with  BI 
KGB  in  or  about  1993  to  1996,  when  BI  was  five  to  eight-years-old;  (2)  Respondent 
intended  to  engage  in  such  misconduct  in  the  presence  of  a  child,  arguably  too  young  to 
understand  the  nature  of  Respondent’s  actions;  (3)  District  did  not  learn  of  the  misconduct 
until  September  2011,  after  BI 
disclose  the  alleged  misconduct  to  her  mother,  who,  in 
turn,  reported  the  acts  to  a  mandated  reporter;  and  (4)  District,  unaware  of  Respondent’s 
previous  misconduct,  hired  him  as  a  teacher.  For  those  reasons,  District  was  permitted  to 
present  evidence  predating  the  four-year  statutory  period. 

19. 

Despite  this,  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  establishing  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  committed  the  acts  alleged  in  the 
Accusation.  On  balance,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  2  through  33,  District’s 
evidence,  namely  the  testimony  of  its  witnesses,  was  not  more  persuasive  than  the 
ones  presented  on  Respondent’s  behalf,  including  Respondent.  In  a  he-said,  she-said 
matter  such  as  this,  where  the  credibility  of  the  percipient  witnesses  was  key,  District 
failed  to  demonstrate  that  Respondent  made  a  practice  of  walking  around  the  house  in 
his  boxer  shorts,  had  BI 
lay  her  head  in  his  lap,  and,  on  one  occasion,  masturbated 
in  BIR s  presence. 

20. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  District  failed  to  demonstrate  Respondent  engaged  in 

unprofessional  conduct  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)),  immoral  conduct  (sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(5)),and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations 
(section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)).  Accordingly,  District’s  Accusation  shall  be  dismissed. 

21. 

In  Morrison  vy.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “‘an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  schoo]  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (/d.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

12

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May2€2015 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

DATED:  May  _,  2015 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member 

TAMMI  DI  GRAZIA 
Commission  Member

  13 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  _,  2015 

DATED:  Mayab,  2015 

DATED:  May  _,  2015 

CARLA  L,  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member 

TAMMI  DI  GRAZIA 
Commission  Member

13 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

DATED:  May  A@  2015 

& 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member 

nO 

TAMMI  DI  GRAZL 
Commission  Member 

13

