 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Immediate  Suspension 
and  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2013040442 

CHINEDU  EMECHETE  (EN  710102),  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 

in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  September  3,  4  and  6,  2013.  The  Commission  consists  of 
Deanna  Clark,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  (retired);  Robin  Scott,  Santa  Ana 
Unitied  School  District;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Eric  Sawyer,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Kristine  E.  Kwong,  Esq.,  Musick,  Peeler  &  Garrett,  represented  Complainant  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Richard  Schwab,  Esq.,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  Chinedu  Emechete 

(Respondent),  who  was  present  on  each  day  of  hearing. 

”  The  parties  presented  opening  statements,  oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  closing 

arguments.  The  case  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  on 
September  6,  2013.  The  Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session  on  September 
9,  2013. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

 

2. 
District. 

At  all  times  relevant  Respondent  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

3. 

On  or  about  March  7,  2013,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 
District’s  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  verified  on  information  and  belief  an  Accusation 
and  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for 
Respondent’s  immediate  suspension  without  pay  and  termination  of  his  employment. 

4, 

By a letter  dated  March  20,  2013,  Respondent  was  advised  by  Ms.  Ekchian 

that  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  had  been  filed  with  the  Board,  and  that  during 
a  closed  session  of  a  Board  meeting  held  on  March  19,  2013,  the  Board  decided  to  dismiss 
Respondent  within  30  days,  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  requested  a  hearing. 

5. 

The  District  filed  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  with  OAH  and 

served  the  same  on  Respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  which 
contained  a  request  for  the  hearing  that  ensued.  Respondent  was  timely  provided  with  notice 
of  the  hearing  before  the  Commission.  The  parties  subsequently  executed  a  written 
stipulation  waiving  the  statutory  requirement  that  the  hearing  be  held  within  60  days  from 
Respondent’s  request  for  a  hearing. 

6. 

On  or  about  August  21,  2013,  Complainant’s  counsel  in  this  matter  verified  on 

information  and  belief  an  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  which  changed 
the  date  of  the  events  alleged  in  charge  number  1  of  the  initial  Accusation,  and  removed  one 
of  the  three  charges  contained  in  the  initial  Accusation. 

7. 

On  or  about  August  21,  2013,  Respondent’s  counsel  filed  an  objection  to  the 

Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  which  requested  that  the  Commission  “deny 
the  District’s  Amendment  to  Charge  1  of  the  Accusation.”  The  objection  was  not  specifically 
raised  with  the  Commission  until  the  final  day  of  the  hearing,  and  it  was  denied  for  the 
reasons  stated  on  the  record. 

Respondent’s  Background  Information 

8. 

Credential.  Respondent  presently  has  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential,  which 

authorizes  him  to  teach  all  subjects  in  a  self-contained  class  and,  as  a  self-contained 
classroom  teacher,  to  team  teach  or  to  regroup  students  across  classrooms.  Respondent  also 
possesses  a  clear  crosscultural,  language  and  academic  development  (CLAD)  certificate, 
which,  when  held  in  conjunction  with  a  prerequisite  credential  or  permit  specified  in  the 
Education  Code,  authorizes  Respondent  to  provide  specified  services  to  limited-English- 
proficient  pupils. 

9, 

Employment  with  the  District,  Respondent  was  hired  by  the  District  in  1998, 

and  throughout  his  career  with  the  District  he  has  taught  at  the  52nd  Street  Elementary 
School.  From  2004  through  2007,  Respondent  also  worked  part-time  as  an  English  as  a 
second  language  (ESL)  teacher  at  an  adult  school  within  the  District. 

10. 

No  evidence  was  presented  indicating  that  Respondent  has  any  prior 

disciplinary  history  with  the  District.  Respondent’s  most  recent  District  evaluation  in  2010 — 
indicated  that  he  met  District  expectations  in  teaching  the  curriculum.  All  students  who 
testified  in  this  matter  without  hesitation  said  that  they  liked  Respondent  and  felt  they  learned 
from  him.  Respondent’s  demeanor  during  the  hearing  was  soft-spoken  and  respectful. 

52nd  Street  Elementary  School 

11. 

During  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Respondent  taught  a  second  grade  class.  at 
the  52nd  Street  Elementary  School  (or  the  school).  The  school  is  located  in  the  south  central 
part  of  the  City  of  Los  Angeles,  an  urban  area.  The  school  is  located  within  a  poor 
neighborhood,  with  significant  family  relocation,  lower  incomes,  and  many  students  who  live 
with  extended  family  members.  For  these  reasons,  students  do  not  have  consistent 
educational  histories.  Many  of  the  students  are  subject  to  violence  within  their  families 
and/or  neighborhoods. 

, 

12. 

Leaders  of  the  school  decided  to  implement  and  follow  a  School  Wide  Positive 
Support  Program  (SWPSP  or  the  program),  beginning  in  the  2009-2010  school  year.  Osbaldo 
Jimenez,  who  became  principal  of  the  school  in  April  2010,  testified  that  the  first  phase  of 
the  program  had  not  been  fully  or  correctly  implemented  that  school  year.  Therefore, 
Principal  Jimenez  essentially  repeated  the  first  phase  of  program  in  the  2010-2011  school 
year.  The  second  phase  of  the  program  was  implemented  in  the  2011-2012  school  year. 

13. 

Principal  Jimenez  felt  that  discipline  at  the  school  by  faculty  was  poor  and 

needed  to  be  improved.  One  problem  he  identified  was  lack  of  respectful  behavior  by 
students  toward  teachers  and  vice  versa.  The  program  was  meant,  in  part,  to  address  that 
problem,  by  focusing  on  respectful  conduct  of  all  parties  at  school. 

14. 

Because  many  students  had  seen  or  been  subjected  to  violence  in  their 

personal  lives,  Principal  Jimenez  also  wanted  to  remove  physical  contact  between  faculty 
and  students  as  much  as  possible,  so  students  would  have  a  safe  haven  at  school.  Therefore, 
as  part  of  the  program,  Principal  Jimenez  advised  faculty  that  they  were  not  to  touch 
students,  unless  such  was  necessary  to  prevent  injury  to  the  student  or  others.  However,  the 
District  presented  no  written  document  stating  the  same,  including  the  school’s  “Moving 
Forward”  document  which  outlined  parts  of  the  program.  Nor  did  the  District  present  any 
policy  or  bulletin  that  expressly  forbids  touching  a  student  under  appropriate  circumstances. 

15. 

The  District  presented  its  policy  bulletin  number  BUL-5046.0,  which  states 

that  corporal  punishment  as  a  disciplinary  measure  is  not  to  be  used  within  the  District.  This 
bulletin  cites  as  supporting  authority,  in  part,  Education  Code  sections  44807,  49000,  and 
49001.'  The  Commission  takes  official  notice  of  said  statutes  and  finds  them  important  in 
understanding  the  contours  of  when a  teacher  is  legally  entitled  to  touch  a  student  as 
permitted  by  the  Education  Code.  For  example: 

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

  

 

    

e
e

 
a

A.  Section  49001  defines  “corporal  punishment”  to  be  the  willful  infliction  of, 

or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of,  physical  pain  on  a  pupil. 

B.  Section  44807  provides,  in  part,  that  a  teacher  shall  not  be  subject  to 

criminal  prosecution  or  criminal  penalties  for  the  exercise,  during  the  performance  of  his 
duties,  of  the  same  degree  of  physical  control  over  a  pupil  that  a  parent  would  be  legally 
privileged  to  exercise  but  which  in  no  event  shall  exceed  the  amount  of  physical control 
reasonably  necessary  to  maintain  order,  protect  property,  or  protect  the  health  and  safety  of 
pupils,  or  to  maintain  proper  and  appropriate  conditions  conducive  to  learning.” 

16. 

| When  Respondent  testified,  he  took  concerted  efforts  to  describe  how  he  first 

uses  verbal  and  other  non-physical  techniques  to  gain  student  attention,  cooperation  and 
order  in  the  classroom.  The  few  examples  he  gave  of  when  he  actually  touched  a  student  all 
related  to  safety  issues,  such  as  when  he  put  out  a  hand  to  help  a  student  down  from  the  top 
of  a  precarious  table  or  when  he  placed  his  body  between  two  students  to  break  up  a  fight.  It 
was  therefore  apparent  from  Respondent’s  testimony  that  he  understood  it  was  Principal 
Jimenez’s  expectation  that  staff  at  the  school  not  touch  pupils,  for  any  reason,  unless 
necessary  for  safety. 

Findings  Related  to  the  Charges  of  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

17. 

JEEP  was a  student  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class.  He  was  extremely 

active,  had  no  respect  for  authority,  was  below  grade  level  in  all  subjects,  and  was  physically 
large  for  his  age  and  bullied  other  students.  He  posed  a  significant  behavior  problem  for 
Respondent,  as  well  as  his  after-school  program  provider  Jaime  Lopez.  Jf  was  capable  of 
dishonesty,  as  demonstrated  when  he  once  pulled a  fire  alarm  in  the  presence  of  another 

-  classmate,  only  to  later  deny  having  done  so  to  Respondent  after  being  confronted. 

18. 

In  early  February  2012,  Jf 

was  seated  at  his  desk  doing  work.  By  his  own 

admission,  he  was  not  seated  properly.  Although  the  interim  events  were  not  established, 
Respondent  ultimately  asked  JH  to  go  to  the  time-out  table.  Hfrcfused.  Respondent  asked 
a  second  time,  and J refused  again.  So  Respondent  took  hold  of  im  by  the  wrist  and  led 
him  to  the  time-out  table,  telling  him  in  a  firm  tone  to  “sit  down  properly.”  It  was  not 
  

*  In  the  case  of Austin  B.  v.  Escondido  Union  School  Dist.  (2007)  149  Cal.App.4th 
860,  the  court  examined  the  interplay  of  these  two  statutes.  The  court  concluded  that  to  be 
considered  corporal  punishment,  the  teacher  must  willfully  inflict  physical  pain.  Since 
teachers  stand  in  loco  parentis  while  children  attend  school,  a  reasonable  amount  of  force 
may  be  used  on  students  to  gain  control  or  obedience  in  the  classroom,  as  is  the  case  at  home 
for  parents.  Thus,  the  court  concluded  that  light  touching  by  a  teacher  of  autistic  children  in 
order  to  guide  them  and  gain  their  obedience  in  the  classroom  was  not  battery,  because  the 
touching  was  reasonable  and  did  not  amount to  a  “willful  infliction  of  physical  pain.”  (/d.,  at 
p.  875.) 

*  Students’  last  names  are  omitted  to  protect  their  privacy. 

   

established  that  Respondent  forcibly  placed  Jf  in  the  seat  at  the  time-out  table.  It  was  not 
established  that  J§j[suffered  any  pain  from  this  event,  nor  was  it  established  that  JI 
suffered  any  injury  from  this  event.  One  or  more  students  present  in  the  classroom  at  the  time 
may  have  seen  tears  welling  in  JP's  eyes,  but 
it  was  just  as  likely  that  those  resulted  from  _ 
embarrassment  over  being  assigned  to  the  time-out  table  as  opposed  to  suffering  from  pain. 

Jf 

19. 

alleged  by  the  District  was 

nor  his  mother  immediately 

The  more  extreme  version  of  events  regarding 
not  established,  for  various  reasons.  For  example,  neither  JI 
complained  about  the  incident  to  Principal  Jimenez.  Instead,  JP's  mother  approached 
Principal  Jimenez  days  after  it  happened,  and  after  Principal  Jimenez  had  advised  JP s 
mother  that  she  may  be  responsible  for  fees  from  the  fire  department  should  Jif  set  off 
another  fire  alarm  as  a  prank.  In  addition,  J[Ps  version  of  events  was  vague  and,  as 
discussed  above,  his  credibility  is  somewhat  in  question.  The  other  students  who  saw  this 
event  did  not  corroborate  the  District’s  more  extreme  version;  although  a  few  testified  that 
Respondent  “grabbed”  Js  wrist,  their  demonstration  of  what  happened  was  far  less 
dramatic.  And  Angelica  testified  that  she  told  Principal  Jimenez  that  (was  not  burt. 
Furthermore,  the  District’s  attempt  to  show  that  this  event  was  serious  enough  to  cause 
deterioration  in  JP's  behavior  was  similarly  unpersuasive.  For  example,  Mr.  Lopez,  the 
after-school  program  provider,  testified  that  he  noticed  Jf§Ps  behavior  drastically  changed  in 
December  2011,  well  before  the  event  in  question.  On  the  other  hand,  JP's  mother  testified 
that  JMdid  not  have  any  serious  behavior  problems  in  the  third  or  fourth  grade,  after  the 
event  in  question. 

| 

20.  KEE  was  another  student  in  Respondent’s  second grade  class. 
had  poor  self-control,  was  defiant,  had  no  regard  for  authority,  and  posed  a  significant 
behavior  problem  in  Respondent’s  classroom. 

iim 

21. 

Ona  date  not  established,  but  by  Principal  Jimenez’s  estimate  was  sometime - 

between  mid-February  and  early  March  2012,  KA  was  misbehaving  in  Respondent’s 
classroom.  Respondent  took  hold  of 
by  the  wrist  and  walked  him  from  his  desk  to 
a  time-out  table  he  had  situated  near  a  wall  in  his  classroom. Ki was  not  cooperating. 
When  they  got  to  the  time-out  table,  Respondent  told  KA  firmly,  to  “sit  down.” 

KG 

was  still  not  cooperating,  so  Respondent  told  him  more  than  once  to  “sit  down”  in 
a  firm  tone.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  yelled 
at KE 

in  doing  so. 

22. 

The  more  extreme  version  of  events  regarding  KiMMfalleged  by  the  District 

was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  For  example,  it  was  not  established 
into  the  seat  at  the  time-out  table  forcefully  by  pushing 
that  Respondent  sat  down Ki 
down  on  his  shoulders  or  arms,  or  that  this  event  caused  pain  to  Ki. 
testimony  in  these  regards  was  not  persuasive.  At  times,  his  testimony  seemed  to  have  been 
influenced  by  others, based  on  some  words  he  used  not  typical  for  children  of  his  age.  No 
other  student  in  the  classroom  corroborated  Ks  version  of  events,  e.g.,  the  only  other 
witness  who  testified  to  this  event,  fellow  ‘ae  did  not  describe  such  a  set  of 
or  his  guardians  about  this  event. 
circumstances.  No  complaint  was  lodged  by  I 

     

's 

    

  

  

The  District’s  Investigation  of Respondent’s  Actions 

23. 

‘By  no  later  than  February  7,  2012,  WEB s  mother  approached  Principal 

Jimenez  in  a parking  lot  after  a  public  meeting  and  told  him  that  Respondent  “pulled”  her 
and  then  a 
son’s  hand  “harshly.”  Within  a  day  or  two,  Principal  Jimenez  interviewed JI 
few  other  students  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  Principal  Jimenez  concluded  a  mote  extreme 
version  of  the  incident  with  J§occurred,  and  that  Respondent  had  acted  improperly. 
Principal  Jimenez  decided  to  use  progressive  discipline  with  Respondent,  so  he  reminded 
him  of  his  directive  that  faculty  not  touch  students,  unless  necessary  for  safety  reasons,  and 
some  other  related  District  policies  and  bulletins.  Principal  Jimenez  decided  not  to  document 
this  incident  or  his  counseling  with  Respondent,  or  take  any  other  disciplinary  action. 

 

24. 

On  March  7,  2012,  an  officer  of  the Los  Angeles  Police  Department  was 

conducting  an  investigation  pertaining  to  an  unrelated  complaint  and  learned  from  another 
student  of  the  incident  involving  KM.  The  officer  interviewed  a:  a  few  other 
students.  Once  Principal  Jimenez  was  advised  of  the  event  involving 

he  pulled 

   

_  Respondent  out  of  his  classroom  assignment  and  began  investigating  that  matter.  Principal 
Jimenez  concluded  a  more  extreme  version  of  the  events  regarding KER occurred, 
which  he  communicated  to  his  superiors. 

25. 

On  May  17,  2012,  Principal  Jimenez  formally  met  with  Respondent.  On  that 

day,  Respondent  was  given  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  acts  pertaining  to  the  events 
regarding  Jj  and  KY.  Respondent  did  not  return  to  the  classroom  after  being 
removed  during  the  investigation  of  the  matter  with  Ki. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Disirict  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  discipline  in  this  matter  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
164  Cal. LApp.  3d  1035,  1038-  1039.) 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  is 
established.  In  addition,  a  governing  board  may  immediately  suspend  a  certificated  employee 
without  pay  pursuant  to  section  44939  upon  the  filing  of  a  statement  of  charges  alleging 

_  immoral  conduct. 

: 

3. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 

the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct  pursuant  to  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1).  Respondent  was  responding  to  classroom  disturbances  created  by 
KB  anc  JM.  He  had  to  stop  their  behaviors  to  redirect  them  so  they  could  learn.  The 
other  students in  the  classroom  had  the  right  to  receive  curriculum  without  disturbance.  By 
taking  the  two  students  to  the  time-out  table  in  his  classroom,  Respondent  was  regaining 
classroom  control; he  was  not  engaging  in  or  inflicting  corporal  punishment.  Although 

  

  

 

Respondent  took  physical  hold  of  both  students  in  non-safety  situations  and  therefore  did  not 
comply  with  Principal  Jimenez’s  prior  directive  to  faculty  at  the  school,  we  do  not  conclude 
that  in  doing  so  Respondent  acted  unprofessionally.  Teachers  have  used  the  same  type  of 
classroom  management  techniques  for  years.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

4A. 

Cause  for  Respondent’s  dismissal  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  for  unsatisfactory  performance  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 

4B. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  (In  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

4C. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance, 
and  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school 
districts  should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus, 
cause  for  discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to 
his  employing  school  district. 

4D.  .  However,  one  court  observed  that  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to 

teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not 
dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and 
perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass’n  v. 
Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.  App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation  is  that  an  employing 
school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a 
certificated  employee  has  performed  unsatisfactorily. 

4E. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  knew  of  Principal  Jimenez’s  directive  to  not  touch 

students  unless  safety  issues  were  involved.  As  far  as  Respondent  knew,  it  was  his 
employing  school  district’s  expectation  for  him  to  not  touch  students  when  trying  to  regain 
control  of  his  classroom,  unless  safety  issues  were  involved.  In  light  of  the  school’s 
population  of  students  subjected  to  violence  and  acts  of  aggression  in  their  homes  and 
community,  Principal  Jimenez’s  expectation  in  this  regard  was  reasonable.  By  touching  two 
students  in  trying  to  gain  control  of  his  classroom,  Respondent  did  not  meet  the  expectations 

 

of  his  immediate  supervisor,  Principal  Jimenez,  or  his  employing  school  district.  The 
Commission  therefore  finds  that,  in  these  two  limited instances  regarding  JE  and  Ka, 

-  Respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  to  the  District.’  (Factual  Findings  1-25.) 

5A. 

It  was  not  established 

by a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 

| 

the  immediate  suspension  and/or  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to 
sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  or  44939. 

5B. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960) 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

179 

5C. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  engaged  two  students  using  a  classroom  management 

technique  the  Commission  finds  generally  acceptable  in  the  teaching  community.  As 
discussed  above,  we  do.not  find  that  conduct  was  unprofessional.  Respondent  did  something 
teachers in  elementary  schools  have  done  for  years,  and  the  District  had  only  recently 
decided  that  it  was  no  longer  a  “best  practice”  at  the  school.  Respondent’s  intent  was  not  to 
inflict  pain  or  punishment  on  either  student,  but  to  simply  redirect  the  students’  behavior 
back  to  the  curriculum.  Under  these  circumstances,  Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  meet  the 
definition  of  immorality  provided  by  the  Weiland  case,  in  that  his  actions  were  not  corrupt, 
indecent,  shameless,  etc.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

6A. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponder ance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 
the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  as  a  teacher  pursuant  to  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

6B. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.  | 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 

  

_ 

*  As  noted,  section 44938,  subdivision  (b)(1),  requires  a  school  district  to  give  written 
notice  of  the  performance  deemed  to  be  unsatisfactory  at  least  90  calendar  days  before  filing 
a  statement  of  charges.  Such  notice  shall  specify  the  instances  of  behavior  “with  such 
particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.”  Given  the  timing  of  the  events  in  question, 
_  particularly  when  Respondent  was  counseled  by  Principal  Jimenez  vis-a-vie  the  incidents 
with KE 
alleged  unsatisfactory  performance,  the  Commission  has  some  lingering  concern  whether 
fair  opportunity  to  correct  his  faults  and  overcome  the  District’s 
Respondent  was  given  a 
dissatisfaction  before  he  was  permanently  removed  from  the  classroom.  However,  given  our 
finding  in  Legal  Conclusion  9,  post,  further  discussion  on  this  point  is  unnecessary. 

and  when  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  specifying  his 

and 

 

presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.) 

6C. 

In  this  case,  the  two  events  in  question  happened  over  a  short  period  of  time, 

ic,  a  few  weeks.  Respondent  had  no  prior  disciplinary  history  regarding  such  conduct.  Thus, 
it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  a  long-standing  pattern  of  such 
activity.  His  response  to  the  two  incidents  in  question  was  part  of  a  designed  classroom 
management  technique,  not  an  emotional  response  over  which  he  had  no  control.  No 
evidence  was  presented  indicating  that  Respondent  engaged  in  similar  treatment  toward  other 
students  present  in  the  classroom  during  the  events  in  question,  which  shows  his  behavior  - 
was  not  escalating.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  was  or 
is  suffering  from  a  temperamental  defect  or  is  otherwise  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher.  (Factual 

-  Findings  1-22.) 

| 

| 

: 

7A.  —  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 

the  dismissal  of  Respondent  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 

prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 

the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him. 

7B. 

Cases  interpreting  section  44932,  subdivision  (a){(7),  require  a  “showing  of 

incident.  So,  we  cannot  conclude  that  Respondent  ignored  Principal 

intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  y. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.)  In  this  case, 
Respondent  was  counseled  by  Principal  Jimenez  after  the Piiinvestigation.  He  was told,  in 
part,  to  not  use  physical  force  in  responding  to  classroom  situations  unless  safety  issues  were 
present.  Although  the  incident  involving  Ki happened  a  few  weeks  later,  it  was  not 
established  whether  it  happened  before  Respondent  had  been  counseled  by  Principal  Jimenez 
as  a  result  of  the  JI 
Jimenez’s  counseling  after  the  incident  with  Wand  subsequently  engaged  in  the  same 
conduct  with  KM  The  District  presented  no  written  policy  or  bulletin  that  prohibited 
Respondent  from  acting  as  he  did.  Although  Principal  Jimenez  had  directed  faculty  not  to 
touch  students  unless  as a  last  resort,  his  directive  was  only  verbal.  Therefore,  it  was  not 
| 
established  that  Principal  Jimenez’s  directive  can  be  considered  a  “school  law”  or 
“reasonable  regulation”  of  the  “school  district  employing  him.”  In  any  event,  it  was  not. 
established  that  Respondent’s  failure  on  two  occasions  to  follow  Principal  Jimenez’s  verbal 
directive  was  “intentional,”  “continual,”  or  “persistent”  for  purposes  of  this  statute  or  the  San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  case.  (Factual  Findings  1-25.) 

8. 

.  Generally,  cause  for  discipline  must  relate  to  a  certificated  employee’s  fitness  to 

teach,  within  the  meaning  of  the  various  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  only  found  cause  to 
dismiss  Respondent  based  on  his  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  Morrison  analysis  does 
not  apply  to  a  cause.for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance.  (Id.,  at  pp.  227-230.) 
Therefore  analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  is  unnecessary,  as  it  is  presumed  that 
Respondent’s  unsatisfactory  performance  for  the  District  is  related:  to  his  fitness  to  teach. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

9A. 
unfitness  to  teach,  . 
.,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  vy.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

9B. 

that  was  not  specifically  prohibited  by  a  written  policy  or  bulletin  of  the  District. 

 Inthis  case,  Respondent’s  dismissal  from  the  District  is  not  warranted  under 
the  circumstances.  The  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  allow  a  certain  degree  of  physical 
contact  between  student  and  teacher.  Respondent  engaged  in  physical  contact  with  a. 
and  |} 
Respondent  used  this  limited  contact  with  two  students  to  divert  their  negative  behaviors  and 
regain  control  of  his  classroom,  which  benefitted  both  misbehaving  students,  as  well  as  their 
classmates.  Respondent’s  conduct  in  this  case  was  not  illegal,  immoral,  unprofessional,  or 
insubordinate.  We  simply  find  his  performance  was  unsatisfactory  as  it  related  solely  to  how 
he  responded  to  two  students’  misbehavior  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  has  no  other  | 
disciplinary  history  with  the  District,  and  no  other  evidence  suggests‘he  is  unfit  to  serve  as  a 
teacher.  We  are  confident  Respondent  will  now  heed  Principal  Jimenez’s  directive  and  will 
not  engage  in  similar  conduct  in  the  future.  (Factual  Findings  1-25.) 

   

 

Hi 

iif 

iif 

iif 

iif 

iif 

iif 

iil 

iii 

Hf 

iif 

if 

iif 

10, 

ORDER 

The  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent  Chinedu 

Emechete  is  hereby  dismissed. 

DATED:  October  4,  2013 

]  concur. 

DATED:  Oclober  3  Qo/2 

T  concur. 

DATED:  1/)  Jp, 

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Rar Coded Lake 

  

Deanna  Clark,  Commissioner 

bila  ALP = 

Robin  Scott,  Commissioner 

 

| 
i 
| 
| 
! 

  

it 

