BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

SEGALIT  SIEGEL, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  Case  No.  2013030380 

DECISION 

On  November  12-15,  and  18,  2013,  Daniel  Judrez,  Administrative  Law  Judge 

(ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter,  together  with  Karen 
Emerson-Roberts  and  Luciano  Ortiz  at  Los  Angeles,  California. 

Musick,  Peeler  &  Garrett,  and  Kristine  Kwong,  Esq.,  represented  Complainant 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (LAUSD  or  Complainant). 

Rosemary  Ward,  Esq.,  and  Naomi  Kottler  Berkowitz,  Esq.,  represented  Segalit 

Siegel  (Respondent).  Respondent  was  present  on  all  days  of  hearing. 

The  ALJ  left  the  record  open  to  allow  Respondent  to  file  Exhibit  BBBB  and  to 

allow  Complainant  to  file  written  opposition  to  Respondent’s  Motion  for  a  Directed 
Verdict,  a  motion  Respondent  filed  on  the  last  day  of  hearing.  Complainant  had  no 
objection  to  the  post-hearing  submission  of  Exhibit  BBBB.  Respondent  filed  Exhibit 
BBBB  timely;  the  exhibit  was  admitted  into  the  record.  Complainant  timely  filed  its 
Opposition  to  Respondent’s  motion.  A  ruling  on  the  motion  is  set  forth  in  Legal 
Conclusions  1-3. 

The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  December  2,  2013. 

STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

Complainant  seeks  the  dismissal  of  Respondent,  an  elementary  school  teacher, 
contending  that  between  2010  and  April  2012,  she  engaged  in  actions  that  constituted 
unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  the  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  school  laws  and  regulations,  and  that  she  is  evidently  unfit  for  service. 

Respondent  denies  the  majority  of  Complainant’s  allegations.  She  contended 

that  her  actions  did  not  warrant  dismissal.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

- 

Complainant  originally  served  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

on  or  about  January  31,  2013. 

2. 

Complainant  served  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Board  of  Education 
Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension  on  February 
15,  2013. 

3. 

4. 

on  March  28,  2013. 

Respondent  requested  a  hearing  on  February  22,  2013. 

Complainant  filed  the  operative  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

5. 

Respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  on  April  8,  2013. 

Respondent’s  Background 

6. 

Respondent  is  an  elementary  school  teacher.  Respondent  began 

teaching  in  1984.  She  began  teaching  at  Selma  Elementary  School  (Selma)  within  the 
LAUSD  in  the  1997-1998  school  year.  She  is  a  permanent,  certificated  employee  of 
LAUSD.  Complainant’s  allegations  herein  all  pertain  to  Respondent’s  actions  while  a 
teacher  of  third  grade  at  Selma  in  2010  and  between  September  2011  and  April  2012. 

The  SST  Referral  Form 

7. 

Complainant  alleged  that  in  April  2010,  Respondent  wrote 

“inappropriate,  judgmental  and  racist”  comments  on  a  Student  Success  Team  (SST) 
referral  form  for  student  A.R.'  Very  generally,  an  SST  referral  form  is  a  form  meant 
to  convey  information  to  a  team  of  persons  at  the  student’s  school  who  work  together 
to  support  and  further  an  at-risk  student’s  academic  success.  The  student’s  teachers 
and  parents  are  part  of  the  SST. 

8. 

Complainant  failed  to  offer  the  SST  referral  form  on  which  Respondent 

allegedly  wrote  the  complained-of  wording.  However,  Respondent  did  not  contest 
the  quoted  comments  as  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  Those  comments  were:  1)  “her 
“I  [Respondent]  called  Children  Services  and  filed  a 
[A.R.’s]  parents  beat  her  up”;  2) 
report”;  3)  “[A.R.’s]  parents  are  tattooed  from  practically  head  to  toe  and  have 
pierced  rings  all  over  the  place”;  4) 
home  looks  like”;  and  5)  “[A.R.’s]  mom  is  black  and  her  father  is  Hispanic.  I  don’t 
know  if  being  bi-racial  is  an  issue  for  her.”  The  comments  were  written  in  a  section 

“I  [Respondent]  don’t  know  what  living  in  her 

© 

  

" 

Jnitials  are  used  to  preserve  student  privacy.

of  the  SST  referral  form  entitled,  “Comments  about  Referral/Specific  Concerns 
Regarding  Student.” 

9. 

Frank  Serrato,  the  Assistant  Principal  at  Selma  in  the  2008-2009  and 

2009-2010  academic  years,  opined  that  the  statements  in  Factual  Finding  8  were 
inappropriate,  judgmental,  and  racist  because  they  were  not  the  type  of  information 
that  would  assist  the  team  in  effectuating  its  goals.  Serrato  reasoned  that  if  the 
information  was  of  no  value  to  the  team,  the  comments  could  only  be  intended  to 
offer  judgmental  or  racist  commentary. 

10. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Serrato’s  opinion.  The  majority  of  the 

Commission  did  not  find  any  of  the  statements  in  Factual  Finding  8  to  be 
inappropriate,  judgmental,  or  racist. 

11. 

| Commission  Member  Emerson-Roberts  agreed  the  statements  in 

Factual  Finding  8  were  not  judgmental  or  racist,  but  she  found  the  statements  to  be 
inappropriate  because,  given  Respondent’s  years  of  experience  as  a  teacher,  she 
should  have  known  that  such  comments  were  not  of  utility  to  the  SST.  Despite 
Commission  Member  Emerson-Robert’s  divergent  view,  all  three  Commission 
Members  agreed  that  the  statements  in  Factual  Finding  8  did  not  provide  any  cause  to 
dismiss  Respondent. 

The  Stolen  Apple  Incident 

12. 

Complainant  alleged  that  on  September  22,  2011,  Respondent 

humiliated  a  student,  S.C.,  by  informing  the  whole  class  that  he  had  stolen  an  apple 
from  another  student  and  therefore  he  could  not  be  trusted  and  that  the  class  should 
not  talk  to  or  play  with  him.  The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  said  words 
similar  to  that  alleged. 

13. 
improper. 

Respondent  denied  that  her  comments  were  humiliating  or  otherwise 

14. 

Dulce  Ruiz  (Ruiz),  a  teaching  assistant  at  Selma  during  the  2011-2012 

school  year,  heard  Respondent  speak  to  the  class  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  12. 
She  saw  S.C.’s  eyes  become  watery  during  the  incident.  Ruiz  opined  that 
Respondent’s  comments  were  humiliating  to  S.C.  Ruiz  was  unpersuasive.  After 
hearing  S.C.’s  testimony,  it  appeared  true  that  S.C.  had  indeed  stolen  another  child’s 
apple,  although  S.C.  denied  it. 

15. 

S.C.  asserted  that  he  felt  sad,  hurt,  and  scared  by  Respondent’s  actions. 
He  was  not  believable.  During  his  direct  examination  by  Complainant,  S.C.  testified 
in  a  manner  that  appeared  disingenuous.  During  his  cross-examination,  he  repeatedly 
failed  to  recall  facts.  His  lack  of  memory  appeared  feigned.  Taking  into  account

S.C.’s  age  (10),  he  still  failed  to  explain  why  he  felt  as  bad  as  he  asserted.  He  was 
unpersuasive. 

16. 

The  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  Respondent’s  comments 

to  the  class  regarding  S.C.  were  humiliating  or  otherwise  improper. 

The  Student  Bathroom  Use  Incident 

17. 

Complainant  alleged  that  on  September  22,  2011,  Respondent 

prohibited  a  student,  Anthony,  from  using  the  restroom  because  Respondent  could  not 
trust  him  to  use  the  restroom  and  immediately  return  to  class.  Complainant  alleged 
that  Respondent’s  actions  humiliated  Anthony. 

18. 

Ruiz  partially  observed  Respondent’s  interaction  with  Anthony  in  the 
schoolyard  while  passing  by  them.  Ruiz  described  Respondent’s  tone  with  Anthony 
as  “aggressive”  and  “humiliating.”  It  was  unclear  whether  Ruiz  was  present 
throughout  the  full  interaction  between  Respondent  and  the  student. 

The  student  did  not  testify. 

19. 

20. 

23. 

24. 

Respondent  denied  prohibiting  the  student  from  using  the  restroom  or 

from  using  an  aggressive  or  humiliating  tone  when  speaking  with  him. 

21. 

Ruiz  was  unpersuasive.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ruiz  or 
anyone  else  actually  heard  Respondent  prohibit  Anthony  from  using  the  restroom. 
There  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  Ruiz’s  opinion  that  Respondent’s  words 
were  aggressive  or  humiliating. 

The  Halloween  Incident 

22. 

Complainant  alleged  that  on  October  31,  2011,  Respondent  yelled  at  a 

student,  S.F.,  for  wearing  her  Halloween  costume  to  school  before  the  allowable  time. 

The  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  yelled  at  S.F. 

On  Halloween  in  2011,  Selma  students  were  not  allowed  to  put  on  their 

costumes  until  the  end  of  the  school  day,  just  before  a  student  costume  parade.  S.F. 
came  to  school  with  her  costume  on  and  Respondent  told  S.F.  that  she  was  in 
violation  of  the  school’s  rules.  According  to  S.F.,  Respondent  sounded  furious,  but 
the  evidence  did  not  establish  the  tone  of  Respondent’s  voice  or  the  actual  words  she 
used.  Selma’s  Principal,  Michelle  Windmueller  (Windmueller),  sent  S.F.  to  the 
nurse’s  office  to  remove  her  costume  make-up.  S.F.  cried  on  her  way  to  the  nurse’s 
office.  S.F.  was  not  allowed  to  join  the  costume  parade  at  school;  she  was  relegated 
to  watching  the  parade  from  a  designated  area  with  other  students  who  did  not  wish 

 

to,  or  could  not  otherwise  participate  in  the  parade.  S.F.  felt  humiliated  by  the 
episode. 

25. 

Respondent  denied  yelling  at  S.F.  She  denied  saying  anything 

inappropriate  or  anything  demeaning. 

26. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  any  of  Respondent’s  words  directed 

to  S.F.  constituted  yelling  to  the  degree  that  would  equate  to  unprofessional  or 
immoral  conduct,  or  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

27. 

_  S.F.’s  mother  testified.  She  asserted  that  Respondent  should  never 
teach  again  and  should  never  be  around  children.  Her  opinion  was  not  persuasive. 

Respondent’s  Lost  or  Missing  Items 

28. 

Complainant  alleged  that  in  approximately  November  2011,  and  in  the 

2010-2011  school  year,  Respondent  lost  or  misplaced  numerous  school-issued 
materials,  including  electronic  equipment. 

29. 

Respondent  lost  her  school-issued  math  computer  program  login 

information.  It  was  issued  to  her  on  October  25,  2011,  and  she  was  instructed  to  keep 
track  of  her  user  name  and  password.  She  did  not,  or  if  she  did,  she  lost  it. 
Respondent  informed  school  personnel  that  she  lost  it  and  school  personnel  re-issued 
her  the  information.  There  was  no  further  evidence  of  losing  the  re-issued 
information. 

30. 

Respondent  lost  student  “health  cards”  that  were  kept  in  her  classroom. 

On  November  2,  2011,  Respondent  informed  Windmueller  of  the  absence  of  the 
health  cards.  Respondent  also  told  Windmueller  that  she  believed  others  were 
entering  her  classroom  and  taking  things,  like  the  health  cards,  and  that  someone  was 
sabotaging  her. 

31. 

The  evidence  failed  to  establish  what  specific  information  was 

contained  on  these  health  cards.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any  harm  caused  by  the 
lost  cards.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  people  were  entering  her  classroom 
and  taking  things,  or  that  there  was  any  concerted  effort  to  sabotage  Respondent’s 
classroom  or  her  employment. 

32. 

| Windmueller  described  Respondent  as  disorganized  and  irresponsible 

in  maintaining  her  office  supplies  and  work-related  documents.  Windmueller’s 
opinion  on  this  was  the  only  evidence  to  support  her  descriptions.  Such  evidence  was 
insufficient  to  establish  that  opinion. 

 

Respondent’s  Discussions  with  Other  LAUSD  Staff 

33. 

Complainant  alleged  Respondent  wrote  to,  and  spoke  to,  Theresa 

Wedaa  (Wedaa),  Selma’s  Coordinator  at  the  time,  about  matters  that  Respondent  had 
_  discussed  in  conferences  with  Windmueller,  and  thereby  violated  Windmueller’s  prior 
written  directives  to  Respondent  that  she  refrain  from  discussing  such  issues  with 
staff  members  or  students. 

34. 

By  written  memorandum,  Windmueller  directed  Respondent  to  refrain 

from  discussing  the  topics  of  their  formal  conferences.  Respondent  disclosed  some  of 
those  topics  to  Wedaa  in  approximately  January  2012,  including  teaching  assistant 
complaints  against  Respondent  and  missing  items  from  Respondent’s  classroom. 

35. 
Finding  34. 

Respondent  violated  Windmueller’s  directives,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 

Respondent’s  Alleged  Harassing  Emails  and  Other  Communications 

36. 

Complainant  alleged  Respondent’s  12  requests  for  technology 
assistance  had  an  “accusatory,  negative”  tone  and  intimated  that  Wedaa  was 
unresponsive  to  the  requests.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  Complainant’s 
allegation. 

37. 

Between  September  7,  2011,  and  November  28,  2011,  Respondent 

filled  out  12  “Tech  Support”  forms  requesting  assistance  with  various  computer  and 
electronic  equipment  or  noting  the  lack  of  equipment.  Several  of  the  request  forms 
are  repetitive.  For  example,  Respondent  requested  that  her  “smart  board”  be 
connected  on  September  21,  2011,  October  18,  2011,  and  October  31,  2011.  None  of 
the  requests  were  improper  in  tone.  They  were  not  accusatory  or  unreasonably 
negative. 

38. 

Complainant  alleged  that  Respondent  sent  harassing  electronic  mail 

messages  (emails)  to  Wedaa  in  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Wedaa  claimed  that 
Respondent’s  emails  were  harassing,  threatening,  and  made  her  feel  uncomfortable 
and  unsafe.  Wedaa  explained  that  this  was  due  as  much  to  the  substance  of  the  emails 
as  to  the  volume  and  frequency  of  emails.  In  Wedaa’s  view,  Respondent’s  emails  felt 
like  one  complaint  after  another  and  a  “laundry  list”  of  problems,  some  that  she  could 
address,  but  many  that  she  could  not.  Wedaa  felt  that  several  of  Respondent’s  emails 
were  excessively  long.  She  felt  the  emails  intimated  that  Wedaa  was  not  doing  her 
job.  As a  result  of  the  emails,  Wedaa  felt  anxious  and  on  at  least  one  occasion, 
Wedaa  was  driven  to  tears. 

 

39. 

Complainant  offered  copies  of  approximately  41  emails  between 

Respondent  and  Wedaa,  between  October  4,  2011,  and  February  12,  2012." 

40. 

The  email  discussions  between  Respondent  and  Wedaa  contain 
Respondent’s  requests  for  information,  requests  for  slots  of  time  in  the  school 
computer  laboratory  for  her  students,  or  other  technology  and  other  educational 
support  assistance.  Respondent’s  tone  is  generally  appropriate,  as  is  Wedaa’s  tone. 
In  several  emails,  it  is  fair  to  conclude  that  Respondent  was  frustrated  with  what  she 
perceived  to  be  a  lack  of  response  or  unsatisfactory  responses  from  Wedaa  and/or  the 
school  administration.  Additionally,  several  of  Respondent’s  emails  appeared  to 
unnecessarily  detail  her  requests  and  unnecessarily  explain  the  effects  of  not  granting 
her  requests  upon  her  students.  Wedaa’s  responses  in  all  instances  were  appropriate. 

41. 

It  appears  clear  that  Wedaa  found  Respondent’s  emails  persistent  and 

annoying.  The  evidence,  however,  did  not  establish  that  Respondent’s  emails  to 
Wedaa  were  harassing  or  threatening.  It  was  not  reasonable  for  Wedaa  to  feel  unsafe 
due  to  the  content,  volume,  or  length  of  Respondent’s  emails  to  her.  The  evidence  did 
not  establish  Complainant’s  allegations. 

Respondent’s  Mathematics  Instruction  Time 

42. 

Complainant  alleged  that  on  February  9,  2012,  Respondent  was 

discussing  the  student  of  the  month  award  and  circulating  flyers  at  8:32  a.m.,  when 
she  was  expected  to  instruct  her  class  in  mathematics. 

43. 

Complainant  provided  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  what 

Respondent  was  discussing  at  the  indicated  time  and  day.  There  was  no  evidence  of 
any  flyers. 

The  Blood  Glucose  Testing  Incident 

44. 

Respondent  has  diabetes.  On  February  24,  2012,  in  her  third  grade 

class,  Respondent  talked  to  the  children  about  how  and  why  she  checked  her  blood 
sugar  content  and  discussed  diabetes  generally.  She  asked  the  class  if  anyone  was 
interested  in  having  their  blood  glucose  level  checked.  Four  children  expressed 
interest  by  raising  their  hands. 

45. 

Without  school  or  parental  knowledge  or  approval,  Respondent  used  a 
separate  sterile  lancet  on  each  of  the  four  students  and  poked  each  student’s  finger  to 
draw  a  small  sample  of  blood.  She  used  a  separate  sterile  testing  strip  and  her  testing 
meter  and  measured  each  of  the  four  children’s  blood  glucose  level.  Respondent 
cleaned  each  child’s  poked  finger  with  a  tissue  and  placed  the  used  lancet,  testing 
strip,  and  tissue  in  the  classroom  trashcan. 

  

*  Several  of  the  offered  email  messages  were  duplicates. 

 

46. 

Thereafter,  once  LAUSD  became  aware  of  this  event,  LAUSD 

removed  Respondent  from  the  classroom. 

47. 

All  four  children  were  willing  participants.  None  of  the  four  children 

asserted  any  significant  discomfort,  pain,  or  problem  with  the  testing  on  the  day  of  the 
testing  or  thereafter  (excepting  S.C.,  as  discussed  post). 

48. 

At  hearing,  Respondent  explained  that,  about  three  days  earlier,  she 

was  thinking  about  talking  to  the  children  about  diabetes  and  blood  glucose  testing  to 
educate  them  about  controlling  their  blood  sugar  levels.  She  had  thought  about  how 
to  do  so  and  considered  testing  student  volunteers  as  she  did. 
recognizes  that  testing  the  children  was  wrong.  She  would  not  test  them  again.  She 
explained  her  intention  as  wishing  to  educate  children  about  controlling  their  blood 
sugar  levels,  general  health,  and  the  consequences  that  result  from  diabetes. 

In  hindsight,  she 

49. 

Several  of  the  students  who  were  tested  testified.  Z.C.,  a  student, 

volunteered  to  be  tested.  She  described  Respondent  as  creative.  She  liked 
Respondent  and  was  sad  when  she  did  not  return  to  the  classroom  on  that  day.  Z.C. 
stated  that  Respondent  would  yell  in  class  every  day. 

50. 

_Z.C.’s  mother  was  upset  about  the  testing,  yet  she  described 

Respondent  as  a  “really  good  teacher.” 

51. 

S.C.  volunteered  to  be  tested  (the  same  student  discussed  in  Factual 

Findings  12-16).  He  claimed  that  the  testing  hurt  “a  little.”  S.C.  further  claimed  that 
he  did  not  mean  to  volunteer  for  the  glucose  testing.  S.C.  stated  he  was  raising  his 
hand  to  go  to  the  bathroom  but  Respondent  mistook  his  raised  hand  as  his 
volunteering.  S.C.  was  not  credible.  There  was  no  persuasive  evidence  that 
Respondent  forced  any  student  to  be  tested.  There  was  no  evidence  that  she  tested  the 
students  so  quickly  as  to  prevent  a  student  from  refusing  to  be  tested. 

52. 

S.C.  stated  that  Respondent  yelled  in  class  all  of  the  time  and  that 

Respondent’s  yelling  scared  him. 

53. 

S.C.’s  grandmother  was  irritated  and  angry  about  the  glucose  testing 

because  she  feared  the  possible  contraction  of  blood-borne  diseases.  She  asserted  that 
S.C.,  who  has  attention-deficit,  hyperactivity  disorder  (ADHD),  now  has  post- 
traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)  because  of  Respondent’s  abusive  nature  toward  him 
and  her  yelling  at  him. 

54. 

The  evidence  established  that  S.C.  was  behaviorally  difficult  in 

Respondent’s  classroom.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  S.C.’s  asserted  diagnoses. 
The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  any  of  Respondent’s  actions  caused  S.C.  to  have 
PTSD  or  any  other  condition. 

 

55. 

D.D-C  volunteered  to  be  tested  because  she  wanted  to  see  if  she  had 
diabetes.  The  testing  did  not  upset  her.  She  described  Respondent  as  an  “awesome 
teacher.” 

56.  | Respondent  described  her  testing  of  the  students  as  a  “big  mistake.” 

She  realizes  that  she  “crossed  the  line.”  She  agrees  she  should  have  gotten 
permission  from  the  parents  and  the  school  administration.  She  asserted  that  she 
would  never  do  it  again.  Respondent’s  remorse  was  credible. 

57. 

Na  H.,  the  father  of  a  child  with  autism  in  Respondent’s  class, 
described  Respondent  as  a  good  teacher  who  helped  her  son.  He  agreed  that  the 
glucose  testing  showed  poor  judgment,  but  he  does  not  believe  Respondent  should  be 
fired  for  it.  That  opinion  was  also  stated  by Ra.  the  mother  of  another  student 
in  Respondent’s  class. 

| 

58. 

vi  C.,  the  mother  of  a  gifted  child  in  Respondent’s  class,  did  not 

find  the  glucose  testing  problematic  as  long  as  she  used  a  distinct,  clean  lancet  for 
each  child.  She  described  Respondent  as  caring  and  helpful. 

Other  Factual  Findings 

59. 

Respondent  has  a  loud  voice.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  she 

yelled  at  her  students  in  any  way  that  would  constitute  cause  for  dismissal. 

60. 

In  November  2012,  Respondent  filed  a  claim  against  LAUSD  for 

employment  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  race,  gender,  age,  national  origin,  religion, 
retaliation,  and  medical  condition.  There  was  no  evidence  of  the  results  of  her  claim. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  LAUSD  has  discriminated  against  Respondent  on  any 
basis,  including  race,  gender,  age,  national  origin,  religion,  retaliation,  or  medical 
condition. 

, 

61. 

Respondent  had  satisfactory  evaluations  with  LAUSD  in  the  2008- 

2009,  2009-2010,  and  2010-2011  school  years. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Respondent’s  Motion  for  Directed  Verdict  on  Charge  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

1. 

Respondent  argued  that  LAUSD  failed  to  give  Respondent  an 

opportunity  to  correct  her  alleged  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent  based  her 
argument  on  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a).

2. 

Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  part: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 

any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45  calendar  days 
prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its  authorized  representative 
has  given  the  employee  against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice 
of  the  unprofessional  conduct,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such 
specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish 
the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome 
the  grounds  for  the  charge.... 

3. 

Complainant  served  Respondent  with  written  warnings  regarding  the 
allegations  of  unprofessional  conduct  as  alleged  in  the  instant  Accusation  by  letters 
and  memorandums  dated  April  19,  2010,  October  4,  2011,  November  4,  2011, 
January  20,  2012,  February  9,  2012,  and  February  29,  2012.  Complainant  served 
Respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  of  Acts  and  Notice  of  15-Day 
Suspension  on  April  18,  2012.  That  notice  referenced  Education  Code  section  44938 
and  specifically  described  the  intention  of  that  notice  as  providing  Respondent  an 
opportunity  to  correct  the  deficiencies  noted  that  included  the  allegations  set  forth  in 
the  Accusation  underlying  this  action.  These  documents,  collectively,  establish 
Complainant’s  compliance  with  Education  Code  section  44938.  Complainant  did  not 
act  on  its  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  until  more  than  45  calendar  days  passed 
from  the  date  of  its  last  written  warning,  in  concert  with  the  law.  Respondent’s 
motion  for  a  directed  verdict  is  therefore  denied. 

The  Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

4. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  its  allegations  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

Relevant  Statutory  and  Case  Law 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  states,  in  part,  that 
“no  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the  following 
causes  ...(1)  [i]mmoral  or  unprofessional  conduct.  []  (5).  Evident  unfitness  for 
service.” 

6. 

“Immoral  conduct”  means  conduct  that  is  hostile  to  the  public  welfare 

and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  It  can  be  conduct 
that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  or  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  or  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude 
toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960) 
179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

10

7. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  “means  ‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 
inadequacies.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  [Zuber]  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  ““Evident 
unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the 
employing  school  district.”  (Ibid.) 

8. 

In  analyzing  the  relevant  Education  Code  provisions  in  teacher 

dismissal  matters,  the  California  Supreme  Court  noted  that  even  where  cause  for 
discipline  is  found  to  exist,  a  commission  on  professional  competence  is  vested  with 
discretion  to  decide  the  appropriateness  of  a  given  sanction,  including  dismissal. 
(Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  219-223.)  The 
State  Supreme  Court  reasoned  that  even  where  cause  for  discipline  is  found  to  exist, 
“a  commission  on  professional  competence  is  empowered  to  exercise  its  collective 
wisdom  and  discretion  to  determine  that  dismissal  is  not  appropriate  in  a  given  case.” 
(Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman,  supra,  45  Cal.3d.  at  222.) 

9. 

It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.” 
(Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also 
“reject  part  of  the  testimony  of a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and 
combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony 
of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  the  selected  material.”  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.,  supra,  9  Cal.3d  at  67-68  [quoting  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958) 
161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767].)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3 
Cal.3d  875,  890.) 

Discussion 

10. 

None  of  Respondent’s  actions  warranted  dismissal.  The  only  action  of 

true  concern  to  the  Commission  was  the  blood  glucose  testing  of  the  students.  That 
action  was  imprudent,  inappropriate,  and  showed  poor  judgment.  It  could  have  had 
dangerous  consequences  for  the  students  involved  and  the  janitorial  staff  cleaning  the 
classrooms.  However,  it  did  not. 
It  was  an  isolated  incident.  Further,  the  facts  do  not 
Support  a  conclusion  that  Respondent  would,  in  the  future,  act  as  imprudently  as  she 
did  in  this  instance.  Indeed,  the  Commission  believes  Respondent  grasps  the  gravity 
of  her  actions  and  will  not  act  similarly  in  the  future. 

11. 

None  of  Respondent’s  actions  constituted  immoral  conduct  or  evident 

unfitness  for  service.  Her  blood  glucose  testing  of  the  students  constituted 
unprofessional  conduct  and  her  failing  to  comply  with  her  Principal’s  directive  to 
refrain  from  speaking  to  others  about  matters  discussed  in  formal  conferences 

11 

 

constituted  unprofessional  conduct  and  a  violation  of  District  rules.  However,  this 
Commission  is  vested  with  the  discretion  to  weigh  the  appropriateness  of  any  given 
sanction  against  Respondent’s  misconduct  and  find  a  result  that  is  in  proportion  to  the 
gravity  of  the  misconduct  established  by  the  evidence.  (Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman,  supra,  45  Cal.3d.  at  222.)  Sampling  a  student’s  blood  for  its 
glucose  level  without  parental  and  school  administration  consent  and  approval  is 
undoubtedly  inappropriate  and  wrong.  However,  when  Respondent’s  action  is 
viewed  within  the  totality  of  the  circumstances,  including  the  fact  that  it  was  her  only 
transgression  of  this  type,  no  one  was  harmed,  and  Respondent  expressed  sincere 
remorse  and  an  understanding  that  her  actions  were  unacceptable  and  should  never 
happen  again,  her  misconduct  need  not  result  in  her  dismissal. 

12. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  the 

California  Supreme  Court  held  that  for  purposes  of  teacher  dismissal,  conduct 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  must  be 
limited  to  conduct  indicating  that  a  teacher  is  “unfit  to  teach”;  otherwise,  these  terms 
would  be  unconstitutionally  vague  and  overbroad.  (Morrison  v.  State  Bd.  of Ed., 
supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  229.)  The  Morrison  Court  listed  factors  relevant  to  determining 
whether  a  teacher's  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach: 

[T]he  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 

students  or  fellow  teachers,  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  the  type  of  teaching 
certificate  held  by  the  party  involved,  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 
circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct,  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct,  the  likelihood 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 
the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 

(Id.,  at  229-230.) 

13. 

Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  adversely  affect  students  and  fellow 
teachers  in  any  substantial  way.  The  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated  is  of  no 
consequence  here,  where  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  adversely  affect  students  or 
teachers  in  any  significant  way.  The  alleged  and  actual  acts  by  Respondent  are 
relatively  recent.  Respondent  holds  teaching  credentials  that  allow  her  to  be 
employed  as  an  elementary  school  teacher.  It  appears  that  Respondent  could  be  and 
was  annoying  toward  other  school  staff.  This  trait  aggravated  the  personality  clashes 
and  disputes  in  which  Respondent  found  herself  with  Wedaa  and  Selma’s  Principal. 
None  of  Respondent’s  actions,  however,  rose  to  the  level  of  dismissal.  Regarding 
Respondent’s  blood  glucose  testing  of  students,  while  imprudent  and  inappropriate, 
Respondent’s  actions  were  motivated  by  her  desire  to  educate  the  students  about  their 
health.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  noted  that  her  testing  of  the  students  showed  poor 
judgment.  There  was  no  evidence  to  support  a  finding  that  Respondent  would  do 

12 

 

something  similar  in  the  future  if  she  returned  to  teaching  in  a  classroom.  It  is 
reasonable  to  conclude  that  there  is  a  low  likelihood  that  Respondent  would  engage  in 
similar  conduct  in  the  future.  As  no  disciplinary  action  is  to  be  imposed  against 
Respondent,  an  analysis  of  the  extent  to  which  such  action  may  inflict  a  chilling  effect 
on  teachers’  constitutional  rights  is  unnecessary. 

14. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  further  establishes  that  there  is 

insufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

15. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  as  set  forth in  Factual 
Findings  1-61,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-14. 

16. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  or  44939,  as  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1-61,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-14. 

17. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  being  evidently  unfit 

for  service,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  as  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1-61,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-14. 

18. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  the  persistent  violation 
of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  or  regulations  of  the  state  or  rules  of  the  school 
district,  as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  as  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1-61,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-14. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent  Segalit  Siegel 

are  overruled.  The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  shall  not  dismiss  Respondent 
Segalit  Siegel  from  employment. 

{YI 

Date:  2  )iwwrey  ZOlF 

  Daniel  Juarez, “Adininistrative  Law  Judge 
and  Commission  Member 

Date: 

|  13  [Ad\4 

Mia 

| 

  

iano  Ortiz,  Commission  Mefpiber 

13

  

DISSENT 

Commission  Member  Emerson-Roberts  respectfully  dissents  from  the 
majority.  Commission  Member  Emerson-Roberts  joins  in  all  of  the  factual  findings 
and  legal  conclusions  herein  but  would  conclude  that  Respondent’s  glucose  testing  of 
the  students  constituted  unprofessional  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service.  For 
these  reasons,  Commission  Member  Emerson-Roberts  would  sustain  LAUSD’s 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  with 
the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

Date: 

[7  3-  |  Y 

‘a orapnaib  LE bis 

Katen  Emésson- Roberts, 
Commission  Member 

14

