 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Immediate  Suspension 
and  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2013120425 

JEBBY  WILLIAMS-WILKEY  (EN  962388), 
a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 

in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  February  11,  12,  13,  14  and  19,  2014.  The  Commission 
consists  of  Kathleen  Davis,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education;  Kathy  Jarvey, 
Hacienda  La  Puente  Unified  School  District;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Eric  Sawyer, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Michele  M.  Goldsmith,  Esq.,  Bergman  Dacey  Goldsmith,  represented  Complainant 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Rosemary  O.  Ward,  Esq.,  represented  Jebby  Williams-Wilkey  (Respondent),  who  was 

present  on  cach  day  of  hearing. 

The  parties  presented  opening  statements,  testimonial  and  documentary  evidence,  and 

closing  arguments.  The  case  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the hearing 
on  February  19,  2014.  The  Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

2. 

At  all  times  relevant,  Respondent  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of 
the  District  teaching  Early  Education  (preschool)  at  Laurel  Early  Education  Center  (Laurel 
EEC). 

| 

3, 

On  October  31,  2013,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

District’s  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  verified  on  information  and  belief  a  Statement  of 
Charges  against  Respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for  Respondent’s  immediate 
suspension  without  pay  and  termination of  her  employment. 

4, 

By a  letter  dated  November  20,  2013,  Respondent  was  advised  by  Ms. 

Ekchian  that  the  Statement  of  Charges  had  been  filed  with  the  Board,  and  that  during  a 
closed  session  of  a  Board  meeting  held  on  November  19,  2013,  the  Board  decided  to  dismiss 
Respondent  within  30  days,  unless  she  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  was  also  advised 
that  she  had  been  suspended  without  pay.  Respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

5. 

On  December  12,  2013,  the  District  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges  with  OAH 

and  served  the  same  on  Respondent.  The  District  thereafter  filed  and  served  an  Accusation 
against  Respondent,  alleging  the  same  grounds  for  discipline  as  the  Statement  of  Charges. 
Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  which  contained  a  request  for  the  hearing  that 
ensued,  Respondent  was  timely  provided  with  notice  of  the  hearing  before  the  Commission. 

Respondent's  Background  Information 

6. 

Credential.  Respondent  possesses  a  Child  Development  Site  Supervisor 

Permit,  which  authorizes  her  to  supervise  a  child  care  and  development  program  operating  at 
a  Single  site;  provide  service  in  the  care,  development,  and  instruction  of  children  in  a  child 
care  and  development  program;  and  serve  as  a  coordinator  of  curriculum  and  staff 
development  in  a  child  care  and  development  program. 

7. 

Prior  Teaching  Experience.  Respondent  began  her  teaching  career  in  or  around 

1993  with  the  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education,  where  she  served  in  the  Head  Start 
program. 

: 

8, 

Employment  with  the  District.  Respondent  began  her  employment  with  the 

District  in 2007.  She  worked  as.a  Head  Teacher  at  Crescent  Heights  Early  Education  Center 
(CHEEC)  from  2007  through  2010.  In  October  2010,  she  transferred  to  Laurel  EEC  as  a 
Head  Teacher,  where  she  remained  until  she  was  removed  from  her  classroom  in  2012. 

The  Michael  G.  Incident 

9, 

On  a  date  not  established  in  April  2011,  Respondent  and  her  class  at  Laurel 

EEC  were  outside  the  classroom  on  a  break.  One  of  Respondent’s  4-year-old  preschool 
students,  Mi 

.,’  was  in  the  playground  area,  sitting  next  to  Respondent,  and  he  was 

  

*  Students’  and  minors’  last  names  are  omitted  to  protect  their  privacy. 

  

 

  

e
r

 
e
a

 
L
E

 
e
h
S

G.,  who  was  not  wearing 

crying.  As  the  break  period  ended,  Respondent  picked  up Ma 
his  shoes,  and  carried  him  back  towards  the  classroom.  Respondent  carried  MIG.  along 
her  side,  like  one  would  carry  a  long  and  heavy  package.  Respondent  was  in  a  hurry  to  get 
back  into  her  classroom  and  she  walked  with  dispatch,  with MEG.  dangling  from  her 
side.  The  way  in  which  Respondent  carried  MJG.  was  inappropriate.  It  was  not  done  in 
a  comforting  manner;  and  it  posed  a  safety  hazard,  in  that  MING.  may  have  fallen  and 
landed  head-first  on  the  ground  if  he  had  slipped  from  Respondent’s  grasp.  There  are  some 
instances  when  carrying  a  crying  child  of  this  age  can  be  appropriate,  e.g.,  to  be  comforting 
or  to  prevent  them  from  harming  themselves  or  others,  but  this  was  not  such  a  situation. 
Much  of  this  activity  was  caught  on  video  by  a  cellphone  camera  used  by  MIG. ’s 
cousin,  who  was  visiting  Laurel  EEC  at  this  time  with  other  family  members. 

10. 

|  As  Respondent  neared  the  classroom,  she  yelled  at  MIG.  to  “stop 

crying.”  This  activity  was  witnessed  by MEEG.’s  sister,  JMEBBE.;  her  testimony  was 
corroborated  by  that  of  Laurel  EEC  Principal  Carol  Collins  and  Plant  Manager  Loretter 
Carter,  who  both  credibly  testified  that  they  had  heard  Respondent  yell  at  students  in  the 
past,  including  to  “shut  up!”  However,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  shook  MI» 
G.  during  this  incident.  Js  testimony  that  Respondent  had  done  so  was  not  credible,  and 
there  was  not  sufficient  evidence  presented  which  corroborated  her  testimony.  For  example, 
it  is  unlikely  that  Respondent  had  the  strength  to  pick  up  ME.  to  her  level  and  shake 
him  as  vigorously  as JM 

had  described  it. 

. 

11.  MEG.  was  suffering  from  severe  separation  anxiety  from  his  mother, 

which  in  turn  created  issues  requiring  Respondent’s  frequently  response.  However, 
Respondent  did  not  adequately  request  assistance  or  resources  from  Principal  Collins  or 
school  staff  to  deal  with  this  situation.  She  provided  inadequate  information  to  the  family 
concerning  available  social  service  resources  to  respond  to  this  problem.  In  any  event, 
yelling  at  MEE.  to  stop  crying  was  not  an  appropriate  response. - 

The Om.  Incident 

12. 

  

Ona  date  not  established  during  the  week  of  March  5,  2012,  Respondent 
yelled  in  a  loud  and  harsh  voice  to  her  preschool  student,  DJA.  “DI  sit  down!” 
Neither  DJA.  nor  her  parents  testified,  but  Principal  Collins  persuasively  testified  that 
"s  parents  met  with  her  to  complain  about  this  incident  at  or  about  the  time  it 
happened.  Principal  Collins’  testimony  was  corroborated  by  the  note  concerning  this  incident 
written  aa:  mother.  Moreover,  Principal  Collins  had  witnessed  Respondent  raise  her 
voice  to. 
heard  Respondent  yell  “shut  up”  several  times  to  children  in  her  classroom. 

once  before,  and  Plant  Manager  Carter  persuasively  testified  that  she  had 

   

13. 

The  underlying  circumstances  explaining  why  Respondent  behaved  as  she  did 
were  not  established.  When  discussing  this  incident  with  school  administrators,  Respondent 
simply  denied  the  incident  happened,  but  offered  no  justification.  During  the  hearing, 

  

    

Respondent  offered  no  testimony  about  this  incident.  Thus,  Respondent  established  no 
reasonable  justification  for  yelling  at  a  young  child. 

The  DEn.  Incident 

H.  was  running  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  D 

On  orabout  March  7,  2012,  toward  the  end  of  the  school  day, 

14. 
preschool  student 
in  Respondent’s  classroom,  so  this  was  not  unusual.  Respondent  put  out  one  or  both  or  her 
hands  to  get  him  to  stop.  D 
  
physical  contact  was  made  on  Dis  throat  area.  Respondent  did  not  intend  to  grab  om 
by  his  throat.  However,  Respondent’s  hand  slid  up  from  DE:  throat  to  his  checks.  At  this 
time,  Respondent  squeezed  Ds  checks  with  that  hand  and  sternly  told  him  to  sto 
running.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  attempted  or  intended  to  choke 
she  did  intend  to  squeeze  his  cheeks. 

.  ran  into  one  of  Respondent’s  out-stretched  hands,  and 

4-year-old 
IH.  frequently  ran 

   H.,  but 

    

15.  DEH.  reported  the  incident  to  his  mother  when  she  picked  him  up  after 

school  that  day.  At  the  time,  DEH.  had  no  visible  marks  or  injuries. DEF:  mother 
waited  until  the  following  day  to  report  this  incident  to  Principal  Collins,  who  in  turn 
submitted  an  unusual  incident  report  to  the  California  Department  of  Social  Services  (DSS). 

16.  oi  H.  gave  Principal  Collins  and  the  DSS  investigator  a  consistent  account 

of  the  incident.  He  credibly  testified  during  the  hearing  about  the  incident.  However,  DEF 
testimony  that  Respondent  “choked”  him  was  not  credible,  as  that  part  of  his  testimony 
seemed  coached  and  om  appeared  to  be  prone  to  exaggeration.  Nonetheless,  the  remainder 
of  his  testimony  about  this  incident  was  credible. 
’s  testimony  was  amply  corroborated 
by  his  mother;  his  friend  from  school  ir.  who  witnessed  the  incident  and  told  her 
mother  about  it  soon  after  she  was  picked  up  from  school  on  the  day  of  the  incident;  and 

*s  mother,  who  independently  reported  to  »  o£  mother  what  If 

had  told  her  soon  | 

after  she  picked  up  im  from  school  that  day. 

The  Citation  Issued  by  the  Department  of Social  Services 

17. 

Asaresult  of  the  above-described  incident  with  Dix.,  Licensing  Program 
Analyst  (LPA)  Victoria  Majarian  of  the  DSS  investigated  the  matter.  LPA  Majarian  issued  a 
Type  A  Citation  to  Laurel  EEC  on  March  15,  2012,  finding  that  Respondent’s  conduct 
toward Diu.  violated  his  personal  rights,  and  thereby  violated  California  Code  of 
Regulations,  title  16,  section  101223.  The  District  did  not  appeal  the  Citation  and  it  became 
final. 

18. 

Although  LPA  Majarian  was  a  poor  witness  during  the  hearing,  her  findings 

comport  with  our  Factual  Findings  described  above,  and  so  the  Commission  believes  the 
Citation  was  warranted.  The  Type  A  Citation  issued  to  Laurel  EEC  is  the  most  serious  of 
citations  that  can  be  issued  by  DSS  to a  licensed  facility.  Although  LPA  Majarian  had  the 
discretion  to  recommend  removing  Respondent  from  the  classroom  and  any  other  facility 

  

  

  

a
 
e
e

 
e
g

 
a

 
a

 

licensed  by  DSS,  she  instead  recommended  that  Respondent  receive  more  training.  The 
District  was  required  to  post  the  Citation  for  one  year  and  to  demonstrate  to  DSS  that  parents 
of  children  enrolled  at  Laurel  EEC,  or  about  to  be  enrolled,  were  made  aware  of  it. 

Other  Relevant  Facts 

19. 

‘For  the  period  of  four  years  before  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed  with 
and  approved  by  the  Board,  Respondent  had  no  prior  disciplinary  history  with  the  District. 

20. 

In  2010,  Respondent  was  given a  positive  Stull  evaluation  by  her  principal  at 
CHEEC,  Jacqueline  Williams,  who  testified  that  Respondent  met  District  standards,  was  a 
good  teacher,  and  had  no  tendency  toward  physical  violence  or  yelling  at  students.  After  Ms. 
Williams  retired  from  the  District,  she  has  maintained  a  social  relationship  with  Respondent 
and  appears  to  be  a  friend.  Ms.  Williams’  credibility  with  the  Commission  was  also  undercut 
by  her  testimony  that  she  saw  nothing  wrong  after  watching  the  video  of  Respondent: 
carrying  MEG. 

| 

21. 

Respondent’s  most  recent  District  Stull  evaluation  was  in  2011,  by  Principal 

Collins.  That  evaluation  indicated  that  Respondent  met  District  expectations,  and  was 
generally  favorable.  However,  Ms.  Collins  clearly  had  reservations  with  Respondent’s 
performance  as  a  teacher,  including  raising  her  voice  and  yelling  at  other  students,  and  yet 
she  did  not  properly  document  the  same.  She  issued  her  2011  Stull  evaluation  after  the  events 
underlying  the 
Collins  had  been  on  vacation  when  that  incident  occurred;  she  believed  the  woman  filling  in 
for  her  at  the  time  would  handle  the  requisite  paperwork.  In  these  respects,  Principal  Collins 
| 
simply  “dropped  the  ball.” 

G.  incident,  and  yet  she  did  not  make  reference  to  it.  Principal 

| 

22. 

The  evidence  presented  generally  indicates  that  Respondent  is  a  good  teacher, 

in  terms  of  the  technical  skills  necessary  to  appropriately  teach  the  District’s  curriculum. 

23. 

Parents  of  some  of Respondent’s  former  students  testified  on  her  behalf.  These 

parents  generally  testified  that  they  liked  and  supported  Respondent,  that  she  was  a  good 
teacher,  and  that  they  never  witnessed  Respondent  yell  at  or  physically  abuse  their  children 
or  other  students.  These  parents’  testimony  was  essentially  off-set  by  the  parents  of  Mi 
G.,  DJA...  and  DIEHL,  who  had  different  points  of view  regarding  Respondent’s 
behavior.  Moreover,  the  Commission  recognizes  that  different  parents  appreciate  different 
teaching  styles  and  respond  to  teachers  in  different  ways.  Some  of  the  parents  presented  by 
Respondent  testified  that  they  had  no  concern  with  the  video  depicting  how  Respondent 
carried vi  G.,  which  undercut  their  credibility  with  the  Commission. 

24, 

Some  of  Respondent’s  former  teaching  assistants  also  testified.  They 

uniformly  stated  that  Respondent  was  a  good  teacher  who  did  not  yell  at  or  physically  abuse 
her  students.  Their  testimony  did  not  dissuade  the  Commission  from  the  findings  above  for 
various  reasons.  For  example,  they  generally  worked  with  Respondent  for  short  periods  of 
time.  Although  required  to  be  in  Respondent’s  proximity  for  purposes  of  maintaining  the 

proper  adult-child  ratio  required  by  DSS,  they  could  not  have  seen  everything  Respondent 
did  at  all  times.  Finally,  they  uniformly  testified  that  they  never  saw  Respondent  yell  at  or 
carry  a  Student.  However,  the  evidence  was  clear  that  Respondent_was  loud,  yelled  at 
students,  and  even  by  her  own  testimony,  Respondent  carried  M 

G.  almost  daily. 

25. 

When  she  initially  discussed  with  school  administrators  the  incidents 

_ 

  

  

involving  MEEG.,  Dia.  and 
to  the  students,  but  she  provided  no  elaboration  or  justification.  During  the  hearing, 
Respondent  denied  all  the  allegations  concerning  the  students,  with  the  exception  that  she 
admitted  carrying  M 
G.  from  the  playground  area  to  the  classroom  (which  had  been 
caught  on  video).  At  no  time  during  the  hearing  did  Respondent  concede  or  admit  that  she 
did  anything  wrong,  She  did  not  appear  remorseful  for  any  of  her  actions. 

H., Respondent  simply  denied  doing  anything 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  discipline  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 
Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

: 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  are 
established.  In  addition,  a  governing  board  may  immediately  suspend a  certificated  employee 
without  pay  pursuant  to  section  44939  upon  the  filing  of  a  statement  of  charges  alleging 
immoral  conduct  and/or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 
cause. 

3A. 

Cause  exists  for  Respondent’s  dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct  pursuant 

to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1).  (Factual  Findings  1-18.) 

3B. 

Unprofessional  conduct  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a 
member'of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553, 
overruled  in  part,  on  another  ground,  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588, 
fn.  7.) 

: 

3C. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  touched  DIJH.  in  a  negative  way  by  squeezing  his 

cheeks  while  sternly  telling  him  not  to  run.  In  fact,  that  conduct  was  deemed  by  a  state 
agency  to  have  violated  DJH.’s  personal  rights.  In  addition,  Respondent  yelled  at 
A.,  and  yelled  at  and  carried  MI 
warranted.  That  conduct  was  unbecoming  of  a  teacher  in  good  standing  and  thus 
unprofessional. 

..  under  circumstances  where  her  behavior  was  not 

_ 

4A. 

Cause  exists  for  Respondent’s  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4).  (Factual  Findings  1-18.) 

  

  

 

4B. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  In  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

4C. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance, 
and  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school 
districts  should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus, 
cause  for  discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to 
his  employing  school  district. 

4D. 

However,  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to  insure  an 

efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for  their 
positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties  efficiently 
and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006) 
145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.) 
Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation is  that  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or 
capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated  employee  has  performed 
unsatisfactorily. 

4E.. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  performed  her  duties  in  a  way  unsatisfactory  to  the 

H.,  and  in  ways  contrary  to 
District.  She  inappropriately  touched  M 
\.  and  MiG.  inappropriately 
District  policies  and  expectations.  She  yelled  at 
and,  again,  in  ways  contrary  to  District  policies  and  expectations.  She  failed  to  request  or 
utilize  District  resources  in  dealing  with  issues  created  by ME 

s  separation  anxiety  and  | 

G,  and 

   

s  physical  activity,  contrary  to  District  expectations. 

5A.  —  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 

the  immediate  suspension  and/or  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to 
sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  or  44939.  (Factual  Findings  1-18.) 

5B. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  ons San  Francisco  Unified  School Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

    

 

SC. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  made  inappropriate  choices  and  exercised  poor 

judgment  on  occasion,  usually  in  situations  involving  split-second  reactions.  But  her  conduct 
does  not  meet  the  definition  of  immorality  provided  by  the  Weiland  case,  in  that  her  actions 
were  not  corrupt,  indecent,  shameless,  or  morally  indifferent. 

6A. 

Cause  exists  for  Respondent’s  dismissal  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  as  a 

teacher  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5).  (Factual  Findings  1-18.) 

6B. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “*Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  id.) 

6C. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  inappropriately  touched  and  yelled  at  students.  Those 

events  usually  involved  Respondent’s  split-second  reactions  to  a  student’s  poor  behavior. 
She  never  provided  a justification  for  her  actions  to  school  administrators  or  expressed  any 
remorse  during  the  hearing.  We  are  left  with  the  impression  that,  to  this  day,  Respondent  still 
does  not  believe  she  engaged  in  any  misconduct,  which  demonstrates  a  lack  of  understanding 
how  a  teacher  should  interact  with  young  students.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  was 
established  that  Respondent  was,  and  is,  suffering  from  a  temperamental  defect  or  is 
otherwise  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher  in  these  respects. 

7A.  —  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  for 

the  dismissal  of  Respondent  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her.  (Factual  Findings  1-18.) 

7B. 

Cases  interpreting  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  require  a  “showing  of 

intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.)  In  this  case, 
Respondent  was  not  insubordinate  and  she  did  not  willfully  and  continually  refuse  to 
cooperate  with  the  District. 

8. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that-cause  exists  for 

the  immediate  suspension  and/or  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  her  employing  district,  pursuant  to  section  44939.  In  this  case,  it  was  not 
established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  such  conduct. 

‘tf 

ff] 

 

The  Morrison  factors 

9. 

Cause  for  discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate  to  her  fitness  to  teach  within 
the  meaning  of  the  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  found  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent 
based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance  and  evident  unfitness.  The 
Morrison  analysis  applies  only  to  the  causes  of  dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct  and 
evident  unfitness,  but  not  unsatisfactory  performance.  (Id.,  at  pp.  227-230.)  With  regard  to 
those  causes  for  dismissal,  we  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and 
compared  them  to  the  facts  established  above.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for 
the  Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994) 
28  Cal.App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each 
individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established 
collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.)  In  this  case,  we  find  the  factors  clearly 
demonstrate  that  Respondent’s  misconduct  related  to  teaching  as  follows: 

(A) 

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 

teachers.  Respondent’s  misconduct  adversely  affected  the  students  involved.  Respondent’s 
misconduct  also  resulted  in  the  issuance  of  a  Type  A  Citation  and  the  public  posting  of  the 
same,  which  affected  Respondent’s  colleagues,  in  that  their  school  was  subjected  to 
increased  scrutiny  by  the  DSS  and  parents  of  current  or  prospective  students. 

(B) 

The  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  misconduct  caused  little  or 

no  physical  harm  to  the  students  involved,  but  due  to  their  age  it  probably  caused  some 
emotional  turmoil  and  erosion  of  their  trust  in  teachers  and  authority  figures.  The  Type  A 
Citation  posed  a  moderate  level  of  adversity,  in  that  the  citation  had  to  be  posted  and  read  by 
parents,  which  may  have  led  some  to  not  enroll  their  children  at  the  school. 

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The  misconduct 

was  recent. 

(D) 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  Respondent 

has  a  permit  to  work  with  young  children.  Her  misconduct  was  more  likely  to  adversely 
impact  those  students  due  to  their  age,  as  explained  above. 

(E) 

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

surrounding  the  conduct.  Neither  aggravating  nor  extenuating  circumstances  were  proven. 

(F) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct.  Respondent  offered  no  adequate  justification  for  her  actions. 

(G) 

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  It  is  highly 

likely  that  Respondent  will  continue  to  use  a  raised  voice  or  yell  at  students.  Warnings  from 
Principal  Collins  had  not  helped  before.  Respondent  apparently  is  not  concerned  with  the 

 

way  she  carried  va  G.  and  has  not  accepted  responsibility  for  squeezing  DE 
cheeks.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  is  more  than  a  remote  possibility  that  Respondent 
will  engage  in  that  sort  of  activity  again. 

H.’s 

| 

(H) 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  We  do  not  foresee  this 
happening. 

Disposition 

10A.  “The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach ...,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  T eachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

10B. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  accepted  no  responsibility  for  her  misconduct,  and 
has  given  no  sign  that  she  understands  her  actions  were  wrong.  She  failed  to  request  or  use 
resources  available  to  her  in  dealing  with  the  involved  students.  If  those  students’  behavior 
was  problematic,  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  was  equipped  to  deal  with  such. 
The  young  children  in  the  classes  she  teaches  are  generally  unable  to  advocate  for 
themselves,  which  is  of  great  concern.  It  is  likely  that  Respondent  will  engage  in  similar 
misconduct  in  the  future.  She  offered  no  mitigation. 

10C. 

We  are  mindful  that  Respondent  otherwise  appears  to  be  a  technically 

proficient  teacher  in  terms  of  the  curriculum.  But  that  cannot  excuse  misconduct  toward  her 
students.  We  are  also  mindful  that  Respondent  had  no  prior  record  of  discipline  with  the 
District.  However,  her  prior  principal  at  CHEEC,  Ms.  Williams,  is  her  friend,  so  we  are  wary 
of  her  testimony.  Principal  Collins  did  a  poor  job  of  documenting  her  concerns  with 
Respondent;  though  she  may  have  been  a  poor  administrator,  that  does  not:  mean  Respondent 
did  not  engage  in  misconduct.  In  addition,  the  lack  of  prior  discipline  against  Respondent 
may  simply  be  a  function  of  her  gradually  losing  her  patience  with  young  children  at  this 
Stage  of  her  career.  Thus,  the  lack  of  prior  discipline  does  not  sway  us. 

10D. 

Under  these  circumstances,  Respondent’s  dismissal  from  the  District  is 

warranted.  (Factual  Findings  1-25.) 

10E. 

However,  Respondent’s  immediate  suspension  without  pay  was  not  warranted. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  that  was  immoral  or 
which  constituted  a  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 
which  are  the  only  theories  pleaded  against  her  that  would  have  supported  such  drastic 
action,  Thus,  Respondent’s  immediate  suspension  without  pay  should  be  overruled,  (Factual 
Findings  1-18,  Legal  Conclusions  5  and  8.) 

10 

ORDER 

The  immediate  suspension  without  pay  of  Respondent  Jebby  Williams-Wilkey  is 
overruled.  However,  Respondent’s  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  is  affirmed. 

DATED:  April  2,  2014 

  ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

11

Tconcur. 
4: 

DATED: 

\4 

Bbty  Sawer. 

Kathy  Jarvey,  Commissioner

I  concur. 

DATED: 

I  [14 

Ablors  ML 
athleen  Davis,  Commissioner 

yt 

. 

oe 

 

