BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

DIANE  HAMPTON  (EN  711789),  a 
permanent  certificated  employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2013041139 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  April  1-4  and  7-8,  2014.  The  Commission 
consisted  of  Deanna  Clark,  Katherine  Estevez,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Erlinda  G. 
Shrenger,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Jeffery  A.  Morris,  Esq.,  Stutz  Artiano  Shinoff  &  Holtz,  represented  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District  (District). 

Diane  Hampton  (Respondent)  represented  herself. 

Oral,  documentary,  and  stipulated  evidence  was  received,  and  argument  was 
heard.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  8,  2014. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 
On  October  15,  2012,  Respondent  was  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts 

and  Notice  of  Suspension,  related  to  her  conduct  on  November  21,  2011,  and  February  7, 
2012,  discussed  in  Findings  14,  15,  and  24,  below.  On  February  11,  2013,  Respondent  was 
issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  Notice  of  Suspension,  related  to  her  conduct  on 
September  5,  2012,  discussed  in  Findings  34  and  35,  below. 

3. 

By  letter  dated  February  19,  2013,  Respondent  was  notified  that  a  meeting  was 
scheduled  for  February  27,  2013,  before  the  District's  governing  board  to  discuss  her  possible 
dismissal  and  immediate  suspension  from  her  employment  with  the  District.  The  letter  stated 
that  Respondent  could  present  statements  and  documents  at  the  February  27  meeting  in

  

response  to  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  issued  to  her  on  October  15,  2012,  and 
February  11,  2013. 
District's  governing  board  would  decide  whether  or  not  to  move  forward  with  her  possible 
dismissal.  and  immediate  suspension. 

The  letter  stated  that,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  February  27  meeting,  the 

4. 

On  March  29,  2013,  a  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed  with  the  District's 

governing  board  by  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District.  The 
Statement  of  Charges  requested  that  the  District's  governing  board  give  notice  to 
Respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44934  and  44939,  of  its  intent  to 
immediately  suspend  her  without  pay  and  dismiss  her  within  30  days  unless  she  demanded  a 
hearing. 

5. 

On  May  7,  2013,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  and 

Statement  of  Charges,  and  other  required  documents.  On  May  18,  2013,  Respondent  filed  a 
Notice  of  Defense.  On  May  23,  2013,  the  District  served  an  Amended  Accusation  and 
Statement  of  Charges.  This  hearing  ensued. 

General  Background 

6. 

107th  Street  Elementary  School  (107th  Street)  is  a  Title  1  school,  whose 

students  come  from  families  with  low  social  and  economic  status.  The  student  population  is 
75  percent  Latino  and  25  percent  African-American.  107th  Street  is  a  low  performing 
school. 

7. 

Reuben  Rios  (Rios)  has  been  the  principal  of  107th  Street  since  2003.  Rios 

was  on  the  committee  that  interviewed  and  selected  Respondent  for  placement  as a  fifth 
grade  teacher  at  107th  Street.  Respondent  was  thereafter  hired  by  the  District  for  placement 
in  the  fifth  grade  language  class  at  107th  Street.  The  fifth  grade  language  class  was  for 
students  who  were  far  below  basic  and  required  interventions,  especially  in  language  and 
phonics.  Respondent  had  experience  working  as  an  Intervention  Pool  Teacher  for  grades  K- 
5  at  Barton  Hills  Elementary  for  the  2009-2010  school  year.  She  had  also  taught  sixth  grade 
science  and  math  at  Muir  Middle  School  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 

8. 

Respondent  taught  fifth  grade  at  107th  Street  for  part  of  the  2011-2012  school 
year,  from  approximately  August  2011  until  April  2012.  In  April  2012,  she  was  reassigned 
to  teach  a  first  grade/second  grade  combination  class.  Respondent  remained  at  107th  Street 
for  the  2012-3013  school  year  and  was  assigned  to  teach  second  grade. 

9. 

The  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  states  that  all  teachers  are 

“expected  to  use  good  judgment,"  and  contains  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  situations  which 
teachers  "are  cautioned  to  avoid.”  Those  situations  include  item  3  ("Engaging  in  any 
behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  with  a  student(s)  or  in  the  presence  of  a  student(s), 
that  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitive"),  and  item  5  ("Making 
statements  or  comments,  either  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  presence  of  a  student(s),  which

    

  

  

are  not  age-appropriate,  professional,  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual  in  nature, 
harassing,  or  demeaning."  (Exh.  118.) 

 

|

10. 

The  District's  Code  of  Ethics  states,  in  part,  that  teachers  should  provide  the 
best  example  they  can  and  strive  to  demonstrate  excellence,  integrity,  and  responsibility  in 
their  work,  and  create  an  environment  of  trust,  care,  and  respect.  (Exh.  119.) 

11. 

The  Opening  Bulletin  distributed  to  all  teachers  at  107th  Street  before  the  start 
of  each  school  year  stated,  in  part,  that  each  classroom  on  the  first  day  of  instruction  should 
be  neat  and  organized,  bulletin  boards  covered  with  fresh  construction  paper,  and  school  and 
classroom  rules  should  be  posted.  Teachers  were  expected  to  reiterate  with  the  students  their 
high  expectations  for  learning  and  responsibility.  In  addition,  teachers  were  expected  to 
maintain  a  positive  learning  room  environment  and  utilize  instructional  practices  that 
increased  student  engagement.  (Exh.  114.) 

2011-2012  School  Year 

12. 

In  October  and  November  2011,  principal  Rios  received  written  complaints 
from  several  students  in  Respondent's  fifth  grade  class.  Rios  received  a  letter  dated  October 
3,  2011,  from  student  LBBB T.  stating  that  Respondent  made  comments  that  she  could  buy 
and  she  did  not  like  oo  On  November  3, 
i  that Lis  whole  family  was  crazy, 
B.  stating  that  Respondent  told  the  class  to 
2011,  Rios  received  a  note  from  student vi 
lie  and  tell  principal  Rios  that  student  KER.  had  hit  Respondent.  On  November  21, 
aT.  stating,  among  other  things, 
2011,  Rios  received  notes  from  students  IS.  and 
that  Respondent  stepped  on  their  toes.  Principal  Rios  also  received  requests  from  at  least  two 
parents  to  have  their  children  transferred  from  Respondent's  fifth  grade  class. 

    

13. 

|  Roxanne  Miranda  (Miranda)  has  worked  for  the  District  for  16  years.  She  was 

the  access-to-core  coach  at  107th  Street  from  2009  until  June  2013,  when  she  left  to  take  a 
similar  position  at  another  elementary  school.  During  the  2011-2012  school  year, Miranda 
was  aware  of  the  complaints  made  by  some  of  Respondent's  students.  At  the  request  of 
principal  Rios,  Miranda  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  practices  and 
her  interactions  with  her  students. 

14, 

On  or  about  November  21,  2011,  Miranda  observed  Respondent  teaching  a 
math  lesson  to  her  fifth  grade  class.  Miranda  sat  among  the  students  because  there  was  no 
room  for  her  to  sit  in  the  back  of  the  classroom.  The  student  desks  were  grouped  into  two 
large  clusters.  Miranda  sat  with  the  students  in  one  of  the  clusters.  During  the  observation, 
Miranda  saw  that  the  students  were  being  defiant  towards  Respondent.  Some  students  did 
'  Paragraph  1  of  the  Amended  Accusation  incorrectly  identifies  the  student  making 

  

R.  The  complaint  was  made  by  student  im  T.  (Exh.  54.) 

maz 

the  complaint  as 

    
  

 

  

» 

. 

© 

not  have  a  chair  or  were  not  part  of  a  group.  Respondent  told  the  students  words  to  the  effect 
you're  not  going  to  learn,  you  need  medicine,  you'll  end  up  in  a  mental  hospital,  and  child 
protective  services  needed  to  come  and  get  them.  Miranda  heard  from  some  of  the  students 
that  Respondent  called  them  "poor."  Miranda  heard  Respondent  call  some  students 
M.  and  other  boys  talked  back 
"ignorant"  and  call  one  student  "crazy."  When  student  J 
to  Respondent,  she  yelled  at  them  to  sit  down  and  said  words  to  the  effect  "you  don't  learn." 
She  would  verbally  argue  with  students  instead  of  positively  interacting  with  the  students  and 
engaging  them  in  the  lessons.  Based  on  her  observations,  Miranda's  opinion  was  that 
Respondent  was  not  using  effective  teaching  strategies. 

15. 

Written  statements  dated  November  21,  2011,  by  four  of  Respondent's  fifth 
grade  students  included  complaints  that  Respondent  called  them  crazy,  stupid,  ignorant,  and 
poor,  and  told  them  they  needed  medicine  and  a  mental  hospital,  and  called  their  parents 
crazy.  (Exhs.  56-59.)  The  students’  complaints  were  similar  to  the  statements  Miranda  heard 
during  her  classroom  observation  of  Respondent. 

16. 

On  November  29,  2011,  principal  Rios  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 

complaints  made  by  the  students  in  her  class.  During  the  meeting,  Rios  provided  Respondent 
with  assistance  and  guidance.  He  continued  to  speak  with  her  informally  during  the  schoo! 
year  about  her  problems  with  students. 

grade  class  for  the 
's  testimony 

17.  Os.  om 

M.  were  “gay”  and  "boyfriends."  The  other  students  in  the  class  laughed. 
"feel  bad"  (his  words). 

was  a  Student  in  Respondent's  fifth 
2011-2012  school  year.  He  is  now  13  years  old  and  in  seventh  grade.  D 
established  that  Respondent  made  comments  in  front  of  the  fifth  grade  class  that  D 
student 
Respondent's  comments  made  D 
Respondent  that  she  needed  to  fix  her  hair  or  that  she  needed  to  go  home.  Do 
principal  Rios  on  more  than  one  occasion  about  Respondent's  comments.  At  Rios'  request, 
     
wrote  a  statement  dated  December  16,  2011,  about  Respondent's  comments. 
wrote  that  Respondent  "said  JBM  and  I  was  doing  what  adults  do  the  day  we  left  out 
the  class  for  45  minutes  last  week.  She  also  said  Jan  THEE  was  doing  it  to  the  whole 
class."  (Exh.  50.)  om  initially  liked  having  Respondent  as  his  teacher,  but  his  feelings 
changed  when  she  made  the  comments  about  him  and  student  Jj  M. 

responded  by  telling 

   

and 

  

18.  FR.  (Hi)  was  a  student  in  Respondent's  fifth  grade  class  for  the 

2011-2012  school  year.  She  is  now  13  years  old  and  in  seventh  grade.  ris  testimony 
established  that,  when  she  was  in  Respondent's  fifth  grade  class,  Respondent  called  her  a 
also  heard  Respondent  call  other  students  gay,  lesbian,  and 
lesbian  and  bisexual.  ri 
bisexual  during  class.  Hill's  classmates  told  her  that  Respondent  called  her  a  lesbian. 
FI  icstified  that  Respondent's  comments  that  she  was  a  lesbian  were  not  true.  As 
discussed  in  Finding  23,  below,  Respondent  told  FA that  she  was  a  bum,  she  was  not 
Respondent 
to  F 
going  to  be  anything  in  life,  and  her  clothes  were  dirty.  According 
liked  having  Respondent 
also  threw  trash  on  the  floor  and  made FRB pick  it  up.. 
as  a  teacher  on  Respondent's  "good  days,"  when  she  was  happy.  According  to  F 
Respondent  was  happy  one  day  and  then  "mad  and  angry  at  us"  the  next  day. 

    

  

  
     

  

  

4 

 

  

  

19. 

BED.  (Mrs.  D)  is  ria:  mother.  Mrs.  D's  testimony  established  that, 

during  the  first  few  months  of  the  2011-2012  school  year,  HR  complained  that 
Respondent  called  her  names  and  said  she  was  a  homosexual.  According  to  Mrs.  D,  F 
did  not  want  to  go  to  school  because  of  Respondent's  hurtful  comments  about  FA  and 
other  students,  calling  them  bums,  they  were  nobody,  and  their  clothes  were  dirty.  On 
January  31,  2012,  Mrs.  D  spoke  to  Respondent  about  the  homosexual  comment.  During  that 
conversation,  Respondent  told  Mrs.  D  that  another  student  said  FRBand  other  girls  were 
homosexual.  Respondent  then  told  Mrs.  D  that  she  believed  the  girls  were  homosexual 
because  "they  are  always  in  the  bathroom.”  Mrs.  D  told  Respondent  her  comment  that 
FREE 
"no  angel,”  but  that  FREE  will  tell  the  truth. 

was  homosexual  was  wrong.  Mrs.  D  admitted  that 

has  a  temper  and  she  is 

20. 

Subsequent  to  her  observation  of  Respondent's  class,  Miranda  conducted  a 

demonstration  math  lesson  for  Respondent  with  her  fifth  grade  students.  Respondent 
approached  Miranda  during  the  demonstration  lesson,  put  her  hand  in  front  of  her  mouth  as  if 
to  whisper  something  to  Miranda,  and  said  in  voice  louder  than  a  whisper  "see,  those  boys  _ 
are  gay,"  in  reference  to  student  ih.  and  another  boy.  According  to  Miranda,  J 
heard  what  Respondent  said  because  he  responded  out  loud,  “I'm  not  gay."  Further,  on 
several  occasions  during  the  school  year,  Respondent  mentioned  to  principal  Rios  that  she 
thought  certain  students  were  gay  but  she  was  unsure  whether  or  not  she  should  mention  it  to 
him.  When  Rios  asked  Respondent  why  she  said  such  things,  Respondent  said  that  she 
thought  Rios  should  know  because  that's  what  the  kids  were  telling  her.  Principal  Rios  told 
Respondent  to  be  careful  about  making  comments  about  students  and  to  avoid  starting 
rumors. 

21. 

On  January  24,  2012,  there  was  an  incident  in  Respondent's  classroom  where 
student  Di.  stated  he  was  going  to  shoot  Respondent.  At  this  hearing,  D 
admitted  making  the  comment  about  shooting  Respondent.  He  could  not  remember  why  he 
made  the  comment  but  recalled  that  Respondent  said  things  about  him  and  im  Written 
statements  from  the  other  students  in  the  class  confirmed  D 
mentioned  Respondent  calling  some  of  the  boys  "gay."  (Exhs.  62-75.) 

s  statement  and  also 

    

22. 

On  January  30,  2012,  principal  Rios  provided  Respondent  with  an  Inter-Office 
Memo  that  summarized  their  meeting  on  November  29,  2011,  regarding  the  student 
complaints  Rios  had  received  in  October  and  November  2011.  In  that  Inter-Office  Memo, 
Respondent  was  reminded  that  she  had  been  provided  assistance  and  guidance  by  Rios 
including  that  she  respect  all  persons  and  treat  all  persons  with  dignity  and  respect. 

23. 

On  February  1,  2012,  an  incident  occurred  in  Respondent's  classroom  which 
prompted  her  to  call  the  office  for  help.  Principal  Rios  and  Mr.  Kossack  responded  to  the 
classroom.  Respondent  repeatedly  stated  to  Rios  that  students ra.  L 
were  yelling  at  her.  Written  statements  obtained  from  the  students  in  the  class  established 
that  Respondent  was  yelling 
names.  (Exhs.  81-92.) 
upset  because  Respondent  called  her  a  bum,  told  her  she  was  not  going  to  be  anything  in  life, 

at  the  students,  kicking  them  out  of  class,  and  calling 
was  one  of  the  students  in  the  class  that  day. 

and  J 

them 

was 

  
  
  

 

  

  

F 

and  said  that  her  clothes  were  dirty.  According  to  aa.  when  Respondent  motioned  as  if 
screamed  at  Respondent  that  she  should  be 
she  was  going  to  throw  a  book  at  her,  .
as  suspended  on  February  2,  2012,  for  screaming  at 
fired  and  called  her  "big  lips." 
,  her 
Respondent.  On  February  3,  2012,  Rios  held  a  post-suspension  conference  with 
mother  Mrs.  D,  and  Maria  Villasano,  SSA.  During  that  conference,  Respondent  repeatedly 
apologized  to 
claimed  that  students  Fi.  im.  and  i. 
Respondent  for  screaming 
   
   
Respondent  why 
her  clothes  were  dirty. 

and  calling  her  "big  lips."  Principal  Rios  also  explained  to 
2s  upset  about  Respondent's  comments  that  she  was  a  bum  and 

were  yelling  at  her.  HEMI 

24. 

On  February  7,  2012,  Rios  observed  Respondent's  classroom  during 

instructional  time  for  approximately  30  minutes,  from  10:59  a.m.  to  11:25  a.m.  According  to 
Rios,  the  classroom  environment  was  "tense."  Respondent  yelled  at  student Mia F.. 
"We  don’t  throw  stuff  in  here!”  Respondent  screamed  and  yelled  at  the  entire  class,  "I  need 
it  completely  quiet!  Did  you  do  the  review?"  When  student  ms.  om  whispered  in  a 
low  voice,  "I  can't  find  the  paper,"  Respondent  yelled  at  JL  "Stop  screaming  at  me!" 
Respondent  yelled  and  screamed  at  student 

R.,  "Please  don't  stomp  on  the  floor!"  when 

lightly  tapped  his  foot  on  the  floor.  Rios  described  Respondent's  voice  as  loud  and 
exploding.  Rios  did  not  see  evidence  of  any  classroom/behavior  management  system  in 
place  or  being  used  by  Respondent  to  address  her  students'  behaviors. 

25, 

During  the  February  7,  2012  observation,  Rios  saw  that  Respondent's 

classroom  was  cluttered.  The  teacher's  desk  was  cluttered  with  books,  crumpled  papers, 
butcher  paper,  and  paper  scraps.  Tables  and  desks  were  all  messy  and  disorganized  with 
stacks  of  books,  papers,  binders,  and  assessments.  Trash  littered  the  classroom  floor.  Prior 
to  February  7,  2012,  Rios  had  spoken  to  Respondent  at  least  five  times  about  classroom 
organization.  There  were  15  students  in  the  class  but  only  four  of  the  students  were  engaged 
in  the  lesson.  During  the  lesson,  Respondent  did  most  of  the  talking  and  remained  seated  in 
the  front  of  the  class.  All  of  the  student  responses  to  Respondent's  questions  were  one-word 
answers.  Several  of  the  students  said,  "skip,"  when  called  on  by  Respondent.  Student  J 
M.  did  not  have  an  assigned  desk  in  the  classroom. 

26. 

Rios  spoke  with  Respondent  after  the  observation.  He  directed  Respondent  to 
go  with  him  and  observe  the  classroom  of  another  teacher,  Mr.  Messina.  Messina's  class  had 
similar  students  to  Respondent's  class  in  that  they  were  low  performing  students  and  required 
interventions  (visual  aides).  During  the  observation  of  Mr.  Messina's  class,  Respondent  was 
rolling  her  eyes,  not  taking  notes,  she  glared  at  Rios,  and  made  audible  sighs. 

27. 

Onor  about  March  1,  2012,  Rios  directed  Respondent  to  get  a  doctor's 

appointment  and  obtain  written  verification  of  her  fitness  for  duty.  Respondent  left  on  or 
about  March  1,  2012,  and  did  not  return  until  three  to  four  weeks  later.  When  she  did  return, 
Respondent  did  not  request  any  accommodation  for  the  performance  of  her  duties  as  a 
teacher.  She  did  not  present  any  medical  documentation  requesting  such  accommodation. 

  
  

  
 

  

  

    

  

  

 
28. 

Rios  decided  to  reassign  Respondent  from  a  fifth  grade  class  to  a  first 

grade/second  grade  combination  class  for  the  remainder  of  the  school  year.  Rios  thought  this 
new  assignment  would  give  Respondent  a  fresh  start,  as  she  would  have  completely  different 
students  and  parents.  Respondent  was  assigned  to  the  first  grade/second  grade  combination 
class  on  or  about  April  24,  2012.  She  completed  the  remainder  of  the  2011-2012  school  year 
in  that  class. 

29. 

Principal  Rios  issued  Respondent's  performance  evaluation  on  May  17,  2012. 
Respondent  was  given  a  rating  of  "below  standard  performance."  That  rating  was  based  on 
specific  deficiencies  including,  but  not  limited  to,  Respondent's  failure  to  adequately 
supervise  children  during  instructional  time;  failure  to  demonstrate  sustained  improvement  in 
curricular  planning,  lesson  delivery,  student  engagement,  and  maintaining  a  neat  and  an 
organized  room  environment;  failure  to  follow  directives  given  by  an  administrator;  and 
failure  to  provide  lesson  plans  on  a  consistent  basis. 

2012-2013  School  Year 

2012-2013  school  year. 

30. 

Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  a  second  grade  class  at  107th  Street  for  the 

31. 

During  the  first  month  of  the  school  year,  principal  Rios  spoke  to  Respondent 

on  four  occasions  (August  15,  17,  21,  and  24)  regarding  the  condition  of  her  classroom 
environment.  When  he  visited  Respondent's  classroom,  principal  Rios  saw  that  the  table 
next  to  the  teacher's  desk  was  piled  with  papers,  clutter,  boxes  and  crumpled  papers.  The 
bookcases  were  messy,  unorganized,  and  cluttered.  Student  books  were  not  organized. 
Materials  piled  under  the  tables  near  the  white  board  were  messy  and  unorganized.  The 
closet  tops  were  cluttered.  Bulletin  boards  were  not  up  on  the  wall  as  per  the  Opening 
Bulletin.  On  the  four  occasions  Rios  spoke  to  Respondent,  she  told  him  she  was  working  on 
removing  the  clutter,  the  previous  teacher  left  the  closets  in  a  mess  and  there  was a lot  of 
stuff  to  throw  away,  she  lost  the  Opening  Bulletin,  and  she  was  having  car  trouble  and  had  to 
leave. 

32. 

On  August  27,  2012,  an  incident  occurred  involving  Respondent  and  access- 

to-core  coach  Miranda.  Miranda's  office  was  next  door  to  the  school's  computer  lab. 
Miranda  was  working  in  her  office  when  Respondent  came  in  and  asked  Miranda  for  help 
with  "Study  Island,"  which  was  a  language  arts  computer  program.  Respondent  asked 
Miranda  if  she  knew  the  password  for  the  computers.  Miranda  went  with  Respondent  to  the 
computer  lab.  Respondent's  second  grade  students  were  already  in  the  lab.  Most  of  the 
students  were  working  on  the  floor.  Three  or  four  of  the  students  were  sitting  at  computers, 
trying  to  log-on.  Miranda  saw  that  the  password  was  written  on  the  board  in  the  lab.  As 
Miranda  attempted  to  log-on  to  a  computer,  the  students  got  up  from  the  floor  to  see  what 
was  happening.  Respondent  told  the  students  to  keep  working  on  what  they  were  doing. 
When  the  students  were  unsure  what  to  do,  Respondent's  voice  escalated  and  she  became 
frustrated.  She  yelled  at  the  students  to  sit  down  and  yelled  out,  "this  is  why  you  don't 
learn!"  Respondent's  frustration  increased  as  the  students  were  not  listening  to  her. 

 

=

Suddenly,  Respondent  turned  her  frustration  from  the  students  to  Miranda.  She  began 
yelling  at  Miranda  words  to  the  effect  that  her  students  were  bad  kids,  they  don't  learn,  and  it 
was  Miranda's  fault  that  these  kids  were  in  Respondent's  class.  According  to  Miranda, 
Respondent  was  yelling  in  a  very  loud  voice  in  front  of  the  second  grade  children.  Miranda 
responded  by  telling  Respondent  to  stop  yelling  at  her.  Miranda  left  the  computer  lab.  She 
reported  the  incident  to  principal  Rios. 

33. 

On  September  4,  2012,  principal  Rios  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

complaints  he  had  received  at  the  end  of  August  2012  from  three  different  parents  who  each 
requested  to  have  their  child  transferred  out  of  Respondent's  second  grade  class.  One  parent 
who  had  observed  Respondent's  class  complained  that  Respondent  appeared  irritated,  jittery, 
and  anxious,  and  that  the  class  did  not  have  a  good  structure  for  his  son.  Another  parent 
stated  that  her  daughter  had  been  complaining  that  Respondent  was  rude  to  her  and  that  she 
doesn't  participate  in  class.  A  third  parent  complained  that  Respondent  did  not  properly 
supervise  the  students in  the  class,  she  was  rude  to  the  students,  and  she  yelled  and  put-down 
her  son  and  did  not  build  up  his  self-esteem.  During  the  meeting,  Respondent  stated  that  she 
didn't  know  that  a  parent  could  give  a  diagnosis,  she  tried  not  to  interact  with  the  parents,  she 
cannot  control  how  parents  feel  about  her,  and  she  was  not  comfortable  with  the  parents  or 
their  diagnosis. 
treat  all  persons  with  dignity  and  respect. 

Rios  provided  Respondent  with  assistance  and  guidance,  including  that  she 

34. 

On  September  5,  2012,  the  administrative  team  at  107th  Street  conducted 

observations  of  all  the  second  grade  classrooms  during  instructional  time.  The  members  of 
the  administrative  team  were  principal  Rios,  access-to-core  coach  Miranda,  intervention  and 
title  1  coordinator  Tamara  Honegan  (Honegan),  and  categorical  programs  advisor  Dr. 
Veronica  Plascencia.  The  four  members  of  the  administrative  team  testified  regarding  their 
observations  of  Respondent's  classroom  on  September  5,  2012. 

35. 

On  September  5,  2012,  the  administrative  team  had  completed  their 

observations  in  the  other  second  grade  classrooms  when  they  approached  Respondent's 
classroom.  There  they  found  four  to  seven  of  Respondent's  students  outside  of  the 
classroom,  unsupervised  by  any  adults.  The  classroom  door  was  closed.  The  students  were 
playing  around  the  stairwell  and  ramp  outside  the  classroom.  The  students  told  Rios  and  the 
other  team  members  that  Respondent  had  kicked  them  out  of  class,  told  them  not  to  come 
back,  and  shut  the  door  on  them.  Rios  told  the  students  to  return  to  their  classroom,  opened 
the  classroom  door,  and  the  team  escorted  the  students  back  inside  the  classroom.  The 
classroom  was  chaotic.  Chairs  were  flipped  over  and  there  were  papers  all  over  the  place. 
Respondent  was  in  the  classroom.  She  was  visibly  upset  and  was  yelling  at  her  students  to 
be  quiet,  sit  down,  and  do  their  work.  Respondent  was  aggressively  flipping  pages  in  the 
student  workbooks  and  yelling  at  the  students  words  to  the  effect  "you're  not  listening  to  me, 
that's  why  you  don't  know  what  to  do!” 

36. 

Respondent  rushed  towards  the  administrative  team,  pointing  at  a  female 

student,  PJ  D.,  and  yelling  out,  "I  want  her  arrested!  She  tried  to  hit  me!"  Rios  asked 
Respondent  where  she  had  been  hit  and  if  she  needed  medical  attention.  Respondent  said 

   

  

  

that 

did  not  really  hit  her  but  had  only  tried  to  hit  her  with  the  door.  Respondent 
_  raised  her  voice  and  began  yelling  out  words  to  the  effect  "I  want  her  raz  arrested! 

im 

You're  not  doing  your  job!  It's  okay  for  others  not  to  do  their  job  and  get  away  with  it.  I'm 
calling  the  school  board  on  you!"  and  "I  don't  care  about  this  school.”  Respondent  also  yelled 
out  that  one  of  the  male  students  was  "humping"  other  students. 

37. 

When  Rios  attempted  to  get  closer  to  Respondent  to  help  her  calm  down, 

Respondent  quickly  moved  away  from  him  while  yelling  out  "Get  away  from  me!  Get  away 
from  me!  You're  not  doing  your  job!  I'm  calling  the  school  board."  Respondent  stated  she 
was  uncomfortable  having  the  administrative  team  in  her  classroom,  especially  team  member 
Miranda.  Several  times,  Rios  directed  Respondent  to  leave  the  classroom  and  meet  him  in 
the  conference  room  in  the  office.  Respondent,  at  first,  did  not  comply.  Eventuaily,  she 
grabbed  her  purse  and  belongings  and  slammed  the  door  as  she  left  the  classroom.  The 
second  grade  students  appeared  shocked,  with  some  students  making  comments  like  "she's 
really  mad  now!"  and  "she's  calling  the  police!"  Rios  directed  the  administrative  team  to 
take  over  the  class.  Honegan  cleaned  up  the  papers  on  the  floor  and  picked  up  the  overturned 
chairs.  The  students  were  directed  to  sit  on  the  carpet  and  Miranda  read  a  book  out  loud  to 
them.  Afterwards,  the  students  were  disbursed  to  other  classrooms  for  the  remainder  of  the 
school  day. 

| 

Other  Findings 

38. 

No  defenses  or  mitigating  circumstances  were  established  on  behalf  of 
Respondent.  Respondent  did  not  testify  at  the  hearing.  Nor  did  she  present  any  other 
witnesses  to  testify  on  her  behalf.  The  documentary  evidence  (six  exhibits)  she  presented 
during  the  testimony  of  the  District's  witnesses,  without  more,  were  insufficient  to  establish 
any  defenses  or  mitigating  circumstances.  The  testimony  of  the  District's  witnesses  was 
taken  as  unrefuted. 

39. 

—  Allegations  contained  in  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

for  which  there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this  Decision  were  found  by  the  Commission  to  be 
not  established  by  sufficient  evidence. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944  and  Factual  Findings  1-5.’ 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  and  the  standard  of  proof  is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

  

*  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

indicated. 

9 

   

3. 

It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact—in  this  case  the  three  members  of  the 

Commission—may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even 
though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9 
Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a cloth  of 
material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762, 
767.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute  substantial  evidence,” 
including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality  Assurance,  supra,  189 
Cal.App.3d  at  1052.) 

truth  out  of  selected 

4, 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  sets  forth  the  grounds  for  which  a  permanent 

employee  may  be  dismissed  by  a  school  district.  The  grounds  alleged  in  this  case  are: 
unprofessional  conduct  (subd.  (a)(1));  immoral  conduct  (subd.  (a)(1));  unsatisfactory 
performance  (subd.  (a)(4));  evident  unfitness  for  service  (subd.  (a)(5));  and  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the 
employing  school  district  (subd.  (a)(7)). 

5. 

(A)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District 

under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  unprofessional  conduct,  based  on  Factual 
Findings  6-37. 

(B)  Unprofessional  conduct  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may 

be  defined  as  "conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such 
conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing."  (Gardner  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal-App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

 

~

D 

and 

(C)  In  this  case,  Respondent  called  her  students  demeaning  and  derogatory 
names.  She  made  inappropriate  comments  regarding  the  sexual  orientation  of  one  or  more 
M,  in  the  presence  of  other  students,  Miranda, 
students,  including  F 
and  principal  Rios.  Respondent  addressed  student  misbehaviors  in  her  classroom  by  yelling 
and  screaming  at  the  students,  engaging  in  verbal  arguments  with  students,  threatening  to 
throw  a  book  at  yO  and  aggressively  flipping  the  pages  of  her  students'  workbooks, 
rather  than  employing  behavior  techniques  to  control  the  situation  and  create  a  positive 
interaction  with  the  students.  Respondent  failed  to  maintain  a  neat,  orderly,  and  positive 
learning  environment  in  her  classroom.  She  failed  to  treat  fellow  teacher  Miranda  and 
principal  Rios  in  a  professional  and  respectful  manner.  She  was  resistant  to  the  guidance  and 
directives  given  to  her  by  principal  Rios.  Respondent's  conduct  was  unbecoming  of  a  teacher 
in  good  standing  and  thus  constituted  unprofessional  conduct. 

6. 

(A)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District 
under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  immoral  conduct,  based  on  Factual  Findings  6,  7, 
12-15,  23,  and  32. 

  

  
   

     

10 

(B)  The  term  “immoral  conduct"  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness; 
or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland 
(1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

(C)  In  this  case,  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  by  repeatedly 

other  things,  crazy,  stupid,  poor  and  ignorant,  and  called  their  parents 

making  demeaning  and  derogatory  comments  about  her  students  and  their  families.  She 
called  them,  among 
crazy.  She  told HE  sic  was  a  bum,  she  was  not  going  to  be  anything  in  life,  and  her 
clothes  were  dirty.  Such  comments,  when  directed  at  students  who  are  from  underprivileged 
backgrounds,  exceed  the  bounds  of  common  decency  because  they  criticize  the  students  for 
things  in  their  background  that  they  cannot  control.  Respondent's  comments  that  the  students 
were  stupid  and  ignorant  are  similarly  egregious  because  they  were  directed  at  students  who 
are  low  performing,  far  below  basic,  and  require  interventions  to  assist  them  in  school. 
Respondent's  demeaning  and  derogatory  comments  towards  her  students  demonstrated  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  an  inconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

7. 

(A)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  with  the  District 
under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  for  unsatisfactory  performance,  based  on  Factual 
Findings  6-37. 

| 

(B)  The  term  "unsatisfactory  performance"  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasamuch  as  there  is  a  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  it  is  presumed  that  the 
Legislature  did  not  intend  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  Ua  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

(C)  While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher's 
conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher's  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance, 
and  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school 
districts  should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus, 
cause  for  discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificate  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to 
his  or  her  employing  school  district. 

(D)  However,  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to  insure 

an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for 
their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties 

11 

   

  

efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist. 
(2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn.  20.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation  is  that  an 
employing  school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding 
whether  a  certificated  employee  has  performed  unsatisfactorily. 

(E)  In  this  case,  Respondent  performed  her  duties  in  a  way  unsatisfactory  to 

the  District.  Respondent's  unsatisfactory  performance  included  her  failure  to  adequately 
supervise  children  during  instructional  time;  failure  to  demonstrate  sustained  improvement  in 
curricular  planning,  lesson  delivery,  student  engagement,  and  maintaining  a  neat  and  an 
organized  room  environment;  failure  to  follow  directives  given  by  an  administrator;  and 
failure  to  provide  lesson  plans  on a  consistent  basis.  She  yelled  at  her  students,  and  made 
demeaning  and  derogatory  comments  about  them.  Some  parents  complained  to  principal 
Rios  and  requested  to  have  their  children  transferred  from  Respondent's  class.  She  engaged 
in  verbal  arguments  with  misbehaving  students,  rather  than  interacting  with  them  in  a 
positive  manner.  She  blamed  her  difficulties  with  classroom  management  on  Miranda,  for 
placing  bad  students  in  her  classes.  Respondent  was  not  responsive  to  the  direction  and 
guidance  provided  by  principal  Rios.  Principal  Rios  was  on  the  committee  that  interviewed 
and  selected  Respondent  to  teach  at  107th  Street.  Thus,  he  had  every  incentive  to  make  sure 
that  Respondent  succeeded  in  her  placement  at  107th  Street.  Unfortunately,  Respondent's 
performance  of  her  duties  at  107th  Street  was  contrary  to  the  expectations  of  principal  Rios 
and  the  District. 

8. 

(A)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  based  on 
Factual  Findings  6-37. 

(B)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  "clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 
unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  tempermental  defects  or  inadequacies." 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  "connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district."  (d.) 

(C)  In  this  case,  Respondent's  misconduct  demonstrates  that  she  loses  her 

composure  and  falls  apart  under  difficult  and  stressful  situations.  She  becomes  loud,  angry, 
frustrated,  combative,  and  aggressive.  When  she  is  having 
having  Respondent  as  their  teacher.  But,  as 
's  testimony  established,  she 
has  unexplained  mood  swings,  where  she  is  happy  one  day,  but  mad  and  angry  the  next  day. 
Despite  repeated  counseling  and  guidance  from  principal  Rios  about  treating  all  persons  with 
dignity  and  respect,  Respondent's  difficulty  with  students  and  her  demeaning  and  derogatory 
name-calling  of  students  continued.  The  totality  of  the  circumstances  established  that 
Respondent  was,  and  is,  suffering  from  a  tempermental  defect  and  is  otherwise  unfit  to  serve 
as  a  teacher. 

a  "good  day,"  students  like 

aa  and 

12

  

9, 

(A)  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  persistent  violation  of  law  or  school  rules, 
specifically  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (items  3  and  5),  the  District's  Code 
of  Ethics,  and  the  107th  Street  Opening  Bulletin,  based  on  Factual  Findings  6-37. 

(B)  Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation 

must  be  either  "persistent"  or  "motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination." 
(Governing  Bd.  of  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 
Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally 
not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

(C)  In  this  case,  principal  Rios  provided  direction  and  guidance,  and  met  with 
Respondent  on  several  occasions,  regarding  her  misconduct,  to  no  avail.  She  was  resistant  to 
the  directives  and  guidance  he  provided.  During  the  observation  of  Mr.  Miranda's  class, 
Respondent  did  not  take  notes,  rolled  her  eyes,  glared  at  Rios,  and  made  audible  sighs.  Thus, 
it  was  established  that  Respondent  acted  in  persistent  violation  of  the  school  rules  and  the 
District's  policies. 

The  Morrison  factors 

10. 

Cause  for  discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate  to  her  fitness  to  teach  within 
the  meaning  of  the  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  found  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent 
based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of  school  rules.  With  regard  to  those  causes  for 
dismissal,  the  Commission  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and  compared 
them  to  the  facts  established  above.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the 
Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28 
Cal.  App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each 
individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established 
collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.)  In  this  case,  the  Commission  finds  the 
factors  clearly  demonstrate  that  Respondent’s  misconduct  related  to  teaching  as  follows: 

(A) 

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 
teachers.  Respondent’s  misconduct  adversely  affected  the  involved  students  and  fellow 
teachers. 
Respondent's  students  made  written  complaints  to  the  principal  regarding  her 
conduct  and  demeaning  and  derogatory  name-calling.  FRE 
because  of  Respondent's  name-calling. 
that  he  and  J 
parents  of  some  students,  who  requested  their  children  be  transferred  from  Respondent's 

cic  not  want  to  go  to  school 
mm”  felt  bad  when  Respondent  made  comments 
M.  were  gay  and  boyfriends.  Principal  Rios  received  complaints  from  the 

   

  

13 

     

  

class.  Other  teachers  were  affected  when  Respondent's  second  grade  students  had  to  be 
disbursed  to  other  classrooms  following  the  September  5,  2013  incident. 

(B) 

The  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  misconduct  caused  great 

adversity  to  her  students. 

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent's 

misconduct  was  recent,  having  occurred  in  2011  and  2012. 

(D) 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved. 

Respondent's  hiring  at  107th  Street  established  she  held  the  credential  required  for  that 
assignment. 
presented.  Respondent  did  not  testify  at  the  hearing. 

The  specific  credential  held  by  Respondent  was  not  established  by  the  evidence 

(E) 

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances.  if  any, 

surrounding  the  conduct.  None  established.  Respondent  did  not  testify  at  the  hearing. 

(F) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct.  None  established.  Respondent  did  not  testify  at  the  hearing. 

(G) 

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  Respondent's 

conduct  at  issue  is  likely  to  recur.  Warnings  and  counseling  from  principal  Rios  have  not 
helped  in  the  past.  Respondent  has  not  acknowledged  responsibility  for  any  of  her  conduct. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  believes  there  is  more  than  a  remote  possibility 
that  she  would  engage  in  the  same  sort  of  activity  again. 

(H) 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Not  applicable. 

    

Disposition 

. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

11. 
unfitness  to  teach  . 
.,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

terminated  as  a  teacher.  (Factual  Findings  6-37  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-10.)   

unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Morrision  decision,  and  she  should  be 

Under  all  of  the  circumstances,  Respondent's  conduct  establishes  that  she  is 

12. 

  

  

   

    

     

    

   
   
    

   

ORDER 

Respondent  Diane  Hampton  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  May  Q{ ,  2014 

a C>  ;  Darsdie 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

KATHERINE  ESTEVEZ 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DATED:  May  _,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

    

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

 

  

  

‘Respondent  Diane  Hampton  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May  £2, 2014 

DATED:  May  ___,  2014 

, 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

     

RINE  ESTEVEZ 

Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Comp 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

 

  

ORDER 
Respondent  Diane  Hampton  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 
DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May  30,  2014 

- 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

a 
KATHERINE  ESTEVEZ 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

    

15

