  

   BEFORE  THE 

COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FOR  THE  LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against, 

BETTY  BEN-NISSAN, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2013040757 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 
Angeles,  California,  on  February  3,  4,  and  5,  2014.  The  Commission  consisted  of  Charlene 
Shimada,  Luciano  Ortiz,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Bryan  J.  Park,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

Joseph  Y.  Avrahamy,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Betty  Ben-Nissan 

(District). 

(Respondent). 

The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  February  5,  2014. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  to  teach  third 

grade  at  Erwin  Elementary  School  (Erwin).  District  alleged  that  Respondent  demonstrated 
unprofessional  and  immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),' 
dishonesty  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(5)),  and  willful  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)  (7)),  all  arising  out  of  alleged  improprieties  relating  to  Respondent’s 
administration  of  the  California  State  Test  (CST)  in  May  2012.  The  essence  of  the  charging 
allegations  is  that  Respondent  violated  state  and  District  testing  policies  during  the 
administration  of  the  2011-2012  CST  by  (1)  telling  one  of  her  students  that  he  marked  the 
correct  answers  on  his  test;  (2)  checking  to  see  if  students  underlined  key  words  and  distributing 
Tic-Taes  and/or  praise  to  those  students;  (3)  helping  and/or  providing  clues  to  students;  and  (4) 
reading  questions  or  passages  to  several  students  and/or  helping  underline  key  words.  District 
seeks  Respondent’s  dismissal. 

   

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

  

 

  

    
   
     

Respondent  committed  the  acts  described  in  the  Accusation.  Accordingly,  District’s 
Accusation  is  dismissed. 

As  more  fully  set  forth  below,  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 
   
  
    
   
  
    
   

Statement  of  Charges  executed  by  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer, 
acting  in  her  official  capacity.  On  April  4,  2013,  Respondent  executed  a  request  for  hearing, 
and  on  May  22,  2013,  served  her  Notice  of  Defense. 

On  April  25,  2013,  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  and 

1. 

2. 

Respondent  is.a  certificated  permanent  employee  of  the  District.  She  began 

teaching  school  in  1992  at  El  Dorado  Elementary  school,  where  she  taught  first  grade, 
second  grade,  and  combination  first  and  second  grade  classes.  In  2006,  Respondent  left  the 
classroom  to  become  an  instructional  math  coach  and  to  teach  teachers  how  to  instruct 
students  how  to  Jearn  math  conceptually.  In  2009  Respondent  began  working  at  Erwin 
where  she  taught  second  grade. 

3. 

During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  in  addition  to  CST  training  provided  by 

District,  the  principal  at  Erwin  invited  Dennis  Parker  to  provide  a  full  day  of  mandatory 
training  to  second  through  fifth  grade  teachers  for  the  preparation  and  administration  of  the 
CST,  which  Respondent  attended.  Mr.  Parker  was  not  an  employee  of  the  District.  Rather, 
Mr.  Parker  was  an  independent  educational  consultant.  The  training  consisted  of  an  oral 
presentation  and  written  material.  One  handout,  entitled  “CST  Homestretch:  Six  Last 
Minute  Strategies,”  discussed  a  strategy  called  “Priming,”  which  was  designed  to  help 
students  achieve  a  positive  mindset.  Specifically,  the  strategy  included  teachers  telling  their 
students  “before  and  during  the  CST”  that  he  or  she  believed  in  them,  that  they  were  going  to 
do  really  well,  and  that  all  they  had  to  do  was  to  take  their  time  and  think. 

4. 

A  second  strategy  addressed  proctoring,  which  suggested  that  teachers  actively 
proctor  the  CST  by  walking  around  to  “(1)  encourage  and  praise  students,  (2)  ask  students  to 
try  their  best  if  they  [were]  seen...  marking  just  any  answer,  (3)  alert  students  to  get  back  on 
track  if...  off  by  one  answer  on  the  answer  sheet  (i-e.,  they  [were]  working  on  #13  but 
bubbled  in  #14),  and  (4)  encourage  students  to  close  their  eyes  and  take  a  deep  breath  if  they 
beg[ajn  to  act  fatigued  or  panicked.” 

5. 

The  handout  also  discussed  other  strategies.  One  strategy  was  entitled  Test 
Chats,”  which  consisted  of  meeting  with  students  who  had  taken  the  CST  in  the  previous 
year  and  inquiring  about  their  performance  and  what  they  could  do  to  improve  it.  Another 
strategy  focused  on  rewarding  or  celebrating  students  who  scored  high  or  made  a  gain  on  the 
previous  year’s  CST  by  holding  an  awards  assembly.  The  handout  also  discussed  holding 
“Saturday  School”  for  those  who  had  scored  in  the  “basic,”  “below  basic,”  and  “far  below 
basic”  categories  on  the  previous  CST,  to  provide  additional  support  and  practice  for  those 
students.  The  final  strategy  was  entitled  the  “Hit  List,”  which  suggested  that  the  teachers 
develop  a  list  of  standards  or  concepts  their  students  had  difficulty  grasping  and  carve  out 

  

  
  

  
      
  
  

   

    

   

   

   

   

    

   

  

    

   

   
    
   
   

      about  30  minutes  per  day  to  use  released  questions  from  the  CST  or  homemade  mini-lessons 
   

to  ensure  that  students  learn  or  at  least  become  familiar  with  those  concepts  and  skills. 

    

6. 

Respondent  implemented  the  strategies  taught  by  Dennis  Parker  to  her  second 

grade  class,  including  active  proctoring,  during  her  2010  administration  of  the  CST 

7. 

For  the  2010-2011  school  year,  Erwin’s  new  principal,  Dr.  Helen  Kim,  asked 

Respondent  to  teach  third  grade.  Dr.  Kim,  who  served  as  Erwin’s  principal  through  2013, 
explained  at  hearing  that  she  asked  Respondent  to  teach  third  grade  because  third  grade  was 
“experiencing  problems,”  and  Respondent  “was  a  great  teacher”  based  on  her  observations  of 
Respondent  during  her  classroom  visits.  When  Respondent  began  teaching  third  grade,  Dr. 
Kim  often  sent  other  third  grade  teachers  into  Respondent’s  class  to  learn  good  practices  and 
Strategies  to  use  in  their  own  classrooms. 

8. 

For  the  CST  administered  for  the  2010-2011  school  year,  Respondent 

implemented  the  strategies  taught  by  Dennis  Parker  to  her  third  grade  class,  including  active 
proctoring. 

9. 

For  the  2011-2012  school  year,  as  in  previous  years,  District  provided  training 

to  teachers  on  how  to  administer  the  CST.  Specifically,  Dr.  Kim  arranged  for  the  teaching 
staff  to  receive  mandatory  training  from  Zeida  Cuellar  who  was  the  categorical  program 
advisor  at  Erwin.  Dr.  Kim  attended  the  training  as  did  Respondent.  Ms.  Cuellar,  who  had 
administered  the  CST  two  or  three  times  herself,  provided  training  which  required  the 
teachers  to  view  a  video  and  to  review  written  material.  At  hearing,  Dr.  Kim  explained  that 
teachers  were  instructed  not  to  provide  assistance  or  guidance  to  the  students  in  answering 
questions  and  were  not  allowed  to  talk  to  students  on  an  individual  basis,  such  as  whispering 
to  them,  highlighting  anything,  or  pointing  out  anything.  According  to  Dr.  Kim,  the  teachers 
were  precluded  from  saying  anything  to  the  students  at  all  during  the  administration  of  the 
test,  even  praise.  Ms.  Cuellar’s  testimony  differed  in  this  regard,  as  she  stated  that  the 
teachers  could  make  general  comments  to  the  students  during  the  administration  of  the  CST, 
like,  “Boys  and  girls,  you’re  doing  a  good  job,”  instead  of  directing  comments  to  individual 
students.  In  addition,  Ms.  Cuellar  stated  that  a  teacher  could  tell  an  individual  student  to  stay 
on  task  if  he  or  she  saw  the  student  struggling  to  remain  focused. 

    

The  official  written  CST  instructions  distributed  to  the  teachers  stated  that, 
during  the  testing,  teachers  could  “encourage  students  to  do  their  best.”  The  written  CST 
instructions  also  provided,  “if  necessary”  during  the  test,  a  teacher  could  “explain  the 
directions,”  but  could  “not  give  help  on  specific  test  questions.”  The  instructions  also 
provided  that  “if  students  ask  for  help  reading  a  word,”  the  teacher  was  to  “encourage  them 
to  sound  it  out,”  but  precluded  the  teacher  from  reading  the  words  for  them.  In  addition, 
during  the  test,  the  teachers  could  “remind  students  to  handle  their  test  booklets  with  care,  to 
record  their  answers  with  heavy,  dark  marks,  and  to  avoid  making  extra  marks  on  the  test 
booklets.”  The  instructions  did  not  specify  how  the  teacher  was  required  tomake  these 
communications,  whether  individually  or  collectively.  Finally,  the  written  CST  instructions 

10. 

  

  

provided  that  teachers  could  “check  periodically  to  make  sure  that  students  [were]  working 
on  the  correct  test  part  and  following  instructions.” 

11. 

During  the  training  provided  by  Ms.  Cuellar,  the  teachers  learned  that  they 

were  to  ensure  the  students  bubbled  the  answer  sheets  properly  because  they  were  now 
precluded  from  erasing  stray  marks  which  was  a  change  from  previous  testing  years. 

12. 

At  the  end  of  the  training  session,  one  of  the  teachers  asked  if  it  was 

permissible  to  give  the  students  a  treat.  At  hearing,  Dr.  Kim  testified  that  she  advised  the 
teachers  they  could  issue  Tic  Tacs  to  the  students  as  a  treat  before  the  test  as  long  as  they 
gave  each  student  the  same  amount  of  Tic  Tacs.  Dr.  Kim  explained  the  teachers  were  not 
allowed  to  distribute  treats  after  the  distribution  of  the  test  booklets.  In  addition,  Ms.  Cuellar 
distributed  a  handout  regarding  the  CST  which  included  information  about  daily  treats, 
among  other  things.  The  handout  stated  as  follows:  “Every  day  before  test  begins,  give 
students  one  or  two  Hershey  Kisses  or  peppermint  candy  that  they  may  munch  on  during  the 
test.”  (Emphasis  included). 

13. 

Ms.  Cuellar’s  testimony  differed  greatly  from  Dr.  Kim’s.  Ms.  Cuellar,  though 

she  remembered  distributing  the  handout  to  the  teachers,  did  not  recall  Dr.  Kim  verbally 
instructing  the  teachers  to  distribute  Tic-Tacs  before  the  test  only,  and  not  during  the  test. 
Ms.  Cuellar.explained  that  the  purpose  of  the  Tic-Tacs  was  to  keep  the  students  alert,  so  it 
would  not  have  been  improper  for  teachers  to  distribute  Tic-Tacs  during  the  middle  of  the 
test,  as  long  as  all  of  the  students  were  given  the  Tic-Tacs.  In  addition,  Ms.  Cuellar  testified 
that  if  a  teacher  had  given  students  Tic-Tacs  for  using  good  test  taking  strategies,  such  as 
underlining  key  words,”  and  refrained  from  saying  anything  to  the  students  while  distributing 
the  Tic-Tacs,  the  action  would  not  be  considered  a  violation  of  testing  protocols.  However, 
if  the  teacher  had  given  some  students  more  Tic-Tacs  than  other  students,  that  action  would 
be  considered  a  violation  of  testing  protocol.  One  exception,  according  to  Ms.  Cuellar, 
involved  a  scenario  where  a  student  was  having  a  “meltdown”  and  crying.  In  such a  case, 
the  teacher  would  be  permitted  to  use  his  or  her  discretion  to  give  the  distressed  student  an 
additional  Tic-Tac. 

14. 

Neither  Dr.  Kim  nor  Ms.  Cuellar  advised  the  teachers  that  they  should  not 

apply  any  previous  trainings  they  had  received  from  District  concerning  the  administration  of 
the  CST,  including  the  training  presented  by  Dennis  Parker. 

15. 

After  receiving  the  training  for  the  2011-2012  CST,  Respondent  signed  a 

security  affidavit  acknowledging  that  she  had  been  trained  and  would  protect  the  security  of 
the  testing  materials  by  (1)  not  divulging  the  contents  of  the  tests;  (2)  not  copying  any  part  of 
the  tests;  (3)  keeping  the  tests  secure;  (4)  limiting  access  to  the  tests  to  the  actual  testing 
periods;  (5)  collecting  and  accounting  for  testing  materials;  (6)  not  reviewing  any  test 
questions,  passages,  or  other  test  items  independently  or  with  students  or  any  other  person, 

. 

Ms.  Cuellar  explained  that  underlining  key  words  was a  testing  strategy  for 

reading  comprehension  passages. 

  

 

   before,  during,  or  following  testing;  (7)  not  developing  scoring  keys,  review  students’ 

Tesponses,  or  prepare  answer  documents;  (8)  returning  all  testing  materials  to  the  designated 
test  site  coordinator;  (9)  keeping  assessment  materials  in  a  secure  locked  storage  except 
when  administering  or  observing  the  administration  of  the  assessments;  and  (10) 
administering  the  tests  in  accordance  with  the  directions  for  test  administration  and  test 
administration  manuals. 

16. 

On  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  CST  testing,  May  8,  2012,  Respondent  had 
her  students  exercising  on  the  yard.  After  Respondent  received  the  test  booklets,  she  brought 
her  students  inside  the  classroom,  gave  them  a  cheese  snack,  and  then  held  a  prep  rally. 
During  the  pep  rally,  Respondent  reminded  her  students  to  underline  key  words,  re-read 
passages,  never  give  up,  and  offered  other  encouraging  words. 

17. 

Respondent  administered  the  CST  to  her  students.  Respondent  proctored  the 
test  with  Humberto  Solis,  who  was  a  paraprofessional  at  Erwin.  Mr.  Solis,  who  testified  at 
hearing,  had  never  worked  with  Respondent  prior  to  his  assignment  to  proctor  her  class  for 
the  CST.  He  had  received  CST  training  approximately  one  week  prior  to  the  administration 
of  the  test,  separate  from  the  teachers.  From  this  training,  he  learned,  among  other  things, 
that  it  was  his  duty  to  walk  around  the  class  to  make  sure  the  children  bubbled  the  answer 
sheets  properly  and  to  report  any  testing  irregularities  to  the  testing  coordinator  (Ms. 
Cuellar). 

18. 

Mr.  Solis  arrived  to  Respondent’s  classroom  at  8:15  or  8:30,  prior  to 

Respondent's  administration  of  the  CST,  and  observed  Respondent  standing  in  front  of  the 
class  and  reciting  rules  of  what  they  could  and  could  not  do  during  the  CST.  According  to 
Mr.  Solis,  Respondent  reminded  the  students  that  they  should  underline  key  words  and 
passages  in  their  test  booklets,  and  said,  “I  will  not  tell  you  what  you  need  to  do,  but  I  will 
give  you  a  Tic-Tac  if  you  are  underlining  and  remembering  what  I  taught  you.”  Mr.  Solis 
also  heard  Respondent  warning  the  students  that  if  they  did  not  underline,  she  would  be  mad 
at  them. 

  

19. 

During  the  test,  Mr.  Solis  observed  Respondent,  on  two  occasions,  pick  up  a 

booklet  from  a  student’s  hand,  review  the  booklet,  and  then  put  it  back  on  the  student’s  desk. 
Respondent  then  pointed  to  something  on  the  booklet  which  prompted  the  student  to  erase 
where  Respondent  had  pointed.  Mr.  Solis  also  observed,  on  two  occasions, Respondent 
whisper  to  students,  but  did  not  hear  what  she  had  said.  Mr.  Solis  observed  Respondent  give 
Tic  Tacs  to  two  or  three  students  during  the  test,  but  not  to  every  student  during  the  time  in 
which  he  was  in  the  classroom.  Mr.  Solis  left  Respondent’s  room  approximately  five 
minutes  before  recess,  while  testing  was  still  in  progress,  purportedly  to  attend  yard  duty. 
However,  Mr.  Solis  walked  directly  to  Ms.  Cuellar’s  office  and  reported  his  observations, 
because  he  believed  teachers  were  not  permitted  to  pick  up  test  booklets  during  the  testing. 
Ms.  Cuellar  testified  that  she  was  unaware  of  any  rule  that  prohibited  a  teacher  from  flipping 
through  a  student’s  test  booklet  to  ensure  the  bubbles  were  bubbled  correctly.  In  addition, 
Ms.  Cuellar  explained  that  if  a  teacher  observed  a  student  bubbling  incorrectly,  the  teacher 

  

    
  

   

  

  
   
   

   was  permitted  to  remind  the  student  to  bubble  correctly  and  make  a  general  statement  to  the 
       

class  to  bubble  correctly. 

20. 

  
   
   
   
students  erased  incorrect  answers  at  Respondent’s  prompting.  He  also  did  not  observe 
Respondent  reviewing  test  questions  or  passages  with  students  during  testing  and  did  not  see 
       
her  indicating  to  students  whether  their  answers  were  correct  or  not. 

During  cross  examination,  Mr.  Solis  conceded  he  did  not  see  whether  any 

    

21. 

After  Mr.  Solis  made  his  report  to  Ms.  Cuellar,  Ms.  Cuellar  immediately 

contacted  Dr.  Kim.  Dr.  Kim  directed  Mr.  Solis  to  write  a  statement  describing  what  he  had 
observed,  which  he  did. 
report  the  incident,  which  she  did.  Ms.  Cuellar  also  prepared  an  irregularity  report  reciting 
Mr.  Solis’  account  and  submitted  it  to  the  District. 

Dr.  Kim  also  instructed  Ms.  Cuellar  to  contact  the  testing  center  and 

     

22. 

Dr.  Kim  conducted  an  immediate  investigation,  which  initially  consisted  of  her 

    

randomly  selecting  four  or  five  students  from  Respondent’s  class  and  interviewing  them. 
However,  after  interviewing  those  students,  Dr.  Kim,  with  the  assistance  of  two 
    
    
administrators,  interviewed  all  21  of  Respondent’s  students.  Dr.  Kim  prepared  three 
questions  to  which  she  requested  the  students  respond:  “(1)  What  was  the  teacher  doing 
  
  
during  the  test?  (2)  Did  the  teacher  help  you,  or  any  other  student,  during  the  test?  No/Yes— 
        
Tell  me  more;  and  (3)  Did  someone  talk  or  whisper  to  you  during  the  test?  No/Yes—Who?” 

    

   

23. 

Based  on  Mr.  Solis’  report  and  some  of  the  answers  provided  by  the  students, 

Dr.  Kim  concluded  that  there  had  been  testing  irregularities  related  to  Respondent’s 
administration  of  the  CST.  Specifically,  Dr.  Kim  found  ten  problems:  (1)  Respondent  told 
her  students  that  she  would  give  them  a  Tic-Tac  if  they  were  underlining,  and  if  they  had 
failed  to  underline,  Respondent  would  be  mad  at  them;  (2)  Respondent  checked  student  test 
booklets  during  the  test  and  rewarded  students  with  a  Tic-Tac  if  they  had  gotten  the  answer 
correct;  (3)  During  the  test,  Respondent  walked  around  specific  students,  flipped  through 
their  test  booklets,  and  pointed  out  certain  items  in  the  test  booklet.  Respondent  also 
whispered  to  students,  and  afterwards,  the  students  erased  their  test  booklets;  (4)  During  the 
test,  Respondent  had  looked  through  test  booklets  and  said,  “good  job,”  while  telling  other 
students,  who  failed  to  answer  questions  correctly,  “check  your  answer;”  (5)  Respondent  told 
some  students  “good  job,”  but  did  not  tell  all  her  students  “good  job;”  (6)  Respondent  gave 
some  students,  who  had  raised  their  hands,  clues,  as  well  as  a  directive  to  “go  back  and 
correct;”  (7)  Respondent  gave  Tic-Tacs  to  students  when  they  got  answers  correct,  and  that 
Respondent  had  gone  over  the  answers  with  one  student,  and  advised  the  student  that  the 
student  had  gotten  all  of  the  answers  right;  (8)  Respondent  continued  to  say,  “check  the 
page”  repeatedly  to  students  who  had  gotten  answers  wrong;  (9)  Respondent  patted  some 
students  on  the  head  and  said,  “good  job”  when  they  answered  questions  correctly;  and  (10) 
Respondent  read a little  bit  of  the  question  to  a  few  of  her  students. 

    

On  May  18,  2012,  Dr.  Kim  conducted  a  conference  with  Respondent 
concerning  Respondent’s  administration  of  the  CST,  and  prepared  a  memorandum 

24, 

  

    

  

  
   
   

   

    
    

 

    

  
    

   

summarizing  the  conference.  Respondent  advised  Dr.  Kim  that  she  disagreed  with  the 
allegations,  and  advised  that  she  would  respond  to  Dr.  Kim’s  allegations  in  writing. 

25. 

On  May  30,  2013,  in  reference  to  the  irregularity  report  submitted  by  Ms. 

Cuellar,  Cynthia  Lim  from  the  District’s  Office  of  Data  and  Accountability  sent  Dr.  Kim  a 
letter  stating  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  testing  irregularities  by  providing  inappropriate 
assistance  to  her  students,  by  checking  students’  answers,  and  by  instructing  students  to 
check  their  answers.  Consequently,  Ms.  Lim  determined  the  students’  scores  would  not  be 
included  in  the  school’s  scores.  The  letter  did  not  mention  anything  about  Respondent’s 
distribution  of  Tic-Tacs.  Ms.  Lim  did  not  testify  at  hearing,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  she 
conducted  an  investigation  or  interviewed  any  students,  Mr.  Solis,  Respondent,  or  anyone 
In  addition,  her  one-page  letter  included  no  language  setting  forth  the  evidence  upon 
else. 
which  she  relied  when  concluding  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  testing  misconduct. 

26. 

On  May  31,  2012,  Respondent  prepared  a  written  response  to  the  allegations 

set  forth  in  Dr.  Kim’s  May  18,  2012  memorandum.  Respondent  explained  that  she  had 
implemented  the  strategies  she  learned  in  the  Dennis  Parker  training  to  improve  the 
performances  of  the  students  on  the  CST  and  did  not  violate  any  CST  testing  protocols. 
Specifically,  Respondent  denied  telling  her  students  that  she  would  give  them  a  Tic-Tac  if 
they  underlined  correctly,  and  that  she  would  be  mad  at  her  students.  Rather,  she  had  told 
her  students  during  the  pretest  “pep  rally”  that  she  would  give  them  a  Tic-Tac  if  she  saw  they 
were  on  task,  taking  time  to  read  the  passages  bubbling  correctly,  and  not  skipping  pages. 
Respondent  also  denied  checking  test  booklets  and  rewarding  students  with  a  Tic-Tac  if  they 
got  answers  correct.  Rather,  she  had  given  Tic-Tacs  to  students  for  remaining  on  task,  and 
had  given  all  students  Tic-Tacs  half-way  through  the  assessment. 

_ 

27. 

Respondent  admitted  to  flipping  through  test  booklets  to  make  sure  students 

were  on  task,  and  to  ensure  that  the  bubbles  were  complete,  which  was  how  she  was  trained 
by  District,  including  the  Dennis  Parker  training.  Respondent  denied,  at  any  time, 
whispering  to  any  students  to  have  them  change  their  answers,  but  admitted  whispering  to 
students  that  they  were  doing  a  good  job,  which  was  consistent  with  her  training  that  she 
should  encourage  her  students.  She  made  it  a  point  to  encourage  the  whole  class  out  loud 
and  to  students  individually,  randomly  and  quietly.  Respondent  also  told  students  to  go  back 
and  check  their  work  if  she  observed  them  off  task  or  bubbling  recklessly,  but  she  did  not 
give  that  directive  for  the  purpose  of  students  correcting  wrong  answers.  Respondent  denied 
giving  clues  to  students  at  any  time,  or  repeatedly  telling  students  to  check  the  page  to  get 
them  to  change  incorrect  answers.  Respondent  also  denied  checking  answers  with  a  student 
and  telling  him  that  he  had  gotten  all  of  the  questions  right.  Finally,  she  denied  reading  any 
part  of  the  questions  to  any  student. 

| 

28. 

On  June  15,  2012,  Dr.  Kim  issued  Respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts 
and  Notice  of  Suspension  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Dr.  Kim’s  May  18,  2012  memorandum. 

29. 

Four  students  testified  at  hearing  on  behalf  of  District.  iy 

N.,  who  is  11 

years  old  and  now  in  fifth  grade,  was  in  Respondent’s  third  grade  class  during  the  2011-2012 

 

  

  

school  year  and  took  the  CST  in  Respondent’s  class.  DEBE  recalled  Respondent  giving  her 
and  other  students  Tic-Tacs  for  underlining  key  words  during  the  test  and  remembered  her 
giving  all  students  the  same  amount  of  Tic-Tacs.  When  students  needed  help,  Respondent 
told  them  to  do  their  best.  She  saw  Respondent  whisper  to  students,  but  could  not  hear  what 
Respondent  said.  Denise  did  not  see  Respondent  give  students  any  answers,  but  did  observe 
her  tell  students  “good  job”  when  they  finished  their  test. 

30.  vm  G.,  who  is  11 

years  old  and  now  in  fifth  grade,  was  also  in 

recalled  Respondent  telling  the  class  to  underline 

Respondent’s  third  grade  class.  D 
key  words  and  to  go  back  to  the  story  to  try  to  find  answers.  Respondent  gave  them  Tic-Tacs 
when  they  underlined  key  words.  Everybody  received  the  same  amount  of  Tic-Tacs.  When  . 
students  asked  Respondent  a  question  during  the  test,  Respondent  told  them  she  could  not 
help  them  and  encouraged  them  to  go  back  to  the  story  to  try  to  find  the  answer. 
Respondent  told  everybody  to  do  their  best. 

31.  =  is  10  years  old  and  now  in  fifth  grade,  was  in  Respondent’s 

third  grade  class.  J 
recalled  Respondent  telling  the  students  before  the  test  to  underline 
key  words  and  to  do  their  best.  During  the  test,  Respondent  walked  around  the  class  to  make 
sure  no  one  was  cheating.  Respondent  gave  all  of  the  students  Tic-Tacs  approximately  half 
way  through  the  test,  by  putting  he  Tic-Tacs  right  on  their  desks  next  to  their  test  booklets. 
All  students  received  the  same  amount  of  Tic-Tacs.  When  some  students  finished  their  test 
early,  Respondent  told  them  to  go  back  and  check  their  work  and  to  make  sure  they  filled  in 
the  bubbles  correctly.  J said  that  when  some  students  raised  their  hands  and  asked 
Respondent  what  a  word  was,  Respondent  reminded  them  to  sound  out  the  word  and  to  use 
syllables  to  figure  out  the  word. 

. 

32. 

PR 

..  who  is  10  years  old  and  now  in  fifth  grade,  was  in  Respondent’s 

third  grade  class.  Pfrecalled  Respondent  told  them  before  the  test  to  underline  key  words 
and  to  read  passages  twice.  During  the  test,  Respondent  told  him  in  a  low  voice  to  underline 
key  words  and  believes  she  said  the  same  thing  to  two  other  students,  Eand  Z 
   
stated  he  did  not  hear  what  Respondent  said  to  Efand 
During  cross-examination, PE 
recalled  having  a  difficult  time  taking  the  test,  and  that  he  had  gotten  upset 
during  the  test.  Respondent  told  him  not  to  be  afraid,  and  that  it  was  only  a  test.  During  his 
testimony,  Pm  seemed  confused,  scared,  and  sometimes  appeared  to  be  making  up 
answers.  Often  times  during  questioning  he  stared  blankly  and  did  not  produce  an  audible 
response.  For  these  reasons,  P 
testimony  was  afforded  very  little  weight. 

s  credibility  was  considered  questionable,  and  his 

Pi 

33. 

Respondent,  who  had  been  teaching  for  18  years  at  the  time  of  the  CST  in 

question,  testified  at  hearing,  and  reiterated  her  denial  of  each  of  the  charges.  Respondent 
told  students  before  the  test  that  she  would  distribute  Tic-Facs  when  they  reached  number  20 
on  the  exam  and  reminded  them  to  follow  test  strategies  such  as  underlining  key  words. 
During  the  test,  she  walked  around  the  class,  complimented  students  individually  throughout 
the  test,  and  made  sure  students  bubbled  properly.  When  she  saw  any  students  bubbling 
improperly,  she  would  tell  them  in  a  low  voice  to  bubble  properly  or  to  erase  stray  marks. 

  

 

When  students  finished  before  the  allotted  time,  Respondent  would  tell  them  to  go  back  and 
   
   
check  their  work.  Prior  to  the  2012  CST,  Respondent  had  never  been  accused  of  committing 
  
  
testing  irregularities. 
      

34. 

July  Hall  provided  character  testimony  on  Respondent’s  behalf.  Ms.  Hall 

became  a  teacher  in  1977  and  then  served  as  a  principal  from  2004  to  2009  for  District  at  El 
    
    
Dorado  Elementary  School  (El  Dorado).  Ms.  Hall  worked  with  Respondent  at  El  Dorado 
and  found  her  to  be  very  dedicated  to  her  students.  Respondent  went  above  and  beyond  the 
   
   
call  of  duty  and  was  very  skilled  as  a  teacher  and  leader  at  the  school.  Ms.  Hall  often  used 
  
  
Respondent  as  a  model  teacher  and  appointed  Respondent  as  a  temporary  literacy  coach. 
  
  
Ms.  Hall  considered  Respondent  a  very  ethical,  child-centered  person,  who  always  sought 
  
  
ways  for  her  students  to  be  successful.  As  a  teacher  at  El  Dorado,  Ms.  Hall  never  had  reason 
        
to  question  Respondent’s  honesty  or  integrity. 

35. 

Karina  Murillo,  who  served  as  Respondent’s  assistant  from  February  2012  to 

June  2012,  provided  character  testimony.  Prior,  Ms.  Murillo  had  served  as  proctor  in 
Respondent’s  class  for  the  CST  she  administered  in  May  2011.  During  the  time  in  which  she 
proctored  Respondent’s  class,  Ms.  Murillo  never  observed  Respondent  engage  in  any 
inappropriate  conduct  or  witnessed  her  help  students  cheat.  Ms.  Murillo  considered 
Respondent  a  “fantastic”  teacher. 

    
   
       
    
    

Bobbie  Zwick,  who  has  been  a  third  grade  teacher  at  Erwin  for  15  years, 

36. 

provided  character  testimony  on  Respondent’s  behalf.  Ms.  Zwick  has  observed  Respondent 
in  her  classroom  and  found  her  impressive.  Respondent  developed  a  lot  of  additional 
practice  and  strategies  for  fellow  third  grade  teachers  to  help  students  reach  their  full 
potential.  Because  of  Respondent’s  contributions,  the  third  grade  scores  improved  on  the 
past  CSTs.  For  the  2011-2012  CST,  Ms.  Zwick  did  not  recall  receiving  a  directive  not  to 
distribute  Tic-Tacs  during  the  test  or  not  to  speak  to  students  during  the  test. 
distribute  Tic-Tacs  during  the  test,  and  encouraged  students  individually  and  collectively 
during  the  test  by  saying,  “You  can  do  it.” 
In  addition,  she  told  her  students  to  erase  stray 
marks  and  walked  around  to  ensure  students  bubbled  their  answer  sheets  correctly.  After 
learning  about  the  charges  against  Respondent  Ms.  Zwick  was  frightened  and  believed  it 
scared  the  other  their  grade  teachers  as  weil,  because  the  charges  made  against  Respondent 
could  have  been  made  against  any  one  of  them. 

In  fact,  she  did 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

   

   
  
  
   

1. 

Absent a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

   

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 
Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal-App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden  of  proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations.
    

    

   
  
  
   

   

   

    
  
  
    
      
  

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

5. 

(a) 

4, 

6. 

more  of  the  following  causes: 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

dismissal  hearing.  (Sections  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two  members  of 
the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  respondent  and  one  by  the 
district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission 
may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of 
dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Section  44944,  subdivision 
()\A)G).) 

 
    

  

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(3)  Dishonesty. 

[N]...  [9] 

[M]  ..  .  [1] 

[TF]...  ["] 

10 

    
(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
ot  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
  
   
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
   
   
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 
   
[t]...  [9] 
    
     
Section  44932,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  a  district  may  suspend  a 
permanent  employee  without  pay  for  a  specific  period  of  time  if  it  follows  the  same 
      
procedures  as  for  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee. 
        
8. 
   
   
  
  

Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

7. 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 
statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
.  the 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 
the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 
30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

.  with  willful  refusal  to 

. 

. 

9. 

Here,  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)), 
immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),  dishonesty  (section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(3)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  or 
willful  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)).  All  of 
District’s  charges  stem  from  allegations  of  testing  misconduct,  as  set  forth  in  Dr.  Kim’s  May 
18,  2012  memorandum,  which  were,  in  essence,  mirrored  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of 
Charges.  Dr.  Kim  based  these  allegations  on  information  provided  by  Mr.  Solis,  as  well  as 
by  some  students  in  their  responses  to  her  interview  questions. 

10. 

District  failed  to  present  credible  evidence  to  support  these  allegations  Dr. 

Kim  made  as  set  forth  in  Finding  23.  None  of  the  student  witnesses  proffered  by  the  District 
corroborated  Mr.  Solis’  account  that  Respondent  would  be  mad  at  them  if  they  had  failed  to 
underline  key  words.  In  addition,  none  of  the  student  witnesses  testified  that  Respondent 
rewarded  them  with  Tic-Tacs  if  they  had  gotten  answers  correct,  but  rather  that  all  students 
received  an  equal  amount  of  Tic-Tacs.  In  addition,  none  of  the  student  witnesses  had 
changed  any  of  their  answers,  or  witnessed  other  students  change  their  answers,  pursuant  to 
any  purported  prompting  on  Respondent’s  part.  Moreover,  none  of  the  student  witnesses, 
with  the  exception  of  Pablo,  whose  testimony  wasdeemednot  credible,  testified  they  were 
given  any  clues  of  any  sort.  While  Julissa  testified  that  when  some  students  raised  their 
hands  and  asked  Respondent  what  a  word  was,  which  prompted  Respondent  to  remind  them 

    
            
                
          

  
    

11 

    

   

    

    

   

 

to  sound  out  the  word,  such  action  was  sanctioned  by  the  official  written  CST  instructions 
described  in  Finding  10. 
testified  that  Respondent  had  gone  over  answers  with  any  students,  read  any  questions  to  any 
students,  or  told  students  to  go  back  and  correct  answers. 

In  addition,  contrary  to  the  allegations,  none  of  the  students 

11. 

On  the  contrary,  the  student  witnesses  established  that  Respondent  had 

followed  proper  testing  protocol.  Specifically,  each  of  the  students  testified  that  Respondent 
had  said  “good  job”  during  the  test,  which  was  consistent  with  the  District’s  training  she  had 
received  from  Dennis  Parker  concerning  active  proctoring  and  was  in  line  with  the  official 
written  CST  instructions  permitting  teachers  to  “encourage  students  to  do  their  best”  during 
the  test. 
In  addition,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Julissa,  when  some  students  finished  their 
test  early,  Respondent  told  them  to  go  back  and  check  their  work  and  to  make  sure  they  filled 
in  the  bubbles  correctly.  Such  action  was  consistent  with  the  official  written  CST 
instructions  as  well  as  the  District  training  provided  by  Ms.  Cuellar. 

12. 

To  the  extent  that  Dr.  Kim  took  issue  with  Respondent  for  talking  to  students 
during  the  administration  of  the  CST,  which  Dr.  Kim  believed  was  prohibited,  the  evidence 
does  not  support  this  belief.  Specifically,  the  official  written  CST  instructions  clearly 
permitted  teachers  to  talk  to  students  during  the  test,  by  giving  students  words  of 
encouragement,  or  by  reminding  them  to  bubble  their  answers  properly,  for  example.  In 
addition,  Ms.  Cuellar  testified  that  teachers  could  make  general  comments  to  students  during 
the  CST,  and  could  tell  individual  students  to  stay  on  task  if  necessary. 

13. 

To  the  extent  that  Dr.  Kim  took  issue  with  Respondent  for  distributing  Tic- 

Tacs  during  the  test,  instead  of  before  the  test  only,  neither  Ms.  Cuellar  nor  Ms.  Zwick 
recalled  Dr.  Kim  verbally  instructing  the  teachers  not  to  distribute  Tic-Tacs  during  the  test. 
Indeed,  Ms.  Cuellar  credibly  explained  that  the  purpose  of  the  Tic-Tacs  was  to  keep  the 
students  alert,  so,  according  to  Ms.  Cuellar,  it  would  not  have  been  improper  for  teachers  to 
distribute  Tic-Tacs  during  the  middle  of  the  test. 

14. 

Finally,  to  the  extent  Dr.  Kim  took  issue  with  Respondent  for  flipping  through 

test  booklets  during  the  test,  the  evidence  showed  that  such  action  was  sanctioned  by  the 
official  written  CST  instructions.  Specifically,  the  CST  instructions  provided  that  teachers 
could  “check  periodically  to  make  sure  that  students  [were]  working  on  the  correct  test  part 
and  following  instructions.” 

  

15. 

Notwithstanding  Dr.  Kim’s  concerns  about  Respondent’s  administration  of  the 

2012  CST,  Dr.  Kim  firmly  established  that  Respondent  was  a  conscientious  and  effective 
teacher,  evidenced  by  Dr.  Kim  sending  other  third  grade  teachers  to  Respondent’s  class  to 
learn  good  practices  and  strategies  to  use  in  their  own  classrooms.  This  belief  was  shared  by 
Ms.  Hall,  Ms.  Murillo,  and  Ms.  Zwick  who  had  worked  closely  with  Respondent  and 
considered  Respondent  a  “fantastic”  teacher.  During  the  18  years  Respondent  had  been 
teaching,  which  required  her  to  administer  the  CST  on  a  number  of  occasions,  she  had  never 
been  accused  of  committing  any  testing  irregularities.  The  evidence  does  not  show  she 
committed  any  in  this  matter  either.

    
    

  

  

  

16.  |  In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (/d.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  9,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

L. 

CARLA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

CHARLENE  SHIMADA 
Commission  Member 

  

LUCIANO  ORTIZ 
Commission  Member 

13

  

   

«May  09  2014  3:33PM 

HP  LagERJET  FAX 

J 

p.2 

16. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involying  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  (/d.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

  
Commission  Member   

CARLA  L,  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

CHARLENE  SHIMADA 
Commission  Member 

DATED:  May  4,  2014 

DATED:  May  _,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

LUCIANO  ORTIZ 

« 

: 

; 

  
  

May  09  14  02:22p 

Luciano  Ortiz 

(805)  983-2708 

pi 

16. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of. Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
Califormia  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  ateacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 
conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (id.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May  __,  2014 

DATED:  May4_,  2014 

oe 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Commission  Member     

CHARLENE  SHIMADA 

Commission  Member

  

  

