BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OCEANSIDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

BONNIE  BAYHAM, 

OAH  No.  2013051042 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  of  the  Oceanside  Unified  School 

District  heard  this  matter  in  Oceanside,  California,  on  August  6,  8,  9,  12,  13,  September  17, 
18,  and  October  9,  2013,  and  in  San  Diego,  California  on  October  10,  2013.  The 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  included  Heather  Bice,  Haywood  Finder  and 

-  Valiera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  who  served  as  chairperson. 

Daniel  R.  Shinoff,  Esq.  and  Kaley  A.  Lichtman,  Esq.,  Stutz  Artiano  Shinoff  &  Holtz, 

represented  Complainant  Shelly  Morr,  Ed.D.,  Associate  Superintendent  of  Human 
Resources,  Oceanside  Unified  School  District. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Esq.,  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool,  &  Wax,  represented  Respondent 

Bonnie  Bayham. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  October  15,  2013.' 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Shelly  Morr,  Ed.D.  is  the  Associate  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  of 

the  Oceanside  Unified  School  District  (OUSD). 

  

The  hearing  concluded  on  October  10,  2013.  The  record  remained  open  for  receipt  of 

' 
a  Stipulation  to  Admit  Exhibits  and  a  Proposed  Sealing  Order.  The  Administrative  Law 
Judge  executed  the  Sealing  Order.  The  foregoing  documents  were  received  on  October  14, 

2013.  The  Stipulation  to  Admit  Exhibits  is  marked  Exhibit  385.   

2. 

Bonnie  Bayham  (Respondent)  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

OUSD.  She  possesses  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  English  and 
Supplementary  Authorizations  in  Mathematics  and  Art.  Prior  to  her  suspension,  Respondent 
had  been  employed  by  OUSD  for  12  years,  assigned  to  El  Camino  High  School  (ECHS). 
During  her  tenure  at  ECHS,  Respondent  taught  courses  that  she  was  qualified  to  teach. 
During  2012/13  school  year,  she  taught  three  periods  of  Art  1,  one  period  of  English  9  — 
advanced  placement,  and  one  period  of  English  9  —  college  prep. 

3. 

While  at  ECHS,  Respondent  had  two  principals  and  different  vice-principals. 
Robert  Rowe  (Rowe)  has  been  principal  at  ECHS  since  the  2011/12  school  year.  Dan  Daris 
was  principal  at  ECHS  for  eight  years  prior;  the  last  year  was  the  2010/11  school  year. 
At 
one  time  or  another,  the  vice-principals  were  Freddie  Chavarria  (Chavarria)*,  Oscar  Felix 
(Felix),  Chris  Hurst  (Hurst),  Stephanie  LoCasio  (LoCasio),  Julie  Johnson  (Johnson),  Barbara 
Perez  (Perez)  and  Barry  Tyler  (Tyler)’.  The  teacher  on  special  assignment  was  Kevin 
Thompson  (Thompson). 

Discipline  System 

4, 

Complainant  alleged  that  Respondent  did  not  follow  OUSD  or  ECHS  student 
discipline  protocols,  that  this  conduct  led  to  chaos  in  the  administrative  office  and  a  lack  of 
notice  to  parents  of  student  discipline;  in  one  case  Respondent  did  not  tell  the  parent  that  the 
student  was  having  problems  until  after  11  incidents  occurred. 

5. 

During  Respondent’s  tenure  at  OUSD,  the  district  had  policies  relevant  to 

student  discipline.  The  OUSD  Board  policies  and  regulations  refer  to  other  relevant  policies, 
regulations  and  California  statutes. 

e 

OUSD/BP  5144  Students  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  Board  of  Education  desires  to  prepare  students  for 
responsible  citizenship  by  fostering  self-discipline  and  personal 
responsibility.  The  Board  believes  that  high  expectations  for 
student  behavior,  effective  classroom  management  and  student 
involvement  can  minimize  the  need  for  discipline.  Staff  shall 
use  preventative  measures  and  positive  conflict  resolution 
techniques  whenever  possible. 

- 

Board  policies  and  regulations  shall  delineate  acceptable  student 
conduct  and  provide  the  basis  for  sound  disciplinary  practices. 

  

Chavarria  served  as  vice-principal  at  ECHS  between  fall  2010  until  the  end  of 

2012/13  school  year. 

3 

Tyler  was  vice-principal  at  ECHS  between  fall  2010  and  January  1,  2013. 

  

2 

 

Each  school  shall  develop  disciplinary  rules  to  meet  the  school’s 
individual  needs. 

When  misconduct  occurs,  staff  shall  implement  appropriate  discipline  and 
attempt  to  identify  and  address  the  causes  of  the  student’s  behavior.  Continually 
disruptive  students  may  be  assigned  to  alternative  programs  or  removed  from  school 
in  accordance  with  law,  Board  policy  and  administrative  regulation.  At  all  times,  the 
safety  of  students  and  staff  and  the  maintenance  of  an  orderly  school  environment 
shall  be  priorities  in  determining  appropriate  discipline. 

The  Superintendent  or  designee  shall  provide  professional 
development  as  necessary  to  assist  staff  in  developing  classroom 
management  skills  and  implementing  effective  disciplinary 
techniques. 

e  OUSD  AR  5144  Students  sets  forth  the  OUSD’s  list  of  appropriate 

disciplinary  consequence.  It  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

1. 

 
n
W
w

 
k
v

 
o
s
8. 

9. 

The  classroom  teacher  under  California  law  is  given  the 
authority  to  act  in  the  place  of  the  parent  during  the  time  the 
student  is  under  the  teacher’s  direction.  To  ensure  suitable 
control  the  teacher  in  this  school  district  may  use  the  following 
means  of  control: 

Confer  with  student  and  explain  the  district’s  school  behavior 
policy. 
Take  away  privileges  enjoyed  by  other  students. 
Lower  a  student’s  citizenship  rating. 
Assign  special  tasks  that  must  be  completed  at  a  specified  time. 
Contact  the  parents  so  that  mutual  action  can  be  taken  to  correct 
the  abnormal  behavior  patterns  of  the  student. 
Detention  after  school.... 
Recess  restriction. 
Except  when  suspension  or  expulsion  is  required  by  law,  the 
Board  of  Education,  the  Superintendent,  principal’s  designee,  at 
his/her  discretion,  may  require  a  student  to  perform  community 
service  on  school  grounds  during  nonschool  hours  instead  of 
imposing  other  disciplinary  action.... 
Refer  student  to  school  administration  for  correction  and 
control. 

Site-Level  Rules 

It  shall  be  the  duty  of  each  employee  of  the  school  to  enforce  the 
school  rules  on  student  discipline.  (Education  Code  35291) 

3

  

6. 

Implementing  the  OUSD  Board  policy  and  regulation,  OUSD  developed  Form 
5144.1-2  (Notice  of  Suspension  By  a  Teacher  [In-School-Suspension])  (Form 
5144.1-2).  This  form  is  completed  by  the  teacher  and  provides  information  to 
administrators  regarding  actions  taken  by  the  teacher  prior  to  requesting  an  in- 
school  suspension. 

7. 

ECHS  had  procedures  that  teachers  were  expected  to  follow  regarding  student 
discipline.  Between  2008  and  2012,  administrators  sent  emails  to  certificated  staff  at  ECHS 
and  to  Respondent  individually  regarding  the  school’s  student  discipline  protocols. 

The  school’s  administrators  expected  teachers  to  implement  progressive  student 

discipline.  When  teachers  sent  students  to  the  vice-principals’  office  for  referrals, 
administrators  at  ECHS  expected  teachers  to  complete  the  school’s  referral  form;  when 
teachers  imposed  in-school  suspension,  ECHS  administrators  expected  teachers  to  complete 
Form  5144.1-2. 

8. 

Respondent  had  classroom  expectations  and  policies.  She  included  them in 
her  syllabus’  and  posted  them  on  the  board in  her  classroom.  In  her  syllabus  for  2012/13, 
Respondent  stated,  in  pertinent  part: 

e 

e 

e 

e 

¢ 

Students  are  expected  to  follow  all  school  rules.  ...  Know 
the  rules.  Follow  them. 
Students  are  expected  to  follow  all  school  attendance  and 
tardy  policies.  ... 
Students  are  expected  to  be  respectful  of  all  persons,  all 
property  and  all  beliefs  of  others.  ... 
Students  must  be  in  their  assigned  seats,  supplies  on  the  desk 
[sic],  backpacks  under  the  desk,  electronic  devices  off  and 
out  of  sight  when  the  bell  rings  or  the  student  will  be  marked 
tardy.  ... 
Cell  phones  and  other  electronic  equipment  are  to  be  off  and 
out  of  sight  from  bell  to  bell.  ... 

Respondent  testified  that  she  imposed  in-classroom  progressive  discipline  for  student 
misbehavior  that  included  changing  the  student’s  seat  or  calling  the  student’s  parent. 

9. 

At  least  since  the  2009/10  school  year,  Respondent’s  administrators  had 

concerns  about  her  method  of  student  discipline,  consistency  of  discipline  and  the  number  of 
referrals  and/or  in-school  suspensions  that  she  made  without  complying  with  the  school’s 
protocol  for  doing  so. 

  

4 

Exhibit  165 

 

10. 

Anemail  from  Daris  to  ECHS-Certificated,  dated  November  3,  2008, 

regarding  behavioral  referrals  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

This  is  just  a  reminder  of  the  referral  procedures  that  the  staff 
club  and  administration  developed  a  number  of  years  ago.  After 
a  teacher  has  completed  in  class  room  [sic]  progressive 
discipline  steps  with  a  student  to  affect  behavior  change,  they 
[sic]  will  then  take  the  next  steps  [sic].  The  next  step  is  parent 
contact  by  email  or  phone  correspondence  with  an  agreed  upon 
plan  of  support  from  home.  (Teleparent  [sic]  calls  do  not  meet 
this  step.)  This  correspondence  by  teacher  and  parent  is 
essential  to  support  possible  future  disciplinary  action  by  the 
administration.  Once  a  teacher  has  taken  that  correspondence 
step  and  have  [sic]  agreed  upon  support  from  home,  hopefully 
the  behavior  will  change.  If  at  that  point  the  behavior  has  not 
changed,  then  it  becomes  appropriate  for  a  behavior  referral  to 
be  written  to  the  assistant  principal’s  [sic]  office.  (Please  make 
sure  you  write  the  date  that  you  corresponded  with  the 
parents  about  the  behavior  issues  on  the  referral.)  Ifa 
referral  does  not  have  that  information  on  it,  it  will  be  returned 
to  the  teacher  to  make  sure  those  steps  have  happened. 
Remember  a  behavior  referral  is  to  be  related  to  disruptive 
behavior  in  class  that  affects  teaching  or  learning  environment. 
Items  such  as:  no  homework,  no  supplies,  not  doing  class  work, 
non-suits  are  not  items  to  refer  a  student  to  the  assistant 
principal’s  [sic]  office  for  a  behavior  issue.  Lack  of  engagement 
in  the  learning  process  is  not  a  behavior  issue. 
If  a  student  is  engaged  in  serious  behavior  conduct  [sic] 
(defiance,  violence,  gang  activity,  or  other  very  serious 
behavior)  a  teacher  can  sent  [sic]  them  [sic]  to  the  assistant 
principal’s  [sic]  office.  When  you  do  this  you  MUST  direct  the 
student  to  go  directly  to  the  assistant  principal’s  [sic]  office  and 
sign  in.  At  your  earliest  convenience  please  send  up  a  referral 
with  the  details  [Emphasis  Added]....  Teachers  have  the 
authority  to  assign  after  school  detention  directly  to  a  student. 
They  do  not  have  the  authority  to  assign  Saturday  School  or 
suspension  from  school.  Only  an  administrator  can  make  these 
assignments.  If  the  entire  faculty  follows  these  procedures,  it 
will  be  a  great  support  to  all  teachers,  administration,  security, 
office  staff,  students  and  parents....° 

  

5 

Exhibit  114 

 

11. 

Ten  days  later,  Respondent  sent  three  students  to  the  office;  she  told  the 

students  to  check-in  with  the  vice-principals’  secretary;  she  “alerted”  the  vice-principals’ 
secretary  “to  the  issue”  and  told  her  “paperwork  would  follow  as  I  am  engaged  in  teaching 
the  students.”  Four  hours  later,  Respondent  wrote  an  email  to  Hurst,  explained  the  foregoing 
as  well  as  the  reason  it  would  have  been  disruptive  to  write  the  referrals  during  class  time. 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  email,  she  asked  “Do  you  still  want  me  to  write  the  referrals  so  the 
APs  can  talk  to  the  students?”  Hurst  responded  yes.° 

12. 

In  October  2009,  Chavarria  had  a  conversation  with  Respondent  about  sending 

students  to  the  office  for  class  suspension  without  completing  Form  5144.1-2.  By  email, 
dated  October  27,  2009,  Chavarria  provided  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  this  two-sided  form.’ 

13. 

In  the  email  to  ECHS-Certificated,  dated  October  29,  2009,  Daris  explained 

that  having  students  stand  outside  a  classroom  for  behavior  or  attendance  reasons  is  a  proper 
classroom  management  strategy,  but  it  should  not  last  more  than  a  few  minutes  because  these 
students  become  a  disruption  for  other  classrooms;  if  a  teacher  needs  to  get  a  student  out  of 
class  for  more  than  a  few  minutes,  “please  send  the  student  to  the  assistant  principals’  office 
with  a  referral  stating  the  reason  why.”® 

14. 

In  September  2010,  Respondent  was  not  using  the  OUSD  required  form  to 

assign  class  suspensions.  Tyler  requested  that  Respondent  use  Form  5144.1-2  to  assign  class 
suspensions  and  provided  her  a  copy  of  the  form.  He  asked  that  she  submit  the  form 
completed  and  signed  to  her  site  administrator.” 

In  an  email  to  Tyler,  dated  September  28,  2010,  Respondent  stated,  in  pertinent  part, 

The  form  5144  1-2,  an  electronic  copy  of  which  you  forwarded 
by  email,  is  not  a  form  we  have  used  at  ECHS.  It  is  a  four  part 
[sic]  form  and  is  not  a  form  we  have  had  [sic]  nor  currently 
have  available  to  teachers.  If  and  when  those  forms  are 
available  and  use  of  those  forms  become  /sic]  an  expectation  of 
all  teachers,  I  will  of  course  meet  the  expectation. 

  

6 

7 

8 

? 

Exhibit  113 

Exhibit  104 

Exhibit  107 

Exhibit  95

  

15. 
she  stated: 

|  Inamemorandum  from  Perez,  dated  December  9,  2010,  to  ECHS-Certificated, 

Just  a  reminder  that  when  you  send  a  student  to  the  office,  we 
need  the  paperwork  as  soon  as  possible  [emphasis  added]  in 
order  to  deal  with  the  student  appropriately.’° 

Rowe  testified  that  “as  soon  as  possible”  meant  with  the  student  or  within  15  minutes. 

16. 

| Rowe  described  the  procedures  for  student  discipline  in  a  memorandum  to 

ECHS,  dated  September  1,  2011.''  This  memorandum  stated,  in  pertinent  part: 

l. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 

6. 

1, 

2. 

3. 

Assigning  Detention  Process: 

Teacher  proceeds  through  establish  [sic]  classroom  progressive 
discipline  system. 
Teacher  contacts  parents  (e.g.,  School  Loop,  Tele-parent  or 
personal  call). 
Teacher  submits  After  School  Detention  Form  to 
Administration. 
Teachers  [sic]  keep  [sic]  a  record  and  are  done. 
Students  [sic]  report  to  detention  the  next  day.  (24  hour  notice 
must  be  given) 
Administration  will  monitor  and  follow  up  on  any  no  shows. 

Progressive  Administrative  Discipline  if  a  student  fails  to 
show  to  a  teacher  assigned  after  school  detention 

Security  follows  up  the  next  day-pulls  the  student/s  out  of  class 
for  a  minute.  Parents  are  contacted  and  student  is  assigned 
detention  for  that  day  until  4:00  p.m. 
If  student  fails  to  show,  he/she  is  assigned  to  Saturday  School 
from  8:00  a.m.  to  11:00  a.m. 
If  students  [sic]  fails  [sic]  to  show  to  Saturday  school,  he/she  is 
assigned  ON  Campus  Suspension  and/or  suspension. 

Student  Behaviors  continue  and  warrant  a  “Referral”  when 
progressive  discipline  and  detentions  failed 

 
o
w

 
—

10 

  

Exhibit  92 

Teacher  makes  personal  phone  call  or  contact  with  parent. 
Teacher  submits  referral  to  administration. 

Exhibit  86   

MN 

3. 

Administration  will  follow  up  with  discipline  that  is  deemed  — 
appropriate  (e.g.  student  removed  from  class  for  a  day  or  two, 
lunch  detentions,  OCS,  Saturday  School  and/or  home 
suspension). 

*Note:  Progressive  discipline  may  be  by-passed  for  severe 

violations  (e.g.  Zero  Tolerance  Offenses). 

17. 

In  September  2012,  a  meeting  was  held  to  discuss  procedures  that  Respondent 

was  required  to  follow  for  sending  students  to  the  office,  timelines  to  complete  the  referral 
and  suspension  protocol  versus  sending  emails  and  Respondent’s  failure  to  follow  the 
foregoing  procedure.  Present  at  the  meeting  were  Tyler,  Johnson,  Perez  and  Terry  Hart,  the 
Oceanside  Teachers’  Association  (OTA)  [union]  representative.  Hart  agreed  to  pass  on  the 
concerns  to  Respondent.  After  the  meeting,  Respondent  continued  to  send  students  to  the 
office  (six  in  one  day)  without  referral  forms. 

By  email,  dated  October  18,  2012,  Chavarria  asked  Respondent  to  write  referrals  for 
the  six  students  that  she  sent  to  the  office  and  to  follow  the  protocol  of  calling  parents  when 
giving  detentions.  Rather  than  send  the  referrals,  on  the  same  date,  Respondent  replied  with 
an  email;  in  this  email,  she  stated  that  it  was  not  her  intention  to  class  suspend  and  explained 
what  happened.'? 
pertinent  part: 

Chavarria  responded  to  her  email  the  following  day.  He  stated,  in 

The  emails  are  helpful  but  not  necessary  as  additional 
information  to  supplement  referrals... 

Please  follow  the  following  protocol  that  all  teachers  follow  and 
that  we  addressed  last  year  with  you  and  Terry  Hart.  Following 
this  protocol  will  help  us  properly  document  referrals  and 
consequences  and  also  ensures  that  students  are  seen  by  the 
administrator  by  alpha  case  load. 

 
e
N

3. 

Write  a  referral  and  submit  to  Sue. 
If  the  violation  is  chronic  or  severe  contact  security,  give  brief 
explanation  to  security  regarding  the  removal  and  submit  a 
referral  as  soon  as  possible  so  that  the  administrator  can  address 
and  determine  the  appropriate  consequence  warranted. 
If  you  are  class  suspending  a  student,  please  ensure  you  contact 
the  parent  to  explain  the  class  suspension  and  to  schedule  a 
parent  conference  and  notify  administrator  regarding  the 
meeting.' 

  

12 

Exhibit  57 

3 

Exhibits  55  and  189

  

18. 

Chavarria  coordinated  student  conferences  because  he  believed  that 

Respondent  would  not  do  so. 

19. 

Tyler  was  concerned  about  Bayham’s  parent  conferences  and  advised  her  of 

his  concern.  Respondent  was  concerned  about  Tyler’s  handling  of  parent  conferences 
because,  in  her  opinion,  he  treated  her  inappropriately  in  the  presence  of  a  parent  and  student. 
She  insisted  on  having  a  union  representative  present  during  parent  conferences  but  held 
parent  conferences  without  a  union  representative  present. 

No  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  Tyler  or  any  other  administrator  informed 

Respondent  that  having  the  union  representative  present  was  improper.  In  fact,  the  evidence 
was  the  contrary;  Tyler  testified  that  he  authorized  Respondent  to  have  a  union  representative 
present  during  a  parent  conference. 

20. 

Respondent  objected  to  parent  conferences  being  scheduled  during  her  prep 

period.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  did  not  schedule  and/or  attend  parent 
conferences  as  required  by  the  District  and  ECHS. 

21. 

Administrators  expected  Respondent  to  follow  the  protocol  for  student 

discipline  and  send  students  to  the  office  with  referral  forms  and/or  the  Form  5144.1-2,  when 
appropriate.  Administrators  repeatedly  requested  that  Respondent  follow  the  protocols.  In 
addition,  Sue  DeGraft  (DeGraft),  the  secretary  for  vice-principals,  complained  to 
administrators  about  problems  associated  with  Respondent’s  failure  to  follow  ECHS’s 
procedure  for  student  discipline. 

Rather  than  send  students  to  the  office  with  the  completed  referral  form  or  the 

completed  Form  5144.1-2,  typically  Respondent  emailed  the  administrative  secretary  or 
assistant  principal  regarding  the  reason  for  sending  the  student  to  the  office;  if  she  did  not 
send  the  referral  or  Form  5144.1-2  with  the  student,  at  times,  she  sent  the  appropriate  referral 
within  24  hours.  She  testified  that  she  did  not  understand  until  the  hearing  that 
administrators  wanted  the  students  to  bring  the  referral  forms  with  them  or  within  15 
minutes. 

ECHS  administrators  had  a  progressive  discipline  policy  (written)  that  they  expected 

teachers  to  follow;  this  included  a  procedure  that  the  teachers  were  to  follow  when  issuing 
referrals  and/or  in-school  suspension. 

Respondent’s  implementation  of  progressive  discipline  and  the  referral  process  was 

inconsistent.  Because  of  the  number  of  referrals  that  she  made-and  the  type  of  behavior 
exhibited  by  the  students,  it  was  impractical  for  her  to  follow  the  school’s  policy  on  every 

occasion.   

22. 

For  at  least  three  years,  ECHS  administrators  informed  teachers  and 

Respondent  individually  about  the  school’s  procedures  for  imposing  progressive  discipline, 
issuing  referrals  and  teacher  suspension.  On  a  regular  basis,  Respondent  did  not  comply. 
Classroom  Management 

23. 

Complainant  alleged  that  Respondent  regularly  failed  to  provide  required 

educational  instruction  and  supervision  of  her  students,  as  demonstrated  by  her  classroom 
management  problems  and  that  Respondent  failed  to  use  ECHS’s  mandatory  procedure  for 
discipline. 

24, 

Respondent  is  an  experienced  teacher.  There  is  no  question  about  her  — 

instructional  skills  or  ability  or  willingness  to  volunteer  to  help  students  improve  basic  skills 
and  grades.  However,  there  is  some  question  about  whether  Respondent  respects  the  right  of 
all  students  to  an  education. 

25. 

During  2012/13  school  year,  at  ECHS,  700  students  were  enrolled  in  English 

9.  Respondent  was  one  of  six  teachers  of  this  class.  Respondent  requested  and  OUSD 
provided  the  names  of  students  who  had  School  Safety  Act  (SSA)  violations.'*  Respondent 
did  not  have  the  facts  and  circumstances  underlying  the  violations.  There  was  no  evidence 
that  she  had  a  greater  percentage  of  SSA  violators  than  any  other  teacher.  However,  80%  of 
the  referrals  for  discipline  came  from  Respondent,  who  had  78  students. 

26. 

Chavarria  and  Felix  worked  with  the  OTA  representative  and  Respondent  to 
conduct  observations  and  to  provide  suggestions  on  how  to  improve  classroom  supervision 
and  educational  instruction.  Chavarria  advised  that  the  incident  in  February  2013  was  part  of 
a  “pattern  of  poor  classroom  management”  and  that  her  class  was  out  of  control. 

27. 

Respondent  became  upset  when  administrators  observed  her  class.  In 

September  2012,  Chavarria  observed  Respondent’s  class;  the  following  day,  Respondent 
emailed  him  and  expressed  concern  that  he  was  there  to  evaluate  her  teaching.  Chavarria 
explained  that  he  was  there  to  observe  her  classroom  dynamics  on  an  informal  basis  to  assist 
in  determining  her  need  for  support. 

28. 

Frequently,  Chavarria  advised  Respondent  on  ways  to  engage  students,  gave 
her  proper  forms  to  use,  provided  general  suggestions  and  met  with  the  OTA  representative. 
Chavarria  stated:  “we  went  out  of  our  way,  more  than  for  any  other  teacher,  to  support.”  He 
had  a  student  moved  from  her  class  [unusually  early  in  the  semester]  because  Respondent 
thought  the  student  was  causing  problems. 

  

As  a  teacher,  Respondent  had  a  right  to  request  and  be  provided  with  this  information. 

4 
She  testified  that  she  requested  the  information  because,  in  her  experience,  there  is  a 
correlation  between  SSA  violations  and  upcoming  behavioral  issues,  so  she  “wanted  to  get  a 
handle  on  that”;  in  addition,  she  hoped  to  enlist  a  partnership  with  the  assistant  principals  to 
help  students  be  successful.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Respondent  participated  as  part  of  a 
team  (with  any  administrator)  to  improve  student  disruptive  behavior. 

  

10

29.  |  When  he  came  to  ECHS,  Felix  tried  to  visit  as  many  classes  as  he  could  to 

learn  about  the  school,  students  and  teachers.  In  his  opinion,  Respondent  lacked  class 
management  skills;  there  was  no  direction  in  her  class. 

On  October  23,  2012,  Felix  was  visiting  the  class  to  observe  a  student  who  had  been 
suspended  from  the  class  two  days  prior.  When  he  arrived,  Respondent  asked  Felix  to  step 
outside.  She  told  him  that  there  were  too  many  administrators  visiting,  and  it  was  hard  to 
teach  with  visitors  in  the  room.  Felix  informed  her  that  he  was  there  to  watch  the  student. 
He  observed  that  Respondent  did  not  follow  a  structured  lesson  plan;  the  class  took  too  long 
to  calm  down;  the  assigned  exercise  was  too  elementary  for  English  9;  and  students  were 
given  15  minutes  to  copy  arubric.  Felix  observed  that  class  time,  which  should  have  been 
dedicated  to  teaching,  was  lost  on  administrative  and  mundane  activities;  these  activities  lost 
students’  attention. 

After  this  observation,  Felix  called  a  meeting  with  Hart  and  Respondent.  Respondent 

did  not  attend  the  scheduled  meetings  but  attended  on  December  20,  2012.  Felix  explained 
his  concerns  and  provided  some  teaching  suggestions.  Respondent  was  visibly  upset;  she 
said  that  she  had  taught  for  years  and  knew  what  to  do.  Felix  had  information  on  content 
standards  to  give  Respondent.  Hart  asked  Respondent  to  step  outside  because  she  was  so 
upset.  During  this  meeting,  Felix  informed  Hart  about  the  disproportionate  number  of 
discipline  referrals  coming  from  Respondent. 

30. 

Thompson  supported  Respondent  in  multiple  areas.  One  incident  occurred  on 

September  27,  2012  when  students  were  throwing  packages  of  ketchup  in  class,  and 
Respondent  sent  five  students  to  the  vice-principals’  office.  In  October  2012,  Thompson  was 
meeting  with  a  student  who  had  been  suspended  for  two  days  from  Respondent’s  class.  The 
student  expressed  concern  about  falling  behind  in  the  lessons.  The  student  asked  to  speak  to 
Respondent  about  the  assignment,  but  Respondent  elected  not  to  give  her  time  to  the 
suspended  student. 

31. 

On  January  28,  2012,  Tyler  coached  Respondent  and  observed  her  class.  He 

suggested  that  she  attend  a  class  management  course  in  spring/summer  2012. 

32. 

Rather  than  attempting  to  develop  a  rapport  with  her  students,  manage  her 

classroom  and  impose  progressive  discipline  in  order  to  modify  student  behavior, 
Respondent  used  a  method  of  managing  her  classroom/student  discipline  that  was 
ineffective.  In  an  email  to  Rowe,  she  stated  that  the  class  was  disruptive  and  that  she  was 
doing  all  the  right  things,  including  calling  parents,  emailing  coaches,  emailing  the  ROTC 
instructor  and  emailing  Eugenia  with  messages  to  call  and  relay  to  Spanish  speaking 
parents.'°  Students  who  engaged  in  disruptive  behavior  were  sent  to  the  office,  typically 
with  an  email  but  not  the  required  documentation.  This  caused  problems  for  administrators. 

11     

Exhibit  382 

  

Is 

At  first  glance,  it  appeared  that  Respondent’s  sixth  period  class  (during  the 

2012/13  school  year)  was  the  only  class  that  she  had  difficulty  controlling.  However, 
Respondent  had  difficulty  controlling  other  classrooms  for  three  years  prior.  Over  this  three- 
year  period,  various  administrators  attempted  to  coach,  guide  and  partner  with  Respondent 
for  the  benefit  of  the  students.  They  offered  her  additional  training  and  opportunities  to  visit 
other  teachers  as  well  as  a  volunteer  mentor  to  reduce  the  number  of  students  in  her  sixth 
period  class.  She  rejected  these  offers.  In  her  opinion,  the  offers  were  not  appropriate. 

e 

In  February  2011,  Johnson  scheduled  a  meeting  with  Respondent  to  discuss 
student  disciplinary  issues;'°  Respondent  asked  Johnson  for  the  names  of 
students  so  that  she  could  be  prepared  for  the  meeting;  present  at  the  meeting 
were  Johnson,  Hart  and  Respondent.  During  the  meeting,  they  discussed 
disciplinary  issues,  including  problems  associated  with  two  students;  Johnson 
reviewed  the  disciplinary  power  point  presented  by  ECHS  administrative  team 
with  ECHS  staff  in  August  2010  and  January  2011  (Respondent  was  present  at 
both  presentations).  Finally,  Johnson  offered  to  arrange  for  a  release  date  for 
Respondent  to  visit  classrooms  with  Johnson  where  teachers  were  very 
effective  in  using  techniques  to  minimize  discipline  issues  for  their  classrooms 
and  maximize  students  remaining  in  the  instructional  program.  Johnson  also 
offered  to  arrange  time  for  Respondent  to  collaborate  with  one  or  two  teachers 
as  well.  Respondent  testified  that  she  rejected  this  offer  for  the  release  date  to 
visit  classrooms  and  collaborate  with  other  teachers  because  the  disciplinary 
issues  had  been  resolved  prior  to  the  meeting.  So,  in  her  opinion,  the  bases  for 
the  offer  no  longer  existed. 

In  September  2012,  Respondent  informed  Rowe  that  a  large  number  of 
students  had  grades  of  D  or  F.  They  scheduled  a  meeting  to  discuss  this  issue 
and  others  but  Rowe  missed  the  meeting.  By  email,  dated  September  24, 
2012,  Rowe  contacted  her,  apologized  for  missing  the  meeting  and  discussed 
issues  that  he  hoped  to  discuss  with  her;  Rowe  stated  that  he  wanted  to  visit 
her  English  9  classes,  particularly  sixth  period  and  that  he  had  a  retired 
teacher/principal  who  would  be  willing  to  mentor  and  tutor  students  in  her 
sixth  period  class.'’  This  would  allow  her  to  reduce  the  class  size  by  five  to 
ten  students.  In  her  responsive  email'®,  Respondent  stated  that  she  had  41 
students  in  the  sixth  period  class,  and  more  than  50  percent  had  SSA 
violations.  Respondent  testified  that,  she  considered  the  tutor/mentor  as  a 

  

Exhibits  88  and  89 

Exhibit  68 

16 

17 

18 

Exhibit  382 

  

12

resource,  but  with  the  strategies  she  used,  students’  grades  had  improved 
without  involving  a  tutor/mentor. 

34. 

Respondent  objected  to  administrators  walking  through  her  classroom.  In  her 
opinion,  rather  than  working  as  a  team  to  improve  the  disruption  and  education  environment 
for  students,  the  visits  by  administrators  undermined  her  authority  as  a  teacher. 

35. 

Overall,  Respondent  had  no  insight  into  her  deficiencies  and  poor  judgment. 

She  took  no  steps  to  modify  her  behavior.  At  no  time  did  she  take  responsibility  for  her 
actions  or  take  steps  to  improve  her  classroom  management  skills.  Instead,  she  blamed 
students  and  administrators. 

36.  —  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  regularly  failed  to  provide  required 
educational  instruction.  Despite  the  problems  observed  by  administrators  in  her  classroom  in 
the  sixth  period  class,  despite  the  behavioral  problems,  Respondent’s  students  improved  their 
grades  during  fall  2012.  In  addition,  the  California  High  School  Exit  Examination 
(CAHSEE)  scores  were  in  line  with  the  students  of  other  teachers  at  ECHS. 

37. 

Respondent  regularly  failed  to  provide  supervision  of  her  students,  as 

demonstrated  by  her  classroom  management  problems. 

38. 

Despite  the  problems  associated  with  student  discipline  and  classroom 

management,  ECHS  administrators  never  ordered  Respondent  to  take  remedial  action,  and 
Respondent  did  not  voluntarily  do  so.  Neither  ECHS  administrators  nor  Respondent  took  her 
evaluations  seriously.  There  is  nothing  in  her  2011  evaluation  that  indicates  that  ECHS 
administrators  or  Respondent  was  concerned  about  Respondent’s  deficits. '” 

Lack  of Supervision  and  Inaction  Lead  to  Assault  of Student 

39.  |  Complainant  alleged  that,  on  February  12,  2013,  during  Respondent’s  sixth 

period  class,  Respondent  failed  to  prevent  an  assault  perpetrated  by  one  student  on  another. 

40. 

On  February  12,  2013,  during  her  sixth  period  class,  several  students  threw 
kiwis  at  each  other  during  class.  Respondent  instructed  J.A.  and  C.R.  to  go  to  the  office. 
J.A.  left  the  classroom,  and  C.R.  refused.  Respondent  called  security  to  have  C.R.  removed. 

41. 

C.R  was  sitting  on  a  desk,  talking  on  her  cellular  telephone  when  C.R.  and 
V.T.  began  arguing  and  verbally  attacking  each  other.  V.T.  proceeded  to  walk  around  the 
classroom  and  get  in  front  of  C.R.  At  this  point,  Respondent  said  several  times,  “V.T. 
sweetie”.  V.T.  and  C.R.  screamed  at  each  other,  and  V.T.  acted  even  more  aggressively. 

  

In  the  opinion  of  Commission  member  Finder,  OUSD  had a  responsibility  to  order 

9 
Respondent  to  attend  training  and  to  indicate  in  her  performance  evaluation  that  her 
classroom  management  skills  were  deficient. 

13 

 

After  almost  90  seconds  of  increasing  tension  and  build  up,  V.T.  threw  off  her  jacket 

and  began  punching  C.R.  She  punched  C.R.  six  times  over  the  next  10  seconds.  She 
punched  C.R.  at  the  back  of  her  head  with  closed  fists.  Then  V.T.  stepped  away  and  five 
seconds  later  threw  a  seventh  punch.  Again,  V.T.  stepped  away;  30  seconds  later, 
Respondent  said  “V.T.”  again  and  “come  back  over  here”.  V.T.  punched  C.R.  with  a  closed 
fist  in  the  back  of  the  head  an  eighth  time.  After  the  eighth  punch,  a  male  voice  is  heard 
yelling,  “calm  down,  calm  down.” 

Students  in  the  class  videotaped  the  incident  on  their  telephones. 

42. 

Levi  Casias  (Casias)  was  teaching  in  a  classroom  approximately  100  feet 

across  from  Respondent’s.  The  commotion  was  loud  enough  that  his  students  alerted  him  to 
a  fight  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  From  his  classroom,  Casias  could  see  V.T.  and  C.R.  but 
could  not  see  Respondent.  Casias  immediately  ran  to  Respondent’s  classroom.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  asked  her  the  name  of  the  aggressor;  she  told  him  V.,  and  he  yelled  out  her 
name. 

43. 

Immediately  after  Casias  entered  Respondent’s  classroom,  Greg  Frazier 

(Frazier),  a  campus  security  assistant,  entered  the  room.  When  he  entered  the  room,  Frazier 
noticed  a  student  fumbling  in  her  bag.  Frazier  realized  the  situation  was  acode  blue 
(imminent  danger),  because  the  student  could  have  been  reaching  for  a  weapon  in  the  bag. 
Frazier  tried  to  approach  the  student;  however  Respondent  blocked  his  path  and  asked, 
“Where  have  you  been?  I  called  10  minutes  ago.”  She  testified  that  she  was  “shocked, 
distressed”.  Frazier  was  upset  that  Respondent  interfered  with  his  task  to  diffuse  a 
potentially  dangerous  situation.  Frazier  got  around  Respondent  and  removed  V.T.  from  the 
classroom. 

44. 

As  the  incident  unfolded,  Respondent  called  security  on  multiple  occasions. 

The  first  time  that  Respondent  called  security,  Billy  Isles  (Isles),  a  campus  security 

officer,  answered  the  telephone.  Respondent  told  Isles  that  students  were  throwing  kiwis  and 
requested  that  security  remove  C.R.  from  the  classroom.  No  urgency  was  noted  at  that  point. 
By  mistake,  security  responded  to  the  wrong  location. 

Respondent  called  for  security  a  second  time.  This  time,  Sandra  Villamar  (Villamar), 

a  campus  security  assistant,  answered  the  telephone.  Villamar  testified  that  Respondent 
asked  where  security  was  and  said  that  “these  girls  are  going  to  fight  and  I’m  not  going  to 
stop  it;  someone  needs  to  come  over  now.”  Also,  Respondent  called  the  principal’s  secretary 
and  vice-principal’s  secretary  for  assistance/to  tell  them  about  the  situation.  DeGraft 
testified  that  when  Respondent  called  her,  Respondent  said  that  she  “had  called  security  two 
times,  and  no  one  is  coming,  you  are  the  third  call.  They  have  been  throwing  kiwis.  There  is 
going  to  be a  fight,  and  I’m  not  going  to  do  anything  about  it.”  Respondent  disputed  the 
testimony  of  Villamar  and  DeGraft.  She  testified  that  she  said:  “I  can’t  do  anything  about 
it.” 

  

14 

 

45. 

During  the  incident  during  sixth  period  on  February  12,  2013,  Respondent  did 

not  call  or  wave  down  any  teachers  in  nearby  classrooms;  she  did  not  yell  at  the  students  to 
stop;  she  did  not  command  V.T.  or  C.R.  to  leave  the  classroom. 

46. 

Respondent  testified  that,  during  the  incident,  she  did  not  speak  to  the  girls  or 

give  them  commands  because  she  was  at  her  desk  trying  to  get  help.  Immediately  prior  to 
and  during  the  incident,  Respondent  made a total  of  four  calls  for  assistance.  Each  time,  she 
looked  up  the  telephone  number.  Each  time  that  she  was  on  the  telephone,  her  back  was  to 
the  students  because  of  the  location  of  the  telephone.  Her  primary  focus  was  to  get  help. 
When  asked  how  many  times  V.T.  punched  C.R.,  Respondent  testified  that  she  saw  V.T. 
punch  C.R.  twice  but  did  not  know  because  her  back  was  to  the  students  as  she  made  the 
calls.  She  testified  that  she  did  not  know  the  features  of  the  telephone  because  she  had  not 
received  training  on  the  telephone. 

47. 

|  When  asked  if  she  considered  other  strategies,  Respondent  explained  that  she 

considered  the  makeup  of  the  class;  her  decision  was  to  keep  everyone  calm,  not  let  other 
students  get  involved  and  to  get  security  there. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  had  no  training  or  protocols  on  how  to  respond  to  a 

fight;  it  was  frightening,  stressful  and  shocking. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  had  a  lot  of  things  to  consider/to  assess,  to  wit:  SSA 

violators  in  the  classroom,  gang  affiliations  in  the  school,  potential  weapons  in  the 
classroom;  there  had  been  a  shooting  in  Oceanside  two  years  prior,  and  one  of  the  girls  shot  and 
killed  had  been  V.T.’s  best  friend;  she  was  concerned  that  other  students  would  get  involved;  she 
wanted  the  students  to  remain  calm;  she  wanted  to  get  security  there. 

48.  |  When  questioned  regarding  V.T.’s  behavior  on  the  video,  Respondent  testified 

that  it  was  not  appropriate  for  the  classroom;  V.T.  was  reacting  to  the  situation;  it  might  be 
appropriate  on  the  street  in  V.T.’s  neighborhood;  it  might  be  a  survival  skill  in  V.T.’s 
neighborhood,  the  way  to  act  in  a  gang;  she  did  not  know  what  V.T.’s  life  was  outside  the 
classroom. 

49. 
wellbeing. 

At  no  time  did  Respondent  express  or  indicate  concern  about  either  student’s 

50.  |  When  asked  if  she  would  do  anything  different,  Respondent  testified  that,  with 

the  benefit  of  hindsight,  she  would  have  waited  until  C.R.  put  the  kiwis  away,  would  have 
been  more  assertive  about  getting  one  of  the  girls  out  of  the  room,  would  have  been  more 
assertive  about  telling  V.T.  not  to  get  involved,  would  have  approached  C.R.  again  to  tell  her 
to  stop  talking  and  to  leave  the  room;  perhaps  in  periods  where  there  are  student  assistants 
she  could  train  these  students  to  contact  security  or  to  have  a  panic  button. 

15   

    

51. 

The  strategies  invoked  by  Respondent  to  handle  this  fight  were  inadequate.  It 

was  reasonable  for  her  to  make  the  first  call  to  security  and  to  step  between  the  students 
before  the  incident;  her  concerns  were  reasonable.  If  she  was  fearful  of  potential  personal 
harm,  there  was  no  expectation  that  she  would  step  between  the  students  or  otherwise  put 
herself  in  harm’s  way.  It  is  astonishing  that  she  turned  her  back  on  the  students  in  the  midst 
of  the  assault,  an  incident  that  was  loud  enough  to  get  the  attention  of  students  and  a  teacher 
(Casias)  100  feet  away.  Respondent’s  failure  to  invoke  other  strategies  was  unreasonable. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  provides: 

|  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for 

(a) 
one  or  more  of  the  following  causes: 

(1) 

Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

(5) 

Evidence  unfitness  for  service. 

(7) 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the 
state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

3. 

OUSD  argued  that,  based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  Respondent  engaged  in  acts 

that  constitutes  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  her  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  (a)(5)  and  (a)(7)). 
Therefore  she  should  be  dismissed.  OUSD  suspended  Respondent  without  pay  or  benefits 
based  on  the  allegation  that  her  acts  constituted  immoral  conduct. 

Respondent  asserted  that  the  facts  of  this  case  do  not  constitute  violations  of  the 

Education  Code  and  therefore  do  not  justify  dismissal  or  suspension  without  pay  and 
benefits. 

4. 

A  particular  act  or  omission  may  constitute  more  than  one  cause  for  removal 

under  Education  Code  section  44932.  (Tarquin  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

16

(1978)  84  Cal.App.3d  251.)  It  follows  that  the  same  acts  or  omissions  may  constitute 
grounds  for  dismissal  for  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  persistent 
violation  of  the  OUSD’s  policies. 

5. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determinative  test  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case  is 

whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Board  of Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560.)  Fitness  to  teach  is  probably  a  question  of 
ultimate  fact.  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  698,  fn.  3.) 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  “evident 
unfitness  for  service”  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  “Evident  unfitness  for 
service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of 
notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4"  1429,  1444.) 

Before  a  commission  can  decide  whether  Respondent’s  behavior  constitutes  “evident 
unfitness  for  service”,  it  must  decide  if  the  identified  conduct  demonstrates  that  an  unfitness 
to  teach  under  the  criteria  established  by  the  California  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  These  factors  are:  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers,  the  degree  of  such  adversity 
anticipated,  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  the  type  of  teaching 
certificate  held  by  the  party  involved,  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 
surrounding  the  conduct,  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  the 
extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (Morrison,  Id.  at  pp.  229-230.) 

It  is  proper  to  consider  the  totality  of  circumstances  surrounding  Respondent’s 

conduct  to  determine  unfitness.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4"  1429,  at  p.  457.)  Not  all  Morrison  factors 
need  be  examined,  only  the  one’s  pertinent  to  Respondent’s  conduct.  (West  Valley-Mission 
Community  College  Dist.  v.  Concepcion  (1992)  16  Cal.App.4th  1766,  1777.) 

7. 

As  the  term  is  used  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  “immoral  conduct”  is 

not  an  abstract  category  that  may  be  applied  by  rote  to  disciple  a  teacher  under  Section 
44932.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Bemran,  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  219-220; 
Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  214,  at  pp.  229-230).  Under  the  rule 
adopted  by  the  California  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  (and  reaffirmed  in  Fontana),  immoral 
conduct  encompasses  unfitness  to  teach  which  must  be  proven  by  the  facts  of  the  individual 
case,  including  the  teacher’s  motive  for  the  challenged  behavior. 

17

  

By  the  same  token,  behavior  that  may  reflect  poorly  on  an  employee’s  fitness  to  teach 

is  not  automatically  “immoral”:  “[n]ot  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or 
unprofessional  conduct.”  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Bemran,  supra,  45  Cal.3d, 
208,  at  p.  220  n.12;  accord  Basset  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1988)  201  Cal.App.3d  1444,  1454.)  One  can  teach  badly,  break  rules,  and  still 
not  behave  “immorally,”  as  the  Legislature  recognized  when  it  created  separate  grounds  for 
dismissal  for  incompetency,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  refusal  to  obey  school  rules 
and  regulations.  See  Ed.  Code  §  44932  subdivisions  (a)(4),  (5),  and  (7).  See  also  Board  of 
Education  v.  Jack M.,  supra,  19  Cal.3d  691,  at  p.  704. 

In  general,  California  courts  have  found  persons  to  have  engaged  in  “immoral 

conduct”  within  the  compass  of  their  professions  where  there  is  evidence  of  either  theft, 
fraud,  or  dishonesty  (In  re  Honoroff (1975)  15  Cal.3d  755,  and  Magee  v.  State  Bar  (1975)  13 
Cal.3d  700),  or  unacceptable  sexual  behavior  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Stubblefield  (1970)  16 
Cal.App.3d  820;  Shea  v.  Board  of Medical  Examiners  (1978)  81  Cal.App.564  (1978).) 

8. 

. 

.  stubborn;  persevering  . 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  And  in  judicial  decisions,  the  word  has  been  interpreted  to  mean  “continuing  or 
constant.”  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  A  single  violation  of  a  school  board’s  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the 
dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher.  The  subdivision  pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as 
intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not 
sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it  is  the  persistent 
disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman,  Id.  at  p.  84.) 

. 

9, 

Under  the  California  Constitution,  students  and  employees  “have  the 

inalienable  right  to  attend  campuses  which  are  safe,  secure  and  peaceful.  (Const.  art.  1,  §28.) 
It  is  an  explicit  duty  of  teachers  to  reasonably  control  the  conduct  of  students  to  maintain  a 
safe  and  healthy  learning  environment.  (Ed.  Code  §  44807). 

Respondent  did  not  satisfy  her  professional  responsibilities  as  a  teacher.  She  lacks 

classroom  management  skills.  She  is  inflexible  and  prejudges  students.  She  has  not 
demonstrated  the  ability  to  self-reflect  and/or  a  desire  to  change  her  behavior.  Respondent 
did  not  acknowledge  and/or  take  responsibility  for  her  deficits.  Instead,  she  blames  others. 
She  exercised  poor  judgment  during  the  assault  that  occurred  in  February  2013.  There  is  no 
evidence  of  compassion  for  her  students. 

10. 

The  facts  and  the  law  have  been  considered.  When  the  factors  in  Morrison  are 

analyzed,  Respondent’s  conduct  demonstrated  that  she  is  not  fit  to  teach. 

  

18

11. 

The  facts  of  this  case  do  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

Respondent  committed  acts  that  constitute  “immoral  conduct”. 

12. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  Respondent  persistently 

violated  the  school  procedures  for  imposing  student  discipline.  Insufficient  evidence  was 
offered  to  establish  that  Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  OUSD. 

13. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  Respondent  committed 

acts  that  constitute  “evident  unfitness  for  service”;  Respondent’s  conduct  was  the  result  of 
temperamental  defects  and  inadequacies;  insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that 
Respondent  can  be  remediated. 

14, 

While  no  single  act  was  sufficient  to  authorize  Respondent’s  dismissal,  the 

cumulative  effect  of  her  behavior  showed  a  pattern  and  course  of  misconduct  that  requires  a 
conclusion  that  Respondent  is  unfit  for  service.  Consequently,  Respondent  should  be 
dismissed  as  a  teacher  in  OUSD. 

15. 

All  arguments,  not  addressed  herein,  are  determined  to  be  unsupported  by  the 

evidence  and  therefore  rejected. 

H 

H 

dl 

i 

H 

H 

H 

19

ORDER 

The  suspension  without  pay  of  Bonnie  Bayham  was  not  justified. 

Bonnie  Bayham  is  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent  certified 

employee  of  the  Oceanside  Unified  School  District.”° 

1. 

2. 

DATED:  Jar.  JO 

QOVW 

corti 

W)\ co 

HEATHER  BICE 
Commission  Member 

° 

¢ Lo  os 

sy 

. 

2  EY 
Avcant 

Eat.  f 

é 

  

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  Member 

DISSENT: 

DATED: 

ow,  2, 

207 

  

0 
Commission  member  Finder  does  not  agree  that  it  is  appropriate  to  dismiss 
Respondent  because  the  District  did  not  order  her  to  attend  training  and  did  not  reflect  her 
deficiencies  in  her  performance  evaluation.  As  such,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to 
establish  that  she  has  a  fixed  character  trait  that  renders  her  unfit  to  teach. 

HAYWOOD  FINDER 
Commission  Member 

20 

    

 

