 

BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
SACRAMENTO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  for 
Dismissal  of: 

STEVEN  FRANK, 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2013040939 

DECISION 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  for  the  Sacramento  City 

Unified  School  District  convened  to  hear  this  matter  in  Sacramento,  California,  on  the 
following  dates:  January  6,  7,  28,  29,  30  and  31,  2014;  February  10  and  11,  2014;  and  March 
24  and  27,  2014,  The  Commission  members  are  Zack  Schulz,  Simone  Simmons,  and 
Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  and 
Commission  Chairperson. 

Gregory  A.  Wedner  and  Gabriela  D,  Flowers,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith, 

appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District  (District).  Also  present 
on  the  District’s  behalf  were  its  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  and  Employee 

_  Compensation  Cancy  McArn,  or  its  Human  Resources  Director  Christina  Villegas. 

Leslie  Beth  Curtis  and  Lindsay  Gold,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Langenkamp,  Curtis  &  Price, 

appeared  on  behalf  of  Steven  Frank  (respondent)  who  was  present, 

The  District’s  Closing  Brief  and  Reply  Brief  were  marked  for  identification  as 
Exhibits  69  and  70.  Respondent’s  Amended  Closing  Brief  was  marked  for  identification  as 
Exhibit  AAAA.  The  Commission  met  in  executive  session  for  deliberations  on  June  9,  10, 
and  24,  2014.  By  stipulation  of  the  parties,  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  Commission’s  deliberations  on  June  24,  2014. 

Did  the  District  prove  by  a  preponderance of  the  evidence  that  respondent  should  be 

dismissed  from  his  position  as  an  elementary  school  teacher  based  upon  unprofessional 

ISSUE 

conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and/or  “persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him”  (hereafter,  persistent  failure  to 
obey  laws  and  regulations),  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)  (1),  (4),  (5),  and/or  (7)  as  alleged  in  the  Accusation?  ! 

Overview 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  received  his  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  liberal  studies  from 

California  State  University,  Sacramento  (CSUS),  in  1992.  The  following  year,  he  completed 
a  teaching  program  at  CSUS  and  received  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential.  In  May 
2012,  respondent  received  a  Master  of  Education  from  Lesley  University  in  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts,  in  a  program  that  emphasized  using  art  throughout  the  curriculum. 

Respondent  has  been  teaching  since  1994.  He  was  hired  by  the  District  in  1998.  He 

took  a  one-year  break  to  teach  for  the  Department  of  Corrections  (1999-2000).  He  then 
resumed  teaching  for  the  District  in  2000,  and  became  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 
Respondent  is  a  member  of  the  Sacramento  City  Teachers  Association  (SCTA). 

2. 

The  relevant  time  period  for  this  dismissal  action  extends  from  March  7,  2009, 
through  March  7,  2013.?  During  this  period,  respondent  taught  different  grade  levels  at  three 
different  elementary  schools  within  the  District:  Oak  Ridge  Elementary  School  (Oak  Ridge) 
for  the  2009-2010  school  year  (third  grade);  Golden  Empire  Elementary  School  (Golden 
Empire)  for  the  2010-2011  and  2011-  2012  school  years  (kindergarten);  and  Leonardo  da 
Vinci  Elementary  School  (LDV)  (first  grade)  from  the  beginning  of  the  2012-2013  school 
year,  until  he  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave  on  March  7,  2013. 

During  the  relevant  period,  respondent  was  supervised  by  three  different  principals, 
each  of  whom  placed  him  on  a  Teacher  Improvement  Plan  (Improvement  Plan)  designed  to 
ameliorate  performance  deficiencies  in  four  of  the  six  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching 
Profession  (CSTP).  The  Improvement  Plans  gave  respondent  detailed  recommendations  for 
improving  his  performance  in  these  areas,  and  identified  types  of  assistance  that  would  be 
provided  him  to  do  so.  Respondent  elected  to  “self-surplus”  from  both  Oak  Ridge  and 

'  Unless  otherwise  indicated,  all  undesignated  statutory  references  are  to  the 

Education  Code. 

: 

?  Section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  limits  the  evidence  that  can  be  considered  by  the 

Commission  to  dismiss  or  suspend  a  certificated  employee  to  that  which  occurred  no  more 
than  more  than  four  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss.  In 
making  the  findings  and  conclusions  set  forth  in  this  Decision,  only  evidence  of  conduct 
(acts  or  omissions)  occurring  during  the  relevant  period  was  considered.

Golden  Empire.  The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  respondent  did  so  in  the  hope  that  the 
Improvement  Plans  would  not  follow  him  to  his  new  school  sites.?  During  the  relevant 
period,  respondent  was  consistently  deficient  in  the  follow  four  CSTP  standards: 

1, 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Engages  and  supports  all  students  in  learning  by  using  a  variety  of 
instructional  strategies  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs  (hereafter, 
Instructional  Strategies), 

Creates  and  maintains  effective  environments  for  student  learning  by 
planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that 
support  student  learning  and  positive  behaviors  (hereafter,  Classroom 
Environment  and  Management); 

Plans  instruction  and  designs  learning  experiences  for  all  students  by 
sequencing  instructional  activities  and  materials  for  student  learning 
(hereafter,  Instructional  Planning for  Learning), 

Assesses  and  evaluates  student  learning  to  guide  instruction,  and 
communicates  progress  with  students,  families,  and  appropriate  staff 
(hereafter,  Assessment  and  Communication). 

The  first  of  respondent’s  Improvement  Plans  was  issued  on  May  4,  2010,  by  Oak 

Ridge  Principal  Steven  Lewis.  During  the  2010-2011  school  year,  Golden  Empire  Principal 
Dr.  Irene  Eister  implemented  this  plan.  Dr.  Eister  also  formally  evaluated  respondent’s 
performance  and,  in  the  Formative/Summary  Evaluation  signed  March  28,  2011,  rated  him 
as  “does  not  meet  performance  standards”  in  these  same  four  CSTP  areas.  Dr.  Eister  then 
prepared  Improvement  Plans  to  address  these  areas  of  deficiency  on  June  10,  2011,  and  again 
on  June  14,  2012.  Although  Dr.  Eister  testified  that  she  prepared  another  formal  evaluation 
of  respondent,  with  similar  ratings,  for  the  2011-2012  year,  this  performance  evaluation  was 
not  in  evidence.  During  the  2012-2013  school  year,  LDV  Principal  Devon  Davis 
implemented  the  most  recent  Improvement  Plan  and,  on  October  15,  2012,  she  prepared  a 
new  Improvement  Plan  with  input  from  respondent  and  his  union  representative. 

On  November  5,  2012,  the  District  issued  a  “Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and 
Unsatisfactory  Performance”  to  respondent.  Principal  Davis  formally  observed  respondent 
in  preparation  for  his  annual  performance  evaluation;  however,  this  evaluation  was  not 
completed  before  respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom  on  March  7,  2013. 
Respondent  is  currently  on  paid  administrative  leave. 

3. 

Statement  of  Charges:  On  March  7,  2013,  District  Chief  Human  Resources 

Officer  Jess  Serna  signed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss/Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of 

3  When  a  school  loses  teaching  positions,  an  employee  with  more  seniority  may 
volunteer  to  leave  his  assigned  school  site  (i.¢.,  self-surplus),  rather  than  requiring  that  a  less 
senior  employee  be  transferred  out  of  that  school,

Charges),  and  informed  respondent  of  his  recommendation  to  the  District’s  Governing  Board 
(Board)  that  respondent  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the 
District. 

The  32-page  Statement  of  Charges  is  divided  into  two  categories  of  allegations  during 

the  relevant  period:  “Specific  Instances  of  Misconduct,”  and  “Performance  Deficiencies.” 
Each  of  these  allegations  was  incorporated  into  and  alleged  as  a  distinct  factual  basis  for 
dismissal  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  (4),  (5),  and/or  (7),  respectively,  for 
unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and/or 
persistent  failure  to  obey  laws  and  regulations.  The  Board  approved  the  Statement  of 
Charges,  which  was  served  on  respondent  on  March  15,  2013. 

On  March  19,  2013,  respondent  signed  his  Demand  for  Hearing. 

Accusation:  On  April  3,  2013,  Mr.  Serna  signed  and  the  District  issued  the 

Accusation,  which  incorporated  the  facts  and  violations  identified  in  the  Statement  of 
Charges  as  independent  grounds  for  his  dismissal.‘ 

6. 

On  April  8,  2013,  respondent  filed  his  Notice  of  Defense  and Objections  to  the 

4, 

5. 

Accusation, 

7. 

Hearing:  A  10-day  evidentiary  hearing  convened  before  the  Commission. 

Respondent  made  a  standing  objection  to  the  use  of  hearsay  statements  under  Government 
Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d),  which  was  joined  in  by  the  District.  ° 

The  District  called  the  following  witnesses:  principals  Devon  Davis  and  Irene  Eister; 

administrators  Mary  Hardin  Young,  Cancy  McArn  and  Carol  Mignone  Stephen;  teacher 
Renee  Mondzak;  and  the  mothers  of  Children  Numbers  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6,  who  were  in 
respondent’s  class  at  LDV.  § 

District 
Respondent  testified  on  his  own  behalf  and  called  the  following  witnesses: 
teachers  or  former  teachers  Eric  Malme,  Jeannie  Katherine  Tedesko,  Kimberly  Rae  Healey, 

“Tn  this  Decision,  specific  allegations  are  designated  by  reference  to  the  paragraph 

in  the  Statement  of  Charges  (SOC  4  _)  as  incorporated  into  the  Accusation. 

°  In  pertinent  part,  Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d),  provides  that 

“hearsay  evidence  may  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  supplementing  or  explaining  other 
evidence  but  over  timely  objection  shall  not  be  sufficient  in  itself  to  support  a  finding  unless 
it  would  be  admissible  over  objection  in  civil  actions...” 

6  To  protect  privacy,  the  names  of  respondent’s  students,  as  well  as  those  of  their 

family  members,  have  been  deleted  and  replaced  with  designated  child  numbers  (C#),  as  set 
forth  in  the  Amended  Confidential  Names  List.  “MOC#”  refers  to  Mother  of  Child  Number 
#,  and  “FOC#”  refers  to  Father  of  Child  Number  #,

and  Linda  Rae  Cochran;  SCTA  officers  Robert  Lynch  and  Garald  Scott  Smith;  the  mothers 
of  Children  Numbers  15,  59,  61,  62,  63;  and  the  fathers  of  Children  Numbers  52,  15  and  61. 

The  testimony  of  these  witnesses  is  paraphrased  as  relevant  below, 

L 

2009  —  2010  School  Year:  Oak  Ridge 

8. 

Stephen  Lewis  was  the  principal  of  Oak  Ridge  during  the  2009-2010  school 

year  and  respondent’s  supervisor.  He  did  not  testify. 

9. 

May  4,  2010  Improvement  Plan  (SOC  2  ¥  (a)):  On  May  10,  2010,  Mr.  Lewis 
and  respondent  met  and  developed  an  Improvement  Plan  for  respondent,  The  plan  notified 
respondent  of  the-four  areas  (Finding  2)  in  which  his  performance  needed  improvement  and 
broadly  recommended  that  he  “study/review  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching 
Profession”  for  each  area,  It  provided  other  specific  recommendations  for  improvement;  and 
identified  the  assistance  that  would  be  provided. 

A. 

Instructional  Strategies:  It  was  recommended  that  respondent: 

(1)  Attend  training  and  visit  successful  classrooms  to  acquire 
strategies  to  engage  and  monitor  student  learning; 

(2)  Maintain  a  neat,  organized  and  engaging  classroom 
environment; 

(3)  Complete  and  follow  a  curriculum  schedule  that  allots  the 
state-mandated  instructional  time  in  each  area; 

(4)  Use  curriculum  guides  to  plan,  pace  and  deliver  lessons; 

(5)  Attend  training  on  classroom  management,  classroom 
organization,  and  active  participation  in  order  to  provide  an 
effective  and  orderly  environment  for  students; 

: 

(6)  Include  active  participation  strategies  in  weekly  lesson 
plans;  and, 

(7)  Refine  procedures  and  processes  for  the  classroom  that 
provide  clear  expectations  for  student  learning, 

Assistance  to  respondent  entailed:  on-site  coaching  to  model  effective  engagement 

strategies;  release  time  during  the  school  day  to  observe  other  classrooms;  and  meeting  time 
with  Principal  to  prepare  curriculum  schedule,  In  addition,  formal  and  informal  observations 
would  be  conducted  of  respondent’s  teaching,  with  post-conferences  to  analyze  instruction 
and  set  improvement  targets. 

  

   

B. 

Classroom  Environment  and  Management:  It  was  recommended  that 

respondent:  (1)  observe  classroom  arrangement  of  effective  teachers;  (2)  create  classroom 
procedures  and  routines  that  are  understood  by  all  students;  and  (3)  establish  and  consistently 
maintain  standards  for  student  behavior. 

Assistance  to  respondent  entailed:  arranging  for  meeting  time  with  Principal  to 
discuss  classroom  setup  to  ensure  that  a  strong  classroom  environment  is  established; 
working  with  site  mentor  and/or  Principal  to  create  effective  environment;  and  visiting 
classrooms  to  observe  effective  use  of  classroom  procedures  and  routines. 

Cc. 

Instructional  Planning for  Learning:  It  was  recommended  that  respondent: 

(1)  Prepare  and  follow  clear  and  complete  lesson  plans  that 
include  the  specific  time  allotments,  lesson  objectives  and 
instructional  strategies/program  components; 

(2)  Use  formal  and  informal  assessment  data  to  diagnose 
student  learning  needs  and  plan  daily  individual/small  group 
instruction  (preteach/reteach/extend)  to  increase  the 
achievement  of  students  scoring  below  grade  level  and  include 
specific  goals  in  weekly  lesson  plans; 

(3)  Work  closely  with  grade  level  colleagues  and  administration 
to  ensure  strong  planning; 

(4)  Turn  in  weekly  lesson  plans  to  Principal  each  week;  and 

(5)  Design  instructional  activities  so  that  all  students  participate 
in  setting  and  achieving  learning  goals. 

Assistance  to  respondent  entailed:  arranging  meeting  time  with  Principal  for  support 

on  lesson  planning;  providing  opportunities  to  analyze  data  and  plan  instruction  at  grade 
level  conferences  and  monthly  grade  level  meetings  throughout  the  school  year;  and 
reviewing  lesson  plans  and  providing  feedback. 

D. 

Assessment  and  Communication:  Jt  was  recommended  that  respondent: 

(1)  Complete  all  forms,  records  and  reports  (report  cards, 
progress  notes,  cumulative  file  recording,  cumulative 
assessments,  instructional  schedules  and  plans,  lesson  plans, 
etc.)  and  submit  to  principal  when  requested. 

(2)  Use  formal  and  informal  assessment  data  to  diagnose 
student  learning  needs  and  plan  daily  individual/small  group

instruction  (preteach/reteach/extend)  to  increase  the 
achievement  of  students  scoring  below  grade  level  and  include 
specific  goals  in  weekly  lesson  plans; 

(3)  Participate  in  grade  level  meetings;  and 

(4)  Participate  in  Academic  Conferences. 

Assistance  to  respondent  entailed  having  the  Principal:  conduct  observations  and 

provide  feedback  regarding  classroom  environment;  provide  collaboration  time  with  grade 
level  peers  to  analyze  data;  and  review  lesson  plans  and  provide  feedback  on  most  recent 
assessment  data. 

10. 

Respondent  and  Mr.  Lewis  signed  the  Improvement  Plan  on  May  10,  2010. 

Respondent  was  advised  that  the  Improvement  Plan  would  be  implemented  in  the  2010-2011 
school  year,  that  he  would  be  formally  evaluated  that  year  and  that  the  Improvement  Plan 
would  be  placed  into  his  personnel  file  after  14  days.  He  did  not  submit  any  written 
response. 

11. 
2010  school  year. 

Respondent  elected  to  self-surplus  from  Oak  Ridge  at  the  end  of  the  2009- 

I. 

2010  —  2011  School  Year:  Golden  Empire 

12. 

Dr.  Eister  is  the  principal  of  Golden  Empire,  where  respondent  worked  as  a 

kindergarten  teacher  for  the  2010-2011,  and  the  2011-2012  school  years. 

Several  weeks  before  the  2010-2011  school  year  began,  Human  Resources  Director 

Carol  Mignone  Stephen  informed  Dr.  Eister  that  respondent  was  assigned  to  be  Golden 
Empire’s  new  kindergarten  teacher.  Dr.  Eister  met  with  respondent  to  discuss  the  position 
and  learned  that  he  had  been  on  an  Improvement  Plan  at  Oak  Ridge  the  previous  year.  Dr. 
Eister  discussed  her  expectations  for  the  job  and  told  respondent  that,  in  addition  to  her 
support,  he  should  use  the  site’s  three  other  kindergarten  teachers  for  assistance,  Dr,  Eister 
called  Mr.  Lewis  and  requested  a  copy  of  respondent’s  Improvement  Plan, 

13. 

Before  the  school  year  began,  Dr.  Eister  met  with  respondent  and  reviewed  his 
Improvement  Plan,  section  by  section.  During  this  discussion,  respondent  was  professional, 
but  expressed  frustration  that  he  was  still  on  the  plan  because  he  believed  he  had  progressed. 
Dr,  Eister  recalled  that  respondent  told  her  he  wondered  if  the  plan  would  actually  follow 
him  to  another  school  site.  Dr.  Eister  told  respondent  she  would  do  whatever  she  could  to 
support  him  and  to  get  him  off  the  plan. 

14. 

Overview  of  Significant  Actions  during  the  2010-2011  school  year:  Dr.  Eister 

implemented  the  May  10,  2010  Improvement  Plan.  She  met  frequently  with  respondent  to 
discuss  teaching,  to  review  lesson  plans  and  to  provide  feedback.  She  instructed  respondent 

 

about  the  requirement  to  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  student  records  and  about  District 
policy  in  that  regard.  She  observed  him  teaching  in  bis  classroom  on  both  an  informal  and  a 
formal  basis.  She  issued  a  Letter  of  Concern  based  on  her  February  12,  2011  formal 
observation.  She  prepared  a  Formal  Evaluation  of  respondent,  finding  his  performance  to  be 
unsatisfactory  in  the  four  CSTP  areas  covered  by  his  Improvement  Plan.  She  prepared  a  new 
Improvement  Plan  with  respondent  to  be  implemented  the  following  school  year. 

15.  |  Respondent  was  notified  that  he  could  submit  a  written  response  to  each  of  the 
documents  described  in  Findings  18,  20,  21  and  25,  but  he  did  not  file  any  response  with  the 
District. 

16. 

Once  the  2010-2011  school  year  began,  Dr.  Eister  immediately  started 

implementing  the  Improvement  Plan.  To  help  respondent  address  the  issues  identified  in  it, 
Dr.  Eister  assigned  him  to  teach  in  the  kindergarten  classroom  of  Rene  Mondzak,  who  she 
characterized  as  an  “exemplary”  teacher.  Ms.  Mondzak  taught  her  class  in  the  mornings. 
Respondent  would  teach  his  students  the  same  lesson  in  the  afternoon,  after  having  watched 
Ms.  Mondzak  deliver  the  same  curriculum  to  her  students.’  In  this  way,  respondent  routinely 
“had  at  his  disposal  another  teacher  that  he  could  actually  witness  and  view  and  follow  for 
guidance.”  In  addition,  respondent  was  to  submit  his  weekly  lesson  plans  to  Dr.  Eister  for 
review.  Dr.  Eister  arranged  to  personally  meet  with  respondent  on  a  weekly  or  biweekly 
basis  to  discuss  his  lesson  plans  and  to  review  readings  from  the  book,  Tools  for  Teaching, 
by  Fred  Jones. 

17. 

Pre-evaluation  Conference:  On  September  27,  2010,  Dr.  Eister  and 

respondent  met  and  signed  documents  for  a  pre-evaluation  conference  to  discuss  the  manner 
in  which  respondent’s  2010-2011  teacher  performance  evaluation  would  be  conducted. 
Respondent  selected  Option  One  for  his  evaluation,  which  required  two  formal  observations 
in  the  six  CSTP  areas,  using  “criteria  that  are  observable,  measurable,  and  applicable  in  all 
segments,  kindergarten  through  adult  education.” 

18. 

Specific  Misconduct:  Confidentiality/Progress  Notes  (SOC  §  1(a)): 

Respondent  compromised  the  confidentiality  of  student  information  during  the  2010-2011 
school  year. 

On  November  1,  2010,  Dr.  Eister  met  with  respondent  to  discuss  his  progress  note 

procedures.  As  memorialized  in  her  November  2,  2010,  memorandum,  Dr:  Eister  identified 
two  concerns  based  on  respondent’s  reports  to  her.  First,  respondent’s  progress  notes  for  two 
students  were  reported  to  be  “similar,  if  not  identical.”  Respondent  told  Dr.  Eister  that  two 
parents  had  expressed  concerns  to  him  after  they  compared  their  children’s  progress  notes 
and  saw  that  his  comments  were  not  specific  to  each  child’s  individual  learning  needs. 
Second,  respondent’s  progress  notes  were  not  maintained  in  a  confidential  manner. 
Respondent  informed  Dr.  Eiser  that  the  parents  had  been  able  to  read  other  students’  progress 

7  Because  there  was  an  overlap  in  the  morning  and  afternoon  kindergarten,  respondent 

was  not  able  to  watch  all  of  Ms.  Mondzak’s  lessons.

notes  because  he  had  placed  them  in  the  students’  folders,  without  putting  them  in  individual 
envelopes  to  ensure  their  confidentiality.  Respondent  was  advised  that  this  was  a  breach  of 
student  confidentiality. 

“Effective  immediately,”  respondent  was  directed  to  understand  the  need  to 

individualize  his  comments  in  progress  notes  to  each  student’s  specific  learning  needs  and  to 
understand  that  progress  notes,  report  cards,  and  other  individualized  student  documents  are 
of  a  confidential  nature  and  must  be  treated  as  such.  He  was  directed  to  place  student 
documents  in  sealed  envelopes  prior  to  distribution  and  to  personally  distribute  these 
documents,  rather  than  allowing  other  adults  to  do  so, 

19, 

Respondent  never  provided  the  District  with  a  written  response  to  this  memo. 
At  hearing,  respondent  provided  a  three-page  typewritten  “to  whom  it  may  concern”  letter, 
dated  November  12,  2010,  expressing  his  concern  that  this  write-up  was  unnecessary  because 
he  had  proactively  sought  professional  advice  from  Dr.  Eister  about  these  parents’  concerns, 
Respondent  wrote  that  this  memo  seemed  to  be  a  familiar  “stacking  of  the  deck”  against  him 
and  a  “gotcha,”  reminiscent  of  what  he  had  experienced  at  Oak  Ridge.  Respondent 
expressed  his  belief  that  “this  is  effective  immediately  creating  a  hostile  work  environment  in 
which  it  is  negatively  impacting  my  status,  performance,  and  self-esteem  as  a  member  of  this 
site’s  staff”  In  his  testimony,  respondent  acknowledged  that  there  was  no  evidence  he  had 
ever  provided  this  letter  to  Dr,  Eister  or  to  anyone  else  in  the  District. 

20. 

February  2011;  Formal  Observation  and  Letter  of  Concern  (SOC  J  2(b)):  In 

preparation  for  respondent’s  performance  evaluation,  Dr.  Eister  conducted  a  formal  lesson 
observation  in  respondent’s  class  on  February  2,  2011,  and  then  met  with  him  on  February 
10,  2011,  for  a  post-observation  debriefing. 

In  her  February  22,  2011,  Letter  of  Concern,  Dr,  Eister  itemized  14  “instructional  and 

management  components”  she  had  observed  and  noted  as  concerning  during  her  formal 
observation  of  respondent’s  teaching,  as  follows: 

(1)  Respondent’s  lesson  pacing  was  “off.”  He  spent  too  much  time  on 
the  anticipatory  set,  with  the  result  in  sections  of  the  lesson  not  being 
finished  in  the  allotted  time. 

(2)  Respondent  was  observed  to  use  too  many  management  strategies, 
which  confused  and  overwhelmed  the  students  and  created  a  chaotic 
classroom  atmosphere.  Dr.  Eister  suggested  that  respondent  use  fewer 
management  strategies,  but  not  all  at  one  time. 

(3)  Respondent’s  students  engaged  in  “pseudo-compliance”  during 
instruction,  by  giving  a  false  appearance  that  they  were  on-task,  when 
they  were  not  engaged  and  attentive.  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  “student 
behavior  must  be  monitored  at  all  times,” 

 

(4)  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  discipline  and  management  before 
beginning  instruction.  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  “students  must  be 
compliant  and  ready  to  receive  content”  and  that  “discipline  must 
always  come  before  instruction.” 

(5)  Respondent  did  not  consistently  monitor  student  engagement  and 
compliance  throughout  the  lesson.  Instruction  should  not  begin  until 
students  are  attentive  and  focused. 

(6)  Respondent  engaged  in  “too  much  ‘teacher  talk’  and  verbal 
redirection.”  Dr.  Eister  suggested  that  respondent  learn  to  use  gestures 
and  silent  cues,  which  must  be  taught. 

(7)  Respondent  did  not  monitor  student’s  active  participation  and 
compliance  with  his  directives  throughout  the  lesson. 

(8)  Respondent’s  lessons  lacked  fluidity  because  he  interrupted  them 
with  continuous  redirection.  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  “the  teacher  must 
plan  instruction  and  learning  experiences  by  maintaining  the  fluidity  of 
the  lesson  to  ensure  maximum  student  achievement.” 

(9)  Respondent  needed  to  implement  frequent  “checking  for 
understanding”  strategies  throughout  the  lesson  to  help  him  gauge 
whether  additional  input,  directives  and/or  reteaching  is  necessary. 

(10)  Respondent  needed  to  maintain  appropriate  classroom 
management  throughout  the  lesson  and  create  an  environment  in  which 
students  will  be  successful  (for  example,  by  only  bringing  out  materials 
when  they  are  ready).  Dr.  Eister  suggested  respondent  “review 
procedures  so  students  are  clear  what  is  expected”  in  his  class  and  then 
hold  them  accountable  at  all  times. 

(11)  In  order  to  maintain  an  effective  environment  for  learning, 
respondent  needed  to  watch  for  “lesson  incongruence,”  i.c.,  between 
what  he  as  teacher  states  and  what  students  actually  do. 

(12)  Respondent  needed  to  minimize  transition  time,  by  clearly 
defining  expectations,  reviewing  procedures  and  holding  students 
accountable. 

(13)  Respondent  needed  to  “review  and  implement  all  steps  of  the  8- 
step  lesson  plan,”  which  “should  be  followed  while  delivering  each 
lesson:  stating  the  objective,  anticipatory  set,  input,  modeling, 
checking  for  understanding,  guided  practice/monitoring,  closure, 

10

independent  practice,”  Dr.  ister  advised  that  all  components  are 
crucial  to  ensuring  that  students  can  master  the  stated  objective. 

(14)  Respondent  needed  to  follow  the  lesson  plan  that  is  prepared  for 
the  principal.  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  during  the  observation,  “there  was 
confusion  with  the  presented  lesson  plan.  Much  of  what  was  shared 
during  the  pre-observation  was  not  delivered.  There  is  a  need  to  review 
lesson  planning  to  ensure  the  8-step  lesson  plan  is  being  followed  and 
presented  to  students  to  ensure  increased  student  achievement  and 
mastery  of  the  objective.” 

In  summary,  Dr.  Eister  emphasized  that  these  were  “great  concerns  as  you  and  I  have 

been  working  on  these  components  since  September  [2010],  meeting  weekly  and/or  every 
other  week  to  further  improve  your  classroom  management,  instructional  planning,  lesson 
design,  and  lesson  delivery.  In  addition,  you  and  I  met  the  morning  of  the  lesson  observation 
to  review  your  lesson  plan.  The  lesson  plan  that  was  provided  to  me  did  not  match  what  you 
actually  delivered  to  the  students,” 

Respondent  was  instructed  to  continue  his  weekly  meetings  with  Dr.  Eister  to  review. 

his  lesson  plans  and  to  discuss  Tools for  Teaching;  to  visit  other  teacher’s  classrooms  and 
observe  classroom  management  and  instructional  strategies  during  non-instructional  time;  to 
work  closely  with  his  kindergarten  team  to  implement  effective  teaching  and  management 
strategies;  and  to  “spend  additional  time  in  preparing  lessons  to  implement  effective  teaching 
and  management  strategies”  and  “in  preparing  lessons  that  follow  the  8-step  lesson  cycle.” 
In  addition  to  their  meetings,  Dr.  Eister  would  “continue  to  provide  written  and  oral  feedback 
during  classroom  walk-throughs,” 

21. 

March  28,  2011  Formative/Summary  Evaluation  (SOC  {  2(c)):  The  District’s 

Formative/Summary  Evaluation  form  for  certificated  teachers  has  four  possible  ratings  in 
each  of  the  six  CSTP  areas.  These  are:  “exceeds  performance,”  “consistent  with 
performance  standards,”  “working  to  meet  performance  standards,”  and  “does  not  meet 
performance  standards”  (unsatisfactory). 

Dr.  Eister  prepared  a  formal  evaluation  of  respondent’s  performance  as  a  certificated 

employee  for  the  2010-2011  school  year,  and  reviewed  his  performance  as  a  teacher  in  the 
six  CSTP  areas.  Respondent  was  rated  as  unsatisfactory  in  the  four  areas  identified  as 
needing  improvement  in  his  May  4,  2010  Improvement  Plan  (Findings  2  and  9),  and  as 
“working  to  meet  standards”  and  “consistent  with  performance  standards”  in  two  other  areas. 
On  March  28,  2011,  respondent  signed  this  evaluation  to  indicate  he  had  received  it  and 
understood  his  right  to  provide  any  written  statement  in  response. 

A, 

Respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  in  Instructional  Strategies.  Dr. 
Eister  commented  that,  while  respondent  did  demonstrate  “some  knowledge  of  subject  matter 
content,”  he  must  implement  all  components  of  the  8-step  lesson  plan.  Respondent  needed  to 
consistently  use  active  engagement  strategies  to  keep  students  focused  during  the  lesson; 

11 

 

increase  student  accountability;  vary  methods  of  instruction  to  promote  students’ 
achievement  levels  and  address  their  varied  learning  styles;  monitor  lesson  pacing  to  ensure 
adequate  time  can  be  devoted  to  all  aspects  of  the  lesson;  and  “implement  strategies  and 
resources  that  have  been  provided  to  him  this  past  year  to  better  improve  student  engagement 
and  achievement.” 

B. 

Respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  in  Classroom  Environment  and 
Management.  While  respondent  “demonstrated  some  positive  interaction/relationships  with 
students,”  Dr.  Eister  commented  that  he  needed  to  “continue  to  create,  teach,  model,  assess, 
and  monitor  classroom  routines  and  procedures  consistently  and  constantly.”  Respondent 
needed  to  work  “proactively  to  prevent  and  respond  quickly  to  minimize  behavioral  issues; 
[and]  help  students  take  responsibility  for  their  own  behavior  and  actions”  on  a  daily  basis. 
Respondent  needed  to  secure  and  maintain  students’  attention  and  participation;  to 
implement  management  strategies  to  redirect  students  that  would  not  continuously  interrupt 
the  fluidity  of  a  lesson.  To  minimize  continuous  oral  redirection,  respondent  should  increase 
the  amount  of  non-verbal  redirection  (wait  time,  gestures,  etc.).  Respondent  needed  “to 
move  about  the  room  and  use  proximity  to  assist  with  off  task  behavior.”  He  needed  to 
“implement  strategies  and  resources  that  have  been  provided  to  him  this  past  year  to  better 
improve  student  engagement  and  achievement.” 

Cc. 

Respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  in  Instructional  Planning for 

Learning.  Respondent  needed:  to  “vary  his  teaching  strategies  in  order  to  motivate  and  hold 
students  accountable  for  their  learning”;  to  better  design  his  lesson  plans  and  devise  methods 
to  motivate  and  encourage  all  students  to  actively  participate;  to  “adjust  lessons  to  provide 
additional  content/input  or  further  check  for  understanding  to  ensure  all  students  (high  and 
low)  are  grasping  the  content”;  to  continually  check  for  understanding  to  ensure  students  are 
mastering  the  lesson’s  content;  to  implement  all  eight  steps  of  the  lesson  plan  while 
delivering  the  lesson;  to  review  and  practice  lesson  transitions;  to  hold  students  accountable 
for  completing  tasks  quickly  and  quietly;  and  to  “implement  strategies  and  resources  that 
have  been  provided  to  him  this  past  year  to  better  improve  student  engagement  and 
achievement.” 

D. 

Respondent’s  performance  was  unsatisfactory  in  Assessment  and 

Communication.  Respondent  needed:  to  “understand  the  need  to  administer  district-wide 
and  curriculum-embedded  assessments  and  how  to  use  these  assessments  to  gauge  his 
teaching  and  student  learning”  and  to  review  the  types  of  assessments  and  how/when  to  give 
them  to  students,  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  it  was  “critical”  to  use  these  data  in  an  ongoing 
manner  to  inform  his  instruction  and  to  share  with  families.  She  encouraged  respondent  “to 
continually  collaborate  with  other  teachers  to  inform  his  instruction  and  to  model  lessons  and 
instructional  strategies  as  well  as  glean  techniques  from  others  as  to  how  best  improve 
academic  achievement,  especially  in  adjusting  instruction  based  on  student  data.” 

E. 

Respondent  was  “working  to  meet  performance  standards”  in  the  CSTP 

standard,  “understands  and  organizes  subject  matter  by  using  district  provided  curriculum/ 
materials  and/or  standards  aligned  resources  to  make  subject  matter  accessible  to  all 

12

students.”  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  respondent:  “understands  subject  matter  material  and  often 
utilizes  educational  resources  and  district/state  standard  to  meet  the  educational  needs  of  his 
students;”  and  that  “some  of  his  lessons  demonstrate  evidence  of  planning  and  preparation.” 
She  encouraged  him  to  use  supplemental  aids  to  stimulate  student  interest  and  engagement, 
to  differentiate  instruction  to  meet  his  students’  diverse  needs,  and  to  hold  students 
accountable  for  their  learning  and  lesson  participation, 

F, 

Respondent  was  “consistent  with  the  CSTP  standard  for  “contributes  to  the 

teaching  and  learning  environment  by fulfilling  extra  duties  as  assigned,  attending  required 
meetings,  maintaining  resources  and  equipment,  and  assisting  in  maintaining  acceptable 
student  behavior  outside  of classroom.”  In  this  regard,  Dr.  Eister  noted  that  respondent 
“fulfills  the  required  duties,  as  assigned  as  a  classroom  teacher.”  Respondent  volunteers  and 
assists  in  extracurricular  activities  and  facilitates  at  some  Family  Nights.  He  was  also 
“willing  to  meet  with  administration  to  improve  his  skills  and  is  open  to  constructive 
feedback  and  suggestions.” 

Based  on  this  evaluation,  a  new  Improvement  Plan  was  to  be  developed.  Dr,  Eister 

provided  recommendations  for  respondent’s  professional  goals,  with  an  emphasis  on 
professional  development  in  direct  instruction,  student  engagement  and  classroom 
management.  Dr.  Eister  commended  respondent  for  his  “caring  and  concern  for  his  students’ 
progress.”  She  noted  he  was  “respectful  of  students  and  their  families,”  “respects  the  cultural 
diversity  and  unique  needs  of  each  of  his  students,”  and  “has  a  good  working  relationship 
with  colleagues  and  staff...” 

Testimony  of Rene  Mondzak 

22. 

Ms.  Mondzak  has  been  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  the  District  for 

approximately  25  years.  During  the  2010-2011  school  year,  she  was  one  of  Golden  Empire’s 
four  kindergarten  teachers  and  she  shared  a  classroom  with  respondent.  Ms,  Mondzak  met 
respondent  in  late  August  2010,  just  before  the  school  year  began.  She  gave  him  a  tour  of 
their  classroom,  and  divided  up  the  space  so  respondent  would  have  room  to  display  things 
for  his  class. 

Because  the  kindergarten  teachers  taught  the  same  curriculum  at  the  same  pace,  they 
met  and  worked  as  a  team  by  preparing  and  sharing  materials  for  lessons  on  a  monthly  basis. 
After  working  with  respondent  for  several  weeks,  Ms.  Mondzak  became  concerned  that 
respondent  acted  as  if  he  had  not  being  given  information  to  carry  out  his  duties,  after  she 
and  the  other  kindergarten  teachers  had  given  him  information  and  materials.  She  requested 
a  meeting  with  Dr.  Eister  and  respondent.  Following  this  meeting,  Ms.  Mondzak  confirmed 
everything  given  to  respondent  in  writing,  with  a  copy  to  Dr.  Eister,  to  verify  that  he  had 
been  given  necessary  information.  Even  after  this,  Ms.  Mondzak  noticed  that  respondent  did 
not  use  many  of  the  materials  prepared  by  the  kindergarten  team  for  monthly  lessons. 

Ms.  Mondzak  taught  the  morning  kindergarten  class  from  8:00  a.m.  until  11:20  a.m. 

Respondent’s  class  came  in  at  10:20  a.m.  During  the  overlap  time,  respondent  took  his  class 

13 

 

to  another  room  until  Ms.  Mondzak’s  students  were  dismissed.  After  her  class  was 
dismissed,  Ms.  Mondzak  typically  remained  in  the  class  another  two  hours  each  day  to 
prepare  her  class.  During  this  time,  Ms.  Mondzak  observed  respondent  teach. 

23. 

Based  on  her  observations,  Ms.  Mondzak  was  concerned  that  respondent’s 

students  were  not  receiving  the  proper  amount  of  foundational  skills  that  they  should  have 
been  taught  or  the  proper  structure.  The  class  was  very  often  chaotic.  She  observed  that 
some  students  tried  to  be  on  task,  but  that  many  of  them  were  not  on  task.  Instead,  they  were 
out  of  their  chairs  wandering  around  and  did  not  appear  to  know  what  the  expectations  were. 
While  typically  students  were  assigned  a  seat  with  nametags,  there  were  periods  when  there 
were  no  nametags  on  the  desks  during  respondent’s  class.*  It  appeared  that,  at  some  point, 
respondent’s  students  had  assigned  seats  with  nametags,  but  the  tags  would  be  torn  or 
removed  and  not  replaced.  The  children  were  free  to  sit  “wherever.”  Rather  than  directing 
the  students  and  creating  the  structure,  respondent  would  ask  the  students  where  they  sat. 

During  the  2010-2011  school  year,  Ms.  Mondzak  observed  respondent:  assign 
students  homework  for  concepts  that  had  not  yet  been  covered  in  class;  demonstrate  how  to 
form  letters  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  the  California  standard;  and  throw  away  bags  of 
student  work  and  materials.  She  heard  respondent  use  a  negative  buzzer-sounding  noise 
when  students  gave  incorrect  answers,  instead  of  giving  the  positive  responses  that  are 
especially  important  for  kindergarten  students.  Ms.  Mondzak  also: 

a. 

Observed  that,  instead  of  the  typical  practice  of  using  counting  manipulatives 

(like  squares  or  bears)  to  further  a  math  lesson,  respondent  would  “just  dump  out  a  whole 
bin”  so  all  the  counters  “would  be  scattered  around  and  the  kids  would  be  crawling  all  over.” 
Instead  of  having  a  real  point  to  the  math  lesson,  respondent  would  simply  allow  the  students 
to  “just  explore  now.” 

b. 

Noticed  that  respondent  would  allow  students  to  take  “an  inordinate  amount  of 

time”  (i.e.,  20  minutes)  to  pass  out  manipulatives  or  whatever  materials  were  needed  for  the 
lesson  during  circle  time.  After  this  was  finished,  “there  would  hardly  be  any  time  left”  for 
the  lesson.  In  her  experience,  it  should  have  taken  only  “a  very,  very  few  minutes”  to 
accomplish  this  task.  Respondent’s  practice  was  an  unnecessary  waste  of  time  that  left  little 
teaching  time. 

C 

Observed  that  respondent  placed  crayons  on  the  students’  desks  in  baskets  that 

were  not  shallow.  Asa  result,  the  children  could  not  see  into  the  baskets  and  would  climb 
onto  the  tables,  and  push  and  shove  each  other  while  trying  to  get  the  colors  they  needed. 

d. 

Observed  respondent  wait  until  shortly  before  events  (e.g.,  Open  House)  to 

have  his  students  begin  complicated  projects  that  the  other  kindergarten  students  had 

®  The  nametags  fot  Ms.  Mondzak’s  students  were  removed  after  her  morning  class,  so 

respondent  could  add  his  own. 

14

 

prepared  over  several  weeks,  resulting  in  unfinished  work  (e.g.,  “All  About  Me”  book; 
Rainbow  Cloud.) 

e. 

Observed  that  respondent’s  preparation  of  lesson  materials,  as  part  of  the 

kindergarten  teaching  team,  was  not  reliable,  so  the  other  teachers  would  have  to  count  each 
of  the  pieces  he  had  prepared  to  make  sure  there  were  enough  and  supplement  them  to  have 
sufficient  pieces  ready  for  the  classes,  Respondent  drew  lines  and  cut  papers  individually  so 
that  the  students  had  pieces  that  were  not  uniform,  When  respondent  was  absent,  on  a 
number  of  occasions,  his  substitute  teacher  would  have  instructions  for  lessons  but  would  not 
have  enough  materials  to  complete  the  lesson. 

24, 

Based  on  her  experience  with  and  observation  of  respondent,  Ms.  Mondzak 

became  wary  of  his  assessment  skills  and  practices.  For  example,  the  kindergarten  team 
developed  a  system  where  the  afternoon  teacher  would  pull  students  out  from  the  morning 
kindergarten  class  to  assess  them  on  certain  skills  and  vice  versa,  Ms,  Mondzak  initially 
teamed  with  respondent,  but  stopped  after  she  found  that  the  results  he  was  giving  her  did  not 
match  with  what  she  knew  her  students  were  or  were  not  capable  of.  Ms.  Mondzak  met  with 
Dr.  Eister  and  told  her  that  she  did  not  feel  she  could  depend  on  the  test  results  respondent 
was  giving  her. 

In  the  spring  of  2010,  Ms.  Mondzak  also  observed  respondent  give  his  students  a 

math  standards  practice  test  on  measurements  as  agreed  by  the  team.  To  administer  this  test, 
the  teachers  were  required  to  read  the  questions  posed  in  the  teacher  manual  out  loud  to  the 
students.  The  students  had  answer  sheets  with  pictures  and/or  numbers  next  to  question 
numbers  and  bubbles  to  fill  in  to  select  the  correct  answer.  There  were  no  questions  written 
on  the  answer  sheet.  Ms.  Mondzak  observed  that,  when  respondent  gave  this  test,  he  did  not 
read  the  questions  from  the  manual.  Instead,  respondent  just  looked  at  the  test  paper  and 
“bizarrely  stated”  questions  he  thought  were  appropriate.  As  a  result,  the  “way  the  children 
were  answering  could  have  been  completely  wrong  but  there  was  no  way  for  parents  or 
anyone  to  know  what  the  expectation  was  for  the  right  answer.”  Ms.  Mondzak  so  strongly 
believed  that  this  was  an  inappropriate  way  to  administer  the  test  that  she  remembered  the 
questions  respondent  asked.  That  same  day,  she  checked  them  against  those  in  the  manual. 
This  caused  her  to  realize  that  respondent  was  “making  up  his  questions.”  For  example, 
whereas  the  manual  asked  students  to  “find  the  [pictured]  object  that  holds  more,” 
respondent  asked  students  to  “find  the  [pictured]  thing  you  would  not  drink  out  of.” 

25. 

June  10,  2011  Improvement  Plan  (SOC  {  2(d)):  As  required  by  the 

performance  evaluation,  Dr.  Eister  and  respondent  prepared  an  Improvement  Plan  which  was 

*  Tn  approximately  the  fall  of  2013,  Ms.  Mondzak  reconstructed  this  for  District 
counsel  on  a  blank  test  answer  sheet  taken  from  Chapter  7  of  the  Standards  Practice  Manual. 
Next  to  these  question  numbers,  Ms.  Mondzak  wrote:  (1)  the  questions  she  remembered 
respondent  asking  his  students,  and  (2)  the  gist  of  the  questions  actually  posed  by  the 
manual’s  Test  Directions  for  Teachers. 

15 

to  be  implemented  beginning  in  September  2011.  Respondent  signed  this  Improvement  Plan 
on  June  13,  2011. 

This  plan  focused  on  the  four  CSTP  areas  determined  to  be  unsatisfactory  in  the 
March  28,  2011  formal  evaluation.  This  Improvement  Plan  continued  and  expanded  on 
previous  recommendations  for  improvement  in  these  areas,  and  added  a  recommendation  that 
he  “study/review  Fred  Jones’  Tools for  Teaching  Program  and  other  teaching/management 
resources.”  It  offered  respondent  substantially  similar  assistance  as  that  detailed  in  the  May 
4,  2010  Improvement  Plan  (Finding  9),  including  that  he  “continue  with  Principal 
conferencing  and  feedback  opportunities.” 

A. 

Instructional  Strategies:  Dr.  Eister  additionally  recommended  that  respondent 

use  the  guides  and  strategies  previously  outlined  “on  a  daily  basis”  (i.e.,  curriculum  guides, 
active  participation  strategies);  that  he  “observe  and  work  with  colleagues  who  are 
exemplary  in  lesson  delivery”;  and  that  he  “incorporate  these  strategies  in  your  lesson 
delivery  and  design.” 

B. 

Classroom  Environment  and  Management:  Dr.  Hister  also  recommended  that 

respondent:  not  only  observe  classroom  arrangement  of  effective  teachers,  but  that  he 
“incorporate  these  strategies  in  your  classroom;  and  attend  training  on  classroom 
management  and  classroom  organization  in  order  to  provide  an  effective  and  orderly 
environment  for  students.” 

Cc. 

Instructional  Planning for  Learning:  Dr.  Eister  further  recommended  that 

respondent:  use  curriculum  guides  on  a  daily  basis  to  plan,  pace  and  deliver  lessons;  that  he 
review,  refine,  and  utilize  the  eight-step  lesson  plan;  and  that  he  follow  the  eight-step  lesson 
plan  in  his  daily  lessons.  Assistance  to  respondent  in  this  area  remained  the  same. 

D. 

Assessment  and  Communication:  Recommendations  for  improvement  in  this 

area  remained  the  same,  with  the  additional  assistance  that  respondent  would  be  provided 
time  to  observe  grade-level  teacher(s)  administering  assessments. 

Ui 

2011  --  2012  School  Year:  Golden  Empire 

26. 

Respondent  returned  to  Golden  Empire  to  teach  kindergarten  during  the  2011- 

2012  school  year.  Ms.  Mondzak  began  teaching  a  full-day  kindergarten  class.  Respondent 
shared  a  classroom  with  teacher  Carla  Randazzo. 

27. 

Overview  of  Significant  Actions  during  the  2011-2012  school  year:  During 

  

this  school  year,  Dr.  Eister  continued  providing  respondent  the  assistance  outlined  in  the 
June  10,  2011  Improvement  Plan.  She  issued  two  “Letters  of  Deficiency”  to  respondent 
(October  and  December  2011),  a  Letter  of  Concern  (February  2012)  and  two  Letters  of 
Reprimand  (May  and  June  2012).  In  addition,  Dr.  Hister  testified  that  she  prepared  another 
formal  evaluation  of  respondent  toward  the  end  of  this  school  year  and  forwarded  it  to  the 
District?’s  Human  Resources  Department.  This  evaluation  was  not  in  evidence  and 

16

respondent  denied  having  received  it. 
Plan  for  respondent,  to  be  implemented  during  the  2012-2013  school  year. 

In  June  2012,  Dr.  Eister  prepared  a  new  Improvement 

28. 

During  this  school  year,  respondent  was  advised  that  each  of  the  documents 

described  in  Findings  29,  30,  31,  33,  34,  and  36  would  be  placed  in  his  personnel  file. 
Respondent  provided  no  written  response  to  any  of  these  documents. 

29. 

October  19,  2011  Letter  of Deficiency  (SOC  {  2(e)): 

In  preparation  for 
respondent’s  evaluation,  Dr.  Eister  conducted  a  formal  observation  of  his  teaching  on 
October  13,  2011,  which  she  and  respondent  discussed  in  detail  on  October  19,  2011.  Dr. 
Hister  then  prepared  a  letter  of  deficiency  documenting  her  concerns  about  his  performance 
as  follows: 

(1)  Respondent’s  lesson  pacing  was  off,  with  too  much  time  (30  to  35 
minutes)  being  spent  on  activities  that  should  take  five  to  10  minutes. 
As  a  result,  teaching  time  was  lost  and  students  lost  interest, 

(2)  Respondent  failed  to  consistently  monitor  student  engagement  and 
compliance  and  was  admonished  not  to  begin  instruction  until  the 
students  are  attentive  and  focused. 

(3)  Respondent  failed  to  implement  a  variety  of  questioning  strategies. 
Instead,  he  asked  questions  to  the  entire  class  without  providing 
expectations  or  guidelines  as  to  how  students  should  respond;  as  a 
result,  students  shouted  out  answers, 

(4)  Respondent  did  not  frequently  implement  “check  for 
understanding”  strategies  to  help  determine  whether  students  accessed 
the  lesson’s  content  or  whether  additional  input,  directives  or  re- 
teaching  was  necessary. 

(5)  Respondent  needed  to  clearly  state  the  lesson’s  objective  at  the 
beginning  of  the  class,  make  sure  students  understood  the  objective  and 
monitor  whether  they  are  meeting  the  objective. 

(6)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  accurate  delivery  of  content, 
Students  were  provided  inaccurate  content  (tracking  letter  “P” 
following  respondent’s  model,  which  was  backward  to  them), 

(7)  Respondent  needed  to  consistently  monitor  for  compliance  in  light 
of  students’  false  appearance  to  him  that  they  were  on  task  (pseudo 
compliance). 

17 

  

 

(8)  Respondent  did  not  provide  discipline  and  management  before 
beginning  instruction.  This  was  necessary  for  students  to  be  compliant 
and  ready  to  receive  content. 

(9)  Respondent  interrupted  his  lesson  continuously  with  redirection. 
This  impeded  lesson  fluidity  needed  to  ensure  maximum  student 
achievement. 

(10)  Respondent  needed  to  minimize  transition  time  by  clearing 
defining  expectations,  reviewing  procedures  and  holding  students 
accountable. 

(11)  Respondent  needed  to  review  and  implement  all  steps  of  the 
eight-step  lesson  plan. 

(12)  Respondent  needed  to  review  and  to  follow  the  lesson  plan  that  he 
prepared  for  Dr.  Eister  with  his  class.  Some  of  the  content  discussed 
during  pre-observation  was  not  delivered  to  students. 

Dr.  Eister  emphasized  her  “great  concern”  because  she  and  respondent  had  been 

working  on  these  components  consistently  since  September  2010,  and  because  the  lesson 
plan  respondent  provided  to  her  at  the  pre-observation  meeting  “had  components  that  did  not 
match  what  you  actually  delivered  to  the  students.” 

Respondent  was  directed  to  continue  his  weekly  meetings  with  Dr.  Eister  to  review 
lesson  plans;  to  continue  weekly  book  talk  on  Tools for  Teaching;  to  visit  other  teachers  to 
observe  effective  teaching  and  management  strategies  and  to  work  closely  with  the 
kindergarten  team  to  implement  them;  to  review  curricular  teacher’s  editions/guides  to  assist 
with  suggested  lesson  pacing;  and  to  spend  additional  time  preparing  lessons  that  follow  the 
eight-step  lesson  cycle.  Dr.  Eister  would  continue  to  provide  written  and  oral  feedback  to 
respondent  during  her  classroom  walk-throughs. 

30. 

December  21,  2011  Letter  of Deficiency  (SOC  §  2()):  Dr.  Eister  conducted  a 

formal  observation  of  respondent’s  teaching  on  December  14,  2011,  which  she  and 
respondent  then  discussed  on  December  21,  2011.  On  December  21,  2011,  Dr.  Eister 
prepared  a  letter  of  deficiency  documenting  concerns  about  respondent’s  performance. 

The  concerns  outlined  were  substantially  similar  to  those  addressed  in  the  previous 

i.e.,  communicating  lesson  expectations;  classroom 

letter  of  deficiency  (Finding  29): 
management  (“student  off-task  behavior  becomes  the  norm,”  not  conducive  to  learning); 
enforcing  classroom  rules/procedures  (“class  was  disorderly  throughout  the  lesson”); 
ongoing  redirection  and  fluidity  of  instruction  (redirection  “used  continuously”  interrupted. 
instructional  flow  and  created  a  chaotic  environment);  overuse  of  oral  redirection/nagging 
(nagging/negative  reinforcement  becomes  detrimental  and  students  “tune-out”);  crucial  to 
monitor  student  progress  throughout  lesson;  need  to  provide  appropriately  assigned 

18

instructional  materials  to  students  who  are  excelling  and  those  who  need  more  time; 
classroom  instructional  time  is  underutilized;  transitions  are  lengthy  and  encroach  on 
instructional  minutes;  need  to  consistently  monitor  classroom  routines,  procedures  and 
expectations;  need  to  review  and  implement  all  steps  of  eight-step  lesson  plan;  and  need 
lesson  closure  to  allow  sufficient  time  for  processing  of  acquired  information.  Dr.  Eister 
noted  that  respondent’s  “observed  instructional  skills  are  deficient.  Address  skill  decencies 
[sic]  outlined  here  and  in  previous  conferences,  walk-throughs,  and  meetings  to  remedy...” 

Respondent  was  directed  to  review  and  implement  the  suggestions  provided  to  him  in 

this  observation  debriefing  and  to  continue  complying  with  the  directives  outlined  above. 

31. 

February  21,  2012  Letter  of  Concern  (SOC  J  2(g):  Respondent’s 
Improvement  Plan  required  him  to  submit  lesson  plans  to  Dr.  Eister  at  the  beginning  of  each 
week,  Respondent’s  lesson  plans  for  the  week  of  February  13,  2012,  did  not  include  any 
activities  for  Valentine’s  Day  (2/14),  or  for  the  100th  Day  of  School  (2/16).  Dr.  Eister 
observed  respondent’s  class  on  both  February  14th  and  16th,  and  saw  students  involved  in 
Valentine’s  and  100th  Day  activities  that  were  not  noted  on  respondent’s  lesson  plans.  At 
their  February  17,  2012  meeting,  respondent  admitted  that  he  had  forgotten  about  these  two 
events.  In  her  letter  of  concern,  Dr.  Eister  emphasized  that  these  are  “two  very  important 
days  in  the  kindergarten  curriculum.”  Respondent’s  failure  to  include  these  events  on  his 
lesson  plans  indicated  that  respondent  was  not  thoroughly  planning  his  lessons,  was  not 
consulting  the  school  calendar,  and  was  not  planning  with  his  kindergarten  colleagues  as 
directed.  Respondent  was  admonished  that: 

You  have  a  multiple  subjects  teaching  credential.  The 
importance  of  planning  for  the  instructional  program  is  a  basic 
component  of  your  training.  When  you  fail  to  plan  adequately, 
the  instructional  program,  as  well  as  student  learning,  is 
negatively  impacted.  Your  students  were  negatively  impacted 
by  your  lack  of  planning  and  your  forgetfulness  of  two  very 
important  and  festive  events  in  a  kindergarten  student’s 
instructional  program.  While  your  colleague  provided  you  with 
some  basic  activities  at  the  last  minute,  the  activities  were 
rushed  and  were  not  implemented  effectively. 

Respondent  was  directed  to  continue  providing  his  weekly  lesson  plans  to  Dr,  Eister. 
In  addition,  he  was  directed  to  alert  her  if  he  needed  to  modify  these  plans.  All  lesson  plans 
“shall  have  stated  learning  objectives  for  each  subject  with  identified  learning  activities  to 
support  these  objectives.”  Dr.  Hister  suggested  that  respondent  consult  the  California 
Standard  for  the  Teaching  Profession,  that  he  follow  the  suggested  pacing  outlined  in  his 
teachers’  manuals,  and  that  he  must  frequently  collaborate  with  other  teachers  in  preparing 
his  lessons. 

32. 

Missing  Formal  Evaluation:  Education  Code  section  44664,  subdivision  (b), 
requires  that  a  school  district  annually  evaluate  any  certificated  employee  who  has  received 

19 

 

an  unsatisfactory  performance  evaluation  “until  the  employee  achieves  a  positive  evaluation 
or  is  separated  from  the  district.”  Based  upon  respondent’s  previous  unsatisfactory 
performance  evaluation,  another  formal  evaluation  was  due  by  late  March  2012. 

Throughout  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Dr.  Eister  worked  with  respondent  to  improve 

his  performance.  She  observed  respondent  in  preparation  for  his  upcoming  formal 
performance  evaluation,  and  debriefed  him  following  her  observations.  These  meetings  and 
observations  occurred  over  extended  periods  of  time.  Dr.  Eister  testified  persuasively  that 
she  completed  this  formal  evaluation  and  had  again  rated  respondent  as  unsatisfactory  in  the 
four  CSTP  areas  found  deficient  in  the  previous  evaluation.  When  completed,  Dr.  Eister 
forwarded  respondent’s  formal  evaluation  to  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Department. 
The  District  did  not  produce  any  such  evaluation  document  at  hearing  and  respondent  denied 
having  received  it.  The  District  failed  to  prove  that  it  complied  with  section  44664, 
subdivision  (b). 

33. 

May  30,  2012  Letter  of Reprimand  (SOC  ¥  I(c)):  On  May  24,  2012, 

respondent  took  some  of  his  students  to  the  computer  lab  and  left  other  students  in  the 
classroom  with  two  parents.  Dr.  Eister  observed  these  students  and  parents  in  the  classroom, 
and  then  spoke  to  respondent  in  the  computer  lab.  In  this  letter  of  reprimand,  Dr.  Eister 
wrote: 

...  Lasked  you  why  you  left  the  students  in  the  classroom 
unsupervised  by  a  credentialed  teacher.  You  stated  that  the 
parents  were  in  the  room.  I  reminded  you  that  the  parents  are 
not  credentialed  and  that  you  must  provide  supervision  to  all 
students.  You  returned  to  your  classroom  while  the  computer 
teacher  supervised  your  other  students,  Later  that  day,  you 
shared  with  me  that  there  must  have  been  some 
miscommunication,  as  you  had  asked  the  other  kindergarten 
teacher  to  supervise  your  students  you  left  in  the  room.  Upon 
verifying  this  information  with  the  other  kindergarten  teacher, 
she  stated  that  you  never  asked  her  to  supervise  the  students  you 
left  in  the  room. 

Dr.  Eister  notified  respondent  that  his  conduct  regarding  this  lack  of  student 
supervision  violated  various  rules  and  regulations,  including  Standard  2.1  of  the  California 
Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (make  classroom  environment  safe  and  accessible); 
Board  Policy  4219.1  (maintain  highest  ethical  standards)  and  District  Administrative 
Regulation  1240  (Volunteer-Under  Direct  Supervision).'°  By  his  changing  story,  respondent  ~ 
intentionally  misrepresented  to  Dr.  Eister-the  facts  about  the  students’  supervision. 

°  District  Administrative  Regulation  1240  (Volunteer-Under  Direct  Supervision) 

provides  that:  “These  volunteers  may  help  supervise  students  during  lunch  and/or  breakfast 
periods  or  may  serve  as  nonteaching  assistants  under  the  immediate  supervision  and  direction 
of  certificated  personnel,  performing  noninstructional  work  which  assists  certificated 

20

Dr.  Eister  indicated  that  respondent’s  conduct  of  leaving  seven  students  in  the 
classroom  with  two  parents  who  had  not  been  fingerprinted  was  a  direct  violation  of  District 
policy  that  negatively  impacted  the  instructional  program,  and  that  exposed  the  District  to 
possible  liability  for  injuries.  Respondent  was  directed  to  remain  in  his  classroom  as 
required  by  District  regulations,  to  review  the  status  of  his  parent  volunteers’  background 
check  and  fingerprint  status.  Those  parents  without  proper  status  are  forbidden  from 
volunteering  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  was  advised  to  review  the  CSTP  and 
administrative  regulations  regarding  volunteers. 

34, 

June  1,  2012  Letter  of Reprimand  (SOC  ¥  2(h)):  This  letter  of  reprimand  was 

based  on  another  incident  Dr.  Eister  had  observed  in  respondent’s  class  at  8:14  a.m.  on  May 
24,  2012. 

...  observed  your  students  sitting  on  the  carpet  singing  along  to 

songs  that  were  being  played  on  the  record  player.  I  observed  you  at 
the  back  of  the  room  talking  to  a  parent.  Four  other  parents  were  in  the 
room  standing  and  watching  some  of  the  students  singing  to  the  songs 
(five  students  were  not  engaged  and  were  sitting  doing  nothing).  The 
next  song  played,  and  all  but  four  students  got  up  to  move.  The  next 
song  played,  and  students  began  running  in  place,  loudly.  Six  students 
remained  sitting  on  the  carpet,  not  engaged  at  all,  The  remaining 
students  became  highly  energized  and  loud,  to  the  point  where  I  was 
concerned  about  interrupting  in  learning  occurring  in  the  neighboring 
classroom.  During  the  five  minutes  I  was  in  your  room,  you  did  not 
engage,  instruct,  nor  speak  to  the  students  once. 

Dr.  Eister  advised  respondent  that  his  conduct  violated  his  Improvement  Plan  for  the 

2011-2012  school  year  in  numerous  ways.  His  class  was  not  conducted  in  conformance  with 
his  lesson  plan  for  that  date  (e.g.,  19  minutes  into  the  class,  the  students  still  had  not  said  the 
Pledge  of  Allegiance  and  had  lost  19  minutes  of  instruction).  His  conduct  also  violated  the 
February  21,  2012  letter  of  concern  where  respondent  was  directed  to  alert  Dr.  Eister  to  any 
changes  in  lesson  plan;  this  had  not  been  forthcoming  for  his  May  24,  2012  class.  Dr.  Eister 
informed  respondent  that: 

Your  conduct  adversely  impacted  the  instructional  program  by  wasting 
valuable  instructional  time  and  not  creating  an  environment  conducive 
to  learning.  The  morning  practice  and  expectation  of  welcoming  and 
setting  the  stage  for  learning  is  crucial.  Nineteen  minutes  into  the 
instructional  day  and  the  majority  of  students  are  still  singing,  without 
any  teacher  direction  or  input,  is  a-concern.  Some  students  were  sitting 
on  the  carpet,  not  engaged  in  any  learning  activity.  This  is  not  an 

  

personnel  in  the  performance  of  teaching  and  administrative  responsibilities.  (Educ.  Code 
35021,  44814,  44815.)  These  volunteers  are  not  to  be  left  alone  with  students  nor  are  they 
allowed  to  supervise  students  outside  the  presence  (visibility)  of  a  certificated  employee.” 

21 

 

effective  use  of  instructional  time.  Further,  the  fact  that  four  parents 
were  observing  this  lack  of  teacher-directed  instruction  is  a  concern  and 
does  not  accurately  represent  the  learning  program  implemented  here  at 
Golden  Empire. 

Respondent  was  directed  to  post  daily  learning  objectives  in  his  classroom,  to  follow 

previous  directives  regarding  submitting  lesson  plans  and  modifications  thereto,  and 
implementing  lesson  as  reflected  in  his  lesson  plans.  He  was  again  reminded  to  review  the 
tenets  of  lesson  planning,  as  well  as  the  CSTP,  teacher  manuals  and  his  Improvement  Plan 
for  appropriate  strategies. 

35. 

During  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Associate  Superintendent  Mary  Hardin 

Young  had  more  than  10  conversations  with  Dr.  Eister  about  respondent’s  performance.  Dr. 
Eister  expressed  increasing  concern  about  respondent’s  teaching  skills  and  interactions  with 
students,  due  to  his  lack  of  improvement,  despite  multiple  Improvement  Plans,  letters  of 
concern  and  of  reprimand.  At  some  point,  Ms.  Hardin  Young  and  Dr.  Eister  discussed 
issuing  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  and  Unprofessional  Conduct  (hereafter, 
45/90  Day  Notice)  to  respondent. 

36. 

June  14,  2012  Improvement  Plan  (SOC  {  2(i)):  Dr.  Hister  and  respondent  met 

on  June  14,  2012,  to  prepare  an  Improvement  Plan  that  was  to  be  implemented  beginning 
September  2012  and  throughout  the  2012-2013  school  year.  The  June  2012  Improvement 
Plan  highlighted  deficiencies  in  the  same  four  CSTP  areas  addressed  in  the  June  10,  2011, 
Improvement  Plan  (Finding  25).  It  made  the  same  recommendations  for  improvement  and 
offered  respondent  the  same  assistance  as  those  previously  outlined,  with  the  following 
additions: 

A. 

Instructional  Strategies:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this  area,  Dr.  Eister 

additionally  recommended  that  respondent:  refine  his  instructional  procedures  and  processes 
that  will  assist  with  lesson  fluidity  and  diminish  ongoing  student  redirection;  actively 
monitor  student  progress  and  lesson  acquisition  throughout  each  lesson,  and  provide 
individual  and/or  group  assistance  when  needed  via  pre/re-teaching  opportunities,  and 
administer/assign  appropriate  and  relevant  lesson  materials  based  on  the  lesson’s  objectives. 

B. 

Classroom  Environment  and  Management:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this 

area,  Dr.  Eister  recommended  that  respondent:  maintain  a  neat,  organized  and  engaging 
classroom  environment;  enforce  classroom  rules  and  procedures  consistently  and  provide 
consistent  reinforcement  opportunities  for  students  who  do  not  follow  classroom 
rules/procedures;  develop  consistent  strategies  to  resolve  student  conflicts;  implement 
strategies  and/or  signals  that  will  redirect  students  instead  of  the  overuse  of  verbal 
redirection;  and  implement  routines/procedures  that  will  shorten  lesson  transition  times.  In 
addition,  Harry  Wong’s  First  Days  of School  was  added  to  the  recommended  book 
study/review/incorporate  list,  and  respondent  was  advised  to  consistently  implement,  monitor 
and  maintain  consistency  with  classroom  routines  and  to  reinforce  on-task  behaviors. 

22.

Cc. 

Instructional  Planning for  Learning:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this  area, 
Dr,  Eister  also  recommended  that  respondent:  complete  and  follow  a  curriculum  schedule 
that  allots  the  state-mandated  instructional  time  in  each  area;  “use  formal  and  informal 
assessment  data  to  diagnose  student  learning  needs  and  plan  daily  individual/small  group 
instruction  (preteach/reteach/extend)  to  increase  the  achievement  of  students  scoring  above 
and  below  grade  level;  implement  the  “Must  Do  and  May  Do”  strategy  to  assist  with  small 
group  instruction;  and  include  specific  goals  in  weekly  lesson  plans.”  Respondent  was 
reminded  to  use  the  eight-step  lesson  plan  “in  the  delivery  of  all  lessons”  and  to  review  Harry 
Wong’s  First  Days  of School  in  this  area. 

D. 

Assessment  and  Communication:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this  area,  Dr. 

Eister  also  recommended  that  respondent:  (1)  provide  ongoing  corrective  feedback  (oral  and 
written)  to  students  on  a  consistent  basis;  and  (2)  “maintain  ongoing  communication  with 
students’  parents/guardians  concerning  student  progress  (informal/formal,  written/verbal, 
etc.)  Utilize  a  communication  log  to  assist  with  documentation.”  In  addition,  in 
participating  in  meetings  and  conferences  previously  recommended,  respondent  was  to 
“bring  required  data/materials  to  each  meeting,” 

37. 
11,  2012. 

Respondent  took  the  Improvement  Plan  home  to  review.  He  signed  it  on  July 

In  mid-to  late  August  2012,  respondent  elected  to  self-surplus  from  Golden  Empire. 

IV. 

2012  -  2013  School  Year;  Leonardo  Da  Vinci 

38.  |  Devon  Davis  is  the  principal  of  LDV,  where  respondent  was  assigned  to  teach 
first  grade  for  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Respondent  joined  Ms.  Nim  and  Ms.  Maroldy  as 
one  of  LDV’s  three  first  grade  teachers.  LDV’s  grade-level  teams  were  expected  to  teach  the 
same  curriculum  at  the  same  pace.  This  meant  giving  students  instruction  on  specific 
lessons,  as  well  as  tests  and  formal  assessments,  as  outlined  in  the  curriculum  for  subjects 
such  as  math  and  English  language  arts. 

On  August  31,  2012,  the  Friday  before  the  2012-2013  school  year  began,  Ms.  Davis 

learned  that  respondent,  along  with  four  other  teachers,  was  being  assigned  to  LDV.  She 
found  a  phone  number  and  called  respondent  to  notify  him  of  his  assignment.!'  At  the  time, 
Ms.  Davis  had  not  seen  any  of  respondent’s  improvement  plans  or  his  formal  evaluation,  and 
she  had  not  spoken  to  any  District  administrators  about  him. 

Respondent  met  Ms.  Davis  at  her  office  later  that  day.  During  their  one-hour 

meeting,  Ms.  Davis  told  respondent  about  LDV’s  curriculum  and  her  expectations  for 
teachers,  Respondent  told  Ms.  Davis  that  he  had  been  on  an  improvement  plan  at  his  last 

"|  According  to  Ms,  Davis,  attempts  by  the  District’s  Human  Resources  to  reach 

respondent  at  his  home  phone  were  not  successful.  Respondent  denied  any  change  in  his 
contact  numbers  or  address. 

23 

 

two  school  sites.  He  also  told  her:  about  his  understanding  that  his  improvement  plan  would 
not  follow  him  from  Oak  Ridge  to  Golden  Empire;  that  “Dr.  Eister  had  been  a  good  mentor” 
to  him;  and  that  he  believed  he  had  improved  so  much  he  no  longer  needed  an  improvement 
plan. 

Based  on  his  history  of  having  been  on  three  improvement  plans  at  his  past  two 
school  sites,  Ms.  Davis  was  very  concerned  about  respondent.  In  her  experience,  such  plans 
are  typically  reserved  for  teachers  with  serious  deficiencies,  including  in  instruction, 
curriculum,  and  class  management.  She  spoke  briefly  to  Dr.  Eister,  who  mentioned  ° 
respondent’s  difficulties  with  pacing,  class  management,  and  his  inability  to  follow  teacher 
manuals.”  She  contacted  Human  Resources  Director  Ms.  McArn  to  obtain  respondent’s 
Improvement  Plans  and  any  letters  of  concern  or  reprimand,  and  she  later  met  with  Ms. 
McArn  on  several  occasion.  At  some  point,  there  was  a  discussion  about  issuing  a  45/90 
Day  Notice  to  respondent.  A  45/90  Day  Notice  was  issued  to  respondent  on  September  20, 
2012,  but  it  was  then  retracted. 

39. 

LDV’s  Program:  LDV  is  an  open  enrollment,  lottery-based  school  program 

that  differs  from  the  District’s  traditional  neighborhood  schools  (like  Oak  Ridge  and  Golden 
Empire)  in  two  ways.  First,  LDV  has  adopted  Integrated  Thematic  Instruction  (TD 
methodology,  under  which  a  common  theme  is  interwoven  throughout  the  curriculum. 
“Habitat”  was  the  ITI  theme  for  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Second,  parents  whose  children 
attend  LDV  must  agree  to  volunteer  with  the  class  for  at  least  40  hours  during  the  academic 
year  to  support  their  children’s  learning.  Due  to  the  parent  participation  component,  LDV 
teachers  sent  weekly  newsletters  home  to  students’  parents  on  Mondays,  which  informed 
families  of  homework,  projects,  significant  dates,  and/or  needed  materials.  Respondent 
referred  to  his  newsletters  as  WAAGS  (week  at  a  glance). 

Centers:  Like  teachers  in  neighborhood  schools,  LDV’s  first  grade  teachers  prepare 
“centers,”  at  which  students  receive  small  group  instruction  in  various  subjects  (¢.g.,  math, 
art,  crafts)  set  up  at  different  locations  around  the  classroom.  In  keeping  with  LDV’s 
curriculum,  the  centers  sometimes  had  an  ITI  theme.  Teachers  divide  their  students  into 
small  groups,  and  the  groups  rotate  to  each  of  the  centers  every  15  or  20  minutes.  The 
centers  are  generally  led  by  parent  volunteers,  who  follow  instructions  provided  by  the 
teacher  and  use  those  instructions  to  help  students  complete  the  designated  center  activity. 
The  teacher  also  leads  a  center, 

40. 

Overview  of  Significant  Actions  during  the  2012-2013  school  year:  During 

this  school  year,  Ms.  Davis  worked  with  respondent  to  implement  his  existing  Improvement 
Plan,  and  she  drafted  a  new  Improvement  Plan  with  input  from  respondent  and  his  union 
representative.  Beginning  early  in,  and  continuing  throughout,  this  school  year,  Ms.  Davis 

2  Ms.  Davis  testified  that  an  ability  to  follow  teacher  manuals  is  important  to  ensure 

that  a  teacher  “is  not  winging  it...[but  has]  actually  read  through  what  the  overriding 
objective  is,  what  the  students  should  be  learning....and  that  they  are  then  able  to  express 
that  in  a  meaningful  manner  to  a  classroom  of  6-year-olds.” 

24

was  made  aware  of  numerous  parent  complaints  about  respondent’s  conduct  and 
performance  in  the  classroom.  Throughout  the  year,  Ms.  Davis  met  with  respondent  on  a 
weekly  to  biweekly  basis,  to  review  lesson  plans  and  to  discuss  teaching  and  classroom 
management  strategies,  including  those  raised  by  parent  complaints;  she  delivered  several 
lessons  to  respondent’s  class  while  he  observed;  she  arranged  for  release  time  for  him  to 
observe  other  teachers,  and  for  a  teacher  to  assist  him  frequently  in  the  classroom;  she 
observed  him  informally  and  formally  in  preparation  for  his  annual  evaluation;  she  provided 
him  detailed  feedback  from  her  lesson  observations;  she  assisted  him  prepare  for  teacher- 
parent  conferences,  and  she  arranged  for  him  to  participate  in  several  all-day  trainings. 

In  late  October,  2012,  Ms,  Davis  issued  respondent  a  Letter  of  Concern.  In  early 

November  2012,  the  District  issued  a  revised  45/90  Day  Notice  to  him.  Ms.  Davis  issued  a 
Letter  of  Reprimand  (December  19,  2012)  and  a  Notice  of  Deficiency  of  Performance 
(December  21,  2012),  On  March  7,  2013,  respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom  and 
placed  on  administrative  leave  pending  dismissal  proceedings.  At  the  time  of  respondent’s 
removal  from  the  classroom,  his  2012-2013  annual  performance  evaluation  was  not  due. 

41, 

During  this  school  year,  respondent  was  advised  that  each  of  the  documents 

described  in  Findings  50,  51,  52,  61,  63  would  be  placed  in  his  personnel  file.  Respondent’s 
counsel  filed  a  written  response  to  the  45/90  Day  Notice  (November  15,  2012;  Finding  52), 
and  a  response  to  an  October  26,  2012,  lesson  observation  (December  14,  2012;  Finding  54), 
attaching  respondent’s  response.  With  these  exceptions,  respondent  provided  no  written 
responses  to  the  District  to  these  disciplinary  letters  or  observations. 

42. 

Ms.  Davis  first  observed  respondent  teach  class  for  approximately  15  minutes 

on  September  4,  2012.  This  was  the  first  day  of  school,  when  Ms.  Davis  spends  time 
observing  each  of  LDV’s  teachers  in  their  classrooms.  Concerns  about  respondent’s 
classroom  were  apparent  on  walking  into  the  room.  The  desks  were  not  arranged  so  that 
every  six-year-old  student  could  see  the  board  or  easily  see  the  teacher  at  the  front  of  the 
room.  Respondent’s  classroom  management  was  concerning  because  he  listed  gender  on  the 
board,  and  was  marking  on  it  when  the  boys  were  being  “bad”  and  when  the  girls  were  being 
“bad.”  The  class  was  in  general  disarray  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  agenda  or  pacing  in  the 
class. 

43. 

To  assist  respondent  and  to  implement  his  Improvement  Plans,  Ms,  Davis 

offered  him  the  following  support: 

a. 

Weekly  Meetings:  Ms,  Davis  set  up  weekly  meetings  with  respondent  and 

asked  him  to  submit  weekly  lesson  plans  to  her  for  review.  This  was  designed  to  give 
respondent  collaborative  time  with  her,  to  review  his  instructional  outline  for  the  upcoming 
week,  to  see  his  knowledge  of  what  he  intended  to  teach,  to  review  transitions  and  check 
pacing  of  curriculum,  and  see  if  he  needed  extra  help.  During  these  meetings,  Ms,  Davis 
would  go  over  the  notes  she  took  during  her  observations  of  lessons  respondent  delivered  to 
the  class  and  she  would  try  to  engage  him  in  a  dialogue.  Ms,  Davis  testified  that,  at  many  of 

25 

 

these  meetings,  she  would  discuss  with  respondent  parent  complaints  she  had  received  about 
his  class  and  she  would  review  written  complaints,  including  Uniform  Complaints,  with  him. 

Beginning  in  early  October,  2012,  Ms.  Davis  requested  that  a  union  representative  be 

present  at  her  meetings  with  respondent.  Ms.  Davis  made  this  request  based  on  her 
consistent  concerns  about  respondent  after  frequent  classroom  walk-through  observations,  as 
well  as  respondent’s  attendance  issues  subsequent  to  their  meetings.  Because  these  concerns 
could  lead  to  disciplinary  action,  the  observations  had  to  be  “validated”  with  a  union 
representative  present.'?  The  SCTA  union  representatives  who  came  to  subsequent  meetings 
between  Ms.  Davis  and  respondent  were  Nikki  Milevsky,  Robert  Lynch,  and/or  Scott  Smith. 
Ms.  Davis  prepared  detailed  agendas  for  these  meetings,  which  occurred  less  frequently  due 
to  scheduling  issues. 

b. 

Release  Time:  Ms.  Davis  arranged  release  time  for  respondent  to  observe  the 

. 
lessons  taught  by  his  grade-level  teammates,  by  providing  substitute  teachers  for  his  class. 
She  and  respondent  met  each  week  to  work  out  a  release  schedule  for  this  purpose  and  Ms. 
Davis  would  then  send  out  a  support  schedule  to  let  respondent  know  when  he  would  have 
release  time  or  class  support.  Ms.  Davis  would  have  respondent  observe  another  first  grade 
teacher  give  a  lesson  in  a  particular  subject,  such  as  language  arts  or  math,  and  then  have 
respondent  teach  the  same  curriculum  and  implement  the  same  lessons  a  day  after  his 
observation. 

C. 

Support  of  In-Class  Teacher:  Ms.  Davis  hired  Julie  Boettner  and  another 
teacher  as  substitutes  to  help  support  respondent  and  two  other  new  teachers  while  they 
became  familiar  with  LDV  and  the  ITI  curriculum.  Ms.  Boettner  taught  second  grade  at 
LDV  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  but  had  been  laid  off  due  to  her  lack  of  seniority. 
After  respondent  was  placed  on  administrative  leave,  Ms.  Boettner  was  hired  to  teach  his 
class. 

During  the  first  trimester  (i.e.,  through  November  30,  2012),  Ms.  Boettner  was  on-site 

three  to  four  days  a  week  and  eventually  focused  her  time  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Ms. 
Davis  arranged  for  Ms.  Boettner  to  be  in  respondent’s  classroom  during  core  academic  times, 
to  support  him  stay  with  the  first  grade  curriculum  pacing.  Ms.  Boettner  also  provided 
respondent  support  regarding  centers,  class  set  up,  and  preparation  for  parent-teacher 
conferences.  In  addition,  Ms.  Boettner  taught  respondent’s  class  during  his  observational 
release  time,  or  when  he  was  absent.  On  fewer  than  six  occasions,  Ms.  Boettner  provided 
information  to  Ms.  Davis  about  “what  was  going  on”  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Ms.  Davis 
then  clarified  with  Ms.  Boettner  that: 
(1)  her  role  with  respondent  was  “not  of  an  evaluation 
nature  whatsoever”  and  that,  except  during  respondent’s  absences,  parent  questions  should 
be  directed  to  respondent  as  teacher.  While  Ms.  Davis  initially  envisioned  this  to  be  a  short- 
term  support,  she  determined  that  respondent  needed  on-going  support.  As  a  result,  Ms. 

3  A  validation  meeting  with  a  union  representative  is  required  to  validate  concerns 
about  conduct  or  performance  that  may  lead  to  disciplinary  action,  as  reflected  in  letters  of 
concern,  reprimand  and/or  deficiency. 

26

Boettner  was  in  respondent’s  class  on  a  majority  of  the  school  days  through  mid-December 
2012,  to  assist  him. 

d. 

Lesson  Observations  and  Feedback:  Ms.  Davis  observed  respondent’s 

delivery  of  lesson  plans  after  weekly  meetings  where  she  had  reviewed  those  plans. 
Frequently  (more  than  half  the  time),  Ms,  Davis  observed  that  respondent  did  not  deliver  _ 
lessons  that  were  consistent  with  his  corresponding  lesson  plans.  On  some  occasions,  the  . 
timing  of  the  lesson  was  off  (i.e.,  math  instead  of  spelling),  On  other  occasions,  the  lesson 
plan  identified  the  objective  of  the  lesson  but,  when  respondent  delivered  the  lesson,  the 
objective  was  unclear.  As  a  result,  respondent’s  students  were  not  at  the  same  pacing  as  the 
other  first  grade  classes;  the  same  support  materials  were  not  going  home;  formal 
assessments  were'not  given  at  the  same  time;  and  there  were  stacks  of  ungraded  work  in  the 
classroom  so  the  students  were  not  getting  the  same  level  of  frequent  feedback  as  in  the  other 
classes. 

Ms.  Davis  gave  respondent  handwritten  notes  about  her  observations  during  her  walk- 
through  class  observations,  either  after  the  observation  or  at  their  weekly  meetings.  In  these 
notes,  she  often  gently  tried  to  focus  him  to  address  various  issues,  including  by  asking  him 
questions;  for  example,  “how  will  you  demonstrate  more  focus  during  instructional  time  that 
indicates  you  have  pre-read  teacher  texts,  prepared  materials,  and  constructed  eight-step 
lesson  plans  for  each  objective?”  (October  26,  2012,  lesson  not  reflective  of  teacher  manual 
objectives.)  Ms.  Davis  also  attempted  to  provide  positive  feedback  to  respondent’s  class,  !* 

Ms.  Davis  also  created  and  gave  respondent  detailed  typed  feedback  charts  with  her 

personal  observations  of  his  lessons,  feedback,  and  suggested  next  steps  for  each  segment  of 
alesson.  Ms.  Davis  explained  that  after  she  observed  respondent  teach  a  lesson,  she  would 
typically  ask  him  how  he  thought  the  lesson  went.  Respondent  would  typically  say  he  felt 
“that  the  lesson  went  pretty  well,”  and  he  seemed  unable  to  articulate  what  the  students  were 
doing  while  he  taught.  Ms.  Davis  believed  these  more  specific  feedback  chart  comments 
would  help  support  respondent  by  showing,  for  example,  what  the  students  were  actually 
doing  in  the  class  while  he  was  teaching,  and  how  he  could  improve  his  preparation  to  more 
effectively  engage  students  (e.g.,  by  pre-writing  sentences  on  the  board  before  the  lesson  so 
students  did  not  have  to  wait  while  he  did  so  during  the  lesson).  On  reviewing  these  charts, 
respondent  seemed  surprised  to  learn  that  students  were  not  actually  participating  during  his 
lessons.  Respondent  did  not  disagree  with  Ms.  Davis’s  feedback  and  would  often  express  his 
intention  to  act  differently  in  the  future  (e.g.,  by  pre-writing  sentences  on  board);  however, 
he  often  did  not  follow  through  on  his  stated  intention. 

"*  For  example,  on  October  5,  2012,  Ms.  Davis  praised  the  “creativity”  demonstrated 
by  respondent’s  students  during  their  “pet  panel”  presentations,  She  explained  that,  unlike 
the  students  in  the  other  first  grade  classes,  respondent’s  students  did  not  have  an  established 
rubric  to  follow  so  student-presenters  knew  exactly  what  to  share,  and  so  the  other  students 
understood  how  to  give  feedback  to  the  presenters. 

27 

 

e. 

Lesson  Modeling:  In  an  effort  to  help  with  his  classroom  delivery,  Ms.  Davis 
also  presented  at  least  three  lessons  to  respondent’s  students  while  respondent  observed.  Ms. 
Davis  tried  to  model  how  to  intertwine  classroom  management  into  the  lesson,  instead  of 
interrupting  the  lesson’s  flow  with  various  methods  of  classroom  management  techniques. 
Respondent  told  Ms.  Davis  that  he  found  her  lesson  modeling  to  be  helpful.  8 

44, 

Complaints  from  LDV  Parents:  Throughout  the  school  year,  Ms.  Davis 

received  numerous  complaints  from  parents  of  students  in  respondent’s  first  grade  class,  via 
emails  and  in  conversations  at  her  office.  Ms.  Davis  did  not  discuss  respondent  with  the 
parents;  rather,  she  simply  listened  to  or  read  the  complaints  and  let  the  parents  know  that 
she  appreciated  their  concerns.  Ms.  Davis  testified  that  she  typically  encourages  parents  to 
talk  directly  to  the  teacher  before  coming  to  her;  however,  she  did  not  do  this  with 
complaints  about  respondent.  In  some  cases,  she  assumed  the  parents  had  already  spoken  to 
respondent.  Most  of  the  complaints  were  about  problems  that  Ms.  Davis  was  already 
working  on  with  respondent  through  the  Improvement  Plan,  the  substance  of  which  they 
discussed  in  their  weekly  meetings.  For  these  reasons,  she  did  not  feel  it  was  “supportive”  to 
respondent  to  continually  tell  him  about  the  complaints.  Ms,  Davis  was  not  aware  that  any  of 
the  complaining  parents  had  made  previous  complaints  about  other  LDV  teachers.  Some  of 
these  complaints  are  summarized  below. 

45. 

Back-to-School  (BTS)  Night:  The  2012-2013  BTS  Night  at  LDV  was  held 

approximately  two  weeks  into  the  first  trimester.  It  began  with  each  of  the  three  first  grade 
teachers  presenting  information  to  the  students’  parents.  The  parents  then  went  to  their 
students’  assigned  classroom  for  further  meeting  with  the  assigned  classroom  teacher. 

Parents  complained  that  respondent  seemed  nervous,  confused  and  repetitive 
(MOC4);  that  he  did  not  explain  well  and  “jumped  sporadically”  from  one  topic  to  another 
(MOC3);  and  that  he  appeared  very  different,  a  bit  unprepared  and  “scattered.”  (MOC2). 
Respondent’s  handout  syllabus  had  grammatical  errors.  (MOC5.)  Much  of  what  respondent 
said  was  in  unfinished  (half)  sentences.  MOC2  was  confused  by  this  and  observed  that  other 
parents  appeared  confused.  Based  on  respondent’s  inability  to  communicate  complete 
thoughts,  MOC2  was  concerned  about  his  ability  to  teach  the  students.'®  Respondent’s 

'S  In  addition  to  modeling  lessons,  Ms.  Davis  gave  respondent  concrete  examples  of 

how  his  classroom  management  affected  his  lesson  delivery;  for  example:  “Observation: 
Teacher  trying  to  write  a  sentence  on  board  (I  want  one  muffin)  but  interrupts  the  writing 
with  many  questions  and  class  management  issues.  I  want  (teacher  then  say  what  do  you 
think,  Seth?  Seth,  no  not  end  —  what’s  next?  Brian  what’s  in  your  mouth?  Come  up  here.” 
Feedback:  “More  verbal  focus  is  given  to  off-task  low  engaged  students  than  on  the  actual 
lesson.  Therefore,  100%  of  students  lose  all  focus  on  objective  and  what  direct  instruction 
should  be.  This  took  10  minutes  —  2  sentences.” 

‘6  MOC2  found  that  respondent’s  confusion  and  class  disorganization  persisted 

throughout  the  2012-2013  school  year,  although  there  was  some  improvement  in  his  class 

28

agenda  referenced  dividing  students  into  genders  for  earning  points,  but  he  did  not  explain. 
MOC4  was  “a  bit  shocked”  by  respondent’s  presentation  and  his  demeanor,  She  recalled 
that  respondent  kept  repeating  that  he  had  experience,  that  he  loved  LDV,  and  stated  that 
LDV  “was  not  like  those  schools  in  Oak  Park.”  MOC4  observed  shock  on  the  faces  of  other 
parents  and  an  “audible  hush...  [as]  when  someone  says  something  inappropriate.”  Other 
parents  also  complained  about  this  comment.  (MOC1,  MOC3.)  At  the  end  of  respondent’s 
presentation,  MOCS  did  not  know  what  respondent’s  expectations  were  and  he  did  not 
clearly  communicate  his  ideas,  philosophy  or  style. 

46. 

Desk  Configuration:  There  were  also  parent  complaints  about  respondent’s 

practice  of  frequently  moving  the  students’  desks.  (MOC2,  MOC4.)  Ms,  Davis  was 
personally  aware  of  this  issue  based  on  her  frequent  visits  to  respondent’s  classroom.  After 
she  saw  him  change  the  desks’  configuration  six  times,  Ms.  Davis  gave  respondent  a  written 
instruction  not  to  change  them  again.  She  believed  this  constant  change  “gave  students  a 
feeling  of  discomfort,  kind  of  scary  for  them  to  walk  into  the  room  day  after  day  and  not  to 
know  where  their  desk  was,  where  their  seatmate  was.” 

47. 

Centers:  In  October  2012,  the  LDV  first  grade  classes  began  using  centers  run 
by  parent  volunteers,  as  instructed  by  the  classroom  teacher.  There  were  four  centers  run  by 
parents  and  respondent  ran  the  fifth  center.  There  were  a  number  of  consistent  complaints 
about  how  respondent  prepared  for,  organized  and  directed  centers. 

For  example,  MOC5  found  that,  as  the  leader  of  the  centers,  respondent’s  direction  to 
parents  was  not  always  clear.  There  was  a  clipboard  with  some  written  instruction  about  the 
day’s  activity  at  the  particular  center;  and  materials  for  the  activity  (either  on  a  clipboard  or 
on  table),  There  were  no  meetings  with  respondent  about  the  activity.  Instead,  according  to 
MOCS,  the  parents  just  came  in,  grabbed  a  clipboard  and  “made  the  best  sense  we  possibly 
could  about  what  was  expected  from  whatever  direction  was  given  on  that  clipboard.  That 
was  it.”  She  testified  that  parents  had  to  infer  from  what  was  written  on  the  clipboard  what 
the  activity  was  and  how  to  run  it.  The  materials  provided  were  often  stacked  and  parents 
had  to  figure  out  the  sequence  of  using  them  during  the  activity.  Oftentimes,  the  tables  did 
not  have  boxes  of  crayons  or  markers  laid  out  and  parents  had  to  search  for  the  tools  kids 
needed.  Throughout  the  year,  MOCS  felt  that  respondent  did  not  give  clear  direction  about 
the  parents’  role  in  the  class,  or  about  what  his  expectations  were  to  either  the  students  or  the 
parents  during  class.  These  concerns  persisted  throughout  the  2012-13  school  year. 

MOC6  worked  at  respondent’s  centers  on  a  weekly  basis.  In  her  experience, 
respondent’s  centers  were  very  confusing.  There  did  not  seem  to  be  any  flow  to  how  they 
went,  The  children  “always  seemed  very  confused,”  and  there  were  times  when  the  children 
were  crying  because  they  were  lost  or  did  not  know  where  they  were  going.  MOC6,  as  a 
parent,  was  also  confused.  MOC6  was  also  the  class  party  coordinator.  In  this  regard,  she 

  

disorganization.  For  these  reasons,  MOC2  wanted  respondent  removed  from  the  classroom, 
and  expressed  to  Ms.  Davis  her  “gut  feeling”  that  respondent  did  not  belong  at  LDV. 

29 

 

had  to  communicate  directly  with  respondent  about  upcoming  events.  Based  on  her  prior 
experience  in  this  role,  for  this  grade  level,  class  parties  are  centers  “so  kids  aren’t  just 
running  around  the  room.”  Respondent  never  offered  any  suggestions  for  party  centers  and 
often  was  absent. 

Ms.  Davis  received  similar  complaints  about  respondent’s  centers  from  MOC4  and 

MOCc3. 

48. 

Communication/WAAGS:  As  reflected  in  the  testimony  of  MOC  2,  3,  4,  5 

and  6,  respondent’s  written  parent  communications  in  the  weekly  WAAGS  were  also  seen  as 
unintelligible  and  were  frequently  not  received  on  Mondays.  For  example,  in  November, 
MOC6  noted  that  respondent’s  “classroom  communications  parents  receive  come  across  as 
fragmented  and  scattered  leading  me  to  believe  Mr.  Frank  has  not  fully  planned  through  his 
message  or  lesson  plans.  I  worry  if  I  cannot  follow  his  thought  process,  how  can  my  child?” 
When  WAAGs  were  late,  MOC4,  who  was  the  class  manager,  had  to  ask  respondent  for  it. 
Although  the  class  manager  was  not  responsible  for  the  newsletters,  MOC4  would  post  her 
copy  of  the  WAAG  on  the  classroom’s  Shutterfly  page  to  ensure  that  other  parents  could  see 
it  right  away. 

49.  -  Grading  Homework:  MOC6  testified  that,  in  early  October  2012,  she  began 

correcting  the  homework  of  respondent’s  students.  Except  for  one  week,  she  did  so 
consistently  for  the  next  two  full  months.  Every  week,  MOC6  took  all  of  the  students’  work 
for  the  entire  week  from  the  homework  basket,  and  spent  a  good  three  hours  on  the  task 
every  weekend.  MOC6  stopped  doing  this  after  learning  from  another  parent  that  her 
corrected  homework  was  filed  directly  into  the  student  folders,  without  respondent  ever 
seeing  it.  Parents  complained  that  it  took  respondent  several  weeks  to  return  graded  work, 
including  spelling  tests.  (MOC6,  MOC4,  MOCS.) 

50. 

October  15,  2012  Improvement  Plan  (SOC  {  2(k)):  On  several  occasions  prior 

to  October  15,  2012,  Principal  Davis,  respondent  and  SCTA  representative  Nikki  Milevsky 
met  to  review  the  June  14,  2012  Improvement  Plan.  Both  respondent  and  Ms.  Milevsky  gave 
Ms.  Davis  feedback  about  the  plan.  Ms.  Davis  then  finalized  a  new  Improvement  Plan  for 
the  2012-2013  school  year  on  October  15,  2012,  which  she  and  respondent  signed  that  day. 
The  new  Improvement  Plan  eliminated  some  of  the  redundant  language  in  the  prior  plan.  It 
was  tailored  to  respondent’s  teaching  at  LDV  and  Ms.  Davis  testified  that  it  included  what 
respondent  believed  to  be  reasonable,  attainable  goals. !” 

‘7  Some  portions  of  the  Improvement  Plan  were  in  template  form,  taken  from  the 

teacher  evaluation  tool  which  is  part  of  the  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  between  the 
District  and  SCTA.  Within  each  CSTP  standard  on  the  template,  the  individual  bullet  points 
were  customized  to  respondent.  In  response  to  Ms.  Milevsky’s  feedback,  Ms.  Davis 
removed  some  of  the  language  in  the  previous  plan  that  appears  duplicative,  to  make  it 
shorter  and  more  cohesive  for  respondent. 

30

The  October  2015  Improvement  Plan  made  the  same  recommendations  for 
improvement  and  offered  respondent  the  same  assistance  as  those  itemized  the  June  2012 
Improvement  Plan  (Finding  36),  with  the  following  additions: 

A 

Instructional  Strategies:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this  area,  Ms.  Davis 

recommended  that  respondent:  “take  notes  and  incorporate  training  into  instructional 
methods”  in  order  to  provide  effective  instruction;  and  “take  notes  and  apply  notes  and 
learning  to  lessons,  pacing,  delivery,  and  classroom  management.”  Respondent  was  to 
“develop  self-sufficient  practices  of  aligning  calendar  with  actual  pacing  in  the  classroom, 
Develop  awareness  of  when  high  student  engagement  is  aligned  to  appropriate  pacing  and 
rigor.” 

B. 

Classroom  Environment  and  Management:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this 

area,  Ms.  Davis  reminded  respondent  that:  positive  behavior  expectations  need  to  be 
consistent;  seating  charts  and  class  seating  needs  to  be  consistent;  and  “pacing  of  lessons 
cannot  be  driven  by  teacher  use  of  a  variety  of  class  management  techniques.  Find  two-three 
effective  methods  and  quickly  use  them  to  keep  100%  of  the  learners  engaged.”  He  was 
reminded  to  “develop  self-sufficient  practices  of  learning  when  class  management  strategies 
are  interrupting  teaching,  pacing  and  learning.”  Other  assistance  in  this  area  was  the  same  as 
in  the  prior  plan, 

C. 

Instructional  Planning for  Learning:  To  ameliorate  deficiencies  in  this  area, 

Ms.  Davis  added  the  following  new  recommendations  for  respondent  to: 

*  Use  pacing  of  first  grade  team  to  guide  instruction.  Keep  instruction  focused. 

*  Communication  system  with  students  needs  to  be  clear, 

(1)  Agenda  and  objectives  need  to  be  posted. 

(2)  Consistent  class  management  routine  should  be  posted. 

Lesson  objective  and  purpose  need  to  be  clearly  stated  by  teacher  and 

(3) 
teacher  needs  to  check  for  understanding. 

(4)  Students  should  be  in  “doing”  learning  activities  with  minimal  time  spent 
on  transitions  that  do  not  support  learning,  daily  schedule,  or  teacher  off-task 
time. 

Communication  with  parents  needs  to  be  professional,  clear,  and  thought  out 

* 
before  being  delivered  verbally  or  in  writing, 

(1)  Voice  messages  should  be  succinct,  answer  questions  and 
parents  should  be  given  a  concrete  reliable  means  of  reaching 
you. 

31 

 

(2)  Any  writing  (beyond  a  paragraph)  to  parents  needs  to  be 
sent  to  Principal  first.  Writing  that  includes  lengthy  paragraphs 
without  punctuation,  grammatical  choices  (use  of  italics, 
capitalization,  or  quotations),  and  confusing  statements  needs  to 
be  corrected. 

(3)  The  more  clear  you  are  with  parents,  the  more  they  will 
support  the  classroom  of  their  child. 

*  Lessons  in  class  need  to  be  aligned  to  lessons  submitted  to  principal  and  aligned  to 
agenda  posted  on  board. 

Assistance  to  be  provided  to  respondent  in  this  area  was  augmented  to  include  that  the 

“principal  will  support  pacing  and  instructional  plans  with  walk-throughs,  observations,  and 
feedback  (timely  feedback  and  concrete  examples)”  and  “District  may  be  able  to  secure  an 
instructional  coach  for  one  hour,  per  week,  to  support  lesson  plan  development  and 
delivery.”  Other  assistance  remained  the  same  as  in  the  prior  plan. 

D. 

Assessment  and  Communication:  Ms.  Davis  added  a  new  recommendation  to 

improve  deficiencies  in  this  area.  Respondent  was  also  to  “continue  to  self-evaluate  what 
students  are  doing  to  demonstrate  learning  during  direct  instruction.” 

51. 

October  2,  2012  Validation  Meeting  (SOC  {  2());  October  23,  2012,  Letter  of 
Concern  (SOC  4  2(1)}:  During  the  October  2,  2012,  validation  meeting,  Ms.  Davis  discussed 
concerns  about  respondent’s  instructional  practices  and  class  management,  based  on  her 
observations  of  his  teaching  on  three  dates  in  September,  2012.  This  meeting  and  Ms. 
Davis’s  concerns  were  later  memorialized  in  the  October  23,  2012  Letter  of  Concern. 

Ms.  Davis  included  specific  examples  based  on  her  observations  of  respondent’s 
science  lesson,  a  spelling  test,  and  an  English  Language  Arts  (ELA)  phonics  lesson.  Each  of 
these  lessons  lacked  focus  on  pacing,  timing,  transitions  and  instructional  objective  or 
purpose.  Respondent’s  lessons  exemplified  “how  loss  of  purpose,  objective,  and  class 
management  drove  lesson  as  opposed  to  rigor,  demonstration  of  student  learning,  and 
students  understanding  purpose.”  She  testified  that  respondent  had  “great  difficulty  in - 
aligning  his  objective  to  what  I  would  call  like  a  [sic]  lesson  cohesion,  so  the  objective  for 
students  would  often  be  very  unclear.”  After  a  lesson,  respondent’s  students  “would  often 
tell  you  something  that  was  completely  different  than  what  they  should  have  been  learning 
about.” 

‘8  For  example,  on  September  14,  2012,  Ms.  Davis  instructed  respondent  to  focus  on 

the  specific  purpose  or  objective  of  his  lessons.  Ms.  Davis  noted  that  she  had  watched 
respondent’s  science  lesson  in  which  his  students  were  to  use  the  scientific  method  to 
observe  a  “rock,”  which  was  made  of  chocolate,  with  their  five  senses.  Ms.  Davis  noted  that 
respondent’s  students  had  eaten  their  rocks  before  writing  down  their  observations.  When 
asked  what  they  had  learned,  respondent’s  students  told  Ms.  Davis  that  they  “ate  chocolate.” 

32

Ms.  Davis  noted  that  “on  a  consistent  basis,  walk-throughs  demonstrate  that  the 
lesson  agenda  and  lessons  submitted  to  the  principal  are  not  being  adhered  to  with  functional 
and  appropriate  lesson  pacing.”  Respondent’s  practices  were  not  aligned  with  the  California 
Standards  for  Teaching  Profession,  particularly  Standard  Four  (Planning  Instruction  and 
Designing  Learning).  She  further  noted  that,  based  on  respondent’s  “current  instructional 
practices,  students  are  left  without  lesson  cohesion,  purpose  and  understanding.”  While 
respondent  had  some  professional  growth  with  class  management,  “due  to  the  distraction  of 
your  style  of  class  management,  students  lose  engagement  and  therefore  are  not  attentive 
during  direct  instruction.”  Respondent  was  advised  that  it  was  “imperative”  that  he 
incorporate  skills  and  training  into  teaching  in  a  way  that  students  are  able  to  learn  and  that 
“the  students  need  a  classroom  environment,  daily,  that  is  free  from  confusion  and  low 
expectations.” 

Respondent  was  directed  to  focus,  among  other  things,  on  lesson  planning  and 
delivery  (“purpose,  objective-what  you  want  students  to  learn  and  how  they  prove  to  you  that 
they  are  learning”),  pacing,  checking  for  understanding  (“when  you  are  clear  about  what  and 
why  you  are  teaching  a  core  content  standard-students  would  be  able  to  accurately  verbalize 
and  write  what  they  have  learned”), 

52. 

43/90  Day  Notice  (SOC  4  2(n):  On  November  5,  2012,  District’s  Area 

Assistant  Superintendent  Sara  Noguchi,  Ed.D.,  issued  to  respondent  a  revised  45/90  Day 
Notice,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44938  and  44932,  for  unprofessional  conduct 
and  unsatisfactory  performance. 

A. 

Respondent’s  asserted  unprofessional  conduct  was  based  on: 

(1)  breach  of 

confidentiality  in  violation  of  Board  Policy  4219.23,"  as  described  in  the  November  2,  2010 
Summary  of  Conference  re:  Progress  Notes  (Finding  18);  (2)  concerns  regarding 
instructional  and  management  components  following  formal  classroom  observations  as 

  

By  allowing  the  students  to  eat  the  rock  before  completing  the  lesson,  the  lesson’s  objective, 
of  writing  down  their  scientific  observations,  became  unclear.  Ms.  Davis  urged  respondent 
to  focus  on  how  the  objective  is  specified,  reiterated  and  reinforced  by  “checking  for 
understanding  strategies.” 

Board  Policy  4219.23  Unauthorized  Release  of  Confidential/Privileged  Information 

provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  District  “staff  shall  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  all 
confidential  records  until  such  time  as  laws,  state  regulations  and/or  bylaws  of  this  district 
permit  disclosure...  Any  employee  who  willfully  releases  confidential/privileged 
information  about  students.  . 
dismissal  from  district  service....  Any  action  by  an  employee  which  inadvertently  or 
carelessly  results  in  release  of  confidential/privileged  information  shall  be  recorded,  and  the 
record  shall  be  placed  in  the  employee’s  personnel  file.  Depending  on  the  circumstances,  the 
Superintendent  or  designee  may  deny  the  employee  further  access  to  any  privileged 
information  and  shall  take  any  steps  necessary  to  prevent  any  further  unauthorized  release  of 
such  information.” 

.  shall  be  subject  to  disciplinary  action  up  to  and  including 

33 

  

   

detailed  in  the  February  22,  2011  Letter  of  Concern  (Finding  20),  and  in  the  October  19,  and 
December  21,  2011  Letters  of  Deficiency  (Findings  29,  30);  (3)  failure  to  include  important 
activities  in  lesson  plans  and  failure  to  follow  lesson  plans  as  described  in  the  February  21, 
2012  Letter  of  Concern  (Finding  31);  (4)  conduct  of  leaving  students  with  volunteers  who 
were  not  fingerprinted  and  cleared  as  detailed  in  the  May  30,  2012  Letter  of  Reprimand 
(Finding  33);  and  (5)  violating  his  improvement  plan  as  detailed  in  the  June  11,  2012  Letter 
of  Reprimand  (Finding  34).  Respondent  was  also  advised  that  his  conduct  violated  Board 
Policy  4119.21,  Code of  Ethics.” 

Respondent  was  instructed  to  improve  his  unprofessional  conduct  over  the  next  45 

days  and  directed  to:  create  an  atmosphere  of  professionalism  in  his  classroom;  observe 
other  teachers’  classroom  management  strategies  during  non-instructional  time;  work  closely 
with  his  grade-level  team  to  implement  effective  teaching  and  management  strategies;  review 
curricular  teacher’s  editions/guides  to  assist  with  suggested  lesson  pacing;  spend  additional 
time  in  preparing  lessons  that  follow  the  eight-step  lesson  cycle;  and  follow  his  established 
Improvement  Plan. 

B. 

Respondent’s  asserted  unsatisfactory  performance  was  based  upon  the 

incidents  described  above  and:  (1)  his  May  4,  2010  Improvement  Plan  (Finding  9);  (2)  his 
Match  28,  2011  Formative/Summary  Evaluation  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  (Finding  21); 
and  (3)  his  June  13,  2011  Improvement  Plan  (Finding  25). 

Respondent  was  instructed  to  eliminate  his  unsatisfactory  performance  over  the  next 

90  days.  He  was  directed  to  immediately  improve  in  the  following  areas  by:  providing  all 
necessary  curricula  and  materials  in  order  to  fully  implement  all  programs;  reviewing  the 
lesson  “prior  to  delivery  to  ensure  that  all  information  provided  is  accurate,  understood  by 
you,  and  follows  the  processes  and  procedures  delineated  in  the  teacher’s  edition;” 
maintaining  appropriate  standards  of  behavior  in  the  classroom  using  positive  reinforcement; 
having  lesson  plans  available  on  a  daily  basis  for  review;  and  working  collaboratively  with 
administrative  staff  members  to  meet  student  needs  and  all  members  of  the  special  education 
team. 

53. 

Section  44938  governs  the  written  notice  of  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  . 

and/or  unsatisfactory  performance.  It  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45 
calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its 
authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against  whom 

©  Board  Policy  4119.21  provides:  “The  Governing  Board  expects  district  employees 

to  maintain  the  highest  standards,  to  follow  district  policies  and  regulations  and  to  abide  by 
state  and  national  laws.  Employee  conduct  should  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  district  and 
the  goals  of  the  educational  program.” 

34

the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of 
behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee 
an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the 
grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the 
evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11  (commencing  with 
Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

(b)  The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unsatisfactory  performance  unless  it  acts  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (1)  or  (2): 

(1)  At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing, 
the  board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 
against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the 
unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with 
such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as 
to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults 
and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice 
shall  include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to 
the  employee.  .. 

The  45/90  Day  Notice  issued  to  respondent  attached  copies  of  each  of  the  referenced 

policies  and  documents,  including  respondent’s  March  28,  2011  Formative/Summary 
Evaluation.  No  other  formal  evaluations  were  attached. 

54. 

October  30/November  14,  2012  Weekly  Meeting  Agenda  and  Feedback  Notes, 
 2(m)):  Based  on  respondent’s  lack  of  improvement  and  some  worsening  issues  that 

(SOC 
might  result  in  discipline,  Ms.  Davis  began  combining  the  weekly  meeting  agenda  with  her 
observation  feedback  notes.  She  believed  a  validation  meeting  was  required  with  “cabinet 
level”  representatives  from  SCTA.  Originally  scheduled  for  October  30,  2012,  this 
validation  meeting  was  continued  twice  (November  14,  2012)  due  to  scheduling  issues,  and 
ultimately  convened  on  November  26,  2012.  (Finding  57.) 

This  validation  meeting  agenda  included  Ms.  Davis’s  feedback  notes  for  her  lesson 
observations  of  respondent’s  teaching  performance  during  a  formal  observation  on  October 
26,  2012,  and  in  a  walk-through  on  October  29,  2012.  Regarding  the  first  observation,  Ms. 
Davis  reported  that  respondent  “was  utterly  not  prepared  and  left  students  bewildered  and 
confused,”  even  though  he  had  been  aware  of  and  had  agreed  on  the  time  for  this  formal 
observation.  Specifically,  respondent  gave  a  lesson  about  the  sound  of  “s”  and  had  students 
complete  a  worksheet  that  did  not  correlate  to  the  lesson,  lesson  objectives,  or  the  teacher’s 
Manual. 
Respondent’s  explanation  about  his  failure  to  teach  this  concept  during  his  November  6, 
2012  observation  debriefing  caused  Ms,  Davis  to  question  his  honesty  and  professionalism. 

The  objective  was  how  to  use  the  apostrophe-s  (’s)  to  show  the  possessive  case. 

35 

  
 

Detailed  feedback  was  provided  for  this  observation.”!  The  second  observation  involved  an 
ITI  lesson  about  trees.  Respondent  had  “allocated  one  hour  to  have  students  write  three 
sentences  about  deciduous  trees  and  then  draw  a  picture.”  Ms.  Davis  found  there  was  “not 
enough  direct  instruction  to  make  a  meaningful  lesson.” 

Based  on  these  observations,  Ms.  Davis  concluded  that  respondent’s  teaching 
evidenced:  “a  tremendous  lack  of growth  and follow-through  with  the  goals  established  on 
your  improvement  plan  and  the  [sic]  from  our  meetings.”  (Italics  added.)  She  identified  the 
following  concerns  about  respondent’s  teaching:  unclear  objectives;  class  management 
interrupts  learning;  teacher  did  not  prepare  lesson  or  follow  manual  (failure  to  read  manual 
and  follow  very  basic  instructions);  lesson  had  no  cohesion;  expectations  low;  pacing  not 
appropriate  to  skills  and  resulted  in  off-task  behavior.  Ms.  Davis  further  noted  that  the  goals 
and  objectives  established  in  respondent’s  45/90  Day  Notice  were  not  being  met  with  any 
changes  in  work  performance,  that  he  was  not  meeting  his  Improvement  Plan  goals;  and  that 
a  “grave  need  for  a  full  time  co-teacher  in  the  room  persists  due  to  lack  of  development  and 
growth  with  the  [sic]  Mr.  Frank.”  She  concluded  by  noting  that  “legal  and  HR  are  being 
advised  of  45/90  Day  Notice  concerns  and  the  negative  impact  on  the  children.” 

55. 

November  8  and  9,  2012  Training  (SOC  {  1(f):  Ms.  Davis  arranged  release 

time  for  respondent  to  attend  an  on-campus  curriculum  training  led  by  Ms.  Boettner  on  the 
McMillan  Math  and  Open  Court  ELA  curriculum.  Although  respondent  had  previously  been 
trained  in  these  areas,  Ms.  Davis  provided  him  this  training  opportunity  based  'on  her 
observations  that  he  “was  having  a  difficult  time  following  teacher  manuals...”  Her  goal 
was  to  ensure  respondent  had  “thinking  and  processing  time  about  the  curriculum”  to  put  it 
into  practice.  The  training  occurred  on  November  8  and  9,  2012,  and  was  attended  by 
respondent  and  two  other  teachers  who  were  newly  assigned  to  LDV,  Eric  Malme  and  Elaine 
Tedesco. 

. 

21  At  the  November  26,  2012  Validation  Meeting,  Ms.  Davis  noted  that,  when  she 

spoke  to  respondent  about  this  on  November  6,  2012,  he  told  her  he  was  “going  to  have  the 
students  come  in  after  recess  and  add  the  apostrophe-s.  This  is  not  true  or  accurate.  You 
failed  to  properly  prepare  for  the  lesson,  you  failed  to  read  through  the  teachers’  Manuel 
[sic]...”  Ms.  Davis  indicated  that  the  teachers’  manual  had  pictures  and  writing  which 
indicated  the  lesson’s  objective  was  the  use  of  the  apostrophe,  but  that  “...when  questioned 
about  your  reasoning,  you  were  unprofessional  and  dishonest.  I  am  troubled  by  the 
frequency  in  which  you  openly  are  dishonest  and  thus  preventing  genuine  accountability  and 
an  opportunity  to  improve  in  many  critical  areas  outlined  in  your  45/90  day  notice,  prior 
disciplinary  letters,  improvement  plan,  and  in  other  meetings.”  Ms.  Davis  ended  the 
November  6,  2012  meeting  and  prepared  for  a  validation  meeting  based  on  respondent’s 
inaccurate  instructions  to  students,  dishonesty  and  lack  of  growth.  She  testified  that  the 
entire  lesson  was  about  possessives  and  that  respondent’s  lesson  was  incoherent  because  he 
never  talked  about.possessives  during  her  observation.  Students  adding  an  apostrophe  after 
lunch  would  have  no  deeper  understanding  of  why  they  were  doing  that. 

36

56. 

November  16,  2012:  Stone  Soup  Day  and  Parent-Teacher  Conferences:  Ms, 
Davis  described  Stone  Soup  Day  (SSD)  as  a  culminating  event  in  which  students  complete 
an  activity  to  support  a  book  they  had  read.  Respondent’s  centers  for  SSD  activities  were 
poorly  prepared.  The  activity  called  for  making  a  soup  and  having  students  bring  different 
ingredients  from  home.  Due  to  poor  communication  with  parents,  ingredients  were  scarce, 
the  project  took  too  long  and  the  soup  was  not  cooked.  Ms.  Davis  recalled  that  MOC4  was 
extremely  upset  at  the  end  of  the  activity. 

MOC4  testified  that  respondent  had  prepared  four  centers  for  SSD,  for  a  one-hour 

period  (9:30  —  10:30)  during  which  all  the  children  would  rotate  through  all  the  centers. 
Respondent  did  not  rotate  the  students  through  the  center  in  the  one  hour.  Instead,  the 
centers  went  on  for  an  additional  hour  (until  11:30)  and  the  students  missed  their  recess  time. 
Respondent  then  lined  them  up  for  lunch  at  11:45,  took  them  out  of  the  class  and  then 
brought  them  back  in  to  sit  down  minutes  later  because  they  were  being  too  loud.  This 
shortened  the  student’s  lunch  break.  MOC4  called  respondent  “ridiculous”  in  front  of 
parents  and  students  in  class.  MOC4  admitted  she  was  “completely  frustrated”  because  the 
children  had  not  had  their  recess  break  and  needed  lunch.  She  agreed  it  was  not  a 
professional  way  to  express  her  frustration.  MOC4  went  directly  to  Ms,  Davis  who  was  not 
available.  She  wrote  down  her  concerns  and  spoke  to  several  parent-volunteers  in  the 
hallway. 

Parent-Teacher  Conference:  In  the  late  afternoon  of  November  16,  2012,  MOC4  and 

FOC4  returned  to  school  to  discuss  options  for  removing  their.son  from  respondent’s  class 
_with  Ms.  Davis."  At  the  time,  Ms.  Davis  was  meeting  with  respondent,  who  was  upset  and 
crying  about  MOC4’s  comments  to  him  in  front  of  the  class.  Later,  with  Ms.  Davis  in 
attendance,  the  parent-teacher  conference  between  MOC4,  FOC4  and  respondent  took  place. 
Ms.  Davis  left  the  conference  after  30  minutes,  The  conference  continued  for  another  half 
hour,  during  which  MOC4  told  respondent  she  did  not  trust  him  and  that  she  “tolerated  him” 
because  she  believed  in  the  school. 

As  reflected  in  MOC4’s  Uniform  Complaint,  respondent  told  MOC4  that  her  son  was 
doing  well  in  all  subjects,  based  on  the  San  Diego  Quick  Assessment  (SDQA).  When  MOC4 
asked  respondent  what  the  purpose  of  the  SDQA  was,  he  was  not  able  to  provide  a  clear 
explanation.  MOC4  did  not  believe  her  son  was  doing  well.  Unlike  the  previous  year,  C4 
was  very  resistant  to  reading  at  home.  Several  weeks  later,  Ms.  Boettner  told  MOC4  that  her 
son  was  not  reading  at  grade  level  and  was  resisting  reading  in  the  classroom.  MOC4  never 
went  to  respondent  to  clarify  this  discrepancy,  because  respondent  “appeared  to  lie  to  cover 
himself”  and  did  not  give  her  useful  information.  MOC4  had  “lost  confidence”  in  what 
respondent  was  saying. 

2  MOC4  and  Ms,  Davis  discussed  whether  there  were  options  to  remove  C4  from 

respondent’s  class,  while  keeping  him  at  LDV,  Ultimately,  after  Thanksgiving  break,  MOC4 
kept  her  son  home  for  three  days  (November  25-28),  but  never  removed  him  from  class. 

37 

  

   

Respondent  detailed  his  dismay  about  MOC4’s  comments  in  a  writing  entitled 

“Documentation  of  Hostile  Work  Environment  for  November  16,  2012.”  There  was  no 
evidence  this  was  ever  provided  to  the  District. 

57. 

November  26,  2012  Validation  Meeting  (SOC  J  2(0)):  During  the  November 

26,  2012  meeting,  SCTA  representatives  Lynch  and  Smith  were  present  with  respondent. 
Ms.  Davis  expressed  various  concerns  about  respondent’s  performance,  including  his 
preparation  for  and  implementation  of  the  Parakeet  Headband  project;”*  giving  out  the  wrong 
dates  for  Duck  Pond  Field  Trip  to  parents  and  cafeteria  staff;  his  honesty  regarding  spelling 
test  grading  and  communication;  and  his  accountability  for  monitoring  student  progress  and 
following  the  school’s  assessment  procedures.”4 

Regarding  respondent’s  honesty,  Ms.  Davis  noted  that,  after  a  parent  discussed 
respondent’s  comment  on  her  child’s  work,  respondent  replied  that  it  must  be  someone  else’s 
writing.  Ms.  Davis  noted  that  the  comment  was  respondent’s  writing  and  that  “there  is  an 
increasing  issue  of  honesty  that  impacts  your  professionalism  and  professional  reputation 
(this  has  surfaced  many  times  and  we  have  discussed  many  issues).”  (SOC  §  /(d).)  In 
addition,  respondent  told  Ms.  Davis  that  he  was  getting  his  spelling  tests  graded  and  returned 
to  students  in  a  few  days.  Ms.  Davis  initially  thought  this  was  reasonable,  but  she  then  . 
learned  that  two-to-three  “weeks  were  going  by  in  which  work,  including  spelling  tests,  were 
not  being  graded.”  (SOC  4  1().)* 

Ms.  Davis  reported  that  respondent  had  only  completed  “50  percent  of  the  ELA 

assessments  that  should  be  calculated  on  the  report  card.  As  a  result,  you  did  not  have  the 
same  level  of  progress  monitoring  information  as  your  grade  level  colleagues  and  your 

3  This  project  had  been  planned  by  the  first  grade  team  a  week  and  a  half  before  the 

project,  with  the  understanding  that  the  teachers  would  provide  the  supplies.  Respondent 
made  last  minute  efforts  to  gather  supplies  from  parents  and  Ms.  Davis  found  that  his  failure 
to  allow  sufficient  time  to  organize  and  complete  the  project  resulted  in  a  scattered  project 
and  a  “lost  opportunity  for  students  to  shine.” 

*4  Formal  assessments  of  students  are  given  to  students  every  six  weeks.  After  Ms. 

Davis  and  other  teachers  told  respondent  not  to  have  parents  give  formal  assessments  to 
students,  he  assigned  a  parent  to  do  so  during  a  center.  The  centers  were  rearranged  to  make 
sure  this  did  not  occur. 

*  MOC4  found  that  it  took  respondent  “several  weeks”  to  return  spelling  tests  to  the 

students.  On  one  occasion,  she  felt  his  comments  on  her  son’s  spelling  test  were 
inappropriate.  Respondent  wrote  in  large  red  letters  that  her  son  had  done  well  but  that  he 
needed  to  improve  his  handwriting.  Even  though  he  had  done  well  in  spelling,  her  son  was 
confused  by  this  comment.  She  and  her  son  met  with  respondent  and  asked  for  clarification. 
During  this  in-person  meeting,  respondent  told  MOC4  that  those  were  not  really  the  words 
he  intended  to  write.  According  to  respondent,  a  parent  volunteer  had  put  a  “to  be  corrected” 
stamp  on  the  top  of  the  test.  The  handwriting  was  respondent’s. 

38

 

students  do  not  have  consistent  report  card  grade  reports  as  you  did  not  include  the 
benchmark  comprehension  results.” 

Based  on  the  recent  curriculum  training,  Ms.  Davis  raised  an  additional  concern  that 

respondent  had  failed  to  be  properly  prepared,  to  take  any  notes  and  to  engage  in  active 
participation  with  the  other  new  teachers.  This  observation  was  based  on  reports  from  Ms, 
Boettner  and  the  other  teacher  attendees,  Respondent  told  Ms,  Davis  that  he  was  on  the  floor 
because  the  chair  was  uncomfortable  and  that  he  did  not  take  notes  because  he  was  not 
instructed  to  do  so.  Ms.  Davis  noted  that,  “in  previous  letters  you  were  reprimanded  for  not 
being  physically  and  mentally  available  to  learn  during  trainings  and  meetings,” 

Ms.  Davis  prepared  a  detailed  written  summary  of  the  Validation  meeting  and  later 

forwarded  a  copy  to  Mr.  Smith  at  SCTA.  She  emphasized  that  it  was  “critical”  for 
respondent  to  take  notes  during  grade  level  meetings,  to  follow-through  with  commitments 
and  agreements,  and  to  demonstrate  an  improvement  in  practices.  Following  a  chaotic  art 
project,  respondent  was  admonished  not  to  request  supplies  from  parents  and  advised  that  the 
inconvenience  of  getting  materials  for  projects  rests  with  teachers  not  with  parents. 
Regarding  respondent’s  conduct  of  sending  out  the  wrong  date  for  the  Duck  Pond  field  trip, 
Ms.  Davis  noted  that  “when  posed  with  a  concern,  you  immediately  and  repeatedly  deny 
responsibility  and  are  not  honest.  I  find  this  to  be  unprofessional.””° 

58. 

Uniform  Complaints:  Through  the  first  trimester,  Ms,  Davis  had  received 

numerous  verbal  and  written  informal  complaints  about  respondent’s  teaching  and 
professional  conduct  from  many  parents.  By  early  December,  2012,  the  District  received 
“Uniform  Complaints”  about  respondent  from  MOC3,  MOC4,  MOCS5  and  MOC6.  These 
included: 

a. 

MOC6’s  Uniform  Complaint  (SOC  {  1(b)):  On  December  14,  2012,  MOC6 

filed  a  Uniform  Complaint  expressing  concern  that  respondent  left  a  voicemail  on  her 
parents’  telephone  (i.e.,  the  grandparents  of  C6  [GPOC6)),  chastising  his  behavior  in  front  of 
the  whole  class.  MOC6  believed  this  violated  her  confidentiality  and  reinforced  her  son’s 
feeling  of  being  “bad.”  A  transcription  of  the  voice  mail  was  attached  to  the  complaint.” 

6  The  Duck  Pond  field  trip  was  cancelled  once  due  to  weather  then  rescheduled.  Ms. 

Davis  testified  respondent  caused  unnecessary  anxiety  for  the  parents  and  school  staff  by 
sending  out  two  different  permission  slips  without  being  clear  on  the  correct  date  he  was 
taking  his  students  on  the  trip. 

?7  In  the  voice  mail,  respondent  identified  himself  and  said: 

“I  was  calling  because 

[C6]  thinks  it’s  funny  to  shake  his  head  and  say  no  apparently  and  not  to  do  what  I  said.  So  I 
"just  wanted  to  let  you  know.  If  you  wish  to  talk  to  me  of  course  I  will  be  here  after  school  or 
you  may  call  through  the  office  to  talk  to  me  during  class.  Thank  you  very  much.”  MOC6 
testified  that,  when  respondent  saw  her  pick  up  her  son mn  after  school  that  day,  he  never 
mentioned  this  voice  mail. 

39 

Ms.  Devon  indicated  that  the  GPOC6  were  listed  as  an  emergency  contact  if  C6  was  ill  and 
needed  to  be  picked  up,  but  that  they  did  not  have  educational  rights. 

b. 

MOCS’s  Uniform  Complaint:  MOCS5  was  in  respondent’s  class  as  a  volunteer 

three  to  four  days  a  month  for  up  to  two  hours  each.  She  was  assigned  to  run  a  center  in 
respondent’s  class.  She  wrote  a  letter  of  concern  about  respondent,  spoke  with  Ms.  Davis, 
and  ultimately  filed  a  Uniform  Complaint  about  respondent  with  the  District.  Concerns 
raised  were  respondent’s  ability  to  manage  the  classroom,  communicating  incorrect  field  trip 
dates  and  his  inconsistent  grading  system.  Regarding  the  latter,  respondent  used  “checks  vs. 
numbers  vs.  stamps,”  with  no  indication  of  what  it  meant,  and  whether,  if  it  was-a  number, 
there  was  a  reason  to  have  a  concern  or  to  be  working  on  something,  or  if  the  student  was 
progressing,  She  testified  that  her  experience  when  volunteering  in  class  was  that  “there  was 
a  lack  of  control  over  the  children,  over  the  flow  of  moving  from  one  activity  to  the  next  and 
being  able  to  kind  of  move  everybody  in  a  somewhat  fluid  way.”  The  class  seemed  very 
chaotic  and  broken  up,  and  respondent  seemed  to  rely  on  the  opinions  of  parents  “about 
where  to  go  from  here.” 

c. 

MOC4’s  Uniform  Complaint:  On  December  13,  2012,  MOC4  filed  a  follow 
up  to  her  previous  Uniform  Complaint  regarding:  respondent’s  inability  to  clearly  explain 
the  purpose  of  the  SDQA  during  the  November  16,  2012  parent-teacher  conference;  her 
perception  of  her  son’s  stagnant  academic  progress;  respondent’s  poor  preparation  for  and 
performance  during  SSD;  his  failure  to  use  his  own  center  time  for  small-group  reading  or 
math  instruction  or  any  activity  with  a  direct  instructional  objective;  respondent’s  continuous 
rearranging  of  desks,  which  affected  center  rotation  and  confused  children  and  parents;  and 
respondent’s  failure  to  communicate  with  her  as  class  manager. 

59, 

December  14,  2012  Validation  Meeting:  On  December  14,  2012,  Ms.  Davis, 

respondent  and  SCTA  President  Scott  Smith  attended  a  lengthy  Validation  Meeting  (90 
minutes  to  two  hours)  to  discuss  a  variety  of  issues  regarding  respondent’s  behavior  and 
performance,  including  his  attendance,  and  his  adherence  to  student  confidentiality  and 
instruction  and  curriculum,  as  documented  in  the  agenda.  Respondent’s  failure  to  report  his 
absences  from  school  during  the  month  of  September  was  included  under  attendance 
concerns.  (SOC  {  /(e)). 

At  this  meeting  Ms.  Davis  provided  four  packets  of  documents,  totaling  47  pages,  to 

respondent  and  Mr.  Smith,  which  included  a  packet  of  parent  concerns/complaints. 

60. 

Training  with  Scott  Smith:  During  the  December  14,  2012  meeting,  Ms.  Davis 

and  Mr.  Smith  discussed  ways  to  further  support  respondent.  Mr.  Smith  was  interested  in 
providing  respondent  with  some  training.  At  Mr.  Smith’s  request,  they  also  discussed 
reducing  the  amount  of  time  Ms.  Boettner  would  be  in  respondent’s  classroom. 

That  afternoon,  after  the  meeting,  Ms.  Davis  notified  tespondent  in  writing  that  she 

had  arranged  for  him  to  have  release  time  to  participate  in  a  one-day  training  with  Mr.  Smith 
on  December  18,  2012.  Ms.  Davis  urged  respondent  to  take  advantage  of  this  opportunity  by 

40

“being  open-minded,  prepared  to  take  notes,  and  mentally/physically  present.”  She  also 
informed  him  that  Ms.  Boettner’s  time  in  his  classroom  from  December  19  through  the  21, 
2012,  would  be  “very  limited,  This  is  a  great  opportunity  for  you  to  make  some  positive 
advancement  in  independently  managing  the  classroom,  curriculum,  parent  participation 
workshop  times,  pacing,  and  keeping  communication  professional.” 

61. 

December  19,  2012  Letter  of Reprimand  (SOC  J  2(p)):  On  December  19, 

2012,  Ms.  Davis  issued  a  Letter  of  Reprimand  to  respondent  based  on  the  topics  discussed  at 
the  December  14,  2012  validation  meeting.  The  seven-page  letter  provided  a  detailed 
summary  of  the  concerns  about  respondent’s  conduct  and  performance,  including  in  the  areas 
of  failure  to  report  attendance,  failure  to  maintain  student  confidentiality,  and  instruction  and 
curriculum  (failure  to  timely  distribute  graded  student  work,  failure  to  prepare  for  special 
projects),  Respondent  was  advised,  inter  alia,  that  his  practices  were  not  aligned  with  the 
California  Standards  of  Teaching  Profession,  specifically  in  Standard  Four  (Planning 
Instruction  and  Designing  Learning  for  all  Students),  Ms.  Davis  indicated  that,  based  on 
respondent’s  current  instructional  practices,  “students  are  left  without  lessen  cohesion, 
purpose  and  understanding.  Due  to  the  distraction  of  your  style  of  class  management, 
students  lose  engagement  and  therefore  are  not  attentive  to  direct  instruction.”  Respondent’s 
conduct  violated  the  District’s  Code  of  Ethics,  Board  Policy  4119.21  (footnote  20). 

Respondent  was  reminded  that  “students  need  a  classroom  environment,  daily,  that  is 

free  from  confusion  and  low  expectations.”  Respondent  was  directed  to  immediately 
implement a  series  of  directives  designed  to  ameliorate  the  identified  problems.  The 
supports  to  be  provided  respondent  continued  as  before,  with  the  addition  of  release  time  for 
training  from  SCTA  representatives  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  Lynch, 

The  Letter  of  Reprimand  included  numerous  documents  as  attachments,  including 

four  document  packets  that  had  been  shared  with  respondent  and  Mr.  Smith  at  the  December 
14,  2012,  validation  meeting.  One  of  these  packets  contained  a  non-comprehensive  selection 
of  parent  letters  and  Uniform  Complaints  “that  indicate  egregious  issues  or  issues  that  have 
continued  since  September.”  Attendance  Form  12  for  reporting  employee  absences  was  also 
attached  to  the  Letter  of  Reprimand  with  a  notation  to:  “turn  in  ASAP  [as  soon  as  possible] 
regarding  September  absences.” 

62. 

Respondent's  Failure  to  Report  Absences  (SOC  {  I(e)):  Respondent  had 

serious  attendance  issues  at  the  beginning  of  the  fall  2012  trimester.  Ms,  Davis  was  aware  of 
respondent’s  absences,  but  during  the  first  month  of  school,  she  did  not  realize  respondent 
was  not  reporting  his  absence  time  to  the  office.  In  September  2012,  on  at  least  three 
occasions,  respondent  told  Ms.  Boettner  that  he  was  “not  feeling  well”  and  he  left  for  the 
day.  Respondent  failed  to  complete  the  District’s  required  Form  12  attendance  form. 
Respondent  was  directed  to  do  so  at  the  December  14,  2012  validation  meeting  and  he  was 

8  Prior  to  this  training,  Mr.  Smith  asked  Ms.  Davis  for  permission  to  rearrange  the 

desks  in  respondent’s  classroom  one  more  time  to  neaten  up  the  classroom. 

41 

  

 

provided  the  form.  Form  12  was  again  attached  to  the  Letter  of  Reprimand  with  an 
instruction  to  turn  it  in  ASAP.  As  of  the  date  she  testified  in  2014,  Ms.  Davis  had  never 
received  the  completed  absence  forms  from  respondent  for  those  dates. 

63. 

December  21,  2012  Notice  of Deficiency  of Performance  (SOC  J  2(q)):  On 

December  21,  2012,  Ms.  Davis  issued  respondent  a  Notice  of  Deficiency  of  Performance,  in 
the  area  of  “establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  suitable  learning  environment,”  based  on  her 
classroom  observations  on  December  19,  2012.  Respondent’s  students  had  worked  on  a 
calendar  gift  project,  which  incorporated  the  students’  individual  art  pictures  for  each 
calendar  month.  Respondent  had  obtained  a  sample  2012  calendar  from  Ms.  Nim  but, 
despite  repeated  reminders,  had  not  changed  the  calendar  dates  to  2013.  Ms.  Davis  observed 
Ms.  Boettner  and  a  parent  working  on  stacks  of  paper,  correcting  the  dates  on  the  calendars 
the  students  had  been  given.  This  was  necessary  to  preserve  the  students’  art  work.  Ms. 
Davis  also  observed  a  parent  volunteer  “grading  and  providing  date  book  input  for  two 
weeks’  worth  of  student  work,  Respondent’s  “lack  of  professionalism  and  preparedness  led 
to  a  chaotic  learning  environment  not  suitable  for  learning.” 

Ms.  Davis’s  recommendations  included  that  respondent  take  notes  in  meetings  with 
team  teachers,  follow  through  with  grade  level  expectations  and  that,  “if  you  make  an  error, 
you  are  responsible  for  correcting  it  (the  calendars  and  grading  student  work).”  Additional 
supports  included  providing  extra  time  for  Ms.  Boettner  to  work  in  the  class  to  help  grade 
papers  and  correct  the  calendars.  According  to  Ms.  Davis,  having  a  parent  input  grades  into 
the  grade  book  affected  student  confidentiality. 

64,  —  In  January  2013,  Ms.  Davis  observed  respondent  incorrectly  teach  Haiku 
poetry  to  90  first  grade  students  during  Bubble  Day,  a  day  of  special  bubble-related  activities 
for  LDV’s  combined  first  grade  students.  In  her  February  1,  2013  email  to  respondent  to  set 
up  a  meeting,  Ms.  Davis  emphasized  the  need  to  re-teach  Haiku  poetry  to  the  students  and 
she  inquired  about  respondent’s  plan  to  address  this  issue.  In  reply,  respondent  advised  Ms. 
Davis  to  contact  his  attorney  for  any  further  meetings.  No  remedial  action  was  taken. 

65. 

After  respondent  was  placed  on  administrative  leave,  Ms.  Davis  advised  the 
parents  that  their  children’s  report  cards  would  be  delayed  about  one  month,  until  April  5, 
2013.  Ms.  Davis  testified  that  “there  were  boxes  and  boxes  of  completed  student  work  that 
was  not  graded,  yet  the  grading  sheets  that  Mr.  Frank  had  appeared  to  show  that  the  work 
had  been  graded.”  When  this  work  was  graded,  “there  was  no  correspondence  between  the 
student  work  and  what  he  had  put  down  in  his  grade  book.  And  so  that  required  that  all  the 
report  cards  be  completed  and  be  completed  accurately.”  There  was  a  “big  issue  going  on 
with  non-graded  work  ot  a  grade  book  that  was  not  reflective  of  the  actual  student  work  in 
the  classroom.” 

Respondent's  Evidence 

66. 

Two  SCTA  representatives  testified  on  respondent’s  behalf. 

42

A. 

Robert  Lynch:  Mr.  Lynch  is  a  27-year  District  employee  who  was  SCTA’s 
second  vice-president  during  the  2010-2011  and  2011-2012  school  years.  He  has  been  its 
treasurer  since  2012-2013.  He  currently  teaches  kindergarten.  Mr.  Lynch  observed 
respondent  teach  approximately  three  times  at  Golden  Empire,  but  he  did  not  recall  if  this 
was  in  the  2010-2011,  or  the  2011-2012  school  years.  He  observed  him  on  three-to-four 
occasions  at  LDV,  one  of  which  included  attending  a  validation  meeting.  His  observations 
lasted  two  to  three  hours  each.  He  did  not  recall  who  at  SCTA  had  asked  him  to  observe 
respondent.””>  Mr.  Lynch  knew  respondent  was  on  Improvement  Plans,  but  had  not  seen 
these  plans  before  his  first  observations  at  either  site.  Ms,  Boettner  was  in  respondent’s  LDV 
classroom  during  one  of  his  observations.  Mr.  Lynch  never  asked  anyone  at  LDV  to  remove 
Ms.  Boettner  from  respondent’s  classroom,”° 

Mr.  Lynch  did  not  see  his  role  as  an  observer  to  change  anything  a  teacher  is  doing. 
After  watching  respondent  teach  kindergarten  at  Golden  Empire,  Mr.  Lynch  thought  he  had 
some  strengths  and  some  areas  he  wanted  to  discuss  with  respondent  to  see  about 
improvement  or  why  he  was  doing  something  a  certain  way.  Respondent  seemed  “tentative 
and a  little  nervous  with  the  children.”  Potential  areas  of  improvement  were  that,  at  times, 
the  children  did  not  transition  as  well  as  they  could  have  and  “seemed  as  though  maybe  they 
weren’t  paying  as  close  attention  or  they  weren’t  seated  in  the  right  place...”  Respondent 
listened  to  his  feedback. 

Mr.  Lynch  believed  respondent  seemed  “more  comfortable  teaching”  at  LDV.  His 

lessons  at  Golden  Empire  “were  good  but  he  did  seem a  little  on  edge  with  the  transitions...” 
At  LDV,  Mr.  Lynch  thought  “everything  went  really  smoothly  and  the  children  were  paying 
attention  to  him  so  he  was  able  to  move  from  one  lesson  to  the  next  fairly  smoothly...”  The 
one  time  he  reviewed  respondent’s  lesson  plans,  they  “seemed  fine.”  In  Mr.  Lynch’s 
opinion,  respondent  taught  “pretty  well”  at  Golden  Empire  and  was  doing  “an  excellent  job” 
at  LDV. 

B. 

Garald  Scott  Smith:  Mr.  Smith  was  SCTA’s  president  in  the  2011-2012,  and 
2012-2013  school  years,  and  he  is  currently  its  first  vice-president.  He  has  been  employed 
by  the  District  for  23  years,  teaching  for  all  but  the  three  years  in  which  he  has  been  released 
to  perform  union  duties.  Mr.  Smith  first  met  respondent  in  late  2012  at  LDV,  after  Mr. 
Lynch  expressed  concerns  about  Ms.  Boettner’s  presence  in  the  classroom.  Mr.  Smith 
testified  that  he  observed  respondent  on  22  occasions  between  December  2012  and  February 

”  Tn  his  deposition,  Mr.  Lynch  testified  that  he  wanted  to  keep  the  union  president 
informed  about  what  was  happening  because  the  president  had  asked  him  to  check  out  the 
situation.  He  did  not  recall  if  Mr.  Smith  was  president  or  a  vice  president  at  the  time. 

*°  Because  both  Ms,  Boettner  and  respondent  are  SCTA  members  and  respondent  did 
not  want  her  to  remain  in  the  classroom,  Mr.  Lynch  testified  that  union  officials  took  care  to 
treat  each  member  equally  and  fairly.  Mr.  Smith  denied  ever  discussing  SCTA’s  potential 
member  conflict  with  Mr.  Lynch. 

43 

 

2013,  in  two-  to  three-hour  blocks  of  time,  and  that  he  saw  himself  as  respondent’s  unofficial 
mentor.  On  at  least  two  of  these  visits,  Mr.  Smith  and  respondent  observed  Ms.  Maroldy’s 
first  grade  class.  Mr.  Smith  also  worked  with  respondent  for  several  hours  over  the  Winter 
Break  to  reorganize  his  classroom,  and  he  fixed  the  bulletin  board  to  display  art  items.  When 
Mr.  Smith  observed  respondent  in  January  2013,  Mr.  Smith  thought  his  classroom  looked 
great. 

Mr.  Smith  was  not  looking  for  specific  things  in  his  observations  and  thought  “things 

went  well”  in  respondent’s  classroom.  After  reviewing  his  deposition,  Mr.  Smith  agreed 
that,  after  his  first  visit,  he  thought  there  were  things  he  could  help  respondent  improve; 
specifically  in  the  organization  of  the  room.  Mr.  Smith  took  notes  during  his  observations, 
either  by  hand  or,  more  frequently,  by  using  his  iPad.  He  provided  three  pages  of  notes 
printed  out  from  his  iPad,  for  two  of  his  22  observations:  on  January  7,  2013  (two  pages) 
and  on  January  30,  2013.7!  Mr.  Smith  shared  some  of  his  observations  with  respondent  but 
never  gave  him  the  notes.  Typically,  he  would  share  something  positive  and  make  a 
suggestion  of  something  that  might  be  helpful  to  respondent.  Mr.  Smith  thought 
respondent’s  lesson  plans  were  “very  well  done”  and  almost  too  thorough.  He  thought 
respondent’s  pacing  went  well,  that  he  monitored  the  centers  by  checking  in  with  the  parents, 
seemed  to  have  good  conversations  with  parents,  and  his  students  seemed  happy  and 
engaged.  Mr.  Smith  thought  respondent  did  a  good  job,  and  had  “all  of  the  ingredients”  to  be 
a  good  teacher,  but  needed  the  right  support  to  improve.  He  suggested  respondent  provide 
more  detailed,  step-by-step  instructions  for  the  parents  working  at  the  centers  and  respondent: 
complied.  Mr.  Smith  cautioned  respondent  to  be  “[c]areful  of  Ms.  Boettner,  she  has  nothing 
but  negative  things  to  say,”  and  he  suggested  that  respondent  “should  probably  not  share 
much  with  her.” 

After  the  December  14,  2012  validation  meeting,  Mr.  Smith  told  Ms.  Davis  that 
respondent’s  authority  was  being  weakened  by  Ms.  Boettner’s  presence  in  the  classroom,  and 
that  he  felt  she  should  be  pulled  from  the  class  to  allow  respondent  an  opportunity  to  be  the 
teacher. 

Mr.  Smith  acknowledged  that  Ms.  Davis  gave  him  some  documents  at  the  December 
14,  2012  validation  meeting;  however,  he  disputed  Ms.  Davis’s  testimony  that  she  had  given 
him  the  47  pages  of  documents  that  were  later  attached  to  the  December  19,  2012  Letter  of 
Reprimand  (Finding  61).  According  to  Mr.  Smith,  Ms.  Davis  had  many  documents  in  front 
of  her  at  the  December  14,  2012  meeting,  but  she  only  gave  him  approximately  five  pages. 
Mr.  Smith  also  testified  that  he  told  Ms.  Davis  he  would  immediately  grieve  the  matter  and 
have  the  documents  removed  from  respondent’s  file.  As  a  result,  Ms.  Davis  “pulled  it  back;” 
i.e.,  she  retracted  the  Letter  of  Reprimand.  For  this  reason,  Mr.  Smith  never  submitted. 
anything  in  writing  as  rebuttal.  Mr.  Smith  agreed  that,  as  SCTA’s  president,  he  had  an 
obligation  to  protect  SCTA’s  members,  and  that  one  of  the  best  ways  to  do  so  is  to  keep 
members  employed. 

31  Mr,  Smith  believed  the  January  7,  2013  date  in  the  middle  of  the  second  page  of  his 

notes  applied  to  the  observations  both  above  and  below  that  date. 

44

67. 

Respondent  called  the  following  District  teachers  as  witnesses: 

A. 

Kimberly  Rae  Healey:  Ms,  Healy  was  a  special  education  teacher  who  taught 

a  special  day/learning  handicapped  class  of  fourth  through  sixth  grade  students  at  Golden 
Empire.  Ms.  Healy  was  placed  on  an  improvement  plan  during  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
She  is  now  retired. 

Ms.  Healy  knew  respondent  as  a  colleague  during  the  2010-2011,  and  2011-2012 

school  years.  For  three  or  four  months  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  she  and 
respondent  collaborated  by  having  their  students  meet  for  joint  activities  one  hour,  twice  a 
week,  Initially,  their  combined  classes  met  on  the  playground  and  then  respondent  brought 
his  students  into  her  classroom.  During  this  time,  respondent  and  Ms.  Healey  supervised,  but 
did  not  teach.  Instead,  Ms.  Healy’s  older  students  would  read  to  respondent’s  students  or 
they  would  work  on  joint  art  projects.  In  the  spring  2011,  Dr.  Eister  reduced  this  joint 
endeavor  to  once  a  week,  so  the  students  would  receive  direct  in-class  instruction.  These 
joint  activities  continued  every  other  week  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Ms.  Healy 
observed  that  respondent  interacted  well  with  children,  and  seemed  organized  and  “fun.” 

B. 

Jeannie  Tedesko  and  Eric  Malme:  Both  Ms,  Tedesko  and  Mr.  Malme  have 
worked  for  the  District  as  certificated  employees  for  many  years,  in  positions  that  did  not 
involve  teaching  in  self-contained  classrooms.  Before  being  assigned  to  teach  in  self- 
contained  classrooms  for  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Ms.  Tedesco  had  been  out  of  the 
classroom  for  nearly  18  years  while  she  worked  as  a  librarian,  and  Mr.  Malme  had  been  an 
orchestra  prep  teacher  for  several  decades. 

For  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Ms.  Tedesko  was  assigned  to  teach  second  grade  and 
Mr.  Malme  was  assigned  to  teach  third  grade  at  LDV.  Ms.  Davis  assigned  support  teachers 
to  help  both  Ms.  Tedesko  and  Mr.  Malme  in  their  return  to  teaching  curriculum,  and  Ms. 
Boettner  worked  in  both  of  their  classrooms.  Neither  witness  observed  respondent  in  his 
classroom.  Ms.  Tedesko  and  Mr.  Malme  attended  the  November  2012  training  with 
respondent.  They  testified,  consistently,  that  the  training  was  given  in  a  very  cold  room 
furnished  with  small  chairs  and  that  respondent  participated  in  the  training.  Mr.  Malme 
recalled  that  respondent  complained  of  back  spasm,  lay  down  on  the  floor  for  about  20 
minutes  to  relieve  pain,  but  remained  completely  conscious  the  whole  time.  (SOC   /(.) 
Ms.  Tedesko  and  Mr.  Malme  found  their  experiences  at  LDV  to  be  unpleasant  and  stressful. 
By  late  December  2012,  both  had  requested  to  be  reassigned  out  of  LDV  and  the  District 
accommodated  their  requests. 

; 

Cc. 

Linda  Rae  Cochran:  Ms.  Cochran  is  a  third  grade  teacher  who  has  taught  at 

LDV  since  1988.  She  has  previously  held  positions  with  SCTA,  Ms.  Cochran  met 
respondent  frequently  outside  of  his  classroom  during  the  2012-2013  school  year,  typically 
after  class  while  they  were  each  engaged  in  class  preparations.  Respondent  frequently  asked 
Ms.  Cochran’s  advice  about  LDV  practices  and  culture.  Ms,  Cochran  never  observed 
respondent  teach,  but  she  thought  the  lesson  plans  he  showed  her  were  thorough,  Her 

45 

 

practice  was  to  allow  parents  help  grade  fairly  objective  homework  as  part  of  their 
participation  hours.  Ms.  Cochran  was  aware  that  respondent  was  on  an  Improvement  Plan 
and  noted  that  he  seemed  concerned  about  doing  a  good  job  and  meeting  expectations.  She 
was  aware  Mr.  Smith  was  working  with  respondent  to  implement  his  improvement  plan  but 
she  was  not  involved  with  that  effort. 

68. 

Parents:  Respondent  called  as  witnesses:  three  parents  of  students  in  his 

Golden  Empire  class  during  the  2010-2011  school  year  (FOC  52,  MOC59,  and  MOC14  by 
Declaration);  three  parents  of  students  in  his  Golden  Empire  class  during  the  2011-2012 
school  year  (MOC61,  FOC61,  MOC62);  and  three  parents  of  students  in  his  LDV  class 
during  the  2012-2013  school  year  (MOC15,  FOC15,  MOC63).  Each  of  these  parents  had 
positive  impressions  of  respondent  as  a  teacher,  believed  their  children  liked  him;  and 
believed  he  communicated  with  them  in  a  courteous  and  professional  manner. 

69.  .  Respondent’s  Testimony:  In  his  testimony,  respondent  reviewed  copies  of  his 

lesson  plans,  his  WAAGS,  photographs  of  his  LDV  classroom  and  centers,  and  copies  of 
letters  and  cards  he  received  from  students in  his  classes  at  each  site  during  the  relevant 
period,  which  expressed  positive  sentiments  about  him.  He  described  his  classroom  teaching 
practices,  his  interactions  with  Dr.  Eister,  Ms.  Mondzak,  Ms.  Davis  and  Ms.  Boettner,  and 
his  efforts  to  comply  with  the  Improvement  Plans  at  Golden  Empire  and  LDV. 

Respondent  did  not  believe  he  needed  an  Improvement  Plan  in  May  2010,  and  he  told 

Mr.  Lewis  so.  He  and  Mr.  Lewis  simply  professionally  disagreed  on  this  and  he  complied. 
Respondent  thought  that,  like  anyone  else  in  the  profession,  there  was  a  need  to  continually 
“improve  the  craft.”  Although  expressing  respect  for  Mr.  Lewis,  respondent  considered  Oak 
Ridge  to  have  been  a  hostile  working  environment.  He  left  when  a  new  principal  told  him  he 
would  never  allow  respondent  to  teach  kindergarten.”  During  the  2010-2011  school  year, 
respondent  believed  that  Ms.  Mondzak  only  stayed  in  his  classroom  for  15  to  20  minutes  at  a 
time  after  teaching  her  class.  Respondent  disputed  the  accuracy  of  Ms.  Mondzak’s 
observations,  and  explained  his  teaching  practices  and  how  he  led  students  through  longer 
projects. 

Respondent  conceded  that  he  is  “not  a  superior  teacher  by  any  means.”  Still, 
respondent  explained  his  belief  that,  at  all  times  within  the  relevant  period  at  all  three  school 
sites,  he  was  performing  within  the  District’s  evaluation  category  of  “working  to  meet 
performance  standards”;  i.e.,  that  he  was  performing  below  the  rating  “consistent  with 
performance  standards,”  but  above  the  unsatisfactory  rating  of  “does  not  meet  performance 
standards.”*?  He  did  not  recall  submitting  a  written  response  to  his  March  28,  2011  formal 
evaluation,  because  he  did  not  think  it  would  affect  the  outcome.  Respondent  respected  Dr. 

»  The  self-surplus  process  does  not  allow  a  teacher  to  select  which  grade  he  will 

teach. 

33  Respondent  also  testified  that  he  thought  his  performance  was  “satisfactory”  when 

the  45/90  Day  Notice  was  issued  in  early  November  2012. 

46

Eister,  thought  she  tried  to  help  him,  but  he  was  intimidated  by  her  “professional  zeal.”  He 
did  not  file  any  written  response  to  any  of  his  Improvement  Plans,  and  did  not  believe  he 
needed  to  be  on  any  of  the  Improvement  Plans  issued  after  the  formal  evaluation.  While 
respondent  professed  to  respect  and  work  professionally  with  both  Mr.  Lewis  and  Dr.  Eister, 
he  believed  that  both  sites  had  elements  of  a  hostile  workplace.  He  believed  LDV  was  a 
hostile  workplace  in  connection  with  the  statement  made  to  him  by  MOC4  in  November 
2012,  but  he  never  asked  to  have  MOC4  removed  from  the  classroom  and  he  agreed  that  her 
subsequent  communications  with  him  were  professional  and  not  threatening. 

Respondent  testified  repeatedly  that  he  did  not  recall  “one  way  or  the  other”  receiving 

numerous  disciplinary  letters  at  or  near  the  time  they  were  issued,  and  that  he  did  not  recall 
one  way  or  the  other  submitting  a  written  response  to  factual  assertions  contained  in  these 
letters,  Nevertheless,  respondent  was  able  to  recount  factual  responses  to  events  referenced 
in  these  documents  with  surprising  detail,  At  hearing,  respondent  offered  three  written 
responses  he  authored,  regarding:  confidentiality  (November  12,  2010  [Findings  18,  19]); 
teaching  lesson  objectives  (November  26,  2012  [Findings  54  and  57])*;  and  his  concern 
about  MOC4’s  comments  to  him  (Finding  56).  Respondent  acknowledged  that  there  was  no 
evidence  that  he  had  ever  directly  provided  these  written  responses  to  anyone  in  the  District, 
and  he  did  not  specifically  recall  whether  he  had  done  so.  Respondent  believed  his  practice 
would  have  been  to  type  up  his  thoughts  and  give  the  documents  to  someone  at  SCTA  to 
review  and  discuss  with  him,  but  he  had  no  clear  recollection  of  having  done  so. 

Respondent  generally  denied  or  explained  his  conduct  in  the  majority  of  the  incidents 
addressed  in  the  documents  and  testimony  discussed  above.  Respondent  categorically  denied 
making  negative  comments  about  other  District  schools  at  BTS  Night.  He  testified  that  it 
was  not  helpful  to  have  Ms.  Boettner  in  his  classroom  during  the  2012-2013  school  year 
because  there  were  many  interruptions  during  instruction  time.  He  took  notes  at  the 
November  2012  training,  but  he  did  not  refute  Ms.  Davis’s  statement  that  he  said  he  was  “not 
told  to  take  notes.”  Respondent  did  not  believe  Ms.  Davis  was  providing  him  support  on  his 
Improvement  Plan,  but  he  never  told  her  that.  Respondent  testified  that  Ms.  Davis  told  him 
to  allow  parent  volunteers  to  grade  student  homework.  He  reviewed  homework  graded  by 
parent-volunteers  to  determine  whether  students  were  achieving  their  general  objectives.  He 
conceded  that  he  did  not  put  any  grade  or  notation  on  the  homework  he  reviewed,  even  if  his 
review  indicated  that  the  student  was  not  meeting  objectives.  He  denied  allowing  a  parent  to 
file  graded  student  papers  and  recalled  that  this  occurred  when  a  parent  misunderstood  his 
instructions  and  filed  confidential  papers  that  were  in  a  different  pile  than  the  one  he  had 
meant  her  to  file,  He  never  denied  that  his  handwriting  was  on  a  student’s  paper,  but  told  the 
parent  questioning  him  that  another  person  had  put  a  stamp  on  it.  He  denied  leaving  students 

34  Tn  a  document  dated  October  26,  2012,  respondent  indicated  that  his  lesson  was  not 

finished  by  recess  time  and  that  he  returned  after  recess  “to  focus  on  that  portion  of  the 
lesson  and  provided  my  students  enough  time  (with  thorough  explanation  and  dialogue  about 
possessive  nouns  and  their  relation  to  using  apostrophe  s)  to  verbalize,  write  about  and 
reflect  upon  these  concepts...”  (Underline  in  original.)  This  response  was  attached  to  his 
attorney’s  December  14,  2012  letter  to  the  District. 

47 

  
 

unsupervised  in  classroom.  Ms.  Boettner  provided  him  with  the  incorrect  calendar  for  the 
student  art  project  and  he  and  his  family  spent  time  making  corrections.  Although  never 
previously  mentioned  in  response  to  the  Letter  of  Reprimand,  respondent  testified  that  he 
was  consoling  a  “distraught”  parent  at  the  back  of  the  classroom  on  May  24,  2012,  when  Dr. 
Eister  observed  him  not  teaching  or  engaging  with  his  students.  (Finding  34.) 

At  the  December  14,  2012  validation  meeting,  respondent  discussed  not  receiving  any 

absence  forms  to  fill  out.  When  asked  if  he  had  ever  turned  in  the  attendance  forms  (Form 
12)  for  his  September  2012  absences,  respondent  had  no  recollection  either  way  and  could 
only  say  that  he  turned  in  whatever  forms  he  had  received  in  his  box.  He  denied  that  Ms. 
Davis  ever  asked  him  to  complete  these  forms. 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

DISCUSSION 

70. 

The  overwhelming  weight  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  respondent’s 

performance  in  the  classroom  during  the  2010-2011  through  the  2012-2013  school  years  was 
unsatisfactory  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct. 

71. 

Dr.  Eister  was  uniquely  qualified  to  assist  respondent  and  to  observe  and 

evaluate  his  performance  as  a  teacher  during  his  two  years  at  Golden  Empire.  Dr.  Eister 
obtained  her  Bachelor’s  and  Master’s  degrees  from  CSUS.  In  2004,  she  obtained  a 
Doctorate  in  Educational  Administration  from  the  University  of  LaVerne.  She  has  a  general 
education  elementary  credential  (1987),  a  clear  cross-language  credential  and  an 
administrative  credential  (approximately  1999).  She  has  broad  experience  as  a  teacher  in 
various  capacities  with  the  District.  Before  becoming  an  administrator,  Dr.  Eister  taught 
elementary  school  (4th-5th  combination)  for  nine  years.  She  served  briefly  as  a  reading 
coach.  For  the  next  four  years,  Dr.  Eister  was  a  Student  Achievement  Specialist  for  the 
District,  assigned  to  at-risk  schools,  which  had  fewer  than  two  out  of  ten  students  performing 
at  grade  level.  Dr.  Eister  then  became  the  District’s  Coordinator  of  Professional  Education. 
During  her  five  years  in  this  role,  she  coordinated  and  provided  professional  development, 
learning  scenarios  and  trainings  for  “anyone”  in  the  District.  This  included  classified, 
certificated  and  administrative  employees.  Dr.  Eister  then  became  the  principal  at  Golden 
Empire,  a  neighborhood  school,  where  she  has  served  for  the  past  10  years.  Based  on  her 
training,  experience  and  the  amount  of  time  she  spent  observing  and  working  with 
respondent  on  his  Improvement  Plans  and  evaluations,  Dr.  Eister’s  testimony  about 
respondent’s  consistent  deficiencies  and  failure  to  demonstrate  appreciable  improvement  was 
very  persuasive. 

. 

72. 

Dr.  Eister’s  testimony  regarding  respondent’s  performance  in  both  the  2010- 

2011,  and  2011-2012  school  years  was  more  persuasive  than  that  of  respondent.  Dr.  Eister’s 
testimony  regarding  the  2010-2011  school  years  was  strongly  supported  by  that  of  Ms. 
Mondzak,  who  she  described  as  an  “exemplary”  kindergarten  teacher.  Ms.  Mondzak  had  an 

48

extensive  opportunity  to  observe  respondent’s  teaching  and  classroom  management  abilities. 
(Findings  22  —  24.)  She  testified  that  she  had  never  complained  about  another  teacher 
before,  but  felt  she  had  a  “certain  duty  to  students”  to  make  her  concerns  about  respondent 
known.  Ms,  Mondzak’s  testimony  was  very  credible,  and  much  more  persuasive  than  that  of 
respondent.  The  testimony  of  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Mondzak  was  also  more  persuasive  than 
that  of: 
(a)  Ms.  Healy,  who  was  on  an  improvement  plan  herself  and  did  not  observe 
respondent  teach;  (b)  Mr.  Lynch,  who  saw  respondent  on  only  two  to  three  occasions;  and  (c) 
parents  who  testified  regarding  their  interactions  with  respondent  at  Golden  Empire. 

73. 

Similarly,  Ms.  Davis  was  well-qualified  to  assist  respondent  and  to  observe 

and  evaluate  his  performance  as  a  teacher.  Ms,  Davis  has  been  the  principal  of  LDV  for  six 
years,  She  holds  Master’s  Degrees  in  English  (1995)  and  in  Educational  Administration 
(2000),  with  an  undergraduate  degree  in  Theatre  Arts,  She  has  an  adult  education  teaching 
credential  which  authorizes  her  to  teach  grades  K-8  in  English  and  Math.  While  completing 
her  teaching  degree,  Ms.  Davis  worked  for  the  Very  Special  Arts  Program  in  1990,  and 
taught  writing,  visual  and  performing  arts  to  students  as  a  push-in  specialist  teacher.  She 
taught  English  language  arts  and  theatre  arts  at  a  private  school  from  1994  to  2000,  and  then 
taught  as  a  classroom  teacher  at  a  public  school  for  one  year.  Ms.  Davis  has  worked  at  the 
District  since  2001,  when  she  became a  full-time  administrator,  She  worked  at  two  high 
schools,  before  becoming  LDV’s  principal.  During  her  tenure  as  LDV’s  principal,  Ms. 
Davis  has  had  substantial  experience  in  assisting,  observing  and  evaluating  teachers  and 
providing  them  with  appropriate  feedback  and  support. 

74, 

Ms,  Davis’s  testimony  about  respondent’s  performance  in  the  2012-2013 

school  year  was  more  persuasive  than  that  of  respondent  and  other  witnesses. 

Mr.  Smith’s  testimony  was  less  persuasive  for  several  reasons.  First,  as  reflected in 

his  observation  notes,  even  in  January  2013,  respondent  needed  to  be  reminded  of  very  basic 
teaching  and  classroom  management  strategies.*> Second,  the  absence  of  notes  from  the  vast 
majority  of  Mr.  Smith’s  observations  strongly  suggests  either  that  there  were  fewer  than  22 
:  observations,  or  that  there  was  a  culling  of  observation  notes  that  might  be  detrimental  to 
respondent.*®  Third,  Mr.  Smith  did  not  recall  the  substance  of  much  of  the  discussion  at  the 

*  For  example,  Mr.  Smith  queried:  “Is  agenda  up  to  date?”  and  “what’s  the  point  of 

the  groups?  What  are  they  to  learn?”  He  asked  respondent  whether  there  was  anything  he 
“could  show  the  students  that  they  could  touch  that  would  relate  to  the  lesson?”  Mr,  Smith 
noted  that  respondent  was  “interrupted  5  times  in  7  minutes  —  perhaps  remind  them  each  day 
in  the  morning  your  expectations  for  them  and  have  them  repeat  it  back  to  you  in  their  own 
words,”  He  suggested  that  respondent  “come  up  with  a  new  class  rules  sheet  written  in  their 
own  language,”  noting  that  “show  your  appreciation  =  say  when  you  like  something...”  He 
suggested  that  respondent  engage  high  functioning  bored  students  by  giving  them  additional 
materials  and  using  them  as  student  tutors, 

*°Mr,  Smith  was  not  required  to  sign  in  with  the  District  for  his  observations  of 

respondent’s  class.  Ms.  Cochran’s  classroom  was  in  close  proximity  to  respondent’s 

49 

 

December  14,  2012,  validation  meeting.  His  testimony  that  he  did  not  receive  certain 
documents  from  Ms.  Davis  at  that  meeting  and  that  Ms.  Davis  “pulled  back”  the  related 
Letter  of  Reprimand  is  viewed  in  light  of  his  poor  recollection  in  general  and  Ms.  Davis’s 
testimony  that  he  was  preoccupied  with  his  iPad  during  much  of  the  meeting.  Further,  the 
full  procedural  record  suggests  that  the  action  “pulled  back”  or  withdrawn  by  the  District  was 
more  likely  the  September  20,  2012,  45/90  Day  Notice,  which  it  reissued  in  November. 
(Findings  38,  52.)  Fourth,  in  his  testimony,  Mr.  Smith  provided  helpful  information  about 
respondent  that  conflicted  in  a  number  of  ways  ftom  his  earlier  statements  during  his  two- 
day  deposition. 

Mr.  Malme,  Ms.  Tedesko  and  Ms.  Cochran  did  not  observe  respondent  teaching  his 
LDV  class.  Mr.  Lynch’s  opinion  that  respondent  was  doing  “an  excellent  job”  at  LDV,  was 
much  less  persuasive  than  that  of  Ms.  Davis,  based  on  her  consistent  and  highly-engaged 
interaction  with  respondent  during  the  2012-2013  school  year. 

75. 

Respondent’s  testimony  about  his  subjective  belief  that  he  was  not  an 

unsatisfactory  teacher  but  was  at  least  “working  to  meet  performance  standards,”  at  all  times 
during  the  relevant  period,  was  not  objectively  reasonable  and  is  not  credible.  Respondent’s 
consistently  poor  memory  about  significant  employment  events  and  his  failure  to  provide  any 
contemporaneous  response  to  disciplinary  letters  contrasted  sharply  with  his  memory  about 
specific  events  at  hearing  and  made  his  testimony  less  credible  than  that  of  Dr.  Eister,  Ms. 
Mondzak,  and  Ms.  Davis.  In  his  testimony,  respondent  denied  that  he  blamed  others  for  his 
acts  ot  omissions,  but  this  denial  was  not  consistent  with  other  portions  of  his  testimony,  or 
the  testimony  of  these  witnesses.  When  confronted  by  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Davis  about 
specific  statements  he  made  or  his  conduct,  respondent  frequently  replied  by  making 
statements  which  deflected  responsibility  and  raised  questions  about  his  honesty,  which 
further  eroded  their  confidence  in  him.  (Findings  33,  54,  57.) 

76. 

During  the  relevant  period,  respondent  was  provided  with  more  than  adequate 
assistance  to  meet  the  District’s  standards.  He  was  given  a  sufficient  opportunity  both  before 
and  during  the  45/90  Day  Notice  period  to  correct  his  deficiencies.  The  record  demonstrates 
that,  at  Golden  Empire,  respondent  was  provided  with  intensive  support  and  feedback  from 
Dr.  Hister,  including  by  pairing  him  with  Ms.  Mondzak  for  a  full  year.  It  also  demonstrates 
that  respondent  was  provided  with  intensive  support  and  feedback  from  Ms.  Davis  at  LDV, 
including  by  assigning  him  near-daily  support  from  Ms.  Boettner  through  mid-December 
2012.  Despite  these  supports,  neither  Dr.  Eister  nor  Ms.  Davis  saw  respondent  demonstrate 
any  significant  improvement  in  his  deficient  areas. 

In  this  regard,  respondent’s  argument  that  the  District  had  an  obligation  to  provide 

him  a  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (“PAR”)  mentor  under  Article  20  the  District’s  Collective 

  

classroom.  Ms.  Cochran  knew  Mr.  Smith,  and  had  conversations  with  him  before  and  after 
times  Mr.  Smith  was  observing  respondent’s  classroom.  Ms.  Cochran  testified  she  believed 
Mr.  Smith  dedicated  five  or  six  days  to  his  efforts  to  help  respondent.  Respondent  testified 
that  Mr.  Smith  was  in  his  classroom  on  “10  to  up  to  20”  occasions. 

50

 

Bargaining  Agreement  (CBA)  with  SCTA  is  not  persuasive.”  Section  44664,  subdivision 
(c),  requires  “the  placement  of  a  teacher  with  an  unsatisfactory  evaluation  into  a  PAR 
program  by  any  district  that  has  such  a  program.”  While  the  CBA  had  a  provision  for  such  a 
program,  the  CBA  required  creation  of  a  joint  committee  that  was  never  established.  Any 
related  funds  received  by  the  District  were  discretionary  funds  that  were  not  dedicated  to  this 
program.  Consequently,  there  was  no  PAR  program  implemented  in  the  District  during  the 
relevant  period  from  which  PAR  mentors  for  respondent  could  have  been  drawn. 

77. 

Respondent’s  theory  that  the  District,  in  effect,  set  him  up  for  failure  by 

assigning  him  to  LDV  for  the  2012-2013  school  year,  rather  than  allowing  him  to  select  two 
sites  for  assignment  after  he  elected  to  self-surplus  from  Golden  Empire  in  August  of  2012, 
is  not  persuasive.  Respondent  did  not  decide  to  self-surplus  until  late  August  2012, 
approximately  one-to-two  weeks  before  the  start  of  the  new  school  year.  Although 
respondent  had  experience  with  the  District’s  typical  self-surplus  process,  when  he  did  not 
hear  from  the  District,  he  made  no  efforts  to  contact  Human  Resources  about  his  late  need 
for  reassignment.  In  addition,  respondent’s  experience  was  not  unique.  Mr.  Malme  testified 
that  he  was  assigned  to  LDV  without  being  given  any  choices  as  part  of  the  surplus  process. 

78, 

Respondent’s  theory  that  he  was  the  victim  of  a  cabal  of  elitist  parents,  who 

held  him  to  standards  that  were  too  high,  and  effectively  helped  the  District  to  place  him  on 
administrative  leave  pending  discharge  proceedings  is  also  unpersuasive.  The  testimony  of 
Mothers  of  Children  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6  about  their  individual  experiences  and  observations  of 
respondent  were  highly  consistent  with  deficiencies  observed  by  Ms.  Davis.  None  of  the 
parent  witnesses  called  by  either  party  are  credentialed  teachers;  however,  the  testimony  of 
these  parent  witnesses  is  more  persuasive  than  that  of  MOC15,  FOC15  and  MOC63,  who 
had  less  of  an  opportunity  to  observe  and  interact  with  respondent  at  LDV.  Moreover,  the 
complaints  by  the  LDV  parents  were  not  unique,  but  were  in  areas  that  had  been  the  focus  of 
concern  about  respondent’s  performance  throughout  his  two  years  at  Golden  Empire,  as 
credibly  detailed  by  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Mondzak. 

Similarly,  respondent’s  theory  that  Ms.  Boettner  participated  in  his  removal  from  the 

classroom,  to  her  personal  benefit,  is  not  persuasive.  The  evidence  established  that  Ms. 
Davis  initially  assigned  Ms,  Boettner  along  with  other  substitutes  to  assist  several  new 
teachers.  Shortly  thereafter,  Ms.  Boettner  was  assigned  to  respondent’s  classroom  based  on 
Ms.  Davis’s  assessment  that  he  required  ongoing  support,  as  well  as  to  ensure  consistency  for 
respondent’s  students  given  his  many  absences.  Ms.  Boettner  was  specifically  instructed  by 
Ms.  Davis  that  her  role  in  respondent’s  class  was  not  as  an  evaluator. 

79, 

The  weight  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  respondent  did  not  improve  his 

performance  or  his  professional  conduct  in  any  meaningful  way  by  March  7,  2013,  four 
months  after  the  45/90  Day  Notice  was  issued. 

37  The  parties  stipulated  that  provisions  for  a  “PAR”  program  existed  in  Article  6  and 
Appendix  H  of  the  CBA),  and  that  the  District  did  not  place  respondent  or  any  other  teacher 
in  a  PAR  program  in  the  school  years  extending  from  2009-2010  through  2012  -2013. 

51 

While  witnesses  agreed  that  some  improvements  were  seen  in  early  2013,  these  were 

not  substantial  or  sufficient  to  ameliorate  the  conduct  addressed  in  the  45/90  Day  Notice,™® 
Some  improvements,  particularly  in  respondent’s  classroom  set  up,  were  attributable  to  the 
infusion  of  support  provided  by  Mr.  Smith  beginning  in  late  December  2012.  In  addition, 
respondent’s  conduct  and  performance  after  the  45/90  Day  Notice  largely  reinforced  the 
reasons  for  its  issuance,  in  areas  of  parental  communication,”  in  his  teaching  coherence  and 
accuracy  (Bubble  Day  Haiku  poetry  lesson),  and  by  his  violation  of  confidentiality  (allowing 
parents  to  input  grades  into  grade  book  [Finding  63]).  The  evidence  persuasively  established 
that  respondent  has  been  consistently  unable  to  make,  incorporate  and  sustain  meaningful 
changes  in  his  classroom  teaching,  management  and  communication  style.  He  was  unable  to 
do  so  in  spite  of  significant  resources  offered  to  assist  him  over  many  years  and  during  the 
four  months  after  his  revised  45/90  Day  Notice  was  issued. 

80. 

Compliance  with  Education  Sections  44938  and  44664:  The  District  did  not 

produce  evidence  that  respondent  was  formally  evaluated  on  or  after  March  28,  2012,  as 
required  by  section  44664,  subdivision  (b),  in  light  of  his  unsatisfactory  evaluation  the  prior 
year.  (Finding  32.)  When  the  District  issued  its  45/90  Day  Notice,  it  attached  the  March  28, 
2011  Formative  Evaluation.  Section  44938  requires  that  the  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory 
performance  and/or  unprofessional  conduct  “shall  include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to 
Article  11  (commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee.” 
(Finding  53.) 

Respondent  argues  that  the  District’s  failure  to  perform  a  formal  performance 
evaluation  in  or  after  March  2012,  and  its  failure  to  attach  that  evaluation  to  the  45/90  Day 
Notice,  deprives  the  Commission  of  subject  matter  jurisdiction  to-consider  charges  of 
dismissal  based  on  either  unsatisfactory  performance  or  unprofessional  conduct.  As  reflected 

8  For  example,  while  MOCS  noted  some  improvements  in  respondent’s  instructions 

to  parent  volunteers  for  centers  and  in  his  WAAGS,  she  testified  that  “the  meat  of  it  was 
missing.  The  actual  teaching  and  handing  down  of  knowledge  and  passing  it  on  and 
explaining  and  helping  the  kids  to  understand  the  different  lessons,  that  was  still  missing.” 

**  For  example,  on  December  12,  2012,  respondent  sent  the  following  mass  email  to 

the  parents  of  students  in  his  class,  with  a  copy  to  Ms.  Milevsky  at  SCTA: 

A  parent  asked  me  if  I  had  sent  out  this  week’s  school  newsletter  and  I  said  I  hadn’t 
received  a  set  in  my  box.  What  happened  was  that  another  staff  member  must  of 
accidentally  taken  my  set  because  I  found  it  in  my  box  later. 
inconvenience  but  sometimes  life  happens  to  us  all. 
took  the  set  but  they  did  return  it. 
cubby  to  take  home  tomorrow.  Late  but  mystery  solved.” 

So,  at  least  I  was  able  to  put  it  in  your  student’s 

I  don’t  know  who  accidentally 

I  apologize  for  the 

Respondent’s  handwritten  note  on  this  email  provides:  “Principal  recommends:  ‘Just  get  30 
more  newsletters  &  send  them  out’  &  NO  email.” 

52

in  the  April  25,  2014  Ruling  on  Respondent’s  Motion  to  Dismiss  on  these  grounds,  the 
Commission  has  subject  matter  jurisdiction,  including  over  the  related  factual  issues  of 
substantial  compliance  with  the  Education  Code  and  whether  any  legal  errors  by  the  District 
in  pursuing  respondent’s  dismissal  were  prejudicial  or  non-substantive. 

81.  | Nonsubstantive  Procedural  Errors:  Education  Code  section  44944, 

subdivision  (c)(2),  provides  that:  “  [t]he  decision  of  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  that  the  employee  should  not  be  dismissed  or  suspended  shall  not  be  based  on 
nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or  governihg  board  unless 
the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.” 

Deciphering  this  somewhat  awkward  statutory  language,  a  procedural  error  becomes 
a  substantive  error  when  it  is  prejudicial  to  the  teacher  subject  to  the  dismissal  action.  In  this 
case,  the  crucial  issue  is  whether,  after  receiving  his  unsatisfactory  March  28,  2011  formal 
evaluation,  respondent  could  reasonably  have  believed  that  the  District  no  longer  deemed  his 
performance  to  be  unsatisfactory,  and  that  he  was  thereby  prejudiced  by  not  knowing  that  he 
needed  to  take  steps  to  meet  those  standards  and  to  improve  his  performance. 

82. 

Substantial  Compliance:  A  review  of  the  record  demonstrates  that  the  four 
CSTP  areas  in  which  respondent  needed  improvement  in  the  May  4,  2010,  Improvement 
Plan  were  the  precise  focus  of  the  March  28,  2011  Evaluation,  and  that  respondent  was  rated 
unsatisfactory  (“does  not  meet  performance  standards”)  in  each  of  these  areas.  Three  months 
later,  based  on  his  unsatisfactory  performance,  a  new  Improvement  Plan  in  the  same  areas 
was  developed.  The  same  subject  areas  were  covered  in  the  Improvement  Plans  dated  June 
10,  2012,  and  October  15,  2012.  Respondent  signed  each  of  the  Improvement  Plans  directly 
under  an  “Employee’s  Acknowledgement,”  which  stated  in  pertinent  part:  “This 
improvement  plan  is  required  for  teachers  whose  summary  rating  is  less  than  (Working  to 
meet  performance  standards)...”  The  only  lower  rating  is  “does  not  meet  performance 
standards.”  In  the  three  post-evaluation  Letters  of  Deficiency  issued  to  respondent  (in 
October  and  December  2011,  and  in  December  2012),  the  District  clearly  communicated  its 
concern  that  respondent  was  not  meeting  performance  standards  in  teaching,  based  on  the 
formal  classroom  observations  conducted  on  October  19,  and  December  14,  2011,  and  on 
December  19,  2012.  In  addition,  after  his  next  evaluation  was  due  (March  28,  2012),  similar 
serious  concerns  about  respondent’s  performance  were  repeatedly  detailed  in  numerous 
letters  of  concern,  letters  of  reprimand,  and  performance  observations,  each  of  which 
underscored  respondent’s  continuing  failure  to  meet  performance  standards.  Respondent 
was  clearly  on  notice  that  his  performance  was  below  minimum  standards,  and  that  he 
needed  to  improve  his  performance,  Respondent’s  subjective  belief  that  he  was  “working  to 
meet  performance  standards”  is  simply  not  reasonable, 

83. 

Based  on  the  overwhelming  record  of  disciplinary  letters  and  Improvement 

Plans  in  this  matter,  it  cannot  be  said  that  respondent  was  the  victim  of  prejudicial  error. 

A. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance:  The  record  supports  a  finding  that  respondent  is 

appropriately  subject  to  dismissal  based  on  unsatisfactory  performance  in  the  2010-2011 

53 

  

 

school  year,  and  for  unsatisfactory  performance  through  March  28,  2012  of  the  2011-  2012 
school  year.  Because  the  District  failed  to  produce  a  formal  evaluation  of  respondent  on  or 
after  March  28,  2011,  it  violated  the  annual  evaluation  mandate  of  section  44644,  subdivision 
(b).  Respondent  cannot  be  dismissed  based  on  unsatisfactory  performance  from  March  28, 
2012,  through  the  time  he  was  placed  on  administrative  leave,  approximately  11  months 
later. 

At  all  at  times  subsequent  to  March  28,  2012,  however,  respondent  was  repeatedly 

notified  by  the  District,  in  great  and  consistent  detail,  that  his  performance  was  unsatisfactory 
and  that  he  needed  to  remediate  and  improve  his  performance.  Respondent’s  performance 
did  not  significantly  improve  in  the  11  months  following  the  time  at  which  the  annual 
evaluation  was  due,  or  in  nearly  four  months  after  issuance  of  the  45/90  Day  Notice. 

B. 

Unprofessional  Conduct:  The  District’s  failure  to  attach  a  more  current 

evaluation  to  its  45/90  Day  Notice  does  not  prohibit  it  from  seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
unprofessional  conduct  during  the  relevant  period.  The  failure  to  include  a  more  current 
evaluation  is  not  a  jurisdictional  defect;  rather,  it  is  an  “evidentiary  consideration”  to  be 
considered  in  light  of  the  evidentiary  record  as  a  whole.  (Crowl  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (Crowl)  (1990)  225  Cal.App.3d  334,  349.)  As  set  forth  in  Finding 
82,  the  record  establishes  that  the  District  substantially  complied  with  section  44938  by 
providing  respondent  ample  notice  over  many  years  of  the  need  to  improve  his  professional 
conduct. 

Fitness  to  Teach 

84. 

Whether  respondent  is  appropriately  subject  to  dismissal  for  unprofessional 

conduct  or  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)  (1)  and  (5),  turns  on  an  analysis  of  his  fitness  to  teach.“° 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230,  the  State 

Board  of  Education  revoked  a  teacher’s  teaching  certificates  based  upon  conduct  alleged  to 
be  “immoral”  or  “unprofessional”  under  the  Education  Code.  On  review,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  held  that  conduct  cannot  be  determined  to  be  “immoral”  or  “unprofessional” 
unless  it  first  indicates  a  teacher’s  “unfitness  to  teach.”  The  Court  identified  the  following 
factors  to  be  considered  in  determining  whether  a  teacher’s  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to 
teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time 
of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved;  (5)  the 
extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the 

“©  When  reviewing  a  school  district’s  dismissal  action  against  a  certificated  employee 

based  solely  upon  unsatisfactory  performance  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(4),  there  is  no  need  to  apply  the  standards  of  fitness  to  teach  set  forth  in 
Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1175-1176.) 

54

praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the 
likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Similarly,  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  Board  of 
Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560, 
stated: 

, 

Our  high  court  in  Board  of Education  vy.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19 
Cal,.3d'691,  delineates  the  process  to  be  considered  in 
determining  fitness.  This  opinion  upheld  the  standard 
established  in  Morrison  that  a  discharged  teacher  is  entitled  to  a 
fitness  hearing  in  which  not  only  his  conduct  but  also  these 
factors  are  analyzed:  (1)  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the 
questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 
circumstances,  if  any;  (3)  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity; 
(4)  impairment  of  teachers  and  students  relationships;  (5) 
disruption  of  educational  process;  (6)  motive;  (7)  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  conduct. 

Courts  have  suggested  that  “fitness  to  teach”  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (Board  of 

Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  102  Cal.App.3d  at  560-561, 
citing  Board  v.  Jack  M.,  supra,  19  Cal,3d  691,  698,  fn.  3.)  Similar  requirements  are  imposed 
on  charges  of  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.,  supra,  19 
Cal.3d  at  698.)  The  fitness  criteria  are  applied  to  the  facts  of  this  case,  as  set  forth  below. 

85. 

Likelihood  and  Degree  of Adverse  Impact  of  Conduct  on  Students  or 

Teachers:  Respondent’s  conduct  over  the  relevant  period  adversely  affected  both  his 
students  and  his  fellow  teachers.  It  is  not  unusual  for  young  children  to  like  their  teachers. 
Even  assuming  the  accuracy  of  respondent’s  hearsay  evidence  that  his  students  liked  him, 
missed  him,  or  considered  him  to  be  a  great  “goofball”  of  a  teacher,  this  does  not  mean  that 
respondent’s  performance  and  conduct  did  not  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  them. 
Kindergarten  and  first  grade  students  are  at  a  particularly  vulnerable  educational  stage. 
Respondent’s  students  required  an  effective  learning  environment  with  procedures  and 
routines  that  supported  their  learning  and  fostered  positive  behaviors.  They  needed 
instruction  that  was  designed,  sequenced  and  delivered  coherently  with  clear  objectives. 
They  needed  instructional  strategies  that  were  tailored  to  their  diverse  needs,  and  they  needed 
to  be  accurately  assessed  so  that  teaching  or  re-teaching  could  occur  and  give  them  an 
educational  foundation  to  sustain  them  in  the  future.  As  repeatedly  documented  in  the 
observations  of  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Davis,  respondent’s  students  were  adversely  affected  by 
not  receiving  appropriate  instruction  in  a  well-regulated  classroom.  As  the  credentialed 
teacher  responsible  for  organizing,  conveying  and  instilling  knowledge  through  the 
curriculum,  respondent  fell  far  short  of  the  mark.  While  it  is  not  possible  to  quantify  the 
degree  of  adverse  impact  on  respondents’  students,  it  can  reasonably  be  inferred  that  the 
effect  of  exposure  to  respondent’s  consistent  deficiencies  in  instruction,  class  management, 
and  assessment  will  have  some  lasting  impact. 

55 

 

Respondent’s  grade-level  teaching  teams  at  Golden  Empire  and  LDV  were  also 
affected  by  his  conduct.  As  reflected  in  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Eister,  Ms.  Davis  and  Ms. 
Mondzak,  these  teachers  were  not  able  to  rely  on  respondent  to  follow  the  agreed  upon 
pacing  or  to  disseminate  correct  information  to  parents.  They  were  not  able  to  rely  on  the 
content  of  his  assessments.  Respondent’s  conduct  caused  additional  work  for  the  teachers  on 
his  grade-level  teams. 

86. 

Disruption  of Educational  Process:  As  detailed  above,  respondent’s 

deficiencies  resulted  in  the  expenditure  of  a  tremendous  amount  of  educational  resources 
(e.g.,  by  requiring  an  additional  teacher  in  the  classroom  on  almost  a  daily  basis;  by  requiring 
time  and  resources  to  address  complaints).  Respondent’s  deficiencies  resulted  in  a  disruption 
of  students’  educational  process  manifested  by  reduced  instructional  time  and  unclear 
objectives. 

87.. 

 Praiseworthiness  or  Blameworthiness  of Respondent's  Motives:  Respondent’s 

conduct  and  performance  is  blameworthy  because  of  his  failure  to  accept  responsibility  and 
his  pattern  of  shifting  blame  to  others  for  his  deficiencies. 

88. 

Proximity  or  Remoteness  in  Time  and  Likelihood  of Recurrence  of the 

Questioned  Conduct:  Respondent’s  conduct  has  persisted  and  been  consistent  throughout 
the  relevant  period.  While  Dr.  Eister  saw  some  improvements  in  lesson  plans  and  some 
minor  improvements  were  seen  in  early  2013,  respondent’s  conduct  and  performance  has  not 
significantly  improved.  The  likelihood  that  respondent’s  conduct  will  continue  in  a  similar 
vein  if  he  is  returned  to  the  classroom  is  high. 

89. 

Extenuating  or  Agegravating  Circumstances:  As  extenuating  factors, 

respondent  was  consistently  described  as  a  nice,  professional  and  courteous  man.  Some 
parents  at  Golden  Empire  and  LDV  liked  him.  Respondent  seemed  to  like  his  students,  he 
remained in  the  classroom  after  the  school  day  to  prepare,  and  he  sought  out ‘professional 
collaboration  with  Ms.  Healy  and  advice  from  Ms.  Cochran. 

In  aggravation,  respondent  lacked  insight  and  the  ability  to  incorporate  meaningful 

changes  in  his  performance  and  conduct.  According  to  both  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Davis, 
respondent  would  often  articulate  a  willingness  to  follow  through  with  suggestions  for 
change,  but  then  failed  to  actually  follow  through  (e.g.,  by  prewriting  sentences  on  the  board 
to  avoid  losing  both  student  interest  and  teaching  time).  This  inability  to  follow  through  with 
a  recommendation,  or  to  consistently  do  so,  was  reflected  in  Improvement  Plan  amendments 
that  added  the  word  “daily”  to  preexisting  recommendations.  In  addition,  respondent  seemed. 
unable  to  accept  responsibility  for  his  actions,  and  he  frequently  placed  the  blame  on  others 
for  his  shortcomings,  causing  Dr.  Eister  and  Ms.  Davis  to  have  concerns  about  his  honesty. 
This  pattern  occurred  over  multiple  years  at  multiple  schools. 

90. 

Other  Factors:  Respondent  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  which 

authorizes  him  to  teach  in  self-contained  classes  in  the  elementary  grades.  His  particular 

56

teaching  certificate  is  a  neutral  factor.  Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  implicate  the  exercise 
of  constitutional  rights.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  notoriety  or  publicity  was  a 
significant  factor  in  this  case. 

91. 

Conclusion:  After  considering  the  Morrison  factors  outlined  above,  the 

evidence  established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

Evident  Unfitness 

92. 

In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (Woodland)  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444,  the  Third  District  Court  of 
Appeal  defined  the  term  “evident  unfitness  for  service,”  as  used  in  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  to  mean  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies,”  The  court  found  that  the 
term  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice 
that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Jbid.) 
The  court  held  that  the  Morrison  factors  “must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold 
matter,  whether  the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.”  (Id.  p.  1445.)  As  the  court 
in  Woodland  explained,  “[i]f  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine 
whether  the  ‘unfitness’  is  ‘evident’;  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect 
in  temperament.”.  (/bid.) 

The  weight  of  the  evidence  persuasively  established  that  respondent  has 
“temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies”  that  constitute  a  “fixed”  (non-remediable)  trait, 
which  are  manifested  in  two  ways,  First,  respondent  has  a  tremendous  lack  of  insight  into 
his  performance  deficiencies  and  has  been  persistently  unable  to  incorporate  meaningful 
changes  despite  years  of  supportive  efforts.  Second,  respondent  has  a  pattern  of  not  taking 
responsibility  for  his  actions  and/or  of  deflecting  responsibility  for  his  conduct  to  others, 
which  has  been  perceived  by  his  supervising  principals  as  intentional  misrepresentation  or 
dishonesty.  (Findings  33,  54,  57;  SOC  I(c),  1(d),  1.) 

93. 

Persistent  Violation  of or  Refusal  to  Obey  Laws  and  Regulations:  A  charge  of 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  requires  a  showing  of  insubordination.  (Midway 
School  District  of Kern  County  v.  Griffeath  (Midway)  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  13,  18-19.) 
Furthermore,  “persistence”  requires  a  showing  of  “continuing  or  constant”  behavior. 
(Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  vy.  Seaman  (1972)  27  Cal.App.3d  77 
82.)  As  indicated  in  Midway,  “[p]ersistence,  in  the  sense  intended,  is  referable  to  past 
conduct.  The  Legislature  undoubtedly  intended  that  opportunity  for  correction  be  available 
and  refrained  from  providing  for  dismissal  for  a  single  violation  of  regulations,  or  until 
repeated  violations  could  be  considered  persistent.”  (Midway,  supra,  29  Cal.2d  at  p.  18.) 

’ 

Respondent  has  repeatedly  violated  the  District’s  confidentiality  policy.  (SOC  1] 

L(a),  1  (b);  Findings  18,  58,  63.)  He  violated  the  District’s  policy  on  leaving  students  alone 
with  parent  volunteers,  without  supervision  by  a  credentialed  teacher,  (SOC  §  /(c);  Finding 
33.)  Respondent  has  repeatedly  failed  to  complete  his  September  2012  absence  forms,  even 

57 

  

 

after  having  been  specifically  directed  to  do  so  and  provided  the  forms  on  two  separate 
occasions.  (SOC  4  /(e);  Finding  62.)  Respondent’s  continuing  failure  to  respond  to  the 
directives  of  his  supervising  principal  from  December  19,  2012  through  March  7,  2013, 
constitutes  insubordination. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  (4),  (5)  and  (7), 

respectively,  a  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  any  of  the  following 
causes:  “unprofessional  conduct,”  “unsatisfactory  performance,”  “evident  unfitness  for 
service,”  and/or  “persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.” 
Section  44932  makes  each  of  these  causes  for  dismissal  distinct  and  independent. 

2. 

The  burden  of  proof  is  on  a  school  district  to  show  by  a  preponderance  of 

evidence  that  a  teacher  should  be  dismissed.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.  App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

3. 

Unproven  Allegations:  The  following  alleged  Specific  Acts  of  Misconduct  in 

the  Accusation/Statement  of  Charges  were  not  proven  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence: 

SOC  {1(b):  Allegation  that  respondent  shared  the  wrong  student’s 

1. 
evaluation  report  with  a  parent  in  the  fall  of  2012; 

2, 
SOC  4  1(:  Allegations:  (a)  that  respondent  was  told  by  Ms.  Nim  and 
Ms.  Boettner,  who  did  not  testify,  about  certain  assessment  practices;  and  (b)  © 
about  respondent’s  conduct  at,  and  alleged  lying  about,  the  November  15-16, 
2012,  training;  and, 

SOC  4  1(g): 

3. 
discussion  in  the  workplace”  in  March  2009. 

Allegation  that  respondent  had  engaged  in  “inappropriate 

4. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance:  As  set  forth in  Factual  Findings  and  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole  and,  particularly, in  Findings  82  and  83,  the  District  did  not  comply 
with  Education  Code  section  44664,  subdivision  (b),  because  it  failed  to  produce  evidence 
that  it  conducted  a  formal  performance  evaluation  of  respondent  on  March  28,  2012,  or 
thereafter.  The  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  establishing  that  respondent  may  be 
dismissed  based  on  his  alleged  unsatisfactory  performance  from  March  28,  2012  through 
March  7,  2013,  when  he  was  placed  on  administrative  leave. 

Because  respondent  was  properly  evaluated  through  March  28,  2012,  and  was  then 

repeatedly  given  notice  by  the  District  that  his  performance  was  unsatisfactory  and  required 
remediation,  respondent  is  properly  subject  to  dismissal  for  his  unsatisfactory  performance 
during  the  2010-2011  school  year  and  through  March  28,  2012  of  the  2011-2012  school  year. 

58

5. 

Unprofessional  Conduct:  “Unprofessional  conduct”  in  a  certificated  employee 

is  defined  as  “the  unprofessional  conduct  particularly  specified  as  a  cause  for  dismissal  or 
suspension  in  Sections  44932  and  44933...”  (§  44938,  subd.  (c).)  As  set  forth  in  Factual 
Finding  No.  52,  the  District  served  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  on  respondent  and 
satisfied  the  jurisdictional  prerequisites  to  pursuing  this  charge.  (§  44938,  subd.  (a);  Crowi, 
supra,  225  Cal.  App.  3d  334,  348.)  As  noted  in  Crowl,  only  section  44938’s  45-day  advance 
notice  requirement  is  a  jurisdictional  prerequisite  to  proceeding  with  disciplinary  action 
based  upon  unprofessional  conduct;  the  failure  to  comply  with  other  provisions  of  this  statute 
is  an  “evidentiary  consideration”  for  the  Commission.  As  discussed  in  Findings  82  and  83, 
the  District  substantially  complied  with  section  44938  by  providing  respondent  with 
sufficient  and  repeated  notice  of  his  unprofessional  conduct  and  the  need  to  remediate  his 
conduct.  The  District  provided  respondent  ample  opportunity  to  improve  or  eliminate  his 
unprofessional  conduct;  however,  he  failed  to  do  so. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole  and, 

particularly,  based  upon  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors  (Findings  84-91),  the  District 
established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for 
unprofessional  conduct  during  the  relevant  period. 

6. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service:  As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal 
Conclusions  as  a  whole  and,  particularly,  based  upon  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors 
(Findings  84-91),  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
respondent’s  conduct  demonstrated  an  evident  unfitness  to  teach.  Contrary  to  respondent’s 
argument,  actual  harm  to  students  is  not  required.  Respondent’s  conduct  over  an  extended 
period  of  time  reflected  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies  that  make  him  unsuitable  for 
teaching,  which  are  reflected  in  (a)  his  consistent  lack  of  insight  and  inability  to  improve  his 
teaching  despite  receiving  intense  support  and  feedback;  and  (b)  his  habit  of  blaming  his 
shortcomings  on  others  and  not  taking  responsibility,  which  manifests  as  a  lack  of  honesty. 

7. 

Persistent  Violation  of Rules:  As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole,  and  particularly  in  Finding  93,  respondent  persistently  violated  rules 
regarding  confidentiality,  leaving  students  unsupervised,  and  failing  to  complete  absence 
forms  after  being  repeatedly  instructed  to  do  so. 

8. 

Legal  Cause  to  Dismiss:  With  the  exception  of  the  matters  identified  in  Legal 
Conclusion  3,  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  is 
subject  to  dismissal  based  upon  the  distinct  and  independent  grounds  of  unprofessional 
conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance  during  2010-2011  school  year  and  through  March  28, 
2012  of  the  2011-2012  school  year,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  laws  or  regulations  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)  (1),  (4),  (5)  and/or  (7). 

Hf 

Hf 

59

ORDER 

Respondent  Steven  Frank  shall  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  September”,  2014 

/) 

As 
Zag 
hulfz,  Member 
Confmission  on  Professignal 

7 

Competence 

DATED:  September  __,  2014 

  Simone  Simmons,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

aey  \crobew  \,  2814  Wy VW  Lf,  [) 

DATED: 

comin 

22034 

TMM. 

: ina  Woollard,  Chaifperson 
Commission  on  Professio 

1  Competence 

60

ORDER 

Respondent  Steven  Frank  shall  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District. 

DATED:  September___,  2014 

DATED:  September 20,  2014 

DATED:  September,  2014 

Zack  Schultz,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Arron.  , 
Simone  Simmons,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

2  M  any 

a 

Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

60

