BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
CHUALAR UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF MONTEREY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2013070289 

Respondent. 

 
 
In the Matter of: 
 
 
VIRGINIA ROACH,  
a certificated teacher, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge David L. Benjamin served as the chairperson of the 

Manuel F. Martinez and Sarah Levitan Kaatz, Attorneys at Law, Lozano Smith, 

 
Commission on Professional Competence.  Kelly Maxwell and Beatrice Rowan served as 
members of the commission.  The matter was heard on September 10-13 and 30, 2013, in 
Monterey, California. 
 
 
represented complainant Roberto Rios, Superintendent of the Chualar Union Elementary 
School District, who was present. 
 
 
Virginia Roach, who was present. 
 
 
the parties to file redacted copies of certain documents, to identify any documents to be 
sealed, and to file a confidential names list.  Complainant‟s Closing Brief was marked 
Exhibit 64 and complainant‟s Closing Reply Brief was marked Exhibit 65.  Respondent‟s 
Initial Closing Argument was marked Exhibit K, and her Second Closing Argument was 
marked Exhibit L.  
 

Joseph A. Cisneros, Attorney at Law, The Biegel Law Firm, represented respondent 

The record remained open to allow the parties to file written briefs, and also to allow 

On October 28, 2013, complainant filed a letter that included redacted copies of 

numerous documents, that identified certain documents to be placed under seal, and that set 
forth a confidential names list.  The letter was marked Exhibit 66.  There was no objection to 
Exhibit 66 by respondent.  Accordingly, the redacted copies were substituted for the 
originals, and the originals were placed under seal; also placed under seal were those 
documents identified to be sealed in Exhibit 66, and Exhibit 66 itself. 
 
 

The record closed and the matter was deemed submitted on October 28, 2013. 

 

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent Virginia Roach is a permanent certificated employee of the 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
Chualar Union Elementary School District (district).  On May 4, 2013, complainant Roberto 
Rios, superintendent of the district, issued a statement of charges against respondent and 
notified respondent of his intent to dismiss her from employment.  Respondent requested a 
hearing.  On July 2, 2013, complainant issued an accusation against respondent that restated 
the allegations in the statement of charges.  Respondent filed a notice of defense, and this 
hearing followed. 
 
 
allegations that she mistreated students, and allegations that her performance as a teacher was 
unsatisfactory.  The accusation alleges cause to dismiss respondent based on unsatisfactory 
performance, unprofessional and immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service and persistent 
violation of school laws and regulations.  Respondent denies the allegations and maintains that 
there is no cause to dismiss her. 
 
Respondent 
 

Broadly speaking, the allegations against respondent fall into two categories: 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Respondent joined the district in 2006 as a classroom teacher.  During the four 

Respondent graduated from Stockton State University in New Jersey with a 
bachelor‟s degree in psychology.  She has done the coursework toward a master‟s degree in 
education at California State University, Monterey Bay, but has not written her thesis.  
Respondent holds a multiple subject teaching credential and a BCLAD (Bilingual, Crosscultural, 
Language and Academic Development) certificate.  She is fluent in English and Spanish. 
 
 
years prior to the filing of the notice of intent to dismiss, respondent taught kindergarten, second 
grade and third grade. 
 
District 
 
 
The district has one school, Chualar Elementary School, which serves preschool 
through eighth-grade students.  The school has two classes for each grade level.  Rios has been 
the principal of the school, and the superintendent of the district, since July 2009.  For nine or 10 
years before that, Rios taught second grade at Chualar Elementary School. 
 
Background to issuance of the statement of charges 
 
 
complaints from parents whose children were assigned to respondent‟s class.  Each year, to 
accommodate those complaints, Rios has transferred students from respondent‟s class to the 
other grade level class.  In the past two school years, Rios has transferred five or six students 
each year due to parent complaints. 

During the past four years, Superintendent Rios has received numerous 

6. 

5. 

 

2 

7. 

8. 

On November 29, 2012, Rios issued to respondent a 45-day notice of 

Between October 2010 and August 2012, Rios received over 15 complaints 
 
about respondent.  Generally speaking, these complaints alleged that respondent was harsh 
with her students.  Rios sent each complaint to respondent under a cover letter that advised 
her that the district took the complaint seriously; that it intended to investigate the complaint; 
and that he wished to meet with her to hear her side of the story.  Respondent met with Rios 
with respect to many, if not all, of the complaints.  The district‟s investigation of those 
complaints led to this proceeding. 
 
 
unprofessional conduct, and a 90-day notice of unsatisfactory performance (the 45/90-day 
notices).  The notices set forth Rios‟s behavioral expectations of respondent, including 
express directions to allow students to go to the bathroom when they request to do so, and 
not to yell at students.  The notices did not include an evaluation of respondent‟s teaching.  
There has been no formal evaluation of respondent in the past four years. 
 
 
then filed the statement of charges and the accusation. 
 
Respondent’s classroom conduct 
 

Respondent was placed on paid leave on March 22, 2013, and complainant 

9. 

 

10. 

It is the obligation of every teacher in the district to establish and maintain a 

suitable learning environment for her pupils.  That obligation is set forth in the job 
description for all district teachers. 

Twelve of respondent‟s students testified regarding respondent‟s conduct in 

the classroom in school years 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13.  Their testimony was 
supplemented by declarations from other students.  On the fundamental allegations of 
respondent‟s conduct in the classroom, the testimony of her students was credible and 
compelling. 
 
 
 
 
the testimony of all of the students who testified. 
 

The testimony of YC, CM, AM2, OG, JC2, ES, MS and SD fairly represents 

YELLING AND THE USE OF PHYSICAL FORCE 

12. 

 

13. 

YC is in the fifth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  She had respondent for 

second grade.  In second grade, YC testified, respondent yelled at her and at other students 
almost every day for things like not doing their homework, or talking during a test.  YC 
described respondent‟s yelling as a “loud voice” that sounded “mean.”  YC was afraid of 
respondent.  She has never been afraid of any other teacher. 

 
11. 

 
14. 

CM is in the fifth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  She was in respondent‟s 

third grade class for a short time.  When she was in that class, respondent yelled at her for getting 
a math problem wrong.  CM remembers that respondent used a loud voice that made her feel 
scared; it was “a mad voice – I felt afraid.  I forgot what I did when she said it was wrong.”  CM 

 

3 

 
15. 

 
16. 

 
17. 

 
18. 

 
20. 

testified that she “felt something in [her] stomach when [respondent] yelled.”  CM told her 
mother that she did not want to go to school.  CM‟s mother asked Superintendent Rios to transfer 
her to the other third grade class, and he did so. 

AM2 is in the fifth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  He had respondent for 

third grade.  He remembers respondent yelling at children in a voice that was “75 percent loud,” 
and “scary.”  AM2 also remembers that respondent used to turn out the lights in the classroom to 
get the children‟s attention. 

OG is in the fifth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  He was in respondent‟s 

third grade class in 2011-12.  OG heard respondent “yell but just a little loud.”  To OG, “yelling” 
is “screaming.”  OG testified that sometimes respondent yelled at him, but “mostly I was good 
and did my work.”  He heard respondent yell at other children, but felt that they “did something 
bad and they deserved to fare [sic] the consequences.” 

JC2 is in the fourth grade.  She was in respondent‟s third grade class.  When JC2 
raised her hand during a test and said she needed help, respondent “screamed” at her to “Do it by 
yourself”; respondent was just a few inches away from JC2.  JC2 was upset and could not finish 
the math question.  Respondent yelled at JC2 a second time when she failed to wash her hands 
before she took a pencil; respondent told her that she was going to get the pencil dirty.  As JC2 
described it, respondent was “right up against my ear.”  JC2 thought that respondent “pretended 
to be nice” when Superintendent Rios came into the classroom. 

ES is in the fifth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  He had respondent for the 

second grade in the 2010-11 school year.  ES testified that respondent “yelled at kids every day.”  
He was afraid of her.  He also remembered that respondent would turn off the lights in the 
classroom.  ES recounted an occasion when he raised his hand to be called on, but did not raise it 
high enough.  Respondent grabbed his arm by the wrist and “pulled his hand up.” 

 
19.  MS is in the fourth grade at Chualar Elementary School.  He was in respondent‟s 
third grade class.  On one occasion during that year, MS was drinking water at the water fountain 
when respondent yelled, “[MS], you‟re not supposed to do that.”  (Respondent testified at 
hearing that MS drank water “a lot” and was “testing her.”)  Startled by respondent yelling at 
him, MS hit his mouth on the fountain.   

 
On another occasion, MS was at the water fountain and respondent wanted him to return 

to his desk.  When he did not do as respondent asked, she put her hands on his shoulders and 
“pinched” him back to his seat.  AB2, a girl who was in the same class, states in her declaration 
that she saw respondent push MS back to his seat “with her finger knuckle” in his back. 

SD is a ninth grade student at Gonzales High School.  She is 14 years old.  SD 

attended Chualar Elementary School.  She never had respondent as a teacher.   

 
During the 2012-13 school year, when she was an eighth grade student at Chualar 
Elementary School, the librarian asked SD to deliver new dictionaries to respondent‟s classroom.  
SD could hear respondent yelling, and could hear “slapping noises,” as if someone was hitting a 

 

4 

desk, from outside the classroom.  The door to respondent‟s room was closed, so she knocked 
and respondent let her in.  SD heard respondent tell the students in a loud voice to wash their 
hands before taking a new book.  One boy, however, tried to take a book without washing his 
hands first.  Respondent grabbed the student‟s hand, pulled him back to his desk, and sat him 
down by pulling on his hand.  She yelled at him to wash his hands first.  The student began to 
cry.  Respondent told the class that she needed to make an example of the student so that the 
other students would “respect and obey” her.  When SD left the classroom after handing out the 
dictionaries, the student was still crying. 

 
21.  Margarita Sanchez is the computer lab technician at Chualar Elementary School; 
she has worked for the district for 14 years.  She saw a boy standing in front of a computer, and 
heard respondent tell him to “Sit down.”  When he did not, respondent said “Sit down” a little 
louder, and then walked over to him and pushed him down by the shoulders. 

 
22.  Mary Teresa Edwards works in special education at Chualar Elementary School, 
and has worked with respondent; she appeared at hearing at respondent‟s request.  Edwards was 
there one day when respondent told a boy to get in line.  When he did not do as respondent 
directed, she said it again, louder.  When he still did not get in line, respondent “touched his 
shoulders and turned him.”  In Edwards view, the student was not upset.  Edwards‟s testimony, 
however, corroborates the students‟ perceptions of respondent‟s conduct.  

 
23. 

 
24. 

 
26. 

Respondent denies that she yelled at her students, or pulled ES‟s arm, or pushed 
MS to his seat.  According to respondent, she does not yell, but sometimes she talks in a “loud 
voice.”  If the class is noisy, respondent stated, her “pitch” goes up.  If the class is, to use her 
word, “belligerent,” then she may raise her voice “two or three levels.”  Similarly, respondent 
testified that she did not pull ES‟s arm, she “guided” it, as she may have “guided” MS to his seat. 

Respondent‟s testimony advances distinctions without differences; if anything, 
respondent‟s testimony corroborates the perceptions of her students.  On the fundamental issue 
of whether respondent maintained a suitable learning environment in her classroom, it is plain 
that she did not, as students were scared of her.  Respondent‟s use of semantic distinctions to 
defend her conduct, even after her students have testified that they were afraid of her, 
demonstrates that she does not acknowledge any wrongdoing; that she lacks insight into her 
conduct; and that she is indifferent to the effects of her conduct on her students. 
 

25. 

Respondent maintains that she is being unfairly criticized simply for being a strict 

teacher.  Aldo Castro‟s son had respondent for kindergarten and second grade.  Castro felt that 
respondent was strict, but testified that his son liked respondent and never complained that she 
yelled.  He noted that his son is a very secure child, a good student, and a child who does not 
misbehave.  Several other parents wrote letters in which they noted the academic achievements 
of their children, and praised respondent for her teaching.  Respondent, however, has an 
obligation to maintain a suitable learning environment for all of her students, not just the good 
students or the students who never misbehave. 

Respondent relies on the testimony of Stephanie Sumarna (formerly Anderson) 

and Dora Uga to support her claim that she did not engage in any misconduct in the classroom.  

 

5 

Sumarna and Uga have both worked as teachers at Chualar Elementary School.  The students in 
Sumarna‟s fifth grade class were “reading buddies” to the students in respondent‟s younger class.  
Sumarna testified that respondent never yelled at students when their classes were together.  The 
testimony of student JC2 is persuasive, however, that respondent acted one way when she was 
alone with her class, and another way when other adults were present.  Uga never spent any time 
in respondent‟s classroom.  

 
27. 

In her closing brief, respondent argues that the district is small and that the 

students who testified have “programmed memories,” and that they were “led to [their] stories” 
by their parents or the school‟s administration.  It is true that the district is small, but that in itself 
does not establish that the students‟ testimony was scripted, and there is no other evidence to 
support her claim.  Respondent‟s argument is unpersuasive, and it is rejected. 
 

DENYING STUDENTS PERMISSION TO USE THE BATHROOM 

28. 

In January 2011, JL1 was a student in respondent‟s third grade class.  She had just 

moved with her family from Mexico to Chualar; respondent was her first teacher.  On January 
31, 2011, within days of starting school, JL1 raised her hand near the end of the day and asked 
permission to go to the bathroom.  Respondent looked at her but did not say anything to her.  JL1 
raised her hand again, and this time respondent acknowledged her but said she would have to 
wait because the class was going out in a few minutes.  JL1 then went up to respondent because 
she “couldn‟t hold it anymore.”  She asked respondent if she could go to the bathroom and 
respondent again told her to wait.  The bell rang and JL1 ran outside, but did not make it to the 
bathroom and urinated in her pants.  JL1 testified that it made her “very sad because everyone 
saw [her].”  JL1‟s father, who was waiting for his daughter to get out of school, found her crying 
and took her to the office.  JL1‟s parents complained to Superintendent Rios about respondent‟s 
conduct and she was transferred to the other third grade class. 

 
 
29.  On February 26, 2013, JO, a student in respondent‟s third grade class, asked 
for permission to go to the bathroom, which respondent did not give, because the class was 
going to recess shortly.  After recess, JO asked again to go to the bathroom, but respondent 
said no, because she felt he should have gone to the bathroom during recess, and class was 
almost over.  Respondent finally let JO go, but he could not make it to the bathroom before 
he soiled himself. 
 

30. 

During the 2009-10 school year, when respondent‟s class was in the computer lab, 

31. 

Lab Technician Sanchez noticed a girl “doing a dance in her chair” as if she needed to go to the 
bathroom.  Sanchez asked the girl if she needed to use the restroom and the girl said she did, but 
that respondent “does not let us use the bathroom.”   
 
 
Superintendent Rios, however, persuasively testified that students in the third grade rarely have 
bathroom accidents; no contrary evidence was offered.  The testimony of JL1, JO and Sanchez is 
more credible than respondent‟s denials.  It is determined that respondent denied JL1 and JO 
permission to use the bathroom and that, as a result, they soiled themselves and suffered 
humiliation and embarrassment. 

Respondent denies that she prevented JL1 or JO from going to the bathroom.  

 

 

6 

ISOLATION OF JC4 

JC4 is in the fifth grade.  He was in respondent‟s third grade class in 2011-12. 

During the time that JC4 was in her class, respondent developed the conviction 

that JC4 was bullying other children.  Respondent told her class not to play with him.  The exact 
language respondent used to convey that message to her students is not completely clear.  
Respondent maintains that she advised her students not to play with anyone who might be 
“dangerous,” and that she never used JC4‟s name.  That may be true.  But even respondent 
acknowledges that she meant JC4, and the other third grade children understood that she meant 
JC4: AM2 and OG, who were in JC4‟s class, understood that they were not to play with JC4, and 
that they could get into trouble with respondent if they did play with him.  Respondent‟s 
isolation of JC4 caused emotional distress for JC4.  In March 2012, After-School Coordinator 
Mary Adams found JC4 crying.  When she asked him why he was crying, JC4 told her that he 
had lost his best friend and that he felt he was a “very bad kid because everyone says that I am 
one.”  Respondent‟s isolation of JC4 also caused emotional distress for JC4‟s friends, who 
wanted to play with him but were afraid they would be punished if they did. 

Respondent‟s feelings toward JC4 led her to undermine a disciplinary agreement 

reached between JC4‟s mother and Superintendent Rios.  Respondent referred JC4 to Rios for 
discipline.  In a meeting with Rios and JC4‟s mother, respondent recommended a one-day,  
“in-house” suspension that JC4 would serve in another classroom.  JC4‟s mother was adamantly 
opposed to sending JC4 to a higher grade for punishment.  In the meeting, it was finally agreed 
that JC4 would lose a lunch recess, and that he would spend that time in a fifth-grade classroom.  
When the time came for the imposition of JC4‟s discipline, however, respondent took JC4 to an 
eighth-grade classroom.  She did not consult with the superintendent before taking this action, 
which was contrary to the agreement reached between Rios and JC4‟s mother. 

Respondent asked another student to photograph JC4 during recess in an effort to 

document his behavior.  Rosalinda Navarro is a playground supervisor and instructional aide at 
Chualar Elementary School.  On October 18, 2011, during the time that third graders were at 
recess, Navarro saw a fifth grader, AO, hiding in the bushes with a camera.  Navarro asked her 
what she was doing, and AO said she was taking pictures of a boy who was bullying her little 
brother; she identified JC4 as the boy she was taking pictures of.  Navarro told her that she could 
not do that.  Children are not allowed to photograph other children on the playground.  AO told 
her that a teacher – respondent – had asked her to do it.  AO remained on the playground until 
the end of recess at which point Navarro saw respondent approach and heard her say to AO, 
“Thank you, I really appreciate you doing this.”  Because the incident was unusual, Navarro 
made a written note of it that day. 

At hearing, respondent did not deny thanking AO, but she denied that she told AO 

to take pictures of JC4 and denied that she was thanking her for doing so.  Respondent testified 
that she “has a habit of saying „thank you‟ a lot.”  Respondent‟s testimony is not credible.  It is 
determined that respondent asked AO to take pictures of JC4 during recess, to provide additional 
support for respondent‟s belief that JC4 was bullying other children.  

32. 
 
33. 

 
34. 

 
35. 

 
36. 

 

7 

 

 

37. 

Superintendent Rios testified that isolating a student from his friends, and 

alienating him from his classmates, was not a proper way to address respondent‟s concerns over 
JC4‟s behavior.  His testimony on this point is credible. 

 
38. 

Respondent does not acknowledge that her treatment of JC4 was improper. 

39. 

Respondent believes that she is being discriminated against by parents in the 

 
Respondent’s discrimination claims 
 
 
community, and by Superintendent Rios, because she is of Puerto Rican descent in a 
community that is almost entirely Mexican-American.  The only facts respondent advances 
to support her belief are that some parents have been antagonistic towards her, and that 
Superintendent Rios complimented her on her colorful handbag, which was from Puerto 
Rico. 
 

Respondent‟s claim of discrimination is not persuasive.  There is no evidence that 

respondent has been treated differently than any other teacher because of her heritage; 
Superintendent Rios did not know respondent was from Puerto Rico until her deposition was 
taken in 2013, and respondent herself did not raise this defense until hearing.  Moreover, the 
facts established at hearing demonstrate legitimate reasons – unrelated to respondents‟ 
heritage – for the parents‟ complaints against her, and for the disciplinary action initiated by 
the district. 
 
 
the union president at Chualar Elementary School, and because she filed a “Williams” 
complaint against the district regarding its instructional materials.  Respondent‟s claim of 
discrimination is not persuasive.  There is no evidence that respondent has been treated 
differently because of her union activities.  There is, however, evidence of legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory reasons for the district‟s disciplinary action. 
 
Allegations relating to the 2008-09 school year 

Respondent also asserts that she is being discriminated against because she is 

40. 

41. 

Paragraphs 1 through 7 of the accusation allege that respondent engaged in 

 
various forms of misconduct during the 2008-09 school year, when she was teaching 
kindergarten, and paragraph 83 alleges that she was the subject of prior discipline in October 
2008.  The evidence established that these events occurred more than four years prior to the 
filing of the notice of intent to dismiss on May 4, 2013.  Under Education Code 44944, 
subdivision (a)(5), “no decision relating to the dismissal . . . of any employee shall be made 
based on charges or evidence of any nature relating to matters occurring more than four 
years” before the filing of the notice of intent.  The evidence pertaining to these allegations, 
therefore, is disregarded and no findings are made as to the matters alleged in paragraphs 1 
through 7 and 83. 
 

 

 

8 

42. 

Some allegations in the accusation appear to relate only to complainant‟s 

Allegations of failure to teach ELD and related matters 
 
 
theory that respondent is subject to discipline for unsatisfactory performance and 
unprofessional conduct.  For example, paragraphs 50 through 53 allege that respondent did 
not properly teach English Language Development and that she was resistant to coaching.  
Respondent contends that, because no evaluation was attached to the 45/90-day notices 
issued by the district, she cannot be dismissed on the grounds of unsatisfactory performance 
and unprofessional conduct.  This contention is addressed in Legal Conclusions 3 through 
10, and therefore no factual findings are made as to these matters. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The standard of proof applied in making the factual findings set forth above is 

preponderance of the evidence.  (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (2013) 214 Cal.App.4th 1120, 1150.)   

 

Causes for dismissal asserted in the statement of charges and accusation 

2. 

Education Code section 44932 sets forth eleven exclusive causes upon which a 

permanent certificated employee can be dismissed.  The statement of charges and the accusation 
identify four causes upon which the district seeks to dismiss respondent: “[i]mmoral or 
unprofessional conduct” (subd. (a)(1)), “unsatisfactory performance” (subd. (a)(4)), “[e]vident 
unfitness for service” (subd. (a)(5)), and “[p]ersistent violation of or refusal to obey the school 
laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by 
the . . . governing board of the school district . . .” (subd. (a)(7)). 
 
Unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance 
 
 
conduct, Education Code section 44938, subdivision (a), provides: 
 

With respect to an action to dismiss an employee on the ground of unprofessional 

3. 

The governing board of any school district shall not act upon any 
charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 days prior to 
the date of the filing of the [statement of charges], the board . . . 
has given the employee against whom the charge is filed, written 
notice of the unprofessional conduct specifying the nature thereof 
with such specific instances of behavior and with such particularity 
as to furnish the employee an opportunity to correct . . . her faults 
and overcome the grounds for the charge.  The written notice shall 
include the evaluation made pursuant to Article 11 (commencing 
with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee. 

9 

 

 

 

Article 11 of Chapter 3 applies to respondent.  It provides that a permanent teacher, like 
respondent, who has been employed by a school district for less than 10 years, shall be evaluated 
pursuant to district-adopted standards at least every other year. 
 
 
performance, subdivision (b)(1) of Education Code section 44938 states: 
 

With respect to an action to dismiss an employee on the ground of unsatisfactory 

4. 

The governing board of any school district shall not act upon any 
charges of unsatisfactory performing unless . . . [a]t least 90 days 
prior to the date of the filing of the [statement of charges], the 
board . . . has given the employee against whom the charge is filed, 
written notice of the unsatisfactory performance, specifying the 
nature thereof with such specific instances of behavior and with 
such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity to 
correct . . . her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge.  
The written notice shall include the evaluation made pursuant to 
Article 11 (commencing with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if 
applicable to the employee. 

 
As noted above, Article 11 and its requirement for an evaluation every other year, applies to 
respondent. 
 
 
respondent because it never performed the evaluation required under Article 11.   
 

The district did not attach an evaluation to the 45/90-day notices it gave 

5. 

6. 

Citing California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Board (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 27 
(Livingston), the district argues that its failure “to adopt guidelines to assess teachers” does not 
mean that it lacks jurisdiction to dismiss respondent for unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory 
performance.  The issue here, however, is not the district‟s failure to adopt guidelines to assess 
teachers, but the district‟s failure to perform an evaluation of respondent and include it in the 
45/90-day notices.  Livingston does not concern that issue: in Livingston, the school district 
performed evaluations and included them in its 90-day notice.  Livingston does not help the 
district. 
 
7. 

The district argues next that the “multiple disciplinary letters and face-to-face 

meetings” comply with the evaluation requirement set forth in Education Code section 44660.  
This argument is based on the cover letters Superintendent Rios sent to respondent with each 
parent complaint, and his meetings with respondent that followed.  (Finding 7.)  Under 
Education Code section 44664, however, an evaluation must (among other things) be in writing, 
must inform the teacher that she is not performing her job satisfactorily, and make specific 
recommendations for improvement.  The letters from Superintendent Rios do not comply with 
these requirements.  Contrary to the district‟s assertion, the letters were not disciplinary: they 
informed respondent that the district had received a complaint about her performance, and that it 
intended to investigate the complaint.  The superintendent‟s letters did not inform respondent 
that he had investigated the complaints, that he thought the matters set forth in the complaint 

 

10 

were true, or make specific recommendations to respondent about how to improve her 
performance. 
 
8. 

The district did not comply with the statutory requirement that it include, in its 

45/90-day notices, an evaluation of respondent‟s performance.  The district may not dismiss 
respondent for unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance without complying with the 
requirements of Education Code section 44938. 

The charges of unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance are 

 
9. 
dismissed. 
 
Persistent violation of school rules 
 
 
maintain a suitable learning environment for her students.  Respondent persistently violated this 
rule, by reason of the matters set forth in Findings 12 through 38.  Cause exists to dismiss 
respondent from her employment pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7). 
 
Immoral conduct 
 

Under the district‟s rules, as set forth in Finding 10, it is a teacher‟s duty to 

10. 

11. 

Immoral conduct is conduct that is “hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals” and “includes conduct . . . showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and [conduct showing an] inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 197 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811, citing Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)   
 

It is humiliating and degrading to deny a third-grade student permission to go to the 
bathroom immediately upon the student‟s request, to say nothing of the physical discomfort, 
anxiety and embarrassment it causes the student.  Isolating a student from his friends, even if that 
student is a suspected bully, causes that student to feel shame and humiliation; it is emotionally 
damaging to the student and to his friends.  In doing these things, respondent demonstrated 
indifference to the physical and emotional well-being of her students.  Her conduct was immoral.  
Cause exists, by reason of the matters set forth in Findings 28-38, to dismiss respondent pursuant 
to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 
 
Evident unfitness for service 
 

12. 

The term “evident unfitness for service” means  

 

 

 

“clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily 
by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  Unlike 
“unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service” connotes 
a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 
receipt of notice that one‟s conduct fails to meet the expectations 
of the employing school district. 

11 

(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 
 

13.   Respondent falls squarely within the definition of evident unfitness.  She is 

14. 

A teacher cannot be dismissed for immoral conduct or evident unfitness for 

authoritarian and harsh with her students, verbally and physically, to the point of being mean.  
These are temperamental traits or inadequacies that are not remediable upon notice.  Over the 
past four years, respondent has been made aware of many complaints about the way she treats 
students.  Her conduct has not changed.  Even today, after hearing the testimony of her students, 
respondent denies that her conduct was improper and advances unpersuasive semantic 
distinctions to justify her conduct.  Cause exists, by reason of the matters set forth in Findings 12 
through 38, and Legal Conclusions 10 and 11, to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). 
 
Application of the Morrison factors 
 
 
service unless her conduct demonstrates that she is unfit to teach under the factors established by 
the California Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-
230.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 2 
Cal.App.4th at p. 1445; Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, 
fn. 12.)  The factors are: (1) the likelihood that respondent‟s conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of any expected adversity; (3) the proximity 
or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by respondent; (5) 
the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood 
of recurrence of the conduct; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 
adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers.  
Only the pertinent factors must be addressed.  (West Valley–Mission Community College District 
v. Conception (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.)  The Morrison factors may be applied to all of 
the charges in the aggregate.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 
Professional Competence, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1456-1457.) 

 
Findings 12 through 38 establish the following: 
 
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS AND TEACHERS   
 
Respondent‟s conduct has in fact had an adverse effect on her students. 
 
DEGREE OF ADVERSITY   
 
The adverse effects of respondent‟s conduct have been serious.  Respondent‟s conduct 
has made students afraid of her; distracted them from their work; made them not want to go to 
school; humiliated and embarrassed them; and hurt them physically and emotionally. 
 

 PROXIMITY IN TIME  
 
Respondent‟s conduct continued to the 2012-13 school year. 

 

12 

TYPE OF TEACHING CERTIFICATE 
 
Respondent has a multiple subject credential, which allows her to teach the youngest and 

most vulnerable students. 
 

EXTENUATING/AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

There are no extenuating circumstances.  That respondent‟s conduct has persisted over 

the past four years, and that her students were in the second or third grade, are aggravating 
circumstances. 
 

PRAISEWORTHINESS/BLAMEWORTHINESS OF RESPONDENT‟S CONDUCT   
 
Yelling at students, using physical force to get them to follow instructions, denying 

young students the right to go to the bathroom immediately upon their request, and isolating a 
student from his friends do not advance legitimate educational or behavioral goals.  
Respondent‟s conduct in doing these things is entirely blameworthy. 

 
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE   
 
Respondent‟s conduct has persisted over the past four years.  She does not believe she 

has done anything wrong.  It is all but certain that her misconduct will recur if she returns to the 
classroom. 
 

CHILLING EFFECT ON THE EXERCISE OF RESPONDENT‟S CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS, OR THE RIGHTS 
OF OTHER TEACHERS   
 
This factor does not apply to respondent‟s case.  None of respondent‟s conduct involves 

the exercise of any constitutional rights. 

  
Application of the Morrison factors establishes that respondent is unfit to teach. 

15. 

 
Discipline 
 
 
Cause for dismissal having been established, the ultimate issue is whether 
dismissal is warranted.  There is no question but that dismissal is the appropriate action.  
Respondent has demonstrated that she is temperamentally unfit to teach.  Over the past four 
years, respondent maintained a harsh learning environment that was harmful to her students and 
their educational experience.  There is no reason to believe that respondent‟s conduct would 
change if she were allowed to return to the classroom.  The district‟s conclusion that 
respondent‟s conduct warrants dismissal is fully supported by the evidence, and it is reasonable. 
 
 
 

 

 

13 

Respondent Virginia Roach is dismissed from employment with the Chualar Union 

ORDER 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
Elementary School District. 
 
 
 
DATED: ____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED: ____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED: ____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

______________________________________ 
KELLY MAXWELL 
Commission Member 

______________________________________ 
BEATRICE ROWAN 
Commission Member 

______________________________________ 
DAVID L. BENJAMIN 
Chair, Commission on Professional Competence 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

14 

