  

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

ANTHONY  LEWANDOWSKI  (EN  756422), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2013050203 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on 

December  8  through  12,  2014,  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  Howard  W.  Cohen, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 
California,  Deanna  Clark,  and  Karen  Schuett  constituted  the  Commission.  ALJ  Cohen 
presided. 

Kristine  E.  Kwong  and  Juan  Torres,  of  Musick,  Peeler,  &  Garrett,  LLP,  tepresented 

complainant  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resource  Officer  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  (District). 

Rosty  G.  Gore,  of  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondent  Anthony 

Lewandowski. 

Prior  to  the  presentation  of  evidence,  the  parties  brought  several  motions  in  limine 

and  respondent  filed  two  motions  to  dismiss.  The  ALJ  considered  and  ruled  on  those  motions 
as  well  as  on  motions  made  during  the  course  of  the  hearing,  as  reflected  on  the  record.  The 
District’s  Hearing  Brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  40.  The  ALJ  ordered  that  any  testimonial 
reference  to  the  name  of  a  minor  student  be  replaced  in  the  hearing  transcript  by  the  student’s 
first  name  or  first  name  and  last  initial.  Counsel  for  the  parties  represented  that  they  had 
redacted  students’  names  in  all  exhibits  so  that  students  are  identified  only  by  first  name  and 
last  initial. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argiiment  was  heard.  The  record 

was  Closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  December  12,  2014. 

The  Commission  considered  the  entire  record  in  executive  session. 

  

 
  

  

   

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  17,  2013,  complainant  filed  and  served  on  respondent  a  Notice  of 
Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension,  with  an  Accusation 
and  Statement  of  Charges.  On  April  29,  2013,  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

2. 

On  May  9,  2013,  complainant,  acting  in  her  official  capacity,  filed  and  served 
on  respondent  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent  timely  served  a  Notice 
of  Defense.  On  May  28,  2013,  the  parties  stipulated  to  waive  the  statutory  requirement  that  a 
hearing  commence  within  60  days  of  the  date  of  respondent’s.  demand  for  hearing. 

3. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  presently  on 

unpaid  leave  status. 

The  District's  Charges  Against  Respondent 

4. 

In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent,  the  District 

alleged  that  it  has  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as  a  permanent 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  for: 

a. 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1);' 

b. 

c. 

Unsatisfactory  performance,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4); 

Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5); 

d. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and 

e. 

Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 

cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district, 
under  section  44939, 

5. 

In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  charged  respondent 

with  the  following  misconduct: 

a... 

Charge 1: On  September  8,  2011,  respondent  allowed  his  students  to 

run 1  from  the  classroom  to  the  playground  without  supervision. 

specified.   

‘  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise 

  

    

   

  

b. 

Charge  2:  From  October  12  to  19,  2011,  respondent  failed  to  provide  a 

library  for  students  in  his  classroom,  leaving  books  ordered  for  that  purpose  unopened. 

c. 

Charge  3:  On  November  30,  2011,  respondent  failed  to  properly 

supervise  many  of  his  students,  (a)  20  of  whom  were  left  unattended  outside  his  classroom  at 
2:15  p.m.  while  respondent  was  in  his  classroom  with  the  door  closed,  (b)  six  of  whom  were 
yelling,  and  (c)  three  of  whom  were  running  near  the  adjacent  play  field. 

d. 

Charge  4:  On  January  9,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  (a)  integrate  access 

Strategies  into  his  lesson,  (b)  engage  all  students  in  the  lesson,  (c)  use  instructional 
conversations  to  build  language  development,  (d)  use  cooperative  groups,  (e)  post  math 
vocabulary  or  an  explanation  of  terminology,  and  (f)  provide  activity  for  students  who 
finished  their  work  early. 

e. 

Charge  5:  On  February  1,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  (a)  discuss  the 

meaning  of  “echo  read”  lesson  vocabulary  words;  (b)  engage  students  in  discussion  during 
the  “Think,  Pair,  Share”  (TPS)  portion  of  the  lesson;  (c)  use  instructional  strategies  other 
than  TPS;  (d)  complete  a  lesson  in  a  timely  manner,  taking  140  minutes  to  complete  a  60 
minute  lesson;  (€)  pre-teach  relevant  vocabulary  words  using  appropriate  strategies;  (f) 
consistently  use  the  “popsicle  method,”  a  method  of  randomly  choosing  students  to  answer 
questions;  (g)  use  an  assessment  at  the  end  of  the  lesson  to  gauge  student  understanding;  (h) 
have  students  assess  and  self-direct  their  own  learning;  and  (i)  integrate  students’  prior 
knowledge  and  life  experience  into  the  lesson. 

f. 

Charge  6:  On  March  19,  2012,  respondent’s  classroom  desks  and  pencil 

boxes  were  dirty  and  filled  with  pencil  shavings,  and  students’  work  was  shoved  into  desks 
and  textbooks. 

g. 

Charge  7:  On  March  19,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  (a)  use  a  variety  of 

instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  address  diverse  student  needs;  (b)  develop  or 
sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials;  (c)  use  access  strategies,  despite  having  been 
provided  professional  development  in  this  area;  (d)  establish  and  articulate  goals  for  student 
learning  and  modify  instructional  plans  to  meet  student  needs;  (e)  provide  consistent  daily 
homework;  and  (f)  assess  student  learning  and  check  for  understanding. 

    

h. 

Charge  8:  On  April  13,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  (a)  meet  with 

instructional  specialist  Marissa  Borden  Conley  to  prepare  lesson  plans,  after  being  directed  to 
do  so  by  Principal  Courtney  Sawyer  on  March  19,  2012;  (b)  provide  support  for  students’ 
-  diverse  learning  needs;  (c)  guide  students  to  be  able  to  ‘explaif  their  thinking:-(d)  utilize  such 
access  strategies  as  TPS,  cooperative  groups,  and  graphic  organizers,  and  provide  passages  at 
the  students’  reading  level;  (e)  write  the  lesson  objective  on  the  board,  as  directed  by  Sawyer 
on  March  19,  2012;  (f)  organize  students  by  achievement  levels  during  English  Language 
Arts  (ELA)  lessons,  as  directed  by  Sawyer  on  March  19,  2012;  (g)  provide  small-group 
instruction;  and  (h)  use  Test  Prep  Materials  strategies  provided  to  him  by  Sawyer. 

if    

 

i. 

Charge  9:  On  May  3,  2012,  respondent  “failed  to  properly  supervise  his 

students  during 
V.,  and 

class  time  and  consequently  four  (4)  students  (DIJC.. MEP.  D 
.)  cut  themselves  with  blades.”  (Ex.  6.) 

j. 

Charge  10:  On  May  3,  2012,  “after  having  been  made  aware  that  some 
themselves  in  the  classroom,  [respondent]  failed  to  follow  up  or 
students  were  cutting 
investigate  after  J 
sic]  P.,  6""  grade  student  in  his  classroom,  reported  to  [respondent]  that 
he  found  an  additional  blade  and  a  metal  strap  on  the  classroom  floor,  therefore  endangering 
the  health  and  safety  of  his  students.”  (fbid.) 

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

6. 

On  several  occasions  during  the  2011/2012  school  year,  including  February  1, 
2012,  the  date  of  the  Stull  observation,  respondent  received  non-disciplinary  counseling  from 
Sawyer  regarding  instruction  and  classroom  management.  On  several  occasions  in  2012, 
including  January  11,  2012,  and  March  19,  2012,  when  Sawyer  met  with  respondent,  and 
April  17,  2012,  when  Borden  Conley  met  with  respondent,  school  administration  issued  to 
respondent  memoranda  in  which  they  warned  that  disciplinary  action  might  follow.  Sawyer 
also  issued  a  memorandum  summarizing  her  conference  with  respondent  of  May  14,  2012, 
regarding  the  May  3,  2012,  incident.  Sawyer  listed  the  assistance  and  guidance  provided  to 
respondent  and  the  directives  issued  to  him,  and  warned  that  disciplinary  action  might 
follow.  She  wrote  that  she  would  “continue  to  investigate  this  incident  with  the  information 
you  have  provided  and  other  information  that  I  have  gathered.”  (Ex.  23.)  There  was  no 
evidence  of  any  further  factual  investigation  into  the  May  3,  2012,  incident. 

7. 

On  May  9,  2012,  Sawyer  issued  to  respondent  a  below-standard-performance 

evaluation.  Sawyer  wrote  that  respondent  demonstrated  instructional  deficiencies  and  that  his 
failure  to  effectively  supervise  students  led  to  injuries,  referring  to  the  incident  of  May  3, 
2012.  She  recommended  that  respondent  “would  benefit  from  participation  in  the  PAR 
program  in  order  to  improve  his  instruction,  supervision,  and  classroom  management.””  (Ex. 
22.)  Respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom  and  “housed”  at  a  District  facility. 

8. 

On  November  8,  2012,  respondent  received  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act(s) 

regarding  the  May  3,  2012,  incident. 

9, 

On  February  5,  2013,  respondent  received  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service 

and  a  Notice  of  Suspension. 

10. 

An  administrative  review  meeting  or  “Skelly  meeting,”  attended  by  George 

Bartleson,  then-Diréctor  of  Intensive  Support  and  Intervention,  Sergio  Franco,  District  Staff 

  

>  “PAR”  is  an  acronym  for  the  California  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  Program,  a 
program  that  a  school  district  is  authorized  to  develop  and  implement  in  accordance  with 
statutorily-mandated  principles.  (§  44500.) 

  

 

  

   

Relations  Field  Director,  respondent,  and  two  union  representatives,  was  held  on  February 
20,  2013,  to  consider  the  November  18,  2012,  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act(s)  and  the 
February  5,  2013,  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service.  On  February  22,  2013,  Bartleson 
informed  respondent  that  he  would  ask  the  Board  to  authorize  respondent’s  dismissal. 

Factual  Background 

11. 

Respondent  is  53  years  old  and  has  an  educational  and  employment 

background  in  electrical  engineering.  He  began  teaching  at  Lynwood  Unified  School  District 
(Lynwood)  in  1997,  and  became  employed  with  the  District  in  2000.  Respondent  holds  a 
multi-subject  credential. 

12. 

During  the  13  school  years  from  1997/1998  through  the  2009/2010  school 

years,  respondent  taught  6"  grade  math  and  science  only,  except  in  1997/1998  at  Lynwood, 
and  in  2006/2007,  when  he  taught  in  a  6"  grade  self-contained  class  at  Charles  Drew  Middle 
School  with  assistance  from  his  department  co-chair.  After  the  end  of  the  2009/2010  school 
year,  6"  grade  was  eliminated  at  Charles  Drew  Middle  School  and  its  6"  grade  teachers  were 
reassigned  to  its  feeder  elementary  schools.  The  District  transferred  respondent  to  99"  Street 
Elementary  School  in  Watts  and  assigned  him  to  teach  a  self-contained  sixth-grade  class  in 
the  2010/11  school  year.  At  respondent’s  request,  respondent  and  another  teacher  team- 
taught  respondent’s  class,  with  respondent  responsible  for  teaching  math  and  science  and  a 
few  other  subjects,  and  the  other  teacher  responsible  for  teaching  ELA  and  related  subjects. 

13. 

Despite  respondent’s  request  that  he  be  permitted  to  continue  teaching  only 

math  and  science,  the  school  discontinued  the  team-teaching  arrangement  and  assigned 
respondent  to  teach  a  self-contained  sixth-grade  class  for  the  2011/12  school  year. 

14. 

—_—  All  of  the  District’s  charging  allegations  pertain  to  the  2011/12  school  year. 

15. 

Sawyer  provided  respondent  with  the  services  of  an  instructional  specialist  and 

afforded  respondent  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  various  professional  development 
training  programs  and  activities.  Respondent  availed  himself  of  those  professional 
development  opportunities.  Respondent  was  not,  however,  offered  an  opportunity  to 
participate  in  the  PAR  program,  which  he  desires  to  do.  Respondent  is  credentialed  to  teach  a 
self-contained  classroom  but,  after  spending  the  vast  majority  of  his  teaching  career  teaching 
single  subject  math  and  science,  respondent  did  not  receive  sufficient  training  to  allow  him  to 
succeed  in  using  appropriate  instructional  methods  in  a  self-contained  classroom.  Sawyer,  in 
her June:21,-2012;  final  Stull  evaluation  of respondent,  recommended  that.respondent  receive 
PAR.  Respondent  was  housed  at  the  time;  Sawyer  testified  she  did  not  know  then  whether  he 
would  be  returning  to  classroom  duties.  Both  Sawyer  and  then-Director  of  Intensive  Support 
and  Intervention  Bartleson  testified  that  the  law  does  not  allow  a  teacher  to  receive  PAR 
unless  he  or  she  receives  a  negative  Stull  evaluation.  They  are  incorrect.’  In  any  event, 

      

>  A  teacher  may  receive  PAR  either  after  volunteering  to  participate  in  the  program  or 

after  receiving  a  negative  evaluation.  (§  44500,  subd.  (b)(1).) 

   5

   

respondent  has  now  received  a  negative  evaluation.  Complainant  argued  that  respondent  is 
not  entitled  to  PAR  because  he  has  demonstrated  unfitness  to  teach.  Complainant,  however, 
failed  to  establish  that  respondent  demonstrated  unfitness  to  teach.  (See  Legal  Conclusions  6- 
16.)  Complainant  also  argued  that  respondent  acted  inconsistently  with  his  expressed  desire 
to  receive  PAR  by  grieving  and  challenging  suspension;  the  Commission  finds  that  argument 
meritless. 

16. 

No  evidence  was  submitted  of  a  prior  history  of  discipline  against  respondent. 
Respondent’s  performance  evaluations  reflect  that,  overall,  he  met  or  exceeded  the  standard 
of  performance  until  2011/12. 

17. 

Respondent  submitted  numerous  letters  of  reference  attesting  to  his 

professionalism,  competence,  and  dedication  to  teaching  at-risk  students,  his  caring  for  and 
desire  to  help  others,  his  dedication  to  his  own  children,  and  his  commitment  to  positively 
affect  the  lives  of  his  students. 

Complainant's  Charging  Allegations  1  Through  8  (Factual  Finding  5(a)  through  (h)) 

18. 

With  respect  to  Charge  1,  on  September  8,  2011,  respondent  allowed  his 

students  to  run  from  the  classroom  to  the  yard  for  recess  without  supervision.  The  classroom 
was  adjacent  to  the  yard,  which  was  a  supervised  area.  On  September  7,  2011,  Borden 
Conley  told  respondent  not  to  allow  this  to  recur.  It  did  not  recur. 

19. 

With  respect  to  Charge  2,  respondent  provided  a  “classroom  library”  for  his 

students.  He  had  a  small  collection  of  his  own  books  in  the  classroom  near  his  desk  available 
for  students  who  had  finished  their  classwork,  and  he  took  his  students  to  the  school  library 
every  Monday  so  they  could  select  books  to  read  for  the  coming  week.  Sawyer  ordered  more 
books  for  respondent’s  classroom;  they  arrived  and  were  delivered  to  respondent’s  classroom 
on  September  15,  2011.  Respondent  arranged  for  them  to  be  unwrapped  and  labeled,  but  he 
did  not  immediately  make  them  available  to  his  students.  Rather,  as  Sawyer  had  instructed 
him  to  do,  he  waited  to  receive  a  lesson  in  “San  Diego  Quick,”  a  method  for  determining  the 
grade  level  at  which  each  student  in  his  class  could  read.  That  would  enable  him  to  make  the 
appropriate  books  available  to  each  student  in  his  class.  Respondent  was  supposed  to  receive 
the  lesson  on  October  21,  2011,  some  days  after  the  period  encompassed  in  the  charging 
allegation;  he  did  not  receive  the  lesson  until  October  28,  2011. 

20. 

With  respect  to  Charge  3,  respondent  briefly  left  his  students  unsupervised  just 
outside  his  classroom  on  November  30,  2011.  The  school  day  ended  at  2:19  p.m.;  respondent 
had  his  students  line  up  two  by  two  and  exit  the  classroom  éarly  that  day,  at  2:12  p.m.  He 
planned  to  escort  them  to  the  school  gate,  as  usual,  where  they  would  be  placed  in  the  care  of 
persons  picking  them  up  from  school.  A  few  students  asked  to  go  back  into  the  classroom  to 
retrieve  forgotten  items.  Respondent  accompanied  them,  and  the  door  closed  while  he  was  in 
the  classroom.  Within  a  few  minutes,  he  and  the  students  with  him  emerged  from  the 
classroom.  While  the  door  was  closed,  though,  Sawyer  had  noticed  that  three  of  the  students 
had  left  the  line  and  were  running  near  the  field,  and  some  students  in  line  were  shouting  at 

each  other.    

 

      

   

  

21. 

With  respect  to  Charge  4,  the  evidence  established  that  the  charged  acts  (see 

Factual  Finding  5d)  occurred.  Respondent  failed  to  engage  some  of  the  students  that  day,  and 
failed  to  post  math  vocabulary  and  terminology.  Respondent  also  failed  to  use  instructional 
techniques  identified  in  the  charging  allegations.  The  evidence  also  established,  however, 
that  January  9,  2012,  the  day  Borden  Conley  chose  to  conduct  an  unannounced  observation 
of  respondent’s  class,  was  the  first  day  of  school  after  winter  break,  and  she  entered  at  8:45 
a.m.,  shortly  after  class  began.  Respondent  was  engaging  his  students  in  a  warm-up  exercise, 
for  which  the  instructional  techniques  referred  to  in  Charge  4  would  have  been  inappropriate. 
Though  the  warm-up  exercise  was  overly  lengthy,  lasting  40  minutes,  that  was  not  included 
in  the  charging  allegations.  Respondent  was  also  inquiring  into  how  his  students  had  spent 
their  holiday,  reminding  them  of  the  classroom  rules,  and  generally  re-acclimating  them  to 
their  classroom  routine.  Early  morning  on  the  first  day  back  from  vacation  was  not 
established  to  be  representative  of  the  conduct  of  respondent’s  class  or  of  his  methods  of 
instruction.  Some  minor  discipline  problems  were  to  be  expected  before  the  students 
readjusted  to  school  routine  after  being  on  vacation  in  what  complainant’s  witnesses  testified 
was  Often  a  chaotic  and  even  dangerous  home  and  community  environment. 

22. 

With  respect  to  Charge  5,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent 

inappropriately  failed  to  discuss  the  meaning  of  “echo  read”  lesson  vocabulary  words  or  to 
pre-teach  relevant  vocabulary  words.  Rather,  uncontroverted  testimony  establishes  that 
respondent  engaged  in  these  instructional  techniques  for  this  lesson  on  Monday  and  Tuesday, 
before  Sawyer’s  Stull  observation  on  Wednesday,  and  that  he  used  an  assessment  at  the  end 
of  the  lesson  on  Friday,  again,  when  Sawyer  was  not  present  to  observe.  The  evidence  did 
not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  strategies  other  than  TPS;  respondent 
used  a  theme  chart  worksheet,  sentence  strip,  sentence  stems,  and  read-aloud  styles.  The 
evidence  did,  however,  establish  that,  on  February  1,  2012,  respondent  used  TPS  incorrectly, 
took  140  minutes  to  complete  a  60-minute  lesson,  inconsistently  used  the  popsicle  method  of 
choosing  students  to  answer  questions,  failed  to  have  students  assess  and  self-direct  their 
own  learning,  and  failed  to  integrate  students’  prior  knowledge  and  life  experiences  into  the 
lesson.  It  was  respondent’s  responsibility  to  manage  classroom  time,  keep  the  lesson flowing, 
and  finish  in  60  minutes.  Respondent  should  have  been  prepared  to  do  so,  knowing  that  he 
was  to  have  his  Stull  evaluation  that  day.  He  allowed  the  lesson  to  go  too  long,  and  he  used 
too  many  instructional  techniques,  some  incorrectly,  during  the  lesson. 

23. 

With  respect  to  Charge  6,  on  March  19,  2012,  respondent’s  classroom  desks 

and  pencil  boxes  had  pencil  shavings  on  them  and  student  work  was  shoved  into  the 
students’  desks  or  inside  notebooks. 

“34""~  With  respect'to  Charge  7,  on  March  19,  2012,  Sawyer  conducted an  informal 
observation  of  respondent's  class;  the  evidence  does  not  establish  how  much  time  she  spent 
there.  Complainant  offered  no  evidence  to  contradict  respondent’s  testimony  that  the  lesson 
plan  was  supposed  to  be  test  preparation,  or  evidence  to  show  whether  Sawyer  understood 
that.  Because  respondent  was  preparing  his  students  for  a  sixth  grade  level  examination, 
tailoring  the  lesson  to  each  student’s  reading  level  by  providing  instructional  strategies  to 

respond  to  the  students’  diverse  needs  was  not  possible.  Nor  was  it  possible  to  develop  or    7 

  

 

  

sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials,  provide  evidence  of  access  strategies  used  to 
meet  the  needs  of  diverse  learners,  or  establish  goals  and  modify  instructional  plans  to  meet 
student  needs.  The  evidence  shows  that  respondent  assigned  homework  to  his  students 
Monday  through  Thursday,  and  allowed  the  students  to  do  the  homework  in  class  if  time 
permitted  after  they  had  completed  their  classwork.  Sawyer  did  not  direct  respondent  not  to 
allow  homework  to  be  done  in  class  until  she  met  with  respondent  after  class  on  March  19, 
2012.  Complainant  did  not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  provide  evidence  of  assessing 
student  learning  or  checks  for  understanding. 

25. 

With  respect  to  Charge  8,  respondent  failed  to  meet  with  Borden-Conley,  as 

Sawyer  had  directed  on  March  19,  2012,  to  prepare  lesson  plans.  The  evidence  did  not 
establish  any  of  the  other  subparts  of  this  charging  allegation.  Rather,  the  evidence 
established  that  respondent  was  doing  test  preparation,  using  “GREAT”  and  other 
appropriate  instructional  strategies.  The  instructional  strategies  in  the  charging  allegations 
are,  at  least  for  the  most  part,  not  appropriate  for  the  lesson  respondent  was  teaching  that  day. 
Sawyer  allegedly  provided  strategies  in  a  document  or  documents  entitled  “Test  Prep 
Materials”  on  March  27,  2010;  that  allegation  was  not  supported  by  documentary  evidence  in 
the  record. 

Complainant's  Charging  Allegations  9  and  10  (Factual  Finding  5(i)  and  (j)) 

26. 

On  May  3,  2012,  several  students,  while  in  respondent’s  class,  cut  or  marked 

their  arms  with  blades  removed  from  plastic  pencil  sharpeners.  The  students  deliberately 
concealed  their  actions  from  respondent,  putting  their  arms  under  their  desks  and  performing 
the  cutting  when  they  were  sure  respondent  was  looking  elsewhere;  they  all  wore  long- 
sleeved  shirts  or  sweaters,  and  used  their  sleeves  to  cover  the  marks  on  their  arms.  The  cuts 
were  not  deep,  but  they  caused  red  marks  and  some  drew a little  blood.* 

27. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  students  in  respondent’s  class  were  able 

to  cut  themselves  due  to  a  failure  of  respondent  to  provide  proper  supervision,  or  that  a 
teacher  properly  supervising  the  class  would  have  observed  the  cutting.  Nor  did  the  evidence 
establish  that  respondent  improperly  failed  to  investigate  the  matter. 

28. 

im  a  student  in  respondent’s  class,  reported  the  classroom  cutting  to 

Sawyer.  He  did  not  report  it  to  respondent.  He  asked  respondent  for  permission  to  go  to  the 
principal’s  office  without  giving  respondent  a  reason;  respondent  granted  permission,  in 
accordance  with  school  policy.  JJ  brought  Sawyer  some  of  the  blades,  which  he  had 
picked  up  from  the  floor  and  wrapped  in  paper.  (Sawyer’s  testimony,  that  im  was  carrying 
sharp  blades in  his bare hands, was  credibly refuted  by JAP  J 
returned to  respondent’s 
classroom.  HBB  ound  more  blades  and,  shortly  before  class  ended,  he  again  asked 

  

*  The  same  students,  and  other  students,  also  cut  their  arms  while  at  recess  in  the  yard 

and  while  at  lunch  in  the  lunch  area;  those  areas  were  supervised  by  school  personnel  other 
than  respondent.  Some  of  the  students  also  cut  their  arms  while  at  home. 

|

  

respondent  for  permission  to  visit  Sawyer.  Respondent  told  im  he  could  go  at  the  end  of 
class,  which  Jaren  did.  On  neither  occasion  did  im  refer  to  or  show  any  blades  to 
respondent  or  tell  respondent  why  he  wanted  to  visit  Sawyer. 

29, 

At  lunchtime,  while  respondent  watched,  Sawyer  and  other  members  of  the 

_ 

school  administration  inspected  the  arms  of  the  students  from  respondent’s  class  and  found 
that  some  students  had  cut  themselves.  This  was  when  respondent  first  learned  that  students’ 
arms  had  been  cut.  Sawyer  instructed  respondent  not  to  investigate  the  incident  and, 
specifically,  not  to  talk  to  anyone  about  it;  respondent  complied  with  those  instructions. 
Respondent  returned  to  his  classroom  while  Sawyer  and  other  members  of  the  school 
administration  interviewed  the  students.  Those  students  whose  arms  were  not  cut  were  sent 
back  to  respondent’s  class,  and  respondent  recommenced  teaching. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

Jurisdiction 

44944.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  3.) 

Burden  of Proof 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

| 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  or 
44939  are  established.  In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  alleged  five 
of  those  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations,  and  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  (Factual  Finding  4.) 

A, 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  charged  respondent  with 

various.acts to.  support the  five  statutory groynds  for  dismissaj.  (Factyal  Findisig’5,)  The 
Commission  examined  each  charged  act  to  determine  whether  it  was  proven;  for  each 
charged  act  proven,  the  Commission  considered  whether  the  charged  acts  violated  one  or 
more  of  the  statutory  bases  for  dismissal,  as  alleged. 

5. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  District  established  that  the  following 

charged  acts  occurred: 

Charge  1  (see  Factual  Findings  5a,  18); 

9

  

   

Charge  3,  subparts  a  through  c  (see  Factual  Findings  5c,  20); 

Charge  4  (see  Factual  Findings  5d,  21); 

Charge  5,  subparts  b,  d,  f,  h,  and  i  (see  Factual  Findings  Se,  22); 

Charge  6  (see  Factual  Findings  5f,  23);  and 

Charge  8,  subpart  a  (see  Factual  Findings  Sh,  25). 

The  District  did  not  establish  that  the  other  acts  occurred  as  alleged. 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a){1),  based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  11 
through  29  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

7. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(4),  based  on  unsatisfactory  performance,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  11  through  17, 
19  through  22,  and  24,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

8. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  17 
through  28  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

9. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44939,  based 
on  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  set  forth  in 
Factual  Finding  24  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

10. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(7),  based  on  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the 
state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,  as 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  17  through  28  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235  (Morrison), 

the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  eithér  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  set  forth  factors  to  consider  in  determining  whether  a  teacher’s 
conduct  indicated  unfitness. 

11. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

    

12. 

The  Morrison  analysis  applies  to  causes  for  dismissal  for  unprofessional 

conduct  and  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  It  does  not  apply  to  causes  for  dismissal  for 
unsatisfactory  performance  or  for  persistent  violation  of  laws  and  regulations  (Morrison, 
supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp.  227-230);  it  is  presumed  that  such  conduct  is  related  to  fitness  to  teach. 
10    

 

  

   

  

13. 

None  of  respondent’s  acts  constituted  unprofessional  conduct,  evident 

unfitness  for  service,  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  or  willful  refusal 
to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  (See,  ¢.g.,  Bd.  of Ed.  v.  Swan 
(1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553  (unprofessional  conduct);  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Com.  on  Prof.  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429  (evident  unfitness);  Governing  Bd.  of 
Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77  (violation  of  school  laws); 
Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  Cal.  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327  (Commission  has  broad 
discretion).)  With  respect  to  Charge  1,  although  there  was  a  violation  of  school  law,  the 
evidence  does  not  establish  a  persistent  violation,  and  the  violation  was  not  repeated. 
(Factual  Finding  18.)  With  respect  to  Charge  8,  although  respondent  refused  to  meet  with 
Borden  Conley  for  a  month  without  adequate  justification,  respondent’s  failure  was  not  part 
of  a  pattern  and  did  not  constitute  a  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments.  (Factual 
Finding  25.) 

14. 

Some  of  respondent’s  acts,  alleged  in  Charge  4  and  Charge  5,  subparts  b,  d,  f, 

h,  and  i,  constituted  unsatisfactory  performance.  (Factual  Findings  5d,  5e,  21,  22.)  Other 
charged  acts,  though  proven,  did  not  constitute  unsatisfactory  performance.  Specifically,  with 
respect  to  Charge  3,  subparts  a  through  c,  the  evidence  is  insufficient  to  support  a  finding  of 
unsatisfactory  performance.  (Factual  Finding  20.)  With  respect  to  Charge  6,  the  facts  are 
insufficiently  significant  to  constitute  unsatisfactory  performance  as  a  cause  for  discipline. 
(Factual  Finding  23.) 

Disposition 

15. 

Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220-222.)  “The 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach...  ,  and 
whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  [Citing  Fontana,  supra,  45 
Cal.3d  at  pp.  220-222.]  *[A]  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may 
require  a  sensitive  evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it 
warrants  the  grave  sanction  of  dismissal.’  [Citation].”  (Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  Cal. 
(1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 

16. 

The  Commission  determined  that  instances  of  unsatisfactory  performance  set 

employees,  or  others  or  to  further  deter  him  from  engaging  in  similar  conduct  in  the  future.   

forth in parts  of Charges  4  and  5,  although constituting cause.for  dismissal 1 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(4), were  insufficient,  “separately  arid’ ‘in the  aggregalé  to  warrant 
dismissal  or  to  demonstrate  that  respondent is  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher.  The  Commission 
members  agree  unanimously.  Respondent  has  no  other  disciplinary  history  with  the  District. 
The  Commission  does  not  believe  that  dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect  students,  school 

ider  section 

    

    

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Anthony  Lewandowski 

are  dismissed. 

DATED:  January  16,  2015 

Bou fda  — 

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

  

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

T  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

    
  

  DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member  _, 

 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Anthony  Lewandowski 

are  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  January lf  2015 

ke  Shwe 

  

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

  

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member 

12 

 

  

    

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Anthony  Lewandowski 

are  dismissed. 

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

  

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

  

DATED:  January  __,  2015 

KAREN  SCHUETT 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  January  af,  2015 

    
  

CBaSamrdbes pa 

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member

