BEFORE  A  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
YUBA  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

TROY  ALEXANDER, 

OAH  No.  2013050114 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (CPC)  of 

the  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District  in  Yuba  City,  California,  on  May  19,  20,  and  21,  2014. 
The  CPC  members  were  Michael  Allen,  Ken  Trapp,  and  Karen  J.  Brandt,  Administrative 
Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH). 

| 

7 

(District). 

May  27,  2014.  © 

This  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  when  the  CPC  concluded  its  deliberations  on 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  Troy  Alexander  (respondent)  at  the 

Kristin  D.  Lindgren,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District 

hearing.  The  hearing  proceeded  as  a  default  hearing  under  Government  Code  section 
11520. 

.    

that  he  would  not  attend  or  participate  in  the  hearing.  In  his  letter,  he  did  not  request  a 
continuance  or  provide  sufficient  information  to  establish  good  cause  for  a  continuance. 
Consequently,  the  hearing  proceeded  as  a  default  hearing  without  him. 

respondent  engaged  in  immoral  and  unprofessional  conduct,  persistently  violated  or  refused 
to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  District’s  Governing  Board,  willfully 

Respondent  is  a  high  school  teacher.  At  the  hearing,  the  District  established  that 

1  At  12:51  a.m.  on  May  19,  2014,  respondent  emailed  a  letter  to  OAH,  which  stated 

SUMMARY 

  

1 

  

  

refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  and  is  evidently  unfit  for 
service.  Consequently,  the  District’s  dismissal  of  respondent  is  sustained. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  Social 

Science.  He  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  August  15,  2005.  He  is  a  permanent 
certificated  employee.  His  most  recent  position  with  the  District  was  as  a  high  school 
teacher.  He  was  assigned  to  teach  World  Geography  and  State  Requirements  at  River  Valley 
High  School  (RVHS)  to  high  school  freshman.  State  Requirements  include  a  health 
component  and  Driver  Education.  Principal  Thomas  Ruesser  and  Vice  Principal  Kenneth 
Schaeffer  were  respondent’s  direct  supervisors. 

Suspension  of  Credential for  Criminal  Convictions 

2. 

On  August  31,  2011,  in  the  Colusa  County  Superior  Court,  Case  No. 

CR52966,  respondent,  upon  a  plea  of  guilty,  was  convicted  of  violating  Penal  Code  section 
602,  subdivision  (1),  trespass  by  entering  and  occupying,  a  misdemeanor.  Imposition  of 
sentence  was  suspended  and  respondent  was  ordered  to  pay  a  fine  of  $580. 

3. 

On  August  31,  2011,  in  the  Colusa  County  Superior  Court,  Case  No. 

CR53024,  respondent,  upon  a  plea  of  guilty,  was  convicted  of  violating  Vehicle  Code  section 
14601.1,  subdivision  (a),  driving  when  privilege  was  suspended  or  revoked,  a  misdemeanor. 
Imposition  of  sentence  was  suspended,  and  respondent  was  ordered  to  pay a fine  totaling 
$1,384. 

4, 

On  March  28,  2012,  in  the  Colusa  County  Superior  Court,  Case  No.  CR53372, 

respondent,  upon  a  plea  of  no  contest,  was  convicted  on  two  counts  of  violating  Penal  Code 
section  459,  burglary  in  the  second  degree,  both  misdemeanors.  Imposition  of  sentence  was 
suspended,  and  respondent  was  placed  on  summary  probation  for  three  years.  He  was 
ordered  to  serve  210  days  in  jail,  which  was  stayed  pending  successful  completion  of 
probation.  He  was  ordered  to  pay  a  fine  and  restitution.  He  was  also  ordered  to  complete  20 
hours  in  the  alternative  work  program. 

5. 

Based  upon  the  convictions  described  in  Findings  2,  3,  and  4,  the  Commission 
on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC)  suspended  respondent’s  teaching  credential  for  a  period  of 
seven  days,  effective  January  13  through  19,  2013.  As a result  of  the  CTC  suspension, 
respondent  was  not  able  to  perform  any  services  for  the  District  during  that  period. 

6. 

In  reaching  its  determination  to  suspend  respondent’s  teaching  credential,  the 

CTC  reviewed  a  Confidential  Investigation  Report  prepared  for  the  CTC.  The  report 
described  the  facts  underlying  respondent’s  August  31,  2011  trespass  conviction  as  follows: 

According  to  the  narrative  report,  an  officer  was  dispatched  on  a 
call  of  possible  thefts.  The  reporting  party  stated  that  he 

2 

 

  

observed  Respondent  gathering  scrap-metal  on  a  levee  road. 
When  Respondent  was  informed  that  the  Sherriff  was  being 
called,  he  fled  the  scene.  The  reporting  party  was  able  to  get 
Respondent’s  license  plate  before  he  fled  the  scene.  The 
property  owner  of  where  Respondent  was  gathering  scrap-metal 
was  contacted.  He  verified  that  several  metal]  items  from  his 
property  had  been  taken  with  a  value  of  approximately 
$6,140.00. 

The  officer  made  contact  with  Respondent.  Respondent 
admitted  to  being  in  the  area  of  the  thefts,  but  denied  taking  any 
items. 

According  to  a  narrative  report,  an  officer  was  dispatched  on  a 
report  of  a  suspicious  vehicle  parked  behind  a  vacant  residence. 
The  officer  discovered  Respondent  coming  out  of  the  residence 
when  he  approached  the  back  door  of  the  house.  Respondent 
admitted  that  he  was  stealing  copper  from  the  residence. 
Respondent  caused  approximately  $710.35  in  damage  to  the 
residence.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  was  involved  in  the 
theft  of  electrical  wire  from  a  prior  burglary  reported  on 
September  21,  2011. 

The  report  described  the  facts  underlying  respondent’s  March  28,  2012  burglary 

conviction  as  follows: 

Information  about  respondent’s  burglary  arrest  was  printed  in  the  Sun-Herald 
. 

. 

newspaper. 

7. 

Because  they  involved  dishonesty  and  a  breach  of  a  duty  owed  to  another  and 

society,  respondent’s  convictions  for  burglary  involved  crimes  of  moral  turpitude.  (See 
Clerici  v.  Department  of Motor  Vehicles  (1990)  224  Cal.App.3d  1016,  1027.)  Crimes 
involving  dishonesty  demonstrate  a  lack  of  moral  character  and  fitness  to  practice  a 
profession.  (Matanky  v.  Board  of Medical  Examiners  (1978)  79  Cal.App.3d  293,  305.) 

8. 

All  of  respondent’s  convictions  are  for  crimes  that  are  substantially  related  to 

the  qualifications,  functions  and  duties  of  a  teacher.  A  teacher  has  been  described  as  an 
“‘exemplar  whose  words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  children  coming  under 
[his]  care  and  protection.’”  (Palo  Verde  etc.  Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967, 
970.)  Because  respondent  taught  Driver  Education,  his  conviction  for  driving  when  his 
license  was  suspended  or  revoked  bears a  particular  nexus  to  his  employment. 

Hf 

// 

 

Taping  Card  on  Student’s  Back  and  Displaying  Altered  Photographs  of Students 

9. 

On  or  about  March  6,  2013,  S.F.,’  a  ninth-grade  student,  fell  asleep  in 

respondent’s  third  period  World  Geography  class.  While  S.F.  was  asleep,  respondent  taped  a 
laminated  card  on  S.F.’s  back.  The  card  had  the  word  “penis”  on  it.  After  respondent  taped 
this  card  to  S.F.’s  back,  two  students  in  the  class  placed  handwritten  notes  on  S.F.’s  back. 
Written  on  these  notes  were  “Meth  Addict”  and  “Registered  Child  Molester.”  A  student 
used  a  smartphone  to  take  a  picture  of  the  card  and  notes  on  S.F.’s  back. 

10. 

Respondent’s  classroom  was  equipped  with  a  SMART  Board.  Respondent 

could  project  images,  data,  text,  and  other  items  from  his  computer  on  to  the  SMART  Board 
for  all  the  students  in  his  class  to  see. 

11. 

‘In  or  about  March  2013,  during  the  third  period  World  Geography  class, 

respondent  projected  from  his  computer  on  to  the  SMART  Board  a  school  photograph  of 
ninth-grade  student  I.R.,  which  had  been  altered  to  include:  (1)  a  swastika  on  LR.’s 
forehead;  (2)  the  numbers  “88”  on  one  cheek,  “14”  on  his  other  cheek,  and  “666”  on  his 
chin;  (3)  what  appeared  to  be  a  teardrop  drawn  under  one  eye;  (4)  the  words  “white  trash”  on 
his  neck;  (5)  a  speech  bubble  over  his  head  with  the  words,  “I  love  little  boys”;  and  (6)  the 
words,  “Sutter  Co  Jail  Inmate”  under  his  face.  I.R.’s  shirt  had  been  altered  to  look  like  the 
shirt  of  an  inmate.  Student  I.R.  was  in  respondent’s  third  period  class  when  respondent 
displayed  the  altered  photograph.  A  student  used  her  smartphone  to  take  a  picture  of  the 
altered  photograph.  Respondent  also  displayed  this  altered  photograph  on  the  SMART 
Board  during  his  fourth  period  class. 

12. 

On  another  occasion  in  or  about  March  2013,  during  the  third  period  World 

Geography  class,  respondent  projected  from  his  computer  on  to  the  SMART  Board  a  school 
photograph  of  ninth-grade  student  N.A.,  which  had  been  altered  to  include:  (1)  a  swastika  on 
N.A.’s  forehead;  (2)  the  numbers  “88”  on  his  forehead,  and  “14”  on  his  cheek;  (3)  what 
appeared  to  be  two  teardrops  drawn  under  one  eye;  (4)  a  speech  bubble  above  his  head  with 
the  words,  “I  have  growing  pains”;  and  (6)  the  words,  “Inmate  #453895A”  and  “CA  Dept  of 
Corrections”  under  his  face.  N.A.’s  shirt  had  been  altered  to  look  like  the  shirt  of  an  inmate. 
Student  N.A.  was  in  respondent’s  third  period  class. 

13. 

Ona  third  occasion  in  or  about  March  2013,  during  the  third  period  World 

Geography  class,  respondent  projected  from  his  computer  on  to  the  SMART  Board  a  school 
photograph  of  student  S.F.,  which  had  been  altered  to  include:  (1)  a  “W”  written  on  each  of 
his  cheeks;  and  (2)  the  words  “is  my  LIFE”  under  his  face. 

14. 

The  District  retained  Richard  Martin  Strang  of  MK  Forensics  to  analyze  the 

contents  of  respondent’s  school  computer.  Mr.  Strang  found  school  photographs  of  students 
on  respondent’s  computer.  These  photographs  included  the  ones  described  in  Findings  11, 
12,  and  13,  as  well  as  a  fourth  photograph  of  another  student  that  had  been  similarly  altered. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  this  fourth  photograph  was  displayed  to  students  during  class.  . 

  

*  Students  are  identified  by  their  initials  to  protect  their  privacy. 

4

| 
| 

Capsules  in  Respondent’s  Desk  Drawer 

15. 

On  March  8,  2013,  Principal  Ruesser  searched  a  drawer  of  respondent’s  school 

desk.  Inside  that  drawer,  Principal  Ruesser  found:  (1)  capsules,  some  open  and  empty,  and 
others  full;  (2)  rolled-up  RVHS  business  cards  for  respondent;  and  (3)  a  cotton  ball  with 
blood  on  it.  Principal  Ruesser  was  informed  by  a  pharmacist  that  the  capsules  were 
Adderall’  and  an  allergy  pill.  Poison  Control  confirmed  that  some  of  the  capsules  were 
Adderall.  The  capsules  were  readily  accessible  to  students  and  substitute  teachers  who  may 
have  opened  respondent’s  desk  drawer. 

Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

16.  .  OnJune  1,  2012,  the  District  served  a  “Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

and/or  Conduct  Demonstrating  Evident  Unfitness”  (Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct)  on 
respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44938,  subdivision  (a),  and  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1).  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  stated  that  respondent  was  in  “an 
extremely  serious  and  job-threatening  situation,”  and  that  his  unprofessional  conduct  and 
evident  unfitness  for  service  were  “cause  for  discipline  up  to  and  including  dismissal.”  The 
Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  stated  further  that  respondent  was  being  afforded  an 
“opportunity  to  correct  [his]  faults  and  to  overcome  the  grounds  for  this  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct.” 

17. 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  set  forth  in  detail  the  following  specific 

instances  of  unprofessional  conduct: 

(a) 

Criminal  Convictions.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

described  six  convictions  that  respondent  had  suffered  between  August  9,  2010,  and 
March  28,  2012,  including  the  three  convictions  described  in  Findings  2,  3,  and  4, 

(b) 

Failure  to  Follow  Policy  and  Procedure  on  Reporting Absences. 

School  began  at  8:00  a.m.  Respondent  was  required  to  be  on  site  no  later  than  7:30 
a.m.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  stated  that,  at  7:41  a.m.  on  October  5, 
2009,  respondent  sent  an  email  stating  that  he  would  not  be  at  his  first  period 
assignment.  Later  that  day,  Principal  Ruesser  met  with  respondent  to  discuss,  among 
other  things,  policy  and  procedure  for  reporting  absences.  Principal  Ruesser  directed 
respondent  to  do  the  following  when  he  was  going  to  be  absent  from  work:  (1)  call 
Principal  Ruesser  on  his  cell  phone  before  7:00  a.m.  on  the  day  of  the  absence  to 
provide  notice  of  his  impending  absence;  and  (2)  request  a  substitute  no  later  than 
7:00  a.m.  on  the  day  of  the  absence.  On  February  24,  2010,  respondent  was  given  an 
additional  directive:  not  to  call  in  absent  for  first  period  and  then  later  call  in  with 
notice  that  he  would  be  absent  for  the  remainder  of  the  day,  without  good  cause. 

  

3  Medline  Plus,  the  National  Institutes  of  Health’s  website,  describes  Adderall  as 
containing  amphetamine  and  dextroamphetamine.  It  is  in  a  class  of  medications  called 
central  nervous  system  stimulants.  It  is  used  to  treat  attention  deficit  hyperactivity  disorder 
and  narcolepsy.  (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a601234.html) 

5 

 

  

  

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  described  with  particularity  10  times 

during  the  2009/2010  school  year  in  addition  to  October  5,  2009,  17  times  during  the 
2010/2011  school  year,  and  nine  times  during  the  2011/2012  school  year  when 
respondent  was  absent,  but  failed  to  comply  with  the  directives  he  was  given  for 
reporting  his  impending  absences. 

_ 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  that  on  “at  least”  45  different 

occasions  during  the  2010/2011  school  year  (including  the  ones  described  with 
particularity  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct)  respondent  either  failed  or 
refused  to  report  his  absences  and/or  request  a  substitute  before  7:00  a.m.  on  the  date 
of  the  absence.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  also  noted  that  on  “at  least” 
eight  different  occasions  during  the  2010/2011  school  year  (including  one  specifically 
identified  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct)  respondent  called  in  with  notice 
that  he  would  be  absent  from  first  period,  and  then  midway  through  or  just  after 
second  period,  called  in  with  notice  that  he  would  be  out  for  the  remainder  of  the  day. 

(c) 

Failure  to  Submit  Appropriate  Lesson  Plans  When  Absent.  The  Notice 
of  Unprofessional  Conduct  stated  that  on  October  5,  2009,  Principal  Ruesser  met  with 
respondent  to  discuss,  among  other  things,  the  policy  and  procedure  for  submitting 
lesson  plans  when  he  was  absent.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  that 
District  Administrative  Regulation  4161.2  provides: 

Whenever  possible,  employees  shall  request  personal 
leaves  in  advance  and  prepare  suitable  lesson  plans  or 
instructions  for  a  substitute  employee. 

Principal  Ruesser  told  respondent  that  he  had  been  absent  for  one  or  more 

periods  on  18  separate  occasions  since  the  beginning  of  the  2009/2010  school  year. 
He  further  relayed  that  respondent  had  failed  to  provide  lesson  plans  on  a  number  of 
those  occasions,  and  that  when  respondent  did  provide  lesson  plans,  they  were  not 
suitable  for  the  classes  scheduled  during  his  absence.  Principal  Ruesser  directed 
respondent  to  do  the  following  when  he  was  absent:  (1)  provide  suitable  lesson  plans 
for  classes  scheduled  on  the  day  of  his  absence;  and  (2)  maintain  three  days  of 
emergency  substitute  plans  (appropriate  to  the  classes/topics  he  was  teaching)  in  - 
writing  and  provide  them  to  the  office  specialist. 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  with  particularity  13  occasions 

between  October  2009  and  May  2012  when  respondent  was  absent  but  failed  to 
provide  sufficient  lesson  plans  that  substitutes  could  follow  to  teach  his  classes. 

(d)  .  Abuse  of  Leave.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  that 
respondent  was  on  a  leave  of  absence  from  October  2011  until  April  16,  2012.  On 
April  27,  2012,  respondent  emailed  Principal  Ruesser  that  he  was  no  longer  disabled, 
and  no  longer  required  a  reasonable  accommodation  to  perform  the  essential 
functions  of  his  position.  In  addition  to  the  directives  noted  above  with  regard  to 

6 

 

  

Board  Policy  5121,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

. 

| 

respondent’s  absences,  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  also  noted  that 
respondent  had  been  directed  to  be  on  campus  during  his  preparation  period  to  plan, 
evaluate,  prepare  and  obtain  materials,  and  described  with  particularity  five  times  in 
April  and  May  2012  when  respondent  arrived  late.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional 
Conduct  stated  that  respondent  “clearly”  viewed  his  preparation  period  as  “optional.” 

(e) 

Failure  to  Follow  Policy  and  Procedure  Regarding  Timely  Submission 

of  Student  Records,  Grades,  and  Absences.  Respondent  was  required  to  track  and 
record  the  attendance,  absences  and  tardiness  of  his  students.  The  District  has  a 
computerized  system  called  Aeries  Browser  Interface  (ABI)  for  teachers  to  use  to 
track  and  record  this  information.  Teachers  were  required  to  submit  ABI  Reports 

_  weekly.  Respondent  was  informed  that  he  was  required  to  report  his  students’ 

attendance  using  the  ABI  system.  The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  that 
respondent  did  not  submit  ABI  Reports  for  six  weeks  in  August  and  September  2009. 
Respondent  was  directed  to: 
(2)  submit  signed  reports  weekly;  and  (3)  contact  the  vice  principal  if  he  had  any 
future  problems  entering  data.  Contrary  to  these  directives,  respondent  failed  to 
promptly  enter  and  report  attendance  information  into  the  ABI  system  for  four 

(1)  enter  student  attendance  data  daily  as  he  took  roll; 

’  separate  weeks  between  September  2009  and  March  2010. 

Parents/guardians  and  students  have  the  right  to  receive 
course  grades  that  represent  an  accurate  evaluation  of  the 
student’s  achievement 

The  teacher  of  each  course  shall  determine  the  student’s 
grade. 

In  December  2009,  respondent  incorrectly  assigned  a  grade  of  “D-”  to  a 
student,  instead  of “B-.”  In  March  2011,  he  incorrectly  assigned  a  grade  of  “B-”  to  a 
student  with  a  92.82  percent  grade  in  his  class. 

Respondent  failed  to  timely  submit  the  second  quarter  grade  report  that  was 

due  on  January  14,  2010,  until  February  25,  2010.  In  addition,  the  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  three  occasions  when  respondent  failed  to  record 
assignments  received  from  a  student. 

In  the  second  quarter  of  the  2010/2011  school  year,  respondent  taught  two 

classes  of  Driver  Education.  Part  of  his  responsibility  was  to  complete  the  necessary 
logs  for  submission  to  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles  (DMV).  The  DMV  logs 
were  due  in  January  2011.  He  did  not  submit  them  timely,  notwithstanding  multiple 
reminders.  As  of  November  2011,  the  District  had  not  received  the  logs.  As  a  result 
of  respondent’s  failure  to  submit  the  logs  timely,  72  students  did  not  have  their  forms 
logged  with  the  DMV. 

 

  

The  deadline  for  the  first  quarter  grades  for  the  2011/2012  school  year  was 

October  14,  2011,  at  8:00  a.m.  Respondent  did  not  meet  this  deadline.  RVHS  issued 
report  cards  to  students  without  respondent’s  grades  in  them.  On  October  17,  2011,  at 
12:06  p.m.,  respondent  turned  in  all  his  grades  except  for  one.  Because  respondent 
turned  in  handwritten  grades,  instead  of  utilizing  the  District’s  computer  system, 
RVHS’s  Records  Specialist  had  to  work  for  two  hours  manually  inputting  them  and 
manually  adjusting  student  grade  point  averages  (GPAs).  The  District  office  then  had 
to  mail  an  additional  set  of  report  cards  to  the  affected  students.  As a  result  of 
respondent’s  failure  to  post  his  grades  timely,  three  students  were  deemed  ineligible 
to  participate  in  freshman  football. 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  also  noted  that  respondent  failed  to 

post  grades  due  by  8:00  a.m.  on  May  4,  2012.  He  gave  inconsistent  reasons  for 
failing  to  meet  this  deadline. 

(f) 

Failure  to  Meet  Professional  Responsibilities.  The  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  noted  that  respondent:  (1)  failed  to  update  his  tuberculosis 
test  timely;  (2)  engaged  in  inappropriate  discussions  in  his  third  period  class, 
including  discussing  his  medical  condition  and  medical  marijuana;  and  (3)  engaged  in 
inappropriate  communications  with  parents. 

18. 

Improvement  Plan.  Set  forth  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  was  an 

Improvement  Plan  designed  to  assist  respondent  in  correcting  his  unprofessional  conduct. 
The  directives  in  the  Improvement  Plan  included  the  following: 

Comply  with  all  directives  from  your  supervisors  and/or 

1. 
District  administration.  This  includes  immediate  compliance 
with  all  past  directives  with  which  you  have  failed  to  comply. 

Attend  work  in  a  predictable  and  reliable  fashion.  This 

2. 
includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  being  present  on-site  at  least  one- 
half  hour  before  school  begins. 

Use  instructional  time  for  instructional  activities.  Do  not 

4. 
use  instructional  time  to  complete  personal  or  administrative 
tasks:  Including,  but  not  limited  to,  email  correspondence. 

Record  and  enter  student  attendance,  absences,  and 

7. 
tardiness  into  the  ABI  system  on  a  daily  basis.  Submit  ABI 
Reports  weekly. 

[T  ..-  (91 

[i  ---[9] 

(T]  ---  (1 

 

  

Check  in  with  the  office  secretary  no  later  than  7:30  a.m. 

10. 
each  work  day. 

Provide  weekly,  suitable  lesson  plans  to  Principal 

11. 
Ruesser  each  Friday  for  the  following  week. 

Refrain  from  discussing  inappropriate  topics  in  the 

12. 
classroom  including,  by  way  of  illustration  and  not  limitation, 
drug  use  and  the  status  of  your  health  and/or  use  of  prescription 
medication. 

19. 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  was  served  on  respondent  on  June  1, 

2012,  the  last  day  of  the  2011/2012  school  year.  The  Improvement  Plan  went  into  effect  on 
August  14,  2012,  the  first  day  of  the  2012/2013  school  year. 

Failure  to  Meet  Requirements  of Improvement  Plan  in  the  2012/2013  School  Year 

20. 

During  the  2012/2013  school  year,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  first 

directive  set  forth  in  the  Improvement  Plan,  to  comply  with  all  his  supervisors’  directives,  in 
the  following  ways:  (1)  on  September  26,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  report  for  a  social 
science  department  meeting;  (2)  on  September  21,  2012,  he  failed  to  submit  his  lesson  plans 
for  the  following  week  by  4:00  p.m.,  as  directed  by  Principal  Ruesser  (he  submitted  them  at 
8:38  p.m.  that  evening);  (3)  he  consistently  failed  to  use  the  format  for  lesson  plans  that  Vice 
Principal  Schaeffer  directed  him  to  use;  and  (4)  on  January  18,  2013,  he  failed  to  submit  his 
lesson  plans  by  4:00  p.m.  (he  submitted  them  at  9:30  p.m.  on  January  19,  2013). 

21. 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  second  directive  set  forth  in  the 

Improvement  Plan  to  attend  work  in  a  predictable  and  reliable  fashion.  He  was  absent  either 
for  the  entire  day  or  for  a  portion  of  a  day  nine  times  between  August  29  and  November  5, 
2012.  This  is  greater  than  the  typical  number  of  absences  for  teachers  in  the  District  over  a 
similar  period  of  time.  As  of  January  2013,  respondent  had  already  exhausted  his  sick  leave 
total  for  the  entire  school  year. 

22. 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  fourth  directive  set  forth  in  the 

Improvement  Plan  to  use  instructional  time  for  instructional  activities  when  he  sent  emails  to 
Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  during  instructional  time  on  August  14,  October  5,  and  October  29, 
2012. 

. 

23. 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  seventh  directive  of  the  Improvement 

Plan  to  submit  ABI  Reports  weekly  by  failing  to  submit  timely  reports  for  the  weeks  of 
August  21  through  24,  September  3  through  7,  September  24  through  28,  and  October  1 
through  5,  2012. 

24. 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  tenth  directive  set  forth  in  the 

Improvement  Plan  to  check  in  with  the  office  secretary  no  later  than  7:30  a.m.  each  work 
day.  Between  August  15  and  October  4,  2012,  he  checked  in  late  eight  times. 

9

25.  —  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  eleventh  directive  of  the  Improvement 

Plan  to  provide  to  Principal  Ruesser  lesson  plans  each  Friday  for  the  following  week. 
Respondent  was  required  to  submit  the  lesson  plans  by  4:00  p.m.  On  August  10,  2012,  he 
submitted  his  lesson  plans  at  8:07  p.m.  On  August  24,  2012,  he  submitted  them  one  hour 
late.  On  August  14  and  24,  and  September  7,  2012,  he  submitted  lesson  plans  that  did  not 
follow  the  format  Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  had  directed  him  to  use. 

26. 

The  actions  that  respondent  took  during  his  third  period  World  Geography 

class  in  taping  a  laminated  card  on  a  student’s  back  with  the  word  “penis,”  and  in  projecting 
altered  photographs  of  three  students  on  the  SMART  Board  demonstrate  that  respondent  also 
failed  to  comply  with  the  twelfth  directive  in  the  Improvement  Plan  to  refrain  from 
discussing  inappropriate  topics  in  the  classroom.  In  addition,  students  who  were  in 
respondent’s  third  period  World  Geography  class  testified  that  respondent  discussed  drug  use 
and  selling  drugs  in  class,  and  sometimes  used  curse  words  such  as  “damn”  and  “shit.” 
Respondent’s  actions  in  taping  the  laminated  card  to  the  student’s  back,  projecting  altered 
photographs,  discussing  drug  use  and  sale,  and  using  curse  words  also  show  that  respondent 
failed  to  comply  with  the  fourth  directive  in  the  Improvement  Plan  to  use  instructional  time 
for  instructional  activities. 

District  Policies 

27. 

In  addition  to  District  Administrative  Regulation  4161.2  cited  in  Finding  17(c) 

and  Board  Policy  5121  cited  in  Finding  17(e),  the  Governing  Board  has  also  adopted  Board 
Policy  4119.21,  which  provides: 

The  Governing  Board  expects  district  employees  to  maintain  the 
highest  ethical  standards,  follow  district  policies  and  regulations 
and  abide  by  state  and  federal  laws.  Employee  conduct  should 
enhance  the  integrity  of  the  district  and  advance  the  goals  of  the 
educational  programs.  Each  employee  should  make  a 
commitment  to  acquire  the  knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to 
fulfill  his/her  responsibilities  and  should  focus  on  his/her 
contribution  to  the  learning  and  achievement  of  district  students. 

28. 

The  District  has  entered  into  a  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  (CBA)  with 

its  teachers.  The  CBA  includes  Appendix  A,  entitled  “Teacher  Duties  and Responsibilities.  » 
In  relevant  part,  Appendix  A  provides: 

...  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District  has  defined  competent 
instruction  as  follows: 

The  teacher: 

[]  ---  (J 

10 

 

  

Prepares  current  lesson  plans  which  include  objectives, 

3. 
activities,  resources,  and  has  them  available; 

[W  ---  [9] 

11. 
learning  by: 

a. 

b. 

Develops  an  atmosphere  that  encourages  students’ 

treating  all  students  in  a  positive  manner; 

showing  interest/enthusiasm  in  the  unit/course 
study; 

Cc. 

helping  students  develop  a  positive  self-image  by: 

i) 

ii) 

striving  for  success  in  every  student, 

emphasizing  what  students  have  learned 
rather  than  what  they  have  not  learned. 

Respondent’s  Fitness  To  Teach 

_ 

29, 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235  (Morrison), 

the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  listed  the  following  factors  as  relevant  when  determining  whether  a 
teacher’s  conduct  indicates  that  he  or  she  is  fit  to  teach:  “[1]  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers,  [2]  the  degree  of  such  adversity 
anticipated,  [3]  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  [4]  the  type  of  teaching 
certificate  held  by  the  party  involved,  [5]  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if 
any,  surrounding  the  conduct,  [6]  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct,  [7]  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and 
[8]  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect 
upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.”  (/d.  at  pp.  229-230.) 

30. 

As  set  forth  below,  when  respondent’s  conduct  is  considered  in  light  of  the 

Morrison  factors,  the  District  established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

31. 

Adverse  Effect  of  Respondent’s  Conduct.  Sixteen  students  between  the  ages 

of  15  and  16  testified  at  the  hearing.  They  generally  described  seeing  the  laminated  card 
with  the  word  “penis”  that  respondent  taped  on  S.F.’s  back  and/or  one  or  more  of  the  altered 
photographs  respondent  put  up  on  the  SMART  Board  in  class.  In  addition,  the  District 
submitted  22  handwritten  student  statements,  including  those  from  the  students  who  testified, 
about  the  card  respondent  placed  on  S.F.’s  back  and  the  altered  photographs  he  put  up  on  the 

11 

 

SMART  Board.  In  their  testimony  and  statements,  some  of  the  students  noted  that  many  in 
the  class  laughed  when  respondent  engaged  in  these  actions.  Some  stated  that  the  students 
who  respondent  targeted  were  the  biggest  “trouble  makers”  in  the  class.  Some  described 
respondent’s  behavior  as  “joking.”  They  noted  that  he  permitted  students  to  place  other 
signs  on  S.F.’s  back  and  to  take  pictures  with  their  smartphones  of  the  signs  and  the  altered 
photographs.  Few  could  remember  any  remarks  respondent  made  when  he  engaged  in  these 
actions,  other  than  to  ask  whether  the  students  wanted  to  see  “something  funny.”  A  few  of 
the  students  stated  that  they  thought  respondent’s  actions  were  “inappropriate,”  and  they  felt 
that  his  intent  was  to  “humiliate”  the  targeted  students  to  keep  them  “quiet.” 

32. 

During  their  testimony,  some  of  the  students  noted  that  students  generally 
talked  more  in  respondent’s class than  in  other  classes.  Some  also  noted  that  respondent 
spent  “a  lot”  of  time  during  class  working  on  his  computer,  while  they  worked  independently 
on  worksheets.  Many  noted  the  significant  amount  of  time  respondent  was  absent.  Some 
remarked  that  he  sometimes  used  “curse  words”  such  as  “damn”  and  “shit.”  One 
remembered  that  he  talked  in  class  about  smoking  marijuana  and  being  part  of  a  drug  cartel. 
Others  remembered  him  telling  the  students  whose  photographs  were  altered  that  they  would 
end  up  in  jail.  Some  of  the  students  believed  that  they  did  not  learn  as  much  in  respondent’s 
class  as  they  should  have.  One  of  the  students  had  asked  for  a  transfer  from  respondent’s 
class  because  respondent  was  “never  there,”  and  he  tested  them  on  material  that  he  did  not 
teach  them. 

33. 

Thomas  Walters,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources,  Principal 

Ruesser,  and  Assistant  Principal  Schaeffer  testified  about  the  effect  respondent’s  conduct  had 
on  students,  administrators,  fellow  teachers,  and  District  staff.  According  to  Assistant 
Superintendent  Walters,  teachers  are  allowed  10  days  each  school  year  for  sick  and  personal 
leave,  and  most  teachers  do  not  utilize  all  this  leave  time.  The  amount  of  time  respondent 
was  absent  was  significantly  above  the  average.  Respondent  was  granted  a  leave  for  a  period 
of  time  during  the  2011/2012  school  year  as  a  reasonable  accommodation  for  medical  issues. 
On  May  9,  2012,  respondent’s  counsel  notified  the  District  that  respondent  no  longer 
required  “any  workplace  accommodations  in  order  to  perform  his  teaching  duties,”  and  that 
he  did  not  require  further  accommodation  at  that  time  because  his  “medical  condition  [had] 
improved  dramatically.” 

34. 

Respondent  was  warned  on  numerous  occasions  about  his  excessive 

absenteeism,  his  failure  to  call  the  substitute  system  in  a  timely  manner,  and  his  failure  to 
have  appropriate  lesson  plans  for  his  substitutes  when  he  was  absent.  Before  the  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  was  issued,  respondent  was  given  written  warnings  about  these 
concerns,  including:  (1)  a  Letter  of  Reprimand  dated  March  26,  2010;  (2)  a  Summary  of 
Meeting  on  March  17,  2011;  and  (3)  a  Letter  of  Warning  dated  March  25,  2011.  In  addition, 
Principal  Ruesser  had  numerous  communications  with  respondent  about  these  issues. 

35. 

Principal  Ruesser  testified  that  respondent’s  failure  to  timely  notify  RVHS  of 
his  absences  made  it  very  difficult  for  the  school  to  obtain  substitutes.  Because  respondent 
did  not  leave  adequate  lesson  plans,  Principal  Ruesser  sometimes  asked  Ashlee  Kaye,  a 
teacher  who  was  the  “content  lead”  in  respondent’s  subject  area,  to  prepare  lesson  plans  for 

12 

 

  

respondent’s  substitutes.  Ms.  Kaye  would  have  to  prepare  these  lesson  plans  at  a  time  when 
she  was  trying  to  teach  her  own  classes.  When  respondent  called  in  absent  for  just  the  first 
period,  and  then  later  called  in  absent  for  the  remainder  of  the  day,  the  District  would 
sometimes  have  to  pay  for  two  substitutes. 

36.- 

When  respondent  failed  to  timely  and  accurately  turn  in  his  grades,  Principal 

Ruesser  received  multiple  complaints  from  parents.  Some  students  were  not  able  to 
participate  in  athletic  programs  because  their  GPAs  were  too  low  when  they  were  calculated 
without  respondent’s  missing  grades.  When  respondent  failed  to  turn  in  the  class  records  for 
the  students  in  his  Driver  Education  class,  those  students  were  not  able  to  get  their  drivers’ 
permits. 

. 

37. 

Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  testified  about  the  significant  time  he  spent  trying  to 

help  respondent  prepare  appropriate  lesson  plans  that  were  “clear  and  congruent.”  Vice 
Principal  Schaeffer  provided  a  lesson  plan  template  for  respondent  to  follow,  and  met  with 
respondent  at  least  10  times  to  help  him  with  his  lesson  plans.  Vice  Principal  Schaeffer 
worked  with  respondent  “extensively”  and  “in  detail”  to  ensure  that  respondent  knew  what 
the  District  required  with  regard  to  lesson  plans.  After  working  with  Vice  Principal 
Schaeffer,  respondent  initially  created  lesson  plans  that  complied  with  the  District’s 
requirements.  But  over  time,  respondent’s  lesson  plans  became  less  and  less  compliant. 
When  respondent’s  lesson  plans  were  not  in  compliance  with  the  District’s  template,  they  did 
not  provide  sufficient  information  for  a  substitute  to  follow  to  teach  respondent’s  classes 
effectively. 

. 

38. 

Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  conducted  two  formal  observations  of  respondent’s 
classroom.  He  observed  that  “lots”  of  students  were  “off  task.”  Many  of  the  students  were 
talking  and  respondent  did  not  appear  to  have  much  control.  When  he  did  attempt  to  redirect 
a  student,  he  made  “idle  threats.”  Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  concluded  that  respondent  did  not 
have  a  “positive  professional  relationship”  with  the  students  in  his  class.  He  spoke  to 
respondent  about  the  proper  ways  to  redirect  students  who  were  off  task.  He  advised 
respondent  to  create  clear  and  consistent  routines  and  procedures.  He  also  advised 
respondent  about  instructional  strategies  to  maximize  student  engagement.  According  to 
Vice  Principal  Schaeffer,  because  the  classes  at  RVHS  were  90  minutes  long,  he  informed 
respondent  that  he  needed  to  prepare  lessons  that  were  very  structured  and  had  sufficient 
work  for  the  students  to  perform  to  keep  them  on  task. 

39. 

Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  conducted  the  investigation  into  respondent’s  taping 
of  the  card  with  the  word  “penis”  on  S.F.’s  back  and  his  displaying  the  altered  photographs 
of  students.  S.F.  told  Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  about  the  card  taped  on  his  back  and  asked  if 
respondent  could  get  into  trouble  for  it.  S.F.’s  parents  were  “shocked”  at  respondent’s 
treatment  of  their  child.  Vice  Principal  Schaeffer  collected  written  statements  from  students 
about  the  card  and  the  altered  photographs.  He  described  respondent’s  conduct  as  “highly 
inappropriate.”  He  believed  that  respondent  improperly  used  humiliation  as  a  disciplinary 
tactic,  and  that  students  were  “unsafe  emotionally”  in  respondent’s  class.  Vice  Principal 
Schaeffer’s  testimony  was  persuasive. 

, 

13 

 

40. 

Kim  Altorfer  is  a  Records  Specialist  employed  by  the  District  at  RVHS.  She 
testified  about  the  adverse  impact  respondent’s  failure  to  timely  turn  in  the  DMV  forms  and 
his  grades  had  upon  RVHS  staff  and  students.  According  to  Ms.  Altorfer,  RVHS  cannot 
order  new  documents  for  the  following  year’s  Driver  Education  class  until  the  current  year’s 
Driver  Education  documents  are  completed  and  submitted.  Although  she  reminded 
respondent  on  numerous  occasions  to  turn  in  completed  DMV  documents  for  the  72  students 
in  his  two  Driver  Education  classes,  instead  of  submitting  them  by  January  2011  when  they 
were  due,  respondent  did  not  submit  them  until  November  2011.  Without  the  completed 
documents,  the  DMV  would  not  recognize  that  the  students  had  completed  the  Driver 
Education  class. 

41. 

At  RVHS,  teachers  have  four  full  days  after  a  grading  period  ends  to  turn  in 
their  grades.  For  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  teachers  were  required  to  turn  in  their  grades  by 
8:00  a.m.  on  October  14,  2011.  Principal  Ruesser  extended  this  deadline  to  midnight  for 
respondent.  By  October  17,  2011,  respondent  still  had  not  turned  in  his  grades.  RVHS 
issued-report  cards  without  respondent’s  grades  for  the  students  in  his  classes.  Ms.  Altorfer 
received  “lots”  of  calls  from  the  students’  parents  about  the  missing  grades.  As  set  forth 
above,  some  students  were  unable  to  compete  in  athletics  because  theit  GPAs  were  not  high 
enough  without  the  missing  grades.  In  addition,  the  overall  GPAs  and  class  credits  could  not 
be  finally  determined  for  any  of  the  affected  students.  When  respondent  finally  turned  in  his 
grades,  instead  of  inputting  them  into  the  school’s  computer  system,  he  handwrote  them. 
Ms.  Altorfer  spent  two  hours  manually  inputting  respondent’s  grades.  Respondent  gave 
different,  inconsistent  excuses  to  Principal  Ruesser  and  Ms.  Altorfer  about  why  he  did  not 
get  his  grades  in  on  time. 

42. 

Given  the  facts  set  forth  in  Findings  29  through  41,  the  likelihood  that 
respondent’s  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students,  fellow  teachers,  school 
administrators,  and  school  staff  is  extremely  high. 

43. 

Degree  of  Adversity  Anticipated.  By  taping  a  card  with  the  word  “penis”  on  a 
sleeping  student’s  back,  permitting  other  students  to  put  similarly  inappropriate  notes  on  that 
student,  drawing  a  swastika  and  unacceptable  phrases  and  numbers  on  the  photographs  of 
students,  and  allowing  other  students  to  take  pictures  of  all  this,  respondent  displayed  an 
extraordinary  insensitivity  to  the  feelings  of  the  targeted  students  and  the  sensibilities  of  the 
teenagers  in  his  class.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  far  worse  than  just  joking,  adolescent 
behavior.  He  subjected  the  targeted  students  to  ridicule  and  humiliation.  He  gave  tacit 
approval  to  the  other  students  that  such  disgraceful  conduct  was  acceptable.  Slurring 
students  as  “white  trash”  and  liking  “little  boys,”  and  using  a  symbol  as  highly  inflammatory 
as  a  swastika  sent  a  signal  to  the  teenagers  in  his  class  that  engaging  in  similar  disrespectful 
conduct  was  okay.  He  brought  disgrace  on  the  profession  of  teaching.  His  conduct  was 
immoral.  Thus,  the  District  established  that  there  was  a  substantial  likelihood  that 
respondent’s  conduct  had  a  significant  adverse  effect  on  his  students. 

44. 

—_Respondent’s  criminal  conduct,  his  leaving  capsules  of  a  prescription  drug  in 

his  desk  drawer,  and  his  discussing  inappropriate  topics  in  his  classroom  such  as  drug  use 
were  similarly  reprehensible  and  had  a  substantial  likelihood  of  having  a  significant  adverse 

14 

 

  

effect  on  his  students.  Teachers  are  expected  to  be  upright,  law-abiding  adults  and  to  model 
appropriate  mature  behavior.  Respondent  woefully  failed  to  conform  his  conduct  to  this 
expectation.  In  addition,  respondent’s  excessive  absenteeism,  failure  to  timely  notify  RVHS 
of  his  absences,  failure  to  provide  suitable  lesson  plans,  failure  to  record  student  attendance, 
absences  and  tardiness  into  the  ABI  system,  failure  to  timely  complete  DMV  forms,  failure 
to  timely  issue  grades,  and  use  of  instructional  time  for  noninstructional  activities  all  had  a 
strong  likelihood  of  having  a  significant  adverse  effect  on  his  students,  fellow  teachers, 
District  administrators  and  school  staff. 

45. 

Proximity  in  Time  of  Respondent’s  Conduct.  Respondent’s  most  egregious 

conduct  -  taping  a  card  with  the  word  “penis”  on  a  sleeping  student’s  back,  and  altering 
student  photographs  —  occurred  in  or  about  March  2013.  The  District  served  the  Notice  of 
Immediate  Suspension  and  Intention  to  Dismiss  on  respondent  on  April  24,  2013, 
approximately  six  weeks  after  learning  of  respondent’s  wrongdoing.  The  remaining 
allegations  in  this  matter  were  based  primarily  on  misconduct  that  was  ongoing,  up  to  and 
including  a  few  months  before  the  District  moved  to  dismiss  respondent. 

46. 

Respondent’s  Teaching  Certificate.  Respondent  is  a  high  school  teacher.  The 

teen  years  are  an  impressionable  time.  High  school  students  are  often  faced  with  issues 
relating  to  discrimination  and  harassment.  Respondent’s  actions  are  of  serious  concern  given 
the  nature  of  his  credential  and  the  age  of  his  students.  Respondent,  as  a  high  school  teacher, 
is  expected  to  be  a  role  model,  and  to  display  appropriate  adult  behavior  for  his  students  to 
emulate.  Instead  of  acting  as  an  exemplar,  respondent  engaged  in  reprehensible 
unprofessional  conduct. 

47. 

_Extenuating  or  Aggravating  Circumstances.  Although  respondent  asserted 
that  he  had  a  disability  and  was  given  time  off  work  as  a  reasonable  accommodation,  there 
was  no  evidence  to  establish  that  his  medical  or  personal  issues  should  be  considered  to  be 
extenuating  circumstances  to  justify  his  wrongful  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  in 
ridiculing  and  humiliating  students  in  his  class,  engaging  in  criminal  conduct,  leaving 
prescription  drug  capsules  in  his  desk  drawer,  using  instructional  time  for  noninstructional 
purposes,  discussing  inappropriate  topics  in  his  classroom,  and  failing  to  comply  with 
District  policies  and  procedures  cannot  be  excused  by  any  claims  of  disability  or  failure  to 
accommodate. 

48. 

In  addition,  although  the  students  who  were  targeted  with  the  altered 

photographs  and  the  laminated  card  may  have  misbehaved  in  respondent’s  class,  their 
misbehavior  did  not  justify  or  excuse  respondent’s  misconduct.  Clearly,  there  were  much 
better  and  more  effective  ways  to  discipline  those  students  and  redirect  their  behavior. 

49, 

Praiseworthiness  or  Blameworthiness  of  Respondent’s  Motives.  There  was  no 

evidence  to  suggest  that  respondent  had  any  praiseworthy  motives  when  engaging  in  the 
conduct  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

50. 

Likelihood  of  Recurrence.  It  is  likely  that  respondent’s  conduct  will  be 
repeated  if  he  is  allowed  to  remain  as  a  teacher  for  the  District.  Respondent  was  given 

15 

 

sufficient  training  and  guidance  on  the  District’s  expectations  regarding  the  quality  of  his 
instruction,  the  preparation  of  lesson  plans,  and  the  requirements  of  the  District’s  policies 
and  procedures.  Respondent  was  repeatedly  warned  about  his  excessive  absenteeism,  his 
failure  to  call  the  substitute  system  in  a  timely  manner,  and  his  failure  to  have  appropriate 
lesson  plans  for  substitutes  when  he  was  absent.  He  was  issued  numerous  written  warnings. 
He  was  given  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct.  None  of  this  training,  guidance,  or 
warnings  appeared  to  have  a  positive  effect  on  improving  respondent’s  conduct.  Moreover, 
there  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  had  adequate  insight  into  his  shortcomings  or  made 
sufficient  effort  to  remedy  his  inadequacies.  Consequently,  the  likelihood  that  his 
wrongdoing  would  be  repeated  if  he  is  retained  as  a  teacher  is  exceedingly  high. 

51. 

Chilling  Effect  of  Discipline.  There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  dismissing 

respondent  would  inflict  an  adverse  or  chilling  effect  upon  his  constitutional  rights  or  the 
constitutional  rights  of  any  other  teachers. 

52. 

When  all  the  Morrison  factors  are  considered,  the  District  established  that 

respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  children. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “immoral”  conduct.  In  San  Diego 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th 
1454,  1466,  the  court  explained  that: 

A  teacher  may  ...  be  dismissed  for  “[i]mmoral  or  unprofessional 
conduct.”  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1).)  “‘The  term  “immoral”  has 
been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of 
the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has 
‘not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct 
inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  wilful,  flagrant,  or 
shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions 
of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public 
welfare.’”  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811,  4  Cal.Rptr.  286.)  Moreover,  the  definition 
of  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  must  be  considered  in 
conjunction  with  the  unique  position  of  public  school  teachers, 
upon  whom  are  imposed  “responsibilities  and  limitations  on 
freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other 
callings.”  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Stubblefield,  supra,  16 
Cal.App.3d  at  p.  824,  94  Cal.Rptr.  318.) 

16

  

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  43,  respondent’s  taping  a  card  with  the  word  “penis”  on 

a  sleeping  student’s  back,  permitting  other  students  to  place  similarly  inappropriate  notes  on 
that  student,  drawing  a  swastika  and  unacceptable  phrases  and  numbers  on  the  photographs 
of  students,  and  allowing  other  students  to  take  pictures  of  all  of  this  constituted  immoral 
conduct.  (Findings  9  through  14.)  Respondent  showed  a  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions 
of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  His  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  the  reasonable  expectations 
society  places  upon  teachers  to  act  as  exemplars  who  model  proper  adult  conduct  to  the 
students  they  teach.  This  conduct  therefore  establishes  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  for 
immoral  conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

3. 

In  addition,  respondent’s  burglary  convictions  were  for  crimes  that  involved 

moral  turpitude.  (Findings  4,  6  and  7.)  Consequently,  those  convictions  also  constitute 
cause  to  dismiss  respondent  for  immoral  conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1). 

4, 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “unprofessional  conduct.”  Before  a 
school  district  may  discipline  a  teacher  for  unprofessional  conduct,  it  must  first  comply  with 
the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44938,  which,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

(a)  The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45 
calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its 
authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against  whom 
the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of 
behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee 
an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the 
grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the 
evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11  (commencing  with 
Section  44660)  of  Chapter 3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

5. 

The District  established  that  it  complied  with  the  requirements  of  Education 

Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  when  it  issued  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct in 
June  2012.  The  District  adequately  described  the  unprofessional  conduct in  which 
respondent  engaged  to  furnish  him  with  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  behavior.  Respondent 
failed  to  correct  his  behavior.  Consequently,  respondent’s:  (1)  criminal  convictions 
(Findings  2  through  8);  (2)  taping  the  card  with  the  word  “penis”  on  a  student’s  back  and 
displaying  altered  pictures  of  students  on  the  SMART  Board  (Findings  9  through  14);  and  (3) 
excessive  absenteeism,  failure  to  submit  adequate  lesson  plans,  failure  to  comply  with 
District  policies  and  procedures  and  supervisors’  directives,  and  failure  to  comply  with  the 
Improvement  Plan  (Findings  16  through  26)  all  establish  cause  to  dismiss  him  for 
unprofessional  conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

17 

 

  

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  In 
Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444  (Woodland),  the  Third  District  Court  of  Appeal  defined  the  term 
“evident  unfitness  for  service,”  as  used  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 
to  mean  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  The  court  found  that  the  term  “connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct 
fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  ([bid.)  The  court  held  that 
the  Morrison  factors  “must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited 
conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.”  (Id.  p.  1445.)  As  the  court  in  Woodland  explained, 
“li]f  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’ 
is  ‘evident’;  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.” 
(/bid.) 

7. 

Respondent’s:  (1)  criminal  convictions  (Findings  2  through  8);  (2)  placing  the 
card  with  the  word  “penis”  on  a  student’s  back  and  displaying  altered  pictures  of  students  on 
the  SMART  Board  (Findings  9  through  14);  and  (3)  leaving  prescription  drug  capsules  in  his 
desk  drawer  (Finding  15)  constitute  conduct  that  demonstrates  that  respondent  is  unsuitable 
for  teaching  due  to  a  defect  in  temperament.  Consequently,  this  conduct  establishes  cause  to 
dismiss  respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(5). 

8. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  a  school  district’s  governing  board.  As  set  forth  in 
Findings  16  through  28,  and  33  through  41,  respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  District’s  Governing  Board.  Consequently, 
the  District  established  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(7). 

9. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939,  a  school  district  may  suspend  a 

permanent  certificated  employee  for  “willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause.”  As  set  forth  in  Findings  16  through  26,  and  33  through  41,  respondent 
willfully  refused  to  perform  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  Consequently,  the 
District  established  cause  to  suspend  respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44939. 

10.  _  As  set  forth  in  Findings  29  through  51,  when  all  the  Morrison  factors  are 
considered,  the  District  established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  children.  Consequently,  - 
the  District’s  dismissal  of  respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivisions 
(a)(1),  (a)(5),  and  (a)(7),  must  be  upheld. 

/ 

/] 

18 

 

ORDER 

Respondent  Troy  Alexander  is  DISMISSED  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of 

the  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District  pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusions  1  through  10,  jointly 
and  individually. 

DATED:  June  \ 

|,  2014 

Me  e— 

MICHAEL  ALLEN,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

KEN  TRAPP,  Menba 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

J.  BRANDT,  Chairperson 

KAREN  J.  BRAN 
SEN 

ofessional  Competence  

