BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  TEACHER  COMPETENCE 
BURLINGAME  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SAN  MATEO  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

JODI  YOUNG, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2013030599 

  

DECISION 

A  panel  consisting  of  Beth  Kanaly,  appointed  by  Respondent,  Michael  Williams, 

appointed  by  the  District,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Ruth  S.  Astle,  State  of  California, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Burlingame,  California,  on 
September  3,  4,  6,  9,  10,  11,  and  12,  2013. 

Ingrid  Meyers,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Burlingame  School  District. 

Respondent  Jodi  Young  was  present  and  represented  by  Christopher  E.  Schumb, 

Attorney  at  Law. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  September  12,  2013. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Maggie  Maclsaac  made  this  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Burlingame  School  District  (District),  San  Mateo  County,  State  of 
California. 

2. 

Jodi  Young  (respondent)  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  in  the  District 

assigned  to  teach  Physical  Education  (P.E.)  at  Burlingame  Intermediate  School  (BIS)  for  the 
2012  -  2013  school  year. 

3. 

On  February  5,  2013,  the  Superintendent  filed  with  the  Board  of  Education  of 
the  District  written  charges  alleging  that  cause  exists  for  immediate  suspension  without  pay 
and  dismissal,  or  in  the  alternative  suspension  for  60  days  without  pay,  of  respondent.

 

 i
,
m
y

C 

4. 

On  February  5,  2013,  the  Board  authorized  and  directed  the  service  of  a  notice 

upon  respondent  that  she  would  be  dismissed,  or  in  the  alternative  suspended  for  60  days 
without  pay,  at  the  expiration  of  30  days  from  service  as  an  employee  of  the  District  unless 
she  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  by  law  and  that  she  was  being  immediately  suspended 
without  pay. 

5. 

It  was  stipulated  by  the  parties  that  all  the  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met 

by  the  District  and  that  on  March  4,  2013,  respondent  demanded a  hearing  to  determine  if 
there  was  cause  to  dismiss  her,  or  in  the  alternative  to  suspend  her  for  60  days  without  pay. 

Immoral  Conduct 

6. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 

engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  the  law.  The  District  has  alleged  sexual 
harassment  on  the  part  of  respondent.  The  allegation  that  respondent  touches  female 
students!  buttocks  while  they  are  performing  push-ups  is  without  merit.  The  allegation  that 
respondent  stares  at  students  in  P.E.  when  they  are  changing  is  also  without  merit.  The 
testimony  of  Child  #1,  who  was  in  respondent's  third  period  P.E.  class  in  the  2012  -  2013 
school  year,  concerning  these  matters  was  not  credible  or  persuasive.  Her  allegations  started 
out  as  reasonable.  She  alleged  that  respondent  touched  her  on  the  hips  to  help  position  her  to 
do  push-ups  and  that  she  did  not  like  to  be  touched  and  asked  respondent  to  stop  once  or 
twice  in  the  previous  school  year.  It  may  have  happened  that  respondent  did  it  again  in  the 
2012  -  2013  school  year  and  she  was  not  sure  if  she  had  asked  her  to  stop.  After  repeated 
questioning  by  District  personnel,  including  the  counselor,  vice  principal,  and  principal,  the 
District's  attorney,  the  police,  and  a  deposition,  Child  #  1's  story  grew  to  outrageous 
proportions.  For  example,  she  claimed  that  respondent  grabbed  her  buttocks  in  front  of  the 
entire  P.E.  class.  None  of  the  other  students,  including  Child  #1's  friends,  corroborated  this 
allegation.  In  fact,  at  least  two  students  testified  that  Child  #1 fabricated  this  ever  increasing 
allegation  to  get  a  transfer  from  respondent's  P.E.  class  into  another  teacher's  class,  who  she 
perceived  as  an  easier  teacher. 

The  allegation  that  respondent  brushed  her  hand  up  against  a  female  student's  breast 
when  walking  past  the  student  into  the  gym  and  turning  and  smiling  at  the  student  was  also 
not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  If  anything  similar  did  occur,  it  was 
accidental. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

7. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  is 
evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher  in  the  District  within  the  meaning  of  the  law.  It  was 
not  established  that  respondent  is  unable  to  remediate  her  actions.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
she  has  a  defect  of  temperament  or  an  inadequacy  that  is  a  fixed  character  trait,  irremediable, 
and  renders  her  unfit  to  teach.  In  fact,  respondent  successfully  taught  in  the  District  for 
almost  20  years.  She  taught  in  the  elementary  school  for  about  one  half  that  time  and  then  at 
the  intermediate  school  for  about  nine  years.  Respondent  was  not  sent  to  any  educational

courses  to  learn  how  to  deal  with  difficult  students  or  increase  her  skills  in  managing  difficult 
classroom  situations. 
Persistent  Violation  or  Willful  Refusal  to  Obey  the  Laws  of  the  State  or  Reasonable 
Regulations 

‘ 

8. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 

persistently  violated  or  willfully  refused  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education 
or  by  the  Governing  Board,  within  the  meaning  of  the  law.  Respondent  did  not  engage  in 
sexual  harassment  or  discrimination.  While  respondent  did  let  her  P.E.  class  play  basketball 
and  volleyball  in  the  rain,  there  is  no  written  rule  or  policy  that  does  not  allow  a  P.E.  teacher 
discretion  to  make  that  call  if  it  is  too  wet  to  stay  outside.  There  was  some 
miscommunication  between  respondent-and  the  principal  concerning  Child  #15's  return  to 
school  after  being  expelled/suspended.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  principal  sent 
an  email  to  respondent  and  the  other  teachers  in  the  school  at  the  beginning  of  the  day  the 
child  returned  reminding  them  to  let  the  child  have  a  fresh  start.  No  email  was  produced  at 
the  hearing.  Respondent  saw  an  email  at  the  end  of  the  day,  after  she  had  already  spoken  to 
the  child.  This  does  not  constitute  a  violation  of  a  school  law  or  rule  and  regulation. 

Unprofessional  Conduct 

9. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  engaged 

in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  the  law.  Respondent  told  a  child  that  he 
was  thought  of  as  a  "cheater,  a  liar,  anda  crook." 
This  is  the  same  student  referred  to  as 
Child  #  15,  above.  This  was  inappropriate  and  respondent  recognized  that  it  was 
inappropriate.  She  spoke  to  the  student's  father,  and  said  she  was  sorry.  She  also  apologized 
to  the  student.  The  father  was  not  only  concerned  about  respondent's  comments,  but  about  a 
number  of  other  things  he  felt  the  District  had  mishandled.  The  District  claims  that  they 
gave  an  oral  warning  to  respondent  about  this  matter,  but  there  was  no  evidence  presented  to 
corroborate  this  claim.  The  principal's  memory  was  poor  and  she  could  not  recall  anything 
with  specifics. 

In  March  2011,  respondent  asked  two  female  students,  Child  #  13  and  Child  #  14, 

who  had  been  suspended  for  fighting  in  the  locker  room  to  retell  their  version  of  the  incident 
and  had  each  of  them  write  a  statement  about  what  had  occurred.  They  had  completed  their 
suspension  and  returned  to  school.  Respondent  wanted  to  resolve  any  dispute  between  the 
girls  that  may  have  still  existed  for  the  safety  of  the  students  in  the  locker  room.  Engaging  in 
dispute  resolution  with  the  girls  was  not  unprofessional  conduct,  but  having  them  write  out 
statements  was  going  too  far  after  the  matter  had  already  been  investigated  and  the  students 
disciplined.  The  principal  gave  respondent  a  written  warning  requiring  her  to  speak  with  the 
administration  before  speaking  with  students  regarding  student  discipline  matters. 

In  October  2011,  respondent  was  on  duty  at  the  front  of  the  school  when  Child  #10 

started  yelling  at  another  student  and  threatened  to  go  after  her.  Respondent  stopped  her  by 
grabbing  the  student's  arm.  The  child's  father  complained  to  the  administration.  Respondent

s, 

spoke  to  the  father  and  the  matter  appeared  to  be  resolved.  On  October  26,  2011,  respondent 
walked  up  to  the  child  in  the  yard.  She  said  she  wanted  to  talk  to  the  child  and  lifted  up  the 
child's  sleeve  to  check  her  arm  for  bruise  marks.  Respondent  did  not  see  any  bruise  marks 
and  commented  that  she  "thought  so"  and  walked  away.  Stopping  the  student  from  going 
after  another  student  was  not  unprofessional  conduct.  However,  confronting  the  child  and 
looking  for  a  bruise  was  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent  should  have  spoken  to  the 
administration  before  speaking  to  the  student.  On  November  16,  2011,  respondent  was 
provided  with  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  based  on  the  incidents  with  Child  #15, 
Child  #13,  Child  #14,  and  Child  #10.  On  November  16,  2011,  respondent  was  also 
suspended  without  pay  for  one  day  for  grabbing  a  student. 

10. 

On  December  21,  2012,  the  last  day  of  school  before  winter  break,  four  female 
students  (Child  #  1,  Child  #  6,  Child  #7,  and  Child  #8)  in  respondent's  third  period  P.E.  class 
came  to  the  main  office  very  upset  and  reported  to  the  Assistant  Principal  that  respondent 
had  required  the  class  to  remain  outside  even  though  it  was  raining.  It  was  not  established  by 
a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  it  was  "pouring  rain."  There  was  no  written  policy  at 
BIS  concerning  having  P.E.  class  out  in  the  rain. 
Respondent  did  bring  the  students  into  the  locker  room  early  that  day.  It  was  not  established 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  students  were  at  risk. 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  any  student  became  ill  because  they  were  required  to 
participate  in  P.E.  in  the  rain. 

It  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  teacher. 

It  was  not  established  by 

Respondent  called  Child  #1  into  the  P.E.  office  at  the  end  of  the  class  period.  It  was 

not  established  by  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  yelled  at  the  student  or 
threatened  the  student.  In  fact,  it  was  established  through  the  testimony  of  at  least  two  other 
students  who  witnessed  Child  #  1's  behavior  during  PE.  class  that  day  and  after  class  that  the 
child  was  disrespectful  and  rude  to  respondent.  Child  #  1  wanted  to  switch  classes  because 
respondent  took  away  points  when  the  child  was  not  participating  in  P.E.  No  other  students 
testified  that  respondent's  conduct  made  them  upset,  afraid,  and  or  that  they  believed  that 
respondent  was  going  to  hit  the  student.  This  incident  does  not  constitute  unprofessional 
conduct. 

11. 

Respondent  admitted  that  she  changed  her  clothes  in  the  P.E.  office  from  her 

street  pants  to  her  gym  shorts  where  students  could  see  her.  Respondent  should  have 
changed  in  private.  Respondent  also  admitted  that  she  discussed  breast  development  with 
female  students  during  class.  This  conduct  is  unprofessional.  Respondent  should  take  care 
not  to  be  too  familiar  with  her  students.  An  educational  opportunity  involving  appropriate 
boundaries  for  P.E.  teachers  and  students  would  be  helpful. 

Other  Matters 

12. 

All  other  allegations  not  specifically  dealt  with  in  this  decision  that  are  in  the 

accusation  in  this  matter  have  been  considered  and  found  to  be  without  merit.

13.  |  While  respondent  did  engage  in  a  number  of  acts  that  constituted 

unprofessional  conduct,  none  of  them  individually  or  in  combination,  were  so  serious  as  to 
support  respondent's  termination  from  her  position  with  the  District.  Suspension  for  10  days 
without  pay  is  adequate  to  discipline  respondent  for  her  conduct. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  6,  cause  for  termination 

and/or  suspension  does  not  exist  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1)  Gmmoral  conduct). 

2. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual.  Finding  7,  cause  for  termination 

and/or  suspension  does  not  exist  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5)  (evident  unfitness  for  service). 

3. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  8,  cause  for  termination 

and/or  suspension  does  not  exist  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(7)  (persistent  violation  of  state  laws  or  rules  and  regulations). 

4. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  9,  and  11,  cause  for 

suspension  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44933 
(unprofessional  conduct).  However,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  10, 
cause  for  termination  and/or  suspension  does  not  exist  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44933  (unprofessional  conduct). 

5. 

The  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  12  and  13  have  been  considered  in 

making  the  following  order.

ORDER 

Jodi  Young,  tenured  teacher  for  the  Burlingame  School  District,  is  hereby  suspended 
for  10  days  without  pay  pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusion  4.  Respondent  is  given  credit  for  the 
time  she  has  been  suspended  without  pay  since  January  2013.  The  District  shall  pay 
respondent  back  pay  except  for  the10  days  of  suspension  set  forth  in  this  order. 

DATED: 

/O  ~j7-i2 

 

RUTH  S.  ASTLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

“Bat  Kon) 

to  |ac  / % 

BETH  KANALY 
P.E.  Teacher 
Appointed  by  Respondent 

My. 

MICHAEL  WILLIAMS 
Vice  Principal 
Appointed  by  the  District 

