BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2013050544 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

MICHAEL  JONES  (EN  586924), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on 

November  12,  2013,  and  March  25,  26,  and  27,  2014,  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The 
Commission  consisted  of  Roger  Kavigan,  Jim  Cartnal,  and  Howard  W.  Cohen, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 
California.  ALJ  Cohen  presided. 

Anahid  Hoonanian,  of  Lozano  Smith,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  complainant 
Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  Chief  Human  Resource  Officer  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District  (District). 

Richard  J.  Schwab  and  Rosty  G.  Gore,  of  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  Attorneys  at 

Law,  represented  respondent  Michael  Jones,  who  was  present. 

Prior  to  the  presentation  of  evidence,  the  parties  brought  several  motions  in  limine. 

The  ALJ  considered  and  ruled  on  those  motions  as  well  as  on  motions  made  during  the 
course  of  the  hearing,  as  reflected  on  the  record.  One  motion  made  at  hearing  by 
complainant,  to  move  into  evidence  complainant’s  Exhibit  7,  was  taken  under  submission; 
the  motion  is  denied  on  grounds  of  lack  of  authentication  and  lack  of  foundation. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  March  27,  2014. 

The  Commission  considered  the  entire  record  in  executive  session. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  17,  2013,  complainant  filed  and  served  on  respondent  a  Notice  of 

Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges.  On  May  7,  2013,  respondent  timely 
requested  a  hearing. 

 

  

    

2. 

On  May  21,  2013,  complainant,  acting  in  her  official  capacity,  filed  and  served 

on  respondent  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent  timely  served  a  Notice 
of  Defense. 

3. 

On  October  30,  2013,  complainant,  acting  in  her  official  capacity,  filed  and 

served  on  respondent  an  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges. 

4. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  presently  on 

unpaid  leave  status. 

The  District's  Charges  Against  Respondent 

b. 

c. 

d. 

5. 

In  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent,  the 
District  alleged  that  it  has  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as  a  permanent 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  for: 

a. 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1);' 

Immoral  conduct,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939; 

Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5); 

Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 

cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district, 
under  section  44939;  and 

e. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

6. 

In  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  charged 

respondent  with  the  following  misconduct: 

a. 

Around  August  13,  2011,  respondent  used  a  District  computer  to  access 

the  website,  “vidii.hardsextube.com.” 

b. 

Around  October  10,  2011,  respondent  used  a  District  computer  to 

access  the  website,  “files. youporn.com.” 

c. 

    

to  as  many  as  three  thousand  one-hundred  seventy-eight  (3,178)  images  containing  one  or 
more  of  the  following  items”  on  his  District-issued  computer:  photographs  featuring 

'  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  specified.

From  June  21,  2007,  to  March  2,  2012,  respondent  “maintained  access 

  

provocative  poses  or  attire,  partial,  full,  or  full-frontal  nudity;  photographs  of  nudes; 
photographs  of  nudes  clutching  their  genitals;  photographs  of  persons  engaging  in  sexual 
intercourse;  and  photographs  of  persons  performing  various  sex  acts. 

d. 

From  April  17,  2009,  to  March  2,  2012,  respondent  used  District 

computers  in  violation  of  the  District’s  Acceptable  Use  Policy,  causing  images  to  appear  on 
his  District-issued  computer  that  included  photographs  featuring  provocative  poses  or  attire, 
partial,  full,  or  full-frontal  nudity;  photographs  of  nudes;  photographs  of  nudes  clutching 
their  genitals;  photographs  of  persons  engaging  in  sexual  intercourse;  and  photographs  of 
persons  performing  various  sex  acts. 

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

7. 

South  Gate  High  School  (SGHS)  Principal,  German  Cerda,  sent  respondent  a 

memorandum  dated  January  16,  2013,  in  which  he  notified  respondent  that  a  meeting  had 
been  scheduled  for  January  24,  2013,  to  discuss  Cerda’s  intention  to  issue  respondent  a 
notice  of  unsatisfactory  acts  and  a  notice  of  suspension  without  pay  “because  of  the  incidents 
that  occurred  on  March  2,  2012.”  (Ex.  14.)  Cerda  offered  respondent  the  opportunity  to 
present  new  information  and  to  bring  a  representative  to  the  meeting. 

8. 

Respondent  denied  the  charges  in  writing.  Cerda  testified  that,  because 

respondent  did  not  present  exculpatory  evidence  at  the  meeting,  Cerda  decided  to  ask  the 
Board  to  authorize  respondent’s  dismissal. 

9. 

On  January  24,  2013,  the  District  gave  respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Act(s)  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  (15  Days). 

Respondent's  Background 

10. 

At  all  relevant  times,  respondent  taught  government,  economics,  and 

constitutional  law  at  SGHS.  Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  1987,  and 
has  been  at  SGHS  since  1993.  Respondent  has  been  serving  as  the  elected  Dean  of  Discipline 
at  SGHS  since  2001,  with  responsibilities  for  discipline,  campus  safety,  and  supervision.  He 
has  also  served  as  a  chapter  chair  for  United  Teachers  Los  Angeles  (UTLA),  representing 
teachers  in  collective  bargaining  and  in  disciplinary  actions  taken  by  administration. 
Respondent  has  a  B.S.  degree  in  political  science  from  Idaho  State  University.  He  has  a 
single-subject  credential  in  social  studies. 

11. 

No  evidence  was  submitted  of  a  prior  history  of  discipline  against  respondent. 
His  performance  evaluations  reflect  that  he  has  met  or  exceeded  the  standard  of  performance. 

Respondent's  District-Issued  Computers 

12. 

The  school  issued  three  District  computers  to  respondent.

  

   

  

13. 

In  fall  2006,  the  school  issued  respondent  an  HP  notebook  computer,  which 

respondent  used  in  the  Dean’s  office  for  such  items  as  pictures  taken  of  graffiti  at  school  and 
documentation  of  evidence  for  school  police. 

14. 

In  September  2010  or  2011,  the  school  issued  respondent  a  Mac  notebook 

computer,  which  respondent  used  in  the  classroom  for  lesson  planning,  grading,  and 
research.  This  was  the  second  Mac  notebook  the  school  had  issued  to  respondent. 

15. 

Ona  date  not  firmly  established  by  the  evidence,  the  school  issued  respondent 

an  iPad,  which  respondent  used  at  school  to  keep  records  of  student  attendance. 

Complainant's  First  Two  Charging  Allegations,  That  Around  August  13,  2011,  Respondent 
Used  a  District  Computer  to  Access  the  Websites,  “‘vidii.hardsextube.com”  and 
“files. vouporn.com.  ” 

16. 

=‘ The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  around  August  13,  2011, 

respondent  used  his  District-issued  computer  to  access  the  websites,  “vidii.-hardsextube.com” 
and  “files.youporn.com.”  The  District  established  that  data  on  the  Mac  notebook’s  hard 
drive,  including  some  data  that  a  user  had  attempted  to  erase  from  the  hard  drive,  reflect 
sexually-explicit  or  pornographic  images  or  a  record  of  access  to  websites,  including  the  two 
websites  charged  in  these  allegations,  displaying  such  images.  But  the  District  offered 
insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  it  was  respondent  who  was  responsible  for  the  presence 
of  that  data  on  the  hard  drive. 

17. 

Mario  Cueto  was  the  school’s  computer  support  technician  at  the  times 

relevant  to  this  matter.  Cueto  had  two  supervisors.  One  was  Gerardo  Llamas,  who  is 
currently  an  Assistant  Principal  but  at  the  relevant  time  was  an  instructional  specialist  at 
SGHS  who  supervised  technology  support  staff  and  evaluated  teachers’  technology  needs. 
Cueto’s  other  supervisor  was  Joseph  Dileva,  the  assistant  principal  who  oversaw  technology 
at  SGHS.  Cueto  was  responsible  for  distributing  computers  to  staff  and  collecting  them  again 
for  summer  break;  he  also  maintained  computer  labs  and  classroom  computers,  ensured 
internet  functionality,  and  assisted  staff.  When  a  computer  was  issued  to  a  staff  member, 
Cueto  had  the  staff  member  fill  out  a  sheet  with  pertinent  information,  including  the 
computer’s  serial  number.  Abrham  Martinez,  who  for  four  years,  including  the  times  relevant 
to  this  matter,  was  Cueto’s  assistant,  testified  that  it  was  the  school’s  practice  to  erase 
computer  hard  drives  on  school-issued  computers  when  they  were  returned  by  teachers 
before  school  summer  break,  and  to  reissue  the  computers  to  teachers  in  the  fall. 

18. 

The  evidence  shows,  however,  that  school  computer  support  personnel  did  not 

effectively  erase  the  Mac  computer  hard  drive  before  reissuing  it  to  respondent. 

19. 

one  school  year.  After  she  returned  the  computer  to  the  school,  most  likely  just  before  the    

two  years,  from  2007  to  2009.  After  Cueto  returned  the  Mac  notebook  to  the  school,  the 
school  purportedly  erased  the  hard  drive  and  issued  the  computer  to  Jade  Casarez  Gutierrez, 
an  English  and  drama  teacher  at  the  school.  Casarez  Gutierrez  used  the  computer  for  at  least 

The  District  bought  the  Mac  notebook  in  2007  and  issued  it  first  to  Cueto  for 

 

    

2011/2012  school  year,  the  school  purportedly  erased  the  hard  drive  and  issued  the  computer 
to  respondent  in  September  2011,”  possibly  at  the  same  time  it  issued  the  iPad  to  respondent. 

20. 

On  February  28,  2012,  there  was  a  scheduled  meeting  of  faculty  and 

administration.  At  the  end  of  the  meeting,  respondent  asked  members  of  the  administration, 
including  Cerda,  to  leave  so  the  teachers  could  discuss  UTLA  business.  After  the 
administrators  left,  respondent  cautioned  faculty  about  possible  monitoring  and  confiscating 
of  computers  by  school  administrators.  The  next  day,  Cerda  was  questioned  about  this  by 
several  staff  members,  who  expressed  concern  about  possible  administration  intrusiveness. 

21. 

On  Friday,  March  2,  2012,  two  days  after  the  faculty  meeting,  Cerda  instructed 

Dileva  to  accompany  respondent  to  his  classroom  to  confiscate  the  Mac  notebook  and  the 
iPad  and  bring  them  back  to  the  principal’s  office.  Dileva  did  as  instructed.  Dileva  knows  of 
no  other  teacher’s  computers  ever  confiscated  by  Cerda  to  look  for  pornographic  images;  he 
testified  that,  from  2008  through  2012,  no  complaints  had  been  made  about  respondent’s  use 
of  District-issued  computers.  Cerda  testified  that  respondent’s  role  at  the  faculty  meeting  and 
as  UTLA  chapter  chair  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  confiscation  of  respondent’s  computers  or 
the  fact  that  no  other  teachers’  computers  were  examined,  but  the  District  did  not  establish  by 
admissible  evidence  the  truth  of  any  alternative  explanation.*  * 

22. 

Cerda  asked  Llamas  whether  he  knew  how  to  recover  deleted  files.  Llamas 
said  he  had  software  that  could  perform  that  operation  and  that  he  had  used  the  software  a 
few  times.  Cerda  asked  him  to  recover  data  from  respondent’s  Mac  notebook.  While  in 

?  Other  evidence  suggests,  though  not  conclusively,  that  the  Mac  notebook  may  have 

been  issued  to  respondent  in  September  2010. 

?  Cerda  testified  that,  after  being  questioned  by  staff  members  who  had  attended  the 

UTLA  meeting,  he  called  Cueto  and  asked  him  about  respondent’s  District-issued 
computers.  Cerda  testified  that  he  then  confiscated  the  computers  due  to  statements  Cueto 
allegedly  made  to  him.  Assistant  Principal  Dileva  and  Cueto’s  assistant,  Martinez,  testified 
that,  in  separate  conversations  they  allegedly  had  with  Cueto  about  those  computers,  Cueto 
had  told  them  that  respondent  asked  him  to  erase  the  hard-drives.  Cerda’s,  Dileva’s,  and 
Martinez’s  testimony  about  Cueto’s  alleged  statements  is  “administrative  hearsay,”  which 
can  be  used  to  supplement  or  explain  other  evidence  but  cannot,  by  itself,  support  a  factual 
finding.  (Gov.  Code,  §  11513,  subd.  (d).)  In  this  case,  the  administrative  hearsay  does  not 
supplement  or  explain  other,  admissible,  evidence.  Rather,  at  hearing,  Cueto,  who  appeared 
reluctant  to  testify,  directly  contradicted  Cerda’s,  Dileva’s,  and  Martinez’s  testimony  about 
what  he  had  told  them,  and  respondent  testified  that  he  had  never  asked  Cueto  to  erase  the 
hard  drives  on  his  District-issued  computers. 

‘  Martinez  also  testified  that,  before  respondent’s  computers  were  confiscated,  Cueto 
showed  him  a  pornographic  image  on  a  notebook  computer.  Martinez  conceded  that  he  has 
no  personal  knowledge  of  who  had  been  issued  the  computer  and  that  there  was  no  written 
repair  order  for  it. 

  

 

Cerda’s  office,  with  Dileva  present,  Llamas  removed  the  Mac  notebook’s  hard  drive,  placed 
it  in  an  external  enclosure,  and  attached  it  to  his  own  computer  with  a  USB  cable.  He  then 
ran  the  Data  Rescue  software.  Llamas  testified  that  he  had  also  attached  another  external 
hard  drive  to  his  computer,  and  that  he  used  the  Data  Rescue  software  to  copy  information 
from  the  Mac  notebook  hard  drive  onto  the  other  external  hard  drive,  without  recording 
anything  on  his  computer’s  internal  hard  drive.  This  testimony  contradicts  a  report  Llamas 
wrote  to  Cerda  dated  January  10,  2013,  in  which  Llamas  made  no  mention  of  another 
external  hard  drive.  In  that  report,  Llamas  wrote  that  he  copied  the  Mac  notebook  hard  drive 
onto  his  laptop  computer.°  At  hearing,  Llamas  testified  that  the  report  was  incorrect.° 

23. 

Llamas  testified  that  the  process  used  by  Data  Rescue  was  a  read-only  process. 

He  admitted,  however,  that  he  used  no  write-blocker  and  no  image  hash  to  preserve, 
unaltered,  the  data  on  the  Mac  notebook’s  hard  drive.  He  does  not,  he  conceded,  know  what 
a  write-blocker  is,  or  what  image  hashing  is,  and  testified  that  he  is  not  a  forensics  expert. 
The  forensic  expert  retained  by  the  District,  Matthew  Albee  (see  Factual  Finding  39), 
credibly  testified  that  a  write-blocker  and  an  image  hash  are  necessary  precautions  to  ensure 
that  data  is  not  altered  or  added  to. 

24, 

Copying  the  hard  drive  took  several  hours.  Cerda  also  asked  Llamas  to  look  at 

the  browser  history  on  the  Mac  notebook  hard  drive;  Llamas  found  nothing  there.  Llamas 
then  placed  the  Mac  notebook  hard  drive  back  in  that  computer,  burned  the  contents  of  the 
copied  data  onto  DVDs,  and  erased  the  copy  that  was  on  the  external  hard  drive  or  Llamas’s 
laptop’s  hard  drive,  depending  on  which  version  of  Llamas’s  account  of  events  is  accurate. 

25. 

Llamas  and  Cerda  testified  that,  during  the  copying  procedure,  they  saw 
pornographic  images  appear  on  the  Mac  notebook’s  screen;  Llamas  also  saw  photos  of 
Casarez  Gutierrez’s  August  21,  2010,  wedding,  and  Dileva  saw  travel  photos.  The  hard  drive 
was  eventually  found  also  to  have  video  footage  of  Casarez  Gutierrez’s  wedding  and  a 
downloaded  image  of  at  least  one  of  her  bank  statements,  from  February  2010.7 

26. 

Llamas  could  not  identify  when  the  pornographic  images  were  stored  on  the 
Mac  notebook;  he  could  not  tell  whether  they  might  have  been  stored  there  as  long  ago  as 
2007,  or  who  stored  them.  This  and  other  evidence,  including  some  of  the  forensic  evidence 
presented  by  the  District’s  expert  witness,  establishes  that  images  and  data,  accessed  and 
stored  by  other,  prior  possessors  of  the  Mac  notebook,  were  present  on  the  Mac  notebook’s 
hard  drive  when  it  was  issued  to  respondent.  District  witnesses  could  not  confirm  that  there 
was  no  adult  material  on  the  hard  drive  when  it  was  issued  to  respondent. 

*  The  report  also  made  no  mention  of  the  Mac  notebook  serial  number. 

®  Dileva  witnessed  the  procedure  but  could  not  support  Llamas’  testimony;  he 

testified  that  he  does  not  know  what  an  external  hard  drive  is. 

7  Cerda  testified  that  nothing  had  been  found  on  the  iPad. 

 

27. 

In  addition  to  the  fact  that  images  and  data  stored  by  prior  users  were  still  on 
the  hard  drive  of  at  least  one  of  the  computers  issued  to  respondent,  there  was  a  significant 
possibility,  based  on  the  evidence  admitted  at  hearing,  that  data  on  the  hard  drives  of 
respondent’s  computers  were  compromised  after  the  District  confiscated  them,  both  through 
a  failure  to  take  appropriate  precautions  against  writing  data  onto  those  hard  drives  while 
examining  then,  and  through  the  District’s  inadequate  chain-of-custody  practices. 

28. 

Cerda  secured  the  Mac  notebook  in  his  office  in  a  metal  gun  safe  once  Llamas 

had  finished  his  procedure.  Cerda  called  the  Los  Angeles  School  Police  Department 
(LASPD);  LASPD  Detective  Hector  Longoria,  who  had  received  verbal  instructions  to  do  so, 
arrived  that  day,  a  Friday,  between  3:00  and  4:00  p.m.,  and  picked  up  the  iPad  and  the  Mac 
notebook,  as  well  as  the  DVDs  made  by  Llamas.  Detective  Longoria  did  not  give  Cerda  a 
receipt  for  the  computers  or  DVDs,  nor  did  he  otherwise  document  the  transfer  of  custody  of 
those  items  or  the  computers’  serial  numbers.®  Detective  Longoria  took  the  computers  to  the 
office  he  shared  with  three  other  detectives;  he  deposited  the  Mac  notebook  and  the  iPad  on 
the  desk  of  one  of  those  detectives,  LASPD  Detective  Ray  Jordan,  and  notified  Detective 
Jordan  of  that  fact  by  telephone.  Detective  Longoria  believed  the  office  to  be  secure;  visitors 
and  custodial  staff  are  allowed  in  the  office  only  when  detectives  are  present. 

29. 

On  the  following  Wednesday,  March  7,  2012,  five  days  after  Detective 

Longoria  had  deposited  the  computers  on  Detective  Jordan’s  desk,  Detective  Jordan  picked 
up  the  Mac  notebook  and  the  iPad  and  delivered  them  to  Shiwanda  Wynn  in  the  District’s 
Employee  Relations  Investigation  Unit.  Detective  Jordan  did  not  testify  that  he  also  brought 
the  DVDs  to  Wynn.  Detective  Jordan  did  not  obtain  from  Wynn  a  receipt  for  the  computers, 
nor  did  he  otherwise  document  their  serial  numbers  or  the  transfer  of  custody.  He  testified 
that,  in  2012,  the  LASPD  did  not  document  the  transfer  and  receipt  of  evidence;  it  does  so 
now  in  order  to  be  able  to  show  the  chain  of  custody. 

30. 

Cerda  instructed  respondent  to  bring  the  HP  notebook  to  campus  on  Monday, 

March  7,  2012,  and  surrender  it  to  him.  Respondent  did  so,  and  Cerda  placed  the  computer  in 
his  safe.  Cerda  contacted  Detective  Longoria  and  so  informed  him.  Two  days  later,  on  the 
morning  of  March  9,  LASPD  Officer  Tommy  Chung  collected  the  computer,  put  it  in  his 
trunk,  went  about  his  daily  patrol  assignments  and,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  placed  the  computer 
on  Detective  Longoria’s  chair,  without  a  note.  Officer  Chung  did  not  give  Cerda  a  receipt  or 
otherwise  document  transfer  of  custody  of  the  HP  notebook;  he  was  given  no  paperwork  and 
no  written  instructions  about  where  to  take  the  computer,  and  he  did  not  log  picking  up  the 
computer  from  Cerda.  He  testified  that  it  is  normal  protocol]  to  have  paperwork  for  taking 
evidence  into  custody,  though  he  did  not  do  so  in  this  case.  On  March  15,  six  days  after 
Officer  Chung  left  the  HP  notebook  on  Detective  Longoria’s  chair,  Detective  Jordan  picked 
it  up  and  delivered  it  to  Wynn,  again  without  documentation. 

8  There  was  no  further  testimony  about  the  DVDs.  (But  see  Factual  Finding  31.) 

  

 

31. 

|  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  disks  Llamas  testified  he  created  were 

transferred  by  the  District  police  to  District  forensic  laboratory  personnel.  The  parties 
stipulated  only  that  Shohreh  Taheri,  working  in  the  District  laboratory  on  some  date  not 
established  by  the  evidence,  printed  sexually  explicit  or  pornographic  images  from  a  DVD 
given  to  her  by  the  District’s  Office  of  General  Counsel.  There  was  no  evidence  as  to  the 
source  of  that  DVD  or  evidence  linking  it  to  Llamas’s  DVDs.” 

32. 

District  forensic  personnel  did  not  examine  the  computers,  or  copy  or  scan 

their  hard  drives,  until  August  5,  2012,  five  months  after  Officer  Jordan  had  delivered  them. 
Alexander  Shekoyan,  who  began  working  for  the  District  in  1995  and  became  a  computer 
technician  for  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Division  in  2008,  blamed  the  five-month 
delay  on  the  press  of  business  in  the  forensic  laboratory.  He  admitted  that  he  could  not  say 
with  certainty  that  no  one  had  accessed  or  tampered  with  the  computers  during  that  lengthy 
interval. 

33.  |  Shekoyan’s  testimony  was  muddled  and  ultimately  not  credible.  He  repeatedly 

confused  the  Mac  notebook  and  the  HP  notebook,  and  his  written  reports  about  both,  and 
which  computers  he  scanned  on  which  of  three  different  scan  dates.  For  example,  Shekoyan 
testified  that  he  scanned  the  HP  hard  drive  on  August  5,  2012,  and  found  that  the  website 
viddii.hardsextube.com  had  been  accessed  on  the  HP;  his  written  report,  however,  states  that 
he  found  that  website  and  the  files-youporn.com  website  when  scanning  the  Mac  notebook, 
not  the  HP. 

34. 

|  Shekoyan’s  report  reflects  that  the  vidii.hardsextube.com  and 

files.youporn.com  websites  had  been  accessed  on  August  13  and  October  10,  2011, 
respectively,  and  that  respondent’s  name  appears  in  the  bookmark  pathway  for  those  sites. 
But  Albee,  the  District’s  expert  witness,  whom  the  Commission  found  to  be  credible,  issued 
a  report  showing  all  websites  accessed  on  the  Mac  notebook  that  reflected  the  date  and  time 
they  had  been  accessed;  neither  vidii.hardsextube.com  nor files.  youporn.com  appears  in  the 
report,  on  August  13,  2011,  October  10,  2011,  or  any  other  date. 

35. 

 Shekoyan  testified  that  he  scanned  the  HP  hard  drive  on  August  5,  2012,  and 

found  it  to  be  corrupted,  severely  restricting  his  access  to  large  portions  of  it.  He  made  no 
mention,  however,  of  a  corrupt  hard  drive  in  his  written  forensic  report.  Albee  did  not  find 
that  the  hard  drive  was  corrupted.  Even  Shekoyan,  in  January  2013,  five  months  after  his  first 
scan  and  10  months  after  the  computer  had  been  delivered  to  the  lab,  did  not  find  that  the 
drive  was  corrupted  when  he  again  scanned  the  HP  hard  drive  using  different  software. 

°  One  of  the  District’s  internal  forensic  reports  refers  to  “South  Gate  4dvd  with 
IMAC.”  (Ex.  12,  p.  2.)  No  witness  at  the  hearing  offered  an  interpretation  of  that  notation,  or 
testified  whether  it  referred  to  DVDs  taken  into  custody  with  the  Mac  notebook  or  with  any 
other  computer.  Nor  did  Llamas  testify  that  he  made  any  DVD  copies  of  data  from  an  iMac, 
which  is  a  desktop  computer;  he  only  testified  that  he  created  DVD  copies  of  the  Mac 
notebook  hard  drive.  The  District  did  not  issue  an  iMAC  computer  to  respondent. 

  

   

36. 

There  was  a  third  scan  date,  October  5,  2012,  when  from  the  written  reports  it 
appears  that  Shekoyan  scanned  at  least  the  iPad  and  the  HP,  finding  no  pornographic  images 
on  either  device. 

37. 

In  view  of  all  of  the  uncertainties  detailed  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  36, 
including  uncertainties  about  the  content  of  the  hard  drives  when  the  computers  were  issued 
to  respondent,’”  a  chain  of  custody  with  too  many  missing  links  and  opportunities  for 
inadvertent  error  or  even  mischief,  and  the  possibility  that  less-than-expert  inspectors  of  the 
hard  drives  corrupted  the  content  of  those  drives,  the  evidence  on  this  record  did  not  establish 
that  around  August  13,  2011,  respondent  used  a  District  computer  to  access  the  websites 
“vidii.hardsextube.com”  and  “files.youporn.com.” 

Complainant's  Third  Charging  Allegation,  That  From  June  21,  2007,  to  March  2,  2012, 
Respondent  Maintained  Access  to  3,178  Sexually  Explicit  or  Pornographic  Images  on  his 
District-Issued  Computer 

38. 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  from  June  21,  2007,  to  March  2, 

2012,  respondent  maintained  access  to  as  many  as  3,178  sexually  explicit  or  pornographic 
images  on  his  District-issued  computer. 

39. 

Albee,  the  District’s  expert  witness,  is  a  full  time  special  agent  at  the  state 

Franchise  Tax  Board,  where  he  investigates  tax  fraud  and  runs  the  computer  forensics  lab, 
processing  evidence  in  criminal  cases  using  court-tested,  industry  standard  methods.  Albee 
also  works  for  Data  Chasers,  Inc.,  where  he  has  been  a  Project  Manager  for  13  years, 
collecting  and  processing  evidence  primarily  for  civil  cases.  Albee  teaches  classes  for  foreign 
government  law  enforcement  personnel  on  the  subject  of  gathering  and  processing  digital 
evidence  and  recovering  deleted  data,  and  has  testified  as  an  expert  witness  in  computer 
forensics  six  or  seven  times.  He  became  a  computer  forensic  certified  examiner  in  2001,  he 
has  expertise  in  using  Encase,  a  leading  tool  for  computer  forensic  exams,  and  he  has  been 
certified  as  a  small  computer  evidence  recovery  specialist. 

40. 

In  October  2013,  Albee  obtained  from  the  District  an  HP  notebook,  a  Mac 

notebook,  and  an  iPad.  Albee  did  not  testify  or  report  that  he  was  given  any  DVDs  to 
examine.  Data  Chasers,  Inc.,  then  scanned  the  devices. 

41. 

Albee  testified  that  there  were  about  300  images  on  the  Mac  notebook  and 

about  100  images  on  the  HP,  nothing  approaching  the  3,178  alleged  by  the  District. 

‘©  See  also  Factual  Findings  44  and  45.  As  to  data  that  Casarez  Gutierrez  stored  on  the 

hard  drive  of  a  computer  subsequently  issued  to  respondent,  the  Commission  in  no  way 
means  to  imply  that  the  use  of  District  computers  to  store  wedding  photos  and  bank 
statements  is  comparable,  in  terms  of  the  gravity  of  any  offense  or  policy  violation,  to  the  use 
of  District  computers  to  access  or  store  pornographic  images. 

 

42. 

The  District  also  alleged  that  respondent  “maintained  access  to”  adult  and 

pornographic  images  on  the  District-issued  computers.  Both  the  Mac  notebook  and  the  HP 
notebook  had  pornographic  images  on  their  hard  drives  but,  while  this  may  suggest  activity 
by  the  same  user,  the  record  does  not  sufficiently  establish  activity  by  respondent.  All  of  the 
images  Albee  found  were  in  unallocated  areas  of  the  hard  drive,  meaning  that  the  images  had 
been  deleted  prior  to  Albee’s  obtaining  possession  of  the  computers.  There  is  no  indication 
as  to  when  they  were  accessed,  viewed,  and  deleted.  Only  computer  technicians  and  experts 
testifying  in  this  case  were  able  to  find  those  images,  so  without  evidence  of  when  the 
images  were  deleted  and  by  whom,  the  allegation  that  respondent  “maintained”  access  to 
adult  or  pornographic  images  on  his  hard  drives  was  not  established.  Even  if  respondent  had 
been  the  person  who  stored  the  images,  which  was  not  proven,  by  the  time  the  drives  were 
tested,  he  apparently  could  not  have  retrieved  them  himself.  There  was  no  evidence  offered 
to  show  that  the  images  would  have  been  accessible  to  students." 

43. 

There  was  no  testimony  connecting  website  links  Albee  found  on  the  hard 
drives  to  the  images  he  found,  although  descriptions  of  website  links  might  describe  the 
some  of  the  images  found  on  the  drives.  Nevertheless,  assuming  the  District’s  allegation  of 
respondent  maintaining  access  to  images  on  the  hard  drives  includes  maintaining  a  record  of 
and  links  to  websites  where  such  images  are  available,  the  Commission  considered  Albee’s 
report  identifying  numerous  pornographic  websites  accessed  on  the  Mac  notebook. 

44. 

Most  of  the  reported  access  dates  are  from  August  9  through  13  and  October 

13  through  16,  2011.  Respondent  was  issued  the  computer  in  September  2010  or  2011,  so  the 
October  2011  access  dates  did  occur  during  a  period  when  respondent  was  in  possession  of 
the  Mac  notebook.  The  evidence  allowed  for  the  possibility,  however,  that  the  August  dates 
were  during  a  period  when  the  computer  had  been  checked  back  in  to  the  technical  support 
department  prior  to  reissuance  for  the  fall  semester.  Of  greater  moment  is  the  fact  that  two  of 
the  reported  access  dates  are  March  5,  2010,  and  May  15,  2010,  by  all  accounts  prior  to  the 
time  respondent  took  possession  of  the  computer.  On  the  earlier  of  those  two  dates,  a 
pornographic  website,  www.xtube.com,  was  accessed,  and  the  report  shows  that  it  was 
accessed  again  in  August  and  October  2011. 

45.  |  When  questioned,  Albee  offered  no  explanation  for  the  appearance  of  the 
earlier  access  dates  on  the  Mac  notebook  hard  drive.  This  unexplained  incongruity  in  the 
access  dates  and  the  evidence  that  a  pornographic  website  was  accessed  prior  to  the 
computer’s  issuance  to  respondent,  combined  with  the  uncertainty  about  when  the  computer 
was  in  respondent’s  possession  and  about  the  integrity  of  the  data  on  the  hard  drives  (see 
Factual  Findings  10  through  37)  makes  doubtful  any  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  about  who 
accessed  any  of  the  websites  and  when  they  did  so.  Respondent  denied  ever  using  any 

"  There  was  some  testimony  about  limited  student  use  of  respondent’s  Mac  notebook 

in  class,  but  no  evidence  that  any  student  saw  or  could  have  seen  any  adult  or  pornographic 
image  on  respondent’s  computers.  No  students  testified  in  this  matter. 

10 

  

 

District-issued  computer  to  access  the  websites, “vidii-hardsextube.com,” 
“files-youporn.com,”  or  any  websites  posting  sexually-explicit  or  oe  enogtaphic i images.” 

46. 

Albee  did  not  demonstrate  that  it  was  respondent  who  was  accessing  the 

computer.  Albee’s  HP  data  show  that  the  computer  user  logged  on  as  “lausd_user”  in all 
instances  but  one,  when  the  login  was  as  “Administrator.”  There  was  no  evidence  that 
respondent  had  privileges  allowing  him  to  log  in  as  an  administrator.  As  for  the  websites 
accessed  from  the  Mac  notebook,  no  user  login  information  is  provided  in  Albee’s  report. 
Some  sites  reported  by  Albee  reflect  the  use  of  Skype;  the  District  did  not  introduce  evidence 
that  respondent  ever  had  a  Skype  account,  and  respondent  denies  that  he  did. 

47. 

In  light  of  the  questionable  evidence  in  support  of  its  charges,  the  District 

argued  that  everything  on  the  computers’  hard  drives  was  respondent’s  responsibility 
because  respondent  had  control  of  the  computers.  But  as  has  been  established,  the  computers 
issued  to  respondent  contained  data  stored  there  by  prior  users,  and  the  absence  of  a  clear 
chain  of  custody  and  the  possible  tainting  of  the  data  raises  too  many  serious  questions  for 
the  District’s  position  to  be  persuasive.  There  are  too  many  uncertainties  as  to  whether 
respondent  accessed  pornographic  images  and  maintained  them  on  the  computers  to  find  that 
the  District  met  its  burden  on  this  charge. 

Complainant’s  Fourth  Charging  Allegation,  That  From  April  17,  2009,  to  March  2,  2012, 
Respondent  Used  District  Computers  in  Violation  of the  District’s  Acceptable  Use  Policy, 
Causing  Sexually  Explicit  and  Pornographic  Images  to  Appear  on  His  District-Issued 
Computer 

48. 

The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that,  from  April  17,  2009,  to  March 

2,  2012,  respondent  used  District  computers  in  violation  of  the  District’s  Acceptable  Use 
Policy,  causing  sexually  explicit  and  pornographic  images  to  appear  on  his  District-issued 
computer. 

49. 

Respondent  knew  or  should  have  known  the  provisions  of  the  AUP,  and  was 
bound  by  the  policy’s  Attachment  B,  which  is  applicable  by  its  terms  to  District  employees. 

50. 

It  would  violate  the  AUP  for  a  staff  member  to  access  pornographic  websites 

on  District-issued  computers,  whether  on  or  off  the  District’s  network.’*  But  the  Commission 

 Shekoyan’s  August  2012  report  shows  0  bytes  for  vidii.hardsextube.com  and  for 

files.youporn.com,  indicating  that  those  site  links  had  been  deleted;  without  further  evidence 
of  when  the  deletions  occurred,  the  Commission  cannot  find  that  they  were  “maintained”  on 
the  hard  drive. 

13  ‘This  is  a  broad  reading  of  the  AUP,  which  in  places  is  confusingly  restrictive,  such 
as  where  it  lists  examples  of  “inappropriate  activity”  but  refers  only  to  activity  on  the  District 
web  site.  (Ex.  30,  p.  5.)  The  AUP  as  a  whole,  however,  reasonably  supports  an  interpretation 
that  the  prohibited  activity  is  not  limited  to  activity  on  the  website. 

  

   

11 

unanimously  finds  that  complainant  did  not  establish  that  it  was  respondent  who  accessed  the 
websites.  (Factual  Findings  10-46.) 

51. 

On  February  12,  2013,  respondent  met  with  James  P.  Noble,  Ed.  D., 

Operations  Administrator,  Educational  Service  Center  South.  In  a  February  19,  2013,  letter 
to  Noble  commemorating  that  meeting,  respondent  denied  all  of  the  District’s  charges  and 
represented  that  he  has  always  followed  the  AUP. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

Jurisdiction 

44944.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.) 

Burden  of Proof 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  are 
established.  In  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  alleged  five 
of  those  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service, 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  and  persistent 
violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations.  (Factual  Finding  5.) 

4. 

The  District’s  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  charged 

respondent  with  various  acts  supporting  the  five  statutory  grounds  for  dismissal.  (Factual 
Finding  6.)  The  Commission  examined  each  charged  act  to  determine  whether  it  was  proven; 
if  proven,  the  Commission  would  consider  whether  the  charged  acts  violated  one  or  more  of 
the  statutory  bases  for  dismissal,  as  alleged. 

5. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of 

proving  that  any  of  the  charged  acts  occurred. 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Michael  Jones  does  not  exist  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings 
10  through  51  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

 

12 

  

  

7. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Michael  Jones  does  not  exist  under  sections 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  based  on  immoral  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  10  through  51  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

8. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Michael  Jones  does  not  exist  under  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  10  through  51  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

9. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Michael  Jones  does  not  exist  under  section 
44939,  based  on  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  51  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

10. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  Michael  Jones  does  not  exist  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  based  on  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by 
the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her, 
as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  51  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

11. 

Since  no  cause  for  discipline  exists,  complainant  having  failed  to  prove  any  of 
the  factual  allegations  in  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  factors  set 
forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  need  not  be  considered.” 

it 

it 

it 

  

'4  Respondent  argued  that  if  the  District  had  proven  that  he  used  District-issued 
computers  to  access  and  store  pornographic  website  links  and  images,  there  would  be 
insufficient  grounds  to  dismiss  him  because  any  images  and  links  were  inaccessible  to 
students.  Although  there  is  no  evidence  of  student  exposure  or  the  likelihood  of  student 
exposure  to  the  material  on  respondent’s  computers  (Factual  Finding  42  and  fn.  11),  the 
Commission  does  not  reach  this  issue.  Cause  to  discipline  respondent  is  lacking  in  this  case 
due  to  the  District’s  failure  to  establish  that  respondent  accessed  and  stored  sexually  explicit 
or  pornographic  material  on  District-issued  computers,  as  alleged. 

13   

  

 

  

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Michael  Jones  is 

dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED:  May  21,  2014 

Boa  hah — 

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  ROGER  KAVIGAN 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  

JIM  CARTNAL 
Commission  Member 

    

14 

 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Michael  Jones  is 

ORDER 

dismissed. 

DATED:  May  21,  2014 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  9 / 30 / 

,  2014 

Kop  Fe 
ROGER  KAVIGAN 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  JIM  CARTNAL 
Commission  Member 

14

  

  

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Michael  Jones  is 

ORDER 

dismissed. 

DATED:  May  21,  2014 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

 

DATED: 

,  2014 

  

ROGER  KAVIGAN 
Commission  Member 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

,  2014 

DATED: 5  [2% 

C..  (sb 
JIM|CARTNAL 
Commission  Member 

—y   
    

