BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  and 
Statement  of  Charges  Against: 

ROBERT  BELIVEAU, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2014120109 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Los 
Angeles  on  January  23,  2015,  and  February  2  —  4  and  6,  2015,  under  the  authority  of 
Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the 
following  members:  Kristi  Harabedian,  teacher,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education; 
Jeffrey  Jacobs,  retired  teacher,  Long  Beach  Unified  School  District;  and  Vincent  Nafarrete, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

Complainant  Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District,  was  represented  by  Mampre  R.  Pomakian,  Assistant  General  Counsel. 
Respondent  Robert  Beliveau  was  present  throughout  the  hearing  and  represented  himself. 
He  was  assisted  during  the  hearing  by  his  spouse. 

During  the  hearing,  complainant  presented  documentary  evidence  and  the  testimony 

of  several  students  as  well  as  teachers  and  administrators.  Respondent  presented 
documentary  evidence  and  the  testimony  of  one  witness.  Respondent  elected  not  to  present 
any  direct  testimony  but  answered  questions  on  cross-examination.  He  made  several 
motions  to  dismiss  the  Accusation;  his  motions  were  denied. 

On  the  last  day  of  the  hearing  on  February  6,  2015,  complainant  filed  an  Amendment 
and  Request  to  Amend  Portions  of  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  which  was  marked 
as  Exhibit  6B.  Complainant’s  request  to  amend  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  to 
conform  to  proof  presented  at  the  hearing  was  granted. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  oral  argument  heard,  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  submitted  this  matter  for  decision  on  February  6, 
2015,  conducted  deliberations  on  February  10,  2015,  and  finds  as  follows:

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

I 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  takes  official  notice  that,  on 

December  12,  2014,  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  Case  Number  2014120109, 
was  made  and  filed  by  complainant  Justo  H.  Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Chief 
Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District).  With 
administrative  offices  located  at  333  South  Beaudry  Avenue  in  Los  Angeles  and  schools 
throughout  the  Los  Angeles  area,  the  District  is  one  of  the  largest  comprehensive  school 
districts  in  the  nation. 

Qe 

At  all  times  relevant  herein,  respondent  Robert  Beliveau  has  been  employed  as 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  He  was  hired  by  the  District  on  or  about 
January  15,  1997,  to  teach  at  the  elementary  school  level.  He  became  a  permanent 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  on  July  1,  2001.  Eleven  years  later,  on  July  1,  2012, 
respondent  was  assigned  or  volunteered  to  be  a  pool  or  contract  pool  teacher  after  he  was 
displaced  from  his  elementary  teaching  position  following  teacher  layoff  proceedings.  From 
July  1,  2012,  through  the  present  time,  in  his  capacity  as  a  contract  pool  teacher,  respondent 
has  served  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  District  at  several  of  its  elementary  schools,  which 
largely  have  been  located  in  the  San  Pedro  and  Los  Angeles  Harbor  areas.  He  is  assigned  or 
volunteers  for  substitute  teaching  assignments  on  a  daily  basis  by  checking  the  District’s 
Sub-Finder  system.  Respondent  has  been  a  credentialed  teacher  for  an  undetermined  number 
of  years. 

State  and  District  Policies 

3. 

(A)  In  October  2009,  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  published  the 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (California  Standards),  which  state,  in  part, 
that  teaching  is  a  professional  endeavor  in  which  the  effective  practice  thereof  is  driven  by  an 
understanding  of  knowledge  in  the  field  and  a  commitment  to  all  students  and  their  families. 
The  California  Standards  provide,  in  part,  that  effective  teaching  requires  careful  crafting  of 
learning  communities  built  on  trust  and  respect  as  well  as  routines,  expectations,  resources, 
and  strategies  that  support  diverse  students’  intellectual  engagement  in  learning.  Effective 
teaching  is  said  to  occur  through  thoughtful  planning  and  is  revealed  in  the  ways  in  which 
teachers  respond  to  the  strengths  and  needs  of  individual  students  while  engaging  and 
supporting  all  students  in  their  learning. 

(B)  The  California  Standards  provide  for  six  interrelated  standards  of  teaching 

practice.  Standard  Number  2  requires  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  effective 
environments  for  student  learning.  Under  Standard  Number  2.1,  teachers  are  expected  to 
promote  social  development  and  responsibility  within  a  caring  community  where  each 
student  is  treated  fairly  and  respectfully.  Under  Standard  Number  2.2,  teachers  should  create 
physical  or  virtual  learning  environments  that  promote  student  learning,  reflect  diversity,  and 
encourage  constructive  and  productive  interactions  among  students.  Under  Standard

Number  2.3,  teachers  should  establish  and  maintain  learning  environments  that  are 
physically,  intellectually,  and  emotionally  safe. 

4. 

Under  its  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  the  District  is  committed  to  three  core 

ethical  principles:  commitment  to  excellence,  district  and  personal  integrity,  and 
responsibility.  For  the  core  ethical  principle  of  commitment  to  excellence,  the  District  and 
its  employees  are  to  be  committed  to  being  the  best  school  district  and  personnel  and  to 
educating  students  to  their  maximum  potential.  Everything  that  employees  do  is  said  to  have 
an  impact  on  the  classroom.  Employees  must  be  committed  to  creating  an  environment  of 
trust,  care,  and  respect.  Discriminatory  or  harassing  behavior  of  students  or  colleagues  is  not 
tolerated.  For  the  core  ethical  principle  of  integrity,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  to  be 
committed  to  ensuring  that  employee-student  relationships  are  positive,  professional,  and 
non-exploitative.  For  the  core  ethical  principle  of  responsibility,  the  District  and  its 
employees  are  to  be  responsible  for  their  performance.  The  District  and  is  employees  must 
ensure  that  power  and  authority  are  used  in  an  appropriate  and  positive  manner  that  enhances 
the  public  interest  and  trust. 

5. 

The  District  has  promulgated  a  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  in  which  the 

District  has  resolved  that  the  most  important  responsibility  of  the  District  is  to  ensure  the 
safety  of  its  students.  While  the  cultivation  of  positive  relationships  with  students  is 
encouraged,  employees  and  all  individuals  who  work  with  or  have  contact  with  students  are 
expected  to  use  good  judgment  and  are  cautioned  to  avoid  situations,  including  engaging  in 
any  behaviors  with  students  or  in  the  presence  of  students,  that  are  unprofessional,  unethical, 
illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative.  District  employees  are  also  cautioned  against  making 
statements  or  comments  in  the  presence  of  students  which  are  not  age-appropriate, 
professional,  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual  in  nature,  harassing,  or  demeaning. 

6. 

In  a  Resolution  adopted  on  October  10,  1988,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 

District  reaffirmed  its  policy  that  students  and  adults  in  both  schools  and  offices  should  treat 
all  persons  equally  and  respectfully  and  should  refrain  from  the  willful  or  negligent  use  of 
slurs  against  any  person  (Board  Resolution). 

7. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  February  23,  2010,  entitled,  “Abolition  of  Corporal 

Punishment,”  the  District  reaffirmed  its  policy  against  the  use  of  corporal  punishment,  in  any 
form,  as  a  disciplinary  option  at  any  grade  level  and  with  any  student.  Corporal  punishment 
is  defined  as  the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of,  physical  pain  on  a 
pupil.  Under  this  policy,  corporal  punishment  refers  to  the  intentional  application  of  physical 
pain  as  a  method  of  changing  behavior.  In  this  Policy  Bulletin,  the  District  encourages  the 
use  of  positive  approaches  to  discipline  and  classroom  management  to  ensure  that  students 
conform  to  proper  and  expected  standards  of  behavior  that  permit  them  to  derive  greater 
benefits  from  the  educational  program. 

8. 

The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  the 

Board  Resolution  re-affirming  its  commitment  to  the  policy  that  all  persons  should  be  treated 
respectfully,  and  the  policy  for  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  constitute  reasonable

regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the  schools  of  the  District  by  its  governing 
board.  As  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  respondent  was  required  to 
abide  by  these  policies  or  regulations  of  the  District.  As  established  by  his  testimony,  at  all 
times  relevant  herein,  respondent  has  been  familiar  with  these  District  policies. 

Cabrillo  Elementary  School 

9. 

On  October  3,  2012,  respondent  was  assigned  to  and  performed  teaching 
duties  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  Ms.  Bertane’s  third  grade  class  at  Cabrillo  Elementary 
School.’  Afterwards,  a  parent  complained  to  Principal  Ursula  Martin  about  respondent’s 
conduct.  The  principal  spoke  to  students  in  Ms.  Bertane’s  class  about  respondent,  obtained 
written  statements  from  them,  and  prepared  a  written  summary  of  the  statements.  On 
November  9,  2012,  Principal  Martin  conducted  a  conference  with  respondent  and  prepared  a 
conference  memorandum.  The  principal  and  three  students  testified  at  the  hearing.  The 
conference  memorandum,  written  statements,  and  respondent’s  response  were  admitted  into 
evidence. 

10. 

(A)  On  October  3,  2012,  while  acting  as  a  substitute  teacher  at  Cabrillo 

Elementary  School,  respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  as  follows:  When  the 
third  grade  students  did  not  stop  talking  with  each  other  or  pay  attention  to  him  in  class, 
respondent  yelled  and  screamed  at  the  students.  When  the  students  were  standing  in  line, 
respondent  yelled  at  them  to  stop  talking.  He  yelled  at  one  student  when  the  student  stood  up 
to  get  a  pencil.  In  addition,  respondent  put  his  fingers  to  his  mouth  and  whistled  loudly  at  the 
students  to  get  their  attention.  Three  students  complained  that  respondent’s  loud  whistles 
hurt  their  ears.  The  students  thought  respondent  was  mad  at  them.  Some  of  them  noticed 
that  respondent’s  neck  became  red  in  color  when  he  yelled  at  them.  The  students  were 
scared  by  respondent’s  yelling  and  loud  whistles. 

(B)  On  October  3,  2012,  respondent  used  and  directed  inappropriate  language 

and  engaged  in  other  unprofessional  conduct  towards  the  third  grade  students.  When  the 
class  got  loud,  respondent  said,  “Shut  up!”  to  quiet  the  students.  He  said  the  words  “shit” 
and  “stupid”  aloud  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  told  the  students  that  they  were  the 
“worst”  class  that  he  had  ever  taught  and  that  they  were  “stupid”  and  “dumb.” 
class  that,  unless  they  quieted  down,  they  would  not  be  going  outside  for  physical  education. 
Respondent  slammed  his  hand  down  on a  desk,  making  a  loud  noise.  A  female  student, 
A.C.,  had  written  an  essay  about  her  family’s  trip  to  Mexico.  After  he  read  it,  respondent 
told  the  student  to  write  it  again  because  there  were  too  many  misspellings  and  then  he 
ripped  up  the  essay  in  front  of  the  student. 

He  told  the 

(C)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  told  the  students  that  he  didn’t  care 

if  people  were  bullying  them a lot. 

'  The  first  or  full  name  of  the  teacher,  Ms.  Bertane,  was  not  established  by  the 

evidence.

(D)  As  a  result  of  respondent’s  unprofessional  conduct,  students  were  made  to 

feel  sad  and  believed  respondent  did  not  care  about  them.  Student  W.A.  became  sad  and 
scared  when  respondent  yelled  at  the  class.  A.C.,  whose  essay  was  ripped  up  by  respondent, 
told  the  principal  that  she  did  not  want  to  return  to  school.  Another  female  student  cried 
because  she  thought  it  was  her  fault  that  respondent  yelled  at  the  class. 

11. 

(A)  At  the  November  9,  2012  conference,  Principal  Martin  reviewed  and 

discussed  respondent’s  conduct  as  a  substitute  teacher  in  Ms.  Bertane’s  third  grade  class. 
The  principal  offered  assistance  and  guidance  by  reviewing  the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students,  the  Board  Resolution  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons,  California 
Standard  Number  2,  and  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  The  principal  directed 
respondent  to  refrain  from  making  inappropriate  statements  to  students  and  to  follow  the 
Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

(B)  During  the  conference,  respondent  was  not  receptive  to  the  principal’s 

suggestions  or  directives.  He  appeared  angry  and  upset.  He  complained  that  Ms.  Bertane’s 
classroom  had  no  classroom  roster,  schedule,  or  lesson  plans,  and  that  the  students  were  not 
respectful,  talked  all  day,  and  would  not  quiet  down.  He  described  the  class  as  the  “most 
misbehaved  class”  and  that  he  felt  like  a  “detention  hall  teacher”  and  a  “pifiata.”  Respondent 
told  the  principal  that  he  had  to  walk  a  “big  African  American  boy”  to  the  school  office  and 
had  a  difficult  time  because  the  student  was  “sprawling”  all  over  the  place.  Respondent 
admitted  that,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  he  stopped  being  nice  and  told  the  class  how  he  felt 
about  them.  He  admitted  that  he  got  mad  and  raised  his  voice  because  the  students  would  not 
quiet  down.  At  the  conference,  respondent  did  not  deny  any  of  the  students’  complaints 
about  him. 

12. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  9  —  11  above,  respondent’s  conduct  at  Cabrillo 

Elementary  School  on  October  3,  2012,  in  yelling  and  whistling  loudly  at  students  and  using 
and  directing  inappropriate  and  derogatory  language  at  the  students  was  inappropriate, 
negative,  and  demeaning  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct  in  violation  of  the  District’s 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  9  —  11  above,  respondent’s  conduct  at  Cabrillo 

Elementary  School  on  October  3,  2012,  in  which  he  yelled  and  whistled  loudly  at  students, 
used  and  directed  inappropriate  and  derogatory  language  at  the  students,  and  ripped  and 
threw  away  a  student’s  essay  was  inappropriate  and  disrespectful  and  constituted  violations 
of  the  Board  Resolution  that  District  personnel  must  treat  others  with  respect. 

13. 

On  November  27,  2012,  respondent  prepared  a  written  response  to  the 

November  9,  2012  conference  and  the  summary  prepared  by  Principal  Martin.  Respondent 
wrote  that  the  students  in  Ms.  Bertane’s  class  were  loud,  unruly,  and  unmanageable  because 
they  had  not  been  taught  how  to  properly  behave  in  the  classroom  or  how  to  be  responsible 
for  their  own  academic  success.  He  stated  that,  because  of  the  students’  “loud  and 
ungoverned  behavior”  and  “booming  voices,”  he  had  to  raise  his  voice  to  preserve  a  “safe 
and  classroom  environment.”  Respondent  admitted  that  he  was  “forced  to  whistle”  at  the

end  of  the  day  because  the  students  were  still  loud  and  his  voice  became  tired  from  trying  to 
communicate  with  them.  Respondent  complained  that  he  could  not  find  any  support  because 
the  administrators  were  absent  from  school  that  day  and  he  became  stressed.  He  claimed  that 
he  maintained  a  professional  demeanor  and  that  he  was  patient  and  kind  throughout  the 
school  day.  Respondent’s  characterizations  of  the  students  and  his  claim  of  not  being  able  to 
find  administrative  support  did  not  mitigate  or  excuse  his  unprofessional  conduct  and 
violations  of  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  or  the 
Board  Resolution.  His  claim  that  he  acted  professionally  at  Cabrillo  Elementary  School  on 
October  3,  2012,  was  self-serving  and  not  supported  by  the  evidence. 

Barton  Hill  Elementary  School 

14. 

On  October  10,  2012,  respondent  was  assigned  by  the  District  to  be  a 
substitute  teacher  for  a  third  grade  classroom  at  Barton  Hill  Elementary  School.  The 
assistant  principal,  Rosemarie  Eisner,  walked  into  respondent’s  assigned  classroom  during 
instructional  time  and  found  the  students  running  around,  shrieking,  and  using  adhesive  tape 
to  try  to  catch  tiny  insects  which  were  crawling  on  the  desks  and  flying  about  the  classroom. 
Other  students  were  scratching  themselves  and  yelling  that  they  were  itchy  from  the  bugs. 
Respondent  had  instructed  the  students  to  try  and  catch  the  insects  in  order  to  distract  and 
calm  them  down.  He  did  not  call  the  school  office  upon  seeing  the  insects  in  the  classroom. 

15. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  respondent’s  conduct  in  directing  or  allowing 
students  in  his  classroom  to  catch  the  insects  with  adhesive  tape,  while  other  students  were 
shrieking  and  yelling  that  they  were  itchy,  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  Nor  did 
respondent  commit  unprofessional  conduct  or  violate  any  school  rule  by  not  immediately 
calling  the  office  upon  seeing  the  insects  in  his  classroom.  The  sudden  and  unexpected 
appearance  of  the  insects  in  the  classroom  caused  an  uproar  among  the  students  and 
respondent’s  conduct  was  not  an  unreasonable  measure  or  reaction  under  the  circumstances 
to  gain  control  or  management  of  the  classroom. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  October  10,  2012,  respondent  gave  candy  to 

students  in  violation  of  any  state  school  or  District  policy. 

16. 

(A)  On  October  10,  2012,  upon  seeing  the  students  trying  to  catch  the  insects 
in  respondent’s  classroom,  Assistant  Principal  Eisner  told  respondent  to  call  the  operations 
coordinator.  She  returned  to  her  office  and  arranged  for  respondent  to  move  his  class  to  the 
computer  laboratory  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  Shortly  thereafter,  the  assistant  principal  called 
respondent  in  the  classroom  but  no  one  answered.  Respondent  had  taken  his  class  outside  to 
begin  recess  early  due  to  the  presence  of  the  insects.  The  assistant  principal  went  to  the 
classroom  and  found  it  empty.  She  asked  the  school  office  to  page  respondent  on  the 
loudspeaker  system  and  tell  him  to  come  to  her  office.  Respondent  returned  the  page  and 
stated  to  the  assistant  principal  that  he  could  not  come  to  her  office  during  recess.  Assistant 
Principal  Eisner  told  respondent  that  he  should  come  to  her  office  to  discuss  the  move  of  his 
class  to  the  computer  laboratory  and  to  pick  up  the  key  to  the  computer  laboratory.

Respondent  replied  that  he  could  not  walk  to  the  assistant  principal’s  office  because  he  had  a 
neck  problem. 

(B)  Assistant  Principal  Eisner  then  met  respondent  in  a  hallway  to  discuss  the 
plan  for  the  rest  of  the  school  day.  Respondent  spoke  to  the  assistant  principal  in  a  loud  and 
angry  tone.  He  was  argumentative  and  talked  over  the  assistant  principal,  interrupting  her 
and  choosing  not  to  listen  to  what  she  had  to  say  to  him.  Respondent  stated  that  the  assistant 
principal’s  plan  was  ridiculous,  that  the  school  was  unkempt,  and  that  he  was  going  to 
complain  to  the  District.  He  complained  that  there  were  no  lesson  plans  for  him  to  follow  in 
the  classroom.  When  the  assistant  principal  told  respondent  that  she  was  trying  to  help  him, 
respondent  replied  that  he  was  helping  her  by  being  there  at  the  school  as  a  substitute 
teacher.  The  assistant  principal  walked  with  respondent  to  the  computer  laboratory  where 
they  found  another  teacher  already  there  with  her  class.  When  the  assistant  principal  asked 
the  other  teacher  to  help  respondent  access  internet  websites,  he  interrupted  and  talked  over 
the  administrator,  complaining  and  venting  his  anger  in  front  of  the  other  teacher. 
Subsequently,  the  assistant  principal  moved  respondent  and  his  class  to  a  classroom  in  a 
bungalow. 

17. 

(A)  On  November  7,  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Eisner  held  a  conference  with 
respondent  to  discuss  his  conduct.  A  specialist  from  Teacher  Quality  and  Staffing  and  the 
operations  coordinator  were  also  present  at  the  conference.  The  assistant  principal  reviewed 
respondent’s  conduct  on  the  day  when  the  insects  invaded  his  classroom  and  when  she  tried 
to  help  him  to  move  to  the  computer  laboratory.  The  assistant  principal  offered  assistance 
and  guidance  to  respondent  by  reviewing  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  the 
Board’s  Resolution  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons.  The  assistant  principal 
reminded  and  directed  respondent  to  follow  all  administrative  directives  and  to  cooperate  and 
follow  instructions  and  directives  of  administrators.  Respondent  was  told  to  treat  everyone 
in  a  respectful  and  professional  manner,  not  to  yell  or  raise  his  voice  at  students  or  adults, 
and  not  to  talk  over  others.  He  was  instructed  not  to  use  students  to  clean  classrooms  or  to 
remove  insects  and  not  to  put  them  in  possibly  harmful  situations. 

(B)  At  the  start  of  the  November  7,  2012  conference,  respondent  immediately 
interrupted  the  assistant  principal  and  would  not  let  her  start  the  conference.  He  said  that  the 
assistant  principal  was  “making  up  stories  [that  were]  not  true”  and  he  was  not  there  to  be 
subjected  to  “slanderous  accusations.”  Respondent  further  stated  that  the  school  was 
mismanaged  and  unkempt  with  insects  and  urine  stains  in  the  hallway.  He  added  that  the 
teacher  for  whom  he  substituted  had  no  lesson  plans  and  that  he  was  moved  to  a  room  with 
asbestos  that  caused  him  to  have  health  problems.  Respondent  apologized  for  being 
disrespectful  but  added  that  he  had  a  passion  for  teaching  and  he  felt  he  was  being 
disrespected.  Respondent  told  the  assistant  principal  and  the  two  other  District  employees  in 
the  conference  that  he  “probably  [had]  more  years  teaching  than  the  three  of  [them]  put 
together.”  The  assistant  principal  felt  respondent  acted  in  an  unprofessional  and 
disrespectful  manner  during  the  conference.  He  was  arrogant  and  demeaning.

18.  —  Based  on  Findings  16  —  17  above,  respondent’s  conduct  and  interaction  with 
Assistant  Principal  Eisner  on  October  10,  2012,  at  Barton  Hill  Elementary  School  in  which 
he  refused  to  go  to  the  administrator’s  office  to  pick  up  a  key,  spoke  to  and  interrupted  the 
administrator  in  a  loud  and  angry  tone,  and  complained  in  front  of  another  teacher,  was 
inappropriate  and  disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent’s 
conduct  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  the  Board  Resolution  that 
District  personnel  treat  others  with  respect.  Respondent  was  likewise  disrespectful  towards 
the  assistant  principal  during  the  November  7,  2012  conference. 

19. 

Ina  written  response  following  the  November  7,  2012  conference,  respondent 

stated  that,  on  October  10,  2012,  he  and  his  class  were  not  given  access  to  the  computer 
laboratory  and  were  sent  to  the  bungalow  without  any  teaching  materials  or  student  books. 
He  complained  that,  although  the  Assistant  Principal  had  good  intentions,  she  had  “little 
capacity  to  offer  any  actual  support  beyond  further  exacerbating  the  situation.”  He  said  the 
assistant  principal’s  suggestions  were  “puzzling,”  she  made  the  problems  worse,  and  she 
caused  him  “discomfort  and  chaos.”  Respondent  wrote  that,  after  working  the  day  at  Barton 
Elementary  School,  he  was  ill  for  over  one  month.  Respondent’s  written  statement  did  not 
mitigate  or  excuse  his  violations  of  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  or  the  Board  Resolution. 

15th  Street  Elementary  School 

20. 

(A)  On  January  22,  2013,  respondent  served  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  a 

second  grade  classroom  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School  in  San  Pedro.  At  the  end  of  school 
day,  respondent  left  the  classroom  and  was  walking  down  the  hallway  when  he  met  Imelda 
Mack,  a  third  grade  teacher  who  was  standing  outside  her  classroom.  Ms.  Mack  asked 
respondent  how  his  day  went  and  how a certain  student  had  behaved  that  day.  The 
classroom  for  which  respondent  was  a  substitute  teacher  that  day  was  known  to  have  students 
who  misbehaved. 

(B)  In  response  to  Ms.  Mack’s  query,  respondent  stated  that  the  certain  student 

had  behaved  so  badly  that  the  student  acted  as  if  his  “cojones”  [testicles]  were  hurting  him. 
Respondent  gestured  or  pointed  towards  his  own  groin  and  private  parts  as  he  made  this 
statement.  Ms.  Mack  was  made  to  feel  very  uncomfortable  by  respondent’s  inappropriate 
and  offensive  statement  and  gesture.  She  thought  that  the  conversation  was  over  and  entered 
her  empty  classroom. 

(C)  Respondent,  however,  followed  Ms.  Mack  into  her  classroom  and  closed 

the  classroom  door  behind  him.  He  then  stated  to  Ms.  Mack  what  he  disliked  about  the 
District  and  its  schools.  He  told  Ms.  Mack  about  the  allegations  or  accusations  that  the 
District  had  made  against  him  and  the  issues  that  he  had  with  Barton  Elementary  School. 
Ms.  Mack  listened  to  respondent  and  felt  uncomfortable  by  respondent’s  complaints  as  well 
Respondent  stayed  in  her  classroom  for  approximately 
as  by  his  presence  in  her  classroom. 
10  minutes.  He  did  not  leave  Ms.  Mack’s  classroom  until  a  male  teacher  entered  and  then

respondent  left  suddenly.  Ms.  Mack  found  the  classroom  contact  with  respondent  to  have 
been  strange  and  unsettling. 

21.  |  Onor  about  April  3,  2013,  respondent  was  again  assigned  to  be  a  substitute 

teacher  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School.  Gordon  Berg, a  third  grade  teacher,  went  into  the 
classroom  where  respondent  was  substitute  teaching  and  began  talking  with  him. 
Respondent  criticized  the  teacher  for  whom  he  was  substituting  by  saying  to  Mr.  Berg  that 
the  colleague  taught  writing  incorrectly.  Respondent  stated  that  he  had  to  correct  the 
colleague’s  teaching  techniques. 

22. 

(A)  One  week  later,  on  April  10,  2013,  respondent  returned  to  15th  Street 
Elementary  School  for  another  substitute  teaching  assignment.  He  was  assigned  to  be  a 
substitute  teacher  for  Mr.  Berg’s  third  grade  class.  Mr.  Berg  had  to  take  an  emergency 
absence  and  did  not  leave  a  lesson  plan  book.  However,  Mr.  Berg  had  put  test  practice 
packets  for  the  upcoming  California  Standardized  Tests  (CST)  on  a  table.  The  students  had 
been  working  on  the  test  practice  packets  for  the  past  week.  In  addition,  the  students  kept 
their  “Measuring  Up”  books  with  them  at  their  desks.  Mr.  Berg  also  left  lesson  plans  on  the 
District’s  Sub-Finder  system,  telling  any  substitute  teacher  that  the  students  should  work  on 
the  test  practice  packets,  Measuring  Up  books,  spelling  packets,  and  language  arts  and  math 
assignments. 

(B)  Upon  meeting  the  students  in  the  classroom,  respondent  introduced 

himself  as  “Mr.  Be  Quiet”  and  wrote  that  name  on  the  white  board.  He  did  not  find  any 
lesson  plan  book.  He  apparently  had  not  accessed  the  Sub-Finder  system  to  listen  to  or 
obtain  Mr.  Berg’s  lesson  plans.  Students  told  respondent  that  they  had  been  working  on  their 
Measuring  Up  books  and  told  respondent  where  they  had  last  worked  in  the  books.  In 
response,  respondent  told  the  students  that  the  Measuring  Up  books  were  “junk.”  When  the 
students  asked  if  they  should  work  on  the  spelling  packets  that  Mr.  Berg  had  prepared  or 
disseminated  to  them,  respondent  replied  that  the  spelling  books  were  “stupid,”  “dumb  junk,” 
and  “a  waste  of  time.”  He  tossed  the  spelling  packet  or  packets  into  a  trash  can  in  front  of 
the  students.  The  spelling  packets  contained  students’  classroom  and  homework  assignments 
in  various  subjects.  Respondent  did  not  use  the  CST  practice  test  packets,  Measuring  Up 
books,  or  spelling  packets  to  teach  the  students  that  particular  day. 

(C)  During  the  school  day,  respondent  told  the  students  that  they  were  not 
going  to  work  on  the  CST  practice  tests  but,  instead,  would  work  on  math.  He  gave  the 
students  math  problems  or  lessons  that  involved  the  multiplication  of  large  numbers.  As 
third  graders,  the  students  had  only  learned  to  multiply  single  digit  numbers.  The  students 
had  not  yet  learned  how  to  multiply  larger  numbers  and  were  confused  by  respondent’s  math 
assignment.  When  a  student  stated  that  the  math  problem  was  for  fourth  grade  students  and 
was  too  hard,  respondent  stated  in  a  loud  voice,  “You  will  learn  what  I  teach  you.” 
Respondent’s  assignment  of  fourth  grade  or  higher  grade  level  math  was  not  appropriate  for 
the  third  grade  students.

(D)  On  the  walls  and  white  boards  of  his  classroom,  Mr.  Berg  had  placed  or 
taped  large  paper  charts  that  contained  instructions  or  lessons  for  the  students  in  math  and 
reading.  Respondent  tore  the  charts  off  the  walls  and  white  boards  and  threw  the  charts  onto 
the  floor,  where  they  remained  for  the  rest  of  the  school  day. 

23. 

(A)  On  April  10,  2013,  respondent  verbally  and  physically  mistreated  and 

abused  individual  third  grade  students  in  Mr.  Berg’s  class.  He  would  not  allow  student  C.C. 
to  work  on  her  spelling  packet.  He  said  that  the  student’s  spelling  packet  and  homework 
were  “junk,”  threw  her  packet  into  a  trash  container,  and  called  C.C.  a  “bitch.”  He  told 
student  A.O.  that  her  spelling  packet  was  a  “nightmare”  and  “boring.”  He  then  took  A.O.’s 
spelling  packet  from  her  desk  and  threw  the  packet  by  the  student’s  face  such  that  the  edge  of 
It  was  not  established  that  respondent  slapped  A.O. 
the  packet  scratched  A.O.’s  right  cheek. 
on  the  face. 

(B)  Before  recess,  respondent  had  the  students  line  up  at  the  classroom  door. 

Respondent  told  student  K.V.  to  unlock  the  classroom  door  so  that  the  class  could  go  outside 
and  he  threw  keys  at  K.V.  The  keys  struck  K.V.  in  the  head  at  his  right  temple.  In  response, 
respondent  stated,  “You  better  catch  them  the  next  time.”  Later,  K.V.  asked  respondent  if  he 
could  go  to  the  restroom;  respondent  would  not  let  the  student  go  to  the  restroom.  During 
recess,  student  N.L.  got  hit  in  the  face  by  a  ball  and,  when  the  student  asked,  respondent 
would  not  allow  N.L.  to  go  to  the  nurse’s  office  for  a  medical  evaluation  and  called  N.L. 
“stupid.”  While  N.L.  was  sitting  at  his  desk,  respondent  hit  N.L.’s  hand  with  the  spelling 
packet.  At  one  point  during  the  school  day,  the  students  were  lined  up  on  the  stairs  leading 
to  the  classroom.  Respondent  told  student  J.-H.,  who  was  standing  on  the  stairs  or  an  upper 
landing,  to  open  the  classroom  door.  He  then  threw  the  keys  toward  the  student.  The  keys 
hit  J.H.  on  her  shoes  and  dropped  down  the  stairs.  Respondent  directed  J.H.  to  come  down 
the  stairs  and  fetch  the  keys. 

24. 

On  April  10,  2013,  respondent  made  additional  remarks  to  the  students  that 
were  demeaning,  disrespectful,  and  inappropriate.  He  told  the  students  that  they  were  the 
“worst  class  ever”  and  “stupid”  and  that  they  would  never  get  promoted  past  the  third  grade. 
He  described  the  classroom  as  “messy”  and  the  overhead  projector  as  a  “piece  of  junk.” 
Respondent  criticized  the  students’  teacher  by  saying  that  Mr.  Berg  had  not  taught  them  well. 
He  told  the  class  that  they  would  fail  the  CST.  On  three  or  four  occasions,  respondent  told 
the  students  to  “shut  up.”  For  example,  he  told  students  J.P.  and  A.S,  “Shut  up,  blabber 
mouths”  when  the  two  girls  were  talking  in  class.  While  he  was  sitting  in  the  classroom, 
respondent  stated  aloud,  “Oh  bitch,  my  ass  hurts.”  At  the  end  of  the  school  day,  respondent 
handed  out  candy  to  the  students. 

25. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  April  10,  2013,  respondent  told  the  class 

that  they  were  “idiots”  and  “a  bunch  of  kindergarten  kids,”  addressed  student  S.D.  as 
“yellow,”  or  called  student  N.L.  “stupid”  when  the  student  did  not  know  how  to  do  a  fourth 
grade  math  assignment. 

10

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  April  10,  2013,  respondent  told  the  students 
in  Mr.  Berg’s  class  that  they  were  “horrible  and  annoying”  or  the  “dirtiest  class.”  Nor  was  it 
established  that  respondent  directed  student  A.S  to  help  her  classmates  with  a  math 
assignment  or  yelled  at  the  student  when  she  did  not  do  a  math  problem  correctly. 

(C)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  April  10,  2013,  respondent  caused  students 
to  be  tardy  to  an  intervention  class  by  telling  the  students  to  wait  until  the  teacher  called  the 
classroom. 
the  numbers  one  to  10  as  many  times  as  possible  despite  the  students’  protests  that  they 
already  knew  the  alphabet  and  the  numbers. 

Nor  was  it  established  that  respondent  had  the  students  write  the  alphabet  and 

26; 

The  next  day,  April  11,  2013,  Mr.  Berg  returned  to  his  classroom  and  found 

his  charts  on  the  floor.  The  students  voiced  complaints  about  respondent.  Mr.  Berg  told  the 
principal  about  the  students’  complaints  that  respondent  had  said  that  their  spelling  packets 
were  “garbage.” 
teacher  any  longer  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School.  Principal  Jennifer  Mak  spoke  to  Mr. 
Berg  and  to  the  students  about  their  complaints.  She  had  Mr.  Berg  obtain  written  statements 
from  the  students. 

The  teacher  asked  that  respondent  not  be  allowed  to  act  as  a  substitute 

27. 

(A)  On  April  12,  2013,  respondent  was  again  assigned  to  act  as  a  substitute 
teacher  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School.  When  she  learned  that  morning  that  respondent 
was  returning  to  her  school,  Principal  Mak  asked  a  school  administrative  assistant  to  instruct 
respondent  when  he  arrived  that  he  was  to  wait  in  the  school  office  because  she  wanted  to 
talk  with  him  before  he  went  to  his  assigned  classroom.  Principal  Mak  had  to  first  conduct  a 
school  assembly.  At  approximately  7:45  a.m.,  respondent  arrived  at  the  school  for  his 
substitute  teaching  assignment.  He  obtained  the  key  and  the  attendance  list  for  his  assigned 
classroom  from  the  school  administrative  assistant  who  gave  him  the  principal’s  instructions. 

(B)  However,  rather  than  wait  in  the  school  office  as  directed,  respondent  went 

out  to  the  school  yard  and  confronted  Principal  Mak  who  was  getting  ready  for  the  school 
assembly.  He  asked  the  principal  why  he  had  to  wait  and  speak  with  her  before  going  to  his 
classroom.  Principal  Mak  informed  respondent  that  she  wanted  to  discuss  the  concerns  that 
were  raised  by  Mr.  Berg  and  his  students  when  he  acted  as  a  substitute  teacher  two  days 
earlier.  Respondent  told  the  principal  that  she  had  to  put  her  directive  in  writing  and  that  he 
had  a  right  to  have  a  union  representative  present  during  any  discussion.  Principal  Mak  told 
respondent  three  times  to  go  and  to  wait  for  her  in  the  school  office.  Finally,  respondent  said 
that  he  felt  sick  and  could  not  take  the  substitute  teaching  assignment  at  her  school  that  day. 
He  told  the  principal  to  find  another  substitute  teacher  and  left  the  yard.  He  went  to  the 
school  office  and  returned  the  key  and  attendance  list  to  the  school  administrative  assistant. 
He  told  the  school  administrative  assistant  that  he  was  not  feeling  well  and  was  leaving,  and 
that  the  school  should  find  another  substitute  teacher. 

(C)  At  8:00  a.m.,  the  school  bell  rang  and  Principal  Mak  opened  and  began 

leading  the  assembly  in  the  school  yard.  Students,  staff,  and  parents  were  present.  The 
principal  planned  to  present  the  award  for  the  “Citizen  of  the  Week.”  However,  respondent 

11

had  returned  to  the  yard  and  began  pacing  back  and  forth  near  the  area  where  the  principal 
was  standing  and  in  front  of  the  entire  student  body.  The  principal  saw  respondent  pacing 
back  and  forth.  After  pacing  for  one  minute,  respondent  went  to  the  main  building  of  the 
school  but  returned  again  to  the  schoolyard  30  seconds  later.  He  stood  in  front  of  the  second 
grade  class  for  a  minute  and  then  walked  back  to  the  main  building.  Parents,  students,  and 
teachers  noticed  respondent’s  pacing.  Principal  Mak  asked  a  program  advisor  to  finish 
leading  the  assembly;  she  cut  short  her  presentation  so  that  she  could  talk  with  respondent. 
The  principal  called  and  told  the  school  administrative  assistant  to  call  the  school  police  and 
report  respondent’s  “strange  behavior.” 

(D)  At  8:12  a.m.,  the  school  administrative  assistant  encountered  respondent  in 

front  of  the  principal’s  office  as  he  was  leaving  the  assembly.  Respondent  asked  if  she  had 
found  a  substitute  teacher  to  replace  him.  Principal  Mak  returned  to  her  office  just  as 
respondent  was  talking  to  the  school  administrative  assistant.  Respondent  stated  to  the 
principal  that  he  still  was  not  feeling  well  and  was  leaving.  The  principal  released 
respondent  from  his  substitute  teaching  assignment  and  escorted  him  off  the  school  campus. 
As  he  was  walking,  respondent  kept  saying  to  the  principal  that  she  was  “harassing”  him  and 
making  him  feel  very  anxious.  Respondent  then  asked  the  principal,  in  a  disrespectful  tone, 
The  principal  directed  respondent  to  go  to  the 
to  unlock  the  gate  by  the  kindergarten  yard. 
staff  parking  lot  and  asked  a  building  and  grounds  worker  to  stand  guard  in  the  staff  parking 
lot  to  make  sure  that  respondent  left  the  school.  The  principal  went  to  the  staff  parking  lot  to 
check  on  respondent  and  saw  that  respondent  was  still  there. 
respondent  said  to  the  principal,  “You  are  still  harassing  me.  Stop  harassing  me!”  He  then 
got  into  his  car,  drove  off,  and  left  the  school  at  8:15  a.m.  Principal  Mak  found  that 
respondent  did  not  follow  her  directive  to  wait  for  her  in  the  school  office  and  was 
insubordinate.  She  also  believed  that  respondent  disrupted  the  school  assembly  and  acted  in 
an  erratic  and  unprofessional  manner. 

In  a  loud  and  angry  tone, 

28. 

On  April  23,  2013,  Principal  Mak  conducted  a  conference  with  respondent  to 

discuss  his  conduct  on  the  three  days  that  month  when  he  was  assigned  as  a  substitute  teacher 
at  15th  Street  Elementary  School,  as  described  in  Findings  21  —  27  above.  A  District 
representative  and  union  representative  were  also  present.  During  the  conference,  the 
principal  offered  assistance  and  guidance  to  respondent  and  issued  directives.  Respondent 
was  instructed,  in  part,  to  use  standards-based  lessons  and  to  provide  instruction  and 
assignments  to  students  which  are  appropriate  to  their  grade  level.  He  was  directed,  in  part, 
to  follow  District  and  school  policies,  obey  directives  of  the  principal,  not  throw  objects  at 
students,  maintain  a  climate  in  the  classroom  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect,  and  conduct 
himself  in  a  professional  manner.  In  response,  respondent  told  the  principal  that  she  did  not 
impart  fairness  and  respect,  that  the  principal  or  the  students  were  making  up  Stories  and  lies, 
and  that  the  complaints  against  him  were  exaggerations  and  falsehoods. 

29. 

(A)  Based  on  Finding  20  above,  respondent’s  conduct  and  interaction  with 

teacher  Mack  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School  on  January  22,  2013,  when  he  used  an 
inappropriate  term  in  referring  to  a  student’s  private  parts,  gestured  towards  his  own  private 
parts,  and  then  stated  what  he  did  not  like  about  the  District  and  its  schools,  was 

1

inappropriate  and  disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent’s 
conduct  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  calling  for  the  creation  of  a  trusting, 
caring,  and  respectful  school  environment,  and  the  Board  Resolution  requiring  respectful 
treatment  of  all  persons. 

(B)  Based  on  Finding  21  above,  respondent’s  conduct  and  interaction  with 

teacher  Berg  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School  in  April  2013,  when  he  criticized  the  regular 
teacher  in  the  classroom  in  which  he  was  acting  as  a  substitute  teacher,  was  inappropriate  and 
disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  violated  the 
District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  calling  for  the  creation  of  a  trusting,  caring,  and 
respectful  school  environment,  and  the  Board  Resolution  requiring  respectful  treatment  of  all 
persons. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  27  —  28  above,  respondent’s  conduct  and  interaction 
with  Principal  Mak  on  April  12,  2013,  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School,  when  he  failed  to 
follow  her  directive  to  wait  in  the  school  office,  disrupted  a  school  assembly,  turned  down  a 
substitute  teaching  assignment  that  he  had  already  accepted,  and  spoke  to  the  principal  in  a 
loud  and  angry  voice,  was  inappropriate  and  disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional 
conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  requiring 
that  employees  create a  trusting,  caring,  and  respectful  school  environment,  and  the  Board 
Resolution  that  District  personnel  treat  all  others  with  respect.  Respondent  was  likewise 
disrespectful  towards  Principal  Mak  at  the  April  23,  2013  conference  when  he  asserted  that 
the  principal  was  unfair  and  disrespectful  and  made  up  lies  against  him. 

30. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  22  —  25  above,  respondent’s  conduct  at  15th  Street 
Elementary  School  on  April  10,  2013,  when  he  told  students  that  his  name  was  “Mr.  Be 
Quiet,”  made  derogatory  remarks  about  and  threw  away  the  regular  teacher’s  and  students’ 
school  work  books  and  packets,  tore  down  the  regular  teacher’s  charts  and  criticized  the 
classroom,  failed  to  follow  the  regular  teacher’s  lesson  plans,  verbally  and  physically  abused 
students,  and  used  and  directed  derogatory  language  at  the  students,  was  inappropriate, 
negative,  immoral,  disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent’s 
conduct  violated  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  and  the 
Board  Resolution  calling  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  22  —  25  above,  respondent’s  conduct  at  15th  Street 

Elementary  School  on  April  10,  2013,  when  he  hit  two  students  with  keys  that  he  had  thrown 
at  them,  did  not  allow  a  student  to  go  to  the  school  nurse,  did  not  allow  a  student  to  go  to  the 
restroom,  hit  a  student’s  hand  with  a  spelling  packet,  and  hit  a  student’s  face  with  a  spelling 
packet,  constituted  corporal  punishment  and  violations  of  the  District’s  policy  against 
corporal  punishment. 

31. 

(A)  In  an  undated  letter  to  Principal  Mak  following  the  April  12,  2013 

conference,  respondent  complained  that  he  had  worked  with  said  principal  for  six  years  at 
Lomita  Math  and  Science  Magnet  School  and,  yet,  she  never  greeted  or  smiled  at  him  at  15th 
Street  Elementary  School.  He  indicated  he  never  felt  welcomed  as  a  substitute  teacher  at 

Hts)

15th  Street  Elementary  School.  Respondent  accused  Principal  Mak  of  having  a  “poisoned 
perspective”  and  making  false  accusations  against  him. 

(B)  With  respect  to  the  substitute  teaching  assignment  in  Mr.  Berg’s 
classroom,  respondent  described  the  teacher’s  classroom  as  “cluttered  with  broken 
technology.”  He  said  Mr.  Berg’s  charts  were  “plastered”  on  the  chalk  boards,  were  poorly 
written  and  unreadable,  and  were  lacking  in  insight  and  educational  benefit.  Respondent 
asserted  he  was  not  given  any  lesson  plans,  schedule,  or  educational  materials  other  than  the 
“rubbish”  that  was  “piled  up  in  huge  mess.”  Respondent  also  criticized  Principal  Mak  of 
being  unable  to  maintain  a  tidy  work  space  for  herself,  which  he  attributed  to  the  principal’s 
tendency  to  overlook  Mr.  Berg’s  inadequacies  and  inability  to  keep  a  clean  classroom. 
Respondent  claimed  that  he  commented  on  the  “inadequacies”  of  the  spelling  packets 
because  not  every  student  had  one  and  he  had  brought  his  own  lessons  with  him.  He  stated 
that  he  has  always  seriously  considered  the  health  and  safety  of  the  students  and  would  no 
longer  share  his  “objective  thoughts”  about  the  public  schools  with  other  teachers  who  do  not 
“welcome  [a]  purposeful  dialog.”  Respondent’s  letter  to  the  principal  did  not  mitigate  or 
excuse  his  unprofessional  conduct  at  15th  Street  Elementary  School  in  April  2013. 

Park  Western  Elementary  School 

325 

(A)  On  April  22,  2013,  respondent  was  assigned  to  be  the  substitute  teacher  at 
Park  Western  Elementary  School  for  an  upper  grade,  special  education  class  that  served  and 
taught  students  with  moderate  to  severe  intellectual  disability.  He  had  been  a  substitute 
teacher  at  the  school  on  several  prior  occasions.  At  the  beginning  of  the  school  day  on April 
22,  2013,  Cathy  Howard,  the  primary  teacher  for  the  special  education  class,  advised 
respondent  that  the  students  needed  to  follow  a  certain  routine  and  a  structured  schedule  and 
that  Gordana  Bezmalinovich,  the  teacher’s  assistant,  knew  the  routine  and  schedule  and 
would  help  and  guide  respondent.  The  routine  included  having  the  students  act  as  monitors 
or  leaders  for  different  parts  of  the  daily  schedule.  In  addition,  Howard  informed  respondent 
that  the  students  had  work  folders  that  contained  their  individual  assignments.  Howard  then 
left  the  classroom. 

(B)  The  special  education  class,  which  was  comprised  of  12  or  13  students, 

began  the  school  day  by  having  breakfast  and  using  the  restroom.  Next,  Bezmalinovich 
began  the  routine  that  the  students  knew  well  by  bringing  a  student  to  the  front  of  the  class  to 
act  as  a  calendar  monitor,  and  then  starting  a  review  of  the  days  of  the  month  and  the  daily 
news.  Rather  than  allow  Bezmalinovich  to  complete  this  part  of  the  schedule,  respondent 
stepped  in  front  of  the  teacher’s  assistant  and  interrupted  her.  He  asked  the  students  whether 
certain  days  of  the  month  were  odd  or  even  numbers.  Respondent’s  attempt  to  teach  odd  and 
even  numbers  was  misplaced,  for  this  math  concept  was  above  the  abilities  of  the  special 
education  students  and  inappropriate  for  them.  The  students  were  puzzled  by  respondent’ s 
lesson. 

14

(C)  Respondent  remained  at  the  front  of  the  special  education  class  and 

continued  teaching  or  lecturing  the  students  without  taking  heed  of  their  need  for  routine  and 
structure.  Bezmalinovich  tried  to  get  respondent’s  attention  to  tell  him  that  the  students 
needed  to  proceed  to  the  next  phases  of  the  class  routine  and  tried  to  tell  respondent  about  the 
class  schedule.  Respondent  ignored  the  teacher’s  assistant.  Bezmalinovich  became 
concerned  because  respondent  would  not  let  her  guide  him  to  the  next  phases  of  the  students’ 
schedule,  which  included  appointing  students  to  perform  duties  as  the  daily  news  monitor, 
office  monitor,  and  recycling  monitor.  These  classroom  monitor  jobs  were  important  to  the 
special  education  students  because  they  earned  the  right  to  be  monitors  by  their  classroom 
performance  or  behavior.  The  students  became  confused  and  uneasy  with  the  change  in  their 
daily  routine  and  schedule. 

(D)  Next  on  their  schedule,  the  special  education  students  were  supposed  to 
perform  individual  work  in  reading  and  writing  which  was  contained  in  their  work  folders. 
Bezmalinovich  tried  to  show  the  students’  work  folders  to  respondent,  but  he  said,  “Never 
mind.  I  brought  my  own  papers  to  do.”  Respondent  proceeded  to  teach  math  to  the  students 
at  a  level  which  was  above  their  educational  or  cognitive  abilities.  He  did  not  have  the 
students  perform  their  reading  and  writing  assignments.  The  students  became  frustrated. 
Bezmalinovich  had  to  spend  time  keeping  the  students  calm.  She  kept  trying  to  tell 
respondent  about  the  classroom  schedule  and  what  the  students’  routines  and  assignments 
were  for  the  school  day  but  respondent  kept  ignoring  her.  Bezmalinovich  became  frustrated 
as  well  and  found  that  respondent  did  not  even  try  to  work  with  her  or  enlist  her  assistance 
with  the  special  education  students.  Bezmalinovich  had  been  a  teacher’s  assistant  in  a 
special  education  classroom  for  15  years  and  never  had  such  an  experience  with  a  substitute 
teacher. 

(E)  Throughout  the  school  day  on  April  22,  2013,  respondent  gave  candy  to 

the  students.  On  a  previous  assignment  at  the  school,  respondent  had  been  told  by  the 
principal,  Rena  Fairchild,  not  to  give  candy  to  the  students  due  to  health  concerns  about 
possible  allergies,  as  described  in  Finding  33(A)  below.  The  provision  of  candy  to  the 
special  education  students  was  inappropriate  in  that  the  classroom  had a  disciplinary 
structure  based  on  classroom  rules  and  the  rewarding  of  stickers,  fake  money,  and  “Goldfish” 
crackers  to  those  students  who  followed  the  rules,  helped  others,  and  were  respectful  to 
others.  Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  principal’s  directive  and  undermined  the  classroom 
disciplinary  structure. 

33. 

(A)  Onan  undetermined  date  in  April  2013,  Principal  Fairchild  learned  that 
respondent  had  given  candy  to  students  as  a  treat.  The  principal  held  an  informal  talk  with 
respondent  and  directed  him  not  to  give  candy  to  students  as  a  reward  or  treat  because  he  did 
not  know  whether  the  students  were  allergic  to  the  candy. 

(B)  On  April  25,  2013,  respondent  was  again  assigned  to  be  a  substitute 

teacher  for  a  kindergarten  teacher  at  Park  Western  Elementary  School.  When  he  arrived  in 
the  classroom  before  8:00  a.m.,  respondent  did  not  find  any  lesson  plans.  At  8:15  a.m., 
another  kindergarten  teacher  brought  him  a  schedule.  Respondent  thanked  the  teacher  for  the 

15

“plans”  and  the  other  teacher  said  the  papers  were  a  schedule  and  not  a  lesson  plan. 
Respondent  replied  the  papers  “were  no  help  anyway”  and  said  he  “was  just  being  polite.” 
His  statement  to  the  other  kindergarten  teacher,  who  was  just  trying  to  help  him,  was 
impolite  and  disrespectful. 

(C)  At  9:00  a.m.,  the  lesson  plans  prepared  by  the  regular  teacher  for  the 

school  day  arrived  in  respondent’s  kindergarten  class.  Principal  Fairchild  visited  the  class 
before  the  morning  recess  and  found  that  respondent  was  not  following  the  lesson  plans. 
Upon  seeing  the  principal,  respondent  forcefully  handed  a  paper  to  the  principal  and  asked 
her  to  make  copies  for  him.  The  principal  asked  respondent  if  the  paper  was  part  of  the 
lesson  plans  that  he  received  earlier.  Respondent  replied  that  he  could  not  understand  the 
lesson  plans.  He  then  aggressively  handed  the  lesson  plans  to  the  principal  and  told  her  to  try 
and  make  sense  of  the  lesson  plans.  Principal  Fairchild  reviewed  the  lesson  plans,  found 
them  to  be  thorough,  and  directed  respondent  to  follow  the  lesson  plans.  Respondent  replied 
that  he  found  it  difficult  to  follow  lesson  plans  when  they  don’t  arrive  until  an  hour  after  the 
start  of  school.  The  principal  told  respondent  to  review  the  lesson  plans,  and  she  began 
teaching  math  to  the  kindergarteners  as  outlined  in  the  lesson  plans  in  order  to  give 
respondent  the  time  to  review  the  lesson  plans.  Respondent  reviewed  the  lesson  plans  and 
re-assumed  teaching  the  class.  The  principal  left  the  classroom. 

(D)  After  lunch  around  1:00  p.m.,  Principal  Fairchild  returned  to  respondent’s 
classroom.  Respondent  was  not  teaching  from  the  lessons  plans  but,  instead,  was  having  the 
kindergarteners  write  numbers  on  worksheets  which  he  had  brought  to  the  classroom.  In 
other  words,  respondent  had  disobeyed  the  principal’s  directive  to  teach  the  students  in 
accordance  with  the  lessons  plans.  When  respondent  was  leaving  the  school  that  day, 
Principal  Fairchild  asked  respondent  to  meet  with  her  in  informal  conference  so  that  she 
could  discuss  his  conduct  and  teaching  that  day.  Respondent  became  angry,  told  the 
principal  that  they  had  already  talked  during  the  day,  and  refused  to  meet  with  her  without  a 
union  representative  being  present.  He  left  the  school  without  meeting  with  the  principal. 

34. 

(A)  On  May  22,  2013,  Principal  Fairchild  held  a  conference  with  respondent  to 

review  his  conduct  during  his  two  substitute  teaching  assignments  at  Park  Western 
Elementary  School  in  April  2013.  A  teacher’s  union  area  representative  and  a  school 
operations  coordinator  were  also  present  for  the  conference.  The  principal  discussed 
respondent’s  conduct  on  April  22  and  25,  2013,  described  above. 

(B)  With  respect  to  his  conduct  in  the  special  education  class,  respondent 
stated  that  Bezmalinovich’s  statements  were  not  true  and  that  the  teacher’s  assistant  had 
made  up  “nonsense  to  fit  her  needs.”  With  respect  to  his  giving  candy  to  students  on  April 
22,  2013,  respondent  replied  that  the  principal  was  treating  him  unequally  and  with 
prejudice.  He  stated  that  other  persons  bring  candy  to  the  classroom  and  that  he  was  giving 
out  candy  that  he  found  in  the  classroom  to  create  a  positive  classroom  environment  and  to 
help  the  students  to  succeed.  Respondent  claimed  that  the  principal  had  not  provided  him 
with  reasonable  accommodations  and  had  a  personal  agenda  that  he  found  “despicable.” 
With  respect  to  his  conduct  on  April  25,  2013,  respondent  stated  that  there  were  no  lesson 

16

plans  in  the  classroom  when  he  arrived  that  morning,  that  the  lesson  plans  did  not  arrive  until 
later  in  the  morning  so  that  he  could  read  not  them  before  the  start  of  class,  and  that  the 
classroom  was  chaotic. 

(C)  During  the  conference  on  May  22,  2013,  Principal  Fairchild  directed 

respondent  to  treat  all  staff  and  students  respectfully  and  to  follow  the  lesson  plans  written  by 
the  regular  teacher.  If  he  had  any  questions  about  the  lesson  plans,  respondent  was  directed 
to  ask  an  administrator  or  a  buddy  teacher  for  assistance.  Principal  Fairchild  also  reviewed 
the  Board  Resolution  regarding  the  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons  and  the  Employees 
Code  of  Ethics.  The  principal  felt  respondent’s  conduct  during  the  conference  was 
confrontational. 

35. 

Based  on  Finding  32  above,  respondent’s  conduct  in  the  special  education 

class  at  Park  Western  Elementary  School  on  April  22,  2013,  when  he  interrupted  and  failed 
to  follow  the  guidance  offered  by  the  teacher’s  assistant,  failed  to  follow  the  regular  teacher’s 
instructions  that  the  students  needed  routine  and  structure,  and  failed  to  implement  the  lesson 
plans,  and,  instead,  tried  to  teach  the  student  math  which  was  above  their  abilities,  was 
inappropriate  and  disrespectful  and  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  The  special 
education  students  became  frustrated  and  the  teacher’s  assistant  became  upset.  Respondent’s 
conduct  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  calling  for  the  creation  of  a  trusting, 
caring,  and  respectful  school  environment  and  positive  relationships,  and  the  Board 
Resolution  requiring  réspectful  treatment  of  all  persons. 

36. 

Based  on  Findings  33  —  34  above,  respondent’s  conduct  and  interactions  with 

Principal  Fairchild  at  Park  Western  Elementary  School  in  April  2013  were  inappropriate, 
disrespectful,  and  insubordinate.  He  failed  to  follow  the  principal’s  directive  not  to  give 
candy  to  students,  aggressively  handed  papers  to  the  principal  and  demanded  that  she  make 
copies  for  him,  failed  to  follow  the  principal’s  directive  to  implement  the  lesson  plans 
delivered  to  the  classroom,  and  angrily  refused  to  meet  with  the  principal  at  the  end  of  the 
school  day.  Respondent  was  likewise  disrespectful  towards  the  principal  during  the  May  22, 
2013  conference  when  he  accused  her  of  having  a  despicable  personal  agenda. 
Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional  and  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics  calling  for  the  creation  of  a  trusting,  caring,  and  respectful  school  environment  and 
positive  relationships,  and  the  Board  Resolution  requiring  respectful  treatment  of  all  persons. 

37. 

On  June  17,  2013,  following  the  conference  at  Park  Western  Elementary 

School,  respondent  sent  a  written  response  to  Principal  Fairchild.  With  respect  to  the 
kindergarten  class,  respondent  complained  that  the  lesson  plans  that  the  principal  directed 
him  to  follow  did  not  arrive  until  9:00  a.m.  and  he  did  not  have  a  chance  to  review  them 
before  the  start  of  school.  He  stated  that  the  principal  continued  to  interrupt  his  instruction 
while  she  tried  to  confer  with  him  and  direct  him  to  follow  the  lesson  pans.  Respondent 
claimed  that  he  “politely  asked”  the  principal  to  make  copies  of  a  math  lesson  because  she 
kept  interrupting  his  teaching  and  distracting  the  students.  With  respect  to  the  special 
education  class,  respondent  characterized  the  teacher’s  assistant  as  unkind  and  said  that  she 
did  not  help  and  lost  control  of  the  students  because  she  became  frustrated.  Respondent 

17

wrote  that  he  continued  to  conduct  himself  in  a  professional  manner  and  did  not  break  any 
District  policies.  He  asserted  that  he  did  not  do  anything  wrong,  lamented  a  lack  of  support 
and  professional  development  training,  and  claimed  that  he  was  being  subjected  to 
harassment  and  retaliation  because  of  his  work-related  injury.  Respondent  concluded  his 
response  by  stating  that  he  was  dedicating  his  time  and  money  to  offering  support  to  the 
students  of  the  District  through  his  on-line  website  called  “Mr.  Beequiet.com.” 

Notices  and  Statement  of  Charges 

38. 

(A)  In  or  before  May  2014,  the  District  re-assigned  respondent  to  the 

Educational  Service  Center  South,  Human  Resources  Division,  pending  an  investigation  of 
allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct. 

(B)  At  a  conference  on  May  8,  2014,  the  District  served  respondent  with  a 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  which  set  forth  causes  of 
unprofessional  or  immoral  conduct  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school 
laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  public  schools  by 
the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  governing  board  of  the  District.  The  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  alleged  45  charges  or  incidents,  and 
attached  to  the  Notices  were  conference  memoranda,  witness  statements,  evaluations, 
notices,  and  documents  evidencing  the  provision  of  assistance  and  guidance  to  respondent. 
Under  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension,  a  school 
administrator  recommended  that  respondent  be  dismissed  from  the  District  and  suspended 
for  15  days.  Respondent  received  copies  of  the  Notices  and  attachments  thereto  at  the 
conference. 

(C)  On  June  3,  2014,  the  District  held  a  Skelly  hearing  or  meeting  on  the 
charges  contained  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  Notice  of  Suspension.  The 
charges  were  affirmed  following  the  Skelly  hearing  or  meeting.  On  June  5,  2014,  respondent 
acknowledged  that  he  received  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  Notice  of  Suspension. 

(D)  On  August  4,  2014,  respondent  was  directed  to  remain  at  home  during  his 
re-assignment  to  the  Educational  Service  Center  South.  On  November  17,  2014,  respondent 
took  a  two-day  leave  of  absence  from  his  job  with  the  District  due  to  illness,  injury, 
disability,  or  a  medical  appointment. 

39. 

(A)  On  October  31,  2014,  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  made  and  filed  by 

Justo  H.  Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District. 
Said  administrator  alleged  that  cause  existed  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and 
44939  to  suspend  and  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment,  and  verified  on  information 
and  belief  that  the  charges  were  true  and  correct. 

(B)  On  November  18,  2014,  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  presented  and  filed 

with  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  at  a  closed  session  meeting.  Pursuant  to  the 

18

action  and  resolution  of  the  Board  of  Education,  the  District  duly  notified  respondent  of  the 
Board’s  intention  to  dismiss  him  from  his  employment  within  30  days  unless  he  demanded  a 
hearing. 

(C)  On  or  about  December  1,  2014,  respondent  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing, 
acknowledging  receipt  of  the  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  and 
demanding  a  hearing  under  Education  Code  sections  44930  through  44988  to  determine 
whether  there  was  cause  to  dismiss  him  from  his  employment  with  the  District.  This  matter 
ensued. 

Respondent’s  Evidence 

40. 

(A)  On  May  19,  2003,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory  evaluation  of  his 
teaching  performance  at  the  Lomita  Math  and  Science  Magnet  School  for  the  spring  2003 
semester.  The  evaluation  showed,  in  part,  that  respondent  adhered  to  curricular  objectives, 
provided  an  effective  classroom  environment,  and  maintained  appropriate  professional 
relationships  and  communications  with  students,  parents,  and  staff.  He  was  commended  for 
delivering  a  standards-based  curriculum  to  students  of  diverse  backgrounds  and  abilities. 

(B)  On  June  13,  2005,  the  assistant  principal  at  Lomita  Math  and  Science 

Magnet  School  conducted  an  evaluation  of  respondent’s  teaching  of  reading  and  math  during 
the  spring  2005  semester  and  issued  an  Evaluation  of  Instructional  Personnel.  Respondent 
was  observed  in  the  classroom  on  two  occasions  and  had  two  conferences.  He  was  found  to 
have  met  all  expectations  or  standards.  For  example,  he  was  found  to  have  prepared  lessons 
designed  to  stimulate  and  challenge  his  students  and  implemented  classroom  procedures  and 
routines  that  supported  student  learning.  Respondent  was  commended  for  his  teaching 
strategies  and  promotion  of  a  high  level  of  student  achievement. 

(C)  On  December  17,  2008,  due  to  an  allegation  regarding  a  student,  the 

District  temporarily  assigned  respondent  to  the  Local  District  8  Office  in  Gardena.  He  was 
directed,  in  part,  not  to  go  to  the  campus  of  the  Lomita  Math  and  Science  Magnet  School. 
On  October  5,  2009,  after  an  investigation  of  the  student’s  allegation  was  completed,  the 
District  re-assigned  respondent  to  Amestoy  Elementary  School  as  a  contract  pool  teacher. 

(D)  On  June  21,  2010,  respondent  received  a  satisfactory  evaluation  of  his 

performance  as  a  contract  pool  teacher  in  English  Language  Arts  and  reading  laboratory  at 
Amestoy  Elementary  School.  He  met  all  of  the  performance  standards,  including  supporting 
student  learning  and  planning  and  designing  instruction.  Respondent  was  commended  for 
being  helpful  in  ancillary  work  duties. 

(E)  On  July  1,  2010,  respondent  was  re-assigned  to  Compton  Elementary 
School.  For  the  2011-2012  school  year,  he  was  assigned  to  be  a  contract  pool  teacher  at 
Crestwood  Elementary  School. 

19

41. 

In  support  of  his  desired  continued  employment  with  the  District,  respondent 

In  addition,  respondent  presented  a  character  reference  letter  from 

presented  several  complimentary  notes  written  by  students  from  a  class  that  he  taught  in 
December  2013. 
Madelyn  Luera  dated  December  10,  2012.  Luera  was  or  is  a  teacher  of  special  education 
students  in  the  fourth  through  sixth  grades  at  Crestwood  Street  Elementary  School. 
Respondent  collaborated  with  and  helped  Luera  for  two  school  years.  Luera  found 
respondent  was a  very  helpful  and  knowledgeable  teacher  who  was  able  to  modify  and 
compartmentalize  the  lessons  or  curriculum  to  meet  the  students’  individual  goals.  He 
prepared  many  structured  lessons  in  math,  implemented  behavioral  strategies,  and  provided 
praise  and  encouragement  to  the  students.  Luera  described  respondent  as  a  well  organized, 
hard  working,  and  great  teacher.  Respondent  presented  one  witness,  Martin  Oghigian,  Jr.,  a 
former  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  Respondent  and  Oghigian  met  in  2008  when 
they  were  both  reassigned  to  the  Local  District  8  Office.  Respondent  attempted  to  elicit 
testimony  from  Oghigian  about  his  own  disciplinary  case  and  his  personal  opinions  about  the 
District,  but  those  lines  of  inquiry  were  not  allowed  on  the  grounds  of  relevance. 

42. 

During  his  case-in-chief,  respondent  took  the  witness  stand  but  then  stated  that 

he  was  not  going  to  present  any  direct  testimony  but  would  answer  questions  on  cross- 
examination  by  the  District’s  counsel.  As  established  by  his  testimony,  with  respect  to  his 
substitute  teaching  assignment  at  Cabrillo  Elementary  School  in  October  2012,  respondent 
admitted  that  he  whistled  loudly  at  the  students  in  class  but  he  did  so  because  the  students 
were  loud  and  he  wanted  to  quiet  them  down  and  gain  their  attention.  He  does  not  believe 
that  whistling  at  the  students  was  demeaning.  He  denied  yelling  at  the  students  but  stated 
that  he  raised  his  voice  so  that  he  could  gain  control  of  the  classroom.  He  denied  telling  the 
students  that  they  were  the  “worst  class  ever”  but  admitted  using  the  word  “stupid”  to 
possibly  refer  to  lesson  plans  and  to  attempt  to  be  humorous. 

43. 

(A)  As  further  established  by  his  testimony,  respondent  is  familiar  with  and 
knows  the  requirements  of  the  California  Standards  and  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  and  Policy  against  corporal  punishment,  and  the 
Board  Resolution  abolishing  corporal  punishment.  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not 
violate  any  of  the  District’s  policies.  He  stated  that  he  did  not  throw  objects  at  students  or 
engage  in  corporal  punishment.  Respondent  testified  that  classrooms  were  not  clean  and  he 
was  not  given  reasonable  accommodations  for  his  disability  or  medical  condition  or 
sufficient  time  to  prepare  for  classes.  He  stated  that  he  had  cause  to  refuse  a  substitute 
teaching  assignment  due  to  the  lack  of  reasonable  accommodations. 

(B)  Respondent  presented  no  probative  evidence  about  any  medical  condition 
or  work-related  injury  or  any  requests  for  reasonable  accommodations.  He  did  wear  a  neck 
brace  and  a  medication  patch  on  his  neck  at  times  during  the  hearing  and  appeared  at  times  to 
be  in  discomfort.  While  he  was  relatively  candid  in  his  testimony  and  argument,  respondent 
demonstrated  no  remorse  for  or  insight  into  any  of  his  actions  that  were  the  subject  of  the 
Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  and  he  was,  at  times  during  the  hearing,  not  respectful 
of  the  proceedings. 

20

44. 

In  his  closing  argument,  respondent  argued  that  he  has  always  wanted  to  be  a 

teacher  but  the  District  prevented  him  from  doing  his  job  as  a  teacher  by  maintaining 
unkempt  and  disorganized  classrooms,  allowing  teachers  to  prepare  inadequate  lesson  plans, 
and  having  inadequate  educational  supplies.  He  contended  that  he  was  prevented  from 
becoming  a  full-time  teacher  and  was  not  provided  with  professional  development  training. 
He  argued  that  he  was  afforded  no  respect  as  a  pool  or  substitute  teacher  and  was  subjected 
to  harassment  and  discrimination  due  to  his  disability  or  work-related  injury  and  his  status  as 
a  veteran  teacher  earning  a  higher  salary.  None  of  respondent’s  arguments  or  contentions 
that  he  made  during  his  closing  argument  were  established  or  supported  by  the  evidence  in 
this  matter.  During  his  closing  argument,  respondent  did  state  that  he  tossed  keys  to  a 
student  and  said  “shut  it,”  but  did  not  say  “shut  up”  to  students. 

45. 

Allegations  contained  in  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  for  which 

there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this  Decision  were  deemed  unproven  or  considered 
irrelevant  or  surplussage  upon  consideration  of  all  of  the  evidence. 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  makes  the  following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

iF 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  the  District  is 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  standard 
of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  for  unsatisfactory  performance  as  a 
contract  pool  teacher  and  substitute  teacher  for  the  District,  based  on  Findings  1  —  44  above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (b),  the  governing  board  of 

a  school  district  shall  not  act  upon  any  charges  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  unless  it  acts 
in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  either  subdivision  (b)(1)  or  (b)(2).  Under  subdivision 
(b)(1),  the  governing  board  or  its  authorized  representative  must  give  written  notice  of  the 
unsatisfactory  performance  at  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  specifying 
the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to 
furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  to  overcome  the  grounds 
for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the  evaluation  and  assessment  of  the 
performance  of  the  certificated  employee  under  Education  Code  section  44660  et  seq. 

21

Under  section  44938,  subdivision  (b)(2),  the  governing  board  or  its  authorized 

representative  may  act  during  the  time  period  composed  of  the  last  one-fourth  of  the  school 
days  it  has  scheduled  for  purposes  of  computing  apportionments  in  any  fiscal  year  if,  prior  to 
the  beginning  of  that  time  period,  the  governing  board  or  its  authorized  representative  has 
given  the  employee  written  notice  of  the  unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature 
thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the 
employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  to  overcome  the  grounds  for  the 
charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the  evaluation  and  assessment  of  the  performance  of 
the  certificated  employee  under  Education  Code  section  44660  et  seq. 

In  this  matter,  on  May  8,  2014,  a  school  administrator  held  a  conference  with 

respondent  and  served  him  with  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  the  Notice  of 
Suspension.  The  notices  alleged  causes  for  dismissal  and  suspension  and  set  forth  45 
charges  or  incidents  and  included  conference  memoranda,  written  witness  statements, 
evaluations,  and  notices  containing  assistance  and  guidance  that  were  previously  provided  to 
respondent.  Six  months  later,  on  November  18,  2014,  and  following  a  Skelly  hearing  or 
meeting,  the  District  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges  with  the  governing  board  and  notified 
respondent  of  the  intention  to  dismiss  him  from  his  employment.  On  December  12,  2014, 
the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  was  duly  made  and  filed.  The  evidence 
demonstrated  that  the  District  gave  prior  written  notice  to  respondent  of  the  charges  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44938  and  may  act  upon 
the  charges. 
demonstrated  unsatisfactory  performance,  as  forth  in  Conclusions  of  Law  3  —7  below. 

Respondent’s  conduct  as  a  contract  pool  teacher  and  substitute  teacher 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  for  immoral  conduct  in  that  it 
respondent  inflicted  physical  abuse  and  corporal  punishment  upon  elementary  school 
students,  based  on  Finding  30(B)  above. 

In  general,  immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters  but  also  includes  conduct  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness,  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  towards 
good  order  in  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d 
808,  811.)  Respondent  inflicted  physical  abuse  and  corporal  punishment  upon  elementary 
school  students  by  throwing a  spelling  packet  and  scratching a  student’s  face,  hitting  a 
student  on  his  head  with  keys,  and  not  allowing  a  student  to  go  to  the  restroom. 
Respondent’s  disregard  of  the  safety  of  the  students  as  well  as  the  District’s  policy  for  the 
abolition  of  corporal  punishment  demonstrated  a  callousness  and  predilection  to  use  physical 
force  that  was  immoral  for  a  school  teacher. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  his  persistent  violation  of 

22

or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the  schools  of  the 
District  by  its  governing  board,  based  on  Findings  12,  18,  29,  30(A),  35,  and  36  above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events 
or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered 
persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito 
Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
1176,  1180-1181.) 

On  several  occasions  from  October  2012  through  June  2013  and  at  four 

separate  elementary  schools,  respondent  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics, 
Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  Board  Resolution  for  the  respectful  treatment  of  others,  and 
the  District’s  policy  for  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment.  Respondent’s  violations  of 
these  policies  and  regulations  of  the  District  were  persistent  and  ongoing  throughout  the 
2012-2013  school  year.  He  persisted  in  and  continued  disregarding  and  violating  these 
policies  and  regulations  despite  having  been  counseled  and  directed  to  comply  with  the 
policies  and  regulations  in  conferences  with  school  site  administrators.  Respondent  ignored 
the  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  and  did  not  reform  his  conduct. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  unprofessional  conduct, 
based  on  Findings  12,  18,  29,  30,  35,  and  36  above.  In  this  matter,  the  clear  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent,  a  substitute  elementary  school  teacher,  engaged  in 
unprofessional  conduct  by  speaking  disrespectfully  to  and  about  administrators  and 
colleagues,  disobeying  directives  of  administrators,  failing  to  follow  or  to  implement  lesson 
plans  prepared  by  the  regular  classroom  teachers,  yelling  at  and  speaking  in  a  demeaning 
manner  to  students,  and  engaging  in  corporal  punishment  or  physical  abuse  of  students. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  the  governing  board  of 
a  school  district  shall  not  act  upon  any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct,  unless  at  least  45 
calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  governing  board  or  its  authorized 
representative  has  given  the  employee  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such 
particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  Thus,  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  requires  a  school 
district  to  give  a  45-day  written  notice  of  the  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  against  a 
permanent  certificated  employee.  Here,  the  District  gave  respondent  the  requisite  prior 
written  notice  of  the  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct,  as  discussed  in  Conclusions  of  Law 
2  above. 

As  one  of  the  specific  grounds  for  which  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
may  be  dismissed  from  employment  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  unprofessional 

23

conduct  has  a  broad  import,  for  it  refers  generally  to  conduct  demonstrating  unfitness. 
However,  a  particular  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  not  only 
unprofessional  conduct  but  also  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  a  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  prescribed  rules  and  regulations.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174-1175;  Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953) 
41  Cal.2d  546,  551.)  Unprofessional  conduct  may  be  viewed  as  a  lesser  included  form  of 
proscribed  behavior  within  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Conduct  constituting  evident 
unfitness  for  service  will  often  constitute  unprofessional  conduct,  but  the  converse  is  not 
true.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.  App.4th  1429,  1445.) 

6. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  in  that 
respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit  to  be  a  teacher  due  to  a 
defect  in  temperament  that  cannot  be  remedied,  based  on  Findings  12,  18,  29,  30,  35,  and  36 
above. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1444- 
1445.)  Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(Id.  at  1444.) 

In  general,  the  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  to  decide 
whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  696.) 
If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  unfitness  is 
evident,  i.e.  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.) 

In  the  Morrison  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 

immorality  or  unprofessional  conduct  are  raised  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case,  the  applicable 
standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra, 
1  Cal.3d.  at  p.  229.)  The  terms  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  have  been  held  too  vague, 
standing  alone,  and  must  be  applied  to  a  specific  occupation  and  given  context  by  reference 
to  fitness  for  the  performance  of  that  occupation.  (Basset  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1988)  201  CalApp.3d  1444,  1453.) 
Morrison  case  requires  that  the  determination  whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  be  based  on  an 
objective  and  analytical  approach  consisting  of a  review of the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an 
assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  criteria  which  include:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  respondent;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity, 

The 

24

if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7) 
the  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher.  These  factors  assist  a  board  of  education  in  determining  whether  a 
teacher’s  fitness  to  teach,  and  whether  the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and 
overall  impact  on  his  or  her  students  are  likely  to  meet  the  standards  of  the  board  of 
education.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp.  229-  230.) 

Based  on  the  mandatory  application  of  the  Morrison  standard,  the  Commission 

on  Professional  Competence  has  broad  discretion  in  matters  of  teacher  discipline  and 
dismissal.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged 
conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as  measured  against  the 
Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman 
(1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220.) 

T 

Discussion—The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that,  during  the  2012- 

2013  school  year,  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  with  students,  teachers,  and 
administrators,  which  violated  the  District’s  policies  and  codes  for  ethical  conduct, 
professional  conduct  with  students,  respectful  conduct  towards  others,  and  avoidance  of 
corporal  punishment.  Respondent  engaged  in  his  conduct  on  several  occasions  at  four 
schools  and  even  after  he  was  given  assistance  and  guidance  not  to  engage  in  such  conduct. 

A  review  of  respondent’s  conduct  under  the  Morrison  factors  demonstrates 

that  his  conduct  was  unprofessional  and  that  he  is  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher.  First, 
respondent’s  conduct  in  the  classroom  adversely  affected  students  and  fellow  teachers. 
Students  were  made  to  feel  sad  and  scared  by  respondent’s  yelling.  One  student’s  face  was 
scratched  when  respondent  threw  her  spelling  packet.  Students  became  frustrated  when 
respondent  failed  to  follow  their  regular  routine  and  the  lesson  plan  suggested  by  the  regular 
teacher.  A  teacher  was  made  to  feel  uncomfortable  by  respondent’s  inappropriate  comments 
and  gestures.  Another  teacher  found  that  posters  that  he  placed  in  his  classroom  had  been 
torn  down  by  respondent  and  left  on  the  floor.  Second,  respondent’s  conduct  was  proximate 
in  time,  having  occurred  over  the  course  of  one  school  year  from  October  2012  through  June 
2013,  which  was  only  two  years  ago.  Third,  respondent  holds  a  credential  to  teach 
elementary  school,  which  allows  him  to  continue  to  teach  and  affect  young  students. 

Fourth,  there  were  aggravating  factors  to  respondent’s  conduct.  He  hurt 
children  by  throwing  objects  such  as  keys  and  a  work  packet.  He  yelled  at  students  and 
spoke  to  them  in  derogatory  and  demeaning  ways.  He  introduced  himself  to  a  class  as  “Mr. 
Bee  Quiet,”  which  was  inappropriate,  for  such  a  name  would  have  suggested  to  the  children 
that  he  did  not  want  to  hear  anything  from  them.  He  taught  math  to  students  that  was  beyond 
their  grade  level  or  cognitive  ability. 
unprofessional  conduct  were  not  praiseworthy  but  selfish.  He  was  apparently  frustrated  by 
his  assignment  as  a  contract  pool  teacher  and  substitute  teacher  and  his  inability  to  find  or  to 
move  into  a  full-time  teaching  position  at  an  elementary  school  within  the  District.  Rather 
than  perform  his  substitute  teaching  assignments  in  a  professional  manner  and  try  to  build  a 

Fifth,  respondent’s  motives  for  engaging  in  his 

25

reputation  as  an  effective  and  thoughtful  teacher  who  is  respectful  and  trustworthy, 
respondent  chose  to  take  out  his  frustrations  on  young  students  who  were  impressionable  and 
vulnerable.  In  addition,  respondent  demonstrated  that  he  is  incapable  of  being  a  cooperative 
and  helpful  member  of  a  school  faculty.  He  constantly  spoke  in  a  disrespectful  tone  and 
manner  to  site  administrators  and  failed  to  comply  with  their  directives,  such  as  to  follow 
lesson  plans  and  not  to  give  out  candy  to  students. 

Sixth,  there  is  a  strong  likelihood  that  respondent’s  unprofessional  conduct 
would  recur  or  continue  despite  the  passage  of  time  or  even  with  additional  assistance  or 
guidance  or  professional  development.  On  several  occasions,  respondent  sat  for  conferences 
with  school  administrators  and  given  guidance  and  assistance.  In  those  conferences  and  in 
the  hearing  in  this  matter,  respondent  failed  to  take  responsibility  for  his  actions  which  were 
detrimental  to  the  educational  process  and  the  development  of  the  children.  He  tended  to 
blame  the  students  for  talking  too  much  and  for  not  paying  attention  to  him,  the  regular 
classroom  teachers  for  purportedly  being  unprepared  or  incompetent,  and  the  administrators 
for  allegedly  interfering  with  his  assignments.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  any  insight 
into  the  effect  that  his  conduct  could  have  on  the  students  or  show  any  remorse  for  his 
actions.  Seventh,  disciplinary  action  would  not  have  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  on 
respondent’s  constitutional  rights. 

Based  on  the  foregoing  analysis  under  the  factors  set  forth  in  the  Morrison 

case,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent’s  conduct  was 
unprofessional  and  indicative  of  unfitness  for  service.  Respondent’s  yelling  at  and  speaking 
to  the  students  in  a  demeaning  manner  and  his  infliction  of  corporal  punishment  on  students 
were  particularly  troubling,  for  such  conduct  shows  that  he  lacks  the  compassion  and 
patience  to  be  an  effective  teacher  of  children.  He  is  also  easily  frustrated  and  can  become 
confrontational  and  argumentative  with  administrators.  Respondent’s  unfitness  for  service  is 
evident,  arises  from  these  defects  in  his  temperament,  and  cannot  be  remedied  with  further 
guidance  or  training,  especially  in  the  absence  of  any  recognition  on  his  part  of  his 
wrongdoing.  As  such,  respondent  is  deemed  evidently  unfit  to  serve  as  a  certificated 
employee  for  the  District  and  must  be  terminated  from  his  employment  with  the  District. 

/} 
// 
Hf 

26

  

WHEREFORE,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  makes  the 

following  Order: 

ORDER 

Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  Case  Number  2014120109,  filed  and 

issued  by  complainant  Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  on  behalf  of  the 
Board  of  Education  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  and  against  respondent 
Robert  Beliveau,  is  sustained,  based  on  Conclusions  of  Law  1  —  7  above,  jointly  and  for  all. 
Respondent  Robert  Beliveau  is  terminated  or  dismissed  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

Dated 

/ /¢  fP-O(§ 

Muerte 

Kristi  Harabedian,  Commission  Member 
Teacher,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education 

Dated:  a)  tft  yES 

Dated: 

!  an 

c  Ay 

Leas 
        
mhher  ya 

¢ 

\— 

eo 

 Aetor 

|  N 

Jeffrey  Fagobs, Cémmission  Member 
Retired  Teacher 
Long  Beach  Unified  School  District 

phd — 

Vincent  Noting 
AdministrativeYLaw  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Commission  Member 

27

  

