  

  

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against, 

GLORY  RANGEL, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2014050417 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 

Angeles,  California,  on  March  2,  3,  11,  12,  13,  16,  17,  18,  and  19,  2015.  The  Commission 
consisted  initially  of  Deanna  Clark,  designated  by  Complainant,  Mary  Ann Meysenburg, 
designated  by  Respondent,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided.  After  completing  one  day  of 
hearing  on  March  2,  2015,  Ms.  Meysenburg  advised  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
on  the  morning  of  March  3,  2015  that,  due  to  a  medical  injury,  she  could  no  longer  serve  on 
the  Commission.  Consequently,  on  the  second  day  of  hearing,  March  3,  2015,  ALJ  Garrett 
advised  the  parties  of  Ms.  Meysenburg’s  status,  and  continued  the  hearing  until  Respondent 
could  designate  a  replacement  panel  member.  On  March  10,  2015,  Respondent  designated  a 
replacement  panel  member,  Mitzi  Okamoto.’  The  hearing  resumed  on  March  11,  2015  and 
proceeded  day-to-day  to  March  19,  2015. 

Michele  M.  Goldsmith,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District  (District  or  Complainant),  Ronald  C.  Lapekas,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

"On  March  10,  2015,  the  parties  executed  a  stipulation  (Exhibit  96)  agreeing  that  Ms. 

Okamoto  was  qualified  to  serve  as  a  Commission  panel  member  based  on  her  lifetime 
credential  and  her  service  as  a  second  and  third  grade  elementary  school  teacher.  The 
stipulation  also  stated  that  Respondent  and  Respondent’s  counsel  had  been  informed  that  Ms. 
Okamoto  was  a  retired  teacher  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District.  Respondent  and 
Respondent’s  counsel  knowingly  waived  any  objection  to  Ms.  Okamoto  serving  as  a 
replacement  Commission  member.  In  that  regard,  and  pursuant  to  a  written  stipulation 
between  the  parties,  Ms.  Okamoto,  prior  to  her  service  as  a  replacement  Commission 
member,  reviewed  the  transcript  from  the  first  day  of  hearing,  specifically  Complainant’s 
opening  statement,  the  direct  testimony  of  Mark  Paz,  and  the  cross-examination  of  Mark  Paz, 
which  had  begun,  but  had  not  been  completed.  Ms.  Okamoto  also  reviewed  trial  briefs 
submitted  by  the  parties,  and  Exhibits  25,  26,  27,  and  28,  which  had  been  introduced  into 
evidence  on  the  first  day  of  hearing. 

 

  

  

  

  

Respondent  Glory  Rangel  (Respondent).  The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on 
March  19,  2015, 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  as  a  second 
grade  teacher  at  Tenth  Street  Elementary  School.  District  alleged  that  Respondent 
demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (ay(1)),?  unsatisfactory  performance  (§ 
44932,  subd.  (a)(4)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)),  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  her  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)  (7)),  and  a  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  employing  district  (§  44939).  District  seeks  Respondent’s  dismissal. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  25,  2014,  District  served  Respondent  with  a  Statement  of  Charges 
executed  by  Justo  H.  Avila,  Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  acting  in  his  official 
capacity,  on  April  14,  2014.  On  May  15,  2014,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  an 
Accusation.  On  June  2,  2014,  Respondent  served  her  Special  Notice  of  Defense. 

A. 

Background  Information:  Performance  History  (April  25,  2010  ~  May  31,  201 2) 

2. 

Respondent  began  teaching  at  District’s  school,  Tenth  Street  Elementary 

School  (Tenth  Street),  as  a  probationary  new  hire  on  August  31,  1998.  Respondent  achieved 
permanent  status  on  July  1,  2000,  and  continued  in  that  capacity  at  Tenth  Street  as  a  teacher 
of  several  grade  levels.  Specifically,  Respondent  began  at  Tenth  Street  as  a  kindergarten 
teacher,  taught  third  grade  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  through  the  2009-2010  school  year, 
and  then  taught  second  grade  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  to  April  25,  2014.  During 
Respondent’s  tenure  at  Tenth  Street,  the  student  body  consisted  mostly  of  children  of 
Hispanic  descent,  whose  primary  language  was  Spanish.  Tenth  Street  was  a  Title  One 
school,  which  mandated  reduced  class  sizes  of  20  students  per  class.  The  school  day  at 
Tenth  Street  began  at  8:00  a.m. 

@) 

2009-2010  School  Year 

3. 

During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  when  Respondent  taught  third  grade, 
Linda  Ariyasu  and  Mark  Paz,  who  were  Tenth  Street’s  principal  and  assistant  principal, 
respectively,  visited  classrooms  randomly  on  a  daily  basis.  The  purpose  for  these  visits  was 
to  monitor  teachers’  performance  and  student  behavior,  and  offer  guidance  and  assistance 
when  necessary. 

These  observations  ranged  generally  from  10  to  30  minutes. 

4. 

On  May  3,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  entered  Respondent’s  class  at  9:09  a.m.  and 

remained  until  9:33  a.m.  When  she  first  arrived  to  Respondent’s  class,  Respondent  was  on 

2 

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

  

 

  

her  computer  certifying  attendance,  instead  of  at  8:00  a.m.,  when  the  school  day  began,  and 
not  circulating  around  the  classroom.  Consequently,  some  students  were  not  on  task 
completing  their  lesson  on  suffixes,  and  were  talking  and  throwing  things.  Additionally,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noticed  some  students  were  confused  about  what  a  suffix  was  and  when  to  use  one. 
Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  her  observations  on  a  Classroom  Observation  form,  and  provided  a  copy 
of  it  to  Respondent.  The  Classroom  Observation  form  included  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  list  of 
assistance  and  guidance,  including  suggestions  that  Respondent  be  clear  about  the  lesson 
objective,  to  watch  the  lesson  pacing,  to  find  ways  to  engage  students  in  the  learning  that 
helped  monitor  for  understanding,  and,  at  the  end  of  the  lesson,  summarize  the  objective  and 
what  the  students  learned.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  attached  a  flyer  from  an  online  professional 
development  program  for  effective  teaching  and  encouraged  Respondent  to  consider 
attending  it. 

5. 

On  May  5,  2010,  Mr.  Paz  entered  Respondent’s  class  at  8:20  a.m.  and  noted 
the  learning  goal  and  subject  matter  of  Respondent's  instruction  was  unclear.  Respondent 
neither  verbalized  the  lesson’s  objective  to  the  students,  nor  had  written  the  objective  on  the 
white  board.  When  Mr.  Paz  examined  Respondent’s  plan  book,  there  was  nothing  in  her 
plan  book  that  correlated  with  the  lesson  she  was  teaching  (i.e.,  crayfish).  Mr.  Paz  noted  his 
observations  on  a  “Classroom  Observation”  form,  and  provided  a  copy  of  it  to Respondent. 
Mr.  Paz  also  verbally  reminded  Respondent  to  include  objectives  in  her  plan  book. 

6. 

On  May  6,  2010,  Mr.  Paz  entered  Respondent’s  class  again  at  1:35  p.m.  and 
noted  the  students  were  off-task  and  roaming  the  room.  Respondent’s  plan  book  did  not 
include  any  information  setting  forth  what  the  students  were  supposed  to  be  doing  at  that 
time.  Mr.  Paz  noted  his  observations  on  a  Classroom  Observation  form,  and  provided  a  copy 
of  it  to  Respondent. 

7. 

On  May  7,  2010,  Mr.  Paz  entered  Respondent’s  room  at  7:55  a.m.,  when  the 

students  were  supposed  to  be  completing  an  Open  Court  Reading  Program  (Open  Court) 
skills  assessment.  Mr.  Paz  noted  that  all  of  the  students,  except  for  one,  were  not  doing 
anything  in  relation  to  Open  Court.  Respondent  asked  one  of  the  students  what  page  in  the 
book  should  the  class  be,  resulting  in  Mr.  Paz’s  conclusion  that  Respondent  was  not 
prepared.  Mr.  Paz  noted  his  observations  on  a  Classroom  Observation  form,  and  provided  a 
copy  of  it  to  Respondent. 

8. 

Because  of  what  he  observed  on  May  5,  6,  and  7,  2010,  Mr.  Paz  held  a 

conference  with  Respondent  on  May  10,  2010.  During  the  conference,  Mr.  Paz  directed 
Respondent,  among  other  things,  to  be  prepared  and  to  have  comprehensive  plans  written  in 
her  plan  book  that  included  clear  objectives  of  each  lesson.  Mr.  Paz  also  told  Respondent 
that  when  he  entered  her  classroom,  he  often  found  her  on  the  computer  and  not  monitoring 

 

*  The  Open  Court  Reading  Program  was  a  comprehensive  English/Language  Arts 
reading  and  writing  program  adopted  by  District  for  its  elementary  school  students.  Open 
Court  was  known  for  its  systematic  instruction  in  phonological  and  phonemic  awareness  and 

phonics.   
  

  

  

the  students.  Mr.  Paz  counseled  Respondent  to  limit  her  time  on  the  computer  and  spend  that 
time  monitoring  her  class  instead. 

(2) 

2009-2010  Stull  Evaluation 

9. 

On  May  19,  2010,  Mr.  Paz  prepared  an  “Evaluation  of  Instructional  Personnel 

Final  Evaluation,”  also  known  as  a  Stull  evaluation,  of  Respondent’s  performance  for  the 
2009-2010  school  year.  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Mr.  Paz  noted 
Respondent  needed  improvement  in  guiding  all  students  to  be  self-directed  and  assess  their 
own  learning,  and  engaging  student  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities. 
Mr.  Paz  commented  that  Respondent  failed  to  meet  the  varied  needs  of  her  students  and  did 
not  differentiate  instruction  for  gifted  students,  and  Respondent  demonstrated  no  evidence 
that  Respondent  engaged  students  in  problem-solving  and critical-thinking. 

10. 

_In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Paz  noted Respondent 

required  improvement  in  demonstrating  evidence  of  short-term  and  long-term  plans  to  foster 
student  learning  and  achievement  of  the  State  Standards,  and  using  instructional  strategies, 
materials,  resources,  and  technologies  that  are  appropriate  to  the  subject  matter.  The 
evaluation  also  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  plan  instruction  to  ensure  that  all  groups  of 
students  had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum.  Mr.  Paz  commented  that  Respondent’s  short 
and  longer-term  planning  needed  to  be  focused  on  grade  level  standards  and  addressing  the 
needs  of  all  of  the  students.  Mr.  Paz  additionally  commented  that  Respondent’s  lessons  were 
inconsistent  with  District’s  pacing  plans. 

11. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Mr.  Paz  noted  Respondent  needed 

improvement  in  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  support 
student  learning,  and  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively.  Mr.  Paz  commented  that 
Respondent  needed  to  maintain  rules  and  procedures  designed  to  support  student  learning. 

12. 

In  the  area  of  developing  as  a  professional  educator,  Respondent  required 
improvement  in  working  with  colleagues  to  improve  professional  practice,  and  providing 
effective  supervision  of  students.  Mr.  Paz  commented  that  Respondent  needed  to  continue  to 
work  with  grade  level  colleagues  to  improve  her  professional  practice. 

13. 

Respondent’s  overall  evaluation  was  “below  standard  performance.”  Mr.  Paz 

included  a  three-page  attachment  to  Respondent’s  Stull  evaluation,  which  listed  specific 
deficiencies,  recommendations,  and  assistance  to  be  provided.  In  the  area  of  specific 
deficiencies,  Mr.  Paz  stated  that  Respondent:  (1)  failed  to  prepare  for  and  teach  lessons  per 
lesson  plans  which  affected  student  learning  and  resulted  in  loss  of  instructional  time;  (2) 
failed  to  teach  a  directed  lesson‘  with  clear,  rigorous  instructional  objectives  with  explicit 

 

*  A  directed  lesson  involves  Stating  clear  objectives,  modeling  and  explaining  the 
concept,  practicing  the  concept  with  the  students,  instructing  the  students  to  practice  the 

concept  independently,  and  assessing  for  evidence  the  students  mastered  the  objective.   
  

  

  

and  purposeful  modeling  of  student  expectations;  (3)  failed  to  properly  evaluate  and  monitor 
student  progress;  failed  to  consistently  use  data  to  adjust  teaching  to  address  the  instructional 
needs  of  all  students,  resulting  in  a  classroom  climate  that  lacked  fairness  and  respect  for 
Students;  and  (4)  lacked  focus  and  attention  during  professional  development  and  grade  level 
meetings  which  adversely  impacted  instructional  practice. 

14, 

Mr.  Paz  recommended  that  Respondent  (1)  prepare  and  deliver  daily  lessons  as 
planned;  (2)  teach  the  mandated  District  core  programs  with  fidelity  so  that  all  students  could 
develop  the  routines  and  procedures  that  help  acquire  the  skills  and  strategies  to  be  effective 
learners;  (3)  use  elements  of  an  effective  directed  lesson  to  guide  teaching,  including  clear 
instructional  objectives,  check  for  student  understanding,  and  re-teaching;  (4)  initiate 
opportunities  for  students  to  engage  in  their  learning  and  explain  their  thinking;  (5) 
incorporate  concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  professional  development  thinking;  (6)  use 
data  and  strategies  to  effectively  monitor  and  evaluate  student  progress  and  guide  the 
instructional  program  to  meet  the  needs  of  each  student;  (7)  differentiate  instruction  for 
students  with  differing  abilities  and  language  developmental  levels;  (8)  consult  with  content 
area  coaches  on  a  regular  basis  to  address  instructional  issues:  (9)  improve  the  fair  and 
respectful  treatment  of  all  students,  particularly  in  the  area  of  student  discipline;  and  (10) 
demonstrate  a  professional  attitude  and  demeanor  during  professional  development  and  grade 
level  meetings. 

15. 

Mr.  Paz  advised  Respondent  that  he  would  provide  her  with  the  following 
assistance:  (1)  conferences  with  the  principal  (Ms.  Ariyasu)  regarding  effective  student 
learning,  planning  and  lesson  delivery,  use  of  data  to  guide  instruction,  student  engagement 
in  response  to  intervention,  and  class  management;  (2)  specific  suggestions  and  materials  as 
to  how  to  improve  Respondent’s  performance;  (3)  coaches  in  language  arts,  math,  and 
English  Language  Development  to  confer  and  assist  with  the  use  of  data  to  guide  instruction, 
planning,  preparation  and  delivery  of  effective  core  content  instruction,  modeling  directed 
lessons,  differentiation  of  instruction  for  English  learners,  and  intervention  strategies;  (4) 
professional  development;  (5)  opportunities  to  plan  and  work  collaboratively  with  and 
observe  grade  level  colleagues  and  others  teach;  (6)  guidance  from  Ms.  Ariyasu;  (7)  review 
by  Ms.  Ariyasu  of  lesson  plans  for  the  following  week  every  Friday;  (8)  notice  of  outside 
professional  development  opportunities;  and  (9)  opportunity  to  participate  in  District’s  Peer 
Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  program.* 

16. 

Mr.  Paz  recommended  that  Respondent  be  evaluated  again  at  the  end  of  the 

next  school  year  (2010-2011). 

 

>The  PAR  program  provides  a  professional  to  meet  with  a  teacher  requiring 

improvement,  generally  weekly,  to  discuss  goals,  the  development  of  lesson  plans,  the 
implementation  of  lesson  plans,  and  teaching  tools  and  strategies.  Additionally,  the  PAR 
professional  provides  reflection  conferences  with  the  teacher,  refers  the  teacher  to  learning 
resources  and  developmental  opportunities  throughout  the  school  year,  and  arranges  for  the 

teacher  to  observe  a  modeling  teacher.   
  

  

  

(3) 

2010-2011  School  Year 

17. 

Because  Respondent  attained  enough  seniority  to  select  the  grade  level  she 
wanted  to  teach,  she  elected  to  teach  second  grade  instead  of  third  grade  for  the  2010-2011 
school  year. 

18. 

District  provided  all  teachers,  by  grade  level,  a  pacing  plan  at  the  beginning  of 
the  school  year,  which  set  forth  how  much  material  to  cover  within  a  certain  period  of  time  to 
ensure  continuity  of  teaching,  and  to  ensure  students  were  receiving  instruction  pursuant  to 
grade  level  standards.  While  there  was  flexibility  in  the  pacing  plan,  District  expected  all 
material  to  be  covered. 

19. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  Tenth  Street  provided  all  teachers, 

including  Respondent,  with  a  handbook  containing  the  policies  and  procedures  of  the  school. 
One  of  the  policies  concerned  student  safety  and  required  students  who  needed  to  visit  the 
restroom  during  instructional  time  to  be  accompanied  by  a  partnet/monitor.  The  handbook 
also  included  guidelines  for  determining  appropriate  behavior  instruction  and  intervention, 
and  procedures  concerning  a  school-wide  behavior  plan  addressing  misconduct  in  the 
classroom,  preventative  plans,  examples  of  consequences,  and  examples  of  school  responses. 
Additionally,  the  handbook  included  a  “Discipline  Foundation  Policy  Resource  Manual” 
addressing  school-wide  positive  behavior  support,  and  required  teachers  to  utilize  “proactive 
Strategies  for  defining,  teaching,  and  supporting  appropriate  student  behaviors.”  In  this 
regard,  the  policy  listed,  among  other  things,  the  necessity  of  teachers  to  monitor  and  correct 
behavioral  errors,  and  to  impose  consistent  consequences. 

20. 

Additionally,  the  handbook  also  included  an  “Employee  Code  of  Ethics,” 

providing,  among  other  things,  that  employees  set  the  best  example  by  demonstrating 
excellence,  integrity,  and  responsibility  in  their  work,  and  that  all  employees  keep  policies, 
procedures,  and  rules  of  District,  including  following  District’s  “Code  of  Conduct,  laws,  and 
District  rules,  regulations,  bulletins,  policies  and  procedures,” 

21. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  instructed  teachers  to  make  sure  their  lesson  plans  were  visible, 
generally  on  their  desks,  so  she  could  review  them  and  ensure  continuity  of  learning  for  each 
grade.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  instructed  teachers  to  post  their  objectives  on  the  white  board  so  the 
students  would  know  on  what  they  needed  to  focus.  Teachers  were  also  required  to  use 
differentiation  of  instruction,  meaning  they  were  required  to  tailor  instruction  to  meet  the 
individual  needs  of  their  students. 

22. 

Pursuant  to  the  provisions  set  forth  in  Mr.  Paz’s  attachment  to  Respondent’s 

2009-2010  Stull  evaluation,  Respondent  received  assistance  throughout  the  school  year  from 
the  math  and  literacy  coaches,  who  planned  lessons  with  Respondent,  demonstrated  the 
lessons,  critiqued  Respondent  when  she  presented  the  lesson,  and,  and  provided  one-on-one 
teaching  to  Respondent.  Additionally,  Respondent  was  required  to  observe  teachers  at  other 
schools,  and  attend  professional  development  programs  to  address  English  language  arts, 

  

math,  classroom  management,  and  school  safety.   
  

 

  

23. 

Respondent  also  received  guidance  from  a  PAR  professional  that  District 

assigned  to  assist  Respondent  in  remedying  her  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  2009-2010  Stull 
evaluation.  The  PAR  professional  met  with  Respondent,  one-on-one,  at  least  one  lime  per 
week.  All  discussions  were  confidential  between  the  PAR  professional  and  Respondent,  and 
no  Tenth  Street  administrator,  including  Ms.  Ariyasu  (the  principal),  had  any  authority  over 
the  PAR  professional.  While  the  PAR  professional  kept  all  communications  confidential,  the 
PAR  professional  met  monthly  with  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  discuss  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  concerns. 

24. 

On  September  21,  2010,  at  1:43  p.m.,  Ms.  Ariyasu  heard a  lot  of  noise 

emanating  from  Respondent’s  classroom.  Ms.  Ariyasu  entered  Respondent's  class  and 
observed  a  noisy  class  and  Respondent  speaking  loudly  about  student  behavior.  She  also 
saw  five  students  out  of  their  seats,  and  only  five  students  on  task  completing  their 
assignment.  Respondent  then  instructed  the  students  to  line  up  so  that  she  could  take  them 
out  for  physical  education  (P.E.);  however,  when  the  students  failed  to  line  up  to  her 
satisfaction,  Respondent  decided  to  require  her  students  to  practice  lining  up.  Twenty 
minutes  later,  only  after  Respondent  modeled  the  behavior  she  expected,  the  students  lined 
up  to  Respondent’s  satisfaction.  The  students  missed  a  portion  of  P.E.  as  a  result.  Ms. 
Ariyasu,  who  discussed  the  results  of  her  observation  with  Respondent,  noted  that  the 
students  missed  a  great  portion  of  instructional  time  during  the  20  minutes  Respondent 
required  the  students  practicing  to  line  up.  Ms.  Ariyasu  instructed  Respondent  to  remain  on 
schedule,  be  prepared,  and  teach  the  class  in  alignment  with  the  lesson  plan.  Additionally, 
she  instructed  Respondent  to  post  and  review  the  purpose  of  each  lesson  with  the  students, 
adopt  a  classroom  management  strategy  or  plan  and  stick  to  it,  and  model  to  the  students 
what  they  were  expected  to  do. 

25. 

On  September  24,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  conducted  an  observation  of 
Respondent’s  class  from  10:40  a.m.  to  11:05  a.m.  During  that  period,  Ms.  Ariyasu  observed 
Respondent  teaching  a  lesson,  but  noted  Respondent  had  not  posted  on  the  board  the 
objective  or  learning  goal.  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  the  students  were  not  attentive  to  the  lesson,  as 
some  were  talking,  and  some  were  hitting  each  other,  but  Respondent  did  not  redirect  any  of 
the  students’  behavior.  Ms.  Ariyasu  conducted  a  conference  with  Respondent  concerning  her 
observations,  and  instructed  Respondent  to  communicate  the  purpose  of  the  lessons  to  the 
students,  and  ascertain  how  Respondent  would  determine  whether  the  students  mastered  the 
objective. 

 

26. 

On  October  6,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  released  Respondent  from  class  to  permit 
her  to  attend  a  two  and  one-half  hour  professional  development  session  presented  by  Dr. 
Peter  Gero,  who  possessed  an  expertise  in  classroom  management.  Dr.  Gero  provided  the 
attendees  with  discipline  philosophies  and  techniques  for  classroom  management. 
Specifically,  Dr.  Gero  provided  strategies  to  ensure  smooth  transitions  between  lessons  or 
activities,  classroom  control,  positive  demeanor,  unemotional  discipline,  teaching  classroom 

respect,  conflict  resolution,  and  addressing  fighting.   

  

27, 

On  October  13,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  conducted  an  observation  of Respondent’s 
classroom,  and  on  October  18,  2010,  conferenced  with  Respondent  about  her  observations, 
and  prepared  a  summary  of  that  conference  on  October  21,  2010.  During  the  conference, 
Ms.  Ariyasu  discussed  concerns  she  observed  in  the  areas  of  student  safety,  classroom 
management,  unclear  lesson  objectives,  and  adherence  to  a  lesson  plan.  Specifically,  in  the 
area  of  student  safety,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  students  carried  their  chairs  with  the  legs  pointed 
straight  out,  and  that  chairs  were  strewn  in  the  aisle. 
In  the  area  of  classroom management, 
Ms.  Ariyasu  told  Respondent  that  she  failed  to  consistently  implement  a  behavior 
management  system,  and,  as  a  result,  there  was  a  constant  and  increasing  loss  of  instructional 
lime.  For  example,  Respondent  failed  to  appropriately  discipline  a  student  who  had  begun 
singing  during  Respondent’s  reading  lesson,  students  who  talked  during  the  bulk  of  the 
lesson,  a  student  who  had  gotten  out  of  her  chair  to  bother  other  students,  or  students  who 
had  thrown  clips  and  books  at  each  other.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  present  a 
phonics  lesson  in  the  way  the  teacher’s  guide  instructed,  and  did  not  state  a  clear  objective  or 
purpose  of  her  Academic  Language  Development  (ALD)  lesson.  Ms.  Ariyasu  mentioned 
Respondent’s  lesson  plans  failed  to  reflect  the  lessons  set  forth  in  Respondent’s  daily 
schedule.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  that  the  issues  raised  in  the  conference  were  reflected  in 
her  observations  and  subsequent  conferences  of  September  21,  2010  and  September  24, 
2010. 

28. 

During  the  conference,  Respondent  told  Ms.  Ariyasu  she  was  not  sure  how  to 
teach  Academic  Language  Development,  and  inquired  into  a  pacing  plan.  Respondent  also 
advised  that  she  would  like  some  help  from  the  Title  III  Access  to  Core  coach. 

29. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance  during 
the  conference:  (1)  choose  a  behavior  management  plan  or  strategy  that  Respondent  learned 
during  the  October  6,  2010  professional  development  session  with  Dr.  Gero,  and  implement 
it  consistently;  (2)  establish  regular  routines  to  help  eliminate  the  loss  of  instructional  time; 
(3)  work  with  the  Title  III  Access  to  Core  coach  to  assist  in  developing  academic  language 
through  social  studies  and  science;  (4)  consult  the  California  State  Framework  for  Language 
Arts  for  appropriate  standards;  (5)  stick  to  the  daily  schedule  for  her  grade  level,  and  avoid 
deviating  from  it  unless  Respondent  advises  Ms.  Ariyasu  ahead  of  time;  (6)  post  and  review 
each  lesson  objective  and  purpose,  and  write  them  in  kid-friendly  language;  (7)  watch  her 
lesson  pacing;  (8)  deliver  the  lesson  planned;  and  (9)  use  the  elements  of  an  effective 
directed  lesson  to  guide  teaching,  including  stating  clear  objectives,  modeling  and 
explaining,  guided  practice,  independent  practice,  and  assessing  for  evidence  the  students 
mastered  the  objective. 

30. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  explained  to  Respondent  at  the  conference  that  if  she  failed  to 
make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  class  management,  lesson  planning, 
and  delivering  lessons,  it  would  lead  to  disciplinary  action. 

 

31. 

On  October  26,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  conducted  a  conference  with Respondent 
regarding  an  earthquake  drill  held  on  October  21,  2010.  All  of  the  teachers  at  Tenth  Street 

received  notice  of  the  earthquake  drill  on  October  19,  2010  during  a  faculty  meeting.  The   

  

earthquake  drill  commenced  at  10:18  a.m.  as  scheduled,  but  Respondent’s  class  did  not 
arrive  to  the  yard  until  10:39,  21  minutes  after  the  drill  began.  Ms.  Ariyasu  told  Respondent 
that  her  lack  of  attention  to  procedures  and  details  raised  concerns  about  student safety. 
Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  adequately  monitor  or  address  student 
behavior,  in  that  Respondent’s  class  line  extended  over  several  yards,  as  students  were 
dancing  or  talking. 

32. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following 

guidance  and  assistance:  (1)  review  emergency  drill  procedures;  (2)  consistently  monitor 
students  for  appropriate  behavior,  particularly  during  emergency  drill  practice;  and  (3)  call 
the  office  for  assistance  or  clarification  of  procedures  if  needed.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  told 
Respondent  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent’s  performance  thus  far, Respondent 
would  receive  a  below  standard  Stull  evaluation.  Ms.  Ariyasu  instructed  Respondent  to 
review  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession,  including  establishing  and 
maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior,  and  planning  and  implementing  procedures  and 
routines  to  support  student  learning  and  safety. 

33. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  also  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  follow  district 
and  school  policies  and  procedures;  (2)  monitor  and  maintain  appropriate  student  behavior  at 
all  times;  and  (3)  adhere  to  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  if  she  failed  to  demonstrate  a  marked  and  sustained 
improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act/Service, 
suspension  without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Similarly,  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised 
Respondent  that  if  she  failed  to  follow  the  directives  or  adhere  to  District  policies  and 
procedures,  it  would  result  in  administrative  or  disciplinary  action  such  as  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Act/Service,  suspension  without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

34, 

On  November  5,  2010,  Ms.  Arlyasu  conducted  an  observation  of Respondent’s 
classroom  from  12:40  p.m.  to  1:05  p.m.,  during  a  District  writing  assessment  assignment.  As 
Respondent  stood  before  the  class  and  explained  the  writing  assessment  assignment,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  observed  students  talking,  playing  with  pencils,  leaning  over  their  desks,  and  overall, 
not  paying  attention.  Respondent  did  not  address  the  students’  behavior.  Additionally, 
Respondent's  instructions  to  the  students  were  unclear,  leaving  them  confused  about what, 
specifically,  they  were  supposed  to  write.  Later,  during  the  close  of  the  Response  to 
Intervention  (RTI)°  period,  where  students  were  placed  in  different  groups  in  different 
classrooms  to  receive  additional  attention  to  address  areas  of  need,  one  of Respondent’s 
students  did  not  return  to  class,  but  Respondent  failed  to  notice.  At  1:48  p.m.,  Ms. Ariyasu 
returned  to  the  class  and  witnessed  Respondent  completing  forms  to  parents  concerning 
unsatisfactory  progress  of  their  children. 

35.  |  On  November  9,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  to 
discuss  her  November  5,  2010  observation.  Ms.  Ariyasu  gave  Respondent  guidance  and 

 

*  Response  to  Intervention  (RTI)  is  a  multi-tier  approach  to  the  early  identification 

and  support  of  students  with  learning  and  behavior  needs.   
  

  

  

assistance.  Specifically,  Ms.  Ariyasu  told  Respondent  she  needed  to  state  clear  objectives 
when  teaching  a  lesson,  explain  and  model  what  students  were  expected  to  learn,  monitor 
student  behavior  at  all  times,  stick  to  lesson  plans,  and  consult  the  Title  III  Access  to  Core 
coach  for  assistance  with  teaching  the  writing  process.  Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to 
follow  assessment  directions  as  set  forth  in  the  teacher’s  manual.  She  also  directed  her  not  to 
complete  paperwork  during  instructional  time.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  if  she 
failed  to  follow  her  directives,  or  follow  District  policy  and  procedures  in  the  future, 
Respondent  could  face  administrative  or  disciplinary  action,  such  as  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Act/Service,  suspension  without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  District  service. 

36. 

On  December  6,  2010,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  to 

discuss  her  observations  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  November  29,  2010,  and  the  periodic 
assessment  data  of  Respondent’s  students.  Ms.  Ariyasu  expressed  concern  about 
Respondent’s  failure  to  prepare  for  and  teach  lessons  as  planned,  because  Respondent  only 
addressed  two  of  the  eight  objectives  indicated  in  her  plan  book.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  expressed 
concern  about  Respondent’s  lack  of  classroom  management,  and  the  resulting  loss  of 
instructional  time.  Specifically,  Ms.  Ariyasu  commented  that  one  student  was  on  the  floor 
with  her  backpack,  several  students  were  talking,  one  student  was  clapping,  one  student  had 
her  head  on  her  desk,  and  Respondent  had  scolded  one  student  four  times,  but  never  had  that 
student  turn  over  her  discipline  card.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  expressed  that Respondent 
failed  to  teach  the  Open  Court  Reading  program  with  fidelity,  which  resulted  in  ineffective 
directive  lessons.  Specifically,  Ms.  Ariyasu  commented  that  Respondent’s  lesson  objectives 
were  not  always  clear  because  Respondent  would  teach  only  part  of  the  lesson. 

37. 

In  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  review  with  Respondent  of  the  periodic  assessments  results 

of  Respondent’s  students,  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised,  in  the  area  of  reading,  15  of  19  students 
showed  a  drop  in  scores  in  at  least  one  or  all  of  the  areas  of  fluency,  comprehension,  and 
vocabulary,  compared  to  the  students’  scores  in  the  previous  year.  Eight  students  who  were 
expected  to  reach  their  benchmark  goals  regressed  in  fluency,  comprehension,  and 
vocabulary.  Only  four  students  reached  benchmark  in  the  area  of  comprehension,  and  only 
one  student  reached  benchmark  in  the  area  of  vocabulary.  In  the  area  of  math,  only  nine  of 
the  19  students  reached  benchmark,  and  10  of  19  students  required  strategic  or  intensive 
intervention, 

38. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

teach  the  lessons  planned;  (2)  follow  the  proscribed  Open  Court  Reading  routines  and 
procedures  when  delivering  lessons;  (3)  meet  with  the  literacy  coach  to  assist  with  Open 
Court  Reading  routines  and  procedures,  as  well  as  pacing  to  ensure  coverage  of  all  material 
in  a  lesson;  (4)  select  a  classroom  management  strategy  and  stick  to  it;  (5)  refrain  from 
showing  frustration  with  certain  students’  behavior;  (6)  seat  students  with  behavior  issues  in 
closer  proximity  to  Respondent’s  desk;  (7)  meet  with  the  math  coach  regarding  the  math 
scores  and  how  to  work  with  her  students;  (8)  deliver  the  math  program  with  fidelity;  (9) 
follow  the  lessons  the  coaches  model  for  her;  (10)  visit  another  second  grade  teacher  to 
observe  how  she  or  he  handles  Open  Court  Reading  routines  and  procedures;  and  (11) 
include  the  elements  of  an  effective  directed  lesson  in  every  lesson  taught.  Specifically, 

 

  
10   

  

Respondent  should  have  a  clear  purpose  or  objective  of  each  lesson,  model  and  explain  to  the 
students  what  Respondent  expects  them  to  know  and  do,  provide  guided  and  independent 
practice;  and  evaluate  student  progress  and  determine  next  steps. 

39. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  gave  Respondent  the  following  directives:  (1)  deliver  the  District 
mandated  programs  with  fidelity;  (2)  teach  the  lessons  planned;  (3)  deliver  effective  directed 
lessons;  (4)  maintain  the  daily  schedule;  (5)  maintain  a  consistent  plan  or  strategy  for 
classroom  management;  and  (6)  maintain  a  professional  demeanor  with  students.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  advised  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she  would  have  to  issue 
a  below  standard  Stull  evaluation. 
Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  if  she  failed  to 
follow  her  directives,  or  follow  District  policy  and  procedures  in  the  future, Respondent 
could  face  administrative  or  disciplinary  action,  such  as  a  Notice  of Unsatisfactory 
Act/Service,  suspension  without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  District  service. 

40. 

On  January  10,  2011  and  February  23,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  observed 

Respondent’s  classroom,  and  noted  classroom  management  had  improved. 

41, 

On  May  2,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  to  discuss 
her  observations  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  April  27,  2011.  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  several 
students  were  distracted  during  Respondent’s  reading  lesson,  as  some  were  playing  with  their 
hands  instead  of  reading,  four  had  their  heads  down  on  the  desk,  two  were  looking  for  things 
in  their  desks,  and  two  were  whispering  to  each  other.  Ms.  Ariyasu  commented  that 
Respondent  tended  to  remain  in  the  front  of  the  class  when  teaching  instead  of  walking 
around  and  interacting  with  students.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  told  Respondent  that  although 
Respondent  wrote  the  lesson  objective  on  the  board,  the  objective  was  not  always  clear 
during  the  lesson.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  that  pacing  continued  to  be  an  issue,  and 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plans. 

42. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following 

guidance  and  assistance:  (1)  maintain  the  classroom  rules;  (2)  initiate  opportunities  for 
students  to  engage  in  their  learning  and  explain  their  thinking;  (3)  be  clear  in  the  purpose  and 
objective  of  the  lesson;  (4)  be  prepared;  (5)  include  elements  of  an  effective  directed  lesson 
when  planning  and  teaching;  (6)  circulate  among  the  students  whenever  possible;  (7)  follow 
and  deliver  lessons  as  planned;  (8)  use  assessment  data  to  identify  students  who  need 
additional  support  and  provide  appropriate  intervention;  (9)  differentiate  instruction  for 
students  with  differing  abilities;  (10)  continue  working  with  the  coaches  for guidance 
concerning  increasing  student  participation,  lesson  pacing,  delivering  a  directed  lesson,  and 
differentiating  instruction  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  students;  and  (11)  submit  all  reports  and 
assessments  on  time.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that 
time,  she  would  have  to  issue  a  below  standard  Stull  evaluation. 

43. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  gave  Respondent  the  following  directives:  (1)  maintain 

classroom  rules;  (2)  consistently  implement  selected  classroom  management  strategies;  (3) 
increase  student  engagement  in  learning;  (4)  be  prepared;  (5S)  deliver  effective  directed 
lessons;  (6)  deliver  lessons  planned;  (7)  work  with  coaches  to  improve  the  areas  of  concern; 

  

11   

 

  

and  (8)  submit  all  reports  and  assessments  on  time.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  if 
she  failed  to  show  immediate  and  sustained  improvement,  Respondent  could  face 
administrative  or  disciplinary  action,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act/Service, 
Suspension  without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  District  service.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu 
advised  Respondent  that  if  she  failed  to  follow  her  directives,  Respondent  could  receive  a 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act/Service,  suspension  without  pay,  or  dismissal  from  District 
service. 

44, 

The  PAR  panel  submitted  a  reporting  form  to  the  District’s  employee  services 
stating  that  Respondent  participated  in  the  PAR  program  from  September  15,  2010  to  June  1, 
2011  for  the  2010-2011  school  year,  but  failed  to  meet  her  established  PAR  goals. 

(4) 

2010-2011  Stull  Evaluation 

45. 

On  May  19,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  prepared  a  Stull  evaluation  of Respondent’s 

performance  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  needed  improvement  in  using  the  results  of  multiple  assessments 
to  guide  instruction,  guiding  all  students  to  be  self-directed  and  assess  their  own  learning, 
engaging  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities,  and  using  a 
variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  commented  that  Respondent  used  limited  student  data,  failed  to  differentiate 
instruction  for  struggling  and  gifted  students,  and  provided  infrequent  opportunities  for 
students  to  engage  in  their  learning  and  explain  their  thinking. 

46. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted 

Respondent  required  improvement  in  demonstrating  evidence  of  short-term  and  long-term 
plans  to  foster  student  learning  and  achievement  of  the  State  Standards,  and  planning 
instruction  to  ensure  that  all  groups  of  students  had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  also  commented  that  Respondent’s  lessons  often  lacked  a  clear  objective,  that  she 
often  failed  to  teach  the  lessons  planned,  and  she  often  failed  to  deliver  a  lesson  with 
components  of  an  effective  directed  lesson. 

47, 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  needed  improvement  in 

establishing  and  maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior  and  creating  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect,  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and 
routines  that  supported  student  learning,  and  using  instructional  time effectively. 

48. 

Respondent’s  overall  evaluation  was  “below  standard  performance.”  Ms. 
Ariyasu  included  a  three-page  attachment  to  Respondent’s  Stull  evaluation,  which  listed 
specific  deficiencies,  recommendations,  and  assistance  to  be  provided.  In  the  area  of  specific 
deficiencies,  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  Respondent:  (1)  failed  to  consistently  monitor  student 
behavior  and  implement  class  management  strategies  that  supported  student  learning;  (2) 
failed  to  teach  lessons  with  a  clear  and  rigorous  instructional  objective;  (3)  lacked  consistent 
monitoring  to  check  for  student  understanding  of  lesson  objectives,  negatively  impacting 
effective  instruction  and  student  learning;  (4)  limited  the  use  of  student  data  which  hindered 

 

12   

  

Respondent’s  ability  to  differentiate  instruction  and  meet  individual  student  needs, 
particularly  struggling  and  gifted  students;  (5)  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plans;  and  (6)  failed 
to  teach  the  District’s  core  programs  and  assessments  with  fidelity,  as  Respondent  failed  to 
implement  routines  and  procedures. 

49. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  recommended  that  Respondent  (1)  monitor  student  behavior  at  all 
times  and  maintain  class  rules;  (2)  consistently  implement  classroom  management  strategies; 
(3)  provide  opportunities  for  students  to  engage  in  their  learning  and  explain  their  thinking; 
(4)  deliver  effective  directed  lessons,  including  providing  clear  and  rigorous  objectives, 
purposeful  modeling,  checking  for  understanding,  evaluation,  and  re-teaching,  if  needed;  (5) 
teach  the  mandated  District  core  programs  with  fidelity;  (6)  use  State  frameworks,  teacher’s 
guides,  and  District  program  guides  as  resources  to  prepare  and  deliver  a  rigorous  program 
that  meets  the  needs  of  all  students;  (7)  use  data  and  other  strategies  to  effectively  monitor 
and  evaluate  student  progress;  (8)  follow  assessment  directions  as  given;  (9)  prepare  and 
deliver  lessons  as  planned;  (10)  maintain  daily  instructional  schedule,  be  prepared,  and  watch 
pacing;  (11)  refrain  from  completing  grading  forms  during  instructional  hours;  (12) 
differentiate  instruction  for  students  with  differing  abilities  and  language  development  levels; 
(13)  plan  and  implement  independent  work  time  for  students  on  a  regular  basis;  (14)  work 
with  content  area  coaches  on a  regular  basis  to  address  instructional  issues  and  improve  in  all 
areas  of  concern;  and  (15)  submit  plans  to  Ms.  Ariyasu  every  Friday  for  lessons  for  the 
upcoming  week. 

50. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  she  would  provide  her  with  the 
following  assistance:  (1)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue  meeting  with  Respondent  in  post- 
observation  conferences  concerning  areas  of  deficiencies;  (2)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue 
providing  Respondent  with  class-observation  summaries;  (3)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue 
previewing  Respondent’s  lesson  plans  every  Friday;  (4)  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  other  staff  to 
continue  to  provide  Respondent  with  specific  Suggestions  as  to  how  she  can  improve  her 
performance;  (5)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue  providing  opportunities  for  Respondent  to  plan  and 
work  collaboratively  with  and  observe  grade  level  colleagues;  (6)  literacy,  math,  and English 
Language  Development  coaches  to  continue  providing  lesson  demonstrations  and  assistance 
in  areas  of  concern,  including  effective  directed  instruction,  planning  and  preparation, 
increasing  student  discourse  and  engagement  in  their  learning,  use  of  student  data  to  guide 
instruction,  differentiation  of  instruction,  certain  aspects  of  class  management,  teaching  the 
District  mandated  core  curriculum  with  fidelity,  incorporating  routines  and  procedures 
proscribed,  and  the  use  of  a  variety  of  resources  to  ensure  all  students  have  access  to  the  core 
curriculum;  (7)  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  staff  to  continue  providing  Respondent  with  professional 
development  sessions  focused  on  rigorous  instruction  in  the  core  content  areas;  (8)  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  others  to  continue  providing  Respondent  with  notices  regarding  outside 
professional  development  opportunities  covering  the  areas  of  concern;  and  (9)  Respondent  to 
be  given  an  opportunity  to  participate  again  in  the  PAR  program. 

 

51. 

Respondent's  failure  to  meet  her  PAR  goals  was  not  used  to  determine 

Respondent’s  Stull  evaluation.   
  

  

 

52. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  recommended  that  Respondent  be  evaluated  again  at  the  end  of 

the  next  school  year  (2011-2012). 

53. 

In  a  written  response  dated  May  19,  2011,  Respondent  stated,  in  the  area  of 

support  for  student  learning,  she  depended  on  the  results  of  periodic  assessment  to  know  the 
skills  the  students  mastered,  and  applied  a  wide  variety  of  techniques  to  guide  students  to 
become  self-directed  and  assess  their  own  learning.  Respondent  stated  that  while  Ms. 
Ariyasu  indicated  Respondent  needed  improvement  in  this  area,  she  never  suggested  any 
modifications  Respondent  could  have  made  in  order  to  meet  her  expectations.  Respondent 
further  stated  that  Ms.  Ariyasu  failed  to  recognize  the  significance  of  many  of  the  techniques 
she  had  incorporated  from  the  4BC'’s  of Student  Engagement  or  any  of  the  innovative 
trainings  she  had  attended.  Respondent  felt  Ms.  Ariyasu  was  never  on  board  with  any  of  the 
Strategies  designed  to  improve  the  relevance  of  academic  activities  for  the  students  and  their 
culture.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  Ms.  Ariyasu  belittled  any  creativity  and  use  of 
imagination  as  far  as  instructional  strategies  and  resources  were  concerned,  because  Ms. 
Ariyasu  seemed  more  eager  to  magnify  deficiencies  in  her  students’  behavior,  as  opposed  to 
noting  the  ways  Respondent  has  tried  to  respond  to  her  students’  diverse  needs. 

54, 

In  her  written  response,  Respondent  stated,  in  the  area  of  planning  and 

designing  instruction,  she  worked  with  her  colleagues  to  develop  short-term  and  long-term 
plans,  and  made  necessary  adjustments  when  needed  to  foster  student  learning  and 
achievement  of  the  State  Standards.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  that  when  she 
scaffolded  instruction  in  order  to  ensure  struggling  students  had  equal  access  to  the 
curriculum,  Ms.  Ariyasu  accused  her  of  not  having  rigorous  instructional  objectives. 
Conversely,  Respondent  stated  that  when  she  provided  opportunities  for  her  gifted  students 
“to  take  the  spotlight,”  Ms.  Ariyasu  failed  to  notice  Respondent's  special  projects  given  to 
gifted  students. 

55. 

In  her  written  response,  Respondent  stated,  in  the  area  of  classroom 

performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  failed  to  see  how  Respondent  helped  her  students  develop  a  level 
of  maturity,  take  responsibility  for  their  actions,  and  express  empathy  for  the  feelings  of 
others.  As  for  maintaining  a  daily  schedule,  Respondent  stated  Ms.  Ariyasu  was  quick  to 
magnify  “petty  issues.” 

56. 

In  her  written  response  concerning  the  overall  evaluation,  Respondent  stated 
she  did  not  deserve  to  receive  an  unsatisfactory  Stull  evaluation  for  a  second  year  in  a  row, 
and  considered  such  action  “harassment  . .  .  designed  to  open  the  doors  to  further 
mistreatment  by  the  administration.”  Respondent  further  stated  that  if  the  overall  evaluation 
deserved  any  credence,  then  the  burden  of  the  “below  standard  performance”  rested  “on  the 
lack  of  genuine  instructional  leadership”  by  Ms.  Ariyasu. 

(5) 

2011-2012  School  Year 

57. 

Pursuant  to  the  provisions  set  forth  in  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  attachment  to 

Respondent’s  2010-2011  Stuil  evaluation,  Respondent  received  assistance  throughout  the 

14   

  

school  year  from  the  math  and  literacy  coaches,  who  planned  lessons  with  Respondent, 
demonstrated  the  lessons,  critiqued  Respondent  when  she  presented  the  lesson,  and  provided 
One-on-one  teaching  to  Respondent.  Additionally,  Respondent  attended  professional 
development  programs  to  address  English  language  arts,  math,  classroom  management,  and 
school  safety. 

58. 

Respondent  also  received  guidance  from  a  PAR  professional  that  District 

assigned  to  assist  Respondent  in  remedying  her  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  2010-2011  Stull 
evaluation.  The  PAR  professional  met  with  Respondent,  one-on-one,  at  least  one  time  per 
week.  All  discussions  were  confidential  between  the  PAR  professional  and  Respondent,  and 
no  Tenth  Street  administrator,  including  Ms.  Ariyasu,  had  any  authority  over  the  PAR 
professional.  While  the  PAR  professional  kept  all  communications  confidential,  the  PAR 
professional  met  monthly  with  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  discuss  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  concerns. 

59, 

On  December  1,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  to 
discuss  an  incident  that  occurred  on  November  29,  2011,  involving  two  of  Respondent's 
students.  Specifically,  two  male  students  had  gotten  into  a  fight  during  the  class’s  walk  to 
the  yard  for  recess,  resulting  in  one  of  the  students  suffering  a  bloody  lip.  Respondent  failed 
to  accompany  her  class  to  the  yard.  Rather,  Respondent  watched  the  students  from  her 
upstairs  classroom.  Ms.  Ariyasu  reminded  Respondent  that  school  policy  required  all 
teachers  to  accompany  their  class  to  and  from  the  yard,  and  also  stated  that  in  September 
2011,  all  teachers  were  reminded  of  that  policy.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  she 
was  responsible  for  the  safety  and  well-being  of  her  students,  and  should  never,  for  any 
reason,  permit  her  students  to  walk  up  or  down  the  stairs  to  the  yard  by  themselves.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  told  Respondent  to  review  with  her  students  the  appropriate  behavior  and 
expectations  when  using  the  stairs,  and  if  she  required  assistance  in  the  future,  to  contact  the 
office  immediately. 

60. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  walk  with  her 
class  to  and  from  the  yard;  (2)  supervise  her  students  at  all  times:  (3)  review  student  behavior 
standards  regarding  the  use  of  the  stairs;  (4)  call  the  office  for  assistance  if  unable  to  provide 
appropriate  supervision;  (5)  refrain  from  discussing  the  incident  with  students,  parents,  or 
staff  members;  and  (6)  refrain  from  retaliating  against  any  student,  parent,  or  staff  member 
who  reported  the  incident.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  any  failure  to  follow 
administrative.  directives  would  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act/Service,  suspension 
without  pay,  or  dismissal  from  the  District. 

  

61. 

On  December  14,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  to 

discuss  an  incident  that  occurred  on  December  9,  2011,  involving  one  of  her  students. 
Specifically,  Ms.  Ariyasu  found  the  student  standing  in  the  doorway  of  Respondent’s 
classroom,  with  the  door  partially  closed,  looking  down  the  hall  at  the  stairway  exit.  The 
student  told  Ms.  Ariyasu  that  he  had  vomited.  Ms.  Ariyasu  took  the  student  into  the 
classroom  and  discovered  the  classroom  was  empty.  The  student  advised  Ms.  Ariyasu  that 

he  was  in  the  front  of  the  classroom  when  Respondent  walked  out  the  door  with  the  other  

  

  

students,  and  then  the  door  closed.  The  student  was  left  alone  in  the  classroom,  became 
frightened,  and  vomited.  He  had  been  waiting  for  Respondent  to  return  to  the  class. 

62. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  she  should  be  the 

last  one  out  the  door  when  exiting  the  room  to  ensure  all  of  her  students  have  exited.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  told  Respondent  that  she  was  responsible  for  the  Safety  and  well-being  of  her 
students,  and  she  should  never  leave  her  students  unsupervised.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu 
reminded  Respondent  that  this  was  the  second  conference  in  less  than  two  weeks  concerning 
her  supervision  of  her  students.  Ms.  Ariyasu  then  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  never  leave  a 
student  unattended;  (2)  be  the  last  person  to  exit  the  room  to  ensure  all  students  have  left  the 
classroom;  (3)  supervise  her  students  at  all  times;  (4)  refrain  from  discussing  the  incident 
with  any  students,  parents,  or  staff  members;  and  (5)  refrain  from  retaliating  against  any 
student,  parent,  or  staff  member  who  reported  the  incident.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent 
that  any  failure  to  follow  administrative  directives  would  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Act/Service,  suspension  without  pay,  or  dismissal  from  the  District.  On  December  15,  2011, 
Respondent  submitted  a  memo  to  Ms.  Ariyasu  Stating  she  intended  to  adhere  to  her 
administrative  directives. 

63. 

On  December  16,  2011,  Ms.  Ariyasu  held  a  conference  with Respondent 
concerning  her  Stull  lesson  observation  of  December  13,  2011.  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  that 
although  Respondent  had  written  the  objective  on  the  board  concerning  the  use  of  four  types 
of  possessive  nouns,  and  read  it  aloud  with  the  students,  the  purpose  of  the  lesson  became 
unclear  as  she  taught  the  lesson.  Specifically,  the  students  became  confused  about  how  to 
indicate  possession  when  a  noun  was  plural.  No  one  understood  the  rationale  behind 
apostrophe  placement  for  “class’s”  and  “goggles’.” 

64. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  that  although  Respondent  provided  guided  and 

independent  practice,  Respondent  was  not  sure  what  to  do  when  students  could  not  complete 
the  task  correctly.  Specifically,  only  one  out  of  17  students  completed  the  task  (i.e.,  grammar 
transparency  sentences)  correctly,  and  almost  all  of  the  students  got  the  last  two  problems 
wrong  because  they  could  not  identify  the  correct  possessive  noun  or  could  not  determine 
whether  the  noun  was  singular  or  plural.  Additionally,  when  Respondent  pulled  aside  a 
small  group  of  three  students,  Respondent  told  them  what  to  circle  on  their  practice  sheet 
instead  of  re-teaching  the  objective.  Respondent  also  marked  one  student’s  work  correct 
when  the  work  was  incorrect. 

65. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  also  stated  during  the  conference  that  Respondent’s  pacing 
remained  an  issue,  and  the  lessons  scheduled  for  teaching  were  not  necessarily  taught. 
Specifically,  it  took  50  minutes  to  complete  the  lesson,  even  though  the  teacher’s  manual 
recommended  30  minutes  for  both  the  grammar  and  writing  lessons.  Respondent 
abbreviated  the  writing  lesson,  because  only  10  minutes  remained  in  the  school  day,  which 
resulted  in  Respondent  failing  to  provide  an  explicit  explanation,  modeling,  or  practicing. 
Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  develop  routines  and  procedures  with  the 
students,  consequently  resulting  in  a  loss  of  instructional  time.  Specifically,  students  should 
have  known  to  work  independently  when  Respondent  put  them  in  small  groups. 

16  

  

  

66. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

use  guiding  questions  during  lessons  to  keep  the  students  focused  on  the  lesson;  (2)  manage 
time  to  include  small  group  instruction  to  meet  the  individual  needs  of  the  students;  (3)  have 
clear  objectives,  and  teach  to  those  objectives;  (4)  deliver  effective  directed  lessons, 
including  providing  clear  and  rigorous  objectives,  purposeful  modeling,  checking  for 
understanding,  evaluation,  and  re-teaching,  if  needed;  (5)  use  instructional  time  to  maximize 
learning,  and  if  most  students  fail  to  understand  the  lesson  or  assignment,  re-teach;  (6) 
differentiate  instruction  for  students  with  differing  abilities  and  language  development  levels 
by  using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  that  respond  to  student  needs;  (7) 
establish  effective  routines  and  procedures  that  provide  students  with  a  productive  learning 
environment  and  maximize  instructional  time;  (8)  incorporate  concepts  and Strategies 
presented  in  professional  development  sessions;  (9)  consult  with  content  area  coaches  on  a 
regular  basis  to  address  instructional  issues;  and  (10)  continue  working  with  the  PAR  coach. 

67. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  establish  clear 

learning  objectives  and  align  all  activities  to  accomplishing  those  objectives;  (2)  teach  the 
lesson  as  planned;  (3)  monitor  pacing  in  order  to  teach  the  program  with  fidelity;  (4) 
establish  appropriate  routines  and  procedures;  (5)  include  small  group  instruction  daily;  (6) 
teach  effective  directed  lessons;  (7)  differentiate  instruction  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  students; 
(8)  maximize  instructional  time  and  re-teach  when  needed;  (9)  continue  to  incorporate 
concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  professional  development  sessions;  (10)  continue  to 
consult  with  content  area  coaches  and  the  PAR  mentor  regarding  Respondent’s  instructional 
issues, 

68. 

On  February  2,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a  conference 

she  held  with  Respondent  on  J anuary  30,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  observation  of 
Respondent’s  classroom  on  January  24,  2012.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing 
instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent’s  organization  of  her  curriculum  did  not  support 
student  understanding  of  the  time-related  mathematical  concepts  Respondent  presented. 
Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  sequence  of  the  math  lessons  set  forth  in  the 
teacher’s  edition  or  in  the  lesson  plan  for  interactive  learning.  Additionally,  Respondent 
failed  to  establish  and  articulate  goals  for  student  learning  at  the  beginning  of  the  lesson,  and 
failed  to  engage  the  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking  and/or  other  activities 
effectively.  Particularly,  when  Respondent  asked  the  students  a  time-related  question,  which 
resulted  in  inaccurate  responses  from  the  students,  Respondent  told  the  students  to  take  out 
their  own  clocks,  but  failed  to  provide  the  students  with  an  Opportunity  to  practice  counting 
time  on  their  clocks,  either  as  a  whole  group,  small  group,  pairs,  or  independently.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  made  a  word  usage  error.  Specifically,  she  used  the  word 
“past”  instead  of  “passed”  in  the  question  she  had  written  on  the  board:  “How  much  time 
has  past?” 

69. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  found  Respondent’s 

explanation  of  content  unclear  and  confusing.  Specifically,  when  telling  the  students  how 
much  time  elapsed  between  five  o’clock  and  eight  o’clock,  Respondent  told  the  students  to 

17   

 

  

begin  counting  from  five  o’clock  (i.e.,  “five  o’clock,  six  o’clock,  seven  o’clock,  eight 
o’clock”)  for  a  total  of  four  hours,  instead  from  six  o’clock,  for  the  correct  total  of  three 
hours. 

70. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  told  Respondent  that  she  failed  to  establish  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect,  and  that  her  response  to  students  was  inconsistent  and 
judgmental.  Specifically,  Respondent  asked  the  students  what  they  could  do  in  five  hours. 
One  student  responded  he  could  do  homework  in  five  hours,  which  Respondent  wrote  on  the 
projector  sheet  so  the  entire  class  could  see  the  response.  A  second  student  responded  he 
could  play  hide-and-seek,  which  Respondent  questioned,  but  did  not  write  the  response  on 
the  projector  sheet.  A  third  student  said  he  could  play  video  games,  which  prompted 
Respondent  to  say,  “I  hope  not,”  and  did  not  write  the  answer  on  the  projector  sheet. 

71. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 

failed  to  create  a  physical  environment  that  engaged  all  of  the  students.  Specifically, 
Respondent  displayed  minimal  current  student  work,  and  the  work  displayed  was  not 
cohesive.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  found  that  Respondent’s  behavior  management  system 
did  not  include  incentives  for  students  to  behave  properly.  Specifically,  Respondent  posted 
six  rules  and  four  consequences,  but  did  not  post  any  rewards. 

72.  —  During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following 
guidance  and  assistance:  (1)  display  current,  rubric-scored  student  work  with  constructive, 
specific  feedback,  and  include  engaging,  thought-provoking  captions;  (2)  remove  outdated 
work  samples  and  add  rewards  to  the  behavior  management  system;  (3)  follow  the  lesson 
plan  and  the  teacher’s  edition  with  program  fidelity;  (4)  use  materials  and  resources  to  make 
the  subject  matter  accessible  to  all  students;  (5)  review  all  instructional  content  and  ensure 
accuracy;  (6)  check  classroom  technology  to  ensure  students  could  see  all  material  presented; 
(7)  build  a  safe  and  trusting  learning  environment  by  validating  the  students’  ideas  when 
responding  to  open-ended  questions;  (8)  teach  the  lessons  planned,  be  prepared,  deliver 
effective  directed  lessons,  and  deliver  the  District  mandated  programs  with  fidelity;  and  (9) 
differentiate  instruction  by  including  daily  small  group  instruction. 

73. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she 

would  have  to  issue  a  below  standard  Stull  evaluation,  Such  an  evaluation  could  result  in 
discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal 
from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  told  Respondent  that  if  she  failed  to  make  an  immediate 
and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  the  issuance  of  a  below 
standard  Stull  evaluation  and/or  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  fromthe  District. 

74. 

On  February  6,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu 

concerning  her  February  2,  2012  conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing, 
Respondent  stated  the  organization  of  the  second  grade  math  curriculum  had  been  affected 
by  the  numerous  revisions  made  to  the  second  grade  schedule  at  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  behest,  but 
she  had  presented  math  lessons  and  materials  in  an  appropriate  manner.  In  the  area  of 

 

18   

  

classroom  performance,  Respondent  stated  her  explanation  of  the  math  content  was  clear 
enough  for  half  of  the  students  to  answer  correctly  all  of  the  problems  in  the  independent 
practice  section,  and  most  of  the  other  half  had  missed  one  question  only.  In  the  area  of 
support  for  student  learning,  Respondent  stated  she  was  doing  her  best  to  keep  her  classroom 
clean  and  free  from  teacher  clutter,  and  she  would  continue  to  display  current  student  work 
on  her  closet  doors.  Respondent  also  stated  that  she  had  a  behavior  management  system  that 
included  several  levels  of  incentives  for  her  students  to  behave  appropriately. 

75. 

On  February  7,  2012,  Respondent  attended  a  professional  development  session 

addressing  grade  level  routines  and  procedures  for  writing,  collaborative  agreements  on 
pacing  writing  lessons,  and  grade  level  prompts,  rubrics,  and  resource  materials. 

76. 

On  March  14,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  a  March  9,  2012  conference 

with  Respondent  concerning  her  observation  of  Respondent's  Academic  Language 
Development  (ALD)  lesson  on  February  23,  2012.  In  the  area  of  classroom  performance, 
Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  guidelines  of  the  lesson  set  forth  in  the 
teacher’s  edition,  and  did  not  engage  the  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and 
other  activities  designed  to  make  the  subject  matter  meaningful.  Additionally,  Respondent 
gave  unclear  instructions  to  the  students  about  what  they  were  to  write  in  their  journals, 
resulting  in  students  becoming  confused  and  unable  to  complete  the  assignment,  or 
completed  the  assignment  incorrectly.  Also,  Respondent  had  written  a  grammatically 
incorrect  sentence  on  the  board.  Specifically,  Respondent  wrote,  “Your  (sic)  moving  your 
body  around,”  instead  of  writing,  “You're  moving  your  body  around.” 

77. 

_  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted Respondent 

failed  to  establish  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect,  in  that  certain  students  were 
given  more  attention  than  others.  Specifically,  Respondent  allowed  one  student  to  dominate 
the  classroom  discussion  who  constantly  called  out  comments  and  questions  without 
permission  and  who  got  out  of  her  seat  six  times  without  permission.  Respondent  failed  to 
respond  to  the  student’s  inappropriate  behaviors.  Additionally,  when  a  student  misbehaved, 
instead  of  having  the  student  change  his  behavior  card  to  promote  individual  responsibility 
and  self-reflection,  Respondent  requested  a  different  student  to  turn  over  the misbehaving 
student’s  card.  Respondent  also  mentioned  a  student’s  weakness  in  front  of  the  other 
students.  Specifically,  in  response  to  a  student’s  comment  that  another  student  failed  to 
participate  in  choral  reading,  Respondent  stated  that  that  student  was  “learning  how  to  read 
so....”  Finally,  Respondent  excluded  some  students  from  a  class-wide  display  by  failing  to 
post  photos  of  three  students  near  their  respective  work,  as  Respondent  had  done  for  all  of 
the  other  students. 

 

78. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the following 

assistance  and  guidance:  (1)  Respondent  to  follow  her  lesson  plan  and  the  teacher’s  edition   

  

of  the  reading/language  arts  program  (Treasures),’  and  teach  it  with  fidelity;  (2)  lower  her 
voice  when  not  addressing  the  whole  class;  (3)  review  for  accuracy  what  she  has  written  on 
the  board;  (4)  use  all  learning  modalities  when  teaching  and  giving  instructions;  (5)  during 
small  group  instruction,  provide  students  with  a  list  of  “Must  Do’s”  and  “May  Do’s”  so 
students  could  be  clear  about  what  they  needed  to  do;  (6)  use  assessment  results  to  plan  small 
group  instruction;  (7)  post  the  missing  photos  of  the  three  students  so  they  could  feel 
included;  (8)  require  students  to  turn  over  their  own  behavior  cards,  rather  than  assigning  the 
task  to  somebody  else;  and  (9)  develop  a  behavior  contract  with  the  student  that  disrupted  the 
_Class  discussion. 

79. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  follow  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition 

program  with  fidelity.  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day, 
Ms.  Ariyasu  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which  could 
result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 
dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 
immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below 
standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

80. 

On  March  21,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Ms. 
Ariyasu’s  March  14,  2012  conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  classroom  performance, 
Respondent  stated  that  “Treasures  [was]  not  an  infallible  program,”  but  she  followed  the 
guidelines  of  the  program.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  that  she  used  kinesthetic,  visual, 
and  verbal  strategies  to  engage  the  students  in  the  lesson  and  critical-thinking.  In  the  area  of 
support  for  student  learning,  Respondent  stated  she  was  interested  in  learning  more  about 
Ms.  Ariyasu’s  ideas  for  establishing  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect  and  how  to 
measure  the  amount  of  positive  and  negative  attention  students  should  receive.  Respondent 
also  stated  that,  in  her  experience,  assigning  a  card  monitor  was  more  practical  than  allowing 
students  an  opportunity  to  further  disrupt  the  class  while  walking  to  the  behavior  chart. 
Further,  her  PAR  professional  previously  suggested  to  Respondent  to  assign  a  card  monitor. 

81. 

On  April  12,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  a  March  29,  2012  conference 
with  Respondent  concerning  her  March  20,  2012  observation  of  Respondent’s  reading  and 
language  arts  lesson.  In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 
failed  to  follow  the  guidelines  of  the  lesson  set  forth  in  the  teacher’s  edition,  resulting  in  a 
disjointed  sequence  of  learning.  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu 
stated  Respondent  failed  to  establish  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect,  as 
Respondent  gave  one  student  more  leeway  than  the  other  students,  Specifically,  the  student 
exhibited  a  lack  of  self-control  by  calling  out  answers,  comments,  and  questions  without 
permission,  and  leaning  on  two  legs  of  his  chair,  without  Respondent  responding  to  those 
actions.  Additionally,  when  a  student  misbehaved,  instead  of  requiring  the  misbehaving 

 

’  The  District’s  Treasures  reading  /language  arts  program,  implemented  at  the 
commencement  of  the  2011-2012  school  year,  replaced  the  District’s  Open  Court  reading 

program.   

  

  

student  change  his  behavior  card  to  promote  individual  responsibility  and  self-reflection, 
Respondent  requested  a  different  student  to  turn  over  the  misbehaving  student’s  card. 

82, 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following 

assistance  and  guidance:  (1)  follow  the  lesson  plan  and  the  teacher’s  edition  of  the  reading 
program  (Treasures),  and  teach  it  with  fidelity;  Ms.  Ariyasu  arranged  for  the  Title  IT  coach 
to  work  with  Respondent  to  plan  clear  objectives,  to  use  the  teacher’s  edition,  and  to  pace 
lessons;  (2)  require  students  to  turn  over  their  own  behavior  cards,  rather  than  assigning  the 
task  to  somebody  else;  and  (3)  pay  attention  and  intervene  when a  student  engaged  in 
inappropriate  behavior. 

83. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  during  the  conference  that  Respondent  had  been  directed 
on  March  14,  2012  to  follow  the  Treasures  reading/language  arts  program  with  fidelity,  yet 
Respondent  had  failed  to  do  so.  Consequently,  Ms.  Ariyasu  again  directed  Respondent  to 
follow  the  program’s  teacher’s  edition  and  teach  with  fidelity.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu 
directed  Respondent  to  require  students  to  turn  over  their  own  behavior  cards,  rather  than 
assigning  the  task  to  somebody  else.  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate 
Respondent  that  day,  Ms.  Ariyasu  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance 
evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 
Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if 
Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it 
could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

84. 

On  April  13,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu 

concerning  the  April  12,  2012  conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  classroom  performance, 
Respondent  stated  that  during  the  week  Ms.  Ariyasu  had  observed  Respondent’s  class,  it  was 
parent  conference  week,  resulting  in  shortened  school  days.  These  shortened  days  had  an 
impact  on  the  number  of  minutes  to  cover  the  Treasures  reading  lesson.  In  the  area  of 
support  for  student  learning,  Respondent  stated  she  was  interested  in  learning  more  about 
Ms.  Ariyasu’s  ideas  for  establishing  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect,  but  stated 
to  “optimize  learning  time,  sometimes  it  [was]  necessary  to  refrain  from  harping  on  every 
single  mistake  a  kid  might  make.”  Respondent  further  stated  that  during  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation,  Respondent  thought  “it  was  alright  for  [Respondent]  to  model  a  modicum 
patience  and  tolerance  instead  of  superciliousness.” 

85. 

Respondent  also  stated  the  following  in  her  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu: 

If  you  want  to  implement  your  type  of  behavior  management  strategy, 
it  should  have  been  introduced  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year.  By 
having  students  change  their  own  cards,  I  have  to  stop  my  lessons  to 
watch  them  so  I  can  make  sure  they  change  their  own  cards.  Students 
cause  more  distractions  or  even  amplify  their  attention-seeking 
strategies  while  walking  from  one  side  of  the  room  to  the  other  to 
change  their  cards.  Some  students  will  stall  as  long  as  they  can  before 

 

  
21   

  

   reaching  the  cards.  Sometimes  students  even  try  to  change  other  students” 

cards  instead  of  their  own.  ...  Whenever  it  doesn’t  interfere  with 
instructional  delivery,  I  will  ask  students  to  change  their  own  cards.  But  I 
developed  the  procedures  and  routines  involving  a  card  monitor  with  my 
2010-2011  PAR  Consulting  Teacher  in  order  to  optimize  learning  time. 

  

86. 

On  May  2,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  an  April  30,  2012  conference 
with  Respondent  concerning  her  April  19,  2012  observation  of  Respondent’s  reading  and 
language  arts  lesson.  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  that  in  the  area  of  planning  and  designing 
instruction,  Respondent  had  no  short-term  or  long-term  plans  that  built  on  or  extended  her 
students’  understanding  of  subject  matter.  Respondent’s  lesson  plans  were  blank  in  two 
mandatory  subjects  for  the  entire  week  of  April  16,  2012. 

87. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Mr.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  did  not 
effectively  develop  and  sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials  for  student  learning. 
Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plan  or  the  teacher’s  edition  of  the 
Treasures  reading/language  arts  program  for  unit  five,  week  two,  day  four,  resulting  ina 
disjointed,  rather  than  a  seamless,  sequence  of  learning.  Additionally,  Respondent  skipped 
elements  of  her  lesson  plan  and  of  the  teacher’s-edition  that  were  crucial  to  student  learning, 
such  as  comprehension  of  the  text  feature,  written  directions,  content  vocabulary,  the  daily 
writing  prompt,  and  revising,  editing,  and  proofreading  a  story. 

88. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 
failed  to  establish  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect.  Specifically,  during  her 
lesson,  Respondent  gave  eight  of  eighteen  students  more  than  one  opportunity  to  respond 
verbally  to  her  questions,  as  a  result  of  Respondents  inconsistent  use  of  equity  sticks.* 
Respondent  also  failed  to  create  a  physical  environment  that  engaged  all  students. 
Specifically,  Respondent  had  outdated  student  work  posted  on  her  closet  doors,  and  failed  to 
include  authentic  written  feedback  on  students’  tests  she  did  post.  Additionally,  Respondent 
failed  to  model  Standard  English  verbally  for  the  students  in  her  classroom,  in  that 
Respondent  repeatedly  said  “gonna”  instead  of  “going  to”  during  the  lesson.  Moreover,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  create  a  classroom  environment  that  was  safe  and 
accessible  for  all  students.  Specifically,  the  adjoining  classroom  door  was  blocked  bya 
pocket  chart,  a  pair  of  children’s  scissors  was  on  the  floor,  and  the  walkway  behind  one  of 
the  students’  tables  was  obstructed  by  three  backpacks  and  three  jackets  on  the  floor. 

89. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

Respondent  to  strategically  design  and  deliver  lessons  in  all  areas;  (2)  follow  her  lesson  plans 
and  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  reading/language  arts  program  with  fidelity;  (3) 
implement  suggestions  given  to  Respondent  by  the  Title  III  coach;  (4)  use  equity  sticks 
consistently  to  ensure  the  random  and  fair  selection  of  students;  (5)  provide  an  accurate  oral 
and  written  language  model  for  students  at  all  times,  using  Standard  English  when  speaking 
to  students;  (6)  update  bulletin  boards  with  current,  rubric-scored  student  samples  that 

®  Equity  sticks  are  popsicle  sticks,  each  one  containing  a  name  of  a  student. 

  
22 
  

  

  

  

   

include  visible,  comprehensive,  constructive  feedback;  and  (7)  ensure  all  walkways  remained 
unobstructed. 

90. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  remove  all  obstructions  from  door 

immediately.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  that  she  had  directed  Respondent  on  March 
14,  2012  and  April  12,  2012  to  follow  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  reading  program  with 
fidelity,  but  Respondent  still  had  not  done  so.  Ms.  Ariyasu  once  again  directed  Respondent 
to  follow  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  with  fidelity  daily.  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  if  she 
were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Ms.  Ariyasu  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard 
performance  evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if 
Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it 
could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

91. 

On  May  5S,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
May  2,  2012  conference  memo.  In  the  areas  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  stated 
that  she  had  been  following  the  Treasures  reading/language  arts  program  with  absolute 
fidelity,  and  had  been  using  strategies  given  by  the  Title  III  coach.  In  the  area  of  support  for 
student  learning,  Respondent  stated  she  worked  hard  to  create  a  physical  environment  that 
engaged  all  students  and  made  them  feel  happy  to  come  to  class.  Additionally,  Respondent 
stated  it  would  be  helpful  if  she  could  receive  some  positive  feedback  so  she  would  know 
what  she  should  build  upon.  Respondent  also  stated  she  would  refrain  from  saying  “gonna” 
and  enunciate  her  words  clearly.  In  addition,  Respondent  stated  that  due  to  budget  cuts,  the 
custodial  staff  had  been  reduced,  so  Respondent  often  swept  the  floor  and  encouraged  the 
Students  pick  up  their  own  trash.  Consequently,  there  were  no  major  safety  hazards. 

92. 

The  PAR  panel  submitted  a  reporting  form  to  the  District’s  employee  services 

Stating  that  Respondent  participated  in  the  PAR  program  from  September  15,  2011  to May 
11,  2012,  but  she  failed  to  meet  her  established  PAR  goals. 

93. 

Ana  Guzman,  who  was  assigned  to  Tenth  Street  as  a  full-time  Title  III  coach 

in  August  2011,  worked  with  Respondent  to  help  address  her  instructional  and  classroom 
management  issues.  Specifically,  Ms.  Guzman  worked  closely  with  Respondent,  using 
techniques  such  as  modeling,  demonstrating  lessons,  observations,  co-planning  with 
Respondent,  and  co-teaching  with  Respondent.  Despite  her  intervention,  Ms.  Guzman  noted 
Respondent’s  failure  to  improve  in  the  area  of  classroom  management,  and  the  delivery  of 
Respondent’s  lessons  lacked  structure  and  focus,  and  took  too  long.  For  example, 
Respondent  would  often  begin  teaching  a  lesson,  a  student  would  ask  Respondent  personal 
questions  to  which  Respondent  would  respond  and  go  on  tangents,  resulting  in  the  students 
becoming  distracted  and  disconnected  from  the  lesson.  Additionally,  Ms.  Guzman  witnessed 
Respondent  demonstrating  inconsistency  concerning  whether  she  would  post  objectives  on 
the  board,  and  generally  failed  to  follow  Ms.  Guzman’s  assistance  and  guidance  concerning 
posting  objectives  on  the  board.  Ms.  Guzman  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  meet  the 
needs  of  her  students  in  her  class,  because  she  failed  to  do‘a  good  job  of differentiating 

   

    
   
   
    

  

    
   
   
    

    

   

   

   

   
23   
                  
  
  
  
    
  

  

  

     

instruction.  For  example,  Respondent  selected  students  for  small  group  instruction  based  on 
disciplinary  issues  instead  of  on  assessment  data.  Moreover,  Ms.  Guzman  witnessed  safety 
issues  in  Respondent’s  classroom,  as  students  would  roam  outside  of  the  classroom,  yet 
Respondent  did  not  seem  to  notice,  resulting  in  Ms.  Guzman  directing  the  students  to  return 
to  the  classroom. 

  

(6) 

2011-2012  Stull  Evaluation 

94. 

On  May  9,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  prepared  a  Stull  evaluation  of Respondent’s 
performance  for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning, 
Respondent  needed  improvement  in  using  the  results  of  multiple  assessments  to  guide 
instruction,  guiding  all  students  to  be  self-directed  and  assess  their  own  learning,  engaging 
student  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities,  and  using  a  variety  of 
instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  Ms. Ariyasu 
commented  that  Respondent  used  limited  student  data,  and  failed  to  differentiate  instruction 
for  struggling  and  gifted  students. 

95. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Respondent  required 

improvement  in  demonstrating  evidence  of  short-term  and  long-term  plans  to  foster  student 
learning  and  achievement  of  the  State  Standards,  using  state  subject  matter  content  standards 
to  establish  rigorous  goals  for  students,  using  instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources, 
and  technologies  appropriate  to  the  subject  matter,  and  planning  instruction  to  ensure  that  all 
groups  of  students  had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum.  The  evaluation  also  noted  that 
Respondent  often  failed  to  teach  the  lessons  planned,  often  failed  to  deliver  a  lesson  with 
components  of  an  effective  directed  lesson,  provided  students  with  limited  opportunities  to 
engage  in  problem-solving  and  critical-thinking,  and  failed  to  effectively  deliver  developed 
and  sequenced  lessons. 

96. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  needed  improvement  in 

establishing  and  maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior  and  creating  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect,  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and 
routines  that  supported  student  learning,  and  using  instructional  time  effectively.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  that  Respondents  failure  to  consistently  monitor  student  behavior  resulted  in  a 
lack  of  equity  of  access  for  all  students.  Additionally,  Respondent  provided  limited 
opportunities  for  small  group  instruction  targeted  at  meeting  specific  student  needs,  and 
struggled  with  lesson  pacing.  Also,  in  the  area  of  developing  as  a  professional  educator,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  needed  improvement  in  providing  effective  supervision  of 
students,  and  commented  Respondent's  lack  of  appropriate  supervision  placed  students’ 
safety  at  risk. 

97. 

Respondent’s  overall  evaluation  was  “below  standard  performance.”  Ms. 
Ariyasu  included  a  three-page  attachment  to  Respondent’s  Stull  evaluation,  which  listed 
specific  deficiencies,  recommendations,  and  assistance  to  be  provided.  In  the  area  of  specific 
deficiencies,  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  Respondent:  (1)  lacked  appropriate  supervision  and 
attention  to  the  physical  environment  which  placed  students’  safety  at  risk;  (2)  failed  to  teach 

  
24 

  

     the  lessons  planned,  limiting  student  achievement  of  State  content  areas;  (3)  failed  to 

organize  lessons  in  a  way  that  supported  the  students’  understanding  of  concepts,  in  that 
Respondent  did  not  follow  the  lesson  plans  and  teacher’s  editions  of  core  programs;  (4) 
failed  to  deliver  lessons  in  a  clear  and  rigorous  manner,  and  often  lacked  an  appropriate 
instructional  objective;  (5)  failed  to  provide  differentiation  of  instruction  to  meet  the  needs  of 
students;  and  (6)  inconsistently  monitored  the  standard  for  student  behavior,  which  created  a 
Climate  that  lacked  fairness  and  respect. 

98. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  recommended  that  Respondent  (1)  supervise  students  at  all  times, 
never  leave  students  unattended,  and  maintain  a  safe  classroom  environment  accessible  to  all 
students;  (2)  be  prepared,  teach  lessons  as  planned,  and  follow  the  core  programs’  teacher’s 
edition  with  fidelity;  (3)  establish  effective  routines  and  procedures;  (4)  deliver  effective 
directed  lessons  and  establish  a  clear,  rigorous  learning  objective  and  align  activities  to 
accomplish  that  objective;  (5)  provide  opportunities  that  engage  students  in  their  learning  to 
ensure  meaningful  subject  matter;  (6)  plan  and  provide  for  rigorous  small  group  instruction 
daily;  (7)  deliver  District  mandated  programs  with  fidelity  and  monitor  pacing;  (8)  monitor 
student  behavior  at  all  times,  hold  students  accountable  for  their  behavior,  and  require  them 
to  change  their  own  behavior  card;  (9)  create  a  physical  environment  designed  to  engage  all 
students;  (10)  incorporate  concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  professional  development;  and 
(11)  consult  with  content  area  coaches  to  address  instructional  issues. 

  

99. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  Respondent  that  she  would  provide  her  with  the 
following  assistance:  (1)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue  meeting  with  Respondent  in  post- 
observation  conferences  concerning  areas  of  deficiencies:  (2)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue 
providing  Respondent  with  class-observation  summaries;  (3)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue 
previewing  Respondent’s  lesson  plans  every  Friday;  (4)  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  other  staff  to 
continue  to  provide  Respondent  with  specific  suggestions  as  to  how  she  can  improve  her 
performance;  (5)  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  continue  providing  opportunities  for  Respondent  to  plan  and 
work  collaboratively  with  and  observe  grade  level  colleagues;  (6)  literacy,  math,  and  English 
Language  Development  coaches  to  continue  providing  lesson  demonstrations  and  assistance 
in  areas  of  concern,  including  effective  directed  instruction,  planning  and  preparation, 
increasing  student  discourse  and  engagement  in  their  learning,  use  of  student  data  to  guide 
instruction,  differentiation  of  instruction,  certain  aspects  of  class  management,  teaching  the 
District  mandated  core  curriculum  with  fidelity,  incorporating  routines  and  procedures 
proscribed,  and  using  of  a  variety  of  resources  to  ensure  all  students  have  access  to  the  core 
curriculum;  (7)  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  staff  to  continue  providing  Respondent  with  professional 
development  sessions  focused  on  rigorous  instruction  in  the  core  content  areas;  (8)  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  others  to  continue  providing  Respondent  with  notices  regarding  outside 
professional  development  opportunities  covering  the  areas  of  concern;  and  (9)  Respondent  to 
be  given  an  opportunity  to  again  participate  in  other  District  resources,  as  Respondent  was  no 
longer  eligible  to  participate  in  the  PAR  program.  A  teacher  is  entitled  to  receive  PAR 
services  for  two  years  only.  Because  Respondent  received  PAR  services  for  the  2010-2011 
school  year  and  the  2011-2012  school  year,  she  was  not  entitled  to  receive  PAR  assistance 
for  the  upcoming  2012-2013  school  year. 

  

  

  

     

  

100. 

Respondent’s  failure  to  meet  her  PAR  goals  was  not  used  to  determine 

Respondent’s  Stull  evaluation. 

101. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  recommended  that  Respondent  be  evaluated  again  at  the  end  of 

the  next  school  year  (2012-2013). 

102. 

On  May  10,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  tesponse  to  the  Stull 

evaluation,  and  stated  in  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  she  used  the  results  of  a 
wide  variety  of  assessments  to  guide  instruction,  and  guided  students  to  be  self-directed  and 
assess  their  own  learning.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  she  did  not  simply  have  students 
recall  information,  but  rather  she  allowed  her  students  to  use  their  natural  curiosity  as 
children  to  imagine  different  ways  a  problem  could  be  solved.  Respondent  also  stated  she 
worked  hard  to  meet  the  diverse  needs  of  her  students. 

103. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Respondent  stated  she 

created  monthly  and  weekly  plans  for  her  class,  which  she  turned  in  to  Ms.  Ariyasu  every 
week,  although  on  Monday  instead  of  Friday  as  Ms.  Ariyasu  requested,  and  reflected  on  the 
California  common  core  standards  as  a  guide  to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals  for  her 
students.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  she  took  more  PAR  classes,  continued  using  a 
variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  technologies  she  practiced  with  her  PAR  professional, 
and  implemented  what  she  acquired  from  the  trainings  she  attended.  Respondent  also  stated 
she  adapted  her  presentation  of  subject  matter  in  ways  that  allowed  students  of  differing 
performance  levels  to  make  progress,  and  considered  it  one  of  her  greatest  strengths  as  an 
educator  to  demonstrate  flexibility  with  lesson  designs  in  order  to  challenge  her  students  and 
keep  them  engaged  in  learning, 

  

104. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  stated  she  established  and 
maintained  standards  for  student  behavior  through  rules,  procedures,  and  routines,  and  had 
posters,  pictures,  charts,  signals,  and  sayings  to  remind  students  of  expectations  for  student 
behavior.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  that  she  had  requested  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  specify 
how  she  wanted  Respondent  to  demonstrate  fairness  and  respect,  but  had  yet  to  hear  from 
Ms.  Ariyasu  in  that  regard.  Respondent  also  stated  she  strived  to  perfect  the  art  of  planning 
and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  to  support  student  learning,  and  with  so 
much  to  teach,  she  wasted  no  time,  but  rather  maximized  all  the  minutes  in  her  classroom 
schedule  and  kept  up  with  a  rigorous  pacing plan. 

105. 

Respondent  stated  she  felt  Ms.  Ariyasu  gave  her  an  overall  evaluation  of 
“below  standard  performance”  because  Ms.  Ariyasu  had  unfairly  held  Respondent  to  a 
higher  standard  than  other  teachers  under  her  Supervision. 

  

fff 

{fi 

  

   

  

B. 

Facts  Underlying  Charges:  Performance  (August  29,  2012  —  April  25,  2014) 

(1) 

2012  —  2013  School  Year 

106. 

For  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Respondent  had  fewer  students  in  her  class 

than  the  class  norm  of  20.  Specifically,  Respondent  had  16  to  18  students  in  her  class.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  assigned  more  high  performing  students  to  Respondent’s  class  than  the  norm. 

107. 

On  September  19,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  September  14,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  August  29,  2012  during  her  reading  lesson.  In  the 
area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  establish 
or  articulate  standards-based  objectives  for  student  learning,  and  failed  to  follow  the 
Treasures  teacher’s  edition  with  fidelity  by  omitting  important  elements,  such  as  vocabulary. 

108. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  failed  to  demonstrate 

knowledge  of  State  Standards  and  student  development.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to 
address  two  standards  in  the  selected  lesson,  namely  demonstrating  map  skills,  and  restating 
facts  and  details  to  clarify  and  organize  ideas.  Additionally,  Ms.  Atiyasu  noted Respondent 
did  not  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  to  create  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect.  Specifically,  throughout  the  entire  lesson,  students  shouted 
out  their  responses,  which  Respondent  accepted,  while  other  students  raised  their  hand  and 
waited  for  Respondent  to  give  them  permission  to  speak.  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 
failed  to  provide  an  effective  classroom  environment  in  that  she  posted  students’  work  that 
contained  no  standard,  rubric,  or  teacher  feedback,  and  there  were  no  student  samples  posted 
for  core  curricular  areas  such  as  math.  Also,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use 
instructional  time  effectively.  Specifically,  Respondent  spent  three  minutes  looking  through 
a  stack  of  sound  and  spelling  cards  to  find  the  ones  that  addressed  the  lesson  Respondent  was 
to  teach,  instead  of  having  those  cards  ready  beforehand. 

  

109. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  create  a  safe  and  engaging  physical 
environment  for  all  students  in  that  pencil  shavings  were  on  the  classroom  floor,  two  chairs 
were  placed  randomly  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  ceiling  lights  were  faint,  yet 
Respondent  had  not  notified  Ms.  Ariyasu  or  the  custodial  staff. 
student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  found  that  Respondent  failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional 
strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  Specifically, Respondent 
recited  a  sentence  frame  that  was  too  lengthy  for  the  students  to  use  by memory, 
mispronounced  a  phoneme  during  the  phoneme  segmentation,  used  “gonna”  instead  of 
“going  to,”  and  failed  to  respond  to  the  raised  hands  of  students  requesting  help.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  that  three  students  in  Respondent’s  class  had  an  Individualized  Education 
Program  (IEP)  because  of  speech  and  language  impairments,  and,  thus,  required  Respondent 
to  provide  them  with  clear  and  accurate  speech  models.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to 
engage  the  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  or  other  activities  that  would  make 
the  subject  matter  meaningful,  and  did  not  provide  effective  supervision  of  students. 

  

In  the  area  of  support  for 

  

     

Specifically,  several  students  were  off  task,  not  engaged  in  the  lesson,  kicking  their  feet, 
making  noises,  and  out  of  their  seats,  which  went  unnoticed  by  Respondent. 

  

110. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 
Respondent  to  write  and  state  the  standards-based  learning  objective  at  the  beginning  and  at 
the  end  of  each  lesson  to  help  focus  Respondent  and  the  students  on  the  intended  learning; 
(2)  follow  the  instructions  for  the  lessons  set  forth  in  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  to  ensure 
lessons  remain  standards-based,  engaging,  focused,  and  rigorous;  (3)  establish  and  maintain 
standards  for  student  behavior,  particularly  the  appropriate  manner  in  which  students  should 
respond  to  Respondent’s  questions  posed  during  lessons;  (4)  prepare  instructional  materials 
prior  to  teaching  lessons  in  order  to  maximize  instructional  time  and  effectiveness;  (5)  use  all 
three  learning  modalities  (auditory,  visual,  and  kinesthetic)  when  teaching  in  order  to 
accommodate  all  learning  styles  and  needs;  (6)  review  the  reading/language  arts  framework 
for  phonemic  awareness  and  carefully  enunciate  sounds  and  words  to  ensure  the  students 
have  an  accurate  speech  model  presented;  (7)  read  and  implement  all  relevant  aspects  of  IEP 
plans  for  students  with  special  needs  in  Respondent’s  class;  (8)  remove  trash  from  the  floor 
and  organize  all  classroom  furniture  to  ensure  a  safe  classroom  environment;  (9)  notify 
custodial  staff  when  things  fail  to  work  properly  in  the  classroom;  (10)  engage  and  monitor 
students  for  understanding  as  well  as  compliance  with  tasks  of  each  lesson:  and  (11)  display 
current  student  work  that  have  been  rubric-scored  with  constructive  specific  feedback,  and  an 
engaging,  thought-provoking  caption. 

111. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  read,  follow,  and 

implement  immediately  all  applicable  elements  of  the  IEP  plans  for  all  students  with  special 
needs  in  her  classroom;  (2)  write  and  state  the  standards-based  learning  objective  at  the 
beginning  and  at  the  end  of  each  lesson;  (3)  adhere  to  the  instructions  for  the  lessons  in  the 
Treasures  teacher’s  edition  to  ensure  the  delivery  of  engaging,  focused,  and  rigorous 
standard-based  lessons;  (4)  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior;  (5)  prepare 
instructional  materials  prior  to  teaching  lessons;  (6)  review  the  reading/language  arts 
framework  for  phonemic  awareness  and  carefully  enunciate  sounds  and  words  to  ensure  the 
students  have  an  accurate  speech  model  presented;  (7)  remove  trash  from  the  floor  and 
organize  ail  classroom  furniture  to  ensure  a  safe  classroom  environment;  (8)  engage  and 
monitor  students  for  understanding  as  well  as  compliance  with  tasks  of  each  lesson;  (9) 
circulate  and  scan  the  classroom  regularly  to  avoid  safety  hazards  and  inappropriate  behavior 
by  the  students;  (10)  and  display  current  student  work  that  have  been  rubric-scored  with 
constructive  specific  feedback,  and  an  engaging,  thought-provoking  caption. 

112. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 
performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 
dismissal  from  the  District. 

113. 

On  September  21,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  September  21,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  September  10,  2012  during  her  writing  lesson.  In 

  
28 

  

   the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

  

provide  an  appropriate  grade-level  standard  or  rigorous  learning  goal  for  the  students,  in  that 
Respondent  failed  to  write  the  topic  on  the  board.  Students  did  not  understand  the  objective 
or  the  purpose  of  the  writing  lesson.  Additionally,  Respondent  skipped  other  components 
planned  in  her  lesson  plan  for  that  day,  such  as  fluency  reading  that  focused  on  punctuation, 
phrasing,  and  pausing,  and  students  did  not  read  the  main  selection. 

114. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  ignored 

or  delayed  addressing  inappropriate  student  behavior,  and  failed  to  maintain  established 
classroom  rules,  resulting  in  a  climate  of  unfairness  and  disrespect.  Specifically,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  entered  the  classroom  because  she  heard  loud  noises  emanating  from  Respondent’s 
class  as  she  walked  down  the  hall,  and  observed  students  throwing  blocks  on  the  floor,  the 
entire  class  talking,  a  “gun  fight”  with  sound  effects  between  students,  students  hopping, 
jumping,  and  whistling,  all  of  which  Respondent  ignored  or  failed  to  address.  Respondent 
failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively  as  a  result  of  Respondent’s  lack  of  classroom 
procedures.  Specifically,  a  five-minute  writing  prompt  activity  lasted  33  minutes,  it  took 
eight  minutes  for  Respondent  to  pass  out  the  students’  readers,  and  Respondent  failed  to  use 
the  decodable  text  routine  as  indicated  in  the  Treasures  teachers’  guide.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also 
noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  subject  matter  knowledge  to  organize  and  sequence  the 
lessons  in  order  to  increase  student  learning,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to  model  or  provide  a 
clear,  coherent  explanation  of  what  she  wanted  to  the  students  to  know  and  be  able  to do, 
failed  to  follow  the  lesson  sequence  in  the  Treasures  teachers’  guide,  and  failed  to  use 
transparencies  provided  to  support  student  learning  for  writing,  fluency,  and  comprehension 
objectives, 

115. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 

failed  to  engage  the  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities 
designed  to  make  the  subject  matter  meaningful,  causing  students  to  lose  interest,  disengage 
in  their  learning,  and  drift  off-task.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  observed  no  differentiation  of 
instruction  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  Also,  Respondent  demonstrated  inequity  in 
calling  on  students,  in  that  only  11  out  of  20  students  spoke,  seven  of  those  speaking  more 
than  once. 

116. 

During  the  conference,  Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following 

guidance  and  assistance:  (1)  identify  a  clear,  standards-based  instructional  objective  and 
teach  to  that  objective;  (2)  deliver  an  effective  directed  lesson  designed  to  activate prior 
knowledge;  model  and  explain  what  students  should  know  and  be  able  to  do;  include  guided 
and  independent  practice  to  check  for  understanding;  provide  evidence  that  students 
understood  the  lesson;  reteach  when  needed;  (3)  teach  pursuant  to  the  lesson  plan  and  use  the 
Treasures  teachers’  guide  to  help  plan  and  organize  lessons;  (4)  use  all  learning  modalities 
when  teaching  and  giving  instructions,  and  verbalize  and  write  instructions;  (5)  differentiate 
instruction  for  students  with  differing  abilities  and  language  development  needs  by  using  a 
variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  that  respond  to  student  needs;  (6)  manage 
time  to  ensure  the  inclusion  of  small  group  instruction  to  meet  the  individual  needs  of 
students,  use  assessment  results  to  plan  small  group  instruction,  and  provide  academic  rigor 

  

29 

  

  

  

  

for  each  small  group  to  maximize  the  use  of  time  with  those  students  to  pre-teach,  reteach,  or 
enrich  lessons;  (7)  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior,  pay  attention  to  student  behavior, 
and  intervene  when  necessary;  (8)  use  equity  sticks  consistently  to  ensure  the  random  and 
fair  selection  of  students;  (9)  develop  behavior  contracts  with  the  students  and  parents  as 
needed;  (10)  review  the  2012-2013  professional  development  schedule  from  the  PAR 
program  and  review  the  class  management  selections;  (11)  establish  effective  routines  for 
passing  out  papers  and  books;  (12)  review  How  to  Teach  Routines  article  Ms.  Ariyasu  gave 
Respondent;  (13)  incorporate  concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  the  Tenth  Street 
professional  development  sessions;  and  (14)  consult  with  content  coaches  on  a  weekly  basis 
to  address  instructional  issues. 

117. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  establish  a  clear  objective  and  align  all 

activities  to  accomplish  that  objective;  (2)  teach  the  lesson  as  planned;  (3)  be  prepared  and 
teach  an  effective  directed  lesson  with a  clear,  rigorous  learning  objective;  (4)  follow  the 
Treasures  teacher’s  edition  program  with  fidelity;  (5)  monitor  pacing  to  ensure  the  teaching 
of  the  Treasures  program  with  fidelity;  (6)  maintain  standards  for  students;  (7)  differentiate 
instruction  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  students;  (8)  include  small  group  instruction  daily;  (9) 
continue  to  incorporate  concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  professional  development 
sessions;  and  (10)  continue  to  consult  with  content  area  coaches  weekly  regarding 
instructional  issues.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  directives  or 
make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an 
overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of 
Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

118. 

On  October  1,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu, 
stating,  in  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  she  wanted  Ms.  Ariyasu  to  provide a  list  of  the 
standards  and/or  goals  appropriate  and  approved  for  use  at  Tenth  Street,  Additionally, 
Respondent  stated  that  she  had  been  using  strategies  suggested  by  the  PAR  professional.  In 
the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  stated  the  standards  of  student  behavior  were 
“more  easily  maintained  in  a  classroom  of  student  who  [had]  not  suffered  through  such 
traumatic  personal  histories  and  family  tragedies  as  the  ones  haunting  the  lives  of  the 
students  in  [Respondent’s]  current  class.”  Respondent  stated  that  the  students’  inappropriate 
behavior  was  “a  symptom  of  the  turmoil  and  hardships  the  youngsters  in  [Respondent’s] 
class  have  been  enduring  for  quite  some  time.”  Consequently,  in  certain  situations, 
Respondent  “chose  to  remain  calm  and  not  overreact  to  every  single  quirk,  tic,  or  disorder 
exhibited  by  some  students.” 

119. 

On  November  15,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  November  14,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  November  14,  2012  during  her  math  lesson.  In 
the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  no  evidence  of  short-term 
or  long-term  planning  to  foster  student  learning  and  achievement  of  State  Standards,  as 
Respondent  had  written  nothing  in  her  lesson  plan  for  math  independent  work  time  for  the 
week  of  October  22  —  26,  2012. 

30 

 

  

 

120. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  and 
maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  and  create  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and 
respect.  Specifically,  Respondent  continued  to  allow  and  acknowledge  students  who  shouted 
out  their  responses,  while  others  raised  their  hand  and  waited  for  Respondent  to  give  them 
permission  to  speak.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  no  evidence  of  planned  or 
implemented  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  supported  student  learning. 
Specifically,  students  left  their  seats  without  Respondent’s  permission,  and  Respondent 
lacked  a  system  for  students  to  acquire  pencils  and  erasers  or  to  have  their  pencils  sharpened. 
Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  did  not  provide  an  engaging  and  safe  classroom 
environment  for  all  students,  in  that  Respondent  continued  not  to  post  student  samples  of 
math  work,  failed  to  include  scoring  rubrics,  or  teacher  feedback  on  the  posted  work,  and 
failed  to  keep  the  walkways  clear  of  debris  and  tripping  hazards.  Moreover,  Ms.  Ariyasu 
noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to 
follow  her  lesson  plan  and  begin  teaching  math  at  8:00.  Instead,  Respondent  did  not  begin 
the  math  lesson  until  8:18,  nearly  20  minutes  behind  schedule,  because  Respondent  was 
using  the  time  for  students  to  eat  snacks. 

121. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 

failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse 
needs.  Specifically,  Respondent  did  not  attempt  to  capture  or  redirect  the  attention  of  some 
students  or  include  them  in  the  math  review,  as  they  played  with  pencils,  squirmed,  placed 
head  on  desk,  talked  to  neighbors,  and  left  their  chairs. 

122. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

Respondent  to  show  evidence  of  planning  by  having  complete  lesson  plans  for  the  entire 
school  day,  including  for  small  group  instruction;  (2)  establish  and  maintain  standards  for 
student  behavior,  especially  the  appropriate  way  to  respond  to  Respondent’s  questions  and  to 
leave  their  seats,  and  be  consistent  when  requiring  students  to  raise  their  hands  and  gain 
permission  before  speaking  or  leaving  their  seats;  (3)  refrain  from  isolating  students  from  the 
rest  of  the  class  for  extended  periods  of  time;  (4)  be  mindful  of  what  to  say  to  students  in 
order  to  avoid  being  offensive  to  them;  (5)  ensure  an  adequate  supply  of  instructional 
materials  for  students;  (6)  remove  trash  from  the  floor  and  hold  students  responsible  for 
putting  away  their  belongings  to  avoid  the  blocking  of  walkways;  (7)  avoid  using 
instructional  time  for  snacking;  (8)  engage  all  students  and  monitor  them  for  understanding; 
(9)  attend  professional  development  workshops  to  improve  in  areas  of  instruction  and 
classroom  management;  and  (10)  display  current  student  work,  which  includes  rubric- 
Scoring,  constructive  feedback  ,  and  a  thought-provoking  caption. 

123. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  demonstrate 

evidence  of  planning  by  developing  complete  lesson  plans  for  the  entire  day  and  for  small 
group  instruction;  (2)  follow  lesson  plans  and  the  daily  schedule;  (3)  establish  and  maintain 
standards  for  student  behavior  in  how  students  should  respond  to  questions  and  leave  their 
seats;  (4)  engage  all  students  in  all  lessons  and  monitor  them  for  comprehension  of  the 
lesson,  participation  in  learning  activities,  and  compliance  of  both  classroom  and  school 
rules;  (5)  circulate  and  scan  the  classroom  regularly  to  prevent  and  correct  safety  hazards  and 

31 

  

 

inappropriate  behavior  by  the  students;  (6)  display  current  student  work  in  math  and 
language  arts,  which  includes  rubric-scoring,  constructive  feedback  ,  and  thought-provoking 
captions;  and  (7)  maintain  a  clean,  neat,  and  orderly  room,  free  of  tripping  hazards.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  directives  or  make  an  immediate  and 
sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 
performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 
dismissal  from  the  District. 

124. 

On  November  29,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  November  16,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  November  9,  2012  during  her  math  lesson,  and  of 
two  student  injuries  during  class  on  November  9  and  15,  2012.  In  the  area  of  planning  and 
designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  there  was  no  evidence  of  an  appropriate  grade  level 
standard  or  rigorous  learning  goal  for  students,  in  that  there  was  no  objective  written  on  the 
board  when  Ms.  Ariyasu  entered  at  8:13  a.m.,  students  were  walking  around,  talking,  sitting, 
and  waiting  because  Respondent  had  not  given  them  an  assignment. 
Also,  at  8:25  a.m.,  after 
Respondent  spent  ten  minutes  telling  students  how  to  “borrow  and  take  away,”  students  did 
not  understand  the  objective  or  the  purpose  of  the  lesson.  Specifically,  three  students  worked 
on  the  assignment,  while  16  students  talked.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  lacked 
preparation  and  failed  to  teach  the  District’s  math  program  with  fidelity,  leading  to  a  loss  of 
instructional  time.  Specifically,  math  should  have  begun  at  8:00  a.m.,  but  Respondent  did 
not  begin  teaching  the  math  lesson  until  8:13  a.m.,  and  did  not  follow  the  procedures 
indicated  in  the  teacher's  guide. 

125. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  and  create  a  climate  that  promoted 
fairness  and  respect.  Specifically,  Respondent’s  lack  of  classroom  management  allowed 
student  behavior  to  become  so  disruptive,  students  could  not  learn.  Respondent  either 
ignored  or  delayed  addressing  inappropriate  student  behavior,  failed  to  maintain  established 
classroom  rules,  and  responded  to  students  inconsistently,  judgmentally,  or  non-responsively. 

126. 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted Respondent 
failed  to  engage  the  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities  to 
make  the  subject  matter  meaningful.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  provide 
differentiation  of  instruction  during  whole  group  instruction,  failed  to  use  a  variety  of 
instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs,  and  told  students 
what  number  to  place  on  their  assignments  to  get  the  answer  instead  of  having  the  students 
figure  out  the  answer  on  their  own.  Additionally,  Respondent  favored  some  students  over 
others,  in  that  Respondent  frequently  called  on  some  to  answer  a  question  or  contribute  to  the 
discussion,  while  others  were  ignored  or  scolded  when  they  made  efforts  to participate. 

127. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  expressed  concerns  that  Respondent’s  lack  of  supervision  and 

failure  to  effectively  manage  her  class  resulted  in  two  incidents  in  which  students  were 
injured  in  the  classroom.  Specifically,  on  November  9,  2012,  one  student  chased  another 
student  in  the  classroom,  and  then  pushed  the  student,  causing  him  to  slide  onto  the  floor  and 

32 

  

 

strike  his  head  on  the  metal  leg  of  a  chair,  requiring  him  to  undergo  first  aid  at  the  nurse’s 
office.  At  12:13  p.m.,  when  Ms.  Ariyasu  returned  the  student  to  Respondent’s  class,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  Respondent’s  classroom  environment  was  loud  and  disruptive,  with  students 
running  around  the  classroom  and  three  students  on  the  yard  without  a  hall  pass,  instead  of 
the  students  in  their  seats  working  on  their  journal  writing  assignment.  On  November  15, 
2012,  one  student  had  kicked  another  student  in  the  head  while  in  the  classroom,  in  response 
to  the  student  throwing  a  juice  bag  that  hit  the  other  student  in  the  face.  Additionally,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  had  received  two  parent  complaints  that  week  stating  that  Respondent’s  classroom 
was  out  of  control. 

128. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

plan  and  identify  a  clear,  standards-based  instructional  objective  by  writing  it  on  the  board  in 
words  that  students  can  understand,  teach  to  that  objective,  and  check  students  for 
understanding  throughout  the  lesson;  (2)  deliver  an  effective  directed  lesson  that  activated 
prior  knowledge,  model  and  explain  what  students  should  know  and  be  able  to  do,  include 
guided  and  independent  practice  to  check  for  understanding,  provide  evidence  students 
understood  lesson,  and  reteach  when  necessary;  (3)  teach  the  lesson  planned  and  use  the 
teacher’s  guide  to  help  plan  and  organize  lessons;  (4)  use  all  learning  modalities  when 
teaching  and  giving  instructions;  (5)  differentiate  instruction  by  providing  small  group 
instruction  to  reteach  critical  concepts;  (6)  manage  time  to  include  small  group  instruction  to 
meet  the  individual  needs  of  students,  and  use  assessment  results  to  plan  small  group 
instruction;  (7)  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior;  (8)  contact  parents  and  create 
behavior  contracts  for  students;  (9)  use  equity  sticks  consistently  to  ensure  the  random  and 
fair  selection  of  students;  (10)  complete  a  classroom  management  professional  development 
session;  (11)  follow  the  instructional  routines  and  procedures  indicated  in  the  teacher’s  guide 
in  order  to  provide  students  with  a  productive  learning  environment,  maximize  instructional 
time,  and  increase  student  participation;  (12)  read  weekly  articles  and  tips  regarding 
classroom  management  on  www.smartclassroommanagement.com;  (13)  incorporate  concepts 
and  strategies  presented  in  Tenth  Street’s  professional  development  sessions;  (14)  meet  with 
math  coach  to  address  Respondent’s  math  instructional  issues;  (15)  implement  a  new 
behavior  plan  and  be  consistent  with  the  implementation  of  that  plan;  (16)  monitor  student 
behavior  by  walking  around  the  classroom  frequently;  (17)  seek  the  assistance  of  an 
administrator  when  encountering  student  discipline  issues;  (18)  send  students  in  pairs  to  the 
bathroom  and  monitor  the  time  they  are  out  of  class;  (19)  maintain  regular  communication 
with  parents  when  concerns  arise  regarding  a  student’s  behavior;  (20)  review  intervention 
strategies  from  the  Behavior  Intervention  Manual,  for  students  who  fail  to  demonstrate 
appropriate  behavior;  (21)  effectively  address  student  concerns  immediately;  and  (22)  post 
an  agenda  on  the  board  with  specific  times  for  each  activity. 

129. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  establish  a  clear 

learning  objective  and  align  all  activities  as  addressed  in  the  instructional  guide  to 
accomplish  the  learning  objective;  (2)  use  teachers’  guides  when  planning  and  then  teach  the 
lesson  as  planned;  (3)  be  prepared  and  teach  an  effective  directed  lesson  with  a  clear  and 
rigorous  learning  objective;  (4)  follow  the  enVision  (math  program)  with  fidelity;  (5) 
monitor  pacing  to  ensure  the  teaching  of  the  math  program  with  fidelity;  (6)  differentiate 

33 

   instruction  to  meet  the  needs  of  ail  students;  (7)  include  small  group  instruction  daily;  (8) 

continue  to  incorporate  concepts  and  strategies  presented  in  professional  develop  sessions; 
(9)  continue  to  consult  with  content  area  coaches  on  a  weekly  basis  to  address  instructional 
issues;  (10)  establish  effective  routines  and  procedures  to  maximize  instructional  time;  (11) 
evaluate  the  behavior  plan  and  make  changes  as  needed,  and  be  consistent  in  its 
implementation;  (12)  seek  administrative  assistance  after  exhausting  all  of  the  consequences 
of  the  discipline  plan;  (13)  communicate  with  parents  on  a  regular  basis;  and  (14)  address 
student  and  parent  concerns  in  a  timely  manner.  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  if  she  were  to 
evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Ms.  Ariyasu  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard 
performance  evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if 
Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it 
could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

130. 

On  December  4,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  November  30,  2012,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  November  30,  2012.  In  the  area  of  planning  and 
designing  instruction,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  indicated  no  small  group  instruction  in 
her  lesson  plan,  despite  Respondent  sending  five  students  to  five  different  small  groups,  and 
there  were  no  instructional  objectives  posted  on  the  board. 

131. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

provide  evidence  of  an  effective  directed  lesson  as  she  did  not  explain  the  instructional 
purpose  to  the  students  and  the  students  were  unable  to  communicate  the  objective,  and 
failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies,  materials  or  resources  appropriate  to  the 
subject  matter.  Specifically,  Respondent  spent  27  minutes  in  a  discussion  that  offered 
limited  student  participation,  failed  to  require  students  to  consistently  refer  to  the  test  to 
justify  or  explain  their  answers,  and  did  not  check  understanding  in  order  to  determine 
whether  the  students  mastered  the  concept.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  had 
not  taught  the  lesson  planned.  Also,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  and  maintain  standards 
for  student  behavior  to  promote  fairness  and  respect,  as  Respondent  ignored  or  delayed 
addressing  appropriate  and  inappropriate  student  behavior.  Specifically,  Respondent 
permitted  students  to  continue  shouting  out  their  responses,  despite  other  students’  raised 
hands.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  maintain  established  classroom  rules,  by  allowing 
a  student  to  deliberately  disrupt  the  class  without  issuing  consequences.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also 
commented  that  Respondent’s  failure  to  effectively  manage  her  classroom  resulted  in  her 
class  becoming  disruptive  (i.c.,  yelling,  loud  noises,  talking,  slamming  books  on  tables, 
leaving  seats  without  permission,  and  dropping  chairs).  Moreover,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted 
Respondent’s  lack  of  established  routines  and  procedures  during  small  group  instruction 
resulted  in  a  loss  and  instructional  time  and  more  behavioral  issues.  Specifically,  no 
evidences  existed  demonstrating  how  Respondent  assigned  students  to  small  groups,  what 
data  Respondent  used  to  determine  the  student  groups,  and  instructional  groups  did  not 
support  student  learning  towards  the  instructional  outcome  of  the  lesson. 

  

  

  

  

132. 

In  the.area  of  support  of  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 

    
  

failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse 
needs  as  Respondent  failed  to  provide  any  re-teaching  for  those  students  who  required  extra 
support  or  enrichment  for  those  students  who  were  advanced.  Specifically,  Respondent 
failed  to  ask  students  to  explain  their  thinking  when  answering  questions,  give  benchmark  or 
above  benchmark  students  more  rigorous  instruction  based  on  their  academic  needs,  use 
strategies  or  activities  provided  in  the  teachers’  guide  for  small  group  instruction,  and  use 
results  of  any  assessments  to  guide  instruction  or  determine  groups  for  small  group 
instruction.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  provide  effective 
supervision  of  students,  as  many  students  were  off-task  during  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  observation. 
Also,  Respondent  failed  to  notice  unsafe  actions  committed  by  some  students,  such  as  a 
student  leaving  class  without  permission  for  15  minutes,  and  Respondent  failing  to  ask  where 
the  student  had  been. 

133. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 
show  evidence  of  planning  by  having  complete  lesson  plans  for  the  entire  day  and  for  small 
group  instruction;  follow  the  grade  level  schedule  in  order  to  provide  students  with  the 
appropriate  number  of  instructional  minutes  in  each  curricular  area;  (2)  identify  clear, 
standards-based  instructional  objective  and  teach  to  that  objective;  (3)  follow  with  fidelity 
the  instructions  for  lessons  in  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  to  make  lessons  standards- 
based,  more  engaging,  focused,  and  rigorous;  (4)  teach  lessons  as  planned  and  follow  the 
teacher’s  edition  with  fidelity;  (5)  deliver  an  effective  directed  lesson  that  activates  prior 
knowledge,  model  and  explain  what  students  should  know  and  be  able  to  do,  include  guided 
and  independent  practice  to  check  for  understanding,  provide  evidence  students  understood 
lesson,  and  reteach  when  necessary;  (6)  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student 
behavior,  especially  the  appropriate  way  to  respond  to  Respondent’s  questions,  leave  their 
seats,  and  leave  the  classroom,  and  be  consistent  when  requiring  students  to  raise  their  hands 
and  gain  permission  before  speaking,  leaving  their  seats,  or  leaving  the  classroom;  (7) 
continue  to  create  and  reinforce  behavior  contracts  for  students  requiring  extra  behavioral 
support;  (8)  establish  effective  routines  and  procedures  during  small  group  instruction;  (9) 
pay  attention  to  student  behavior  and  intervene  when  necessary;  (10)  engage  all  students  and 
monitor  them  for  understanding;  (11)  attend  professional  development  workshops  and 
sessions  to  help  improve  instructional  and  classroom  management  areas;  and  (12)  work  with 
the  core  coach  to  assist  with  organizing  for  small  group  instruction. 

134. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  turn  in  evidence  of 
planning  to  Ms.  Ariyasu  every  Friday  for  plans  to  be  implemented  the  following  week;  (2) 
follow  lesson  plans  and  daily  schedule  by  teaching  the  lesson  planned;  (3)  establish  a  clear 
learning  objective  and  align  all  activities  in  order  to  accomplish  that  objective;  (4)  be 
prepared  and  teach  directed  lessons;  (5)  follow  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  program  with 
fidelity;  use  materials  and  resources  to  make  the  subject  matter  accessible  to  all students; 
monitor  pacing;  (6)  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior,  especially  the 
appropriate  way  to  respond  to  Respondent’s  questions,  leave  their  seats,  and  leave  the 
classroom,  and  be.  consistent  when  requiring  students  to  raise  their  hands  and  gain  permission 
before  speaking,  leaving  their  seats,  or  leaving  the  classroom;  (7)  establish  routines  and 

  
35 

  

  

 

procedures  for  small  group  instruction;  (8)  engage  all  students  in  all  lessons  and  monitor 
them  for  comprehension  of  the  lesson,  participation  in  learning  activities,  and  compliance  to 
both  the  classroom  and  school  rules;  (9)  develop  behavior  contracts  as  needed;  (10)  circulate 
and  scan  the  classroom  regularly  to  prevent  and  correct  safety  hazards  and  inappropriate 
behavior  by  students;  and  (11)  work  with  the  core  coach  to  assist  with  organizing  for  small 
group  instruction.  Ms.  Ariyasu  stated  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which  could 
result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 
dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 
immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below 
standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

135. 

On  December  13,  2012,  Ms.  Ariyasu  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee,  suspending  Respondent  without  pay  for  a  period  of 
five  days,  and  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  for  the 
period  from  November  29,  2011  to  May  16,  2012,  for  (1)  failing  to  follow  District  and 
school  policies  and  procedures;  (2)  failing  to  follow  administrative  directives;  (3)  failing  to 
demonstrate  proper  presentation  of  subject  matter;  (4)  failing  to  follow  recommended  course 
of  study;  (5)  failing  to  meet  the  individual  needs  of  students;  (6)  failing  to  provide  a  safe 
learning  environment  for  students;  (7)  failing  to  provide  appropriate  supervision  of  students; 
and  (8)  failing  to  adequately  plan  and/or  prepare  for  instruction. 

136. 

Ms.  Guzman,  who  had  worked  closely  with  Respondent  as  the  Title  III  coach 
since  August  2011,  ended  her  tenure  at  Tenth  Street  in  December  2013.  Ms.  Guzman  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  improve  during  Ms.  Guzman’s  period  at  Tenth  Street. 

137. 

On  February  1,  2013,  Ms.  Ariyasu  memorialized  the  substance  of  a  conference 

she  held  with  Respondent  on  January  31,  2013,  regarding  Ms.  Ariyasu’s  observation  of 
Respondent’s  classroom  on  January  31,  2012  during  Respondent’s  language  arts  lesson.  In 
the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Atiyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use 
instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources,  and  technologies  appropriate  to  the  subject 
matter.  Specifically,  Respondent  did  not  properly  or  adequately  use  the  teacher’s  assistant 
assigned  to  her  class  to  provide  instructional  support  to  the  students.  Respondent  had  not 
provided  the  teacher’s  assistant  with  a  plan  or  discussed  with  him  his  responsibilities  prior  to 
assigning  him  to  work  with  a  group  of  students,  each  of  whom  had  different  worksheets  to 
complete.  Consequently,  the  teacher’s  assistant  had  to  individually  explain  to  each  student 
what  their  particular  worksheet  required.  Additionally,  the  paper  Respondent  provided  her 
students  were  not  developmentally  appropriate  for  second  graders  as  the  line  spaces  were 
narrow,  and  Respondent  had  previously  provided  them  with  unlined  paper  to  write  letters. 
Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  continued  to  not  plan  instruction  to  ensure  all  students 
had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum,  in  that  one  student  was  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the 
students  for  more  than  16  minutes. 

36 

138. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  and  create  a  climate  that  promoted 
fairness  and  respect,  as  Respondent’s  behavior  management  practices  were  negative. 
Specifically,  Respondent  erased  table  points  rather  than  simply  giving  table  points  to  tables 
where  the  students  behaved  properly,  and  told  two  students  to  turn  their  behavior  cards 
without  telling  them  why  they  were  being  penalized.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  provide  an  engaging  and  safe  classroom  for  all  students  by  continuing 
to  not  post  student  samples  of  math  work,  posting  writing  samples  that  continued  to  include 
no  scoring  rubric,  rubric  scores,  standards,  or  teacher  feedback,  and  by  continuing  to  permit 
debris  and  other  tripping  hazards  in  the  walkway,  such  as  jackets,  books,  scraps  of  papers, 
pencils,  and  backpacks.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  time 
effectively,  as  Respondent  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plan  and  schedule. 

139. 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning,  Ms.  Ariyasu  noted  Respondent 

failed  to  engage  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities  by 
instructing  the  students  to  visualize  something  and  then  write  “what  happened  in  Chapter  3” 
without  demonstrating  how  they  should  complete  their  task.  Ms.  Ariyasu  also  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  provide  effective  supervision  of  students  by  not  noticing  or  not 
addressing  off-task  behavior,  and  by  remaining  in  her  chair  at  the  front  of  the  class  instead  of 
walking  around  and  monitoring  student  learning  and  student  behavior.  Additionally,  Ms. 
Ariyasu  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to 
respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  Specifically,  when  Respondent  instructed  students  to 
write  a  summary  of  one  their  reading  chapters,  she  failed  to  provide  them  with  a  visual 
example  of  one,  even  though  it  was  something  required  by  one  of  her  student’s  IEP. 

140. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 
provide  students  with  developmentally  appropriate  writing  paper;  (2)  plan  the  duties  of  the 
teacher’s  assistant  in  order  to  maximize  his  time  in  the  classroom;  (3)  support  the  use  of 
instructional  resources  such  as  dictionaries  or  word  books  by  allowing  and  encouraging 
students  to  use  them;  (4)  promote  a  climate  of  fairness  and  respect  by  not  continuing  to 
isolate  students  from  the  rest  of  the  class  for  extended  periods  of  time,  erasing  table  points 
from  table  groups  rather  than  adding  points  to  others,  and  being  mindful  of  behavior 
management  practices  and  supporting  positive  behavior  by  being  positive  with  the  students; 
(5)  refrain  from  assigning  students  to  work  on  subject  matter  not  taught  to  the  rest  of  the 
students  to  avoid  providing  unequal  access  to  the  curriculum;  (6)  follow  the  daily  schedule  in 
order  to  provide  students  with  the  appropriate  number  of  instructional  minutes  for  each 
subject;  (7)  remove  trash  from  the  floor  and  hold  students  responsible  for  putting  away  their 
belongings  to  avoid  blocking  walkways;  (8)  make  sure  closet  doors  remain  closed  to  avoid 
safety  hazards;  (9)  engage  all  students  by  using  a  variety  of  instructional  Strategies  and 
monitor  them  for  understanding  and  compliance;  circulate  and  scan  the  classroom  regularly 
to  prevent  or  respond  to  sagely  hazards  and  inappropriate  behavior;  (10)  attend  some 
professional  development  workshops  to  help  improve  instruction  and  classroom management 
skills;  and  (11)  display  current,  rubric-scored  student  work  in  language  arts  and  math,  and 
include  specific  feedback  and  an  engaging,  thought-provoking caption. 

37 

  

 

  

 

141. 

Ms.  Ariyasu  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  follow  lesson  plans  and  daily  schedule 

by  teaching  the  lesson  planned;  (2)  engage  all  students  in  all  lessons  and  monitor  them  for 
comprehension  of  the  lesson,  participation  in  learning  activities,  and  compliance  to  both  the 
classroom  and  school  rules;  (3)  treat  all  students  with  respect;  (4)  circulate  and  scan  the 
classroom  regularly  to  prevent  or  respond  to  safety  hazards  and  inappropriate  behavior;  (5) 
display  current,  rubric-scored  student  work  in  language  arts  and  math,  and  include  specific 
feedback  and  an  engaging,  thought-provoking  captions;  (6)  maintain  a  clean,  neat,  orderly 
room  and  keep  all  walkways  clear  of  any  item  which  could  be  a  tripping  hazard.  Ms.  Ariyasu 
stated  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Ms.  Ariyasu  would  give  her  an 
overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms. 
Ariyasu  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement 
in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

142. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Ariyasu,  who  had  been  employed  with  the  District  since  1973, 

served  as  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  12  years,  served  as  an  assistant  principal  for  one 
and  one-half  years,  and  who  began  serving  as  a  principal  in  1986,  opined,  based  on  her 
experience  and  observations,  that  Respondent  should  not  return  to  the  classroom,  because  she 
failed  to  demonstrate  the  ability  to  make  substantial  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  ability 
to  carry  out  her  duties  as  a  teacher,  despite  the  extensive  assistance  and  guidance  provided  to 
Respondent  over  the  years.  Ms.  Ariyasu  considered  Respondent  to  be  unprepared, 
unorganized,  unable  to  demonstrate  classroom  management  or  monitor  student  behavior, 
unable  to  deliver  directed  lessons  properly,  unable  to  teach  core  District  programs  with 
fidelity,  and  an  overall  ineffective  teacher. 

143. 

At  the  beginning  of  February  2013,  Ms.  Ariyasu  left  her  position  as  a  principal 
at  Tenth  Street  to  accept  a  promotion  to a staff  relations  position  with  the  District.  The  new 
principal,  Juan  Alfayate,  began  at  Tenth  Street  immediately  thereafter.  Ms.  Ariyasu  did  not 
talk  to  Mr.  Alfayate  about  Respondent,  but  did  provide  him  with  all  of  the  personnel  files  of 
all  of  the  teachers  at  Tenth  Street,  and  talked  to  him  about  the  operation  of  the  school. 

144, 

Mr.  Alfayate  visited  and  observed  all  of  the  classrooms  during  his  first  week  at 
Tenth  Street,  including  Respondent’s,  for  approximately  five  to  seven  minutes.  During  these 
observations,  Mr.  Alfayate  became  concerned  about  Respondent’s  class.  Specifically,  Mr. 
Alfayate  noted  Respondent’s  lack  of  classroom  management,  where  students  were  off-task 
and  not  engaged.  Consequently,  Mr.  Alfayate  made  plans  to  return  to  Respondent’s  class  to 
conduct  further  observations. 

145. 

On  February  15,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 
conference  he  held  with  Respondent  on  February  14,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  February  14,  2013,  during  Respondent’s 
Academic  Language  Development  (ALD)  lesson. 
instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  state  subject  matter  content 
standards  to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals  for  students.  Specifically,  as  Respondent 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing 

38 

     

started  her  lesson,  she  wrote  on  the  board,  “Objective:  Oral  vocabulary,”  which  was  part  of  a 
daily  schedule,  but  did  not  qualify  as  a  standards-based  objective.  Additionally,  at  no  time 
during  the  lesson  did  Respondent  tell  the  students  the  purpose  of  the  lesson.  Mr.  Alfayate 
also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources,  or 
technologies  that  were  appropriate  to  the  learning  activities.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed 
to  refer  to  her  lesson  plan  during  the  lesson,  or  adhere  to  the  lesson  plan,  which  resulted  in 
Respondent’s  introduction  of  vocabulary  words  unrelated  to  the  planned  lesson. 

146. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  or  create  a  climate  that  promoted 
fairness  and  respect.  Specifically,  during  the  transition  from  math  to  ALD,  one  student 
remained  on  the  floor  distracting  other  students,  yet  Respondent  never  redirected  his 
behavior.  Additionally,  during  the  ALD  lesson,  several  students  were  off-task,  yet 
Respondent  did  not  redirect  them.  Mr.  Alfayate  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use 
instructional  time  effectively.  Specifically,  according  to  Respondent’s  lesson plan, 
Respondent  was  supposed  to  deliver  the  ALD  lesson  at  10:00  a.m.  until  10:30  a.m.,  however, 
when  Mr.  Alfayate  entered  Respondent’s  classroom  at  10:10  a.m.,  most  of  the  students  were 
working  on  a  math  activity,  which  Respondent  did  not  conclude  until  10:18  a.m.,  resulting  in 
a  loss  of  18  minutes  of  instruction  for  ALD.  Also,  Respondent  wasted  approximately  eight 
minutes  during  the  transition  to  small  group  instruction,  because  Respondent  failed  to  plan 
and  prepare  for  small  group  activities.  Specifically,  Respondent  spent  five  minutes  of 
instructional  time  to  explain  to  the  teacher’s  assistant  what  she  expected  the  teacher's 
assistant  to  accomplish  in  his  small  group,  instead  of  providing  the  teacher’s  assistant  with  a 
written  plan  beforehand.  Respondent  wasted  an  additional  three  minute  setting  up  the 
computer,  as  opposed  to  completing  such  tasks  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  school  day. 

147. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

keep  the  lesson  plan  in  close  proximity  so  Respondent  could  use  and  refer  to  it,  and  adhere  to 
its  timelines  and  content;  (2)  shorten  transitions  to  ensure  a  minimal  loss  of  instructional 
time,  and  make  certain  to  have  all  materials  ready,  including  any  notes  to  the  teacher’s 
assistant  outlining  his  duties  for  the  day;  (3)  redirect  students  when  they  drift  off-task;  and 
(4)  clearly  state  and  write  the  standards-based  learning  objective  for  each  lesson,  refer  to  it 
during  the  lesson,  and  ask  students  to  restate  it. 

  

148. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  implement  carefully  designed  lesson 
plans  with  program  fidelity;  (2)  plan  and  develop  effective  transitions  between  activities;  (3) 
effectively  redirect  students  when  off-task;  and  (4)  effectively  integrate  the  objective  of  the 
lesson  as  a  teaching  strategy.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  if  he  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that 
day,  Mr.  Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which 
could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr.  Alfayate  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 
immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below 
standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

  

  

   

  

  

149. 

On  April  8,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a  conference  he 

held  with  Respondent  on  April  5,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s  observation  of 
Respondent’s  classroom  on  March  11,  2013,  during  Respondent’s  language  arts  lesson.  In 
the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to  use 
instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources,  or  technologies  that  were  appropriate  to  the 
subject  matter.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  provide  students  with  appropriate  writing 
paper  for  them  to  copy  words  Respondent  had  written  on  the  projector  and  instructed  the 
students  to  write  five  times,  as  the  paper  was  blank,  containing  no  lines. 

150. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  or  create  a  climate  that  promoted 
fairness  and  respect.  Specifically,  Respondent  alternated  between  accepting  student 
responses  called  out  to  Respondent  and  calling  students  names  randomly.  Respondent’s  use 
of  the  equity  sticks  was  ineffective,  as  Respondent  randomly  pulled  sticks  and  then  returned 
them  back  to  the  same  container,  thus  causing  Respondent  to  repeatedly  call  some  of  the 
same  students,  rather  than  leaving  all  used/called  sticks  outside  of  the  container  until  all  the 
students  names  had  been  pulled  or  called.  Additionally,  Ms.  Alfayate  noted Respondent 
failed  to  provide  an  engaging  and  safe  classroom  for  all  students.  Specifically,  the  closet 
doors  included  postings  of  student  samples  of  personal  narratives  that  were  outdated  by  more 
than  two  months,  posted  math  student  samples  lacking  teacher  feedback  or  a  scoring  rubric, 
items  spilled  out  of  the  closet,  such  as  backpacks,  a  jacket,  and  a  bottle  of  water,  some  items 
were  on  the  floor  such  as  pencils  and  stickers,  unapproved  zip  ties  connected  the  legs  of  the 
desks,  Respondent’s  desk  and  surrounding  area  were  cluttered,  and  instructional  materials 
were  not  stored  in  their  proper  place. 

151. 

In  the  areas  of  support  of  student  learning,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent 

failed  to  guide  the  students  to  be  self-directed  or  to  access  their  own  learning,  in  that 
Respondent  directed  students  to  complete  a  page  from  their  reading/language  arts  practice 
book  that  required  them  to  choose  words  with  various  spelling  patterns  they  had  just  learned, 
namely  the  /u/  sound,  but  told  students  to  consider  words  that  made  sense  in  the  sentences, 
instead  of  referencing  the  spelling  patterns  they  had  just  learned.  Additionally,  Respondent 
failed  to  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  and  create  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect,  by  not  requiring  students  to  change  their  own  behavior  cards, 
but  rather  assigned  other  students  to  turn  the  cards.  Mr.  Alfayate  also  noted  Respondent 
failed  to  engage  students  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities  as  they 
exhibited  off-task  behavior,  such  as  flipping  through  their  reading/language  arts  practice 
books,  cleaning  out  their  desks,  talking  to  other  students,  fiddling  with  their  clothing,  playing 
with  their  hands,  and  putting  their  heads  down  on  the  desk.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed 
to  provide  effective  supervision  of  the  students  as  Respondent  did  not  appear  to  notice  or 
respond  appropriately  to  a  student  leaving  the  class  without  her  knowledge  to  participate  in 
adapted  physical  education,  a  student  sitting  unsafely  in  her  seat  on  her  knees,  a  student 
tossing  paper  in  the  air,  and  Respondent  rarely  left  her  seat  in  front  of  the  class  to  walk 
around  and  monitor  student  learning  and  student  behavior.  Respondent  also  failed  to  use  a 
variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs. 
Specifically,  when  a  student  approached  Respondent  complaining  of  a  stomach  ache, 

  
40 

  

  

  

Respondent  responded,  “Let’s  wait  for  our  visitor  to  leave.  They’re  here  to  see  us  work,  not 
to  see  me  send  you  to  the  nurse.” 

152. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

follow  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  suggestions  in  order  to  engage  the  students  in  the 
learning  activities;  (2)  engage  all  students  by  using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and 
monitor  them  for  understanding  and  compliance;  (3)  use  instructional  time  in  order  to 
explain  all  terms  used  by  Respondent  to  teach  concepts  contextually  so  that  students  can 
create  a  connection  to  learning  rather  than  being  exposed  to  the  information  in  isolation;  (4) 
when  teaching  and  assigning  students  to  practice  or  apply  new  learning,  constantly  refer  to 
the  standards-based  learning  objectives  so  that  they  see  the  connection  between  the  learning 
goal  and  their  activities;  (5)  provide  students  with  developmentally-appropriate writing 
paper;  (6)  ensure  to  create  and  maintain  a  climate  that  promotes  fairness  and  respect  for 
every  student  in  learning  activities  by  pulling  equity  sticks  randomly  from  a  container 
without  re-inserting  them  until  all  names  have  been  called,  and  require  students  to  turn  over 
their  own  behavior  card;  (7)  immediately  remove  the  zip  ties  from  the  legs  of  the  students’ 
desks  so  they  can  move  freely;  (8)  Respondent  to  clean  and  organize  her  desk  and  the 
surrounding  area;  (9)  remove  trash  from  the  floor  and  hold  students  responsible  for  disposing 
of  their  trash;  (10)  ensure  no  items  rest  on  the  floor  of  the  closet,  and  teach  students  how  to 
hang  their  items  properly;  (11)  circulate  and  scan  the  classroom  regularly  in  order  to  prevent 
safety  hazards  and  inappropriate  behavior;  (12)  respond  to  students’  needs  immediately  and 
appropriately;  (13)  attend  some  of  the  professional  development  workshops  addressing 
instruction  and  classroom  management;  and  (14)  display  current  rubric-scored  student  work, 
and  include  constructive  feedback,  a  visual  scoring  rubric,  standard,  and  an  engaging 
thought-provoking  caption. 

153. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  use  the  teacher’s 
editions  in  order  to  engage  the  students  in  their  learning  activities  and  to  accommodate  all 
types  of  learners;  (2)  use  the  instructional  time  effectively  in  order  to  teach  the  students  new 
concepts  and  to  help  them  make  connections  to  the  learning  in  real  contexts  rather  than  in 
isolation;  (3)  engage  all  students  in  all  lessons  and  monitor  them  for  comprehension  of  the 
lesson,  participation  in  learning  activities,  and  compliance  to  both  classroom  and  school 
tules;  (4)  provide  the  students  with  developmentally  appropriate  writing  paper  at  all  times; 
(5)  treat  all  of  the  students  equitably  by  giving  them  equal  opportunities  to  participate  in  all 
learning  activities;  (6)  respond  to  and  address  the  students’  needs  immediately  and 
appropriately;  (7)  circulate  and  scan  the  classroom  regularly  to  prevent  and  correct safety 
hazards  and  inappropriate  behavior  by  the  students,  and  supervise  them  with  diligence;  (8) 
display  current  rubric-scored  student  work,  and  include  constructive  feedback,  a  visual 
scoring  rubric,  and  an  engaging  thought-provoking  caption;  (9)  maintain  a  neat  and  orderly 
room,  including  keeping  walkways  clear  of  tripping  hazards;  and  (10)  immediately  remove 
the  zip  ties  from  the  legs  of  the  students’  desks  so  they  can  move  freely.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated 
that  if  he  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Mr.  Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall 
below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr. Alfayate 
advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her 

  

  
41 
    

     

performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

  

154. 

On  April  15,  2013,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr.  Alfayate’s 

April  8,  2013  conference  memo.  Respondent  stated  that  the  school  often  had  a  shortage  of 
lined  paper,  so  she  had  become  accustomed  to  having  students  write  on  scratch  paper.  In  the 
area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  stated  she  used  equity  sticks  to  encourage  all 
students  to  participate  in  class  discussions  and  activities.  Also,  Respondent  stated  that 
teachers  used  duct  tape  or  rope  to  keep  their  classroom  desks  in  straight,  orderly  positions, 
and  thought  using  plastic  zip  ties  was  an  acceptable  variation  of  this  practice.  Respondent 
was  not  aware  there  were  any  District  restrictions  against  connecting  the  desks.  Respondent 
also  stated  that  in  order  to  minimize  loss  of  instructional  time  and  distractions,  she  assigned  a 
student  to  be  a  card  monitor.  Respondent  stated  the  class  had  accepted  the  fact  that  there  was 
a  card  monitor. 

155. 

On  April  25,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a  conference 

he  held  with  Respondent  on  April  24,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s  observation  of 
Respondent’s  classroom  on  April  17,  2013,  during  Respondent’s  oral  language  and  listening 
comprehension  lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  consistency  in  her  lesson  plans  to  foster  student  learning 
and  achievement  of  State  Standards.  Specifically,  Respondent,  after  stating  the  objective  of 
the  lesson,  failed  at  any  time  during  the  lesson  to  do  any  modeling,  discussion,  guided 
practice,  or  student  activity  that  involved  the  objective  of  the  lesson.  Additionally,  the 
objective  did  not  align  with  State  Standards.  Respondent  also  failed  to  use  instructional 
strategies,  materials,  resources,  and  technologies  appropriately,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to 
give  the  teacher’s  assistant  any  plans  for  his  work  duties  or  responsibilities  for  the  day, 
leaving  the  teacher’s  assistant  waiting  for  ten  minutes  at  the  back  of  the  class  for  instructions. 

156. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

implement  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  supported  student  learning,  in  that 
Respondent  used  equity  sticks  inconsistently  to  call  on  students,  but  also  accepted  answers 
called  out  by  students. 

157. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 
rewrite  the  objective  for  the  lesson  to  align  it  with  California  content  Standards;  (2)  limit  the 
number  of  objectives  so  they  can  be  reflected  during  modeling,  guided  practice,  and  during 
the  students’  independent  practice;  (3)  continue  to  use  equity  sticks  and  refrain  from 
validating  answers  from  students  talking  out  of  turn;  and  (4)  prepare  plans  ahead  of  time  for 
the  teacher’s  assistant. 

158. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  adhere  to  lesson  plans  teaching 

standards-based  learning  objectives;  (2)  ensure  to  align  learning  objectives  with  the 
California  content  standards;  (3)  utilize  classroom  management  strategies  that  allow  all 
students  to  participate  in  the  lessons;  and  (4)  utilize  resources  effectively  by  preparing  plans 
ahead  of  time  for  the  teacher’s  assistant.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  if  he  were  to  evaluate 

  
42 

  

     

Respondent  that  day,  Mr.  Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance 
evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 
Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr.  Alfayate  advised  that  if 
Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it 
could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

  

(2) 

2012-2013  Stull  Evaluation 

159. 

On  April  23,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  prepared  a  Stull  evaluation  of  Respondent’s 

performance  for  the  2012-2013  school  year.  In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning, 
Respondent  needed  improvement  in  guiding  all  students  to  be  self-directed  and  assess  their 
own  learning,  engaging  student  in  problem-solving,  critical-thinking,  and  other  activities,  and 
using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs, 
and  integrate  students’  prior  knowledge,  life  experiences,  and  interests  into  the  instructional 
program.  Mr.  Alfayate  commented  that  Respondent  failed  to  use  different  strategies  for 
students  with  diverse  and  different  needs. 

160. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Respondent  required 

improvement  in  demonstrating  evidence  of  short-term  and  long-term  plans  to  foster  student 
learning  and  achievement  of  the  State  Standards,  using  state  subject  matter  content  standards 
to  establish  rigorous  goals  for  students,  using  instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources, 
and  technologies  appropriate  to  the  subject  matter,  and  planning  instruction  to  ensure  that  all 
groups  of  students  had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum.  The  evaluation  also  noted  that 
Respondent  needed  to  be  consistent  in  her  planning,  including  planning  the  duties  of  the 
teacher’s  assistant. 

161. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  Respondent  needed  improvement  in 
demonstrating  knowledge  of  State  Standards  and  student  development,  establishing  and 
maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior  and  creating  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and 
respect,  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  supported 
student  learning,  using  instructional  time  effectively,  and  providing  an  effective  classroom 
environment.  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  that  Respondent  needed  to  consistently  use  strategies  to 
engage  all  students  and  monitor  for  students’  understanding  during  the  lessons. 

162. 

In  the  area  of  developing  as  a  professional  educator,  Respondent  needed 
improvement  in  providing  effective  supervision  of  students.  Mr.  Alfayate  commented 
Respondent  needed  to  regularly  walk  around  the  classtoom  to  provide  effective  supervision 
for  her  students,  prevent  unsafe  conditions  in  the  classroom,  and  be  aware  of  any  student 
leaving  the  classroom  without  permission. 

163. 

Respondent’s  overall  evaluation  was  “below  standard  performance.”  Mr. 
Alfayate  included  a  three-page  attachment  to  Respondents  Stull  evaluation,  which  listed 
specific  deficiencies,  recommendations,  and  assistance  to  be  provided.  In  the  area  of  specific 
deficiencies,  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  Respondent:  (1)  failed  to  use  a  consistent  classroom 

  
43 

  

   management  system  that  would  allow  all  students  to  participate  in  the  lesson,  leaving  many 

  

students  unengaged;  (2)  failed  to  use  instructional  strategies  to  respond  to  students’ 
instructional  and/or  physical  needs;  (3)  failed  to  show  evidence  of  planning  as  parts  of  the 
lesson  plan  were  blank  or  incomplete;  (4)  failed  to  establish  and  maintain  standards  for 
student  behavior  or  create  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and  respect  as  her  behavior 
management  practices  were  negative  or  punitive;  (5)  failed  to  implement  classroom 
procedures  and  routines  consistently,  such  as  using  equity  sticks  or  requiring  that  students 
raise  their  hands  before  speaking  in  order  to  support  student  learning;  (6)  failed  to  use 
instructional  time  effectively,  due  to  her  failure  to  have  materials  ready  and  to  follow  her 
lesson  plan  or  the  daily  schedule;  (7)  failed  to  provide  effective  supervision  of  all  students  in 
the  classroom,  as  students  left  her  class  without  her  knowledge,  students  had  unsafe  objects 
in  their  mouths  without  any  redirection  from  Respondent,  or  students  sat  in  unsafe  manners 
without  any  redirection  from  Respondent;  (8)  failed  to  establish  or  articulate  standards-based 
objectives  for  student  learning;  (9)  failed  to  properly  or  adequately  use  the  resources 
provided  by  the  teacher’s  assistant  assigned  to  her  class  to  provide  instructional  support  for 
students;  (10)  failed  to  provide  all  students  with  access  to  the  curriculum  as  some  students 
remained  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  students  and  did  not  participate  in  selected 
instructional  activities;  and  (11)  failed  to  provide  an  effective  or  safe  classroom  environment, 
as  objects  existed  on  the  floor  that  could  cause  accidents,  and  student  samples  did  not  have 
feedback  and/or  rubrics  posted. 

164. 

Mr.  Alfayate  recommended  that  Respondent  (1)  show  evidence  of  planning  by 
having  complete  lesson  plans;  (2)  follow  the  daily  schedule;  (3)  be  consistent  in  establishing 
and  maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior  such  as  requiring  students  to  raise  their  hands 
before  speaking;  (4)  refrain  from  isolating  students  from  the  rest  of  the  classroom  for 
extended  periods  of  time;  (5)  ensure  students  have  an  adequate  supply  of  instructional 
materials;  (6)  display  current  student  work  with  constructive  and  specific  feedback;  (7)  write 
and  State  Standards-based  learning  objectives  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  lesson,  and 
refer  to  them  when  teaching  and/or  interacting  with  the  students;  (8)  circulate  around  the 
classroom  to  identify  and  prevent  possible  hazards  by  removing  unsafe  objects  from  the 
floor;  (9)  prepare  instructional  materials  prior  to  teaching  in  order  to  maximize  instructional 
time;  (10)  engage  all  students  and  regularly  monitor  for  student  understanding,  and  redirect 
their  attention  to  the  task  at  hand  as  needed;  and  (11)  plan  the  duties  of  the  teacher’s  assistant 
assigned  to  the  class  in  order  to  use  his  or  her  time  effectively  and  to  maximize  the 
instructional  support  he  or  she  offers  to  the  students. 

165. 

Mr.  Alfayate  advised  Respondent  that  he  would  provide  her  with  the following 

assistance:  (1)  Mr.  Alfayate  to  continue  encouraging  participation  in  staff  development 
addressing  instruction,  classroom  management,  and  behavior  modification;  (2)  Mr.  Alfayate 
to  continue  providing  Respondent  assistance  to  address  classroom  participation,  engagement 
and  discussion  techniques  with  students;  (3)  Mr.  Alfayate  to  continue  providing  Respondent 
assistance  with  lesson  planning  and  instructional  goal  setting;  (4)  Mr.  Alfayate  to  continue 
providing  Respondent  information  about  the  teaching  and  learning  framework;  (5)  Mr. 
Alfayate  to  continue  providing  Respondent  the  support  of  instructional  coaches  to  help 
Respondent  plan  and  implement  effective  instruction;  and  (6)  Mr.  Alfayate  to  continue 

  
44 
  

  

  

   providing  weekly  grade  level  meetings  where  peer  teachers  and  instructional  coaches  could 

assist  Respondent  with  data  analysis,  short  and  long-term  planning  and  development  of 
instructional  strategies. 

166. 

Mr.  Alfayate  recommended  that  Respondent  be  evaluated  again  at  the  end  of 

the  next  school  year  (2013-2014). 

(3) 

2013  -  2014  School  Year 

167. 

For  the  2013-2014  school  year,  Respondent  had  fewer  students  assigned  to  her 
class  than  the  class  norm  of  20.  Specifically,  Respondent  had  16  to  18  students  in  her  class. 
Mr.  Alfayate  assigned  more  high  performing  students  to  Respondent’s  class  than  the  norm. 

168. 

On  August  12,  2013,  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  Respondent  attended 

a  staff  meeting  where  she,  along  with  the  other  teachers,  received  a  grade  level  daily 
schedule  and  a  policy  handbook. 

169. 

On  August  16,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee,  suspending  Respondent  without  pay  for  a  period  of  11 
days,  and  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  for  the  period 
of  August  29,  2012  to  April  26,  2013,  for  (1)  unsatisfactory  performance;  and  (2)  persistent 
violation  of  and  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  school  by  the  state  board  of  education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  school  district  employing  her.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  follow 
the  discipline  foundation  policy,  required  curriculum  of  the  District,  namely  its  Treasures 
reading  and  language  arts  program,  and  its  enVision  math  program,  and  failed  to  adhere  to 
California  state  content  standards. 

  

170. 

On  September  3,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 
conference  he  held  with  Respondent  on  August  29,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  August  27,  2013,  during  Respondent’s  math 
lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  did 
not  follow  a  sequence  described  in  the  math  (enVision)  teacher’s  edition,  namely  (1)  daily 
spiral  review,  (2)  problem  of  the  day,  (3)  interactive  learning,  (4)  visual  learning  bridge,  (5) 
guided  practice,  (6)  independent  practice,  (7)  quick  check  master,  and  (8)  daily  common  core 
teview.  Instead,  Respondent  followed  a  sequence  that  neither  corresponded  to  that  of  the 
teacher’s  edition,  nor  included  all  components.  Specifically,  Respondent’s  lesson  included 
the  follow  sequence:  (1)  guided  practice,  (2)  independent  practice,  (3)  daily  common  core 
review,  (4)  interactive  learning,  and  (5)  quick  check,  reteach,  and  practice.  Additionally, 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plan  for  math,  did  not  provide  students  with  counters 
or  any  other  manipulatives,  and  did  not  follow  the  directions  given  in  the  enVision  math 
teacher’s  edition.  Respondent  also  failed  to  demonstrate  an  awareness  of  her  students’ 
academic  and  social/emotional  strengths  and  needs  in  planning  and  implementing  learning 
activities.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  adhere  to  a  student’s  IEP  requiring  Respondent 

  

  

  

     

to  provide  the  student  with  opportunities  to  practice  speech  strategies,  reminders  to  stay  on 
topic,  and  prompts  to  expand  sentences. 

  

171. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

adequately  monitor  the  students  and  address  their  needs  or  redirect  them.  Specifically, 
Respondent,  during  her  lesson,  stood  in  a  way  where  she  did  not  have  an  adequate  view  of  all 
of  the  students,  resulting  in  Respondent  missing  raised  hands,  students  talking  to  their 
neighbors,  and  one  student  standing  and  dancing  for  at  least  two  minutes. 

172. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

effectively  use  a  random  selection  technique  in  order  for  students  to  share  their  thinking  in 
connection  with  Respondent’s  questions.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  use  the  equity 
stick  technique  correctly,  resulting  in  Respondent  calling  on  a  few  students  more  often  than 
other  students.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  group  students  in  a  purposeful  and 
productive  manner  in  order  to  promote  productive,  cognitive  engagement  in  the  learning 
activity.  Specifically,  Respondent  did  not  have  anything  posted  or  written  in  her  lesson  plan 
indicating  which  students  were  designated  to  work  in  particular  groups  for  particular  tasks. 
Respondent  also  failed  to  monitor  closely  student  learning  in  order  to  see  if  the  students  were 
understanding  and  progressing  toward  the  learning  objectives,  as  Respondent  did  not  redirect 
the  attention  of  students  who  were  off-task.  Also,  Respondent  failed  to  provide  evidence  that 
she  provided  students  with  instructive  or  specific  feedback  that  would  move  their  learning 
forward.  Specifically,  Respondent  placed  stars  or  happy  faces  on  assignments  of  students 
who  had  completed  the  assignment  incorrectly,  and  posted  student  work  representing  only 
one  core  curricular  area,  specifically,  language  arts. 

173. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

follow  the  math  program  (enVision)  teacher’s  edition  and  lesson  plans  with  fidelity  daily;  (2) 
for  small  groups,  group  them  deliberately  according  to  academic  needs  based  on 
assessments,  plan  learning  activities  that  have  a  standards-based  purpose,  communicate  the 
standards-based  purpose  in  writing  and  verbally  using  student-friendly  language,  include  a 
visible  and  accessible  written  version  of  necessary  information  such  as  specific  procedures 
and  the  names  of  students  who  should  be  in  each  small  group,  and  practice  procedures, 
transitions,  and  activities  so  that  the  actual  small  group  rotation  will  run  smoothly  with 
minimal  disruption;  (3)  create,  implement,  and  reinforce  a  behavior  management  system 
designed  to  help  students  understand  the  consequences  or  rewards  for  their  behavior;  (4) 
actively  monitor  student  behavior  and  respond  to  off-task  behavior  immediately  as  it  can  be 
disruptive  to  the  rest  of  the  students,  including  positioning  herself  physically  so  that  she  can 
maintain  a  constant  visual  awareness  of  all  of  the  students  at  all  times,  and  circulating  the 
entire  classroom  regularly  to  notice  whether  students  are  complying  with Respondent’s 
directions;  (5)  monitor  the  students’  learning  in  order  to  determine  if  Respondent  needs  to 
reteach  a  concept/skill  to  the  whole  class  so  that  all  of  their  needs  are  addressed;  (6)  consider 
reconfiguring  the  layout  of  the  room  to  ensure  Respondent  she  can  see  all  students;  (7)  be 
mindful  of  the  correct  manner  in  which  to  use  the  equity  sticks  technique;  (8)  ensure  the 
safety  of  the  classroom  environment  at  all  times;  (9)  provide  all  of  the  students  with 
constructive  feedback  regarding  the  work  that  they  produce  and  display  current  rubric-scored 

  
46 

  

   student  work  with  constructive  specific  feedback,  standard,  and  an  engaging  thought- 

provoking  caption;  and  (10)  attend  professional  development  workshops  addressing  some  of 
Respondent’s  needs,  such  as  student  engagement,  the  power  of  presence,  and  classroom 
management. 

  

174. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  follow  the  follow  the  math  program 

(enVision)  teacher’s  edition  and  lesson  plans  with  fidelity  daily;  (2)  group  students  with 
purpose  according  to  their  academic  needs  and  post  the  names  of  the  students  who  belong  in 
particular  groups;  (3)  post  and  review  student-friendly  visual  reminders  of  procedures  and 
expectations;  (4)  display  current  rubric-scored  student  work  with  constructive  specific 
feedback,  standard,  and  an  engaging  thought-provoking  caption;  (5)  develop,  implement,  and 
reinforce  a  behavior  management  system;  and  (6)  actively  monitor  student  compliance  with 
directions  for  their  academic,  behavioral,  and  physical  well-being  by  circulating  the  room 
regularly,  and  intervene  whenever  necessary  and  always  maintain  visual  contact  with  all  of 
the  students.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  if  he  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Mr. 
Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  which  could 
result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 
dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr.  Alfayate  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 
immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below 
standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension, 
and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

175. 

On  September  10,  2013,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr. 
Alfayate’s  September  3,  2013  conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing 
instruction,  Respondent  stated  that  she  attended a  training  at  the  Math  Institute  during  the 
summer  of  2011  that  it  was  appropriate  to  alter  the  sequence  of  the  enVision  math  program 
to  meet  the  needs  of  her  students.  In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  stated 
she  used  equity  sticks  during  her  lesson,  and  noticed  her  mistake  with  the  equity  sticks.  In 
the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  stated  she  gave  her  students  a  writing  rubric 
score,  which  she  posted  next  to  the  group  of  writing  samples. 

176. 

On  September  16,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 
conference  he  held  with  Respondent  on  September  13,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  September  9,  2013,  during  Respondent’s  language 
arts  lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  knowledge  of  the  difference  between  planning  tasks  and 
learning  objectives,  and  did  not  use  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  as  a  reference  for 
appropriate  learning  objectives.  Specifically,  Respondent  wrote  on  her  board  “Objective: 
Making  Muffins  and  a  Friend,  page  36,”  but  the  objective  as  listed  on  page  36  should  have 
been  “Learning  the  meaning  of  vocabulary  words  . 
.”.  Respondent  had  also  written  as  an 
objective,  “Read  Len  and  Gus,”  however,  the  Treasure’s  teacher’s  edition  listed  the  objective 
as  “Decode  words  with  short  e,  0,  u  in  connected  text...  .” 

. 

. 

177. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 
demonstrate  evidence  of  an  effective  routine  or  procedure  for  students  to  go  to  the  restroom, 

  
47 

  

  

     

as  Respondent  failed  to  reinforce  the  school’s  safety  policy  requiring  students  to  travel  in 
pairs  and  with  a  hall  pass  if  they  left  the  classroom. 
clearly  her  expectations  for  behavior  as  Respondent  had  not  posted  indications  of  classroom 
rules,  consequences,  or  rewards.  Specifically,  Respondent  implemented  a  color  coded 
system  to  address  behavior,  but  failed  to  post  what  each  color  signified.  Additionally, 
Respondent  failed  to  adequately  monitor  the  students  and  address  their  needs  or  redirect 
them,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to  redirect  off-task  students. 

Respondent  also  failed  to  express 

  

178. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

communicate  clearly  her  learning  expectations  to  the  students  when  she  instructed  the 
students  to  retrieve  their  decodable  readers  and  read  “Len  and  Gus.”  Additionally, 
Respondent  failed  to  monitor  closely  student  learning  in  order  to  determine  whether  students 
were  progressing  toward  the  learning  objectives.  Specifically,  after  instructing  the  students 
to  read  chorally,  Respondent  did  not  redirect  the  actions  of  a  student  standing  with  his  book 
turned  to  the  wrong  page,  or  of  students  who  did  not  read  chorally  as  instructed.  Respondent 
also  failed  to  provide  students  with  instructive  or  specific  feedback  that  would  forward  their 
learning,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to  provide  meaningful  feedback  to  help  reinforce  the 
lesson.  Additionally,  Respondent  provided  students  with  no  opportunities  to  assess  their 
work  against  the  established  criteria  and  monitor  their  own  progress  towards  achieving  the 
expected  outcomes,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to  post  a  data  chart  regarding  the  students’ 
reading  comprehension,  and  a  scoring  rubric  for  the  math  placement  tests  posted  in  order  for 
the  students  to  understand  the  scores  they  had  received. 

179. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

write  and  articulate  the  learning  objectives  that  exist  in  the  teacher’s  edition  in  order  to  focus 
the  students’  attention  on  the  key  learning  goals  for  each  language  arts  lesson;  (2)  follow  the 
Treasures  teacher’s  edition  reading  program  with  fidelity  daily  in  order  to  teach  the  language 
arts  curriculum;  (3)  create,  implement,  and  reinforce  a  behavior  management  system 
designed  to  help  students  understand  the  consequences  or  rewards  for  their  behavior;  (4) 
actively  monitor  student  behavior  and  respond  to  off-task  behavior  immediately  as  it  can  be 
disruptive  to  the  rest  of  the  students,  including  positioning  herself  physically  so  that  she  can 
maintain  constant  visual  awareness  of  all  of  the  students  at  all  times,  and  circulating  the 
entire  classroom  regularly  to  notice  whether  student  are  complying  with  her  directions;  (5) 
consider  using  individual  behavior  contracts  for  students  who  exhibit  significant  disruptive 
behaviors;  (6)  communicate  clearly  her  learning  expectations  to  the  students  verbally  and  in 
writing,  and  then  reference  those  expectations  and  learning  objectives  when  teaching  the 
lesson;  (7)  monitor  students’  learning  in  order  to  determine  whether  reteaching  a  concept  to 
the  whole  class  becomes  necessary,  including  ensuring  students  are  on  the  correct  page  at  all 
times,  providing  them  with  scaffolding,  and  providing  them  with  an  explanation  if  they  give 
an  incorrect  answer;  (8)  provide  all  of  the  students  with  constructive  feedback  regarding  the 
work  that  they  produce  and  display  current  rubric-scored  student  work  with  constructive 
specific  feedback,  standard,  and  an  engaging  thought-provoking  caption;  (9)  provide  students 
with  opportunities  to  assess  their  own  work  against  the  established  criteria  and  monitor  their 
own  progress  towards  achieving  the  expected  outcomes  by  posting  an  explanation  and/or 
tubric  regarding  some  of  the  posted  information;  and  (10)  attend  professional  development 

  
48 

  

workshops  addressing  some  of  Respondent’s  needs,  such  as  student  engagement,  the  power 
of  presence,  and  classroom  management. 

180. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  follow  the  Treasures  reading/language 

arts  program  teacher’s  edition  and  lesson  plans  with  fidelity  daily;  (2)  write,  articulate,  and 
reference  the  learning  objectives  set  forth  in  the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition;  (3)  post  and 
review  student-friendly  visual  reminders  of  procedures,  expectations,  and  explanations  of 
Respondent’s  behavior  management  system;  (4)  display  current  rubric-scored  student  work 
with  constructive  specific  feedback,  standard,  and  an  engaging  thought-provoking  caption; 
(5)  develop,  implement,  and  reinforce  a  behavior  management  system;  and  (6)  actively 
monitor  student  compliance  with  directions  for  their  academic,  behavioral,  and  physical 
well-being  by  circulating  the  room  regularly,  and  intervening  whenever  necessary  and 
always  maintain  visual  contact  with  all  of  the  students.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  if  he  were  to 
evaluate  Respondent  that  day,  Mr.  Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard 
performance  evaluation,  which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr.  Alfayate  advised  that  if 
Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it 
could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

181. 

On  September  23,  2013,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr. 

Alfayate  regarding  his  September  16,  2013  conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  planning  and 
preparation,  Respondent  stated  she  used  the  Treasure  reading/language  arts  program  to 
accomplish  multiple  learning  tasks  and  objectives  in  a  weekly  routine  lesson  that  used  a  short 
story  preceding  the  weekly  main  selection  to  engage  students  in  the  unit  theme, 
comprehension  skills,  and  vocabulary  development.  Respondent  stated  that  the  objective  in 
the  Treasures  teacher’s  edition  for  that  day  was  not  written  in  kid-friendly  language,  so  it  did 
not  seem  as  if  it  was  intended  for  her  to  write  on  the  board.  However,  Respondent  stated  she 
would  write  the  objective  on  the  board  in  the  future. 

182. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  stated  her  classroom  rules 

were  posted  in  front  of  the  classroom  for  the  students  to  see,  and  she  used  a  behavior 
monitoring  chart  that  was  universal,  behavior  monitoring  system  used  in  many  classrooms. 
Respondent  also  stated  most  of  the  students  were  sitting  quietly  at  their  seats  throughout  the 
whole  lesson,  and  Respondent  had  circulated  around  the  room  during  the  lesson.  Respondent 
disagreed  that  a  student  stood  dancing  and  jumping  for  21  minutes. 

183. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  stated  the  classroom 

observation  occurred  right  before  dismissal,  leaving  insufficient  time  to  review  more  pages 
and  identify  short  vowel  sounds.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  she  had  different  times 
and  ways  in  which  she  provided  students  with  feedback  at  school,  such  as  using  the  words 
“correct”  or  “incorrect,”  but  did  not  believe  it  was  helpful  to  dwell  on  their  mistakes. 
Respondent  stated  that  it  had  never  been  brought  to  her  attention  before  that  she  needed  to 
write  a  rubric  score  on  student  tests. 

49 

  

 

184. 

On  September  30,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 
conference  he  held  with  Respondent  on  September  27,  2013,  regarding  Mr.  Alfayate’s 
observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom  on  September  25,  2013,  during  Respondent’s 
language  arts  lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  a  sequence  of  learning  that  was  aligned  to  her  posted  daily 
classroom  schedule,  as  Respondent  spent  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  on  a  learning  activity 
which  should  have  lasted  a  fraction  of  that  time.  Specifically,  a  15  minute  lesson  took 
Respondent  more  than  50  minutes  to  teach,  leaving  her  only  six  minutes  to  teach  the  next 
lesson  before  excusing  her  students  to  lunch.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate 
an  awareness  of  best  practices  regarding  how  students  learn,  as  Respondent  did  not  provide 
them  with  accurate  or  appropriate  models  of  skills  that  students  are  expected  to  learn  and  use. 
Specifically,  when  speaking  to  students,  Respondent  repeatedly  (more  than  10  times)  said 
“gonna”  instead  of  “going  to,”  “gotta”  instead  of  “got  to”  or  “have  to,”  and  “wanna”  instead 
of  “want  to.” 

185. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

a  point  at  first,  but  now  I  have  to.”  Respondent  also  failed  to 

create  an  environment  that  projected  respect  and  a  supportive  learning  environment. 
Specifically,  Respondent  focused  on  negative  student  behavior  when  she  asked,  in  a  negative 
tone,  students  to  point  to  the  students  who  did  not  have  their  hands  raised.  Additionally, 
Respondent  made  a  negative  statement  about  a  group  of  students,  namely,  “Wow!  I  didn’t 
wanna  (sic)  give  Group  1 
provide  students  with  a  clean  and  safe  physical  classroom  environment,  in  that  there  were 
items  on  the  floor,  such  as  counters,  a  bandage,  an  eraser,  a  packet  of  plastic  eating  utensils, 
all  of  which  posed a  slip  and  fall  hazard.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  adequately 
monitor  student  behavior  and  redirect  their  misbehavior,  such  as  intervening  in  a  timely 
manner  when  a student  played  with  a  feather  for  eight  minutes,  a  student  played  with  two 
pencils  for  at  least  five  minutes,  a  student  threw  a  counter  at  another  student,  and  that  another 
student  spent  17  minutes  in  the  restroom  adjacent  to  the  class  without  Respondent  checking 
on  him. 

186. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Mr.  Alfayate  noted  Respondent  failed  to 

clearly  and  consistently  express  her  expectations  for  student  behavior  concerning  how  they 
should  speak  to  Respondent  in  class.  Specifically,  at  times,  Respondent  permitted  students  to 
speak  out  of  turn  without  raising  their  hands  and  awaiting  permission  to  speak,  and  then 
validated  their  noncompliance  by  engaging  in  conversation  with  them,  instead  of  redirecting 
their  behavior.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  provide  a  clear  delivery  of  instruction  or 
adapt  the  content  explanations  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  students,  in  that  Respondent  failed  to 
provide  visuals,  to  make  the  information  more  comprehensible.  Moreover,  Respondent 
failed  to  closely  monitor  the  student  learning  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  students  were 
progressing  toward  the  learning  objectives.  Specifically,  most  of  the  students  whom 
Respondent  asked,  at  the  close  of  her  lesson,  to  identify  the  five  vocabulary  words,  could  not 
accurately  respond. 

187. 

Mr.  Alfayate  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

follow  the  daily  classroom  schedule,  the  lesson  plan,  and  the  Treasures  reading/language  arts 

50 

  

 

teacher’s  edition  with  fidelity  daily  in  order  to  teach  the  students  all  of  the  components  of  the 
language  arts  curriculum;  (2)  use  best  practices  by  using  Standard  English  when  speaking  to 
students;  (3)  interact  with  all  of  the  students  so  that  Respondent  could  provide  them  with  a 
positive  and  respectful  experience  while  in  her  class,  including  verbalizing,  emphasizing,  and 
praising  positive  and  compliant  behavior;  (4)  provide  students  with  a  clean  and  safe  physical 
classroom  environment  by  ensuring  the  students  clean  up  after  themselves;  (5)  create, 
implement,  and  reinforce  a  behavior  management  system  designed  to  help  students 
understand  the  consequences  or  rewards  for  their  behavior;  (6)  actively  monitor  student 
behavior  and  respond  to  off-task  behavior  immediately  as  it  can  be  disruptive  to  the  rest  of 
the  students,  including  positioning  herself  physically  so  that  she  can  maintain  constant  visual 
awareness  of  all  of  the  students  at  all  times,  and  circulating  the  entire  classroom  regularly  to 
notice  whether  students  are  complying  with  her  directions,  communicate  clearly  her  learning 
expectations  to  the  students  verbally  and  in  writing,  and  then  reference  those  expectations 
and  learning  objectives  when  teaching  the  lesson;  (7)  monitor  students’  learning  in  order  to 
determine  whether  reteaching  a  concept  to  the  whole  class  becomes  necessary,  including 
ensuring  students  are  on  the  correct  page  at  all  times,  providing  them  with  scaffolding,  and 
providing  them  with  an  explanation  if  they  give  an  incorrect  answer;  (8)  attend  professional 
development  workshops  addressing  some  of  Respondent’s  needs,  such  as  student 
engagement,  the  power  of  presence,  and  classroom  management. 

188. 

Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  to  (1)  follow  the  follow  the  Treasures 
reading/language  arts  program  teacher’s  edition  and  lesson  plans  with  fidelity  daily;  (2) 
provide  the  students  with  a  model  of  Standard  English  verbally  and  in  writing  at  all  times;  (3) 
attend  professional  development  workshops  addressing  some  of  Respondent’s  needs,  such  as 
student  engagement,  the  power  of  presence,  and  classroom  management  system;  (4)  provide 
students  with  a  clean  and  safe  physical  classroom  environment,  including  removing  all  items 
from  the  floor  which  could  be  slip  and  fall  hazards;  and  (5)  actively  monitor  student 
compliance  with  directions  for  their  academic,  behavioral,  and  physical  well-being  by 
circulating  the  room  regularly,  and  intervene  whenever  necessary  and  always  maintain  visual 
contact  with  all  of  the  students.  Mr.  Alfayate  stated  that  if  he  were  to  evaluate  Respondent 
that  day,  Mr.  Alfayate  would  give  her  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation, 
which  could  result  in  discipline,  such  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of 
Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Mr.  Alfayate  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed 
to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an 
overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of 
Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

189. 

On  October  7,  2013,  Respondent  submitted  to  Mr.  Alfayate  a  response  to  his 
conference  memo  of  September  30,  3013  concerning  his  September  25,  2013  observation. 
Respondent  stated  that,  in  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  she  wanted  to  thoroughly 
teach  the  lesson  and  cover  all  aspects  of  the  learning  activity,  but  picture  day  was  held  on 
September  25,  2013,  which  disrupted  their  daily  classroom  schedule.  Additionally, 
Respondent  stated  she  would  speak  Standard  English  to  the  students  at  all  times,  and  would 
correct  students  who  used  non-Standard  English. 

51 

   

190. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  stated  that  she  had  just 

moved  into  the  classroom  a  week  prior,  which  was  covered  in  layers  of  dust  and  cob  webs, 
and  she  had  been  working  hard  to  get  the  classroom  clean  and  safe  for  her  class.  Respondent 
stated  the  janitors  did  not  sweep  the  classroom,  thus  small  items  may  have  remained  on  the 
floor  underneath  the  desks  of  the  students,  but  not  in  a  walkway  that  could  result  in a  slip  and 
fall.  Additionally,  Respondent  stated  she  did  not  redirect  the  student  who  was  playing  with  a 
feather,  because  she  wanted  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  take  personal  responsibility  and 
put  the  feather  away  on  his  own.  Also,  Respondent  did  not  go  and  check  on  the  student  who 
had  remained  in  the  restroom  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  because  she  did  not  want  to 
embarrass  the  student.  In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  stated  she  would 
not  validate  students’  responses  if  it  was  not  their  turn  to  speak. 

191. 

On  October  17,  2013,  Mr.  Alfayate  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee,  suspending  Respondent  without  pay  for  a  period  of  15 
days,  and  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  for  the  period 
of  August  27,  2012  to  September  30,  2013,  for  (1)  unsatisfactory  performance;  and  (2) 
persistent  violation  of  and  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  school  by  the  state  board  of 
education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  school  district  employing  her.  Specifically, 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  discipline  foundation  policy,  required  curriculum  of  the 
District,  namely  its  Treasures  reading  and  language  arts  program,  and  its  enVision  math 
program,  and  failed  to  adhere  to  California  state  content  standards. 

192. 

At  hearing,  Mr.  Alfayate,  who  had  been  employed  with  the  District  for  24 

years,  served  as  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  16  years,  taught  second  grade  for  10  years, 
served  as  an  assistant  principal  and  a  principal,  and  now  serves  as  a  field  director  in  District’s 
Office  of  Staff  Relations,  opined,  based  on  his  experience  and  observations,  that  Respondent 
was  not  an  effective  teacher  and  should  not  be  allowed  to  teach. 

193. 

On  December  5,  2013,  Dr.  Chiae  Byun-Kitayama,  who  is  an  instructional 

director  with  District’s  Educational  Service  Center  East,  sent  Respondent a letter  scheduling 
a  meeting  for  December  10,  2013  to  discuss  her  possible  dismissal  from  the  District.  Dr. 
Kitayama,  who  observed  Respondent’s  class  with  Mr.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate 
approximately  10  times  between  July  2012  and  April  2014,  noted  students  were  not  on  task, 
not  in  their  seats,  and  often  did  not  know  what  they  were  supposed  to  be  doing.  Dr. 
Kitayama  also  noted  Respondent  would  write  an  objective  on  the  board,  but  her  instruction 
would  not  match  the  objective.  Dr.  Kitayama,  as  well  as  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate,  all 
of  whom  testified  at  hearing,  failed  to  see  any  appreciable  improvement  in Respondent’s 
ability  to  teach  effectively  over  the  years.  Dr.  Kitayama  stated  in  her  letter  to Respondent 
that  in  addition  to  her  meeting  with  her,  Dr.  Kitayama  would  review  conference  memos  and 
observations  notes  from  September  2009  through  September  30,  2013, Respondent’s 
responses  to  those  memos,  Stull  evaluations,  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  of 
Certificated  Employee  and  Notices  of  Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee.  Dr. Kitayama 
explained  that  thereafter,  she  would  make a  report  to  the  superintendent  who  would  decide 

52 

  
 

    

whether  a  written  recommendation  for  dismissal  would  be  submitted  to  the  board  of 
education. 

194. 

On  December  10,  2013,  Respondent,  along  with  her  union  representative,  met 

with  Dr.  Kitayama  and  Dr.  Kristen  Murphy  (Employee  Performance  Accountability  Field 
Director).  During  the  meeting,  Respondent  stated  she  understood  the  charges  against  her, 
namely  (1)  unsatisfactory  performance;  and  (2)  persistent  violation  of  and  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
school  by  the  state  board  of  education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  school  district  employing 
her.  However,  she  disagreed  with  the  charges  and  believed  the  conference  memos  were  a 
compilation  of  petty  things.  Respondent  stated  she  felt  blindsided  by  the  proposed  dismissal, 
and  felt  she  had  done  a  wonderful  job  with  her  students.  Subsequent  to  the  meeting, 
Respondent  provided  additional  documents  to  Ms.  Kitayama  for  her  to  consider. 

195. 

On  January  13,  2014,  Ms.  Kitayama  sent  Respondent a  letter  stating  that, 

based  on  the  information  available  to  her,  including  the  additional  documents  provided  by 
Respondent,  she  concluded  that  the  proposed  disciplinary  action  should  be  forwarded  to  the 
board  of  education  for  disposition,  and  that  she  would  be  recommending  that  the  District 
move  forward  with  Respondent’s  dismissal. 

c. 

Respondent's  Testimony 

196. 

Respondent  testified  at  hearing.  Respondent  lived  in  Los  Angeles  as  a  child 

and  went  to  private  school.  Respondent  attended  the  University  of  Southern  California  as  an 
undergraduate  and  majored  in  film  production.  Respondent  discovered  she  required  a 
profession  with  more  stability,  so  she  returned  to  college  and  earned  her  teaching  credential. 

197. 

Respondent  mostly  testified  in  a  general,  global  fashion,  and  did  not  address 

with  much  specificity  the  100  allegations  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  However,  one 
recurring  theme  throughout  Respondent’s  testimony  was  her  belief  that  Ms.  Ariyasu’s 
“assistance  and  guidance”  set  forth  in  her  conference  memos  did  not  truly  provide  assistance 
and  guidance  on  how  to  improve  her  teaching.  On  the  contrary,  Respondent  believed  she 
had  been  doing  already  most  of  the  activities  suggested  by  Ms.  Ariyasu.  While  Respondent 
admitted  that  she  made  some  mistakes  in  the  presence  of  the  principals,  she  believed  that  Ms. 
Ariyasu  arbitrarily  subjected  her  to  criticism,  and  did  not  seem  to  notice  how  she  improved 
her  manner  of  teaching. 

D. 

198. 

Character  Testimony 

    

Street,  provided  character  testimony.  Ms.  Maldonado-Garcia  and  Ms.  Vega  described 
Respondent  as  a  hardworking  teacher  who  came  to  work  early  and  remained  at  school  long 
after  the  school  day.  Additionally,  Respondent  often  volunteered  to  type  the  grade  level 
lesson  plans  created  through  weekly  collaborations  of  second  grade  teachers. 

Cynthia  Maldonado-Garcia  and  Christina  Vega,  who  are  teachers  at  Tenth 

 

     

  

199. 

Caroline  Kwong-Der,  who  served  as  Respondent’s  colleague  and  union 
representative,  described  Respondent  as  honest,  dependable,  responsible,  pleasant,  and 
someone  who  appeared  to  be  in  a  good  mood  at  all  times,  and  helped  others  when  needed. 
Ms.  Kwong-Der  accompanied  Respondent  to  some  of  her  conference  meetings  with  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate,  and  assisted  Respondent  with  some  of  her  written  responses.  Ms. 
Kwong-Der  believed  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate  found  fault  in  some  of  Respondent’s 
actions  that  they  would  not  have  found  in  other  teachers,  including  Ms.  Kwong-Der. 

E. 

Credibility  Findings® 

200. 

The  Commission  found  credible  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Ariyasu,  Mr. Alfayate, 

and  Ms.  Guzman,  as  they  observed  Respondent  independently  over  a  period  of  time,  and 
reached  similar  conclusions  concerning  Respondent’s  performance.  Their  perspectives  were 
corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Kitayama,  who  not  only  observed  Respondent  on 
approximately  10  occasions,  but  met  with  Respondent,  reviewed  documents  submitted  by 
her,  and  still  concluded  that  Respondent  should  be  dismissed  from  District.  All  four  of  these 
witnesses  testified  in  a  clear,  concise,  unequivocal  manner,  and  supported  their  perspectives 
with  descriptive  facts. 
Ariyasu,  Mr.  Alfayate,  Ms.  Guzman,  and  Dr. Kitayama. 

The  Commission  afforded  great  weight  to  the  testimony  of  Ms. 

201. 

The  testimony  of  Respondent  was  afforded  less  weight,  as  her  testimony  was 

disjointed,  difficult  to  follow,  and  did  not  fully  address  the  allegations  set  forth  in  the 
Accusation.  Additionally,  Respondent  was  slow  in  answering  questions,  and  appeared  to 
have  great  difficulty  recalling  facts.  Consequently,  the  Commission  gave  more  weight  to  the 
written  memos  penned  by  Respondent  in  response  to  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate’s 
conference  memos  than  to  her  testimony  itself,  as  they  better  explained  Respondent’s 
perspective.  However,  the  Commission  did  not  find  that  Respondent’s  responsive  memos 
discredited  either  the  testimony  of,  or  the  conference  memos  penned  by,  Ms.  Ariyasu  or  Mr. 
Alfayate,  nor  did  the  Commission  consider  them  weightier  than  the  testimony  of  Ms. 
Guzman  or  Dr.  Kitayama. 

HT] 

”  In  this  matter,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses  pursuant  to 
the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the  demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witness 
while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the  capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events 
occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty,  the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other 
statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the 
existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness  testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness 
toward  the  proceeding  in  which  the  testimony  has  been  given.  The  manner  and  demeanor  of 
a  witness  while  testifying  are  the  two  most  important  factors  a trier  of  fact  considers  when 
judging  credibility.  The  mannerisms,  tone  of  voice,  eye  contact,  facial  expressions  and  body 
language  are  all  considered,  but  are  difficult  to  describe  in  such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly 
understands  what  causes  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  or  disbelieve  a  witness. 

  

  
54 

  

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Absent  a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 
Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden of  proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations. 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (§§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4. 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two  members  of 
the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  respondent  and  one  by  the 
district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

5. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission 
may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of 
dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (§  44944,  subd.  (c)(1)(3).) 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(a) 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

more  of  the  following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

["]  ...  [T] 

[MT]...  [M] 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

55 

  
 

  

 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

7. 

Unprofessional  conduct  as  used  in  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  may  be 

defined  as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is 
unbecoming  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953) 
41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled  in  part,  on  another  ground,  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of  Ed. 
(1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588,  fn.  7.) 

8. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  (In  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 
While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s  conduct  relative  to 
the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be  analyzed  with  an 
eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing  school  district. 
Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory 
performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  refers  to 
section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school  districts  should 
evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for 
discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to  his 
employing  school  district.  However,  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to 
insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice 
for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties 
efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist. 
(2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411, p. 
757.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation  is  that  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be 
arbitrary  or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether a  certificated  employee  has 
performed  unsatisfactorily. 

9. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.) 

10. 

Even  where  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are  established,  it 

must  also  be  established  that  such  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  renders  the 

56 

     

Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 
230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208 
(Fontana);  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at  1444-1445.)  In  Morrison,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  set  forth  guidelines  (eight  factors)  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct 
in  question  indicates  such  unfitness: 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(7) 

(1)  _  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students, 
fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such 
adversity  anticipated. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 

The  type  of  credential  held  by  the  person  involved. 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct. 

(6)  —  The  likelihood  of  the  reoccurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 
chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or 
other  teachers. 

(8) 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

  

11. 

Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 

satistied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 
Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact established, 
but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.) 

12. 

“Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,”  which 
concerns  Education  Code,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  requires  a  “showing  of 
intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

  

Section  44932,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  a  district  may  suspend  a 
permanent  employee  without  pay  for  a  specific  period  of  time  if  it  follows  the  same 
procedures  as  for  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee. 

13. 

  

14, 

—  Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 
statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
.  the 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 
the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 
30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

.  with  willful  refusal  to 

. 

. 

15. 

Section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  provides  that  no  testimony  shall  be 
given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years 
prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice.  As  such,  in  the  instant  matter,  the  statute 
of  limitations  began  running  on  April  25,  2010,  based  on  Factual  Finding  1. 

16.  —  The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  provides  in  part: 

A.  We  are  committed  to  being  the  best  school  district  and  personnel  we 

can  be,  educating  our  students  to  their  maximum  potential. 
Everything  we  do  has  an  impact  on  the  classroom. 

1. 

Set  the  example.  We  are  committed  to  providing  the  best 
example  we  can,  striving  to  demonstrate  excellence,  integrity 
and  responsibility  in  our  work.  (Emphasis  in  original.) 

[M]...  [1] 

5.  Keep  policies,  procedures  and  rules.  Our  rules,  policies  and 
procedures  are  the  foundation  of  trust  and  how  our  District 
conducts  everyday  business.  They  define  our  expectations  and 
evaluation  criteria.  We  are  committed  to  following  our  Code  of 
Ethics,  laws,  and  District  rules,  regulations,  bulletins,  policies 
and  procedures,  recommending  changes  required  to  make  them 
better,  and  will  not  tolerate  improper  conduct.  (Emphasis  in 
original.) 

17. 

Here,  District  established,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that 

Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1)),  unsatisfactory 
performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(4)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)), 
persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)  (7)),  and 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  (§  44939).  As  such, 

58 

  
 

as  set  forth  in  more  detail  below,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  position  as  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  of  District. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

18. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  8,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  Respondent’s 
employing  school  district.  The  evidence  showed  District  issued  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service  and  suspended  Respondent  on  three  occasions.  Specifically,  Respondent  was 
suspended  on  December  13,  2012,  August  16,  2013,  and  October  17,  2013,  for  five,  eleven, 
and  fifteen  days,  respectively,  for  her  failure  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  despite 
numerous  warnings,  directives,  and  substantial  assistance  and  guidance.  Specifically,  from 
September  19,  2012  through  September  30,  2013,  Respondent  received  12  conference 
memos  outlining  her  repeated  failures  to  write  objectives,  follow  lesson  plans,  follow  the 
teacher’s  edition,  teach  effective  directed  lessons  and  differentiate  instruction,  demonstrate 
classroom  management,  teach  core  subjects  with  fidelity,  monitor  and  address  student 
behavior,  post  current  work  product,  use  Standard  English,  and  many  other  deficiencies. 
These  failures,  established  by  the  credible  testimony  of  Ms.  Ariyasu,  Mr.  Alfayate,  and  Ms. 
Guzman,  all  of  whom  observed  Respondent’s  poor  work  performance  over  the  years, 
remained  uncorrected,  despite  intensive  and  extended  interventions  provided  by  the 
administration,  multiple  core  coaches,  and  PAR  professionals. 

19. 

Additionally,  Respondent  received  multiple  below  standard  Stull  evaluations, 
thereby  rendering  her  ineligible  for  continued  participation  in  the  PAR  program  to  address 
the  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  May  2012  and  April  2013  evaluations.  Specifically, 
Respondent  received  two  consecutive  schoo!  years’  worth  of  PAR  assistance  (2011-2012  and 
2012-2013),  because  she  had  received  below  standard  Stull  evaluations  for  the  2009-2010 
and  2010-2011  school  year. 

20. 

Despite  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Services,  suspensions,  multiple  below 

standard  Stull  evaluations,  and  the  guidance  and  assistance,  directives,  and  coaching 
resources  provided  by  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate,  Respondent  continued  to  demonstrate 
an  apparent  inability  or  unwillingness  to  perform  as  required.  Given  these  factors,  District 
demonstrated  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  performed  unsatisfactorily 
for  multiple  consecutive  years,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(4). 

Persistent  Violation  of  or  Refusal  to  Obey  School  Laws  /  Willful  Refusal  to  Perform 
Regular  Assignments 

21.  _  As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  12,  cases  interpreting  whether  a  teacher  has 

persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  school  laws  require  a  showing  of  intentional  and 
continual  refusal  to  cooperate.  Here,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow 
multiple  directives,  and  failed  to  show  marked  improvement  after  the  issuance  of  below 
standard  Stull  evaluations,  multiple  notices  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and multiple 
suspensions,  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  adhere  to  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of 

59 

   

Ethics,  requiring  its  employees  to  provide  “the  best  example  . 
excellence,  integrity  and  responsibility.”  Specifically,  Respondent,  despite  numerous 
directives  to  do  otherwise,  used  non-Standard  English,  such  as  “gonna,”  “wanna,”  and 
“gotta,”  and  continually  performed  in  a  substandard  fashion.  Respondent  also  failed  to 
adhere  to  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  requiring  employees  to  “keep  policies, 
procedures  and  rules.”  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  directives,  follow 
teacher’s  edition  instructions  to  ensure  the  proper  and  complete  delivery  of  lessons  to  her 
students,  and  failed  to  follow  pacing  plans. 

.  striving  to  demonstrate 

. 

22. 

Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  and  implement  a  behavior  system 

as  required  by  District’s  “Discipline  Foundation  Policy  Resource  Manual.”  Specifically, 
Respondent  failed  to  utilize  “proactive  strategies  for  defining,  teaching,  and  supporting 
appropriate  student  behaviors,”  including,  among  other  things,  monitoring  and  correcting 
behavioral  errors,  and  imposing  consistent  consequences.  The  evidence  showed  that  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate  observed  Respondent’s  class  on  a  number  of  occasions  where 
students  were  off-task,  out  of  their  seats,  roaming  the  classroom,  talking,  shouting,  making 
noise,  leaving  the  classroom  without  permission,  and  other  inappropriate  behaviors,  often 
without  Respondent  addressing  or  redirecting  the  inappropriate  behavior.  Although  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate  directed  Respondent  repeatedly  to  adopt  and  implement  an 
effective  behavior  support  system  for  her  students,  including  requiring  misbehaving  students 
to  turn  over  their  own  behavior  cards  instead  of  Respondent  assigning  the  duty  to  another 
student,  Respondent  failed,  or  was  otherwise  unable,  to  comply. 

23. 

These  same  factors  also  demonstrated  Respondent’s  refusal  to  perform  regular 

assignments,  particularly  her  failure  to  comply  with  multiple  directives  issued  by  Ms. 
Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate.  Given  the  above,  District  has  demonstrated  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  school  laws,  and 
willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  §§  44932, 
subd.  (a)(7),  and  44939. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service  {  Unprofessional  Conduct 

24. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  9  and  7,  evident  unfitness  for  service  and 

unprofessional  conduct  address  whether  a  teacher  is  unfit  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  by 
reason  of  inadequacies,  and  whether  a  teacher’s  conduct  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a 
profession  in  good  standing,  respectively.  Here,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Respondent 
failed  to  adhere  to  and/or  carry  out  specific  teaching  duties,  in  direct  violation  of  numerous 
warnings  or  directives  issued  by  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate.  Specifically,  Respondent 
failed  repeatedly  to  follow  lesson  and  pacing  plans,  teach  effective  directed  lessons,  and 
follow  the  teacher’s  edition  in  Treasures  (reading/language  arts  program)  and  enVision  (math 
program),  resulting  in  an  overall  failure  to  teach  those  core  subjects  with  fidelity. 
Additionally,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent’s  repeated  failure  to  demonstrate 
effective  classroom  management,  monitor  and  address  student  behavior,  coupled  with  her 
repeated  instances  of  unpreparedness,  often  resulted  in  a  noisy,  disorganized  classroom,  as 
well  as  an  on-going  loss  of  instructional  time  for  her  students.  Also,  Respondent  failed  to 

60 

   

     

maintain  a  safe  environment  for  her  students,  such  as  maintain  walkways  free  of  backpacks, 
trash,  or  other  debris,  and  adequately  supervise  her  students,  all  of  which  happened 
repeatedly  and  consistently,  despite  numerous  directives  from  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr.  Alfayate 
to  remediate  these  deficiencies.  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply  with  the  sheer  number  of 
directives,  most  of  them  recurring,  issued  to  her  from  September  19,  2012  through 
September  30,  2013,  totaling  93,  and  correct  her  teaching  inadequacies,  represented  a 
sustained  inability  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  District,  thereby  demonstrating  her 
unfitness  for  service. 

25. 

Similarly,  to  the  extent  that  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply  with  repeated 

directives  related  to  a  continual  unwillingness  to  adhere  to  specific  orders  issued  by  those  in 
authority  over  her,  specifically  those  requiring  easily  executed  tasks,  such  as  using  equity 
sticks  properly  or  requiring  misbehaving  students  to  turn  over  their  own  behavior  cards, 
reasonably  demonstrated a  level  of  defiance,  constituting  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member 
of  a  profession  in  good  standing  (i.e.,  unprofessional  conduct). 

Morrison  Factors 

26. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  10,  after  establishing  evident  unfitness,  or 

unprofessional  or  immoral  conduct,  it  must  be  established  whether  such  evident  unfitness  or 
conduct  renders  Respondent  unfit  to  teach,  pursuant  to  the  Morrison  factors: 

a. 

b. 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students, 
fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated. 
This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  As  set  forth  in 
detail  above,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  numerous  directives  issued  by  Ms.  Ariyasu  and  Mr. 
Alfayate,  and  correct  a  number  of  teaching  deficiencies,  despite  an  inordinate  amount  of 
assistance  and  guidance,  including  interactive  instruction,  modeling,  and  consulting  provided 
by  core  coaches  and  PAR  professionals.  Consequently,  Respondent’s  students  experienced  a 
constant  loss  of  instructional  time,  the  delivery  of  ineffective  directed  lessons,  instruction 
that  lacked  fidelity  concerning  the  reading/language  arts  and  math  programs,  a  noisy, 
disorganized,  and  poorly  managed  classroom,  and  a  number  of  other  unacceptable  practices, 
all  obstructing  their  ability  to  access  the  curriculum. 

61     

factor  has  minimal  application,  in  that  the  type  of  credential  held  by  Respondent  did  not 
serve  as  a  relevant  factor  cither  explaining,  defending,  or  excusing  her  failures  to  carry  out 
her  duties  as  a  teacher. 

moderate  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action,  in  that  the  events  in  question  are 
not  remote,  as  they  occurred  fewer  than  two  years  ago. 

This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  The  evidence 

The  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved.  This 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  This  factor  has 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct. 

c. 

d. 

  

showed  that  Respondent  was  given  extensive,  intensive,  and  repeated  assistance  and 
guidance,  including  at  least  a  dozen  conferences  with  Ms.  Ariyasu  and/or  Mr.  Alfayate 
between  September  19,  2012  through  September  30,  2013,  extensive  coaching  by  core 
coaches  and  PAR  professionals,  and  attended  professional  development  sessions,  but  failed 
to  make  a  marked  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  as  a  teacher.  In  addition  to 
the  assistance  and  guidance,  Respondent  received  multiple  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Service 
and  suffered  three  suspensions,  but  none  of  those  actions  resulted  in  Respondent  correcting 
her  deficiencies. 

e. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting in 

the  conduct.  While  Respondent’s  performance  was  not  praiseworthy,  the  “motives” 
underlying  her  conduct  remain  unclear.  Therefore,  this  factor  has  minimal  application. 

f. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  This  factor 

has  maximum  application  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  The  evidence clearly 
established  that  Respondent  was  unsuccessful  in  remediating  her  deficiencies,  despite 
substantial  intervention.  As  such,  if  Respondent  is  permitted  to  return  to  the  classroom,  the 
likelihood  is  great  that  she  would  continue  to  perform  with  evident  unfitness. 

g. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 

chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person  involved,  or  other  certified 
persons.  The  parties  raised  no  constitutional  issues  in  this  matter. 

h. 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct.  This  factor  has  no 

application  in  this  matter,  as  the  record  includes  no  evidence  of  publicity  or  notoriety 
stemming  trom  Respondent’s  conduct. 

27. 

In  light  of  the  above,  the  Morrison  factors,  on  balance,  indicate  that 

Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach,  as  the  number  of  factors  with  maximum  application  outweighs 
the  number  of  factors  with  less.  Specifically,  District  has  met  its  burden  of  demonstrating 
that  Respondent’s  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  its 
students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  her  actions  as  a  teacher. 

28. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  Commission  has  determined,  by  unanimous  vote, 

that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District  as  a 
permanent  certificated  employee,  for  her  unsatisfactory  performance,  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations,  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments 
without  reasonable  cause,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  unprofessional  conduct. 

Conclusion 

Mf 

itt 

62 

   

  

as  an  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  forthwith.    

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Glory  Rangel  is  sustained  and  shall  be  dismissed 

ORDER 

DATED:  June  Aly  2015 

DATED:  June  __,  2015 

DATED:  June’4,  2015 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

DEANNA  CLARK 
Commission  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

/ 
Mik  lamas 
MITZI  OKAMOTO 
Commission  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  
   

  

Se 

= 

 
a

 
e
e

 
a

 
e
n
i

 
=

 
e
a
u

 
e
s

oe 

eas 

= 
= 
a 
se 
a 

Oe 
fee 

 
e
 a
a
 
e
o
f

aos Se 

  

      

Seer et ee 

  

 
s
a
e

so 

a 

= 
ee 

lr 

See 

ee 
es 
os  o 
SF 

  

Ss 

e
e
 e

 
i

:

