BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against, 

ANA  GARCIA, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2014030267 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 

Angeles,  California,  on  April  21,  22,  23,  and  24,  2014.  The  Commission  consisted  of 
Virginia  Escobar,  Jeffrey  Jacobs,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Rupert  A.  Byrdsong,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Rosty  G.  Gore,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Ana  Garcia  (Respondent). 

The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  April  24,  2014,  and  subsequently  agreed 

to  extend  the  Decision’s  due  date  to  August  8,  2014. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  to  Haskell 
Elementary  School.  District  alleged  that  Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  and  immoral 
conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),'  evident  unfitness  for  service  (section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her  (section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)),  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district 
(section  44939),  all  arising  out  of  Respondent’s  alleged  abusive  or  inappropriate  behavior 
against  four  students.  District  seeks  Respondent’s  dismissal. 

Mf 

{/} 

  

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  17,  2014,  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  and 

Statement  of  Charges  executed  by  Justo  H.  Avila,  Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer, 
acting  in  his  official  capacity.  On  March  19,  2014,  Respondent  served  her  Notice  of 
Defense. 

: 

2. 

Respondent  began  teaching  school  with  the  District  with  an  emergency 

credential  in  July  1994,  and  continued  in  that  capacity  until  June  1998.  She  subsequently 
became  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  and  in  September  1998,  began 
teaching  at  Haskell  Elementary  School  (Haskell).  During  her  period  at  Haskell,  in  addition 
to  teaching,  Respondent  served  as  an  in-class  bilingual  coordinator  for  two  years,  marathon 
kids  lead  teacher  for  three  years,  intervention  teacher,  and  has  served  as  a  volunteer  at  a 
number  of  school  activities. 

3. 

The  2012-2013  school  year  began  on  August  14,  2012.  Respondent  was 

assigned  to  teach  first  grade.  Respondent’s  first  grade  class  consisted  of  primarily  six-year- 
old  students,  including  a  student  named  LI 
who  had  just  enrolled at  Haskell.  Pursuant  to 
District  protocol,  Respondent,  during  the  first  week  of  school,  distributed  permission  slips  to 
parents  seeking  their  consent  to  photograph  or  videotape  their  children. 

4, 

On  August  20,  2012,  Li 

after  returning  home  from  school,  expressed  to  his 
mother  he  no  longer  wished  to  attend  school.  When  his  mother  asked  why,  LI  explained 
that,  earlier  that  day,  after  issuing  multiple  warnings  requesting  him  to  pay  attention, 
Respondent  grabbed  Ls  neck  and  forcibly  turned  his  head  to  face  the  board.  Li 
further  advised  his  mother  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  the  same  conduct  against  him  on 
three  other  occasions  since  the  commencement  of  school. 

5. 

On  the  following  day,  August  21,  2012,  LPs  mother,  who  testified  at 
Lis 

hearing,  complained  to  Dr.  Thompson  about  Respondent's  treatment  of  LI 
mother  requested  that  Lfbe  removed  from  Respondent’s  classroom.  At  hearing,  LEREs 
truthful  when  he  told  her  about  Respondent’s 
mother  explained  that  she  felt LEE  was  being 
ever  telling  her  a  lie,  and  that  he  had  no 
actions.  She  also  added  she  could  not  recall  _ 
reason  to  lie. 

6. 

On  the  same  day,  Dr.  Thompson,  who  testified  at  hearing,  talked  to 

Respondent  denied,touching  LMM  on  the 

Respondent,  about  the  statements  made.by,  LI 
back of the  neck  and  squeezing  it  or  otherwise  hurting  Lh 
misbehavior  at  school.  Specifically,  Respondent  advised-Dr:  Thompson  that  in  the  six  days 
had  been  noncompliant  and  disruptive.  During 
since  the  commencement  of  school, 
her  conversation  with  Dr.  Thompson,  Respondent  retrieved  her  cell  phone  and  showed  Dr. 
Thompson  a  videotape  she  filmed  of 
approximately  15  seconds  in  length,  showing 
MB rolling  on  the  ground  with  his  fingers  in  his  mouth,  protesting  Respondent’s  directive 
to  the  class  that  they  return  to  their  desks  and  begin  working  in  their  workbooks.  Respondent 
advised  Dr.  Thompson  that  she  filmed  Lf  for  the  sole  purpose  of  showing  his  parents  how 

irrespective  LIRR 

s. 

   

  

  

  

  

LB bad  been  misbehaving  and  acting  immaturely.  Dr.  Thompson  had  not 

-  Respondent  prior  approval  to  videotape  Lor  any  other  student,  and 

given 
s  mother  had 

not  yet  returned  an  executed  permission  slip  granting  District  authority  to  photograph  or 
videotape  L 

7. 

Dr.  Thompson  immediately  removed  Respondent  from  her  classroom 

assignment,  pending  an  investigation. 

8. 

On  August  21,  2012,  Dr.  Thompson  interviewed  4  |  a  who  testified 

at  hearing,  explained  that  he  was  talking  to  one  of  his  friends  in  class,  which  prompted 
Respondent  to  put  her  hand  on  the  back  of  his  neck,  turn  his  head  to  face  the  board,  and  tell 
him  to  get  to  work.  When  Respondent  grabbed  his  neck,  it  hurt  him.  LEB  testified  that 
everyone  in  the  class  witnessed  Respondent  grab  his  neck.  He  did  not  want  to  return  to 
Respondent’s  class  after  she  squeezed  his  neck. 

9, 

Dr.  Thompson  reported  is  allegations  to  the  District,  and  then 

interviewed  all  of  the  other  students  in  Respondent’s  class.  According  to  Dr.  Thompson, 
Respondent’s  class  consisted  of  16  to  24  students.  No  student  corroborated  Li 

account. 

10. 

Dr.  Thompson  interviewed  Mary  Lou  Casillas,  a  special  education  assistant 
assigned  to  provide  additional  classroom  support  to  Respondent’s  class.  Ms.  Casillas,  who 
testified  at  hearing,  worked  mornings  in  Respondent’s  classroom  from  August  14,  2012  to 
August  17,  2012,  from  8:10  a.m.  to  11:00  a.m.  Ms.  Casillas  never  saw  Respondent  grab 

a  neck  or  touch  his  head,  or  have  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  with 

Casillas  described LE  as  requiring  a  lot  of  attention  and  redirection,  and  who  often 
of  his  seat,  but  Respondent  always  remained  calm  and  patient  when  dealing  with 

Ms. 
got  out 

11. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Casillas  explained  she  had  provided  classroom  assistance  for 

‘Respondent  on  and  off  for  10  years,  had  never  heard  Respondent  speak  to  any  student  in  a 
threatening  manner,  never  heard  Respondent  raise  her  voice  at  students,  never  heard  parents 
complain  about  Respondent, and  only  witnessed  Respondent  speaking  to  students  in  a  calm, 
patient,  and  slow  manner. 

12. 

On  August  30,  2012,  Debra  Bryant  and  Howard  Yao,  operations  coordinators 
from  the  District,  came  to  Haskell  and  conducted  interviews  of  Respondent’s  students.  Ms. 
Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao,  who  testified  at  hearing,  asked  each  of  the  students  the  following 
questions, and  then  scribed  their  responses,  though  ndt  always  word  for  word:**(1)  What  do 
you  like  about  [Respondent]?;  (2)  How  does  [Respondent]  reward  good  behavior?;  (3)  What 
happens  when  students  do  not  behave  in  [Respondent’s]  class?;  (4)  How  does 
[Respondent]get  your  attention  when  you  are  not  following  directions?;  and  (5)  Has 
[Respondent]  ever  made  you  feel  bad?” 

iff 

iff 

 

  

13. 

Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  found  that  the  students 

and  said  she  was  nice.  None  of  the  students  corroborated 
incidents  of  inappropriate  physical  touching.  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  submitted  their 
handwritten  notes,  which  included  the  students’  answers  to  the  questions  posed  to  them,  to 
the  staff  relations  department  of  the  District. 

generally  liked  Respondent 
s  account,  or  reported  any 

October  9,  2012  Conference 

14. 

On  October  9,  2012,  Dr.  Thompson  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  so  that 
she  could  discuss  the  allegations  of  inappropriate  treatment  related  to  LA.  Dr.  Thompson 
memorialized  the  substance  of  that  conference in  a  memorandum  dated  October  10,  2012, 
and  summarized  the  allegations  made  by  i;  mother  on  August  21,  2012,  of  purported 
inappropriate  conduct  committed  by  Respondent  on  August  20,  2012.  Specifically,  Dr. 
Thompson  stated  that  Respondent,  in  response  to  Lis  bad  behavior,  engaged  in  the 
following  acts: 
hurt  him,  and  forced  him  to  turn  his  head  toward  the  front  of  the  class;  (2)  on  another 
occasion,  grabbed  the  top  of 
cell  phone  to  videotape 

(1)  placed  her  hand  on  the  back  of  LEB s  neck,  squeezed  it  hard  enough  to 

s  head  and  forced  him  to  pay  attention;  and  (3)  used  her 

to  share  evidence  of  his  behavior  with  his  parents. 

15. 

During  the  conference,  Dr.  Thompson  instructed  Respondent  that  students 
must  always  be  treated  in  a  respectful  and  appropriate  manner,  and  that  school  personnel 
must  never  touch  students.  Dr.  Thompson  then  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  Education  Code 
section  51512,  prohibiting  anybody  from  using  a  recording  device  in  the  classroom  to 
promote  an  educational  purpose  without  prior  consent  from  the  principal. 

16. 

 Inaddition,  Dr.  Thompson  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  the  LAUSD  District’s 

Ethics  Policy  Statement,  which  included  language  stating  that  “employees  shall  treat  students 
with  respect  and  care  and  be  aware  of  their  proper  role  as  public  servants,  role  models,  and 
contributors  to  student  development.  Employees  shall  not  exploit,  harass,  or  discriminate 
against  any  student...  .” 

17. 

Dr.  Thompson  also  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  the  Board  Resolution 

“Commitment  to  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons,”  which  included  language  stating 
that  “The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  reaffirms  its  policy  that  students  and  adults  in 
both  schools  and  offices  should  treat  all  persons  equally  and  respectfully  and  refrain  from  the 
willful  and  negligent  use  of  slurs  against  any  person  on  the  basis  of  race,  language  spoken, 
cOlgr, Sex,  Te pandas national ongin,  immigrauon  status,  age, sexual  ofentation  or 
political belief.  5.07 

COL 

Sy 

2 

18. 

In  addition,  Dr.  Thompson  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  Bulletin  1347.2  entitled 

“Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements,”  which  defined  child  abuse  as  “willful 
cruelty  or  unjustifiable  punishment  (a  situation  where  any  person  willfully  causes,  inflicts  or 
permits  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental  suffering,  or  a  caregiver  willfully  causes  or 
permits  the  child  to  be  placed  in  a  situation  in  which  the  child’s  person  or  health  is 
endangered.  Endangerment  and  cruel  punishment  are  both  reportable  categories  of  child

      

  

  

abuse  which  do  not  require  that  injury  be  sustained)  or  mental  suffering,  emotional  well- 
being  (when  suffering  has  been  inflicted  upon  a  child  or  his  and  her  emotional]  well-being  is 
endangered  in  any  other  way).” 

19. 

Dr.  Thompson  also  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  With 
Students,  which  included  language  in  paragraphs  three  and  six  prohibiting  the  following: 
“(3)  Engaging  in  any  behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a  student(s)  or  in  the 
presence  of  the  student(s),  that  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative 
.  (6)  Touching  or  having  physical  contact  with  a  student(s)  that  is  not  age-appropriate  or 

within  the  scope  of  the  employee’s/individual’s  responsibilities  and/or  duties.” 

20. 

In  addition,  Dr.  Thompson  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  Bulletin  5046.0  entitled 

“Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment,”  which  stated  that  the  “Superintendent  encourages  the 
use  of  positive  approaches  to  discipline  and  classroom  management  to  ensure  that  students 
conform  to  proper  standards  of  behavior  permitting  them  to  derive  greater  benefits  from  the 
educational  program.” 

21. 

Dr.  Thompson  also  gave  Respondent  a  copy  of  the  California  Standards  for  the 

Teaching  Profession,  in  particular,  Standard  2.2,  that  discussed  establishing  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect. 

22. 

Respondent  told  Dr.  Thompson  that  she  would  prepare  a  written  response 

concerning  the  allegations  discussed  during  their  October  9,  2012  conference,  which  she  did. 
Specifically,  on  October  21,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  denying  the 
allegations.  Respondent  denied  grabbing  Lis  head  at  any  time  to  redirect  his  attention 
towards  the  board.  Respondent  further  stated  that  she  had  not  ever  used  corrective  measures 
that  have  hurt  any  student. 

23. 

   

she  was  going  to  take  a  picture  and  show  his  mom  how  he  was 

As  for  the  videotape,  Respondent  admitted  in  her  written  statement  that  she 
had  taken  a  picture  "Oe  She  used  it  as  a  way  of  getting  LR to  follow  her  request. 
Specifically,  she  told 
behaving;  however,  there  | is  no  evidence  that  Respondent  made  the  statement “in  a 
threatening  manner,” as  set  forth in  the  Accusation.  Lifimmediately  stopped  rolling  on 
the  ground,  stood  up,  and  then  Respondent  placed  her  arm  lightly  over  his  shoulder  and 
walked  him  back  to  his  seat.  Respondent  stated  that  she  understood  the  District’s  policy 
regarding  pictures  taken  at  school  by  teachers.  She  recalled  that  Haskell  had  just  distributed 
permission  slip  forms,  and  she  had  received  some  signed  forms  from  parents, but  determined, 
after  her  discussion with  Dr.  Thompson,  she had  not  received’a  signed  permission  slip  from 
Lis  parents. 

fil 

  

? 

At  hearing,  Respondent  interchanged  the  words “videotape”  and  “picture” 

when  describing  her  filming  ofl

  

24. 

On  December  12,  2012,  Dr.  Thompson  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension,  as  well  as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
that  Respondent  had  (1)  grabbed  the  top  of 
placed  her  hand  on  Lis  neck,  squeezed  it  hard,  and  forced  him  to  turn  his  head  toward 
in  a  threatening  manner  that  she  was  going  to  take 
the  front  of  the  class;  and  (3)  told 
his  picture  and  show  his  mother. 

Act(s)  of  Certificated  Employee,  charging 
*s  head  and  forced  him  to  pay  attention;  (2) 

25. 

The  staff  relations  department  of  the  District  determined  that  further 

investigation  was  necessary,  and  directed  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  to  return  to  Haskell  to 
interview  Respondent’s  students  from  previous  school  years. 

26. 

On  April  15,  2013  and  May  1,  2013,  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  randomly 

interviewed  students  who  were  enrolled  in  Respondent’s  2009-2010  and  2010-2011  classes, 
and  asked  these  students  the  same  questions  as  they  had  asked  the  students  in  August  2012. 
The  2009-2010  school  year  began  in  August  or  September  2009  and  ended  in  June  2010. 
The  2010-2011  school  year  began  in  August  or  September  2010  and  ended  in  June  2011. 
Many  of  the  students  said  Respondent  was  nice,  creative,  and  fun.  However,  a  few  students 
offered  some  negative  comments  about  Respondent,  according  to  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao. 
Specifically,  these  students  reported  that  Respondent  tapped  their  heads  with  a  marker  or 
yard  stick,  yelled,  and  grabbed  students.  A  few  students  reported  Respondent  frequently 
engaged  in  such  behavior  with  a  student  named  S 
outside  unsupervised  and  count  to  100. 

,  and  additionally  required  him  to  go 

27. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  reported  that  a  student  named  iim 

told  them  that  Respondent  tapped  his  classmate,  S 
attention.  REE  wo  testified  at  hearing,  and  now  in  sixth  grade,  testified  he  was  a 
student  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class.’  He  said  Respondent,  on  one  or  two  occasions, 

on  the  head  and  told  him  to  pay 

  

; 

was  correct  when  he  stated  he  was  in 

was  in  Respondent’s  2009-2010  class  or  in  her 

It  is  unclear  whether RE 
2010-2011  class.  However,  assuming 
Respondent’s  second  grade  class,  one  can  deduce  that  RI,  who  was  in  sixth  grade  at  the 
time  of  his  testimony,  was  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class  during  the  2009-2010  school 
year,  barring  any  “skipping”  of  grade  levels.  Following  this  logic,  if  RIB  attended 
Respondent’s  first  grade  class,  he  would  have  done  so  in  2008-2009  school  year, a  period 
clearly barred by:the:statute  of limitations  in  this  matter,  Therefore,  for  the  purpose  of  this 
Decision,  the  Panel  will  assume  RI was  not  in  Respondent’s  class  during  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  but  rather  attended  Respondent’s  class  in  a  subsequent  school  year.  The 
problem  is,  District  called  RIM  as  a  witness  to  describe  Respondent’s  purported  actions  as 
they  pertained  to  his  classmate,  S 
Respondent’s  first  grade  classroom  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  a  period  in  which  — 
REE  ould  have  been  in  the  third  grade,  assuming RBBB  neither  skipped  any  grades 
levels  or  was  retained  in  any  grades.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  District  mistakenly  listed  the 
incorrect  school  year  in  its  Accusation,  or  whether RE 
was  mistaken,  or  whether  there 
were  Other  factors  in  effect  that  neither  party  introduced  on  the  record,  but  in  an  abundance 

However,  the  Accusation  stated  SI  was  in 

6

  

    
  

  

hit  him  softly  on  the  head  with  some  kind  of  stick  that  resembled  _a  yard  stick,  and  he  said  he 
witnessed  her  hit  SIM  on  the  head  one  or  two  times.  rim 
Respondent  engaged  in  such  behavior  when  students  were  loud,  noisy,  goofing  off,  or  when 
they  were  not  paying  attention.  On  those  occasions  when  Respondent  tapped 
with  a 
yard  stick,  it  did  not  hurt  him.  RIdid  not  specify  when  during  the  school  year 
Respondent  engaged  in  such  behavior  toward  him  or  Si”  The  Accusation  did  not 
include  any  reference  to  Rs  allegations  of  physical  abuse  against  him  purportedly 
perpetrated  by  Respondent. 

further  testified  that 

28. 

Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  testified  that  a  student  named  ma.  who  attended 
gotten 
s 

Respondent’s  class  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  told  them  that  Respondent  had 
angry  with  her,  grabbed  J[Fs  head  with  both  of  Respondent’s  hands,  turned  J 
head  toward  the  board,  and  told  her  to  pay  attention.  J 
,  who  is  now  in  sixth 
testified  at  hearing,  and  explained  that  Respondent’s  actions  occurred  when  J 
Respondent’s  second  grade  class.*  J 
upset  her  and  made  her  cry. 
action  against  her  on  two  occasions,  and  had  witnessed  her  engaging 
with  other  students  in  her  class,  including  one  named  AM  J 
did  not  specify  when 
during  the  2009-2010  school  year  Respondent  purportedly  engaged  in  such  behavior  toward 
her  or  anybody  else. 

testified  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  such  physical 

further  explained  that  Respondent’s  conduct 

in  the  same  conduct 

grade, 
was  in 

J 

, 

29. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  testified  they  interviewed 
reported  that  Respondent  had  tapped  him  on  the  head  with  a  yard  stick,  which  resulted  in  a 
bump  on  his  head.  Neither  Ms.  Bryant  nor  Mr.  Yao  ascertained  when  during  the  school  year 
Respondent  engaged  in  such  action.  Sim”  did  not  testify  at  hearing. 

7  who 

30. 

Ms.  Bryant  and  Mr.  Yao  also  testified  that  a  student  named AR  who 

attended  Respondent’s  class  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  reported  that  Respondent  put 

  

of  caution,  the  Decision  will  include  analysis  regarding  SB  and  im  for  both  school 
years. 

during 
J 

--  second  grade  class,  asswming’she  matriculaied  on  time, then J 

In  its  Accusation,  the  District  states  that  mz  was  in  Respondent’s  class 

‘ 
the  2009-2010  school  year,  but  that  JA 
was  in  Respondent’s  first  grade  class.  If 
,  who  is  now  in  sixth  grade,  was  correct  when  she  testified  she  was  in  Respondent’s 
in  the 

would  have been 
first  grade  during  the  2008-2009  school  year,  a  period  clearly  outside  of  the  statute  of 
limitations.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  District  was  mistaken,  whether  JJ  was  mistaken, 
or  whether  there  were  other  factors  in  effect  that  neither  party  presented  on  the  record. 
However,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Decision,  the  analysis  will  not  focus  on  whether  J 
was  in  the  first  grade  or  in  the  second  grade  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  but  rather 
whether  the  District  met  its  burden  of  showing  Respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  toward 
y 

|  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  within  the  statutory  period. 

 

both  hands  on  the  sides  of  his  head,  and  turned  his  head  toward  the  board. Am  who  is 
~  now  11-years-old  and  in  sixth  grade,  testified  at  hearing,  and  explained  that  Respondent’s 

actions  occurred  when  he  was  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class.  °  He  and 
the  same  class.  ARB  gia  not  specify  when  during  the  2009-2010  school  year  that 
Respondent  engaged  in  such  behavior. 

were  in 

31.  |  Respondent’s  teacher’s  assistant  for  the  2008-2009  and  2009-2010  school 

years,  Lorena  Franco-Lomelli,  testified  at  hearing.  During  those  school  years,  Ms.  Franco- 
Lomelli  worked  in  Respondent’s  class  for  three  and  one-half  hours  a  day.  Ms.  Franco- 
Lomelli  never  witnessed  Respondent  engaging  in  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  with 
students.  In  addition,  she  never  witnessed  Respondent  scream  at  students  or  grab,  hit,  or 
shake  students.  She  also  never  saw  Respondent  exhibit  unkindness  to  students,  or  do 
anything  to  make  them  cry.  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli  never  witnessed  Respondent  leave  students 
unsupervised,  or  send  any  student  out  of  the  classroom  and  close  the  door.  Respondent  had 
an  open  door  policy  and  rarely  closed  the  classroom  door. 

May  15,  2013  Conference 

32. 

On  May  15,  2013,  Dr.  Thompson  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  so  that 

Specifically, 

she  could  discuss  the  results  of  the  April  15,  2013  and  May  1,  2013  investigations.  Dr. 
Thompson  advised  Respondent  that,  pursuant  to  the  April  15,  2013  investigation,  she 
concluded  that  Respondent  had  engaged  in  multiple  acts  of  inappropriate  treatment  of 
5 
  
had  (1)  pushed  S 
of  the  classroom  unsupervised  for  at  least  five  minutes  as  a  consequence  for  misbehaving;  (3) 
rapped  S 
(4)  screamed  at  S 
(5)  grabbed 
tap 

and  other  students  to  get  their  attention,  which  made  them  afraid; 
by  the  shirt  and  yanked  on  it  to  get  his  attention;  (6)  used  a  marker  to 

Dr.  Thompson  advised  that  students  had  reported  that  Respondent 
in  the  back  because  he  was  not  behaving;  (2)  left  SJ  outside 

    
on  the  head;  and  (7)  rapped  SHEE on  the  head  with  her  knuckles. 

on  the  head  with  a  yardstick  on  more  than  one  occasion  to  get  his  attention; 

   

33. 

Dr.  Thompson  also  advised  Respondent  that  she  learned,  pursuant  to  the 

interviews  conducted  on  May  1,  2013,  that  on  one  occasion,  in  front  of  the  class,  Respondent 
screamed  at  J 

and  then  grabbed  J ae  :  head  with  both  hands,  shook  it,  and  told 

   

  

° 
In  its  Accusation,  the  District  states  that AB  was  in  Respondent’s  class 
the  2009-2010  school  year,  but  that ABB  was  in  Respondent’s  first  grade  class. 
during 
ABE  who  is  now  in sixth grade,  was  correct  when he testified  he  was  it, Respondent's 
second  grade  class,  assuming  he  matriculated  on  time,  then  Af would  have  been  in  the 
first  grade  during  the  2008-2009  school  year,  a  period  clearly  outside  of  the  statute  of 
limitations.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  District  was  mistaken,  whether  JJ  was  mistaken, 
or  whether  there  were  other  factors  in  effect  that  neither  party  presented  on  the  record. 
However,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Decision,  the  analysis  will  not  focus  on  whether  A 
was  in  the  first  grade  or  in  the  second  grade  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  but  rather 
whether  the  District  met  its  burden  of  showing  Respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  toward 

If 

ABB 

during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  within  the  statutory  period. 

   

  

    

  

    

1G  to  pay  attention.  J 
grabbed  another  student, 
attention. 

   

also  reported  that  on  another  occasion,  Respondent 
by  the  head  with  both  hands  and  shook  it  to  get  his 

34. 

Dr.  Thompson  instructed  Respondent  that  students  must  always  be  treated  in  a 
respectful  and  appropriate  manner,  and  that  school  personnel  must  never  touch  students.  Dr. 
Thompson  then  gave  Respondent  another  copy  of  (1)  LAUSD  District’s  Ethics  Policy 
Statement;  (2)  Board  Resolution  “Commitment  to  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;” 
(3)  Bulletin  1347.2  entitled  “Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements;”  (4)  Code  of 
Conduct  With  Students;  (5)  Bulletin  5046.0  entitled  “Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment;” 
and  (6)  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession. 

Respondent’ S  lestimony 

35. 

At  hearing,  Respondent  emphatically  declared  untrue  the  charges  levied 

,  who  was  in  Respondent’s  class  for 

against  her.  Specifically,  in  reference  to  L 
approximately  five  days  prior  to  her  removal  from  the  classroom,  Respondent  described  him 
as  requiring  constant  redirection,  because  he  had  difficulty  paying  attention  and  remaining 
sit  at  the  front  of  the  class,  in 
seated.  Consequently,  Respondent  determined  LJ should 
hope  it  would  keep  him  more  focused.  Despite  how  challenging  LE  could  be,  Respondent 
never  grabbed  Lis  neck,  squeezed  his  neck,  turned  his  head,  or  did  anything  of  the  sort, 
and  always  addressed  UE 

in  a  calm  manner. 

36. 

Respondent  also  vehemently  denied  the  allegations  levied  by  i  and 

Am  as  she  has  never  screamed  or  shaken  any  child.  While  she  conceded  that  sometimes 
she  had  to  raise  her  voice  slightly  to  get  the  group’s  attention,  depending  on  the  activity,  she 
has  never  used  yelling  or  screaming  as  a  form  of  discipline. 

37. 

Similarly,  Respondent  denied  the  allegations  concerning  S| 

Specifically,  Respondent  denied  having  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  S| 
such  as  tapping  him  on  the  head,  and  never  left  him  unsupervised.  Respondent  testified 
SIRE  was  always  in  her  line  of  sight,  even  on  those  occasions  when  he  had  been 
disruptive,  prompting  her  to  ask  him  to  stand  outside  the  threshold  of  the  classroom 
(approximately  two  inches)  and  count  to  100.  Her  rationale  for  telling  S 
to  count  to 
100  was  to  give  i  mind,  which  “ran  a  mile  a  minute,”  something  else  on  which  to 
focus.  Respondent  found  that  when  she  had  given  Cc 
often-calmed  him  down  and  readied  his  mind  for  learning.  Respondent always.had  to  keep  a 
visual  on  S 
than  eight  feet  away  from  Respondent,  whether  S 
two  inches  outside  the  threshold  of  the  classroom. 

more 
was  in  the  classroom,  or  standing 

because  he  was  so  active  and impulsive.  At  no  time  was  SI 

the  task  of  counting,  the  act 

38. 

Respondent  concluded  her  testimony  by  reiterating  she  had  not  engaged  in  any 
inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students,  or  any  contact  that  was  outside  her  purview  as  a 
teacher.  No  parent  had  ever  complained  to  Respondent  about  her  treatment  of  their  children. 

 

  

Character  Testimony 

39.  |  When  Ms.  Casillas  and  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli  served  as  assistants  in 
Respondent’s  class,  they  found  Respondent  to  be  a  good  teacher.  Ms.  Casillas,  who  had 
been  a  teacher’s  assistant  for  approximately  15  years,  could  not  picture  Respondent  doing  the 
acts  set  forth  in  the  Accusation,  and  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli,  who  had  worked  as  a  teacher’s 
assistant  for  six  years,  had  a  similar  view.  Ms.  Casillas  wrote a  letter  stating  that  Respondent 
had  worked  professionally  with  all  of  her  students,  and  provided  extra  assistance  for  those  in 
need.  Ms.  Casillas  indicated  that  there  were  two  students  in  the  2012-2013  class  that 
required  additional  support,  assistance,  and  constant  redirection,  and  that  Respondent  would 
assist  those  students,  and,  despite  the  difficulty  Respondent  experienced  in  presenting  her 
lessons  as a  result  of  the  two  students’  constant  disruptions,  always  demonstrated  patience. 
Ms.  Casillas  further  stated  that  she  had  worked  with  Respondent  in  previous  school  years, 
and  found  that  Respondent  had  a  wonderful  work  ethic,  was  dedicated  and  caring,  and  stated 
that  it  was  always  her  pleasure  to  work  with  Respondent. 

40. 

Ms.  Franco-Lomelli  considered  her  time  in  Respondent’s  class  as  the  best  in 

her  career,  because  she  witnessed  how  Respondent  treated  the  students  as  Respondent’s  own 
children.  She  also  witnessed  Respondent’s  professionalism,  dedication,  and  how  welcoming 
Respondent  was  of  her  students.  In  that  regard,  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli  wrote  a  character  letter 
on  Respondent’s  behalf,  and  expressed  that  Respondent  made  students  feel  comfortable, 
special,  and  heard. 

41. 

Deirdre  Jean  McDermott,  who  was  Respondent’s  co-worker  at  Haskell, 

beginning  in  1999,  provided  character  testimony  at  hearing.  Ms.  McDermott  has  observed 
Respondent  in  her  classroom,  and  found  Respondent  a  very  effective  teacher,  particularly 
with  English  language  learners  and  low  achieving  children.  Respondent  maintained  an  open 
classroom,  and  only  closed  the  door  in  bad  weather.  Ms.  McDermott  considered  Respondent 
a  good  teacher,  and  never  witnessed  or  heard  anything  about  Respondent  using  inappropriate 
physical  contact  or  screaming  at  students. 

42. 

In  addition  to  the  letters  by  Ms.  Casillas,  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli,  and  Ms. 

McDermott,  Respondent  submitted  more  than  30  other  character  letters  from  colleagues  and 

parents.°  Like  Ms.  Casillas,  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli,  and  Ms.  McDermott,  the  colleagues  and 
parents  considered  Respondent  to  be  very  conscientious,  dedicated,  and  professional,  and 
believed  her  to  be  an  invaluable  asset  to  the  Haskell  community. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Absent a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 

6 

Some  letters  were  written  in  Spanish  without  translation.  Those  letters  were 

not  considered  during  deliberations  or  in  this  Decision. 

10    

     

Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden of proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations. 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (Sections  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4. 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two  members  of 
the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  respondent  and  one  by  the 
district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from 
the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

5. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission 
may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of 
dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Section  44944,  subdivision 
(£))G)-) 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(a)  |  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

more  of  the  following.  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct.  — 

[]...  [9] 

(3)  Dishonesty. 

[u]...[¥ 

(5)  Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(T]...  [9] 

        

 

    

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 
[M]...  [1] 

  

     
   

     

    

    

    

    
    
   

7. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  a  district  may  suspend  a 
permanent  employee  without  pay  for  a  specific  period  of  time  if  it  follows  the  same 
procedures  as  for  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee. 

8. 

Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 
statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
.  with  willful  refusal  to 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
.  the 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 
the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 
30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

. 

. 

9. 

Section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  provides  that  no  testimony  shall  be 
given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years 
prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice.  As  such,  in  the  instant  matter,  the  statute 
of  limitations  began  running  on  January  22,  2010. 

10. 

The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  provides  in  part: 

(3) 

   
       
    
   

|  Engaging  in  behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a 

While  the  District  encourages  the  cultivation  of  positive  relationships 
with  students,  employees  and  all  individuals  who  work  with  or  have 
contact  with  students  are  expected  to  use  good  judgment  and  are 
cautioned  to  avoid  situations  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the 
following: 
(...1] 

[]    
 

student(s)  or  in  the  presence  of  a  student(s),  that  are 
unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative. 

  
  
        
  

(6) 

Touching  or  having  physical  contact  with  a  student(s)  that  is  not 
age  -appropriate  or  within  the  scope  of  the 
employee’s/individual’s  responsibilities  and/or  duties. 

11. 

Section  5152  prohibits  the  use  by  any  person  of  any  electronic  listening 

or  recording  device  in  any  elementary  or  secondary  school  classroom  without  the 
prior  consent  of  the  teacher  and  the  principal,  as  the  Legislature  finds  the  use  of 
electronic  listening  or  recording  devices  disrupts  and  impairs  the  teaching  process. 

12, 

Here,  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)), 
immoral  conduct  (sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939),  evident  unfitness  for 
service  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 
reasonable  regulations  (section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7)),  and  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  As  set  forth  in  more  detail  below,  District 
failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating  Respondent  committed  the  acts  described  in  the 
Accusation.  Accordingly,  District’s  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

13. 

The  majority  of  District’s  charges  stem  from  allegations  of  physical  =  “ 

inappropriate  physical  contact  with  four  students:  Si” a  a  rt and  Li 
addition,  District  alleges  Respondent  left  Si 
approximately 
manner”  to  L 
Decision  will  address  each  student  individually. 

five  minutes.  District  also  alleges  Respondent  stated  “in  a  threatening 

that  she  was  “going  to  take  a  picture,  and  show  it  to  [his]  mom.”  This 

outside  the  classroom  unsupervised  for 

ST 

14.  _  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating  that  Respondent  engaged 

in  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  —_,  Although  District  alleged in  the 
Accusation  that  Respondent  pushed  S 
grabbed  his  shirt  and  yanked  it  (Charge  1(e)),  and  rapped  sa  on  the  head  with  her 
knuckles  or  a  marker  (Charges  1(f)  and  (g)),  District  presented  absolutely  no  credible 
documentary  or  testimonial  evidence  that  corroborated  or  supported  these  allegations, 
including  any  testimony  from  S 

(Charge  1(a)),  screamed  at  him  (Charge  1(d)), 

15. 

Additionally,  with  respect  to  District’s  allegation  that  Respondent  left 

Siz  outside  the  classroom  unsupervised  for  approximately  five  minutes  (Charge  1(b)), 
the  evidence  did‘not  demonstrate  this.  District  presented  no  witness  or  documentary 
evidence setting  forth  District  rules  or  policies  describing  or  defining  what  it  meant  by 
“unsupervised,”  however,  according  to  Webster’s  Dictionary, “unsupervised”  means  to  not 
have  “the  oversight  or  direction  of.”’  Here,  While  Respondent  admitted  to  sending  S 
just  outside  the  threshold  of  the  classroom  (approximately  two  inches)  to  count  to  100,  she 

  

’ 

Websier. Dictionary.com.  Dictionary.com  Unabridged.  Retrieved  August  4, 

2014,  from  Dictionary.com  website:  http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/webster. 

13 

    

 

  

presented  credible,  uncontroverted  testimony  that  SBibever  left  her  line  of  vision,  and 
that  she  was  never  more  than  eight  feet  from  him  at  any  given  time.  Additionally, 
Respondent’s  uncontroverted  testimony  established  that  SHB  remained  outside  the 
classroom’s  threshold  for  a  maximum  of  one  to  one  and  one-half  minutes,  and  not  five 
minutes  as  alleged  in  the  Accusation.  Given  these  factors,  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden 
of  proof  concerning  Charge  1(b). 

16.  |  With  respect  to  the  allegation  that  Respondent  rapped  S| on  the  head 

—_— 

Rather,  District  proffered  testimony 

with  a  yardstick  (Charge  1(c)),  District  proffered  no  testimony  from  the  alleged  victim 
himself, 
Respondent  committed  such  acts  against  him  and 
mention  in  the  Accusation  that  Respondent  committed  such  acts  against 
seemed  to  insinuate  that  because  Respondent  purportedly  committed  those  acts  against 
   
R 

Respondent  must  have  committed  such  acts  against  SHB  t00.  However, 
s  testimony  was  neither  credible  nor  persuasive,  as  he  testified  to  events  that 

from 
   
|  Notwithstanding 

who  said  that 

the  lack  of 
,  District 

occurred  more  than  four  years  ago,  when  he  was  six  or  seven  years  old,  and  provided  no 
clarity  when  the  purported  abuse  occurred.  If  such  acts  occurred  during  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  then  the  acts  occurred  outside  of  the  statute  of  limitations  (i-e.,  all  acts  prior  to 
January  22,  2010).  If  such  acts  occurred  during  the  2009-2010  school  year,  the  District 
needed  to  establish  that  such  acts  occurred  after  January  22,  2010  in  order  for  them  to  be 
relevant  for  this  proceeding.  District  failed  to  do  so,  as  Ra  recounted  no  specific  time 
period  or  date  in  which  Respondent  purportedly  committed  such  acts.  Given  these  factors, 
District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  establishing  Respondent  rapped  Sim  on  the  head 
with  a  yardstick. 

17. 

Insum,  District  failed  to  meet  its  burden  of  proving  all  the  charges  in  the 

Accusation  related  to  S 

a 

18. 

District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating  that  Respondent  screamed 

’s  head  (Charge  3),  as  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  Both  J 

“En  (Charec  2(a)),  grabbed  JIE s  head  (Charge  2(b)),  and 

grabbed  and  shook 
sand  Als 
testimony  failed  to  establish  when  the  purported  abuse  occurred.  If  such  acts  occurred 
during  the  2008-2009  school  year,  the  acts  occurred  outside  of  the  statute  of  limitations  (i.e., 
all  acts  prior  to  January  22,  2010).  If  such  acts  occurred  during  the  2009-2010  school  year, 
the  DiSttict  neéded  ‘to‘establish  that  such acts  occurred  after  January  22,  2010  in  order  for 
them  to  be  relevant  for  this  proceeding.  District  failed  to  do  so,  as  neither  Jj  nor  A 
recounted  any  specific  time  period  or  date  in  which  Respondent  purportedly  committed  such 
acts  against  them.  Given  these  factors,  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  establishing 
   
am  os 
J 

screamed  at  yo  or  engaged  in  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  with 

or  A. 

  

f/f 

  

14 

 

  

  

  

_ 

19.  _  District  failed  to  sustain  its  burden  of  demonstrating  that  Respondent  engaged 

in  any  inappropriate  physical  contact  with is 
|  (Charges  4  and  5).  Specifically, 
Respondent  failed  to  proffer  credible  evidence  that  Respondent  grabbed  the  top  of 
head  and  forced  him  to  pay  attention  (Charge  4),  or  squeezed  his  neck  and  forced  him  to  turn 
his  head  to  the  front  of  the  class  (Charge  5).  While  District  presented  Li 

at  hearing, 

S 

LBM  offered  no  testimony  concerning  Charge  4.  As  for  Charge  5,  while  Lltestified  that 
Respondent  had,  indeed,  grabbed  his  neck  and  forced  him  to  turn  his  head,  and  that  everyone 
in  the  classroom  witnessed  Respondent’s  actions,  the  evidence  did  not  support  LPs 
testimony.  The  evidence  demonstrated  that  after  Li:  mother  levied  the  allegations 
against  Respondent,  Dr.  Thompson  conducted  an  investigation  immediately  thereafter,  which 
consisted  of  interviewing  each  student  enrolled  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  Yet,  the  results 
of  the  investigation  showed  no  corroboration  of 
*s  account.  Additionally,  Respondent 
credibly  testified  that  she  perpetrated  no  such  acts. 

20. 

 Inregard  to  Charge  6,  which  alleges  that  Respondent  told  Lin  a 

without  permission  from  his  parents  or  from  the  principal,  in  violation 

_  threatening  manner”  that  she  was  “going  to  take  [his]  picture,  and  show  [his]  mom,”  District 
failed  to  show  that  such  action  constituted  an  act  of  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral 
conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or 
the  laws  of  the  state,  or  a  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 
cause.  While  the  District  spent  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  establishing  that  Respondent 
had  videotaped  LE 
of  Education  Code  section  51512,  the  Accusation  included  no  such  charge.  Rather,  the 
Accusation  focused  primarily  on  the  manner  in  which  Respondent  made  the  statement  (i.e.,  a 
“threatening”  one),  but  failed  to  established  with  specificity  what  it  meant  by  “threatening.” 
Webster’s  Dictionary  defines  threatening  as  “tending  or  intended  to  menace.”  The  evidence 
did  not  demonstrate  such  action  on  the  part  of  Respondent.  Rather,  the  evidence  showed  that 
in  a  calm 
Respondent,  according  to  her  uncontroverted  testimony,  always  spoke  to 
manner,  a  character  trait  echoed  in  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Casillas  and  Ms.  Franco-Lomelli, 
and  that  she  simply  made  the  statement  to  encourage  Lio  cooperate.  Neither 
Respondent’s  statement  nor  the  manner  in  which  she  delivered  it  demonstrated  any 
unprofessional,  immoral,  or  unfit  conduct,  and  did  not  show a  persistent  refusal  to  obey 
school  rules  or  perform  regular  assignments.  Given  these  factors,  District  failed  to  sustain  its 
burden  its  burden  of  proof  concerning  Charge  6. 

a  21.  ;  In  sum,  District  failed  to  meet  its  burden  of proving  all the  charges in  the 
Accusation  relaied  to  SED  AR  or  LE 

woes 

22. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  court  concluded  that  a  teacher’s  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “immoral,”  “unprofessional,”  or  “involving  moral  turpitude”  unless  the 

15

  

  

conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach.  (7d.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth 
guidelines  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question  indicated  this  unfitness. 
However,  as  it  has  been  determined  that  the  conduct  was  not  proven  as  alleged,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  that  conduct. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed.      

     
ETT 

DATED:  August  11,  2014 

CARLAL. 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DATED:  August  __,  2014 

DATED:  August  __,  2014 

  

VIRGINIA  ESCOBAR 
Commission  Member 

  

JEFFREY  JACOBS 
Commission  Member 

  

16 

 

03/66/2814 

16:36 

562--5948-9@51 

FEDEX  OFFICE 

6328 

PAGE 

al 

  

   

   

   
   

ORDER! 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  August,  2014 

DATED:  August  __,  2014 

DATED:  August  6,  2014 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearing 

VIRGINIA  ESCOBAR 
Commission  Member! 

_. 
JACOBS 

JEFF 
Commission  Member 

  
  
      
    

 

         

eg/a7/2014 

13:33 

5626982513 

UPTOWN  MATL 

PAGE 

02/82 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  August,  2014 

, 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DATED:  August  7,  2014 

. 

: 

dy 
COBAR 

VIRG) 
Commission  Member 

   
   

      

   

DATED:  August,  2014 
    

JEFFREY  JACOBS 
Commission  Member

