BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
AND  THE  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2014100094 

MARK  LEOPANDO, 
a  permanent  certificated  employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  consisting  of  complainant’s  designee, 

Helen  Shepard,  respondent’s  designee,  Luciano  Ortiz,  and  Jennifer  M.  Russell, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Los 
Angeles,  California  on  August  24,  25,  26,  and  27. 

Kristine  E.  Kwong,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  (District).  Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent 
Mark  Leopando,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent  based  on  charges  that,  during  the  period 

October  17  through  October  30,  2013,  respondent  manifested  unprofessional  conduct, 
immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  was  persistent  in  his  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  District’s  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education.  Respondent  disputes  the  charges. 

During  the  hearing,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  ruled  on  motions  in  limine.  On 
complainant’s  unopposed  motion,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  issued  a  Protective  Order 
Sealing  Exhibits  34,  35,  36,  and  37.  Complainant’s  Trial  Brief  was  marked  for  identification 
as  Exhibit  39.  Respondent’s  Trial  Brief  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  BB.  The 
record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  September  4,  2015.  1 

'  The  record  remained  open  consistent  with  an  August  28,  2015  Post-hearing  Order 
providing  for  the  submission  of  a  Confidential  Name  List.  No  Confidential  Name  List  was 
submitted.  To  protect  confidentiality  an  initial  is  used  to  identify  certain  testifying  and  non- 
testifying  witnesses.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  48-year  old  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Respondent  holds  an  undergraduate  degree  in  biology  from  the  University  of  San  Carlos, 
which  is  located  in  the  Philippines,  where  he  was  born  and  raised.  After  migrating  to  the 
United  States,  respondent  pursued  several  unspecified  courses  of  study  without  earning  any 
additional  diploma  at  several  institutions,  including  Los  Angeles  Valley  College,  California 
State  University—Northridge,  and  the  University  of  Wisconsin  at  Madison,  before  he 
eventually  obtained  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential.  Since  2000,  the  District  has 
employed  respondent,  and  since  2001,  respondent  has  been  teaching  at  the  107"  Street 
Elementary  School  located  in  the  Watts  neighborhood  of  the  Los  Angeles  metropolitan  area. 
Respondent’s  most  recent  performance  evaluation,  which  was  issued  on  June  20,  2012, 
indicates  that  respondent  “Meets  Standard  Performance,”  that  respondent  “Provides  rigorous 
lessons  for  students,”  and  that  respondent  “Is  frequently  requested  by  parents  to  be  their 
child’s  teacher.”  (Exhibit  J.)  Respondent  has  no  training  or  experience  investigating, 
assessing,  or  managing  a  potential  threat  to  school  safety.  Respondent  has  no  authority  to 
make  decisions  regarding  appropriate  responses  to  rumors.  Respondent  has  not  been 
involved  in  any  prior  disciplinary  actions.  During  the  2013/2014  academic  year,  respondent 
was  assigned  to  teach  a  second  grade  classroom  at  the  107"  Street  Elementary  School. 

2. 

At  all  relevant  times,  the  District  required  its  employees,  including  members 

of  the  107"  Street  Elementary  School  faculty  to  adhere  to  its  directives  articulated  in 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (Revised  2/03),  Workplace  Violence,  Bullying  and  Threats  (Adult- 
to-Adult)  (BUL-5798.0;  dated  July  16,  2012),  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy  (Student-to- 
Student  and  Student-to-Adult}  (BUL-5212.1;  dated  September  17,  2012),  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Student  (July  15,  2008),  and  October  1988  Board  of  Education  Resolution  to  Enforce 
the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons. 

3. 

a.  For  the  past  three  years,  Alfonso  Webb  has  served  as  an  Operations 

Coordinator  for  the  District.  Mr.  Webb’s  professional  career  includes  teaching  and  other 
administrative  positions  in  Watts.  Mr.  Webb’s  responsibilities  as  Operations  Coordinator 
include  supporting  107"  Street  Elementary  School  and  its  teachers  to  ensure  a  safe  school 
environment  within  the  Watts  community. 

b.  Mr.  Webb’s  testimony  establishes  that  in  2013  “there  were  a  high  amount  of 

tension”  between  the  parents  of  107"  Street  Elementary  and  the  District.  Parents  had  a 
tendency  to  be  “loud,”  which  Mr.  Webb  defined  as  “meaning  yelling  and  screaming”  during 
their  interactions  with  school  officials  because  “they  didn’t  have  middle  class  strategies”  to 
negotiate  through  appropriate  channels.  Parents  had  a  general  mistrust  of  officials  that 
resulted  in  their  disproportionate  response  to  issues  concerning  the  community.  As 
Operations  Coordinator,  Mr.  Webb  worked  to  support  the  107"  Street  Elementary  School 
environment  “to  avoid  disruptive  factors.”  Mr.  Webb  looked  at  trends,  patterns,  and  data  to 
determine  an  appropriate  course  of  action  or  training.  Concepts  of  restorative  justice  were 
employed  to  “equip  students  with  skills”  and  to  provide  de-escalation  and  empathy  training. 

   

c.  In  case  there  were  threats  to  safety  at  the  school,  the  District’s  Standard 
Operating  Procedure,  which  was  created  after  collaboration  among  the  District’s  senior 
deputy  superintendent,  human  resources  executive,  mental  health  experts,  and  general 
counsel,  sets  forth  a  response  protocol.  The  protocol  includes  directives  governing  the 
notification  of  law  enforcement  officials,  assessments  regarding  the  nature  and  credibility  of 
a  threat,  the  dissemination  of  information  to  faculty,  parents,  and  students,  and  the 
circumstances  under  which  closing  the  school  would  be  deemed  a  necessary  and  appropriate 
course  of  action. 

4. 

During  the  2013/2014  academic  year,  the  faculty  at  107"  Street  Elementary 

School  included  Teacher  L.,  who  taught  a  kindergarten  classroom.  On  a  date  not  established 
by  the  evidence,  respondent  noticed  that  Teacher  L.  had  a  classroom  helper  in  his 
kindergarten  classroom,  and  respondent  yelled  at  Teacher  L.  According  to  Teacher  L.’s 
testimony,  respondent  expressed  that  he  wished  he  had  similar  assistance  in  his  second  grade 
classroom. 

5. 

On  the  morning  of  October  17,  2013,  before  the  instructional  day  began, 

Teacher  L.  and  another  faculty  member,  Teacher  P.,  conversed  in  the  work  room.  During 
their  conversation,  Teacher  L.  stated  to  Teacher  P.,  “If  Mr.  Leopando  goes  off,  I  hope  he 
doesn’t  shoot  up  the  place.”  Teacher  L.  went  to  his  classroom  after  this  conversation. 

6. 

Teacher  P.  wrote  a  note  to  Principal  Karin  Diskin  indicating  that  she  needed  to 

speak  to  Principal  Diskin  about  an  important  matter.  When  Principal  Diskin  met  with 
Teacher  P.,  she  told  Principal  Diskin  that  Teacher  L.  stated  that  he  would  not  be  surprised  if 
someone  came  to  the  school  and  shoot  up  the  school  on  Halloween.  Teacher  P.  indicated  to 
Principal  Diskin  that  she  did  not  know  if  the  person  shooting  would  be  Teacher  L.,  but 
Teacher  P.  expressed  concern  because  she  believed  from  prior  conversations  with  Teacher  L. 
that  Teacher  L.  had  a  gun  at  his  home. 

7. 

Principal  Diskin  called  Mr.  Webb  at  approximately  9:30  a.m.  According  to 

Mr.  Webb,  Principal  Diskin  informed  him  that  “a  faculty  member  was  having  difficulty  with 
another  faculty  member”  and  that  “a  teacher  had  a  possible  medical  issue.”  Mr.  Webb 
responded  telling  Principal  Diskin  that  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  school.  Mr.  Webb  notified 
the  police.  Principal  Diskin  also  called  and  informed  the  District’s  Instructional  Director 
Carol  Long,  who  served  as  her  immediate  supervisor,  about  the  situation. 

8. 

a.  At  approximately  10:00  a.m.,  Principal  Diskin  invited  Teacher  L.  to  her 

office,  and  she  kept  him  there  to  await  Mr.  Webb’s  arrival.  Principal  Diskin  told  Teacher  L. 
that  she  received  a  report  that  he  made  a  statement  regarding  the  safety  of  the  school. 
Teacher  L.  became  upset  about  the  purported  statement.  Mr.  Webb,  school  police,  and 
officers  from  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  arrived  at  the  school  and  joined  Principal 
Diskin  with  Teacher  L.  Mr.  Webb  and  the  officers  interviewed  Teacher  L.,  who  became 
aggrieved  about  the  focus  of  the  interview.  Mr.  Webb  asked  Teacher  L.  about  his 
conversation  with  Teacher  P.  According  to  Teacher  L.,  “They  questioned  me;  they  asked  if  I 

   

was  homicidal  or  suicidal.  I  said  I  had  no  intention  of  hurting  myself  or  anyone  else.  I  said  I 
had  a  fiance  who  I  loved.” 

b.  Mr.  Webb  “assessed  the  situation”  and  made  a  “low  risk  determination.” 

According  to  Mr.  Webb,  “There  was  no  truth  to  the  statements  comprising  the  rumor.  There 
was  no  evidence  [Teacher  L.]  was  going  to  harm  himself  or  others.”  Mr.  Webb  testified  that 
he  “verified  that  [Teacher  L.]  had  not  made  any  threat  or  response  that  could  be  considered 
violent.” 

c.  Mr,  Webb  advised  Principal  Diskin  that  it  nonetheless  made  sense  to  follow 

up  with  the  Psychological  Mobil  Response  Team  (PMRT)  as  a  precautionary  measure. 
According  to  Mr.  Webb’s  testimony,  involving  the  PMRT  was  “a  part  of  protocol”  and  he 
wanted  to  make  sure  that  he  was  taking  the  right  step  “so  that  the  situation  didn’t  go 
sideways.”  Mr.  Webb  instructed  Principal  Diskin  not  to  send  out  any  notice  regarding 
Teacher  L.’s  condition  to  the  school  community.  During  the  hearing  Mr.  Webb  opined  that  it 
would  have  been  “horrible  judgment”  to  share  the  specifics  of  [Teacher  L.’s]  condition  with 
the  school  community  because  “parents  would  turn  around  and  tear  up  the  school.” 
Principal  Diskin  testified,  “It  is  given  that  you  don’t  send  out  information  universally  about  a 
staffs  illness.  It  is  a  matter  of  privacy.” 

9. 

While  Teacher  L.  was  being  interviewed,  the  school  proceeded  with  its  10:00 
a.m.  morning  recess.  According  to  respondent,  during  the  morning  recess  in  the  presence  of 
several  other  teachers  and  assembled  children,  Teacher  P.  told  him  that  she  reported  to 
Principal  Diskin  that  Teacher  L.  said  he  was  going  to  shoot  himself  in  front  of  the  children  at 
the  school  on  Halloween. 

10. 

©  Once  Mr.  Webb  determined  that  Teacher  L.  “didn’t  present  a  threat  to  the 

school  campus,”  Mr.  Webb  left  the  school.  After  Mr.  Webb  departed  the  scene,  the  PMRT 
determined  to  take  Teacher  L.  to  the  hospital.  According  to  Teacher  L.,  “they  wheeled  me 
out  on  a  gurney  in  front  of  the  whole  school  during  dismissal  time.”  “I  never  made  threats  to 
any  LAUSD  employee,  parent,  or  kids.  It  never  even  entered  my  mind.” 

11. 

Respondent  learned  from  Teacher  P.  and  other  parents  that  Teacher  L.  was 
taken  from  the  school  on  a  gurney.  According  the  respondent,  parents  congregated  at  the 
school  at  the  end  of  the  instructional  day.  One  parent  stated  to  respondent  that  her  son,  who 
was  in  Teacher  L.’s  class,  told  her  that  Teacher  L.  was  taken  out  by  the  police  on  a  gurney. 
She  asked  respondent  what  was  going  on.  She  stated  to  respondent  that  she  asked  the 
administration,  and  that  she  was  told  nothing  was  going  on.  She  said  to  respondent  that  she 
did  not  believe  the  administration  because  her  son  does  not  lie.  Respondent  instructed  the 
parent,  “I  don’t  know  what  is  going  on.  Go  ask  the  office.” 

12. 

The  next  day,  on  October  18,  2013,  respondent  went  to  Principal  Diskin’s 
office  before  the  instructional  day  began.  Respondent  told  Principal  Diskin  that  parents 
approached  him  and  that  they  were  upset  about  Teacher  L.  Respondent  represented  to 
Principal  Diskin  that  he  told  the  parents  “I  don’t  know  what  is  going  on.  Please  go  the 

   

principal  for  information.”  Respondent  wanted  to  know  whether  Principal  Diskin  would  be 
notifying  the  school  community  that  Teacher  L.  made  a  threat  to  the  school.  According  to 
Principal  Diskin,  she  “demurred.”  Principal  Diskin  indicated  to  respondent  that  the  police 
determined  that  Teacher  L.  “didn’t  make  any  viable  threat,”  and  that  Teacher  L.  was  sick, 
and  that  she  could  not  send  out  a  notice  regarding  a  private  matter.  Respondent  became 
agitated  and  told  Principal  Diskin  that  she  had  a  duty  to  inform  parents,  and  that  “parents 
would  go  to  the  district  and  demand  that  they  be  informed.”  Principal  Diskin  testified,  “I 
interpreted  his  demeanor  as  threatening;  he  was  threatening  me  about  my  responsibility.  I 
wanted  to  be  firm  that  I  couldn’t  breach  someone’s  civil  rights  when  something  was  deemed 
not  credible  and  that  I  was  following  protocol.” 

13. 

Respondent  claimed  at  the  hearing  that  he  had  no  intent  to  threaten  Principal 

Diskin.  According  to  respondent,  “I  was  feeling  the  heat  of  the  parents.  They  were  not 
happy  with  the  information  coming  from  the  office.”  “My  purpose  was  to  tell  [Principal 
Diskin]  that  parents  needed  more  information.”  “I  was  attempting  to  convey  the  parents’ 
mood.  The  parents  were  upset.  They  said  if  we  don’t  get  answers  we  are  going  to  the 
district. 
idea  of  the  angry  parents.”  Respondent  acknowledged  that  at  the  time  Principal  Diskin  told 
him  “Don’t  worry.  I'll  take  care  of  it.  Send  them  to  me.” 

It  was  not  my  idea  for  parents  to  go  to  the  district  and  demand  action.  It  was  the 

14. 

On  October  21,  2013,  at  approximately  2:00  p.m.,  school  police  officers 

arrived  at  the  school’s  main  office.  Principal  Diskin  asked,  “Hey  guys  what  are  you  doing 
here?  We  didn’t  call  you.”  The  officers  told  Principal  Diskin  that  they  were  at  the  school  to 
check  on  her.  Principal  Diskin  explained,  “They  received  an  anonymous  threat  that  was 
called  into  a  radio  or  television  station  stating  that  someone  was  coming  to  the  school  to 
shoot  me.”  The  officers  remained  at  the  school  throughout  the  dismissal  period. 

15. 

On  October  21,  2013,  school  police  visited  Teacher  L.  at  his  home,  and  they 

queried  him  about  a  rumored  “threat  to  dress  as  a  nun  and  set  off  a  bomb  during  the 
Halloween  parade.”  It  was  the  first  time  that  Teacher  L.  heard  about  the  rumor.  Teacher  L. 
testified,  “I  couldn’t  believe  it. 
I  worried  about  my  reputation  in  the  community.  I  worried 
about  possible  firing  and  not  having  a  job—all  for  something  I  didn’t  say  or  thought.” 

16. 

Later  that  evening  when  Principal  Diskin  was  at  her  home,  she  realized  that 

she  did  not  know  enough  about  the  threat.  “1  felt  foolish  because  I  didn’t  ask  questions 
regarding  the  surrounding  circumstances  of  the  anonymous  threat.”  The  next  morning,  on 
October  22,  2013,  Principal  Diskin  called  the  desk  sergeant  and  inquired  further  about  the 
anonymous  threat.  According  to  Principal  Diskin,  “They  deemed  the  whole  thing  not 
credible.  The  sergeant  had  misspoken.  The  threat  was  not  specific  to  me;  it  was  general.  I 
asked  again,  ‘Do  I  have  to  worry?’  They  said  they  found  it  non-credible  and  said  I  didn’t 
have  to  worry.” 

17. 

A  professional  development  day  was  previously  scheduled  for  October  22, 
2013,  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  faculty  was  expected  to  meet.  At  that  meeting,  Principal 

Diskin  announced  to  the  faculty  in  attendance  that  the  police  informed  her  about  “a  threat    

that  was  deemed  not  credible.”  Principal  Diskin  informed  the  faculty  that  the  threat  was 
made  anonymously  and  that  the  police  conducted  an  investigation.  Principal  Diskin  assured 
the  faculty  that  there  was  “nothing  to  be  concerned  about,”  that  “there  would  be  police,”  and 
that  “the  goal  is  to  keep  the  school  safe.”  Respondent  raised  his  hand  to  be  recognized,  and 
when  Principal  Diskin  called  on  him,  he  proceeded  to  link  Teacher  L.’s  name  with  the 
discredited  anonymous  threat.  Principal  Diskin  corrected  respondent  stating  “No,  No. 
[Teacher  L.]  is  sick.  He  made  no  threat.  The  two  are  separate  things.”  Respondent  insisted 
that  Principal  Diskin  “send  out  a  letter  to  parents.”  According  to  respondent,  he  stated  to 
Principal  Diskin,  “Wouldn’t  it  be  wise  to  tell  the  parents?  They  deserve  to  know  the 
information.”  Principal  Diskin  reiterated  that  “she  would  not  tell  parents.”  “[Teacher  L.]  did 
not  make  a  threat;  the  other  threat  was  deemed  not  credible  by  the  police.” 

18. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  was  concerned  and  confused,  “In  my  mind  she 
said  it  was  still  being  investigated.  Also,  there  was  already  this  heat  from  the  [Teacher  L.] 
issue.  Again,  she  is  keeping  this  from  the  parents.  I  said  it  was  worthy  enough  for  the  police 
to  tell  you;  it  was  worthy  enough  for  you  to  tell  the  whole  staff;  therefore,  it  is  worthy 
enough  to  tell  parents.” 

19. 

One  faculty  member  present  at  the  October  22,  2013  meeting  recalled  that 

respondent  was  confrontational.  Another  faculty  member  recalled  that  respondent  “had  some 
words”  with  Principal  Diskin,  and  that  respondent  “just  kept  repeating  the  same  thing.” 
Some  members  of  the  faculty  applauded  when  Principal  Diskin  said  she  didn’t  want  to 
abridge  Teacher  L.’s  civil  rights.  Others  thanked  Principal  Diskin  “for  shutting  Mr. 
Leopando  down.” 

20. 

After  the  October  22,  2013  faculty  meeting,  respondent  sought  out  Principal 

Diskin  to  insist  that  she  notify  parents  that  Teacher  L.  presented  a  threat  to  safety  school. 
Respondent  continued  to  tell  Principal  Diskin  that  parents  would  demand  that  the  district 
address  the  threat  to  the  school  community.  Principal  Diskin  responded  that  Teacher  L.  was 
ill  and  that  everyone  wished  him  a  speedy  recovery.  Principal  Diskin  repeated  to  respondent 
that  there  was  no  credible  threat  to  the  school  community. 

21. 

‘Principal  Diskin  testified  that  it  would  have  been  “more  than  insubordinate” 

not  to  follow  Mr.  Webb’s  directive  against  a  universal  notification.  “His  directive  was 
already  cleared  by  a  very  high  administrator.” 

22. 

Despite  Principal  Diskin’s  multiple  statements  to  respondent  that  there  was  no 
credible  threat  to  safety  at  107"  Street  Elementary  School,  between  October  22  and  October 
30,  2013,  respondent  warned  the  school  community  to  avoid  the  school  on  Halloween  day. 
Respondent  communicated  with  at  least  50  parents,  whom  he  contends  approached  him 
about  a  rumored  Halloween  shooting.  According  to  one  testifying  parent,  respondent  “was 
trying  to  warn  parents  that  [Teacher  L.]  was  going  to  dress  up  as  a  nun  and  shoot  people.” 
Respondent  contends,  “Even  if  there  was  nothing  I  can  do,  I  had  to  validate  their  questions.  I 
know  that  community  longer  than  the  principal  [and  two  other  named  faculty  members] 
combined.  Ifthe  community  respects  me,  their  children  will  respect  me.  I  didn’t  just  brush 

   

them  off. 
respect.  I  can’t  say,  ‘I  don’t  know,’  because  I  work  there.” 

So,  I  said,  ‘I  heard  that  too,  but  I  know  no  more  than  you.’  I  have  to  show  some 

23. 

Respondent  warned  his  colleague  Teacher  B.  not  to  come  to  school  on 
Halloween  day.  Respondent  asked  Teacher  B.  whether  she  had  a  child,  and  when  she 
responded  that  she  does  have  a  child,  respondent  informed  her  that  she  would  leave  her  child 
motherless  should  she  attend  the  school  on  Halloween  day. 

24. 

Respondent  announced  to  the  children  in  his  classroom  that  they  should  tell 

their  parents  not  to  bring  them  to  school  on  Halloween  day,  October  31,  2013.  Child  N. 
recalled  hearing  respondent  say  Teacher  L.  “was  going  to  bomb  the  school  and  shoot  little 
kids.”  Child  N.  immediately  crawled  under  a  table  because  he  was  scared,  and  Child  N. 
asked  for  respondent’s  permission  to  remain  under  the  table.  Respondent  granted  Child  N. 
permission  to  do  so,  and  Child  N.  remained  under  the  table  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  Child  J. 
testified  that  she  heard  respondent  say  that  “a  teacher  insulted  a  teacher  and  that  teacher 
would  come  around  and  shoot  the  school.”  Child  J.  was  scared  to  go  to  school  on  Halloween 
day.  Child  M.  testified  she  heard  respondent  say  that  “somebody  is  going  to  come  to  school 
on  Halloween  and  shoot  it  up.”  Child  M.  was  scared  that  she  “was  going  to  get  shot.” 

25. 

The  testimonies  of  Child  N.,  Child  J.,  and  Child  M.  were  corroborated  by  a 
drawing  or  written  statement  they  prepared  in  accordance  with  respondent’s  instruction  to 
them  to  do  so.  Child  N.  prepared  a  drawing  of  a  figure  inside  a  building  with  eviscerating 
lines.  The  words  “solo  sot”  appears  on  the  drawing.  (Exhibit  14.)  Child  Y.  wrote,  “Mr. 
Leopando  said  the  school  was  going  to  get  shoot.”  (Exhibit  15.)  Child  M.  wrote,  “Mr 
Leopando  seid  that  the  shool  was  going  to  get  shot  up.”  (Exhibit  13.)  The  drawing  and 
writing  exercise  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  reminder  for  the  children  in  respondent’s  second 
grade  classroom  to  tell  their  parents  not  to  bring  them  to  school  on  Halloween  day.  Child  M. 
relayed  to  her  parent  that  respondent  “said  kids  shouldn’t  come  to  school  on  Halloween 
because  there  is  going  to  be  a  shooting.”  According  to  Child  M.’s  parent,  Child  M.  was 
crying,  upset,  and  scared.  Child  M.  “worried  about  something  bad  happening  to  her.” 

26. 

Respondent  additionally  caused  an  October  29,  2013  flyer  to  be  distributed  to 
the  children  in  his  second  grade  classroom.  The  October  29,  2013  flyer  contains  a  two-year 
old  picture  of  Teacher  L.  with  schoo!  children  that  was  previously  used  in  an  appeal  for 
donations.  The  flyer  contains  the  following  English  statement  along  with  a  Spanish 
translation: 

Dear  Parents, 

This  is  regarding  a  situation  regarding  107"  Street  Elementary  School.  We 
have  been  informed  that  there  is  kindergarten  teacher  name  [Teacher  L.]  who 
threatened  the  teachers,  administration  and  students  of  our  school.  His  threat 
is  coming  into  campus  on  Halloween  day  of  our  carnival.  [Teacher  L.]  is 
planning  to  use  a  costume  as  a  disguise  and  killed  [sic]staff  on  the  premise. 
He  will  harm  anyone  in  his  way.  For  the  safety  of  our  children,  and  ourselves 

 

please  do  not  bring  your  children  to  school  on  Thursday  October  31,  2013. 
Lets  [sic]  spread  the  word! 

Sincerely, 
A  very  concerned  parent 

(Exhibit  11.)  Child  Y.  credibly  testified  that  she  went  to  the  restroom  and  that  when  she 
returned  to  the  classroom  the  October  29,  2013  flyer  was  on  her  desk.  Child  Y.  was  “super 
scared.”  Child  Y.  gave  the  flyer  to  her  parent. 

27. 

On  October  30,  2013,  at  8:10  a.m.,  after  the  instructional  day  began,  Mr.  Webb 
observed  respondent  standing  at  the  school  gate  handing  a  copy  of  the  October  29,  2013  flyer 
toa  parent.  At  that  time,  respondent  was  expected  to  be  in  his  classroom  providing 
instruction  to  his  students. 

28. 

Children  in  Teacher  M.’s  third  grade  classroom  told  her  that  respondent 

instructed  them  not  to  attend  school  on  Halloween  Day  because  a  man  would  be  coming  to 
the  school  to  shoot  them.  The  children  in  Teacher  M.’s  classroom  were  frightened  and 
worried.  During  the  week  leading  up  to  Halloween,  Teacher  M.  spent  45  to  60  minutes  each 
day  calming  down  the  children  in  her  classroom. 

29, 

On  October  30,  2013,  Principal  Diskin  learned  from  several  children  enrolled 

in  the  after-school  program  that  respondent  was  actively  informing  them  that  a  shooting 
would  occur  at  the  school  on  Halloween  or  that  something  bad  would  happen  on  Halloween. 
Principal  Diskin  reassured  the  children  that  “nothing  was  going  to  happen  to  them  on 
Halloween.”  Respondent  claimed  at  the  hearing  that  he  had  no  discussions  about  a  rumored 
Halloween  shooting  with  the  children  in  the  after-school  program,  but  maintains  that  if  he 
did  he  would  have  stated,  “I  don’t  know  any  more  than  you  do.  The  only  solution  I  have 
is—please  tell  your  parents.”  Respondent  asserted  he  “only  wanted  to  validate”  the  children. 

30.  —  Principal  Diskin  sought  guidance  from  Mr.  Webb,  who  determined  that 
students  should  be  invited  to  write  about  what  they  heard  from  respondent.  Principal  Diskin 
was  assisted  by  another  faculty  member  who  instructed  the  children  to  “just  write  whatever 
you  know  about  Halloween.”  All  of  the  participating  children  wrote  that  respondent  told 
them  about  a  school  shooting  that  would  occur  on  Halloween.  For  example,  Child  R.D. 
wrote  the  following,  which  is  unedited  for  spelling,  grammar,  and  punctuation: 

I  think  it  was  october  23  on  wensday  mr.  leopando  said  did  you  here  what  was 
on  the  news  and  I  said  no.  Then  he  said  did  you  here  what  was  going  to 
happen  at  school  on  Halloween.  I  said  yes  then  I  said  we  have  to  bring  are 
costom  to  school  in  holloween.  He  said  no  not  that  the  other  thing  then  I  said  I 
don’t  now  what  your  talking  aboat  then.  He  called  his  student  to  come  up  and 
she  told  me  about  that  they  are  gona  shoot  kid’s  at  school  for  holloween  but  I 
didn’t  beleave  her  then f  left. 

 

(Exhibit  32-22.) 

31. 

At  the  direction  of  Mr.  Webb,  Principal  Diskin  additionally  prepared  a  child 
abuse  report  because  it  became  apparent  that  “there  was  more  than  just  a  few  complaints;  it 
was  wide-spread.”  Respondent  was  telling  the  children  that  their  safety  was  threatened,  and 
such  conduct,  according  to  Principal  Diskin,  constitutes  child  abuse  because  “it  was  a  threat 
to  mental  health  and  safety.”  Concomitant  with  her  preparation  of  a  child  abuse  report, 
Principal  Diskin  contacted  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department,  which  in  turn  generated  an 
Injury  Investigation  report.  Principal  Diskin  advised  the  responding  officer  that  it  has  been 
“alleged”  *  that  Teacher  L.  would  be  coming  to  shoot  up  the  school  on  Halloween.  The 
responding  officer  notes  in  the  Injury  Investigation  report  that  a  sergeant  communicated  to 
him  “that  two  teachers  [respondent  and  Teacher  L.]  do  not  like  each  other  which  has 
provoked  a  rumor  that  [Teacher  L.]  was  going  to  dress  up  as  a  nun  and  shoot  the  school  up.” 
(Exhibit  30.) 

32. 

In  collaboration  with  the  District’s  Administrator  of  Operations,  Daryl 

Narimatsu,  the  District’s  Instructional  Director,  Carol  Long,  and  Mr.  Webb,  Principal  Diskin 
prepared  a  School  Interoffice  Memo  addressing  the  school’s  support  for  students  for 
distribution  to  the  school  community  on  October  31,  2013.  In  pertinent  part  the  memo  states 
the  following: 

Staff:  Our  school  community  has  encountered  vast  misfortunes  in  the  past  few 
weeks.  Namely,  our  school  climate  has  shifted  with  unproven  notions  that 
foster  panic  and  distress  amongst  our  teachers,  staff,  parents,  and  students. 
Subsequently,  our  students  and  families  are  in  more  need  of  your  support  to 
reduce  any  possible  distress.  Please  take  a  moment  to  review  this  memo 
regarding  our  students’  safety  and  well-being.  I  am  asking  every  teacher  to 
read  the  following  statement  to  their  class  at  the  beginning  of  our  school  day. 

Class: 
In  the  past  few  weeks,  we  have  heard  many  stories  about  bad  things 
that  are  going  to  happen  at  our  school.  Please  understand  that  our 
principal,  Dr.  Diskin,  and  other  adults  at  107"  Street  Elementary 
School  are  doing  everything  they  can  to  be  sure  you  are  safe.  For  your 
safety  and  the  safety  of  others,  it  is  very  important  for  you  not  to  share 
stories  that  you  are  not  sure  about.  If  you  hear  a  bad  story  from  your 
friends  or  another  person  at  school,  you  must  tell  the  principal 

?  Principal  Diskin  credibly  testified  that  she  used  the  word  “allegedly”  when  she 
reported  the  matter  to  the  Los  Angeles  police  officer  preparing  the  report.  The  officer, 
however,  wrote  “there  is  a  possibility  that  a  teacher  . 
.  is  going  to  come  to  shoot  up  the 
school  tomorrow  (10/31/2013).”  (Exhibit  30.)  Principal  Diskin’s  live  hearing  testimony  is 
credited  over  the  hearsay  statements  in  the  Injury  Investigation  Report.  (See  Lake  v.  Reed 
(1997)  16  Cal.4th  448.) 

. 

 

immediately.  Our  students  at  107"  Elementary  School  are  very 
important  to  us  and  so  we  will  put  your  safety  first. 

Carefully  review  the  attached  handout  on  Psychological  First  Aid  (PFA).  It  is 
strongly  recommended  that  you  use  these  tools  to  best  support  your  students. 

(Exhibit  18.) 

33. 

|  Mr.  Webb  telephoned  respondent  at  his  home  during  the  evening  of  October 
30,  2013,  with  the  intention  of  advising  respondent  that  he  was  doing  a  “preliminary  pull,” 
and  that  respondent  should  not  attend  107"  Street  Elementary  School  the  following  day  on 
October  31,  2013.  Respondent  hung  up  the  telephone  before  Mr.  Webb  was  able  to 
communicate  that  message  to  him. 

34, 

On  October  31,  2013,  Halloween  day,  fifteen  members  or  25  percent  of  the 

faculty,  including  Teacher  B.,  did  not  report  to  work  at  107"  Street  Elementary  School. 
Respondent  did  not  report  to  work  at  107"  Street  Elementary  School  on  Halloween  day. 
Only  eight  of  the  students  in  respondent’s  second  grade  classroom  attended  school.*  Child 
N.,  Child  J.,  and  Child  M.  were  among  the  students  absent  from  respondent’s  second  grade 
classroom.  According  to  the  testimony  of  one  fifth  grade  classroom  teacher,  four-fifths  of 
his  students  were  absent  on  Halloween  Day,  and  he  spent  at  least  10  minutes  at  the  beginning 
of  the  instructional  day  reassuring  those  students  present  that  “the  school  would  protect 
them”  and  “that  everything  would  be  okay.”  In  total,  three  hundred  and  forty-five  students 
or  more  than  37  percent  of  the  student  population  were  absent  from  107"  Street  Elementary 
School  on  Halloween  day,  which  absence  in  turn  resulted  in  a  subsequent  $10,000  reduction 
in  funds  allotted  to  the  school. 

35. 

Principal  Diskin  announced  over  the  school’s  public  address  system  that 

faculty  in  attendance  should  look  out  for  the  Schoo!  Interoffice  Memo  in  their  mailboxes. 
Principal  Diskin  explained  that  she  wanted  the  faculty  to  be  aware  that  some  children  might 
be  in  stress  and  that  they  should  not  hesitate  to  provide  counseling.  District  administrators, 
including  Mr.  Webb,  were  present  at  107"  Street  Elementary  School  on  Halloween  Day  to 
“reassure  everyone  that  it  would  be  a  calm  day.”  The  107"  Street  Elementary  School 
October  31,  2013  Halloween  activities  proceeded  without  any  shooting  incident. 

36. 

On  October  31,  2013,  Halloween  day,  Teacher  L.  was  at  his  home  recovering 

from  a  broken  hip  he  sustained  in  an  October  25,  2013  motorcycle  accident.  According  to 
Teacher  L.’s  credible  testimony,  he  was  so  disabled  from  his  injuries  he  “couldn’t  even 
change  his  underwear.”  “I  had  to  use  plyers  to  put  my  socks  on.”  When  Teacher  L. 
subsequently  recovered  from  his  injuries,  the  District  re-assigned  him  to  another  school 
because,  as  Mr.  Webb’s  testimony  establishes,  it  would  have  been  “difficult  to  provide  for 
[his]  safety  in  light  of  the  incident.”  “He  could  not  be  placed  back  at  107.” 

*  The  evidence  admitted  at  the  hearing  did  not  establish  the  total  number  of  students 

assigned  to  respondent’s  second  grade  classroom. 

10 

 

37. 

After  October  31,  2013,  Child  N.  felt  unsafe  attending  107"  Street  Elementary 

School.  He  was  absent  40  to  50  school  days.  His  grades  declined.  Ultimately,  Child  N.’s 
family  moved  their  home  so  that  he  could  attend  school  in  another  district  where  he  feels 
safe.  Child  N.’s  mother  observed  changes  in  his  behavior.  Child  N.  awakens  three  to  four 
times  throughout  the  night  screaming.  Child  N.  is  fearful  when  he  sees  any  scenes  involving 
guns  on  television. 

38.  |  Mr.  Webb’s  testimony  establishes  that  “the  rumors  affected  the  trust 
relationship  between  the  school  and  the  parent  community.”  “Based  on  the  fact  that  the 
principal  didn’t  share  the  specifics  of  [Teacher  L.’s]  condition,  parents  believed  the  school 
was  withholding  information.”  The  rumor  “caused  parents  to  take  action  to  challenge  the 
school  leadership.”  The  107"  Street  Elementary  School  “is  now a  charter”  outside  the 
District’s  jurisdiction  and  operated  by  another  entity. 

39. 

On  December  16,  2013,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Webb  and  a  United  Teachers 

Los  Angles  representative,  Principal  Diskin  conducted  a  conference  in  which  she  interviewed 
respondent  about  the  events  occurring  between  October  17  and  31,  2013.  At  the  conference, 
Principal  Diskin  provided  respondent  with  directives,  including  instructions  to  comport 
himself  with  the  District’s  policy  bulletins  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  2,  and  with  an 
opportunity  to  respond.  The  conference  is  memorialized  in  “Summary  of  Conference  on 
Monday,  December  16,  2013.”  (Exhibit  21.)  Respondent  expressed  a  preference  to  provide 
a  written  response,  and  he  was  notified  to  do  so  before  December  23,  2013. 

40. 

On  December  20,  2013,  respondent  provided  Principal  Disking  with 

“Response  to  Summary  of  Conference  on  Monday,  December  16,  2013.”  In  general, 
respondent’s  response  attributes  “only  one  source  and  trajectory  of  all  this  information”  to 
“the  school  principal’s  staff  and  office.”  Respondent’s  response  expressed  his  perception  of 
“being  railroaded  into  a  scapegoat,”  which  he  notes  is  defined  to  mean  “a  person  who  is 
unfairly  blamed  for  what  others  have  done.”  (Exhibit  23.) 

41. 

On  April  1,  2014,  the  District  issued  two  notices,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  (Exhibit  25)  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  of  Certificated 
Employee  (Exhibit  26),  both  of  which  state,  among  other  things,  that  respondent 
“Encouraged  and  participated  in  spreading  a  rumor  that  someone  was  going  to  shoot  down 
the  school  and  that  children  and  staff  should  stay  home  on  Thursday,  October  31,  2013.” 

42. 

At  the  hearing  Principal  Diskin  expressed  that  respondent’s  conduct  was 

“repugnant.”  She  recommended  respondent’s  dismissal  because  she  had  “never  encountered 
anyone  who  caused  so  many  to  fear  for  their  children.  Just  nye  a  terrorist  activity.  There 
were  so  many  people  who  have  a  tenuous  connection  to  the  school  and  this  event  upended 
that  connection.  We  tried  so  hard  to  make  the  school  a  strong,  nurturing  place. 
[Respondent’s  conduct]  compromised  the  children’s  sense  of  safety  in  the  school 
environment.”  Principal  Diskin  emphasized  that  “regardless  of  whether  [respondent]  was  an 
excellent  academician,  or  received  teacher  of  the  year  award,  or  was  liked  by  parents,”  she 

11    

“wouldn’t  change  her  recommendation  because  [respondent’s  actions]  were  heinous 
actions.”  According  to  Principal  Diskin,  the  magnitude  of  respondent’s  actions  warranted 
more  than  a  memorandum  directing  respondent  to  refrain  for  similar  conduct  in  the  future. 
“These  particular  actions  were  beyond  what  a  mere  memo  would  be  used  for.”  Respondent 
“caused  students  to  have  nightmare;  he  caused  students  to  come  to  me,  essentially  a  stranger, 
and  cry.”  Respondent  “caused  students  to  relive  memories  of  past  trauma  in  the 
community.” 

43. 

By  letter  dated  May  23,  2014,  the  District’s  Administrator  of  Operations  Daryl 
Narimatsu  notified  respondent  of  a  meeting  scheduled  for  June  3,  2014,  2:30  p.m.,  to  discuss 
respondent’s  possible  dismissal  and  immediate  suspension  by  the  Los  Angeles  Board  of 
Education  (Board).  Respondent  requested  rescheduling  the  June  3,  2014  meeting,  and  his 
request  was  granted.  A  new  meeting  date  was  set  for  June  11,  2014. 
Respondent  did  not 
appear  at  the  June  11,  2014  meeting.  By  letter  dated  June  12,  2014,  Mr.  Narimatsu  informed 
respondent  that  failure  to  meet  constituted  a  waiver  of  respondent’s  opportunity  for  an 
administrative  review.  Mr,  Narimatsu  additionally  informed  respondent  that,  having 
reviewed  all  the  available  information,  he  determined  that  “the  recommended  discipline 
should  be  sustained”  and  that  the  dismissal  recommendation  would  be  forwarded  to  the 
Board  for  adoption.  (Exhibit  38.) 

44, 

By  letter  dated  September  16,  2014,  the  Board  notified  respondent  that  he  was 

suspended  without  pay  and  of  its  intention  to  dismiss  him  thirty  days  from  the  date  of  the 
letter.  Accompanying  the  letter  was  a  specification  of  charges  setting  forth  the  specific 
instances  of  conduct  alleged  to  constitute  respondent’s  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional 
conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  refusal  to  obey  the  Board’s  regulations 
for  the  District.  On  September  29,  2014,  respondent  demanded  a  hearing  on  the  charges 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44943.  Thereafter,  on  October  8,  2014,  the  District  filed 
and  served  an  Accusation  incorporating  the  charges  contained  in  the  September  16,  2014 
notice.  On  October  9,  2014,  respondent  filed  a  notice  of  defense.  Thereafter,  this  dismissal 
proceeding  ensued. 

45. 

As  indicated  above,  throughout  his  testimony  at  the  proceedings,  respondent 

maintained  that  he  sought  to  “validate”  parents  and  students  querying  him  about  the  rumored 
threat  to  107"  Street  Elementary  School.  Respondent  claimed  he  acted  out  of  concern 
because  he  was  aware  of  other  incidents  involving  school  shootings.  Respondent  asserted 
that  without  warning  he  did  not  know  his  conduct  set  forth  in  the  charges  was  wrongful  and 
in  need  of  correction.’  On  direct  examination  respondent  denied  the  charges  in  the 
Accusation.  Under  cross-examination,  however,  respondent  rambled  as  he  admitted  his 
ignorance  and  lack  of  personal  knowledge  about  the  origin  and  the  specific  character  of  the 
anonymous  threat  Principal  Diskin  learned  about  on  October  22,  2013.  Respondent  admitted 

“It  is  unimaginable  that  a  teacher  of  respondent’s  experience  could  have  failed  to 

realize  the  wrongfulness  of  his  acts.  “Teachers,  particularly  in  the  light  of  their  professional 
expertise,  will  normally  be  able  to  determine  what  kind  of  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to 
teach.”  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  233.) 

12 

   

to  his  dissatisfaction  with  Principal  Diskin  for  not  informing  parents  about  the  threat. 
Respondent  was  apologetic  without  specifying  the  act  or  acts  for  which  he  offered  an 
apology.  Respondent  asserted  that  he  “may  have  been  misunderstood”  and  that  “looking 
back  [he]  could  have  projected  a  different  impression.” 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  that  a  permanent  employee  shall  not 

be  dismissed  except  for,  among  other  causes,  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct, 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

2. 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  generally  as  “that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to 
sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  a  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco 
Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960),  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

3. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  is  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code 

of  a  profession  or  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing. 
(Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  The  conduct  in  question  must 
indicate  an  unfitness  to  teach  in  order  to  amount  to  “unprofessional  conduct.”  (Perez  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

4. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 

5. 

“Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her”  as 
cause  for  dismissal  requires  more  than  a  single  violation  of  a  school  board's  rules  by  a 
permanent  school  teacher.  (Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d 
77,  rehearing  denied  28  Cal.App.3d  77.)  In  addition,  persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to 
obey,  a  district’s  governing  board’s  reasonable  regulations  requires  a  “showing  of  intentional 
and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Diego  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

13

6. 

a.  In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra,1  Cal.3d  at  235,  the 
California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  Morrison  court  made  clear  that  abstract  characterizations  of  a  teacher’s 
conduct  as  “unprofessional”  or  “immoral”  were  insufficient  grounds  for  removal  from  the 
teaching  profession.  Any  such  conduct  must  indicate  a  teacher’s  evident  unfitness  to  teach. 
The  Morrison  court  therefore  required  a  rational  connection  or  nexus  between  alleged 
misconduct  and  a  teacher’s  competence  or  ability  to  effectively  teach. 

b.  Morrison  involved  a  teaching  credential  revocation  proceeding;  however,  its 
holding  applies  to  proceedings,  such  as  this,  involving  dismissal  from  a  single  school  district. 
(See  Board  of Education  v,  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691  indicating  that  the  determinative 
test  in  teacher  discharge  cases  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach  and  upholding  the  factors 
delineated  in  Morrison  for  consideration.)  Consequently,  before  respondent  is  subjected  to 
dismissal  from  the  District,  the  following  several  factors  should  be  considered:  the  likelihood 
that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students,  fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational 
community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time 
of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved;  the 
extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of 
the  questioned  conduct;  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact 
or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person  involved,  or  other  certified 
persons;  and  the  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

c.  All  Morrison  factors  need  not  be  present  to  reach  a  determination  that 

respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  In  other  words,  an  item  by  item  analysis  of  each  established 
individual  fact  is  not  required.  Rather,  Morrison  calls  for  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the 
accumulated  established  facts.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  1457.) 

7. 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 
cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  permanent 
certificated  employee,  from  the  District.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  “‘Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  (Citations.)  . . 
[T]he  sole  focus  of the  legal  definition  of  ‘preponderance’  in  the  phrase  ‘preponderance  of 
the  evidence’  is  the  quality  of  the  evidence.  The  quantity  of  the  evidence  presented  by  each 
side  is  irrelevant.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Company  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314,  324- 
325.)  (Emphasis  in  text.) 
evidence,  the  complainant  “must  produce  substantial  evidence,  contradicted  or  un- 
contradicted,  which  supports  the  finding.”  (Un  re  Shelley  J.  (1998)  68  Cal.App.4th  322,  339.) 

In  meeting  the  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

. 

8. 

a.  In  this  dismissal  proceeding,  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses  has  been 

evaluated  pursuant  to  the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the  demeanor  and 

14 

   

manner  of  the  witness  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the  capacity  to 
perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty,  the 
existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or 
inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness 
testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the  proceeding  in  which  the  testimony  has 
been  given. 

b.  In  particular,  the  manner  and  demeanor  of  a  witness  while  testifying  are  the 

two  most  important  factors  a  trier  of  fact  considers  when  judging  credibility.  (See  Evid. 
Code,  §  780.)  The  carriage,  mannerisms,  tone  of  voice  and  hesitation,  eye  contact,  and  facial 
expressions  of  a  witness  are  “wordless  language,”  which  although  difficult  to  describe  in 
such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly  understands  what  causes  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  or 
disbelieve  a.witness,  are  not  only  part  of  the  evidence  for  consideration,  but  also  evidence  on 
which  the  outcome  of  a  case  may  be  determined.  (See  Dyer  v.  MacDougall  (2d.  Cir.,  1952.) 
201  F.2d  265,  268-269.) 

c.  “On  the  cold  record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached, 

uncontradicted—-but  on  a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his 
credibility  factor  nil.  Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict 
himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who 
sees,  hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.” 
(Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17  Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)° 

d.  The  Commission  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject 

another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke,  Davis  & 
Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  Commission  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of 
testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth 
out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161 
Cal.App.2d  762,  777.)  Further,  the  Commission  may  even  reject  testimony  that  is  not 
contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.) 

e.  “Although  impeaching  evidence  in  the  nature  of  contradictions  or  otherwise 
has  been  received,  it  is  still  the  right  as  well  as  the  duty  of  the  [Commission]  to  determine  to 
what  extent  they  believe  or  disbelieve  the  testimony.  [Citations.]  [The  Commission]  may 
likewise  give  credence  to  a  witness  . 
. 
inconsistencies.”  (Hansen  v.  Bear  Film  Co.  (1946)  28  Cal.2d  154,  184.) 

.  [citation]  whose  testimony  contains  contradictions  or 

9. 

Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent 

engaged  in  the  conduct  set  forth  in  the  Charges  in  the  Accusation  in  this  matter. 

>  As  observed  in  Broadcast  Music  v.  Havana  Madrid  Restaurant  Corp.  (2d.  Cir., 

1949)  175  F2.d  77,  80,  the  best  and  most  accurate  record  or  hearing  transcript  is  like  a 
dehydrated  peach;  it  has  neither  the  substance  nor  the  flavor  of  the  fruit  before  it  was  dried. 

15 

   

a.  Charge  1:  On  or  about  October  18,  2013,  LEOPANDO  told  Principal  Karin 
Diskin,  “If  you  don’t  send a  letter  to  parents  to  tell  them  about  [Teacher  L.],  they’re  going  to 
go  the  District  and  demand  action.”  After  being  told  that  the  Principal  would  not  send  letters 
to  the  community  about  an  employee’s  illness,  LEOPANDO  continued  to  assert  in  a 
threatening  tone  that  it  was  Principal  Diskin’s  responsibility  to  notify  the  community  of  any 
threats  and  that  the  parents  would  demand  answers  from  the  District.  (See  Factual  Finding 
12.) 

b.  Charge  2:  On  or  about  October  22,  2013,  LEOPANDO  disrupted  a  faculty 
meeting  by  conflating  two  separate  incidents  (on  involving  [Teacher  L.]  and  one  involving 
an  anonymous  threat),  insisting  that  [Teacher  L.]  had  been  the  person  who  threatened  the 
school  community,  and  became  visibly  angry  when  told  that  the  police  were  [sic] 
investigating  the  anonymous  threat  and  that  there  was  no  credible  threat  from  [Teacher  L.] 
(See  Factual  Findings  17  and  19.) 

c.  Charge  3:  During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  October  21  through 
October  30,  2013,  LEOPANDO  told  his  second  grade  students  that  someone  was  coming  to 
the  school  to  shoot  the  school  down  on  Halloween,  causing  only  8  students  from  his  class  to 
attend  school  on  October  31,  2013.  (See  Factual  Findings  24,  25,  and  34.) 

d.  Charge  4:  During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  October  21  through 
October  30,  2013,  LEOPANDO  approached  [Teacher  B.],  a  third  grade  teacher  at  107th  St 
ES  and  said,  “Do  you  have  a  child?  You  might  be  leaving  your  child  without  a  mother  if  you 
come  to  work  on  Halloween,”  causing  [Teacher  B.]  to  become  frightened  and  not  report  to 
work  on  October  31,  2013.  (See  Factual  Findings  23  and  34.) 

e.  Charge  5:  During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  October  21  through 

October  30,  2013,  LEOPANDO  approached  student  [C.]  during  the  after  school  program  and 
told  [her]  to  tell  [Child  R.D.]  and  [Child  R.S.],  also  students  in  the  after  school  program,  that 
someone  was  going  to  shoot  down  the  school  on  Halloween,  causing  [Child  R.D.]  and  [Child 
R.S.]  to  become  frightened  and  not  attend  school  on  October  31,  2013.  (See  Factual 
Findings  29  and  30.) 

f.  Charge  6:  During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  October  21  through 

October  30,  2013,  LEOPANDO  encouraged  and  participated  in  spreading  a  rumor  that 
someone  was  going  to  shoot  down  the  school  on  Halloween  and  that  children  and  staff 
should  stay  home  on  October  31,  2013.  (See  Factual  Findings  22  through  30.) 

g.  Charge  7:  On  or  about  October  30,  2013,  at  approximately  8:10  a.m., 
LEOPANDO  handed a  flyer  through  the  school  fence  to  a  parent.  The  flyer  included  a 
picture  of  an  ill  107'"  St  ES  teacher  and  alleged  that  this  same  teacher  would  be  coming  to  the 
school  on  Halloween,  would  be  wearing  a  costume,  and  would  kill  staff  and  others  on  the 

campus.  (See  Factual  Findings  26  and  27.)    

h.  Charge  8:  On  or  about  October  30,  2013,  at  approximately  8:10  a.m. 

LEOPANDO  left  his  students  waiting  for  him  on  the  yard  and  failed  to  provide  instruction  to 
these  same  students  while  LEOPANDO  was  distributing  a  flyer  through  the  school  fence  to  a 
parent,  as  LEOPANDO’s  instructional  day  starts  at  8:00  a.m.  (See  Factual  Finding  27.) 

10. 

Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  adverse 

consequences,  including  those  set  forth  in  the  Charges  in  the  Accusation  in  this  matter, 
resulted  from  respondent’s  conduct. 

a.  Charge  9:  On  or  about  October  31,  2013,  there  were  348  students  (30%  of 

the  student  population)  and  14  staff  members  (24%  of  staff)  absent  from  school  as  a  result  of 
LEOPANDO  spreading  the  rumor  that  someone  was  going  to  shoot  down  the  school  on 
Halloween  and  that  children  and  staff  should  stay  home  on  October  31,  2013.  In  2012,  only 
8  percent  of  the  student  population  and  6  percent  of  the  staff  were  absent  on  Halloween. 
(See  Factual  Finding  34.) 

11. 

a.  Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

respondent’s  conduct  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  9  constitutes  “immoral  conduct”  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932. 

b.  “A  board  of  education  is  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  schools  under  its 

jurisdiction,  their  standards  of  education,  and  the  moral,  mental  and  physical  welfare  of  the 
pupils  during  school  hours.”  (Johnson  v.  Taft  School  Dist.  (1937)  19  Cal_App.2d  405,  408.) 
Thus,  the  judiciary  has  long  recognized  that  “[a]  teacher  . 
.  in  the  public  school  system  is 
regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions  are 
.  [the  teacher’s]  care  and  protection.” 
likely  to  be  followed  by  the  children  coming  under  . 
(Board of  Education  of  the  City  of  Los  Angeles  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  552.) 

. 

. 

c.  As  a  professional  educator  with  nearly  two  decades  of  teaching  experience 

in  the  District,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  infer  that  respondent  is  aware  of  the  impact  of  his 
words  and  actions  on  the  children  in  his  care  and  protection  at  107"  Street  Elementary 
School.  Respondent  himself  intimated  that  he  cultivates  a  relationship  with  the  community 
in  order  to  gain  the  children’s  respect.  Yet,  without  regard  for  his  professional  standing  as  a 
teacher,  respondent  repeatedly  and  systematically  disseminated  to  children  attending  107" 
Street  Elementary  School  a  rumor  that  there  would  be a  threat  to  their  safety  at  the  school  on 
Halloween  day,  October  31,  2013.  Most  significantly,  respondent  perpetuated  the  rumored 
threat  after  school  administrators,  who  consulted  with  law  enforcement  officials  and  who 
were  knowledgeable  about  and  in  possession  of  intelligence  regarding  the  rumored  threat, 
communicated  to  respondent  on  multiple  occasions  that  the  rumored  threat  was  not  credible. 
Respondent’s  words  and  actions  kept  the  rumored  threat  alive,  and  in  doing  so,  respondent 
fomented  fear,  especially  in  young  children  ill  equipped  with  coping  skills. 

d.  Children  attending  107"  Street  Elementary  School  manifested  anxiety, 

fearfulness,  and  worry  that  were  both  immediate  and  long  lasting.  Child  N.,  for  example, 
reflexively  sought  refuge  under  a  desk  in  the  classroom  when  he  heard  respondent’s  words. 

17    

Other  than  allowing  Child  N.  to  spend  the  instructional  day  hidden  beneath  the  desk, 
respondent  did  nothing  to  comfort  Child  N.,  who  was  later  plagued  with  sleeplessness,  which 
interfered  with  his  learning.  Child  N.  lagged  in  his  academic  development.  Ultimately, 
Child  N.  had  to  leave  107"  Street  Elementary  School  altogether. 

e.  Thirty  percent  of  the  children  attending  107"  Street  Elementary  School  were 

so  fearful  they  did  not  attend  school  on  Halloween  day,  and  as  a  consequence,  they  received 
no  academic  instruction  on  October  31,  2013.  Respondent’s  words  and  actions  incited  fear 
in  his  colleagues.  Fifteen  percent  of  the  faculty  at  107"  Street  Elementary  School  did  not 
report  to  work  on  Halloween  day,  October  31,  2013.  Respondent’s  words  and  actions 
spreading  unfounded  rumors  are  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  and  as  such,  they  constitute 
“immoral  conduct.” 

12. 

a.  Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

respondent’s  conduct  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  9  constitutes  “unprofessional  conduct” 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932. 

b.  Although  lacking  the  intelligence  law  enforcement  officials  and  District  and 

school  administrators  possessed,  respondent  disagreed  with  the  course  of  action  adopted  for 
best  managing  the  discredited  rumored  threat.  Even  recognizing  respondent’s  prerogative  to 
disagree  with  those  District  employees  authorized  to  determine  whether,  when,  and  how  to 
respond,  respondent  went  beyond  any  legitimate  expression  of  dissention.  Respondent  was 
confrontational  with  the  school’s  principal  when  his  uninformed  opinion  was  set  aside. 
Respondent  contravened  and  undermined  District  administrators’  and  the  principal’s 
informed  determination  not  to  issue  any  universal  notice  of  the  discredited  rumored  threat  or 
confidential  information  regarding  another  teacher  when  he  caused  the  distribution  of  an 
inflammatory  flyer  to  the  children  in  his  second  grade  classroom  and  to  parents.  In  essence, 
respondent  yelled  “Fire!”  when  there  was  no  fire.  Respondent  upended  legitimate  efforts  to 
maintain  calm  and  civility  among  the  107"  Street  Elementary  School  faculty,  student  body, 
and  parents.  These  instances  of  respondent’s  defiance  illustrate  conduct  unbecoming  a 
member  of  the  teaching  profession  in  good  standing,  and  as  such,  respondent’s  conduct 
constitutes  “unprofessional  conduct.” 

c.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44938,  respondent  was  entitled  to  notice 

and  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  behavior  constituting  “unprotessional  conduct.” 
pertinent  part  section  44938  provides: 

In 

(a)  The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon  any  charges 
of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of 
filing,  the  board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 
against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with 
such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or 
her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge. 

18 

   

d.  Since  October  31,  2013,  respondent  has  not  taught  at  107"  Street 

Elementary  School  or  at  any  other  school  in  the  District.  Respondent,  therefore,  has  had  no 
opportunity  to  correct  his  faults  or  to  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge  of  “unprofessional 
conduct”  prior  to  the  Board’s  September  16,  2014  letter  notifying  him  of  the  charges  alleged 
for  his  dismissal.  Consequently,  as  provided  for  in  section  44938,  the  dismissal  of 
respondent  from  the  District  may  not  be  premised  on  “unprofessional  conduct.” 

13. 

a.  Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

respondent’s  conduct  set-  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  9  renders  respondent  “evidently  unfit  for 
service”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932. 

b.  Respondent  was  dogged  and  righteous  about  his  uninformed  opinion. 

Respondent  was  indifferent  to  the  likely  impact  his  promulgation  of  a  false  ramor  would,  and 
did,  have  on  the  107"  Street  Elementary  School  community.  The  totality  of  respondent’s 
conduct  evinces  respondent’s  contempt  for  those  with  the  authority,  knowledge,  and 
accountability  to  decide  and  execute  policies  and  directives  for  the  protection  of  school  safety 
and  welfare.  In  turn,  respondent’s  contempt  manifests  an  irremediable  defect  in  temperament 
that  renders  respondent  “evidently  unfit  for  service.” 

14. 

a.  Complainant  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

respondent’s  conduct  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  9  constitute  a  persistent  violation  of,  or 
refusal  to  obey,  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  the  District  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44932. 

b.  Respondent’s  refusal  to  abide  by  the  District  and  school  administrators’ 

determination  not  to  widely  disseminate  notice  of  a  disreputable  rumor  was  persistent  in  that 
it  occurred  over  an  extended  period  of  time—fourteen  days. 

15. 

a.  Comprehensive  analysis  of  the  accumulated  established  facts  indicates  that 
respondent’s  conduct  demonstrates  his  unfitness  to  teach.  Respondent,  who  holds  a  multiple 
subject  credential,  has  no  history  of  prior  discipline.  Respondent’s  most  recent  teaching 
evaluation  indicates  that  respondent  “Meets  Performance  Standard.”  Nonetheless,  the 
calamitous  consequences  of  respondent’s  conduct,  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  9  through  14, 
so  negatively  impacted  students,  parents,  and  faculty  of  107"  Street  Elementary  School,  that 
they  dwarf  respondent’s  performance  record. 

b.  Respondent’s  conduct  disseminating  the  discredited  rumored  threat  is 

notorious.  Respondent’s  conduct  caused  children  to  suffer  visible  psychological  harm—they 
experienced  anxiety  and  stress—which  in  turn  disrupted  their  education.  Because  of 
respondent’s  conduct,  the  District  had  to  re-assign  a  member  of  the  107"  Street  Elementary 
School  faculty  to  another  school  because  the  safety  of  that  faculty  member  could  not  be  assured 
at  107"  Street  Elementary  School.  The  partnership  that  District  and  schoo!  administrators 
sought  to  foster  with  the  community  fractured  and  parents  successfully  petitioned  for  the 
release  of  107"  Street  Elementary  School  from  the  District’s  jurisdiction.  The  motives  for 
respondent’s  conduct,  to  the  extent  that  such  motives  were  discernible  from  the  established 

19

facts,  are  unpraiseworthy.  Respondent  was  evidently  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  there  was 
cause  for  concern  about  school  safety  on  Halloween  day  in  October  2013.  In  order  to  maintain 
the  illusion  of  impending  threat,  respondent  steadfastly  ignored  all  informed  indication  to  the 
contrary.  Respondent’s  conduct  is  recent  occurring  just  three  academic  years  ago.  As a  result, 
respondent’s  conduct  and  its  consequences  continue  to  resonate  throughout  the  community. 
Respondent’s  demonstrated  irremediable  temperament  suggests  a  high  likelihood  that, 
presented  with  the  opportunity,  respondent  would  again  engage  in  such  conduct.  As  recognized 
in  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2 
Cal.App.4th  at  1445,  discipline  in  the  form  of  warnings  and  reprimand  is  unlikely  to  reform  a 
flaw  of  temperament.  Respondent  offered  a  vacuous  apology  in  which  he  made  no  attempt  to 
name  or  even  take  ownership  of  his  conduct.  There  is  no  evidence  remotely  suggesting  that 
disciplining  respondent  would  have  any  chilling  effect  on  a  constitutional  right.  Based  on  the 
foregoing  analysis  of  the  accumulated  established  facts  in  this  case,  the  preponderance  of 
evidence  indicates  respondent’s  unfitness  to  teach.° 

16. 

By  unanimous  vote,  the  Commission  determines  that  cause  exits  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  1  through  45  and  Legal 
Conclusions  1  through  11  and  13  through  15,  to  dismiss  respondent  from  employment  with  the 
District  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  immoral  conduct,  for  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  and  for  persistent  violation,  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations. 

°  This  is  in  distinct  contrast  to  Board  of Education  of  the  Sunnyvale  Elementary 

School  v.  Commission  of  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  where  the 
accumulated  established  facts  in  that  case  did  not  support  a  determination  that  a  teacher 
falsely  reporting  that  an  explosive  had  been  hidden  in  a  school  was  unfit  to  teach  when 
conflicting  testimony  was  resolved  in  favor  of  the  teacher.  The  Sunnyvale  case  does  not 
preclude  the  Commission’s  determination  of  unfitness  in  this  case  as  suggested  by 
respondent’s  trial  brief.  (See  Exhibit  BB  at  p.  3.) 

20 

 

Friday  02 

of  Oct  2015,  Faxination 

-> 

Page 

2 

of 

2 

| 

| 

| 

|

 

ORDER 

Mark  Leopando  is  dismissed  as  an  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District, 

Dated:  October  2,  2015 

:

 

——o 

rennet 
JENNIFER  M,  RUSSELL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Hearin,     
Office  of  Administrative 

  

   
HELEN  SHEPARD 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

 

21, 

  

