     

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2014100284 

BRUNO  AGHEDOH  (EN  706616), 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

On  December  3,  4,  and  5,  2014,  and  January  6,  2015,  Michael  A.  Scarlett, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  Michaele  Scheer,  and  Ray 
Andrzejewski,  hereafter  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission),  heard 
this  matter  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  On  January  20,  2015,  the  Commission  reconvened  to 
deliberate  regarding  the  decision  in  this  case.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on 
January  20,  2015. 

Meredeth  G.  Karasch  and  My  T.  Huynh,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  complainant, 

Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
(District).  Rosty  G.  Gore,  Attorney  at  Law,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented 
respondent,  Bruno  Aghedoh  (respondent),  a  permanent  certified  employee  of  the District, 
who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 

decision  on  January  20,  2015.  The  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Complainant  made  and  filed  Statement  of  Charges  in  his  official  capacity  on 

June  13,  2014.  On  October  9,  2014,  complainant  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against 
respondent.  On  October  6,  2014,  respondent  submitted  to  complainant  a  Request  for Hearing 
in  response  to  the  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges.  On  October  13, 
2014,  respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  to 
proceed  to  hearing  before  the  Commission.  On  December  5,  2014,  the  third  day  of  hearing, 
complainant  amended  the  Accusation  to  conform  with  the  evidence  admitted  at  hearing.  The 
Accusation  was  amended  to  change  the  date  in  Charges  1  through  4  from  Friday,  December 
6,  2013,  to  Thursday,  December  5,  2013.  The  Accusation  was  also  amended  to  change 
     
1

  

  

Charge  Number  3  as  follows:  “On  Friday  Thursday,  December  6  5,  2013,  AGHEDOH,  while 
still  holding  student  Aaron  S.  by  the  back  of  his  shirt,  slapped  ABB  S.  no  less  than  tve  one 
@)  (1)  times  on  the  face.”  The  Commission  proceeded  at  hearing  on  the  First  Amended 
Accusation. 

2. 

On  March  4,  2014,  the  District  issued  respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Act(s)  of  Certificated  Employee  recommending  that  respondent  be  suspended  for  15  days 
and  thereafter  dismissed  from  the  District.  The  notice  specified  causes  for  discipline  for 
unprofessional  conduct  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the 
State  or  reasonable  regulation  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  Governing  of  the  School  District.  The  notice  also  included 
charges  that  alleged  the  following: 

On  or  about  Friday,  December  6,  2013,  Mr.  Bruno  Aghedo  [sic], 
Contract  Pool  Teacher  assigned  to  Jefferson  High  School,  did  the 
following  to  11th  grade  student,  Aaron  §.,  during  3rd  period  class: 

c. 

Chased  a"  the  classroom. 

by  the  back  of  his  shirt  and  pulled  him  towards 

a. 
b.  Grabbed 
him. 
While  still  having  hold  of  him,  turned  him  around  and  slapped 
AE no  less  than  2  times  on  the  face  with  enough  force  to  be 
heard  by  other  students  in  the  class. 
Yelled,  “don’t  you  ever  touch  me!”  and  pushed  NC  away. 

d. 

3. 

On  March  31,  2014,  Dr,  Shelly  Holt,  the  Local  District  Superintendent  or 

Designee,  approved  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts’  recommendation  for  a  15-day 
suspension  and  respondent’s  dismissal.  The  District  made  and  filed  the  Statement  of 
Charges  and  Accusation  against  respondent  based  upon  the  March  4,  2014  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Acts. 

4, 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  teacher  who  has  taught  with  the 
District  for  almost  17  years.  In  April  1998,  respondent  was  hired  by  the  District  as  a 
substitute  teacher  and  worked  various  schools  within  the  District.  In  November  1998,  he  was 
hired  as  a  special  education  teacher  at  Jefferson  High  School  (Jefferson)  9-12th  grades,  a 
position  he  held  for  two  years.  From  July  2001  until  his  dismissal  in  March  2014, 
respondent  taught  Chemistry/Integrated  Coordinated  Science  (ICE)  9-12th  grade  at  Jefferson. 
Respondent  has  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  in  Chemistry  with  a  Clear  Cross-Cultural 
Language  and  Academic  Development  (CCLAD)  certificate. 

5. 

Respondent  was  born  in  Nigeria,  Africa  and  moved  to  the  United  States  in 
1997.  He  is  45  years  old  and  unmarried  and  has  no  children.  Respondent  testified  that  he 
had  polio  as  a  child  in  Nigeria,  and  as  a  result,  his  left  leg  is  severely  atrophied  and  is  shorter 
than  his  right  leg.  Consequently,  respondent  walks  with  a  severe  limp  and  has  restrictions  in 
his  mobility  and  difficulty  with  his  balance.  He  wears  a  two-inch  elevated  shoe  on  his  left 
foot  to  prevent  him  from  falling  when  walking  and  to  minimize  back  pain  caused  by  his 

2. 

 
  

  

disability.  Respondent  also  wears  a  brace  on  his  left  leg  to  assist  him  with  walking  and 
standing.  Respondent  has  difficulty  standing  for  extended  periods  and  typically  leans  on 
objects  or  furniture  when  standing,  and  has  difficulty  walking.  Respondent  credibility 
testified  that  he  has  severe  mobility  limitations  and  demonstrated  in  court  the  physical 
limitations  caused  as  a  result  of  his  atrophied  left  leg  and  the  leg  brace  and  modified  shoe 
that  must  be  worn  to  compensate  for  his  physical  limitations.  Respondent  is  incapable  of 
running  and  experiences  difficulty  walking  and  maintaining  his  balance. 

6. 

Dr.  Timothy  C.  Tran,  MD,  Kaiser  Permanente,  submitted  a  letter  dated 
February  28,  2014,  which  corroborated  respondent’s  testimony.  Dr.  Tran  states  that 
respondent  suffers  from  “post  poliomyelitis  syndrome,”  which  caused  asymmetry  in  the 
Dr. 
muscle  development  of  respondent’s  legs  and  which  rendered  him  susceptible  to  falling. 
Tran  confirmed  that  respondent  has  chronic  pain  which  requires  him  to  take  medication  and 
he  wears a  leg  brace  to  alleviate  some  of  the  problems  or  symptoms  associated  with  his 
condition. 

oe 

December  5,  2013  Incident 

7. 

On  December  5,  2013.  respondent  was  experiencing  problems  with  two 

At  the  beginning  of  the  third 

and 
students  in  his  third  period  class, 
   
period  class,  respondent  assigned  a  “dispatch”  or  class  exercise  to  the  students  who  began 
working  on  the  dispatch,  which  respondent  began  to  review  and  correct  with  each  student. 
Wilbert  B.  came  into  class  late  and  he  and  A began  being  disruptive  and  disturbing 
the  other  students,  including  pouring  pencil  shavings  on  two  other  students.  Respondent 
requested  both  students  to  take  their  assigned  seats  but  they  initially  ignored  his  instructions. 
After  WIE  took  his  assigned  seat,  respondent  had  to  move  a  student  who  was  being 
and  WEEE who  poured 
disturbed  by  WIE  Respondent  had  to  separate  AN 
pencil  shavings  on  another  student  who  had  become  angry  with  them  because  of  their 
outside  of  the  classroom  to  talk  to 
disruptive  behavior.  Respondent  had  to  take WEE 
him  to  try  control  and  stop  his  disruptive  behavior.  Ultimately,  respondent  had  to  separate 
ABE  and  WIE  from  sitting  near  each  other. 

8. 

While  walking  around  the  classroom  reviewing  the  students’  work, 

unbeknownst  to  respondent,  WHEE  and  ARB  had  come  up  behind  him  and  were 
mimicking  tapping  or  rubbing  respondent’s  head.  While  standing  behind  respondent,  WEEE 
WH  hit  respondent  on  the  back  of  his  head.  Respondent  was  shocked  and  startled  by  being  hit 
or  slapped  on  the  back  of  the  head.  He  turned  around  quickly  and  twisted  his  right  knee,  lost 
his  balance  and  almost  fell  to  the  floor.  Respondent  testified  that  when  he  turned  around 
AMEE  was  standing  behind  him.  He  reached  out  and  grabbed  ANE  by  the  hand  to 
keep  from  falling  and  to  regain  his  balance,  but  the  student  pulled  away  which  further 
destabilized  respondent’s  balance.  According  to  respondent,  he  grabbed Am  with  one 
hand  and  inadvertently  hit  him  softly  in  the  face  with  his  other  hand  while  trying  to  regain 
his  balance.  Respondent  admits  that  he  firmly  told  ANNE  “Don’t  touch  me!”,  or  words  to 
that  effect,  when  he  turned  around  and  grabbed  the  student.  He  stated  that  he  did  not  run  or 
chase  after  AN,  but  just  instinctively  reached  out  and  grabbed  him  because  he  was 
falling  and  AM  was  the  only  student  behind  him.  Respondent  was  in  significant  pain  as 

3 

 

  

  

a  result  of  twisting  his  right  knee.  The  incident  occurred  at  the  end  of  respondent’s  third 
period  class  just  before  the  bell  rang  to  dismiss  his  class,  and  was  over  very 
Students  in  respondent’s  third  period  class,  including ABB  ana 
class  immediately.  Several  of  the  respondent’s  third  period  students  witnessed  varying 
portions  of  the  incident  and  told  other  students  that  respondent  had  slapped a  student. 

quickly. 
|  the  left  the 

9, 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  did  not  immediately  report  the  December  5,  2013 
incident  to  school  administration  because  he  was  dazed  and  in  shock  immediately  following 
the  incident.  He  did  not  think  it  was  necessary  to  report  the  incident  immediately  because  it 
had  been  an  accident  and  AJ  was  not  injured  or  hurt.  The  incident  also  occurred  at  the 
end  of  respondent’s  third  period  class  and  students  were  beginning  to  arrive  for  his  next 
class.  Respondent  did  not  want  to  leave  his  class  unsupervised  to  go  to  the  school  office  to 
report  the  incident.  Moreover,  the  telephone  in  the  classroom  was  not  working  and  he  could 
not  walk  to  the  office  because  his  knee  was  in  pain  as  a  result  of  the  incident.  Finally,  he  did 
not  report  the  incident  at  the  end  of  the  school  day  because  he  was  tutoring  students  and 
admittedly  forgot  the  incident  as  the  day  progressed. 

10.‘ 

Later  that  day,  at  approximately  3:15  pm,  Acquinetta  Cook,  the  Assistant 

Principal  at  Jefferson,  was  informed  that  respondent  had  slapped  a  student  in  his  third  period 
class.  Emily  P.,  a  “City  Year”  volunteer  tutor,  told  Ms.  Cook  that  J,  a  student 
in  respondent’s  third  period  class,  told  her  respondent  slapped  a  student,  whose  name  was 
unknown.  Emily  P.  did  not  witness  the  incident.  Later  that  afternoon,  after  school  was  out, 
Ms.  Cook  contacted  Michael  Taft,  the  Jefferson  Principal,  to  inform  him  about  incident.  Mr. 
Taft  was  away  from  the  school  campus  attending  a  conference  on  December  5  and  6,  2013. 
He  told  Ms.  Cook  to  meet  with  respondent  the  next  day,  December  6,  2013,  to  obtain 
respondent’s  statement  about  the  incident.  Ms.  Cook  was  assigned  to  Jefferson  in  September 
2013  as  the  Assistant  Principal,  her  first  position  as  an  assistant  principal. 

11. 

On  December  6,  2013,  respondent  arrived  at  school  at  approximately  6:30  am. 

Respondent  intended  to  report  the  incident  to  an  administrator,  however,  Mr.  Taft  and  the 
Title  I  Coordinator,  the  persons  respondent  believed  he  should  report  the  incident  to,  were 
not  in  the  main  office  when  he  arrived.  Consequently,  respondent  went  to  his  classroom  to 
grade  student  papers  and  to  prepare  for  his  next  class.  Ms.  Cook  arrived  at  school  at 
approximately  6:30  am,  but  did  not  see  respondent  and  respondent  did  not  attempt  to  contact 
her  that  morning.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  did  not  report  the  incident  to  Ms.  Cook 
because  she  was  new  at  Jefferson,  and  he  believed  Mr.  Taft  was  his  supervisor  and  the 
person  he  should  notify.  Respondent  did  not  notify  or  contact  Mr.  Taft  regarding  the 
incident  on  December  5  or  6,  2013,  because  the  principal  was  off  campus  attending  a 
conference.  He  did  not  notify  Mr.  Taft  by  email  or  by  leaving  a  message  with  his  office 
before  being  summoned  to  Ms.  Cook’s  office  on  December  6,  2013. 

District’s  Investigation  of Incident 

12. 

On  December  6,  2013,  at  approximately  8:00  am  Ms.  Cook  sent  a  substitute 

teacher  to  respondent’s  first  period  class  and  summoned  respondent  to  her  office.  Ms.  Cook 
interviewed  respondent  and  prepared  a  written  statement  of  the  interview  on  that  same  day. 

4 

 

  

(Exh.  6.)  According  to  Ms.  Cook’s  written  statement,  she  asked  respondent  what  had 
occurred  in  his  third  period  class  the  previous  day.  She  specifically  asked  respondent  about 
an  allegation  that  he  had  slapped  a  student  during  his  third  period  class.  According  to  Ms. 
Cook’s  statement,  respondent  stated  that  the  allegations  were  hearsay  and  the  incident  could 
have  been  misunderstood  and  blown  out  of  proportion.  Ms.  Cook  again  asked  respondent 
what  had  happened  in  his  third  period  class  and  whether  he  “had  contact  with  a  student.” 
(Exh,  6.)  Respondent  was  initially  hesitant  to  answer  Ms.  Cook’s  question,  but  after  being 
asked  again  whether  he  had  contact  with  another  student,  respondent  stated  “Yes.”  Ms. 
Cook  then  asked  respondent  “did  that  involve  you  putting  your  hands  on  another  student?” 
and  respondent  again  answered  “Yes.”  (Exh.  6.)  According  to  Ms.  Cook’s  written 
statement,  respondent  then  stated:  “I  was  circulating  and  explaining  to  students  and  someone 
hit  me  in  the  back  of  my  head.  I  turned  around  fast  and  saw  ABBE  running.  I  almost  fell. 
I  grabbed  and  held  him  and  hit  him  back.  I  slapped  him.  I  told  him  don’t  touch  me.”  (Exh. 
6.)  Respondent  told  Ms.  Cook  that  the  incident  occurred  during  the  last  10  minutes  of  his 
third  period  class,  and  that  he  had  planned  to  speak  to  Mr.  Taft  after  school,  but  he  was 
working  with  a  student  and  lost  track  of  time. 

13a. 

Following  Ms.  Cook’s  interview  with  respondent,  on  December  6,  2013,  she 
randomly  selected  six  students  from  respondent’s  third  period  class,  J a  A 
and  (EE,  to  interview  regarding  the  incident.  Ms. 
a,  CE.  K 
Cook  obtained  written  signed  statements  from  each  student  she  interviewed.  Ms.  Cook’s 
December  6,  2013  written  statement  regarding  her  investigation  and  interview  with 
respondent  indicates  that  all  of  the  students  she  interviewed  stated  that  respondent  slapped  a 
student.  (Exh.  6.) 

b.  As  written  statement  indicated  that  he  and  his  friend  “Ci”  wi 

HD  were  behind  respondent  and  “Cif  has  his  hands  up  behind  the  teacher  head  pretending  to 
grab  it  then  the  teacher  moved  his  head  back  and  Cf  started  running  and  I  ran  behind  him 
then  the  teacher  grabbed  me  by  my  shirt  and  pulled  me  then  swinged  [sic]  at  me  while 
yelling  “‘don’t  you  ever  touch  me’”  when  really  I  never  touched  him  so  he  swing  [sic]  the 
last  time  then  hit  me  hard  in  the  face  liked  slapped  me  with  anger  ... 

I  was  upset.”  (Exh.  4f.) 

did  not  testify  at  hearing. 

c.  ERE  who  testified  at  hearing,  prepared  a  written  statement  stating  that 

he  was  focused  on  his  school  work  until  he  heard  “laughing  and  screaming”  and  “turned 
around”  and  saw  respondent  “grabbing  a  student  and  slapped  the  student  2  times  in  the  face,” 
and  “push  the  student.”  (Exh.  4a.) 

d.  ERB,  who  testified  at  hearing,  prepared  a  written  statement  stating  that  a 
student  was  “messing  with  the  teacher  and  the  teacher  got  annoyed  and  mad  so  he  slapped 
the  student.”  (Exh.  4b.)  She  states  that  “the  teacher  got  mad  because  the  student  was 
touching  him.”  (Exh.  4b.) 

| 

e.  JER  s  written  statement  indicated  that  “the  kids  did  something  to  the 

teacher  behind  his  back  while  the  teacher  was  looking  away.”  (Exh.  4e.)  He  stated  that 
“when  teacher  notice  the  touch  he  quickly  turned  around  and  started  chasing  them,”  and  that 

5 

 

one  of  the  kids  managed  to  escape,  but  the  other  did  not.  it  claimed  that 
respondent  caught  up  to  one  of  the  kids,  became  angry  and  slapped  the  student  “3  or 
less/more  times,”  while  telling  the  student  “Don’t  ever  touch  me.”  (Exh.  4e.)  He  stated  that 
respondent  “was  really  angry  and  the  kid  was  trying  to  block  but  the  teachers  hand  still 
managed  to  slap  him.”  (Exh.  4e.) 

f.  KEM  prepared  a  signed  written  statement  indicating  that  she  did  not  really 

pay  much  attention  to  what  was  going  on  until  she  heard  “people  arguing”  and  respondent 
scream  “Don’t  you  ever  talk  to  me  like  that.”  (Exh.  4i.)  At  that  time,  she  turned  around  saw  © 
respondent  “slap  the  kid  two  times.”  (Exh.  41.)  KR  did  not  see  the  entire  incident  but 
heard  other  students  stating  that  respondent  “slapped  the  wrong  kid.”  (Exh.  4i.)  KI 
did  not  testify  at  hearing. 

g.  JM  prepared  a  written  statement  indicating  that  he  was  doing  his  work 
He  said  there  was  a  “slaping 

when  he  heard  respondent  yell  “don’t  touch  me!”  (Exh.  4h.) 
[sic]  sound”  but  he  did  not  observe  respondent  hitting 
that  the  other  students  were  saying  “someone  got  slaped  [sic]  by  the  teacher.”  (Exh.  4h.) 
[EE  did  not  testify  at  hearing. 

(Exh.  4h.)  He  just  recalled 

14, 

After  interviewing  respondent  and  the  students,  Ms.  Cook  again  contacted  Mr. 

Taft,  who  advised  Ms.  Cook  to  remove  respondent  from  the  classroom  and  to  replace  him 
with  a  substitute  teacher.  Mr.  Taft  also  advised  Ms.  Cook  to  contact  Irene  Hyland,  the 
Operations  Coordinator  at  Jefferson,  who  directed  Ms.  Cook  to  contact  the  Los  Angeles 
Police  Department  (LAPD)  Abuse  hotline. 

15. 

On  December  6,  2013,  LAPD  dispatched  two  police  officers  to  Jefferson  to 

take  statements  from  respondent  and  NC  The  LAPD  investigation  report  indicates  that 
respondent  told  officers  that  during  class  he  was  “slapped  in  the  back  of  his  head”  and  he 
turned  around  and  saw  AM  running  away.  (Exh.  8.)  According  to  the  LAPD  report, 
by  his  clothing,  and  told  him  “‘don’t  ever  touch  me 
respondent  stated  he  grabbed A 
again’  and  slapped  him  across  the  face.”  (Exh,  8.)  Alii  reportedly  told  officers  that  he 
and  another  student  were  standing  behind  respondent  when  respondent  “stepped  back  and  hit 
the  other  students  hand  [with]  the  back  of  his  head,  causing  him  to  turn  around.”  (Exh.  8.) 
ARB  told  officers  that  he  and  the  other  student  tried  to  run  away,  but  respondent  grabbed 
him  by  his  clothing  and  “slapped  him  across  the  face,”  and  stated  “don’t  ever  touch  me 
again.”  (Exh.  8.)  The  investigation  report  indicates  that  ANB  did  not  have  any  marks  or 
bruises  on  his  face  and  that  he  told  officers  that  the  slap  did  not  hurt. 

| 

16. 

On  December  10,  2015,  Ms.  Hyland  reportedly  interviewed  vil 

who 

was  not  interviewed  by  Ms.  Cook  on  December  6,  2013.  WHEE  prepared  a  written 
statement  that  stated  he  was  “messing  around  behind”  respondent  and  respondent  “turn 
around  all  pissed  off  and  he  grabbed  my  friend.”  (Exh.  XXXX.)  WHEE  stated  that  he 
was  “out  of  there”  when  respondent  turned  and  that  “I  didn’t  clearly  see  when  he  got  hit,” 
referring  to  his  friend  AJ  (Exh.  XXXX.) 

 

  

17. 

On  January  17,  2014,  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland  interviewed  respondent 

regarding  the  December  5,  2013,  incident.  This  was  the  first  official  interview  of  respondent 
conducted  by  Mr.  Taft  (principal)  and  Ms.  Hyland.  An  official  “Record  of  Interview”  dated 
prepared  by  Mr.  Taft.  (Exh.  4k.)  Respondent  told  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms. 
January  17,  2014,  was 
were  being  disruptive  in  his  third  period  class  and  that 
Hyland  that WEI  an 
he  had  to  stop  instruction  on  several  occasions  to  address  their  disruptive  behaviors.  He 
stated  that  as  he  was  walking  around  his  classroom  checking  his  student’s  assigned  work, 
someone  came  up  behind  him  and  hit  him  in  the  back  of  the  head.  The  January  14,  2014 
Record  of  Interview  indicates  that  respondent  told  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland  the  following: 

     

My  Back  was  turned  when I  felt  someone  hit  the  back  of  my  head.  As  I 
turned,  I  tweaked  my  right  knee.  This  rapid  movement  caused  me  pain 
on  my  knee.  I  grabbed  him  by  the  hand  and  I  as  I  did  this,  he  pulled 
back.  I  swung  my  arm  towards  him  so  that  I  could  stabilize  my 
balance.  That  is  when  I  slapped  him.  I  slapped  him  once.  It  was  not  a 
hard  hit.  There  was  no  malice  on  my  part. 
‘Don’t  touch  me.’ 

I  just  reacted.  I  told  him 

(Exh.  4k.) 

18. 

On  January  27,  2014,  respondent  met  with  Mr.  Taft  again  to  discuss  the 
December  5,  2013,  incident.  Also  in  attendance  was  an  UTLA  representative  and  an 
Operations  Coordinator  from  the  District.  A  memorandum  summarizing  the  January  27, 
2014  conference  memorandum  indicates  that  respondent  was  given  a  summary  of  the 
evidence  obtained  by  the  District  regarding  the  December  5,  2013  incident  including:  (1)  Ms. 
Cook’s  statement  that  respondent  had  had  grabbed  and  slapped ABBE  during 
period  class,  on  December  5,  2013;  (2)  that  respondent  had  told  LAPD  officers  that  he 
grabbed  and  slapped  A, 
the  back  of  the  head;  (3)  that  Ms.  Hyland  had  interviewed  seven  students  who  provided 
statements  that  respondent  had  slapped  a  student  in  class,  describing  the  contents  of  the 
students’  statements;  and  (4)  a  brief  description  of  respondent’s  January  17,  2014  interview 
with  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland.  Respondent  was  given  information  regarding  District’s 
policies  regarding  teacher  conduct  and  informed  that  the  results  of  the  District’s  investigation 
may  lead  to  disciplinary  action  District. 

once  on  the  face  because  the  student  hit  respondent  hard  on 

his  third 

19. 

On  February  3,  2014,  respondent  submitted  a  written  statement  to  Mr.  Taft  in 

response  to  the  January  27,  2014,  conference  memorandum  prepared  by  Mr.  Taft. 
Respondent  reiterated  that  on  December  6,  2013,  he  told  Ms.  Cook  that WHEE and 
ABB 

had  been  disruptive  in  his  third  period  class  on  December  5,  2013,  and  that  he  was 
suddenly  slapped  on  the  back  of  his  head  by  someone  standing  behind  him.  He  stated  that  he 
was  shocked  and  in  pain,  after  turning  awkwardly  and  twisting  his  right  knee.  Respondent 
stated  that  he  almost  fell  and  reached  out  and  grabbed  ARs  hand  for  support,  but  the 
student  pulled  his  hand  back.  Respondent  stated  when Aj pulied  his  hand  back,  he  was 
further  destabilized  and  he  reached  out  with  his  hand  and  inadvertently  hit  AJ  in  the 
face.  He  admitted  that  he  firmly  told  ABBE  “Don’t  touch  me!,”  while  reaching  out  for 
support  and  stumbling  towards  AJ  (Exh.  YYY.)  Respondent  stated  that  he  told  LAPD 

7 

 

  

officers  on  December  6,  2013,  that  he  lost  his  balance  when  he  turned  around,  almost  fell  and 
inadvertently  hit  ABB  in  the  face.  He  stated  he  told  the  police  officers  about  his  leg 
brace,  showed  them  the  brace,  and  explained  how  the  sudden  slap  caused  him  to  lose  his 
balance.  Respondent  told  Mr.  Taft  that  he  was  dealing  with  “post-polio  syndrome”  which. 
caused  him  to  frequently  lose  his  balance,  and  that  he  wore  a  leg  brace  and  a  modified  shoe 
to  help  manage  his  pain  and  loss  of  balance.  He  stressed  that  he  could  not  have  chased  after 
two  students  as  alleged  due  to  the  condition  of  his  left  leg.  (Exh.  YYY.)  Respondent  again 
stated  that  he  did  not  report  the  incident  immediately  because  students  from  his  next  class 
started  walking  into  the  classroom  and  his  focus  shifted  to  teaching  and  preparing  for  his 
next  class.  As  the  day  progressed,  respondent  stated  he  became  immersed  in  his  normal 
activities  and  forgot  about  the  incident.  Finally,  respondent  again  denied  using  the  words 
“slap”  or  “grab”  to  describe  the  December  5,  2013  incident  when  interviewed  on  January  17, 
2014,  by  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland.  He  stated  that  he  told  Mr.  Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland  that  he 
inadvertently  hit  AJ  one  time.  (Exh.  YYY.) 

20. 

The  District  relies  heavily  on  Ms.  Cook’s  statement  that  respondent  admitted 
slapping  AI  and  the  students’  statements  indicating  that  respondent  slapped  a  student 
in  his  third  period  class.  Ms.  Cook  testified  that  respondent  admitted  that  he  “slapped” 

AWB 

and  that  he  never  stated  that  the  slap  was  an  accident  or  that  he  hurt  himself  during 

the  incident.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  hit Am  across  the  face,  although  he  denies 
ever  describing  the  contact  as  a  “slap”  as  the  as  the  District  contends.  It  is  not  significant 
whether  respondent  described  the  contact  as  a  “slap”  or  a  “hit,”  what  is  important  is  whether 
respondent  intentionally  slapped  or  hit  the  student  in  the  classroom.  However,  the 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  inadvertently  and  unintentionally 
hit  AMM  across  the  face  as  he  was  trying  to  regain  his  balance  after  quickly  turning  in 
response  to  being  hit  himself  by  a  student  on  the  back  of  the  head. 

21. 

The  evidence  established  that  Vii 

and  ABBE  were  disruptive  in 

respondent’s  third  period  class  on  December  5,  2013,  and  that  WHEE  hit  respondent  on 
the  back  of  the  head  from  behind  while  he  was  working  with  another  student.  There  is  no 
dispute  that  respondent  hit  or  slapped ABB 
once  in  the  face  during  the  December  5, 
2013,  incident.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  was  shocked  after  being  hit  from 
behind  and  lost  his  balance  and  almost  fell  when  he  quickly  turned  to  see  who  had  hit  him 
and  grabbed  ABBE  He  also  credibly  testified  that  he  twisted  right  knee,  which  caused  him 
significant  pain,  and  that  when  he  grabbed  Ato  avoid  falling  he  inadvertently  hit  the 
student  in  the  face.  Respondent  suffers  from  post  poliomyelitis  syndrome  which  caused 
atrophy  in  left  leg  and  makes  him  susceptible  to  falling.  Dr.  Michael  Hall,  MD.,  Kaiser 
Permanente,  treated  respondent’s  right  knee  on  March  5,  2014,  and  reported  that  respondent 
sustained  the  injury  to  the  knee  on  December  5,  2013,  and  noted  that  the  injured  right  knee 
could  occasionally  swell  and  cause  pain  after  prolonged  standing  and  walking.  He 
prescribed  physical  therapy  as  a  result  of  the  injury.  This  evidence  corroborates  respondent’s 
testimony  that  he  almost  fell  and  twisted  his  knee  after  being  hit  in  the  back  of  the  head  by 

22. 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  was  reluctant  to  provide  information  to  Ms.  Cook 
during  the  December  6,  2013  interview  because  she  was  a  new  Assistant  Principal  whom  he 

8 

 

  

did  not  know,  and  that  he  chose  to  merely  answer  specific  questions  asked  by  Ms.  Cook 
without  elaborating  on  the  circumstances  of  the  incident.  Respondent  believed  he  would 
have  been  better  served  by  preparing  a  formal  written  statement  explaining  the  incident 
because  he  feared  he  might  be  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted  by  Ms.  Cook.  For  example, 
in  his  February  3,  2014  written  statement  to  Mr.  Taft,  respondent  stated  that  he  did  not  tell 
Ms.  Cook  that  he  grabbed  AJ  because  he  had  lost  his  balance  and  twisted  his  knee, 
although  he  clearly  told  her  that  he  almost  fell  after  being  hit.  While  testifying  at  hearing,  it 
was  apparent  that  respondent  spoke  with  a  heavy  accent  or  dialect  from  his  native  Nigerian 
language  and  culture,  which  explained  his  preference  to  submit  a  written  statement  because 
of  a  fear  of  being  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted.  His  reluctance  to  fully  explain  the 
incident  to  Ms.  Cook  contributed  to  Ms.  Cook  reaching  the  conclusion  that  respondent 
intentionally  slapped  or  hit Am. 

: 

23. 

Although  Ms.  Cook  testified  that  respondent  never  stated  he  hit  or  slapped 

ABM  accidently,  Ms.  Cook’s  written  statement  describing  her  interview  with  respondent 
indicates  that  respondent  stated  he  almost  fell  when  he  turned  and  grabbed  ARB.  This 
supports  respondent’s  assertion  that  he  lost  his  balance  and  hit  ABB  accidently  when  he 
grabbed  the  student  to  break  his  fall,  The  District  also  relies  on  the  LAPD  investigation 
report  to  support  its  assertion  that  respondent  admitted  intentionally  slapping  A. 
However,  respondent  credibly  testified  that  the  LAPD  investigation  report  inaccurately 
describes  his  statement  to  the  LAPD  officers.  Respondent  stated  that  he  told  the  officers  that 
he  lost  his  balance,  almost  fell  and  inadvertently  hit  ABB  in  the  face,  and  that  he  told  the 
officers  he  previously  had  polio  and  wore  a  leg  brace  as  a  result,  although  these  statements 
do  not  appear  in  the  LAPD  investigation  report.  Ms.  Cook  testified  that  respondent  told  the 
LAPD  officers  that  he  had  previously  had  polio  and  that  she  first  learned  of  his  polio  and  his 
leg  brace  during  the  LAPD  interview.  Ms.  Cook’s  testimony  corroborates  respondent’s 
testimony  that  he  told  the  officers  that  he  had  suffered  from  polio  and  wore a  leg  brace.  The 
only  plausible  reason  respondent  would  disclose  this  information  to  officers  would  be  to 
support  his  statement  to  them  that  he  lost  his  balance  and  almost  fell  after  being  hit  by  the 
student.  The  LAPD  officers  did  not  testify  at  hearing  and  based  upon  both  Ms.  Cook  and 
respondent’s  testimony,  the  investigation  report  does  not  reflect  respondent’s  complete 
statement  to  officers.  Consequently,  respondent’s  testimony  that  he  told  the  LAPD  officers 
that  he  inadvertently  hit 

|  is  found  to  be  credible. 

24, 

The  students’  written  statements  relied  upon  by  the  District  also  do  not 

establish  that  respondent  intentionally  slapped  ANE.  Neither  AN  nor 
two  students  involved  in  the  December  5,  2013  incident,  testified  hearing.  W 
statement  fails  to  admit  that  he  hit  respondent  on  the  back  of  the  head,  and  merely  states  that 
he  was  “messing  around  behind”  respondent.  He  indicated  that  he  did  not  see  respondent 
slap  or  hit  AR,  AB’s  statement  also  neglects  to  state  that  WIM  hit  respondent 
in  the  back  of  the  head,  instead  stating  that  respondent  “moved  his  head  back”  which  caused 
the  contact  with  Wis  hand.  Both At 
    
truth  in  their  written  statements  about  W 
render  their  statements  unreliable  and  not  credible. 

and  AEs  failure  to  include  the 
hitting  respondent  in  the  back  of  the  head 

,  the 

*g 

  
 

  

25.  HSE  and  ERB  were  the  only  two  percipient  student  witnesses  that 
testified  at  hearing.  Both  of  these  students  testified  that  they  saw  respondent  grab  and  slap 
ABBE.  MEE,  however,  admittedly  did  not  see  the  entire  incident.  He  testified  he  did 
not  see  AR  or  WH  hit  respondent  on  the  back  of  the  head  and  that  he  turned 
around  only  after  hearing  laughing  and  screaming.  (Exh.  4a.)  ERB  did  not  see 
respondent  pivot  and  turn  and  lose  his  balance  after  being  hit  by  WIE  ~He  only  saw 
respondent  grabbing  AI  and  appearing  to  hit  or  slap  the  student  intentionally.  Without 
seeing  the  beginning  of  the  incident,  he  could  not  have  fully  understood  or  appreciated  the 
contextual  nature  of  the  rapidly  occurring  incident.  He  would  not  have  known  that 
respondent  reached  out  to  grab  ABB  in  an  attempt  to  regain  his  balance  or  that  the  slap  or 
hit  was  unintentional. 
looked  mad  and  had  a  frown  on  his  face.  But  the  anger  in  respondent’s  voice  and  the  frown 
on  his  face  could  have  been  attributed  to  respondent  being  shocked  by  being  unexpectedly  hit 
from  behind  and  the  pain  he  experienced  when  he  twisted  his  knee.  ERB  also  claimed 
he  saw  respondent  slap  ANE  two  times,  but  AHEEFs  own  written  statement  indicates 
he  was  only  slapped  once.  Finally,  HEE  was  seated  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
classroom  from  where  the  incident  occurred  which  further  reduced  his  ability  to  effectively 
witness  the  incident.  Consequently,  EPs  written  statement  and  testimony  is  not 
persuasive. 

ma”  testified  respondent’s  voice  sounded  angry  and  that  he 

26. 

 ERBBEEEs  written  statement  and  testimony  were  not  consistent  and  on  some 

him.  At  hearing  she  testified  that  she  saw  two  students 
standing  behind  respondent  and  Wi 

points  in  contradiction.  Her  written  statement  did  not  indicate  that  two  students, AR 
and  WEE,  were  involved  in  the  incident,  but  merely  states  that  a  single  student  was 
messing  with  respondent  and  respondent  became  annoyed  and  mad  and  slapped  the  student 
because  the  student  was  touching 
playing  with  respondent,  A 
respondent.  This  contradicts  the  evidence  that  established  that  both  students  were  standing 
behind  respondent.  She  testified  that  both  students  were  tapping  respondent  on  the  head  and 
respondent  turned  and  slapped  ABBR  Again  the  evidence  showed  that  WHEE.  oot 
ABBE,  hit  respondent  on  the  head.  EN  also  testified  that  respondent  did  not  push  or 
grab  AN  after  respondent  slapped  him,  which  contradicts  other  evidence  that 
established  respondent  grabbed  AME  when  he  turned  to  see  who  had  hit  him  on  the  head. 
ERB  appeared  to  be  honest  and  forthright  in  her  testimony.  However,  her  recollection  of 
the  incident  was  inconsistent  and  contradictory  and  therefore  not  persuasive.  Moreover, 

in  front  of 

was 

mmm”  was  seated  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  classroom  from  where  the  incident  occurred 

which  impacted  her  ability  to  clearly  see  the  incident. 

27. 

The  written  statements  by  J,  KEE,  and  (J  unreliable 

J 

who  did  not  testify  at  hearing,  did  not  see  the 

because  the  statements  indicate  that  ae  did  not  witness  the  entire  incident,  or  did  not 
witness  the  incident  at  all. 
entire  incident.  His  written  statement  indicates  the  “kids  did  something  to  the  teacher  behind 
his  back,”  suggesting  that  it  did  not  see  the  beginning  of  the  incident.  (Exh.  4e.) 
about  the 
He  did  not  know  which  students  were  involved  because  when  he  told  Ej 
or 
incident,  who  reported  the  incident  to  Ms.  Cook,  JI 
WEE s  name.  This  suggests  that  he  did  not  see  the  incident  at  all,  or  did  not  have  a 
clear  recollection  of  the  incident.  Additionally,  it  staternent  that  respondent 

did  not  know  A 

10 

 

  

  

 

chased  after  two  students  is  also  implausible  given  respondent’s  physical  limitations. 
Finally,  J a  :  statement  that  respondent  slapped  a  student  three  times,  more  or 
less,  is  not  supported  by  the  record.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  hit  A 
only  once.  Consequently,  Rs  statement  is  not  credible.  KEE s  written 
statement  indicates  that  she  also  did  not  see  the  entire  incident.  She  stated  she  only  looked 
up  after  hearing  respondent  scream  “don’t  you  ever  talk  to  me  like  that,”  and  saw  respondent 
“slap  the  kid  two  times,”  and  that  the  “kids  were  saying  that  he  slapped  the  wrong  kid.” 
(Exh.  41.)  These  statements  contradict  other  evidence  which  established  that  respondent 
screamed  “don’t  ever  touch  me,”  or  words  to  that effect,  and  that  he  slapped rr 
one  time.  K§Ps  statement  also  indicates  that  she  relied  on  statements  by  other  student’s 
in  preparing  her  written  statement,  which  suggests  that  her  statement  was  not  based  entirely 
written  statement  indicates  that  he  did  not  see  the  incident 
on  her  own  observations.  If 
at  all.  Because  these  students  did  not  witness  the  entire  incident,  and  did  not  testify  at 
hearing,  their  statements  are  not  persuasive. 

only 

| 

28. 

The  December  5,  2013  incident  occurred  very  quickly,  in  a  matter  of  seconds, 

and  some  of  the  student  statements  indicate  that  they  did  not  see  the  entire  incident,  which 
influenced  their  perception  of  what  actually  occurred.  Some  students’  statements  were 
influenced  by  other  students’  versions  of  the  incident,  and  were  not  based  their  own 
observations.  ER,  EMRE,  and  KEE,  students  whose  statements  the  District 
relied  upon,  all  were  seated  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  classroom  from  where  the  incident 
occurred  which  hindered  their  ability  to  fully  observe  the  incident.  Although  J 
and  ia were  seated  nearest  to  the  incident,  JR  cid  not  witness  the  entire 
incident  and  IM  did  not  witness  the  incident  at  all.  Finally,  Ms.  Cook  interviewed  only 
six  of  the  over  30  students  who  were  in  respondent’s  third  period  class  at  the  time  of  the 
incident.  This  is  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  the  available  student  witnesses  to  the 
incident.  Several  students  who  were  seated  closest  to  the  incident  were  not  interviewed  at 
all. 

29.  |  Respondent’s  testimony  regarding  the  December  6,  2013  interview  is  credited 

over  Ms.  Cook’s  version  of  the  interview.  Ms,  Cook  admitted  that  the  focus  of  her 
investigation  when  she  interviewed  respondent  was  that  respondent  had  slapped  or  hit  a 
student.  Although  respondent  told  Ms.  Cook  that  he  was  hit  in  the  back  of  the  head  by  a 
student  and  almost  fell,  Ms.  Cook  did  not  explore  whether  respondent’s  loss  of  balance 
played  any  part  in  respondent  hitting  the  student  in  the  face.  She  did  not  ask  A 
whether  he  or  WI  intentionally  hit  respondent  in  the  back  of  the  head  or  whether 
respondent  stumbled  and  almost  fell  when  he  turned  around  and  grabbed  AN.  Ms.  Cook 
did  not  interview  Vi—m  on  December  6,  2013,  and  did  not  recall  why  she  neglected  to 
question  WJ who  was  directly  involved  in  the  incident.  Ms.  Cook  admitted  at  hearing 
that  when  she  interviewed  respondent  she  was  not  aware  that  respondent  had  suffered  polio, 
and  as  a  consequence,  had  severe  limitations  in  mobility  and  was  susceptible  to  falling.  Ms. 
Cook  did  not  consider  respondent’s  assertion  that  had  hit  the  student  accidently,  she  relied  on 
student  statements  that  were  contradictory  and  unreliable,  and  she  interviewed  a  small 
sampling  of  students  who  purportedly  saw  the  incident.  In  short,  Ms.  Cook  did  not  conduct  a 
thorough  interview  of  respondent  and  was  unduly  influenced  by  student  statements  that 
proved  to  be  inconsistent  and  unreliable. 

11 

  

30. 

Respondent  has  consistently  stated  that  he  hit  ABBE  inadvertently  in  an 

attempt  to  break  his  fall  after  being  unexpectedly  hit  in  the  back  of  the  head.  Mr.  Taft 
testified  that  respondent  admitted  during  the  January  17,  2014  interview  that  he  slapped 
AQBBBBE  and  that  he  never  claimed  it  was  an  accident.  However,  respondent  told  Mr.  Taft 
that  he  grabbed  and  slapped ABB 
during  an  attempt  to  stabilize  himself  and  regain  his 
balance.  According  to  Mr.  Taft’s  record  of  the  interview,  respondent  specifically  stated  he 
swung  his  arm  in  an  attempt  stabilize  his  balance  and  that  he  slapped  ABBE  without 
malicious  intent.  Mr.  Taft  did  not  believe  respondent  was  being  truthful  during  the  January 
17,  2014  interview,  and  stated  that  respondent  never  expressed  any  remorse  for  the  incident. 

31. 

OnFebruary  3,  2014,  respondent  prepared  written  statement  in  response  to  Mr. 

explained  his  physical  disability  and  how  he 

Taft’s  memorandum  following  the  January  17,  2014,  interview.  Respondent  again  asserted 
that  he  hit  AMM  inadvertently  and  fully 
could  not  have  chased Am  and  vie  as  alleged  by  the  District  given  his  physical 
limitations.  Respondent  gave  Ms.  Cook  and  Mr.  Taft  a  consistent  account  of  what  occurred 
during  the  December  5,  2013,  incident.  Consequently,  respondent’s  testimony  regarding  his 
December  6,  2013  interview  with  Ms.  Cook,  and  his  January  17,  2014,  interview  with  Mr. 
Taft  and  Ms.  Hyland  is  found  to  be  credible  and  afforded  more  weight  than  Ms.  Cook’s  and 
Mr.  Taft’s  recollections  of  the  respective  interviews.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
respondent  intentionally  hit  or  slapped  AJ.  Rather,  respondent  inadvertently  made 
contact  with  the  student’s  face  when  grabbed  the  student  in  an  attempt  to  avoid  falling  and 
further  injuring  himself  after  being  unexpectedly  hit  from  behind  by  a  student. 

Other  Relevant  Facts 

32. 

Respondent  presented  as  a  teacher  that  is  extremely  conscientious  about  his 

profession.  His  testimony  was  forthright  and  consistent  with  the  statements  he  had  made  to 
District  representatives  during  the  District’s  investigation.  Respondent  expressed  a  sincere 
enjoyment  from  teach  and  stated  that  he  has  always  made  himself  available  to  his  students 
for  additional  help  and  tutoring  even  if  it  meant  remaining  at  school  long  after  the  school  day 
is  over.  Respondent  is  soft  spoken  and  exudes  a  gentle  demeanor  with  a  high  degree  of 
humility.  Respondent  became  extremely  emotional  when  discussing  his  physical  disability 
and  the  mobility  restrictions  he  lives  with  as  a  result  of  post  poliomyelitis  syndrome. 
Respondent  has  no  prior  history  of  any  physical  or  verbal  misconduct  involving  a  student. 
To  the  contrary,  respondent  was  described  as  being  soft  spoken  and  beloved  by  both  students 
and  teachers  alike.  Base  on  this  evidence, 

33. 

During  the  four  year  period  immediately  preceding  the  District’s  Statement  of 

Charges  and  First  Amended  Accusation.  Respondent  had  no  prior  disciplinary  history  with 
the  District. 

34. 

OnApril  23,  2012,  the  District  provided  respondent  a  Final  Performance 

Evaluation  for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  The  teacher  evaluation  indicated  that  respondent 
had  met  all  the  District  standards  of  performance  for  that  school  year.  Respondent’s  2011, 

12

   

2012,  and  2013  AGT  Reports!  showed  that  his  Chemistry  students  were  performing  above 
District  average  on  the  CST  in  all  three  years,  and  his  ICE  students  were  performing  above 
District  average  on  the  CST  in  2012,  and  just  below  District  average  on  the  CST  in  2011  and 
2013, 

35. 

By  all  accounts  respondent  has  been  a  responsible,  conscientious,  competent 
teacher  who  enjoys  teaching  students  and  appears  to  be  well  qualified  to  perform  his  duties. 
He  is  respected  amongst  teachers  and  students  at  Jefferson.  On  December  18,  2013,  several 
of  respondent  colleagues  in  the  Jefferson  science  department  submitted  a  character  reference 
on  behalf  of  respondent.  The  teachers  stated  that  for  more  than  ten  years  respondent  had 
been  one  of  the  most  distinguished  teachers  in  the  science  department.  They  praised 
respondent  for  his  highly  professional  approach  towards  faculty  and  students  and  his 
expertise  in  teaching  Chemistry  and  Integrated  Science.  They  note  that  respondent  has 
always  made  himself  available  to  students,  including  frequently  tutoring  students  after 
school.  Several  students  also  submitted  letters  on  respondent’s  behalf.  The  students 
generally  described  respondent  as  a  teacher  who  always  provided  additional  assistance  and 
was  generous  with  his  time.  He  was  overwhelmingly  described  as  a  very  conscientious  and 
effective  teacher  by  his  students. 

36. 

Respondent  was  provided  with  the  District’s  policies  and  procedures  annually, 

which  included  among  others,  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  bulletin;  the  Child 
Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  requirements;  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Ethics;  the  Bullying  and 
-  Hazing  Policy;  the  Discipline  Foundation  Policy  (positive  behavior  support  and  discipline 
plan);  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  and  the  California  Standards  for  the 
Teaching  Profession.  The  District’s  corporal  punishment  policy  specifically  defines 
“corporal  punishment”  as  the  “willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of, 
physical  pain  on  a  pupil.”  (Exh.  10.)  Under  the  District’s  child  abuse  and  neglect  policy, 
child  abuse  is  defined  in  relevant  part  as  “physical  abuse”,  which  included  “physical  injury 
(external  or  internal)  such  as  a  bruise,  welt,  burn,  or  cut  inflicted  on  a  child  by  other  than 
accidental  means  by  another  person.”  (Exh.  11.)  Child  abuse  also  includes  “willful  cruelty 
or  unjustifiable  punishment”  which  occurs  when  “any  person  willfully  causes,  inflicts  or 
permits  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental  suffering...”  upon  a  student.  (Exh.  11.) 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

1, 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof  in 
a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.)  Proof  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  requires  a  showing  that  it  is  more  likely  than  not  to  be  true. 

?  The  AGT  Reports  (Academic  Growth  over  Time)  reports  provide  data  which 

measure  the  teacher  impact  on  the  academic  growth  of  students  for  California  Standards 
Tests  (CST)  tested  subjects. 

     
13

  

  

In  other  words,  the  evidence  is  more  convincing  than  that  which  is  offered  in  opposition. 
(People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

2. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 
hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.)  When  a  school  board  recommends 
dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against 
the  dismissal;  the  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing 
probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds,  (c)(1)-(3).)  The 
Commission’s  decision  is  deemed  to  be  the  final  decision  of  the  district’s  governing  board. 
(California  Teachers  Ass’n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  331.)  A 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  the  issues  before  it,  including  whether 
dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  (/bid.,  at  p.  343.) 

Grounds  For  Dismissal 

3. 

The  District  alleged  six  causes  for  dismissal  in  the  First  Amended  Accusation 
and  Statement  of  Charges:  (a)  unprofessional  conduct,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)’;  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1), 
and  44939;  unsatisfactory  performance,  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4); 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5);  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and  willful  refusal  to 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  pursuant  to  section  44939.  The 
District  alleged  that  on  December  5,  2013,  respondent  chased  ABB  in  his  classroom, 
grabbed  the  student  by  the  back  of  his  shirt,  slapped  him  no  less  than  one  time,  and  yelled 
“don’t  you  ever  touch  me!”  or  words  to  that  effect  and  pushed  AQ  away. 

4a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  unprofessional  pursuant  to 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  |  through  36. 

4b. 

 “Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(I),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

4c. 

Here,  the  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  chased  AZ  and  intentionally  slapped  the  student.  The  evidence  established 
that  respondent  was  physically  unable  to  chase  AN because  of  his  physical  limitations 
caused  by  his  atrophied  left  leg,  leg  brace  and  the  modified  shoe  that  he  wears  as  a  result  of 
previously  having  polio  as  a  child.  The  evidence  also  established  that  respondent  was 
shocked  when  he  was  unexpectedly  hit  on  the  back  of  the  head  from  behind  by 
Respondent  turned  fast  and  awkwardly,  twisted  his  right  knee  and  lost  his  balance. 

  

*  All  further  statutory  references  shall  be  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

specified. 

14 

 

  

Respondent  then  grabbed  AI  by  the  hand  or  shirt,  the  only  student  he  saw  standing 
behind  him,  in  an  attempt  to  avoid  falling  and  to  regain  his  balance.  AJ,  who  was 
attempting  to  run  away,  pulled  away  which  further  destabilized  respondent’s  balance. 
Respondent  swung  his  other  free  hand  towards  Alf trying  to  regain  his  balance  and 
inadvertently  hit  or  slapped  AIM  in  the  face.  Respondent  did  scream  “don’t  you  ever 
touch  me”  while  turning  and  grabbing  AJ.  However,  respondent  credibly  testified  that 
his  reaction  was  triggered  by  the  shock  of  being  hit  from  behind  and  the  pain  he  experienced 
when  he  twisted  his  knee  while  awkwardly  turning.  Finally,  student  written  statements  relied 
upon  by  Ms.  Cook  during  the  District’s  investigation  revealed  that  the  students  did  not 
witness  the  entire  incident,  or  relied  upon  other  students’  versions  of  the  incident  to  prepare 
their  statements.  The  student  statements  were  determined  to  be  inconsistent  and  unreliable 
by  the  Commission. 

| 

4d. 

Although  respondent  did  not  immediately  report  the  December  5,  2013 

incident  to  school  administration,  he  provided  justifiable  reasons  for  his  delay.  Respondent 
reasonably  chose  to  begin  instruction  for  his  next  class,  which  was  already  arriving  in  the 
classroom,  and  he  did  not  want  to  leave  his  students  unsupervised.  There  was  not  a  working 
telephone  in  his  classroom  so  he  could  call  the  school  office  from  his  classroom.  As  the  day 
went  on  respondent  was  preoccupied  with  his  students  and  admittedly  forgot  the  incident. 
Respondent  attempted  to  report  the  incident  the  following  morning,  December  6,  2013,  but 
Mr.  Taft  and  the  Title  1  Coordinator  were  not  in  their  offices  when  respondent  arrived  at 
school.  Ms.  Cook  summoned  respondent  to  her  office  before  he  could  make  any  further 
attempt  to  report  the  incident.  Finally,  in  spite  of  respondent’s  decision  not  to  immediately 
report  the  incident,  the  District  does  not  allege  that  the  failure  to  report  the  incident 
constituted  unprofessional  conduct  or  a  basis  for  discipline. 

4e. 

Accordingly,  the  Commission  determined  that  respondent  did  not  commit 

unprofessional  conduct  when  he  inadvertently  hit  or  slapped  AIEEE  on  the  face  on 
December  5,  2013. 

5a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  1  through  36. 

5b. 

“Immoral  conduct,”  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939, 

has  been  defined  to  mean  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  is  sometimes  used  as 
synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of Education  of the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811 
(Weiland).)  Immoral  conduct  can  be  construed  according  to  common  usage.  “The  term 
‘immoral’  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but 
includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency, 
depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 

15 

 

inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified 
School  District  of Riverside  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972  (Hensey).) 

Sc. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
respondent  committed  immoral  conduct.  As  stated  above  in  Legal  Conclusion  4,  the 
evidence  established  that  respondent  inadvertently  slapped  or  hit  the  student  in  the  face  while 
trying  to  regain  his  balance  after  being  unexpected  hit  from  behind  by  a  student.  Thus,  the 
Commission  determined  that  the  District  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  committed  the 
alleged  conduct.  Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  committed  immoral 
conduct. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  unsatisfactory  performance 
pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  1  through  36. 

6a. 

6b. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes,  (in  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

6b. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance. 
It  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.  that  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school  districts  should 
evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for 
discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  within  his 
employing  school  district. 

6c. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent’s  performance  in  the  classroom  was  unsatisfactory  in  any  manner.  As  stated 
above  in  Legal  Conclusion  4,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  inadvertently  slapped 
or  hit  AJ  in  the  face,  and  thus  did  not  intentionally  slap  the  student  as  alleged  by  the 
District.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  has  otherwise  been  a  good  teacher  that 
has  meet  all  the  expectations  and  requirements  of  his  duties  as  a  Chemistry  and  ICS  teacher 
at  Jefferson.  His  students  typically  have  performed  at  or  above  the  District  average  for 
students  taking  the  California  Standards  Test.  Respondent  frequently  remains  after  school  to 
tutor  his  students  and  often  spends  additional  time  with  students  to  assist  in  their  learning  the 
material  in  his  class,  Respondent  is  highly  respected  by  his  peers  and  students  at  Jefferson 
and  respondent  has  no  prior  history  of  discipline  with  the  District.  Accordingly,  the 
Commission  determined  that  the  District  failed  to  show  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed 
based  upon  unsatisfactory  performance. 

16

    

Ta. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service 
pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  |  through  36. 

7b. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  provides  the  District  may 

suspend  or  dismiss  a  permanent  employee  for  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  “Evident 
unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly 
not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445  (Woodland).)  Evident  unfitness  for  services  requires  that 
unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Id.  at  1444.) 

7c. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  is  not  synonymous  with  “unprofessional 

conduct,”  and  the  term  means  clearly  not  fit  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies;  it  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not 
remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  expectations  of  the 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “Evident  unfitness”  includes  in  its  definition 
“unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  To 
terminate  the  teacher  on  grounds  of  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  it  must  also  be  established  that  the  conduct  renders  the  teacher  unfit  to 
teach.  (Morrison  y.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230.)  Thus  a 
determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on  criteria  set  forth  in 
Morrison.’  In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist  to  dismiss  a  certificated  employee  on 
the  basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be  examined,  only  the 
pertinent  ones.  (Governing  Board  vy.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384.) 

7d. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  based  upon  the  alleged  misconduct.  As  stated  in  Legal 
Conclusion  4,  respondent  did  not  chase  Aaron.  S.  in  the  classroom  or  intentionally  hit  or 
slapped  the  student.  Consequently,  the  Commission  determined  that  the  District  failed  to 
establish  that  the  alleged  misconduct  occurred.  The  District  did  not  establish  the  existence  of 
a  fixed  character  defect  or  a  temperamental  inadequacy.  The  single  inadvertent  incident  that 
occurred  on  December  5,  2013,  does  not  establish  respondent’s  evident  unfitness,  as  defined 

>  In  Morrison,  the  Supreme  Court  of  California  held  that  the  determination  of  whether 
a  person  is  fit  to  teach  must  be  based  on  an  objective  and  analytical  approach,  consisting  of  a 
review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an  assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  factors  including: 
(1)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  presence  of  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances;  (3)  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (5)  the  disruption  of  the  education 
process;  (6)  the  motive  underlying  the  conduct;  and  (7)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time 
of  the  conduct.

    

by  the  statute  and  applicable  case  law,  including  under  the  factors  established  in  Morrison. 
Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

8a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal 
to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  by  reason  of 
Factual  Findings  |  through  36. 

8b.  _  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations  under 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  require  that  the  violation  be  either  “persistent”  or 
“motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Bd.  of  Oakdale  Union 
School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents 
involving  an  issue  unresolved.  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered  persistent. 
(Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.)  Cause 
for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180- 
1181.) 

8c. 

As  stated  in  Legal  Conclusion  4,  the  Commission  determined  that  the  District 
did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proving  that  respondent  committed  the  charged  acts,  and  there  is 
no  other  evidence  that  respondent  violated  any  other  school  laws  or  regulations.  To  the 
contrary,  respondent  has  no  prior  history  of  insubordination  or  discipline  with  the  District. 
Accordingly,  the  District  failed  to  show  respondent  persistently  violated  school  laws  and 
regulations. 

9a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  pursuant  to  section  44939,  by  reason  of 
Factual  Findings  |  through  36. 

9b.  —  The  District  presented  no  evidence  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to 
perform  his  teaching  assignments  at  Jefferson.  Accordingly,  the  District  failed  to  establish 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed  on  these  grounds. 

10. 

Since  no  cause  for  discipline  exists,  complainant  having  failed  to  prove  the 

factual  allegations  in  the  First  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  factors  set 
forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  need  not  be  considered. 

Hit 

Hit 

Hd 

Mit    Hilt
      

  

ORDER 

The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  Bruno  Aghedoh  (EN  706616)  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44932  and  44939  is  not  upheld.  Accordingly,  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  First 
      
Amended  Accusation  are  hereby  dismissed.  Respondent  shall  be  reinstated  as  a  certificated 
employee  of  the  District. 

    

     

DATED:  May  4,  2015 

-  L 

Mell  |  -—— 
MICHAEL/A:  SCARLETT 
Administrativé  Law  Judge, 
Office  of/Administrative  Hearings, 

MICHAELE  SCHEERLE 
Commission  Member 

         

RAW ANDREEIEWSRT— 
ee
Commission  Me 

  

  

