  

BEFORE  THE  COMMISSION 
ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

ANITA  CASTRO,  a  Permanent  Certificated 
Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2014050304 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 
in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  April  20,  21,  22,  23,  27,  28,  29,  and  30,  2015,  May  4,  5,  6  and 
7,  2015,  June  8,  9,  10,  25,  and  26,  2015  and  September  28  and  29,  2015.  The  Commission 
consists  of  the  following  members:  Jan  Miller,  teacher,  Ryan  Hickman,  teacher  and  Glynda 
B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who  presided. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District  or  Complainant)  was  represented  by 

Ejlen  Wu,  Attorney  at  law.  Respondent  Anita  Castro  (Respondent)  was  self-represented  and 
assisted  by  her  brother,  Frank  Castro,  who  served  as  her  note-taker.  Rulings  on  motions  were 
made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  The  exhibits  and  transcripts  were  sealed  to  protect 
the  privacy  of  the  students  because  redaction  was  not  practical. 

The  Accusation  in  this  matter  was  filed  on  May  14,  2014.  Respondent's  May  22,  2015 

motion  for  Leave  to  Amend  the  Accusation  to  Conform  to  Proof  was  granted  on  June  25,  2015, 
after  briefing,  and  over  Complainant’s  objection.  Complainant's  motion  to  amend  the  Amended 
Accusation  by  interlineation  was  also  granted  without  opposition.  The  Amended  Accusation 
was  amended  on  page  9,  line  3,  to  replace  "November  12"  with  "November  13",  and  on  page 
10,  line  25,  to  replace  "February  1,  2013"  with  "March  14,  2013." 
evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  concluded  on  September  29,  2015,  except  for  the 
submission  of  closing  briefs.  At  the  request  of  the  parties,  the  record  remained  open  until 
October  14,  2015  for  the  submission  of  written  closing  briefs.  Complainant  timely  filed  a 
closing  brief  which  was  marked  and  received  as  exhibit  100.  On  October  15,  2015,  Respondent 
filed  a  request  for  extension  of  time  to  submit  her  closing  brief  which  was  granted  over 
objection.  The  matter  was  reopened  on  October  15,  2015,  to  permit  Respondent  to  file  a  closing 
brief  before  1:00  p.m.  on  October  16,  2015,  Respondent  filed  her  closing  brief  late  and 
accordingly,  the  brief  was  not  considered  because  it  was  untimely.  The  matter  was  resubmitted 
on  October  16,  2015. 

Oral  and  documentary 

 

  

SUMMARY  OF  DECISION 

The  issue  before  the  Commission  is  whether  to  uphold  District's  decision  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  her  permanent  position  as  a  certificated  employee. 

Complainant  contends  that  Respondent,  a  physical  education  teacher,  must  be 
dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  certificated  employee  because  she  is  an  unfit  teacher  who 
was  verbally  abusive  to  the  students  and  other  staff,  made  racists  comments  to  students,  and 
failed  to  provide  appropriate  instruction  to  her  students,  manage  her  class  and  follow 
directives  from  her  supervisors.  Complainant  also  contends  that  despite  assistance  and 
guidance,  Respondent  failed  to  improve  her  performance. 

Respondent  contends  that  she  was  treated  unfairly  by  the  District  when  she  was 

moved  from  local  district  8  near  her  home,  to  John  Muir  Middle  School  (John  Muir),  and 
later  to  Barack  Obama  Global  Preparatory  School,  both  in  local  district  7.  Respondent 
further  contends  that  she  was  subjected  to  humiliation,  verbal  and  physical  threats,  and  injury 
by  students,  staff  and  a  parent.  Respondent  also  contends  that  she  provided  appropriate 
instruction  to  her  students. 

Respondent  denies  making  the  racists  comments  and  most  of  the  other  statements 

attributed  to  her.  Finally,  Respondent  asserts  that  despite  the  lack  of  administrative  support 
and  resources  at  both  schools,  she  provided  her  students  with  appropriate  physical  education 
instruction  and  managed  her  class  to  the  extent  possible  without  administrative  support. 

The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive  session.  After  due  consideration 
of  the  record,  the  Commission  determined  that  although  Respondent's  teaching  performance 
could  be  improved,  she  did  not  make  the  racist  statements  attributed  to  her,  she  is  not  unfit  to 
teach,  and  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent.  On  the  contrary,  Respondent 
performed  as  well  as  could  be  expected  of  any  teacher  faced  with  the  extremely  challenging 
behaviors  from  staff,  students,  and  parents,  without  benefit  of  administrative  support. 
Accordingly,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and 
order  dismissing  the  Accusation  and  Charges  and  reinstating  Respondent. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

The  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Justo  H. 

Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District. 

On  April  22,  2014,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the  District's 

intention  to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  she  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  submitted  a 
timely  demand  for  a  hearing. 

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges,  dated  April  3,  2014,  and  the  Accusation,  dated 
May  14,  2014,  recommended  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  District  for  the  following 

2    

legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1)  unprofessional  conduct; 
(2)  immoral  conduct;  (3)  dishonesty;  (4)  unsatisfactory  performance,  (5)  evident  unfitness 
for  service;  (6)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  employing  Respondent;  and  (7) 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  described  by 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district. 

4, 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

Background  Information 

5. 

Respondent  received  her  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  and  single  subject  physical 

education  teaching  credential  from  California  State  University,  Long  Beach.  Respondent 
started  her  employment  with  the  District  as  a  substitute  teacher  more  than  20  years  ago  with 
an  emergency  credential.  Respondent  is  a  certificated  permanent  employee.  At  the  end  of 
the  2009-2010  school  year,  Respondent  signed  a  voluntary  displacement  request  which 
resulted  in  her  reassignment  from  the  Ellen  Ochoa  Learning  Center  in  local  district  8  to 
Wilmington  Middle  School,  also  in  local  district  8,  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  In  the 
spring  of  2011,  Respondent  was  notified  by  the  District  that  she  would  be  displaced  from 
Wilmington  Middle  School  for  the  following  school  year  (2011-2012)  because  of  staffing 
needs  and  consistent  with  the  voluntary  displacement  form  she  had  signed  the  prior  year. 
Respondent  was  initially  placed  at  Carnegie  Middle  School  (Carnegie)  in  local  district  8, 
near  her  home,  for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  She  was  pleased  with  the  assignment  and 
hoped  to  stay  at  Carnegie.  Respondent  had  hoped  and  expected  that  she  would  be  transferred 
to  a  school  within  local  district  8.  A  few  days  into  the  2011-2012  school  year,  Respondent 
was  notified  that  she  would  be  reassigned  effective  immediately  to  John  Muir  Middle  School 
(John  Muir)  in  local  district  7'  for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Respondent  and  the 
administrator  at  Carnegie  questioned  the  move  and  asked  District  administrators  to  allow 
Respondent  to  stay  at  Carnegie.  The  request  was  denied  and  Respondent  was  required  to 
report  immediately  to  John  Muir  in  local  district  7  on  September  12,  2011.  The  change  in 
work  site  required  Respondent  to  commute  in  traffic  for  up  to  two  hours  each  morning. 

if 

i 

it 

’  At  the  time,  the  District  had  divided  itself  internally  into  8  geographic  "districts." 

Each  of  those  8  districts  had  its  own  district  superintendent  who  worked  under  the  direction 
of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District's  overall  Superintendent  of  Schools. 

3 

 

  

John  Muir  Middle  School  2011-2012  school  year 

6. 

John  Muir  was  a  newly  "reconstituted"  school.  This  meant  that  the  District 

had  released  all  teachers  from  the  prior  school  year,  replaced  the  administrators,  and  hired  a 
new  staff  of  teachers.  Nisha  Dugal  was  transferred  to  John  Muir  to  serve  as  the  principal 
after  having  previously  served  as  principal  of  Manual  Arts  High  School.  Principal  Dugal 
began  her  position  the  summer  before  school  started.  Her  tasks  included  hiring  a  new  staff 
of  teachers  and  administrators.  Some  of  the  teachers  that  had  previously  worked  at  the 
school  were  re-hired.  Others  were  hired  from  a  District-provided  list  of  available  teachers. 
A  group  of  unassigned  teachers  "displaced"  from  other  schools  designated  as  "pool  teachers" 
were  placed  on  the  John  Muir  campus  to  serve  as  substitute  teachers  and  extra  staff  for  the 
campus.  Respondent  became  a  “pool  teacher"  when  she  was  reassigned  to  John  Muir. 
Respondent  arrived  on  the  John  Muir  campus  on  October  17,  2011,  after  the  initial  staff 
meetings  and  instruction  had  already  taken  place.  (Exhibit  8.)  She  was  not  greeted, 
acknowledged,  or  treated  as  a  member  of  the  staff.  Respondent  was  instructed  to  either  sit  in 
the  office  or  in  the  school  library  until  and  unless  needed.  Respondent  felt  humiliated  by  the 
situation.  Although  John  Muir  teachers  had  time  cards  that  were  used  to  show  the  time  they 
arrived  and  departed,  Respondent  was  not  given  a  time  card  during  the  time  she  served  as  a 
"pool  teacher"  and  no  contemporaneous  record  of  her  attendance  was  kept  by  John  Muir  staff 
until  she  was  later  assigned  to  a  permanent  position  as  a  physical  education  teacher  on 
October  28,  2011.  Sometime  in  November  of  2011,  Respondent  was  asked  to  sign  blank 
time  cards  for  prior  months.  Respondent's  original  time  cards  were  not  offered  as  evidence 
at  the  administrative  hearing. 

7. 

Principal  Dugal  instituted  a  procedure  at  John  Muir  wherein  all  time  cards 

were  removed  from  the  front  desk  and  replaced  with  a  "late  book"  that  teachers  were 
required  to  sign  if  they  arrived  less  than  15  minutes  before  the  start  of  the  school  day.  In 
those  instances,  teachers  were  not  allowed  to  check  in  using  their  time  cards  and  instead  were 
required  to  sign  the  "late  book."  The  "late  book"  was  not  offered  as  evidence  in  the 
administrative  hearing. 

8. 

Respondent  acknowledges  that  she  was  tardy  on  several  occasions  during  her 

first  weeks  at  the  school  due  to  her  lack  of  familiarity  with  the  traffic  patterns  and  her  long 
commute.  Respondent  was  also  at  the  District  office  on  a  few  occasions  resulting  in  her 
arriving  late  to  John  Muir.  Respondent  called  the  office  and  reported  her  estimated  time  of 
arrival  on  the  days  she  was  tardy.  The  dates  of  these  absences  and  tardies  were  not 
established  by  the  evidence. 

9. 

On  October  28,  2011,  Principal  Dugal  held  a  conference  with  Respondent.  At 

the  conference,  Principal  Dugal  advised  Respondent  that  Respondent  had  been  marked 
absent  on  September  19,  2011,  and  on  October  4,  6,  18,  19,  and  21,  2011.  Principal  Dugal 
also  noted  that  Respondent  had  been  marked  tardy  on  September  28  and  30,  2011,  and 
October  3,  5,  10,  25,  and  27,  2011.  Principal  Dugal  noted  that  the  District  Attendance  policy 
requires  regular  attendance,  because  frequent  absences  negatively  impact  the  instructional 
program,  and  excessive  absences  and  tardies  set  a  poor  example  for  students,  are  a  poor 

4 

 

  

  

reflection  on  the  school,  and  undermine  confidence  in  the  school.  Principal  Dugal  also  told 
Respondent  to  allow  more  time  for  her  commute.  She  directed  Respondent  to: 
main  office  by  7:30  a.m.  on  any  day  of  absence;  (2)  bring  verification  for  any  future 
absences;  and  (3)  enroll  in,  complete,  and  submit  verification  of  completion  of  the  District 
Absence  Management  Class  by  November  18,  2015.  Respondent  disputed  that  she  was 
absent  and  tardy  on  all  of  the  specified  dates  and  advised  Principal  Dugal  that  she  would 
respond  in  writing. 

(1)  notify  the 

10. 

Principal  Dugal  issued  a  conference  memorandum  dated  October  28,  2011, 
summarizing  the  conference.  In  the  memorandum,  Principal  Dugal  wrote  that  any  written 
response  should  be  made  by  November  4,  2011.  (Exhibit  3.) 

11. 

On  November  3,  2011  Respondent  replied  to  the  conference  memorandum.  In 

her  response,  she  explained  that  she  had  been  instructed  not  to  call  the  substitute  desk 
because  she  was  a  "pool  teacher"  and  that  there  had  been  no  answer  in  the  main  school  office 
until  after  7:40  a.m.  She  also  noted  that  her  absences  occurred  prior  to  assignment  to  a 
regular  teaching  assignment  on  October  28,  2011,  and  did  not  impact  the  instructional 
program  because  she  was  only  performing  tasks  as  assigned. 

12. 

Complainant  did  not  provide  original  time  cards  or  any  contemporaneously 

prepared  time  records.  Instead,  a  summary  and  chart  prepared  by  Principal  Dugal  was 
offered  as  evidence  to  support  the  allegations  of  excessive  absences  and  tardies.  The 
Commission  gave  the  charts  and  summary  little  weight  because  Complainant  failed  to  prove 
that  the  data  that  Principal  Dugal  used  to  prepare  the  summary  and  chart  was  accurate  and 
reliable.  Respondent  successfully  challenged  Principal  Dugal’s  data  by  providing  copies  of 
time  cards  that  conflicted  with  the  summary  and  chart. 

13. 

|  After  Respondent  was  placed  in  a  regular  physical  education  assignment, 

Principal  Dugal  received  complaints  from  some  of  the  African-American  female  students 
about  comments  Respondent  allegedly  made  to  them.  There  were  a  few  groups  of  girls  that 
regularly  complained  about  Respondent  and  made  allegations  that  Respondent  made  racist 
and  demeaning  statements  to  them.  Principal  Dugal  did  not  investigate  the  allegations,  but 
assumed  them  to  be  true,  and  encouraged  the  students  to  continue  reporting  any  such 
comments  made  by  Respondent. 

14. 

Respondent  felt  under  siege  during  her  tenure  at  John  Muir.  The  students  were 
openly  disrespectful,  threatened  teachers,  disobeyed  school  rules,  and  used  profanity  directed 
at  teachers  on  a  regular  basis  without  disciplinary  consequences.  Principal  Dugal  made  it 
clear  that  she  expected  the  teachers  to  handle  the  students  without  sending  them  to  the  office. 
The  physical  education  area  was  a  particularly  difficult  area  to  monitor  because  students 
from  other  classes  often  tried  to  "ditch"  class  there.  To  ensure  student  safety,  the  teachers 
were  required  to  monitor  the  locker  rooms  and  the  blacktop,  in  addition  to  their  own  classes. 
After  Respondent  was  hired  as  a  physical  education  teacher,  a  second  teacher,  Gina  Holmes, 
was  also  hired.  Initially,  Respondent  and  Ms.  Holmes  worked  well  together.  However,  the 
relationship  soured  and  eventually  the  two  teachers  were  not  speaking  to  each  other.  Ms. 

5 

 

Holmes  and  Respondent  were  frequently  at  odds  about  whose  responsibility  it  was  on  a  given 
day  to  monitor  the  locker  room  or  the  students  on  the  blacktop  and  about  the  presence  of  Ms. 
Holmes’  students  in  Respondent's  class  area.  Respondent  complained  that  Ms.  Holmes' 
students  were  fréquently  mixing  into  Respondent's  classes  and  were  unsupervised. 

15.  |  Respondent  had  heated  exchanges  with  students  from  Ms.  Holmes  class.  Ms. 

Holmes  saw  what  she  believed  to  be  a  rift  between  the  African-American  students  and  Latino 
students  and  teachers.  She  became  the  confidant  for  the  African-American  female  students 
and  encouraged  them  to  report  any  comments  they  found  offensive.  Ms.  Holmes  did  not 
challenge  student  behavior  and  allowed  her  students  to  wander  about  the  physical  education 
area  and  disrupt  Respondent's  class. 

16. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Holmes  presented  as  having  a  bias  against  Respondent.  She 
refused  to  look  at  the  Respondent  while  testifying  even  asking  the  court  on  one  occasion  if 
she  was  required  to  look  at  Respondent  during  her  testimony.  Ms.  Holmes  openly  displayed 
contempt  and  disgust  for  Respondent.  Ms.  Holmes  acknowledged  that  she  had  never  heard 
Respondent  make  any  racist  or  race-related  statements  to  students.  She  had  observed,  and 
did  not  like,  that  Respondent  always  seemed  to  be  loud  and  yelling  about  something.  Ms. 
Holmes’s  testimony  conflicted  with  the  more  credible  testimony  of  teacher  Anthony 
Catanzaretti  and  proctor  Gloria  Caro  who  were  not  directly  involved  in  the  dispute  between 
Ms.  Holmes  and  Respondent.  Mr.  Catanzaretti  and  Ms.  Caro  never  heard  such  comments 
and  had  witnessed  Ms.  Holmes  allow  her  students  to  go  to  Respondent's  class  and  be 
verbally  and  physically  aggressive  with  Respondent.  Ms.  Holmes’  uncorroborated  testimony 
that  she  had  heard  the  Respondent  mumbling  "I  hate  black  people"  as  she  walked  behind 
Respondent  was  not  credible  based  upon  her  demeanor  and  apparent  bias. 

17.  Jas  a  student  in  Respondent's  physical  education  class  in  the  2011- 

2012  school  year.  She  was  the  only  student  witness  offered  to  support  Complainant's 
allegations  that  Respondent  made  racist  and  inappropriate  statements  to  students.  The 
commission  did  not  find  J's  uncorroborated  testimony  credible.  J's 
testimony  was  inconsistent  and  her  memory  was  selective  about  the  details  of  her 
interactions  with  Respondent.  While  Respondent  had  a  vague  recollection  of  comments 
made  by  Respondent,  she  had  no  memory  of  the  context  in  which  the  comments  were  made. 
WERE  testified  that  Respondent's  physical  education  class  was  out  of  control  within  the 
first  three  weeks.  She  felt  that  Respondent  had  a  bad  attitude  toward  the  class  and  the 
students  had  a  bad  attitude  toward  Respondent.  J)  acknowledged  having  a  bad 
attitude,  starting  fights,  misbehaving  and  challenging  teachers  on  a  regular  basis  while  a 
student  at  John  Muir.  She  also  acknowledged  that  she  did  not  like  Respondent.  According 
to  MA,  Respondent  yelled  often,  used  the  word  "Bitch"  on  several  occasions,  and 
commented  "Black  Kids  are  stupid,”  "Black  kids  are  from  the  ‘hood  and  are  not  going 
anywhere"  and  told  JM  to  “get  your  ass  out  of  my  class.”  J 
continuation  school  as  a  result  of  her  behavior  and  poor  performance  in  school. 

now  attends  a 

 

18. 

On  December  9,  2011,  Principal  Dugal  held  another  conference  with 

Respondent  and  her  union  representative  in  which  she  advised  Respondent  that  in  addition  to 
the  previously  noted  absences  and  tardies,  Respondent  had  been  absent  on  November  13,  16, 
17,  and  December  5,  2011,  for  a  total  of  12  absences,  and  on  November  8,  9,  November  28, 
and  December  6,  through  December  9,  2011,  for  a  total  of  16  tardies.  Principal  Dugal_ also 
advised  Respondent  of  the  following  complaints  made  by  students: 

On  November  15,  2011  Sj  M.,  REE  L.,  and 

W.  alleged  that 

mn 

said  "SJ  M.  is  a  man."  and 

G.,  Sj  M,  KG  J.,  and 

A.  alleged  that  [Respondent]  said  "where  do  black  people  get  their 

   
attitude  from;" 

| 

On  November  30,  2011  AM  J.  alleged  that  [Respondent]  told  her  to  "shut 
up",  SEB  R.  alleged  that  [Respondent]  said  "what  did  you  say  you  stupid 
little  girl,"  and  TJ  G.  alleged  that  [Respondent]  said  "I'm  sorry  that  you 
don't  have  no  mother  to  take  care  of  you,"  "you  all  black  kids  don't  have  any 
parents"  and  "I  don't  like  you,  you're  a  butt  kisser  and  I  don't  like  butt  kissers;" 
and 

On  December  1,  2011,  SJ  M.  alleged  that  [Respondent]  told  her  to  "shut 
up."  (Exhibit  4.) 

19.‘ 

Principal  Dugal  referred  Respondent  to  the  District  policies  including  its: 

Attendance  Policy;  Employee  Code  of  Ethics;  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  and  Board 
Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons  and  the  Standard  for  Creating  and 
Maintaining  Effective  Environments  for  Student  Learning. 

20. 

Respondent  denied  making  the  alleged  statements  to  students,  disputed  the 

attendance  issues,  and  stated  that  she  would  further  respond  in  writing. 

At  the  conference  and  in  a  written  memorandum,  Principal  Dugal  directed 

| 

a. 

Notify  the  main  office  by  7:30  a.m.  on  the  day  of  any  absence; 

Bring  verification  of  any  future  absences  or  she  would  not  be  paid  until  receipt 

c. 

Enroll  in,  complete,  and  submit  a  verification  of  completion  of  the  District 

Absence  Management  Class  by  December  16,  2011; 

d. 

Not  retaliate  against  any  student  who  provided  information  regarding  the 

21. 
Respondent  to: 

b. 
of  verification; 

allegations; 

 

e, 

Not  make  statements  or  comments,  either  directly  or  in  the  presence  of 

students,  which  are  not  professional  or  which  may  be  considered  harassing  or  demeaning 
nature;  and 

f. 

Refrain  from  using  negative  or  disrespectful  language  around  students  and  or 

staff  members.  (Exhibit  4.) 

22. 

Principal  Dugal  also  warned  that  if  Respondent  were  to  be  evaluated  at  that 

time,  she  would  rank  her  performance  as  below  standard.  (Exhibit  4.) 

23. 

On  December  13,  2011,  student  N{J  M.  struck  Respondent  with  a  rock. 

Respondent  attempted  to  get  assistance  from  school  police  and  to  make  a  report  of  the 
incident,  but  was  not  given  any  assistance  by  the  school  police  or  administration.  (Exhibit  R 
137) 

24. 

On  December  16,  2011,  Respondent  replied  to  Principal  Dugal's 
memorandum.  In  her  reply,  Respondent  denied  the  allegations  made  by  the  students  set  forth 
in  the  December  9,  2011  memorandum.  Respondent  described  the  December  13,  2011, 
attack  by  N@J  M.  and  her  attempts  to  obtain  assistance.  She  notified  Principal  Dugal  that 
she  was  fearful  for  her  own  safety  and  had  not  received  any  assistance  from  the 
administration  despite  multiple  requests  for  assistance.  Respondent  reported  she  did  not 
have  technical  support  to  use  the  computers  for  attendance  and  had  only  recently  been 
provided  with  a  form  for  office  referrals.  Respondent  disputed  the  accuracy  of  school 
attendance  records.  (Exhibit  RESP  116.) 

25. 

Beginning  in  October  of  2011,  Respondent  regularly  sent  notes,  hand- 
delivered  by  proctor  Gloria  Caro,  to  Assistant  Principal  Alfie  Enciso,  her  immediate 
supervisor,  notifying  him  of  vulgar  and  threatening  comments  and  actions  by  students.  She 
identified  the  students,  dates,  and  times  of  the  comments.  In  response  to  her  complaints,  Mr. 
Enciso  visited  Respondent's  class  on  numerous  occasions.  He  instructed  Respondent  not  to 
send  students  that  refused  to  dress  for  physical  education  to  the  school  office.  Instead, 
Respondent  was  to  call  their  parents  and  have  parent  conferences.  As  documented  in 
Respondent’s  notes  to  Mr.  Enciso,  many  of  the  students  who  had  alleged  Respondent  made 
inappropriate  comments  to  them,  had  in  fact  made  vulgar  or  threatening  remarks  to 
Respondent. 

26. 

On  January  19,  2012,  Principal  Dugal  had  another  conference  with 

Respondent.  At  the  conference,  Principal  Dugal  discussed  Respondent's  failure  to  submit 
verification  of  completion  of  the  District  Absence  Management  Class  by  December  16,  2011, 
as  previously  instructed.  Respondent  explained  to  Principal  Dugal  that  she  had  completed 
the  class,  but  did  not  know  how  to  print  out  the  verification  and  had  asked  for  assistance. 
Principal  Dugal  again  instructed  Respondent  to  submit  the  verification,  and  in  writing 

~  reminded  her,  as  she  had  before,  that  had  she  been  evaluated  at  that  time,  she  would  receive  a 
below  standard  performance  evaluation.  Principal  Dugal  summarized  the  conference  in  a 
memorandum  dated  January  19,  2013.  (Exhibit  5.) 

8 

 

  

  

27. 

On  January  31,  2012,  Respondent  was  sent  home  from  work  without 

explanation  while  an  investigation  was  conducted  about  female  student  RI  L.’s  allegation 
that  Respondent  used  her  elbow  to  strike  RJ  L.  Respondent  returned  to  work  the 
following  day,  February  1,  2012,  after  the  allegations  were  deemed  unsubstantiated. 

28. 

On  February  2,  2012,  Principal  Dugal  held  a  conference  with  Respondent. 

Also  present  were  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  and  Respondent's  colleague,  Anthony 
Catanzeritti,  who  attended  at  her  request.  At  the  conference,  Principal  Dugal  advised 
Respondent  that  on  November  30,  2012, 
L.  alleged  that  Respondent  thrust  her  elbow 
into  Rj  L's  face.  That  same  day,  Se  en  M.  alleged  that  Respondent  said  to  him 
"you  need  to  go  fucking  cry  to  your  daddy."  Respondent  denied  the  allegations  and  advised 
Principal  Dugal  that  she  would  respond  in  writing.  Principal  Dugal  again  referred 
Respondent  to  the  District  bulletins  and  policies  and  reiterated  the  directives  she  had 
previously  given.  Principal  Dugal  summarized  the  conference  in  a  memorandum  dated 
February  2,  2012.  (Exhibit  7.) 

. 

29. 

Also  on  February  2,  2012,  an  incident  occurred  in  the  physical  education  area 

In  front  of  students,  referring  to  RJ  L.,  Respondent 

when  Ms.  Holmes’  student,  RJ  L.,  left  Ms.  Holmes  class  and  lingered  in  the  area  of 
Respondent's  class  area  on  the  black  top.  Respondent  asked  RM  L.  to  leave,  but  she  did 
not.  Also,  at  the  same  time,  student Na  M.,  also  not  Respondent's  student,  lingered  in 
her  class  area.  Respondent  became  frustrated  seeing  the  two  students  back  in  her  class. 
Respondent  calied  to  the  other  physical  education  teachers  and  Assistant  Principal  Gonzales 
who  was  in  the  immediate  area. 
shouted  “how  can  I  have  a  student  that  has  falsely  accused  me  back  in  my  class.” 
Respondent  also  shouted  to  her  colleagues  that  "administration  was  doing  nothing  to  help" 
with  reference  to  N§J  M.  Teacher  Anthony  Catanzaretti  and  another  male  physical 
education  teacher  went  to  Respondent's  aid.  They  directed  N§j  M.  to  leave  the  area,  but 
he  refused.  Assistant  Principal  Gonzalez  stood  on  the  perimeter  of  the  physical  education 
area,  but  did  nothing  to  assist  the  teachers.  When  Assistant  Principal  Gonzalez  approached 
Respondent,  she  told  him  that  she  would  not  remain  in  the  area  if  student  NJ  M. 
remained  in  the  area.  Respondent  was  very  upset  and  left  the  class  leaving  Assistant 
Principal  Gonzales  in  charge  of  the  students. 

30. 

Respondent's  colleague,  teacher  Anthony  Catanzaretti  testified  on  her  behalf. 
He  credibly  testified  that  he  found  John  Muir  to  be  completely  out  of  control.  He  found  the 
administration  offered  no  support  to  teachers  and  there  were  no  consequences  for  student 
misbehavior.  He  reported  that  students  threatened  his  life  and  students  regularly  cursed  at 
_  teachers  without  disciplinary  consequences.  He  also  testified  about  an  incident  in  which  a 
parent  punched  a  teacher.  Mr.  Catanzaretti  was  in  Respondent's  vicinity  often  and  never 
heard  her  make  any  inappropriate  or  racist  remarks  to  students.  Mr.  Catanzaretti  opined  that 
Respondent  was  a  good  teacher  facing  challenging  circumstances  at  John  Muir.  According 
to  Mr.  Catanzaretti,  Ms.  Holmes  was  not  a  motivated  teacher  and  often  allowed  her  students 
to  do  whatever  they  wanted,  including  disrupting  Respondent's  class.  He  found  the 
environment  at  John  Muir  to  be  very  stressful.  Mr.  Catanzaretti  was  injured  when  two 

| 

 

students  trampled  him  to  exit  the  gym  and  did  not  finish  the  school  year.  He  did  not  return  to 
John  Muir. 

| 

31. 

Gloria  Caro,  the  school  proctor,  was  often  stationed  in  the  physical  education 

_area  for  extra  supervision.  She  corroborated  Mr.  Catanzaretti's  testimony  about  the 
demeanor  and  behavior  of  John  Muir  students.  She  frequently  saw  Ms.  Holmes  allow  her 
students  to  wander  throughout  the  physical  education  area  and  disrupt  Respondent's  class. 
Ms.  Caro  assisted  Respondent  by  hand-delivering  her  notes  and  student  referrals  to  Assistant 
Principal  Enciso. 

32. 

Once  the  students  sensed  that  Respondent  did  not  have  the  support  of  the 
administration,  her  predicament  worsened.  She  lost  control  of  the  students  and  became 
concerned  for  her  safety.  Respondent's  boyfriend,  Andrew  Corral,  drove  her  to  work  each 
day,  picked  her  up  from  work,  escorted  her  to  the  campus,  and  spent  many  days  observing 
Respondent  from  positions  both  on  and  off  the  campus.  He  identified  himself  as 
Respondent's  husband  and  was  frequently  allowed  on  the  campus,  as  such.  Respondent  was 
fearful  for  her  safety,  but  needed  her  job,  so  she  continued  working  at  John  Muir  while  trying 
to  work  through  union  channels  to  transfer  to  another  school  closer  to  her  home. 

33. 

On  February  28,  2012,  Respondent  was  injured  by  two  students.  One 
intentionally  ran  into  her  trying  to  knock  her  down  and  another  kicked  a  ball  hitting 
Respondent  on  the  side  of  the  head.  She  reported  the  incidents  to  the  school  administration, 
but  Principal  Dugal  discounted  the  incidents.  As  a  result  of  the  incidents,  Respondent  was 
absent  from  work  for  the  period  of  February  29,  2012  through  March  6,  2012.  Respondent 
did  not  want  the  students  prosecuted,  but  did  want  the  incidents  noted  by  school  police. 
Respondent,  Counselor  Ramona  Fletcher  and  an  officer  from  the  District  police  met  to 
discuss  the  incidents  on  March  12,  2012.  District  treated  the  incidents  solely  as  a  workers' 
compensation  matter.  Principal  Dugal  wrote  a  memorandum  dated  March  12,  2012, 
summarizing  the  meeting.  (Exhibit  10.) 

34. 

On  April  16,  2012,  Principal  Dugal  held  another  conference  with  Respondent. 

In  the  conference,  Principal  Dugal  informed  Respondent  that  her  records  showed  that 
Respondent  had  24  absences  and  18  tardies.  Respondent  disputed  the  accuracy  of  the 
records  and  asserted  that  she  would  respond  in  writing.  Principal  Dugal  admonished 
Respondent  about  her  attendance  and  directed  Respondent  to  turn  in  lessons  plans  for 
substitutes  directly  to  Principal  Dugal.  She  also  directed  Respondent  to  maintain  lesson 
plans  for  substitutes,  call  the  office  before  4:00  p.m.  to  have  a  substitute  "held  over,”  and  call 
before  7:30  a.m.  to  notify  the  office  of  an  absence.  Principal  Dugal  summarized  the 
conference  in  a  memorandum  dated  April  16,  2012.  (Exhibit  11.) 

_ 

35. 

On  April  16,  2012,  Principal  Dugal  also  issued  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  for  three  days  based  upon  on  the  charge  that 
on  February  2,  2012  Respondent  retaliated  against  student  RAJ  L.,  by  yelling  out  "How  can 
[  have  a  student  that  has  falsely  accused  me  back  in  my  class"  and  "Administration  is  doing 
nothing  to  protect  me."  The  Notice  stated  that  the  allegations  constituted  poor  judgment, 

10 

 

  

failure  to  follow  district  policies  and a  failure  to  follow  an  administrative  directive.  As  a 
result,  Respondent  was  suspended  for  three  days  without  pay.  (Exhibits  13  and  14.) 

36. 

On  April  20,  2012,  Respondent  filed  a  request  for  an  immediate  transfer  to  any 

other  middle  school  or  high  school  in  the  District.  Principal  Dugal  approved  the  request. 

37. 

On  April  23,  2012,  Respondent  reported  to  the  administration  that  Student 

REM  L.  came  into  her  office  cursing  and  threatening  her,  then  followed  her  to  class  taunting 
her  along  the  way,  cursing  at  her  in  front  of  students,  and  mocking  her  when  she  called  to 
proctor  Gloria  Caro  for  assistance. 

38. 

Assistant  Principal  Enciso  was  Respondent's  direct  supervisor.  She  often 

complained  to  him  about  the  discipline  problems  in  her  classes  and  the  general  bad  behavior 
of  several  groups  of  students.  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  conducted  multiple  classroom 
observations  during  the  period  of  January  12,  2012,  to  March  14,  2012,  and  went  to 
Respondent's  classroom  to  assist  with  discipline  issues  on  nine  occasions  between  January 
12,  2012,  and  April  21,  2012. 

| 

: 

39. 

On  May  4,  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  held  a  conference  with 

Respondent.  Also  in  attendance  were  Assistant  Principal  Ed  Gonzalez  and  a  union 
representative.  At  that  time,  Assistant  Principal  Enciso,  advised  Respondent  of  allegations 
made  by  several  students  against  her.  Specifically,  Mr.  Enciso  reported  the  following 
statements. 

a. 

On  April  11,  2012,  Respondent  "got  up"  in  MQ  H.'s  face  and  yelled  "That's 

why  nobody  likes  you!" 

b. 

On  April  17,  2012, iw  R.  and Ha  R.  alleged  that  Respondent  pushed 

Ham  R.  and  broke  his  earphones. 

c. 

On  April  19,  2012, 

7  A.  alleged  that  Respondent  told  a  group  of  African 

American  girls  in  the  5th  period  class  that  "That's  why  I  don't  like  dealing  with  black  kids 
like  you...” 

d. 

Students  CJ  C.  and J 

M.  also  alleged  that  Respondent  told  them  to 

"Shut  up"  which  caused  them  to  leave  class. 

e, 

On  April  20,  2012,  Student  Cj  V.  alleged  that  Respondent  said  "Black 
students  are  the  ones  that  cause  the  problems  anyway"  and  "Black  girls  are  only  used  for 
opening  their  legs." 

On  April  20,  2012,  Student  AM  J.  alleged  that  Respondent  said  "This  is 

why  I  can't  deal  with  black  kids." 

students  are 

On  April  20,  2012,  Student  AM  B.  alleged  that  Respondent  said  "Black 
the  one  that  cause  problems  anyway." 

f. 

g. 

11 

 

h. 

On  April  26,  2012,  Student  TIJ  M.  alleged  that  while  Respondent  was 

screaming  and  arguing  with  another  student,  Respondent  said  that  "[I]  don't  like  black  kids." 

40.  |  Respondent  denied  the  allegations  and  asserted  that  she  would  respond  in 

writing.  There  was  no  evidence  that  Mr.  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  investigated  the 
allegations  or  that  the  allegations  were  true.  Instead,  he  accepted  the  student  allegations  as 
true.  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  summarized  the  conference  in  a  memorandum  dated  May  4, 
2012.  (Exhibit  14.) 

41. 

On  May  5,  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Enciso  collapsed  on  campus  and  later 

died.  After  Mr.  Enciso's  death,  Principal  Dugal  reviewed  his  files  pertaining  to  Respondent 
and  her  own  conference  memorandum.  Principal  Dugal  had  never  conducted  an  observation 
of  Respondent's  class  and  had  never  visited  Respondent's  class.  Her  practice  was  to  delegate 
classroom  observations  to  her  assistant  principals.  On  May  15,  2012,  Principal  Dugal 
prepared  an  evaluation  of  Respondent.  She  contacted  Respondent  about  several  meeting 
dates  and  Respondent  agreed  to  meet  with  her  on  May  18,  2012  about  the  evaluation. 
Respondent  did  not  attend  the  scheduled  meeting.  Principal  Dugal  issued  the  Below 
Standard  Evaluation  without  a  conference  on  May  21,  2012.. 

42. 

In  the  evaluation,  Principal  Dugal  rated  Respondent  as  meeting  performance 

standards  in  three  of  five  areas  of  Section  1  (Support  for  Student  Learning)  and  needing 
improvement  in  two  areas.  Principal  Dugal  rated  Respondent  as  meeting  performance 
standards  in  three  of  five  areas  of  Section  2(Planning  and  Designing  Instruction)  and  needing 
improvement  in  two  areas.  Principal  Dugal  rated  Respondent  as  meeting  performance 
standards  in  one  of  six  areas  of  section  3  (Classroom  Performance)  and  needing 
improvement  in  four  areas  and  not  meeting  standards  in  the  area  3c.  (establishes  and 
maintains  standards  for  student  behavior  and  creates  a  climate  that  promotes  fairness  and 
respect).  Principal  Dugal  rated  Respondent  as  meeting  performance  standards  in  three  of 
eight  areas  of  section  4  (Developing  As  a  Professional)  and  needing  improvement  in  four 
areas.  Respondent  was  rated  as  not  meeting  standards  in  area  4g.  (communicates  and 
interacts  with  colleagues,  staff,  parents  and  students  in  an  appropriate  manner).  Principal 
Dugal  did  not  rate  Respondent  as  meeting  performance  standards  in  any  of  the  three  areas  of 
section  5  (punctuality,  attendance  and  recordkeeping.)  Respondent  was  rated  as  needing 
improvement  in  maintaining  accurate  and  timely  records.  Principal  Dugal  rated  Respondent 
as  not  meeting  standards  in  areas  5a  (regularly  arrives  on  time,  starts  class  on  schedule)  and 
5b  (regularly  in  attendance  for  the  total  contract  day).  (Exhibit  15.) 

43. 

Asa  result  of  the  below  standard  evaluation,  Respondent  was  required  to 

participate  in  the  District's  PAR  program,  a  remedial  program,  in  which  a  mentor  teacher  is 
assigned  to  provide  confidential  assistance  and  guidance  to  a  teacher  that has  received  a 
below  standard  evaluation. 

44, 

On  May  25,  2012,  Principal  Dugal  issued  Respondent  two  Notices  of 

Unsatisfactory  Acts.  The  first  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  was  accompanied  by  a  five  day 

12 

   

  

unpaid  suspension  related  to  absences  and  tardies  accumulated  during  the  2011-2012  school 
year.  (Exhibit  16.)  The  second  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  recommended  Respondent's 
dismissal  based  upon  the  allegations  recited  in  the  various  conference  memoranda.  (Exhibit 
17.) 

2012-2013  School  Year  Barack  Obama  Preparatory  Academy 

45. 

Respondent  was  reassigned  from  John  Muir  to  Barack  Obama  Global 

Preparatory  Middle  School  (Barack  Obama)  for  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Barack  Obama 
was  also  in  local  district  7.  Respondent  was  excited  and  relieved  to  leave  John  Muir. 
Respondent  was  the  only  female  physical  education  teacher  at  Barack  Obama  at  the 
beginning  of  the  2012-2013  school  year.  She  took  on  the  role  of  department  head  and 
prepared  duty  schedules  because  the  other  physical  education  teachers  were  not  inclined  to 
perform  administrative  tasks.  Although  Barack  Obama  was  a  brand  new  school  with  state  of 
the  art  facilities,  it  lacked  basic  physical  education  equipment.  Respondent  made  repeated 
requests  for  funds  or  a  budget  for  the  physical  education  department  to  no  avail. 

46. 

Initially,  Herbert  Jones,  Principal  of  Barack  Obama,  saw  Respondent  as  a  hard 
working  teacher  with  a  good  attitude.  At  first,  he  was  impressed  with  her  initiative  in  setting 
up  duty  schedules  and  serving  as  the  de  facto  department  chair  for  physical  education  while 
handling  all  physical  education  duties  for  the  female  students.  Principal  Jones  was  not  aware 
that  Respondent  had  a  prior  below  standard  evaluation  when  he  hired  her.  He  first  became 
aware  of  the  issue  when  he  saw  a  PAR  teacher  on  campus.  He  later  inquired  with  Principal 
Dugal  about  Respondent's  performance  at  John  Muir.  He  was  somewhat  surprised  to  find 
out  that  Respondent  had  attendance  issues  and  allegations  of  making  inappropriate  comments 
to  students.  He  was  also  advised  by  the  District  Staff  Relations  department  that  Respondent 
"had  a  history."  Principal  Jones  testified  that  he  "believes  in  second  chances"  and  would 
have  hired  Respondent  even  had  he  known  of  her  prior  performance  issues. 

47. 

Principal  Jones  is  an  experienced  administrator  and  very  familiar  with  the 

community  in  which  Barack  Obama  is  situated.  Principal  Jones  presents  as  a  credible  and 
candid  witness  with  no  particular  bias.  He  had  worked  as  the  principal  of  George 
Washington  Preparatory  School  for  many  years  and  was  asked  to  open  Barack  Obama,  a  new 
school.  Principal  Jones  served  as  the  principal  from  September  of  2012  until  he  was  placed 
on  medical  leave  in  April  of  2012.  When  Principal  Jones  returned  from  medical  leave,  he 
was  placed  in  an  administrative  position  with  the  District’s  Staff  Relations  department. 

48.  |  Manuel  Santa  Maria  was  the  Assistant  Principal  at  Barack  Obama  for  a  period 

of  time.  Assistant  Principal  Santa  Maria  did  not  testify  at  hearing,  but  a  memorandum  that 
he  prepared  following  his  55  minute  observation  of  Respondent's  physical  education  class  on 
September  28,  2012,  was  admitted  in  part.  Assistant  Principal  Santa  Maria  was  critical  of  a 
strength  and  exercise  activity  Respondent  used.  Students  were  asked  to  run  a  lap  and  then 
perform  an  exercise  which  required  them  to  use  their  arms  and  lower  body  to  "crab  walk" 
along  the  field.  The  activity  was  a  warm-up  exercise  and  part  of  Respondent's  ongoing 
attempts  to  assess  the  fitness  level  of  her  students.  Assistant  Principal  Santa  Maria,  in  his 

13 

 

  

memorandum,  was  critical  of  the  amount  of  time  Respondent  spent  in  the  locker  room  with 
sixth  graders  who  had  just  been  assigned  lockers  and  were  still  struggling  with  opening  them. 
Mr.  Santa  Maria  also  noted  concerns  about  Respondent's  choice  to  have  students  sitting  on 
the  blacktop  in  warm  weather  when  the  gymnasium  was  available.  It  was  not  clear  whether 
Mr.  Santa  Maria  was  aware  that  Principal  Jones  had  instructed  Respondent  not  to  use  the 
gymnasium  because  there  were  too  many  doors  to  be  monitored  and  his  concerns  about 
student  elopement.  In  his  memorandum,  Assistant  Principal  Santa  Maria  also  expressed 
concern  about  Respondent's  admonishment  to  students  and  her  tone  of  voice. 

49. 

Respondent's  problems  at  Barack  Obama  started  when  Superintendent  Deasy 

announced  his  desire  to  rid  the  District  of  poorly  performing  teachers.  Principal  Jones 
invited  Superintendent  Deasy  to  visit  Barack  Obama  and  asked  for  his  help  in  improving  the 
teaching  staff.  Superintendent  Deasy  committed  to  helping  Principal  Jones  and  other 
principals  improve  their  teaching  staffs.  When  he  visited  Barack  Obama,  he  told  Principal 
Jones  to  categorize  his  staff  into  groups  one,  two  and  three.  Group  one  was  defined  to  be  the 
teachers  who  were  performing  at  the  highest  level.  Group  two  teachers  were  teachers  who 
were  performing  adequately  or  could  be  coached  to  a  higher  level.  Group  three  teachers 
were  those  who  were  not  performing  at  standard.  Mr.  Deasy  asked  to  visit  a  random  sample 
of  classrooms  from  each  category  and  insinuated  that  principals  would  be  evaluated,  in  part, 
based  upon  the  accuracy  of  their  selections.  Based  upon  her  prior  below  standard  evaluation, 
Principal  Jones  placed  Respondent  in  Group  three. 

50. 

Respondent  was  targeted  for  removal  when  designated  as  a  Group  three 
teacher.  The  superintendent  created  a  special  task  force  of  administrators  charged  with 
assisting  principals  in  preparing  the  evaluations  and  observation  of  teachers  that  had  been 
placed  in  Group  three.  Michael  Voight  was  the  Coordinator  in  charge  of  staff  relations 
assigned  to  the  special  task  force.  Mr.  Voight  earned  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  from 
Humboldt  State,  a  Master's  degree,  a  teaching  credential,  and  an  administrative  credential 
from  California  State  University,  Dominguez  Hills.  He  also  received  a  law  degree  from  the 
University  of  West  Los  Angeles.  Mr.  Voight's  job  consisted  of  accompanying  principals  on 
surprise  observations  of  the  Group  three  teachers,  observing  the  teachers,  comparing 
observations  with  the  principal,  writing  the  observations  in  the  form  of  a  conference 
memorandum  for  the  principal's  signature  and  drafting  evaluations  for  review  and  signature 
by  the  principals.  His  services  were  provided  as  administrative  support  for  principals  to 
assist  them  in  carrying  out  the  superintendent's  mandate  of  improving  teacher  performance 
and  rooting  out  and  removing  bad  teachers.  Of  the  group  of  teachers  assigned  to  Mr.  Voight 
for  observation,  only  one  teacher  improved  and  remained  employed  with  the  District.  The 
remaining  teachers  either  left  the  District  or  were  terminated. 

51. 

Mr.  Voight  and  Principal  Jones  carried  out  a  series  of  unannounced 

observations  of  Respondent  on  November  13,  2012,  February  22,  2013,  and  March  14,  2013. 
Neither  Mr.  Voight  nor  Principal  Jones  have  physical  education  credentials  and  neither  has 
ever  been  a  physical  education  teacher.  Principal  Jones  has  served  as.a  track  coach  and 
supervised  physical  education  teachers. 

14 

 

    

52. 

Based  upon  the  November  13,  2012  observation,  Principal  Jones  held  a 

conference  with  Respondent  on  November  28,  2012  and  advised  her  of  their  concerns  about 
her  planning  and  designing  curriculum,  classroom  performance,  use  of  instructional  time  and 
student  learning.  Principal  Jones  read  the  concerns  from  a  written  conference  memorandum 
Mr.  Voight  drafted.  The  November  13,  2012  observation  was  conducted  during  one  segment 
of  a  multi-part  unit  in  which  the  students  were  running  and  walking  the  track  and  measuring 
heart  rates.  Mr.  Voight  and  Principal  Jones  criticized  Respondent  for  spending  too  much 
time  talking  with  a  group  of  students  and  handling  locker  room  and  P.E.  clothes  related 
issues.  Mr.  Voight  and  Principal  Jones  were  also  concerned  that  not  all  students  were 
running,  not  all  students  seemed  to  report  their  heart  rate  data,  students  were  not  asked  to 
chart  or  graph  their  heart  rates,  and  no  alternatives  to  running  were  provided.  Respondent 
engaged  students  in  an  activity  which  was  part  of  a  multi-part  lesson,  consistent  with  state 
standards.  The  lesson  incorporated  the  Activities  Integration,  Math  and  Science  (AIMS) 
curriculum,  a  well-respected  and  professionally  developed  curriculum.  In  a  written 
conference  memorandum,  dated  November  28,  2012,  Principal  Jones  directed  Respondent  to 
review  the  state  standards  for  physical  education.  Principal  Jones  also  directed  Respondent 
to  optimize  class  time,  model  expectations,  tasks,  and  activities  for  students,  stand  in  the 
student  line-up  area  of  the  blacktop  unless  supervising  the  locker  room,  and  use  physical 
education  and  fitness  equipment  to  make  the  lessons  "more  exciting,  engaging,  and  relevant 
to  students."  (Exhibit  20.)  The  criticisms  frustrated  Respondent,  but  she  did  her  best  to 
follow  the  directives  given  by  Principal  Jones.  Subsequently,  Respondent  prepared  and 
posted  written  standards  for  physical  education  and  announced  an  intention  for  each  lesson  at 
the  beginning  of  each  class. 

53. 

On  February  1,  2013,  Principal  Jones  and  Mr.  Voight,  made  an  unannounced 

observation  of  Respondent's  Health  class.  Respondent  had  been  using  a  third  floor 
classroom  which  was  different  from  the  assigned  classroom  shown  on  the  school  master 
schedule.  Principal  Jones  was  not  aware  that  Respondent  had  been  using  a  different 
classroom  than  the  one  shown  on  the  master  schedule.  Principal  Jones  had  Respondent  and 
her  students  summoned  from  classroom  304  to  classroom  130  as  listed  on  the  master 
schedule  over  the  school  announcement  system.  In  her  haste  to  get  to  the  classroom, 
Respondent  left  some  of  her  notes  behind,  and  attempted  to  reorganize  her  materials  and  her 
students  in  the  new  classroom.  The  classroom  did  not  have  sufficient  chairs  for  the  students. 
The  observers  obtained  sufficient  chairs  from  other  classrooms  to  accommodate  the  students. 
Respondent  was  giving  a  lesson  on  the  food  groups  and  food  pyramid.  She  assigned  students 
to  prepare  projects  in  groups.  The  class  was  loud  and  students  were  moving  about  the 
classroom,  however  the  students  were  not  disruptive.  Respondent  used  a  loud  voice  when 
addressing  the  class. 

54. 

Mr.  Voight  and  Principal  Jones  considered  the  lesson  to  be  disjointed  and 

lacking  because  Respondent  did  most  of  the  talking  in  the  lesson,  They  also  believed  that 
Respondent  had  not  done  anything  to  ensure  that  all  students  were  engaged  in  the  lesson 
because  one  student  was  brushing  her  hair  during  the  lesson.  Respondent  was  aware  of  the 
student  brushing  her  hair,  but  chose  to  ignore  her  behavior  because  the  student  had  an 

15 

 

  

explosive  temperament  and  Respondent  wanted  to  continue  with  the  lesson  for  the  students 
who  were  interested  and  participating  instead  of  spending  time  dealing  with  one  student’s 
tantrum.  Principal  Jones  communicated  their  concerns  to  Respondent  in  a  conference  on 
February  22,  2013,  and  in  written  memorandum  drafted  by  Mr.  Voight  and  approved  by 
Principal  Jones  dated  February  26,  2013.  In  the  memorandum,  Mr.  Jones  warned 
Respondent  that  she  was  in  danger  of  receiving  a  below  standard  evaluation.  (Exhibit  24.) 

55. 

Later  in  the  day  on  February  1,  2013,  Respondent  was  assaulted  by  Naomi 

Manchan,  a  long-term  substitute  physical  education  teacher  who  had  been  placed  at  Barack 
Obama  in  November  2012.  Initially,  Ms.  Manchan  and  Respondent  got  along  well,  but  as 
time  went  on,  Ms.  Manchan  became  resentful  of  Respondent's  loud  and  bossy  ways.  On 
February  1,  2013,  Respondent  locked  herself  out  of  the  locker  room  and  asked  Ms.  Manchan 
to  unlock  it  for  her.  When  Ms.  Manchan  hesitated,  Respondent  told  Ms,  Manchan  that  she 
needed  to  listen  to  Respondent  as  an  authority  figure.  Ms.  Manchan  became  frustrated  and 
upset  and  vented  her  frustration  to  Rhonda  Miller,  a  custodial  staff  member.  Ms.  Miller 
encouraged  Ms.  Manchan  to  confront  Respondent  and  put  a  stop  to  her  bossiness.  Ms.  Miller 
accompanied  Ms.  Manchan  to  the  locker  room  to  confront  Respondent.  The  two  entered  the 
girls  locker  room,  found  Respondent  in  the  physical  education  office,  closed  the  door,  and 
Ms.  Manchan  yelled  at  Respondent  and  struck  Respondent.  When  Respondent  pushed  Ms. 
Manchan  away,  she  scratched  her.  Ms.  Manchan  was a  credible  witness  at  hearing.  Ms. 
Manchan  admitted  that  she  started  the  physical  encounter  with  Respondent  because  she  was 
upset  with  what  she  perceived  as  Respondent's  lack  of  respect  for  her.  Ms.  Manchan  was 
released  from  her  assignment  at  Barack  Obama  as  a  result  of  the  incident.  Ms.  Manchan 
expressed  sincere  regret  and  remorse  for  her  conduct. 

56. 

In  the  same  general  time  frame,  Principal  Jones  made  Respondent  return  a 

radio  he  had  issued  to  her  for  the  physical  education  department  for  emergencies  because  she 
made  a  radio  call  for  assistance  in  which  she  stated  that  that  she  needed  some  help  because 
her  colleagues  were  not  being  supportive.  In  one  instance  the  radio  was  lost,  stolen  or 
misplaced,  and  students  were  heard  on  the  radio  making  inappropriate  comments.  Principal 
Jones  was  concerned  that  Respondent  might  not  be  using  the  radio  as  intended,  and  that 
transmissions  over  the  radio  were  being  recorded  by  the  District  police  and  transmitted 
throughout  the  District.  Respondent  felt  even  more  vulnerable  when  the  radio.was 
eliminated. 

In  the  same  general  time  frame,  Respondent  was  attacked  by  a  parent  wielding 

57. 
The  attack  occurred  after  Respondent  witnessed  some  students  abuse  a  dog. 
acrowbar. 
Respondent  was  not  aware  that  the  dog  had  bitten  one  of  the  students  that  had  abused  it. 
Respondent  had  approached  the  stray  dog  and  commented  that  it  was  pretty.  The  parent  of 
the  student  who  had  been  bitten  by  the  dog  became  enraged  by  Respondent's  comment  and 
attacked  her  with  a  crowbar.  Respondent's  boyfriend,  Andrew  Corral,  witnessed  the  abuse, 
the  dog  bite  and  Respondent  being  attacked  with  a  crowbar  while  he  waited  in  his  car  for 
Respondent  to  arrive  at  the  end  of  the  school  day.  Mr.  Corral  immediately  intervened  to 
keep  Respondent  from  being  hurt.  School  police  arrived  on  the  scene,  but  did  not  provide 

16 

 

assistance  to  Respondent.  Instead,  the  school  police  and  Principal  Jones  comforted  the  irate 
parent  and  injured  student. 

58. 

On  March  14,  2013,  Mr.  Voight  and  Principal  Jones  observed  Respondent's 

eighth  grade  physical  education  class.  Respondent  took  roll,  had  students  do  stretching 
activities  and  run  a  lap  around  the  blacktop  before  leading  them  to  the  gym.  Several  students 
were  sitting  on  a  bench  outside  of  the  gym  and  not  dressed  in  gym  clothes  when  Mr.  Voight 
and  Principal  Jones  arrived.  These  students  were  not  part  of  Respondent's  class.  Principal 
Jones  and  Mr.  Voight  assumed  that  the  students  sitting  outside  the  gym  belonged  in 
Respondent's  class  and  insisted  that  they  go  into  the  gym  and  sit  in  the  stands.  Respondent 
planned  a  lesson  involving  footballs,  but  after  she  discovered  there  were  not  enough  inflated 
footballs  for  the  lesson,  she  changed  plans  and  conducted  a  dance  lesson  instead.  Some  of 
the  students  engaged  in  the  dance  lesson  and  some  did  not.  Principal  Jones  and  Mr.  Voight 
were  Critical  of  several  aspects  of  Respondent's  performance.  Principal  Jones  and  Mr. 
Voight  were  concerned  that  she  had  not  checked  to  make  sure  she  had  footballs  to  use  before 
going  to  the  gym  and  opined  that  Respondent  failed  to  engage  the  students,  did  not  show 
them  respect  and  left  students  outside  the  gym  that  they  assumed  belonged  in  her  class.  Not 
long  after  the  observation,  Principal  Jones  suffered  an  injury  and  was  placed  on  medical 
leave.  Respondent  was  also  off  from  work  for  an  extended  period  of  time  during  the  same 
time  period  on  medical  leave. 

59. 

On  March  19,  2013,  Principal  Jones  issued  a  memorandum  to  Respondent 

admonishing  her  not  to  behave  inappropriately  with  colleagues  or  to  engage  in  work  place 
violence.  The  memorandum  was  issued  in  response  to  Ms.  Manchan’s  February  1,  2013 
assault  of  Respondent. 

60. 

Respondent's  boyfriend,  Mr.  Corral,  had  been  in  contact  with  school  board 
member  Marguerite  Poindexter  LaMotte,  after  Ms.  Manchan  assaulted  Respondent.  Ms. 
LaMotte  was  Principal  Jones'  mentor  and  a  vocal  critic  of  the  then-Superintendent  Deasy.  At 
one  point,  Lani  Foster,  an  experienced  physical  education  teacher  who  served  as  Ms. 
LaMotte's  chief  of  staff,  was  dispatched  to  Barack  Obama  as  a  substitute  physical  education 
teacher  to  assist  Respondent  and  report  back  to  Ms.  LaMotte.  While  at  Barack  Obama,  Ms. 
Foster  noted  that  the  school  lacked  basic  physical  education  equipment  and  made 
arrangements  for  additional  balls  and  other  essential  physical  education  equipment  to  be 
delivered  to  Barack  Obama.  Ms.  Foster  credibly  testified  at  hearing  that  she  found 
Respondent  to  be  hard  working  and  an  adequate  physical  education  teacher. 

61. 

Principal  Jones  was  on  medical  leave  and  could  not  meet  with  Respondent 
about  the  March  14,  2013  observation.  Instead,  he  prepared  a  written  memorandum  dated 
April  12,  2013  which  the  Barak  Obama  staff  placed  in  her  school  mail  box  while  she  was  out 
on  medical  leave.  When  Respondent  received  the  April  12,  2013  memoranda,  she  prepared  a 
response  in  which  she  disputed  Principal  Jones'  version  of  the  March  14,  2013  lesson.  She 
placed  it  in  Principal  Jones'  mail  box,  but  he  never  received  it.  (Exhibits  RESP  076-RESP 
086) 

17 

 

  

| 
| 

| 

| 

62. 

Principal  Jones  left  Barack  Obama  on  April  13,  2013  and  did  not  return  to  the 

school  site.  Yesenia  Karamanos  replaced  Principal  Jones  as  principal  of  Barack  Obama. 
Principal  Karamanos  had  never  observed  Respondent's  class.  Based  solely  upon  her  review 
of  Principal  Jones'  memorandum  and  notes,  on  April  29,  2013,  Principal  Karamanos 
prepared  a  below  standard  evaluation  for  Respondent.  Principal  Karamanos  rated 
Respondent  below  standard  in  ali  aspects  of  supporting  student  learning,  three  of  five  areas 
in  planning  and  designing  instruction,  four  of  six  areas  of  classroom  performance,  two  of  six 
areas  of  developing  as  a  professional  and  in  the  area  of  regular  attendance  noting  17 
absences.  Respondent  was  rated  as  meeting  standards  in  the  remaining  12  areas  evaluated 
including  regularly  arriving  on  time  (0  tardies),  starting  class  on  schedule,  maintain  accurate 
and  timely  records,  communicating  and  interacting  with  colleagues,  staff,  parents  and 
students  in  an  appropriate  manner,  following  policies,  communicating  instructional  goals  to 
students,  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  support  student 
learning,  using  a  grading/evaluation  system  aligned  with  state  standards,  using  instructional 
strategies,  materials  and  resources  that  are  appropriate,  interrelating  ideas  and  information 
within  and  across  subject  matter  areas. 

63. 

On  June  7,  2013,  Principal  Karamanos  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act 
and  15  day  suspension  to  Respondent  based  on  the  February  1,  2013  assault  of  Respondent 
by  Ms.  Manchan.  Respondent  was  not  personally  provided  with  the  Notice  and  did  not  sign 
it. 

64.  —  Also  on  June  7,  2013,  Principal  Karamanos  issued  another  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Service  and  15  day  suspension  to  Respondent.  This  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Service  was  based  upon  the  observations  and  allegations  contained  in  the  various  conference 
memoranda  issued  to  Respondent  during  the  2011-2012  and  2012-2013  school  years. 
Respondent  was  not  personally  provided  with  the  Notice  and  did  not  sign  it. 

Specific  Charges  of Amended  Accusation 

65. 

In  Paragraph  1  of  the  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  [Respondent]  commencing  September  19, 
2011  through  March  29,  2012,  [Respondent],  P.E.  teacher  at  Muir 
Middle  School,  failed  to  report  to  work  on  time  by  at  least  229  minutes 
as  follows: 

a.  On  September  28,  2011,  [Respondent]  was  6  minutes  late. 

b.  On  October  2,  2011,  [Respondent]was  3  minutes  late. 

  .  On  October  13,  2011,  [Respondent]  was  2  minutes  late. 

a

  .  On  December  12,  2011,  [Respondent]  was  70  minutes  late. 

a

18 

 

e.  On  December  14,  2011,  [Respondent]  was  7  minutes  late. 

f.  On  January  9,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  12  minutes  late. 

g.  On  January  24,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  17  minutes  late. 

h.  On  January  25,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  12  minutes  late. 

i. 

j. 

On  January  26,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  17  minutes  late. 

On  February  22,  2012,  [Respondent  was  4  minutes  late. 

k.  On  March  20,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  16  minutes  late. 

1.  On  March  22,  2012,  [Respondent]  was  63  minutes  late. 

66. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  set  forth  in  Paragraph  1  the  Amended  _ 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

67. 

In  Paragraph  2  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  September  19,  2011  through 
March  29,  2012,  [Respondent],  failed  to  provide  at  least  205 
instructional  minutes  to  her  students  when  she  arrived  late  to  her 
assignment. 

a.  On  September  28,  2011,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  4  minutes  of  instruction. 

b.  On  October  3,  2011,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  1  minute  of  instruction. 

c.  On  December  12,  2011,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  68  minutes  of  instruction. 

d.  On  December  14,  2011,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  5  minutes  of  instruction. 

e.  On  January  9,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  10  minutes  of  instruction. 

f.  On  January  24,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  15  minutes  of  instruction. 

g.  On  January  25,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  10  minutes  of  instruction. 

h.  On  January  26,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  15  minutes  of  instruction. 

19 

 

    

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 
| 

On  February  22,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 

i. 
provide  2  minutes  of  instruction. 

j.  On  March  20,  2012,.  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  14  minutes  of  instruction. 

k.  On  March  22,  2012,  [Respondent]  failed  to 
provide  61  minutes  of  instruction. 

68. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  2  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

69. 

In  paragraph  3  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  September  19,  2011  through 
April  12,  2012,  [Respondent],  failed  to  sign  in  the  late  book,  on  21 
different  occasions,  as  instructed  by  Principal  Nisha  Dugal: 

a.  On  September  30,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not 
sign  the  late  book. 

On  October  5,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 

b. 
the  late  book. 

c.  On  October  10,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

d.  On  October-20,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

On  October  25,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 

e. 
the  late  book. 

f.  On  October  27,  2011,  [Respondent]did  not  sign 
the  late  book.  ° 

g.  On  November  8,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

h.  On  November  9,  2011,  [Respondent]did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

i.  On  November  28,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not 
sign  the  late  book. 

j.  On  December  7,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 

the  late  book.    

k.  On  December  8,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

1.  On  December  9,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

m.  On  December  13,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not 
sign  the  late  book. 

n.  On  December  15,  2011,  [Respondent]  did  not 
sign  the  late  book. 

o.  On  January  10,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

p.  On  March  21,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book 

q.  On  March  26,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

r.  On  March  27,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign 
the  late  book. 

s.  On  April  9,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign  the 
late  book. 

t.  On  April  10,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign  the 
late  book. 

u.  On  April  12,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  sign  the 
late  book. 

70. 

‘District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  3  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

71. 

‘In  paragraph  4  of  the  Amended  Accusation  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  September  19,  2011  through  March 
29,  2012,  [Respondent],  failed  to  supervise  her  students  by  allowing  them  to 
wait  outside  the  classroom  until  she  arrived. 

72. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  4  of  the 

73. 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

In  paragraph  5  of  the  Amended  Accusation  District  alleges:    

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  September  19,  2011  through  March 
29,  2012,  [Respondent],  failed  to  notify  Muir  Middle  School  that  she  would  be 
arriving  late  to  the  school  and  her  assignment.  | 

74. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  5  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

75. 

In  paragraph  6  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  September  19,  2011  through  March 
29,  2012,  [Respondent],  P.E.  Teacher  at  Muir  Middle  School,  failed  to  report 
to  work  on  24  different  days. 

76. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  6  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

77. 

In  paragraph  7  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  15,  2011,  [Respondent],  stated  the  following  to 
students  Sj  M.,  RE  L.,  and 

 W.:  “Shi  M.  is  a  man.” 

78. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  7  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

79. 

‘In  paragraph  8,  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or-about  November  15,  2011,  Respondent,  stated  the  following  to  students 
Hi  G.,  SR  M.,  KR  A.  and  Rg  A...:  “Where  do  black  people 
get  their  attitude  from?" 

80. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  8  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

81. 

In  paragraph  9  of  the  Amended  Accusation  District  alleges  that  on  or  about 

November  30,  2011,  Respondent  said  "Shut  up!"  to  student,  Al 

J. 

82. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  9  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

83. 

In  paragraph  10  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

During  or  about  the  period  commencing  November  2011,  through  April 
2012,  [Respondent],  said,  “Get  your  stupid  ass  out  of  class,"  or  words 
to  that  effect,  to  student,  J.  R.  During  or  about  the  period 
commencing  November  2011,  through  April  2012,  [Respondent],  said 
following  in  the  presence  of  student,  3M  R.  and  other  students: 

22 

   

a.  "Black  kids  are  stupid,"  or  words  to  that  effect; 

b.  "Black  kids  are  from  the  hood,  this  is  why  black  kids  are  like  this;  they 
[black  kids]  are  not  going  to  make  it;  they  [black  kids]  are  not  going  anywhere,"  or 
words  to  that  effect. 

84. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  10  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

85. 

In  paragraph  11  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  30,  2011,  [Respondent],  said,  to  student,  TM  G.: 

a. 

b. 

C. 

"I'm  sorry  that  you  don't  have  no  mother  to  take  care  of  you." 

"You  all  black  kids  don't  have  any  parents." 

"T  don't  like  you.  You're  a  butt  kisser  and  I  don't  like  butt  kissers." 

86. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  11  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

87. 

In  paragraph  12  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  2,  2012,  [Respondent],  yelled  out  in  the  hearing  range  of 
other  students,  in  retaliation  for  student  Rj  L.  having  reported  her  to  the 
principal  as  follows: 

a.  "How  can I  have  a  student  that  has  falsely  accused  me  back  in  my  class?" 

b.  "Administration  is  doing  nothing  to  protect  me!" 

88. 

District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made 

the  two  statements  alleged  in  paragraph  12  of  the  Amended  Accusation.  District  also 
established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  statement  "How  can  I  have  a  student 
that  has  falsely  accused  me  back  in  my  class?"  was  made  with  reference  to  Rj  L.  and  was 
made  in  retaliation  against  Rj  L.  for  having  made  an  unsubstantiated  claim  of  child  abuse 
against  Respondent  a  few  days  prior.  The  second  statement,  was  made  by  Respondent  in 
reference  to  student  N§jjn  M.  and  was  not  retaliatory. 

89. 

In  paragraph  13  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged  that  or  about 

February  2,  2012,  Respondent,  failed  to  follow  an  administrative  directive  when  she 
retaliated  against  RI  L.,  a  6th  grade  student. 

90.  _ District  established  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  13  of  the  Amended 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  When  Respondent  shouted  "How  can  I  have 
a  Student  that  has  falsely  accused  me  back  in  my  class,"  she  did  so  in  front  of  the  entire 

23 

 

physical  education  class  and  called  attention  to  Respondent.  This  was  a  violation  of  the 
directive  issued  by  Principal  Dugal. 

91. 

‘In  paragraph  14  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged  that  on  or 

about  Apri!  11,  2012,  [Respondent],  walked  up  to  third  period  student  MI  H.,  put 
her  face  a  few  inches  away  from  M's  face  and  yelled,  "That's  why  nobody  likes 
you." 

92. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  14  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

93. 

In  paragraph  15  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges  that  on  or  about 
April  17,  2012,  Respondent  pushed  her  third  period  student,  Hj.  and  ripped  his  earphones 
in  half. 

94. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  15  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

95. 

In  paragraph  16  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges  that  on  or  about 
M.,  students  in  her  fifth  period 

April  17,  2012,  Respondent,  yelled  at  Qj  C.,  and J 
class,  to  "Shut  up!"  causing  the  students  to  become  alarmed  and  leave  the  classroom. 

96. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  16  of  the 

* 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

97. 

In  paragraph  17  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges  that: 

On  or  about  April  19,  2012,  [Respondent],  said  the  following  in  the  presence 
of  her  students: 

a.  "Black  students  are  the  ones  that-cause  the  problems  anyway." 

b.  "Black  girls  are  only  used  for  opening  their  legs  and  collecting  a 
government  welfare  check,”  or  words  to  that  effect;.  "That's  why  I  hate  black 
people.  You  are  bullies.  I  went  to  school  with  black  kids  and  you  are  nothing 
but  bullies."  or  words  to  that  effect. 

98.  _  District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  17  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  only  evidence  offered  to 
support  this  allegation  came  from  witnesses  Holmes  and  JM}.  Neither  witness  testified 
that  Respondent  made  these  statements.  Furthermore,  the  Commission  did  not  find  either  of 
them  credible  witnesses. 

99. 

_——  In  paragraph  18  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges  that  on  or  about 

April  26,  2012,  Respondent  said  "I  don't  like  black  kids"  while  screaming  and  arguing  with  a 
student. 

24 

 

  

100. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  18  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

101. 

In  paragraph  19  of  the  Amended  Accusation  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent],  P.E.  Teacher  at  Barack 
Obama  Global  Preparatory  Academy  did  not  demonstrate  evidence  of  short 
term  and  long  term  plans  to  foster  student  learning  nor  did  she  use  state  subject 
matter  content  standards  to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals  for  students. 
Specifically,  [Respondent]  did  not: 

a.  Give  purpose  to  the  lesson. 

b.  Share  the  learning  objective. 

c.  Share  the  standards  for  Physical  Education  lesson  with  students. 

d.  Instead,  [Respondent]  taught  a  lesson  more  aligned  with  2nd  and  3rd  grade 
level  standards.  She  only  directed  students  to  perform  basic  warm-up 
activities  including  running  a  lap  around  the  field  and  engaging  in  an  activity 
where  students  had  to  use  their  arms  to  drag  their  buttocks  and  lower  body 
backwards  across  the  grassy  field. 

e.  [Respondent]  should  have  engaged  students  in  a  lesson  that  was  aligned  to 
the  6th  grade  standards  which  calls  for  students  to  explain  and  analyze 
physical  education  principles,  distinguish  relationships  between  physical 
education  techniques,  and  identify  and  define  roles  in  physical  education 
activities. 

102. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  19  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

103. 

In  paragraph  20  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged  that  on  or  about 

September  28,  2012,  Respondent,  did  not  use  the  results  of  multiple  assessments  to  guide 
instruction  because  she  directed  all  students,  regardless  of  athletic  or  fitness  ability  to  engage 
in  the  same  skill.  She  should  have  demonstrated  that  she  had  knowledge  of  the  individual 
students’  athletic  and  fitness  abilities  and  developed  lesson  components  to  match  the  needs  of 
the  students. 

104. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  20  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

105. 

In  paragraph  21  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged  that: 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  should  have  given  relevance  to 
the  lesson  so  as  to  further  students'  interest  in  physical  education  and  life-long 
fitness  goals  by  relating  the  lesson  activities  and  skills  with  real  world 

25 

 

occurrences  that  students  could  relate  to  and  understand.  She  did  not  integrate 
students’  prior  knowledge,  life  experiences  and  interests  into  the  instruction 
program  because  she  did  not  relate  the  skill  being  taught  with  real  world 
application,  relate  the  skill  to  a  part  of  future  activity  or  give  relevance  to  the 
activities. 

106. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  21  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

107. 

In  paragraph  22  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged: 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  use  instructional  time 
effectively.  For  the  first  14  minutes  of  the  class  period  (1:40  p.m.  to1:54 
p-m.),  [Respondent]  was  not  with  her  students  who  were  on  the  playground 
waiting  for  her.  As  a  result,  18%  of  the  class  period  was  not  utilized  and 
students  had  to  wait  for  [Respondent]  to  start  instruction.  From  1:55  p.m.-1:58 
p.m.  [Respondent]  did  not  engage  students  in  a  lesson  when  she  yelled  at 
students  for  being  so  slow  in  the  locker  room,  left  students  to  retrieve  her 
clipboard  from  her  office,  then  did  not  return  to  the  waiting  class  until  2:04 
p.m.  and  did  not  instruct  students  to  engage  in  any  activity  until  2:06  p.m. 
when  she  asked  students  to  "give  me  ten  jumping  jacks."  In  total,  from  1:40 
p-m.  to  2:06  p.m.,  twenty  minutes  of  instructional  time  was  not  effectively 
used  for  instruction.  This  constitutes  a  33%  loss  of  the  total  instructional 
period. 

: 

108. 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence, 

109.  =‘ In  paragraph  23  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleged: 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  22  of  the 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  create  a  physical 
environment  that  engaged  students  in  meaningful  lessons.  Despite  the  84 
degree  weather  and  numerous  complaints  from  students,  [Respondent] 
directed  students  to  sit  on  the  hot  black  asphalt  and  exercise  in  the  direct  sun. 
[Respondent]  should  have  planned  her  lesson  to  allow  students  to  use  the 
indoor  and  air  conditioned  gymnasium.  At  the  time  of  this  occurrence,  one 
entire  room  of  the  gymnasium  was  empty. 

   

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  create  a  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect  because  she  addressed  students  unprofessionally 
and  disrespectfully.  At  1:55  p.m.  she  abruptly  yelled  to  the  class,  "What's  your 
problem? 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  23  of  the 

Don't  bother  me  with  your  complaining.  It's  500  degrees  out  here 

In  paragraph  24  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

111. 

110. 

26 

  

and  I'm  hot!"  At  1:57  p.m.,  she  scolded  the  class  and  said,  "From  now  on  you 
have  one  minute  to  go  to  your  locker.  I  don't  want  to  hear  a  peep  from  you!  If 
you  are  going  to  have  problems!"  At  2:23  p.m.,  in  front  of  the  entire  class  she 
loudly  yelled  at  a  student,  "Sit  down!  How  many  times  do  I  have  to  tell  you? 
When  you  are  done  running,  sit  down!" 

112. 

District  failed  to  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  24  of  the  amended 

accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

113. 

In  paragraph  25  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  organize  the 
curriculum  to  support  student  understanding  of  physical  education  concepts. 
As  a  result,  students  could  not  easily  follow  along  with  her  lesson  or 
understand  the  meaning  of  lesson  components.  She  did  not  transition  between 
one  activity  and  the  next  and  she  did  not  interrelate  one  activity  with  another. 

114. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  25  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

115. 

In  paragraph  26  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  September  28,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  offer  an  opportunity 
for  students  to  reflect  on  and  evaluate  their  learning  by  engaging  students  in  an 
activity  where  they  could  connect  class  material  with  real  world  application  of 
fitness  skills. 

116. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  26  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  activity  that  the  students 
engaged  in  was  a  strength  exercise  not  a  skill-based  learning  activity. 

117. 

In  paragraph  27  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  13,  2012,  [Respondent],  a  Physical  Education  Teacher 
at  Barack  Obama  Global  Preparatory  Academy,  did  not  demonstrate  evidence 
of  short-term  or  long-term  plans  to  foster  student  learning  and  achievement  of 
the  state  standards  when  she  directed  students  to  walk  around  the  field  as  the 
Physical  Education  activity.  She  did  not  require  or  provide  an  opportunity  for 
students  to  assess  and  maintain  levels  of  physical  fitness  to  improve  health  and 
performance,  demonstrate  knowledge  of  physical  fitness  concepts,  principles, 
and  strategies  to  improve  health,  or  direct  students  to  demonstrate  fitness 
knowledge  as  related  to  the  class  activity. 

118. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  27  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Respondent  incorporated  AIMS, 
a  professionally  developed  curriculum,  in  her  lesson  plans.  Respondent  was  working  with 
the  students  on  activities  related  to  heart  and  training  rates. 

27 

 

119. 

In  paragraph  28  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  13,  2012,  [Respondent]  did  not  establish  and  maintain 
standards  for  student  behavior.  [Respondent]  should  have  redirected  off  task 
student  behavior  and  reminded  students  of  her  behavioral  and  class 
participation  expectations.  Students  did  not  follow  the  lesson  plan  nor  engage 
in  the  lesson  activities.  At  9:25  a.m.,  although  she  directed  students  to  run 
around  the  field,  all  of  the  students  walked  around  the  field  and  socialized  with 
peers.  Four  of  the  eighteen  students  did  not  wear  their  prescribed  physical 
education  uniform. 

120. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  28  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Complainant  did  not  meet  its 
burden  of  proof  because  it  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  did  not  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior. 

121. 

In  paragraph  29  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  13,  2012  [Respondent]  did  not  use  instructional  time 
effectively.  She  did  not  supervise  nor  provide  instruction  to  the  students  for 
the  first  fifteen  minutes  of  class.  Students  socialized  with  peers. 
{Respondent]  stood  away  from  the  class  and  talked  with  four  students  who 
were  not  enrolled  in  her  class.  For  the  final  thirteen  minutes  of  class, 
[Respondent]  allowed  students  to  change  from  their  PE  uniforms,  sit  on  the 
lunch  benches  and  socialize  with  peers.  In  total,  [Respondent]  provided  only 
23  minutes  of  actual  instructional  activities.  This  represents  only  48%  of  the 
total  class  used  for  instruction  while  52%  was  not  used  for  instruction. 

122. 

District  failed  to  establish  by  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  29  of  the 
Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Complainant  did  not  meet  its 
burden  of  proof  because  it  failed  to  demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  did  not  use  instructional  time  effectively  or  supervise  students. 

123. 

In  paragraph  30  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  sequence  instructional 
activities  and  materials  for  student  learning  and,  as  a  result,  her  students  were 
not  engaged  in  the  lesson  and  seemed  confused  about  lesson  activities. 
[Respondent]  primarily  lectured  and  did  not  engage  students  in  any  type  of 
meaningful  lesson.  When  she  asked  students  questions,  students  did  not 
respond  or  only  minimally  responded.  She  lectured  about  the  food  pyramid 
but  did  not  explain  the  meaning  of  the  different  sections  of  the  food  pyramid 
nor  how  students  would  use  this  information.  She  did  not  explain  the 
procedures  of  a  group  project  which  resulted  in  confusion.  A  student  called 
out,  "What  are  we  doing?"  Another  student  asked  her,  "What  are  we  doing? 
What  is  our  group?"  She  did  not  respond.  [Respondent]  was  not  prepared  for 

28 

  

 

I  need  to  fill  time.  I  need  each  group  to  select  a  leader, 

the  lesson.  She  announced,  "Where  is  my  sodium  group?"  None  of  the 
students  responded.  She  said,  "Oh,  I  had a  list  but  I  forgot  it.”  At  10:10  a.m., 
she  said,  “OK  ... 
timekeeper,  speaker  and  note  taker."  She  announced  to  the  class  that  they 
were  to  complete  a  final  report  but  did  not  explain  what  the  report  entailed  or 
the  rubric  she  would  use  to  evaluate  the  reports.  She  said,  "You  will  do  energy 
drinks.  They  are  bad  for  you!  Just  get  a  board.  Buy  it  or  make  it  and  explain. 
This  is  due  on  Monday!  J  want  a  board  and  an  outline  on  it  by  Monday.  If 
you  don't  do  this  you  will  have  to  see  [schoo]  principal]  Mr.  Jones!" 

124. 

District  failed  to  establish  by  the  |  allegations  of  paragraph  30  of  the  Amended 
Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Although  the  students  made  the  statements 
or  similar  statements  to  those  alleged,  the  statements  were  irrelevant  to  a  determination  of 
whether  Respondent  properly  sequenced  activities  and  instruction.  Complainant  did  not  meet 
its  burden  of  proof  because  it  failed  to  demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  did  not  sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials  for  learning  and  that  her 
students  were  not  engaged  in  the  lesson  and  she  was  unprepared. 

125. 

In  paragraph  31  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  establish  and  maintain 
standards  for  student-behavior  nor  did  she  ensure  that  all  students  were 
following  along  and  participating  in  the  lesson.  At  the  beginning  of  the  class 
period,  she  directed  students  to  take  out  a  piece  of  paper.  Only  sixteen  of 
thirty-one  students  complied.  [Respondent]  did  not  hold  them  accountable  for 
taking  out  paper.  Students  who  did  not  take  out  paper  were  unable  to 
participate  in  the  lesson.  At  9:40  a.m.,  a  student  who  was  sitting  in  the  back 
row  was  brushing  her  hair  and  not  engaged  in  the  class  activity.  [Respondent] 
did  not  redirect  her.  At  9:45  a.m.,  three  of  the  students  in  her  class  rested  their 
heads  on  their  desks  for  over  fifteen  minutes.  [Respondent]  did  not  wake  them 
up  nor  engage  them  in  the  lesson.  At  10:12  a.m.,  although  [Respondent]  was 
attempting  to  assign  topics  for  research  reports,  none  of  the  class  was  listening 
to  her  as  they  were  all  socializing  with  peers.  [Respondent]  did  not  attempt  to 
regain  the  attention  of  the  class  and  continued  to  talk  over  the  noise.  Three 
minutes  later,  the  noise  level  from  the  students  was  so  loud  [Respondent] 
loudly  yelled  over  the  noise  and  continued  to  give  instructions.  None  of  the 
students  listened  or  were  engaged  in  the  lesson. 

126. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  31  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of 
proof  because  it  failed  to  demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
did  not  establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior  and  participation.  Although 
Respondent  and  her  students  had  been  forced  to  move  classrooms  at  the  beginning  of  the 
period,  she  maintained  her  confidence,  adapted  to  the  situation,  provided  instruction  and 
most  students  participated.  Respondent  was  aware  that  one  student  was  brushing  her  hair, 

29 

 

  

but  made  a  decision  to  ignore  the  behavior  because  the  student  had  volatile  behavior  and  she 
did  not  want  to  deal  with  behavior  issues  during  the  lesson. 

127. 

In  Paragraph  32  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  develop  lessons  that 
engage  students  in  problem  solving,  critical  thinking,  or  other  activities  that 
made  the  subject  matter  meaningful  to  them.  She  told  students  to  complete  a 
report  of  different  health  related  topics  but  only  required  students  to  write  a 
general  summary.  She  did  not  instruct  them  to  actually  apply  health  concepts 
or  use  skills  learned  in  class  toward  real  world  application. 

128. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  32  of  the 

Amended  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of 
proof  because  it  failed  to  demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
failed  to  engage  students  in  problem  solving,  critical  thinking,  or  other  activities  that  made 
the  subject  matier  meaningful  to  them. 

129. 

In  paragraph  33  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  14,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  establish  and  articulate  the 
class  agenda  or  the  class  learning  goals  for  student  learning  and,  as a result, 
students  were  confused  about  the  purpose  of  the  lesson.  At  the  beginning  of 
class,  [Respondent]  should  have  shared  the  overall  agenda  for  the  period  and 
the  intended  learning  objective  so  students  know  the  purpose  of  the  lesson  and 
overall  class  expectations.  At  8:44  a.m.,  forty-four  minutes  after  class  started, 
she  announced,  "Your  objective  today  is  to  accept  and  encourage  people." 
This  lesson  objective  does  not  align  with  any  of  the  Physical  Education 
Standards  nor  did  it  demonstrate  a  real  lesson  purpose.  At  8:48  a.m.,  one 
student  loudly  called  out,  "What?  What  did  you  say?  What  are  we  doing 
today?"  [Respondent]  did  not  respond  or  repeat  the  instructions  given.  At 
8:39  a.m.  [Respondent]  appeared  to  not  be  prepared  for  the  lesson  and  not 
know  what  the  objective  of  the  lesson  was.  She  yelled  out,  "Oh,  I  don't  even 
want  to  do  this  lesson  anymore  cause  (sic)  we  don't  even  have  enough 
footballs.  OK!  Hurry  up!  Everybody!  Let's  go!  Somebody  go  grab  those 
cones  and  bring  them  over  to  me."  She  further  induced  confusion  by  shouting, 
"Don't  even  start  with  me  today.  I'm  not  in  the  mood.  I  need  lines.  Give  me 
lines  now!"  At  8:41  a.m.  she  said,  "OK  ...  stand  up!  Stand!  Hey,  stand  up!" 
After  all  the  students  in  the  class  stood  she  yelled,  "I  only  want  the  first  person 
to  stand!  Come  on!"  Students  appeared  confused  about  what  they  were 
supposed  to  do.  A  student  called  out  to  her,  "What  do  we  do?"  Another 
student  yelled,  "What  are  we  doing?  Where  do  we  go?"  [Respondent] 
responded,  "OK...everybody,  sit!  Ready?  Sit!"  A  student  responded,  “What 
are  we  doing?  I  don’t  get  if  you  want  us  to  sit  or  stand?"  [Respondent]  did  not 
respond  to  the  student  comments  because  she  just  stood  at  the  front. 

30 

 

130. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  of  paragraph  33  of  the  Amended 
Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proof 
because  it  failed  to  demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  failed  to 
establish  and  articulate  the  class  agenda  or  the  class  learning  goals  for  student  learning  and, 
as  a  result,  students  were  confused  about  the  purpose  of  the  lesson.  Respondent  attempted  to 
engage  the  students  in  a  football  activity,  but  was  unable  to  do  so  because  of  the  lack  of 
equipment.  When  she  discovered  the  lack  of  equipment,  she  quickly  shifted  to  a  new  lesson 
plan  involving  dancing  which  did  not  require  equipment.  Although  there  was  initially  minor 
confusion  and  reluctance,  the  students  were  engaged  in  the  lesson. 

131. 

In  paragraph  34  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  at  about  12:20  p.m.,  [Respondent],  P.E. 
Teacher  at  Barack  Obama  Preparatory  Academy,  after  having  lost  her  keys 
yelled  the  following  at  Ms.  Manchan,  a  fellow  P.E,  teacher  in  the  presence  of 
students: 

a.  "Ms.  Manchan  open  up  the  locker  room  door  please!" 

[Respondent],  in  response  to  Ms.  Manchan's  request  to  stop  yelling,  yelled 

b. 
back:  "Ms.  Manchan  you  need  to  learn  how  to  respect  because  I'm  the 
authority!" 

132. 

District  established  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  34  of  the  Amended 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

133. 

In  paragraph  35  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  at  about  12:20  p.m.,  [Respondent],  P.E.  teacher 
at  Barack  Obama  Preparatory  Academy,  grabbed  Ms.  Manchan, a  fellow  P.E. 
teacher  by  her  sweatshirt  and  while  pulling  on  the  sweatshirt,  yelled:  "Ms. 
Manchan  you  need  to  learn  how  to  respect  because  I'm  the  authority  here!" 
This  caused  Ms.  Miller,  Campus  Aide,  to  step  in  and  break  up  the  altercation. 

134. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  35  of 

the  Amended  Accusation.  Ms.  Manchan  and  Ms.  Miller  were  the  instigators  of  the  incident, 
they  approached  Respondent,  cornered  her,  and  Ms.  Manchan  made  the  first  physical  contact 
with  Respondent.  Respondent  was  not  the  aggressor  and  any  physical  contact  she  had  with 
Ms.  Manchan  was  an  act  of  self-defense. 

135. 

In  paragraph  36  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2013,  after  the  6th  period,  [Respondent],  after  the 
altercation,  yelled  at  Ms.  Manchan:  "Ms.  Manchan  you  are  nothing!  I  am  the 
authority!" 

31 

 

  

| 

139. 

In  paragraph  38  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

136. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  36  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

137. 

In  paragraph  37  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  14,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  supervise  students  for  the 
entire  period.  At  8:28  a.m.  after  she  escorted  her  class  into  the  gymnasium, 
she  directed  seven  students  to  sit  on  a  bench  outside  the  gymnasium,  she  then 
closed  the  gymnasium  door.  While  the  students  were  sitting  outside,  they 
were  outside  of  her  direct  supervision.  The  school  principal,  Herbert  Jones, 
asked  one  of  the  students  why  they  had  to  sit  on  the  bench.  One  student 
responded,  "We  aren't  in  uniform.  We  have  time  out."  The  students  remained 
unsupervised  outside  of  the  gymnasium  for  the  remainder  of  the  class  period. 
During  this  time  the  students  sitting  outside  socialized  and  listened  to  music  on 
their  MP3  players  and  cell  phones. 

138. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  of  paragraph  37  of  the  Amended 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  students  that  Principal  Jones 
encountered  outside  of  the  gymnasium  were  not  Respondent's  students  and  were  not  under 
her  supervision. 

On  or  about  March  14,  2013,  [Respondent]  did  not  develop  stronger 
management  of  her  students  by  establishing  clear  behavior  expectations  and 
engaging  students  in  meaningful  lesson  or  create  a  classroom  climate  that 
promoted  fairness  and  respect.  She  did  not  develop  a  positive  rapport  with  her 
students  because  she  repeatedly  yelled  at  and  reprimanded  students.  At  8:34 
a.m.  she  yelled,  "Boys!  You  get  in  a  straight  line  now!  Do  it  before  I  run 
you!"  At  8:37  a.m.  she  sharply  yelled  to  the  entire  class:  "Hey!  I  asked  you  to 
give  me  a  boy's  and  girl's  line  but  you  can't  even  listen!  Go!  Go!  I  want  three 
and  three  of  each!  Do  it  before  you  all  run!  That  will  teach  you!"  At  8:39  a.m. 
she  yelled: 
No!  Now,  line  up  by  a  cone!  Why  aren't  you  ready?  Come  on!  Stand  up! 
I  said  ,  only  the  first  person!  Hey! 
No,  wait!  Only  the  first  person  stands  up! 
Only  the  first  person!"  At  8:42  a.m.  she  yelled:  "Ready  yet?  Sit!  Everybody 
sit!  Ok,  stand  up!"  At  8:57  a.m.  the  students  laughed  at  [Respondent]  when 
she  yelled  to  the  class:  “You  are  not  listening!  Follow  instructions!  You  know 
what?  That's  it!” 

"I'm  talking!  Hello!  Get  in  your  lines!  Don't  touch  those  cones! 

140. 

District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made 

the  statements  attributed  to  her  in  paragraph  38  of  the  Amended  Accusation.  However, 
District  failed  to  establish  that  those  statements  demonstrate  that  Respondent  did  not  have 
strong  management  skills,  did  not  establish  clear  behavior  expectations,  did  not  engage 
students  in  a  meaningful  lesson  and  did  not  create  a  classroom  climate  that  promoted  fairness 
and  respect.  Respondent  was  frustrated  with  the  lack  of  administrative  support  and 

32 

   

  

consequences  for  student  misbehavior.  She  used  a  loud  voice  to  get  the  students’  attention  in 
an  outdoor  space  and  to  project  authority. 

141. 

In  paragraph  39  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  14,  2013,  [Respondent]  was  not  developing  as  a 
professional  educator  because  she  was  not  showing  evidence  of  reflecting  on 
her  teaching  practice  or  establishing  professional  goals  as  to  grow 
professionally.  The  school  principal,  Herbert  Jones,  repeatedly  provided  her 
with  assistance  and  guidance,  formal  directives  with  regard  to  planning  lessons 
that  were  more  rigorous  and  developing  a  positive  rapport  with  her  students. 
[Respondent]  repeatedly  failed  to  use  the  assistance  and  guidance  provided 
and  did  not  develop  rapport  with  her  students.  She  did  not  prepare  necessary 
equipment  and  materials  for  her  lessons.  She  continued  to  engage  students  in 
low  level  lessons  that  did  not  require  critical  thinking  or  skill  application.  She 
continued  to  address  students  in  a  disrespectful  fashion. 

142. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  39  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  and  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  was  not  developing  as  a  professional.  Principal  Jones  referred  Respondent  to 
District  policies,  but  did  not  provide  Respondent  with  real  assistance,  guidance  or  useful 
training.  Respondent  showed  sincere  efforts  to  meet  Principal  Jones'  expectations  but 
struggled  with  the  lack  of  equipment  and  lack  of  administrative  support  for  discipline.  By 
the  end  of  her  two  years  in  local  District  7  at  John  Muir  and  Barack  Obama,  Respondent  was 
simply  exhausted  and  demoralized. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

1. 

In  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  allegations  of  the 

Charges  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than, 
the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal-App.3d  314, 
325.)  The  “preponderance  of  the  evidence”  standard  requires  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  that 
the  existence  of  a  fact  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (in  re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63 
Cal.App.4th  700,  709.) 

it 

Ht 

if 

33 

 

  

Cause  for  Dismissal 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Education  Code”  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a),  are  established.  In  this  case,  the  District  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal  based 
on  subdivisions  (a)(1)  immoral  conduct,  (a)(2)  unprofessional  conduct,  (a)(4)  dishonesty 
(a)(5)  unsatisfactory  performance,  (a)(6)  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  (a)(8)persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing 
board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.  District  also  seeks  dismissal  under 

_  Education  Code  section  44939,  subdivision  (b)  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments 
without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  The  Amended  Accusation  does  not  specifically  identify  which  factual 
allegations  support  each  alleged  cause  for  dismissal. 

3. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1).  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with 
rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.)  There  was  no  evidence  to  support  a  finding  that  Respondent  engaged 
in  immoral  conduct.  The  various  racist  and  inappropriate  statements  that  Respondent 
allegedly  made  were  not  proven  and  the  evidence  revealed  that  Respondent  was  assaulted  by 
Ms.  Manchan  who  instigated  the  confrontation  and  only  defended  herself.  It  was  proven  by 
a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  a  single  statement  about  student 
RIM  L.  in  the  heat  of  the  moment  and  that  statement  was  retaliatory  and  in  violation  of  a 
directive  from  her  supervisor.  However,  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  the  single  instance  constituted  immoral  conduct. 

4, 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(2).  Unprofessional  conduct  in  the  teaching  profession  has  been  defined  as 
that  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  the  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a  member  of 
the  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled 
in  part,  on  another  ground,  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588,  fn.  7.)  The 
evidence  in  this  case  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct. 
Instead,  it  was  established  that  Respondent  used  a  loud  voice,  attempted  to  take  control  of  the 

  

?  All  further  references  to  Code  shall  mean  the  Education  Code. 

34 

 

  

  

physical  education  classroom  and  manage  students  with  extremely  challenging  behaviors 
without  any  support  from  District  administration. 

5. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  was  dishonest  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 
Dishonesty  “connotes  a  disposition  to  deceive”  and  “necessarily  includes  the  element  of  bad 
faith.”  It  means  “fraud,  deception,  betrayal,  faithlessness,”  and  “denotes  an  absence  of 
integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray.”  Midway  School 
District  v.  Griffieath  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  13,  19;  Hogg  v.  Real  Estate  Commissioner  (1942  )  54 
Cal.  App.  2d  712,  717. 

6. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  unsatisfactory  performance  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(5).  The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 
Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for  unprofessional 
conduct  in  section  44932,  and  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  the  Legislature  intended  to  enact 
completely  duplicative  statutes  (In  re  Maes  (2010)  185  Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110), 
unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from  unprofessional  conduct.  In 
fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory  performance”  does  not 
include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

7. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory  performance  to  be 
preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance.  Section  44938  refers  to  section 
44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school  districts  should  evaluate 
and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for  discipline  may 
be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  in  an  unsatisfactory  manner  to  her 
employing  school  district.  However,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  purpose  of  the  statute 
giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members 
are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly 
and  perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v. 
Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Therefore,  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary 
or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated  employee  has  performed 
in  an  unsatisfactory  manner. 

8. 

In  this  case,  Complainant  failed  to  establish  unsatisfactory  conduct  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  because  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of 
unsatisfactory  performance.  Respondent  received  two  below  standard  evaluations  and 
multiple  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts/Service.  However,  those  evaluations  and  Notices 
were  for  the  most  part,  based  upon  assertions  that  were  not  proven  at  hearing.  Of  the  many 
allegations  asserted  in  the  Notices  and  below  standard  evaluations,  only  the  allegation  that 

35 

 

Respondent  made a  retaliatory  comment  about  student  Rj  L.  was  proven  at  hearing.  The 
comment  was  the  subject  of  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  dated  May  25,  2012. 
Respondent  received  an  unpaid  suspension  for  that  conduct.  Respondent  was  among  a  group 
of  teachers  targeted  for  dismissal  by  the  District  as  part  of  a  plan  to  improve  the  quality  of 
teachers  in  the  District.  As  such,  she  was  subjected  to  intense  scrutiny,  surprise  observations, 
and  received  little  support  from  the  administration.  Furthermore,  Respondent  was  not 
provided  meaningful  opportunity  to  improve  her  performance,  or  any  real  assistance  or 
guidance  from  her  administrators.  Instead,  Respondent  was  directed  to  read  various  bulletins 
and  policies.  A  comparison  of  Respondent's  evaluation  from  John  Muir  with  that  from 
Barack  Obama,  reveals  that  she  improved  her  performance  in  several  areas  including 
attendance.  Under  these  circumstances,  Complainant’s  conclusion  that  Respondent’s 
performance  was  unsatisfactory  must  be  viewed  as  arbitrary  and  capricious. 

9, 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(6).  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for 
teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429, 
1444.)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not 
remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of 
the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.)  Respondent  expressed  a  sincere  desire  to  improve  her 
teaching  and  did  make  improvements  as  evidenced  by  a  comparison  of  her  two  evaluations. 
While  Respondent  was  not  a  good  fit  for  Barack  Obama  or  John  Muir,  each  of  which  had 
significant  challenges  as  low  performing  schools  plagued  with  disciplinary  problems,  that 
does  not  mean  that  she  is  unfit  to  teach.  Respondent  was  faced  with  challenging  student 
behaviors,  verbal  and  physical  assaults,  a  lack  of  resources,  a  lack  of  administrative  support 
and  an  ongoing  evaluation  process  that  was  demeaning  at  best.  Nevertheless,  Respondent 
trudged  on  and  provided  instruction  to  her  students  to  the  best  of  her  ability  and  responded  to. 
direction  and  suggestion  from  administrators. 

10. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  Board,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8).  Cause 
for  discipline  here  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules  or  district  policies.  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal  .App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.)  However,  there  must  be  a  “showing  of  intentional  and 
continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (Jd.  at  p.  1196.)  The  violation  must  be  persistent  or 
“motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of  the 
Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77, 
81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are 
generally  not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  322.)  In  this  case,  Complainant  alleged  that  Respondent  made  a 
series  of  racist  remarks,  violated  a  variety  of  District  policies  and  a  Board  policy.  These 

36 

 

  

allegations  were  not  proven  at  hearing.  Similarly,  Complainant’s  allegations  that 
Respondent  was  excessively  absent  and  tardy  in  violation  of  the  District  Attendance  Policy 
were  not  proven.  Complainant  proved  only  that  Respondent  made a  retaliatory  statement  in 
the  heat  of  the  moment  and  was  suspended  for  making  the  statement.  Respondent's  conduct 
was  not  proven  to  be  habitual  or  continuing, 

11. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district  within  the 
meaning  of  Code  section  44939,  subdivision  (b).  There  was  no  evidence  that  Respondent 
willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments.  Complainant  asserts  that  Respondent 
willfully  refused  to  perform  a  regular  assignment  when  she  left  her  class  with  Assistant 
Principal  Gonzalez  in  charge  of  the  students.  The  incident  does  not  support  a  finding  that 
Respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  a  regular  assignment.  Instead,  Respondent  left  her 
students  in  the  capable  hands  of  an  administrator  while  she  extricated  herself  from a  volatile 
situation.  In  other  instances,  Respondent  dutifully  followed  direction  to  leave  her  preferred 
assignment  at  Carnegie  and  report  to  John  Muir  where  she  was  designated  as  a  "pool 
teacher"  and  required  to  report  to  the  school  office  or  library  without  a  teaching  assignment 
even  though  she  felt  humiliated  by  the  situation. 

12. 

Respondent  followed  the  curriculum  for  physical  education,  developed  lesson 

plans,  and  incorporated  suggestions  from  the  administration.  She  attempted  to  implement  the 
curriculum  despite  extreme  behavior  challenges  from  students  at  John  Muir  and  a  lack  of 
adequate  equipment  and  support  at  Barack  Obama.  At  Barack  Obama  Respondent 
demonstrated  her  enthusiasm  for  her  assignment  by  assuming  the  role  of  defacto  department 
chair  and  handling  the  girls  locker  room  as  the  sole  female  physical  education  teacher.  To 
the  extent  that  Respondent  deviated  from  the  curriculum,  the  deviations  were  minor  and 
made  for  the  benefit  of  the  students  by  necessity,  because  necessary  equipment  was  not 
available  to  her. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

13. 

Here,  the  Commission  did  not  find  cause  for  dismissal  under  any  of  the 
grounds  asserted  by  the  District.  Nevertheless,  an  analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  is 
informative. 

14. 

Generally,  in  deciding  whether  cause  for  dismissal  on  the  grounds  of 

unprofessional  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service,  it  also  must  be  established  that  a 
teacher’s  misconduct  relates  to  her  fitness  to  teach,  within  the  meaning  of  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  227-230).  The  Morrison  analysis  does  not  apply  to 
cause  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance  or  persistent  violation  of  school  rules, 
laws  or  policies  because  such  theories,  by  definition,  have  a  direct  nexus  with  teaching.  (Id., 
at  pp.  227-230).  With  regard  to  the  remaining  identified  causes  for  dismissal]  that  must  be 
analyzed,  all  of  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  were  considered  and  compared  to  the  facts 

37 

 

established  above.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 
satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 
Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established, 
but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.)  As  applied  in  this  case,  the  applicable  factors  do  not  support  a  nexus  between 
Respondent's  conduct  and  respondent’s  fitness  to  teach. 

15. 

In 

the  Morrison  case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s  conduct  and 

determined  that  a  school  board  may  consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity; 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

| 

16. 

In  Morrison,  the  California  Supreme  Court  noted  that  legislation  authorizing 
disciplinary  action  against  the  holders  of  a  variety  of  certificates,  licenses  and  government 
jobs,  other  than  teaching,  contain  general  terms.  The  Court  had  not  attempted  to  formulate 
explicit  definitions  of  those  terms,  but  had  given  those  terms  more  precise  meaning  by 
referring  to  the  particular  profession  or  specific  governmental  position  to  which  they  were 
applicable.  ([bid.,  at  p.  220).  With  regard  to  such  general  terms  “immoral”  or  unprofessional 
conduct”  and  “moral  turpitude,”  those  terms  had  to  be  interpreted  in  a  manner  bearing  upon 
the  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach.  “Without  such  a  reasonable  interpretation,  the  terms  would  be 
susceptible  to  so  broad  an  application  as  possibly  to  subject  to  discipline  virtually  every 
teacher  in  the  state.”  (/bid.,  at  p.  225.)  Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not 
merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the 
conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach. 
(Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman,  45  Cal.  3d,  208,  220.)  The  Morrison  factors 
are  analyzed  with  regard  to  Respondent’s  conduct  as  follows: 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or 

fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent's  conduct,  specifically  her  loud 
voice  and  her  retaliation  against  student  Rj  L.,  the  only  factual  allegations  that  were 
proven,  had  a  mild  effect  on  her  students.  Respondent  had  a  negligible  impact  on  her 
colleagues  and  they  had  mixed  reactions  to  her.  Some  of  her  colleagues,  such  as  Ms.  Caro, 
Ms.  Foster  and  Mr.  Catanzaretti  got  along  with  Respondent  and  others  such  as  Ms.  Manchan 
and  Ms.  Holmes  disliked  her. 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The 

conduct  was  proximate  in  time. 

38 

 

    

  

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher. 

Respondent  held  a  physical  education  credential  which  was  the  appropriate  credential  for  the 
teaching  assignment. 

(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 

publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct. 
struggling  with  challenging  student  behavior,  verbal  and  physical  threats  and  assaults,  and 
received  no  real  assistance  or  guidance  from  her  administrators.  Instead,  she  was  targeted  for 
dismissal  and  not  given  the  support  that  she  needed  to  be  successful  in  new  and  challenging 
assignments. 

As  extenuating  circumstances,  Respondent  was 

(e)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 

resulting  in  the  conduct.  There  was  nothing  praiseworthy  or  blameworthy  about 
Respondent's  conduct. 

(f)  Morrison  Factor:  Likelihood of  Recurrence:  The  conduct  is  likely  to  reoccur  if 
Respondent  is  placed  in  the  same  circumstances  without  appropriate  support  and  training. 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 
chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on  constitutional 
rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination  of  Respondent  from 
the  District. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

17. 
unfitness  to  teach  . 
(California  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 

.,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 

. 

18. 

In  this  instance,  the  Commission  found  no  cause  for  dismissal  of  Respondent. 

District  failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  a  single  cause  for  discipline  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Substantial  portions  of  the  case  were  based  upon  allegations 
made  by  students  that  Respondent  made a series  of  inappropriate  and  racist  statements. 
District  failed  to  establish  these  statements  were  made.  Notably,  only  a  single  student 
testified  at  hearing  and  her  testimony,  which  was  not  seen  as  credible  by  the  Commission, 
did  not  establish  that  Respondent  made  any  such  statements.  Another  large  portion  of  the 
case  concerned  Respondent's  absences  and  tardies  as  recorded  in  the  records  at  John  Muir. 
The  records  produced  at  hearing,  were  not  reliable  and  did  not  establish  Respondent's 
attendance.  Notably,  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Service/Acts  and  Below  Standard 
Evaluations  which  were  offered  by  District  to  support  their  case  for  dismissal  of  Respondent 
were  in  large  part  based  upon  those  allegations. 

19.  |  Respondent  may  have  room  to  improve  her  teaching  skills,  but  this  fact  alone 

does  not  support  a  conclusion  that  she  should  be  discharged  from  her  certificated  teaching 
position.  On  the  contrary,  the  Commission  found  unanimously  that  District  failed  to 
demonstrate  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent 

39 

 

  

from  her  employment  with  the  District  based  upon  the  allegations  set  forth  in  the  Amended 
Accusation  and  the  evidence  presented  at  the  administrative  hearing. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Anita  Castro  shall  be 

reinstated  to  her  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District. 

    

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence 

   

Dated:  January  22,  2016 

Dated:  January  22,  2016 

Dated:  January  22,  2016 

Miller, 

Member 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence 

he  Hickman 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence 

40 

  

 

  

