BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
NEWPORT-MESA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

LIANNE PFISTER,
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2014010104

DECISION

This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) in Costa Mesa on March 10-13, 17-20, 24-26, 30, 2015; April 1-2, 2015; June
13-17 and 20-22, 2016; and August 8-10, 2016. The Commission consisted of Christianne
Off, M.A., CCC-SLP; Susan Svendsen, M.S., CCC-SLP; and Erlinda G. Shrenger, 
Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, who 
presided.

Anthony P. De Marco, Esq., and Barbara J. Ginsburg, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, 
Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented Newport-Mesa Unified School District (District).  Daniel
J. Kolodziej, Esq., Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented Lianne Pfister (Respondent).

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and the hearing was concluded on 
August 10, 2016.  The record was held open for the submission of written closing briefs as 
follows:  the District's brief was due by August 26, 2016, Respondent's brief was due by
September 26, 2016, and the District's reply brief was due by October 7, 2016.  The parties
timely filed their briefs. The District's closing brief was marked as Exhibit 58 and its reply 
brief was marked as Exhibit 59.  Respondent's closing brief was marked as Exhibit 1518.
The record was closed and the case was submitted for decision on October 7, 2016.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

2.

On November 12, 2013, a Statement of Charges was filed with the District's 

governing board by John Caldecott, Executive Director of Human Resources for the District.
The District's governing board adopted a resolution on November 12, 2013, indicating its
intent to dismiss Respondent from employment based on the acts and conduct described in 
the Statement of Charges.

3.

On November 15, 2013, the District served respondent with a Notice of Intent 

to Immediately Suspend Without Pay and Dismiss, which notified Respondent of the 
District's intent to dismiss her within 30 days unless she demanded a hearing. On December 
6, 2013, Respondent filed a Request for Hearing. On December 17, 2013, the District served
Respondent with a Notice of Accusation, Accusation, and related documents. Respondent
filed a Notice of Defense. All jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Respondent's Background

4.

Respondent is 58 years old.  She is of Hawaiian descent and was born and 
raised in Hawaii.  She is married and has two sons (ages 25 and 19).  Her younger son has
high functioning autism.

5.

Respondent received her bachelors of science degree in speech pathology and

audiology from the University of Hawaii in 1980.  She received her master's degree in 
speech pathology and audiology from California State University, Los Angeles.  In 2005, she 
began a Ph.D. program through Walden University.  Respondent progressed through the 
Ph.D. program up to the point of doing her dissertation but her progress was delayed for 
reasons not specified in her testimony. Respondent testified that she is allowed to include in 
her title the initials "ABD," which means "all but dissertation."

6.

Respondent holds a Certificate of Clinical Competence (CCC) from the 

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). She holds a California state 
license to practice as a speech language pathologist. She also holds a Clinical Rehabilitative
Services Credential with Special Class Authorization and a certificate of school audiometry.

7.

Since 2013, Respondent has worked for Chapman University as an adjunct 
professor of communication disorders and sciences.  She teaches in the post-baccalaureate
program.  She also supervises master's degree students when they are in the field to get hours 
needed for their licensure.  Respondent is authorized to supervise the students in various
activities such as assessment, providing therapy, and writing reports. In addition, 
Respondent works in a private practice office and per diem for home health care agencies 
and in hospital settings.

8.

Respondent has approximately 29 years' experience working as a speech 

language pathologist (SLP) in public schools.  She began her career working in preschools
and elementary schools in various school districts.  Respondent did itinerant SLP work in 
those settings for many years but what she really wanted to do was work in high schools 
because she felt her skills were best served in that setting. Respondent was hired by the

2

District as an SLP on August 23, 2006. She worked at Corona Del Mar High School for five 
years prior to her assignment to Mariners Elementary School (Mariners) for the 2012-2013
school year.

Position and Duties

9.

The District's Special Education Procedural Handbook (Handbook) "provides
special and general educators information regarding the process and procedures for students 
with special needs who require special education services."  (Exh. 1, p. 175.)

10.

The basic functions of an SLP for the District are to "screen, assess and 

provide specialized speech and language services and assistance for children and young 
adults with communication disorders who qualify for services as established by State
Standards; participate in developing and implementing Individual Education Plans (IEPs) for 
students who qualify for Designated Instruction and Services (DIS); provide speech and 
language therapy to individuals and/or groups of students."  (Exh. 1, p. 347) These basic 
functions are performed by the SLP "[u]nder the direction of the Principal and Director of 
Special Education."  (Id.)

11.

The representative duties of an SLP for the District include, but are not limited 

to, providing "specialized services and assistance with the assessment and screening of 
children and young adults with speech and language disorders; utilize age-appropriate
standardized and non-standardized testing and assessment tools; provide phonological, 
language voice and fluency training in individual or small groups of students"; "[p]repare, 
type and maintain a variety of related records and reports, such as IEP's, annual assessment 
reports, daily speech logs, attendance register, notes and files." (Exh. 1, p. 347.)

12. A "case carrier" is the IEP team member who is in charge of a student's IEP and 
schedules and runs the IEP meetings, prepares all IEP documentation, maintains the student's 
records, and ensures that services and supports are being implemented in accordance with the 
IEP.  In short, the person designated as a student's case carrier is responsible for all aspects of 
that student's IEP.  In general, an SLP will be designated a student's case carrier when the 
only service the student is receiving is for speech and language. However, when the student 
has needs in academic areas, a special education teacher will be designated the case carrier.
In that situation, the SLP participates as an IEP team member only with respect to the 
student's needs in the area of communication and has no case carrier responsibilities.

Confidential Files

13.

The District maintains a "confidential file" (also referred to as a "brown file"

or "legal file") for each special education student. The District requires that "[a]ll 
confidential special education files beginning with an initial IEP must be organized in the 
manner detailed [in the Handbook]."   (Exh. 1, p. 277.)  The procedures to organize the 
confidential file include the following:

3

"1.  The student's case carrier is responsible for maintaining the ONE 
Confidential file at the student's school site.  [¶] . . .[¶]

"4. Case carrier and team members (SLP, Psych, APE, OT) will place ALL 
original documents, i.e. all original correspondence, IEP documents, all 
protocols, etc. in the appropriate sections (see Confidential File Organization
chart; no duplicates). [¶] … [¶]

"6.  ALL protocols, from the last 6 years, are to be placed in a manila 
envelope and stored at the back of the Brown File.  Protocols beyond 6 years 
are to be placed in manila envelopes, labeled with the student's name and birth 
date, and sent to Special Education Records, Attn: Student Records 
Technician, at the District Office.

"7. This file is considered the ONLY Confidential [file] for each student. It 
contains ALL original documents and is to be stored in a common area in the
front office of the school where the student attends. It is to be kept in a cabinet
that can be locked. [¶] … [¶]

"9. When an IEP meeting is held, the case carrier will bring the
CONFIDENTIAL file to the meeting, and will be responsible for the [sic]
maintaining an organized file. [¶] … [¶]

"11.  Zone Coordinators will need to rely on Genesea [now Synergy, discussed 
below] for IEP information and will travel to school sites when needing access 
to the Confidential File.  It [is] imperative that ALL information be entered
into Genesea (including notes) ensuring that Coordinators and attorneys have 
access to current data."

(Exh. 1, p. 277 [bold and italics in original].)

Synergy Computer System

14.

An SLP for the District must have knowledge of, among other things, record-
keeping techniques, and must have the ability to, among other things, maintain records and 
prepare reports, operate a computer terminal to enter data, maintain records and generate 
reports, and maintain current knowledge of program rules, regulations, requirements and 
restrictions.  (Exh. 1, p. 348.)

15.

The District's computer system for entering data, maintaining records, and

generating documents and reports is called Synergy.1 Synergy is a web-based program for

1 Synergy was formerly known as Genesea. An example of the Synergy screen is 

found at Exhibit 1, page 637.

4

generating IEPs and all related and supporting documents for an IEP, such as IEP meeting 
notices and assessment plans.  Synergy keeps track of when IEPs are due.  Every case carrier 
has a "portfolio" in Synergy which lists all of the students that the case carrier is servicing 
and keeps track of all IEP dates and deadlines.  The program will send alarms or signals as 
IEP related dates and deadlines approach.

16. Workflow is a section of Synergy that keeps track of the steps for completing
an IEP. Once the case carrier has the assessment plan signed by the parent, the case carrier 
initiates the Workflow process through Synergy. The Workflow screen guides the case 
carrier through the various steps for preparing an IEP and ensuring that none of the required 
steps in the process are missed.  The case carrier enters the date each step in the IEP process 
is completed and/or the status of the particular step.  For example, the case carrier will input 
the date that the student's parent responded to an IEP meeting notice and agreed to a meeting 
date; the date the IEP meeting was convened and whether the parent attended; the date the 
parent gave full consent to the IEP; and the date the "IEP is finalized as current or FAPE 
offer."2 The data entered in the Workflow section of Synergy is not reported to the State.

17.

CASEMIS is another section of the Synergy program.3 The information in 

CASEMIS is reported by the District to the State two times per school year, in December and 
June, as required under special education law.  When an IEP is finalized in Synergy, data 
from the IEP will auto-populate the fields in CASEMIS.  For example, the "effective date" 
shown in CASEMIS is supposed to match the date the IEP is finalized and approved and 
consented to by the parent.  The "effective date" in CASEMIS is used to determine whether 
the IEP complies with IEP timelines.  A report or alarm goes out if the "effective date" in 
CASEMIS indicates non-compliance with IEP timelines for the particular student's IEP.
Although the "effective date" in CASEMIS is auto-populated by data from the finalized IEP, 
the "effective date" can also be manually changed, for example, to a date that gives the 
appearance that an IEP is timely or to prevent alarms indicating the IEP is untimely.

Mariners Elementary School

18. Mariners is a school with approximately 800 students.  It has one preschool 

special day class (SDC) and classrooms for kindergarten through sixth grade (K-6). At all 
relevant times, Pam Coughlin was the principal at Mariners.

19. At all relevant times, Heidi McDowell was a special education zone coordinator 
for the District.  The District is divided into zones.  McDowell was the zone coordinator for 
the zone that included Mariners. In general, the duties of a zone coordinator are to act as a
special education administrator for the schools within their zone, provide support to staff, 
parents, and site administrators, attend IEP meetings, and work with staff on compliance 

2 Examples of the Workflow screen are found at Exhibit 1, pages 598, 639, 649, 665, 

and 690.

3 Examples of the CASEMIS screen are found at Exhibit 1, pages 595, 635, and 638.

5

preparing for IEPs and other special education issues that may arise at a school site. The
zone coordinator's duties also include supervising the SLPs assigned to schools within their 
zone. McDowell was Respondent's supervisor when she was the SLP assigned to Mariners.

20. McDowell has over 20 years' experience working in special education.  She has

a general education credential, a special education credential, and an administrative 
credential.  She also has a master's degree in special education. McDowell is not an SLP.

21. McDowell first became familiar with Respondent when they both worked at 

Lincoln Elementary School.  At that time, McDowell was a program specialist and was not 
Respondent's supervisor.  They interacted during the course of attending IEP meetings.
McDowell's impression of Respondent as the SLP at Lincoln was that Respondent was very
good.  She did interesting things with therapy and was very cutting edge in using technology
as part of her therapy. There were many students with autism at Lincoln. Respondent was
very knowledgeable about autism and did a nice job working with those students.

22. Respondent and Lindsey Murphy were the assigned SLPs at Mariners for the 

2012-2013 school year. The SLPs assigned to Mariners in the prior school year (2011-2012)
were Mimi Turgeon and Kathy Murphy. At the end of the 2011-2012 school year, Mimi 
Turgeon retired and Kathy Murphy was reassigned to Corona Del Mar High School. Mimi
Turgeon had been the SLP at Mariners for over 20 years before she retired. Principal
Coughlin was good friends with Turgeon and held her in high regard.

23. Respondent worked five days per week at Mariners while Lindsey Murphy only

worked one day per week (Tuesday) at Mariners. Jessica Haffar was a graduate student at 
Chapman University.  She worked as a graduate student intern at Mariners three days per 
week and assisted Respondent and Lindsey Murphy during therapy sessions.  Respondent 
was Haffar's graduate student supervisor.  Haffar worked at Mariners for the first half of the 
2012-2013 school year until December 13, 2012.

2012-2013 School Year

24. Respondent and Lindsey Murphy were both new SLPs to Mariners.  In early

September, they sent a letter to the parents of Mariners students introducing themselves and 
student intern Jessica Haffar and expressing that they were looking forward to working 
collaboratively with the parents and teachers. (Exh. 1040.)

25. The school hours at Mariners were from 8:35 a.m. to 3 p.m. The schedules for 

the library, physical education, computer lab, music, science, and RSP groups, were
distributed the week of September 5, 2013. (Exh. 1043.) Respondent and Lindsey Murphy
prepared the speech schedule for the students on the SLP caseload. (Exh. 1070.)  On the 
speech schedule, starting from 9:15 a.m., the school day was divided into 30-minute blocks
of time, with each block designed for a particular speech activity, push-in sessions, pull-out
sessions, group sessions, assessments, consults, Synergy and Medi-Cal billings. The speech
schedule for Tuesday, when Respondent and Lindsey Murphy were both at the Mariners 

6

campus, indicated that therapy sessions with Lindsey Murphy occurred in Room C and 
therapy sessions with Respondent occurred in Room D. Teachers were expected to direct 
their students to the correct room.

26. According to emails between Respondent and Heidi McDowell in September 

2012, the SLP caseload at Mariners consisted of 13 SDC preschoolers and 65 K-6 students, 
for a total of 78 students.  (Exh. 1049.)  In the emails, Lindsey Murphy was identified as case
carrier for 13 students, and Respondent was identified as case carrier for the remaining 65 
students. This division of caseload accounted for the fact that Lindsey Murphy was at 
Mariners only one day per week while Respondent was at Mariners five days per week.  For 
students who required more than one speech therapy session per week, Lindsey Murphy
would provide therapy on Tuesday and Respondent would provide the additional therapy
sessions on other days of the week.

27. Respondent and Lindsey Murphy worked with all students and did not 
differentiate between preschool SDC students and the K-6 students.  This was in contrast to 
the division of work between Mimi Turgeon and Kathy Murphy in the previous school year.
Kathy Murphy was at Mariners two days per week and all of preschool students were
assigned to her caseload.  Mimi Turgeon was the full-time SLP and only had K-6 students on
her caseload.

28. At the start of the 2012-2013 school year, Respondent and Lindsey Murphy

found that SLP Mimi Turgeon had qualified many students for speech services solely on the
basis of articulation issues.  Both Respondent and Lindsey Murphy were of the impression 
that many of the articulation-only students should not have been qualified for speech.  They
felt that those students' issues should have first been addressed through interventions 
provided by their teachers in the classroom.  Respondent and Lindsey Murphy exited many
students from speech at the start of the school year, either because the student's speech issue 
had resolved itself or there were no longer any speech issues with the student.

29. Respondent and Lindsey Murphy implemented a new procedure for teachers to 

refer students for speech services.  Respondent notified the teachers of the new procedures in 
an email dated September 26, 2012, which read: "Aloha Awesome Mariners teachers! [¶] If 
you have a student you want to refer for speech consult (i.e. to determine if we need to 
pursue further action), I will have a stack of forms in my mailbox for you to access and fill 
out for documentation.  If a child has other issues other than speech/articulation sounds, they 
should go through the SST process as there may be other factors involved that possibly need
to be addressed.  Let me know if you have any questions or need additional assistance.
Thanks for your patience!!!"  (Exh. 1053.)

30. As the 2012-2013 school year unfolded, there was some confusion about the 

new speech procedures implemented by the SLP team.  For example, on October 10, 2012, 
Respondent sent an email to Mariners teachers to address the situation that "some students 
are being sent to speech at their unscheduled times leading to some confusion."  (Exh. 1058.)
Respondent's email reminded the teachers that on Tuesdays, speech students have to be 

7

directed to a specific speech therapy room, either Room D (for sessions with Respondent and 
student intern Jessica Haffar) or Room C (for sessions with Lindsey Murphy).  The room 
assignments for Tuesday were indicated on the speech schedule.  Respondent believed that 
some of the "confusion" was due to students not going to the correct assigned room.

31.

Some teachers complained to Principal Coughlin about Respondent. They did

not first speak with Respondent before complaining to the principal. For example, one
teacher complained that her students went to the speech room for therapy on Wednesday and 
Respondent was not there.  (Exh. 1064.)  As it turned out, the teacher had sent her students to 
the speech room on the first Wednesday of the month.  Respondent had previously informed
all teachers that she had an SLP meeting at the district office on the first Wednesday of every
month from 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., but she was available on other Wednesdays for make-up
sessions. Other teachers complained that their speech referrals were not being handled
promptly. Respondent explained to the teachers the new procedure and that Lindsay Murphy
would handle all speech referrals in the order received.  According to Respondent, Principal 
Coughlin came to the speech room and was angry because of the complaints she had
received from the teachers.

32.

Respondent had asked Principal Coughlin if the SLP team could do an in-

service training for the teachers and staff at Mariners to introduce the SLP team and explain 
the new speech procedures.  The principal's response was to allow the SLP team to provide 
in-service training to teachers on an individual basis, which Respondent thought was 
impractical.  However, later on, the principal allowed the SLP team to do an in-service but 
only for the kindergarten teachers.

33.

On October 16, 2012, the SLP team (i.e., Respondent, Lindsey Murphy, and 
Jessica Haffar) was coming back from lunch and entered the main office. The SLP team's 
scheduled lunch time was from 12:00 p.m. to 12:40 p.m., and then they had collaboration 
time scheduled from 12:40 p.m. to 1:00 p.m.  The SLP team returned from lunch and entered 
the main office at 12:55 p.m.  Principal Coughlin called out all of the SLP team for returning 
late from lunch in front of everyone who was in the main office.  The SLP team members 
were shocked and offended by the principal's angry tone and how she berated them in front 
of everyone who was in the main office.  The team had been discussing speech cases over 
lunch and during the drive back to school.  Later, Lindsey Murphy spoke with Principal
Coughlin about the incident.  During that conversation, Principal Coughlin stated she 
received complaints from six teachers that Respondent was not seeing students according to 
the speech schedule, which Respondent disputed.  The principal stated she was going to be 
checking every day whether Respondent was back from lunch at 12:40 p.m. and students 
were being seen according to the speech schedule. Lindsey Murphy's impression was that 
Principal Coughlin was listening to the teachers' reports but not speaking to Respondent 
about them. (Exhs. 1071, 1077.)

34. For the first half of the 2012-2013 school year, Respondent felt unduly stressed
and overwhelmed by the SLP workload at Mariners. She felt hostility and resistance from 
Principal Coughlin and certain teachers. Respondent was handling all SLP duties almost

8

single-handedly since Lindsey Murphy was at Mariners only on Tuesday.  All of the duties 
and tasks related to student IEPs, providing therapy to students, conducting assessments, etc.,
fell on Respondent. By emails to Heidi McDowell and others, Respondent requested help to 
address the SLP issues  and concerns that were arising at Mariners.  (E.g., Exhs. 1054, 1104.)
By December 2013, Respondent requested to be transferred to another school site. (Exhs.
1144, 1149.) The subject line on her December 19, 2012 email to Denise Knutsen was "Still 
needing help."  (Exh. 1152.) Respondent was not transferred and continued as the SLP at 
Mariners for the second half of the 2012-2013 school year.

35.

In January 2013, Respondent was working on IEPs that she acknowledged 
were "a bit late."  (Exh. 1156.)  She communicated by email with Lindsey Murphy about 
evaluations and recommendations for exiting some of the students from speech.  (Exhs. 
1155, 1156, 1159.)

36.

As noted in Finding 26, above, Lindsey Murphy was identified in September 

2012 emails as the carrier for 13 students.  (Exh. 1049.)  However, Lindsey Murphy
apparently was not identified as a case carrier in Synergy.  This was confirmed in Lindsey
Murphy's email to Heidi McDowell on March 5, 2013, in which she wrote that she "was not 
the case carrier for any cases at Mariners" and Respondent "does them all since I am only
one day."  (Exh. 1163.)

37.

Teacher complaints about Respondent continued.  For example, on March 12, 
2013, a teacher complained to Principal Coughlin that she saw students playing with Legos 
during speech therapy.  (Exh. 1167.) The teacher did not first speak with Respondent before 
complaining to the principal. Respondent denied the students were "playing." She explained 
the students were helping the kindergartners to build a structure that they were problem 
solving. The kindergartners had come to the speech office 10 minutes early.  According to 
Respondent, the teacher "swung the door open, saw the children helping the kinders, and did 
not say ONE word then closed the door --- she could have easily called me instead."  (Exh. 
1167.) Respondent later emailed the teacher to explain that the students were not simply 
"playing" with Legos and that she uses Legos or other manipulatives during therapy.  (Exh
1183.)  Teachers continued to complain to Principal Coughlin that Respondent was absent or 
not in the speech office when they sent their students for therapy.  (Exh. 1171.)  According to 
Respondent, there were some teachers who sent their students to speech before their 
scheduled therapy time.

38.

(A) On March 22, 2013, Heidi McDowell, Special Education Coordinator, 

held a conference with Respondent to discuss issues related to maintaining compliance with 
IEPs. McDowell called the meeting with Respondent after receiving email alerts in Synergy
of overdue IEPs for students with Respondent designated as the case carrier. The conference 
is summarized in a memorandum dated March 28, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 712.)

(B) During the conference, McDowell and Respondent discussed that 

CASEMIS data indicated Respondent had 16 overdue IEPs as of March 18, 2013.
Respondent admitted she was not in compliance with IEP timelines for the IEPs for seven 

9

students: KB, SD, KG, LN, ZP, ZR, and BW.4 Respondent acknowledged the problems with 
the IEPs and that she understood the importance of complying with IEP timelines, and she 
agreed that in the future her IEPs would meet required deadlines.  McDowell directed 
Respondent to complete all of her overdue IEPs by no later than April 12, 2013. That gave 
Respondent three weeks to complete all of her late IEPs.  (Spring Break was April 15-19,
2013.) During the conference, Respondent indicated she could get the paperwork in order
and complete the overdue IEPs by the April 12, 2013 deadline.

39.

On March 22, 2013, Lindsey Murphy notified McDowell that she had taken 

over as case carrier for four students.  (Exh. 1184.) On May 1, 2013, McDowell moved eight 
more students from Respondent to Lindsey Murphy as case carrier.  (Exh. 1213.)

40.

(A) Patti White (White) is an SLP who has been employed by the District 

since June 2004. She has known Respondent for 17 years. Respondent was her daughter's 
SLP.  White became an SLP because of Respondent, who mentored her.   White wrote a
character reference letter for Respondent dated June 1, 2012.  (Exh. 1248, p. 19.) White
testified credibly at this hearing.

(B) On April 29 and 30, 2013, White went to Mariners to help Respondent.

White finished work at her assigned school site at 1:30 p.m., so she went to Mariners in the 
afternoon.  Mariners was just down the street from White's assigned school site.  White
helped to organize Respondent's files, which were in disarray. White was "shocked" that
Respondent's speech office was so disorganized and there were piles of papers everywhere.
White could not open the bottom drawer of the filing cabinet.  White found that students 
confidential files were incomplete and missing documents, such as notices, assessment plans, 
and signature pages.  She also found that IEPs were indicated as current on Synergy but were
not printed out and placed in the confidential files. White printed out 10 of the IEPs to help 
get things organized.  (Exhs. 1208; 1194, 1202.) She printed out the IEPs at her assigned 
school site and brought the documents back to Mariners. Although White was focused on 
getting the paperwork in order, she did notice there were also CASEMIS errors in 
Respondent's records. White testified that Respondent was good working with the students.
But when she saw the paperwork in Respondent's office, White felt like Respondent was 
using her to clean up her mess.

(C) On May 6, 2013, at Heidi McDowell's request, White returned to Mariners 

to assist with providing therapy and screening students for speech. Many of the teachers 
wanted their students screened for articulation errors. White worked at Mariners at least 
three to four times per week in May and June, after Respondent had been removed.
According to White, there were at least four others who worked on fixing the problems with 
Respondent's files and records.

41.

On May 2, 2013, Respondent was placed on paid administrative leave.  (Exh. 

1, p. 714.) A conference was held with Respondent and her union representative Nicholas 

4 Students are identified by their initials to protect their privacy.

10

Dix. Respondent indicated that documents missing from student confidential files might be 
at her home. Respondent and Dix retrieved documents from Respondent's home and brought 
them to the District.  They brought back at least one bankers box, although the evidence was 
not clear on the exact number of boxes.  Respondent estimated that she retrieved 
approximately 2,000 pages of documents from her home.

42.

Heidi McDowell reviewed the materials in the boxes from Respondent's home.

She placed documents that she could identify as pertaining to a specific student in that 
student's confidential file.  All other remaining documents she left in the box. McDowell
testified the boxes contained random papers and materials. At the hearing, Respondent and 
her counsel raised issues that the District did not properly maintain the box or boxes of 
Respondent's documents.  Respondent testified that documents missing from the confidential 
files of students were in the boxes retrieved from her home or in the speech office.  She did 
not have an opportunity to organize or review the contents of the boxes from her home after 
she was placed on administrative leave on May 2, 2012.  Respondent claimed she would 
have been able to identify which students her notes belonged, even though she did not write 
student names on her notes, because she knew her students so well and could recognize them 
from the information in the notes.

43.

After Respondent had been placed on administrative leave, the Director of 

Special Education requested Heidi McDowell to review some of Respondent's student files at 
Corona Del Mar High School, where Respondent was assigned in the prior school year 
before her assignment to Mariners.  McDowell reviewed a sampling of files.  Three of the
charges in the Accusation (Charges 11, 12, and 13) are based on McDowell's findings at
Corona Del Mar High School.

44.

The factual allegations for the charges in the Accusation are based on the 

findings of Heidi McDowell's review of the confidential files and Synergy records for the 
students on Respondent's caseload.  McDowell reviewed the confidential files and records in 
the spring of 2013.

Assessments and Protocols

45.

As used in this Decision, the term "protocol" refers to the preprinted booklet 

provided with the testing and assessment materials from the testing company for the purpose 
of recording identifying student information, the date of assessment, etc., and for recording 
data, and calculating scores and assessment results.  Typically, the protocols include 
instructions to be followed by the assessor in administering the assessment.  The cover page 
of the protocol includes space for indicating the name of the student being assessed and other 
identifying information, the date of assessment, and recording and tallying scores.  Protocols 
may have practice questions to be administered to the student before the actual testing 
begins.5

5 Examples of protocols are found at Exhibit 1, pages 370-389 and 390-421 and 

Exhibits 4-14.

11

46.

Under special education law, assessments are to be administered according to 

instructions provided by the producer of the assessment. The District is required by law to 
retain, as mandatory interim pupil records, records of participation in special education 
programs, including required tests. The District requires original protocols to be placed in 
the student's confidential file and organized according to the detailed procedures set forth in 
the Handbook.

47.

A Psychological-Educational Multidisciplinary Assessment (PEMA) report is 

a written report that reviews all assessments and testing conducted with the student and 
reports the results.  The PEMA report interprets the results of that testing and then applies 
that testing to determine the eligibility of a student for special education. It also would 
identify the areas of unique needs for the student. There are multiple designated specialists 
working to compile that report. The PEMA report is presented and discussed at the student's 
IEP meeting. Respondent's contribution to the PEMA report would be the section of the 
report that listed the speech and language assessments given, reporting on the findings and 
results of the speech and language assessments, and presenting the analysis to determine if 
there was a speech and language impairment.

Charge 3 – Student DC6

48.

On September 28, 2012, a written PEMA report was prepared for student DC.

As the student's SLP, Respondent indicated that she administered the Test of Language 
Development -Primary: Fourth Edition (TOLD-4) and the Comprehensive Assessment of 
Spoken Language (CASL), and reported raw scores, scaled scores, and percentile rank.
However, as of spring 2013, student DC's confidential file contained blank protocols for the 
TOLD-4 and CASL, except that the student's name, the date tested, and the notation "3rd 
grade" was written on the cover page of the TOLD-4 protocol, and the cover page for the 
CASL protocol showed the student's name and sex, his school, Respondent as the examiner, 
and the reason for testing was "triennial," but the space for providing the date of the testing 
was blank. The cover pages for both protocols provided spaces for recording data and 
calculating scores but those spaces were blank. Respondent admitted she did not use the 
preprinted protocols but instead recorded data and scores on a separate notepad.  Her intent 
was to transfer the data from her notepad to the protocols at a later date when she had time to 
do so.  She testified her notes should have been in the speech office or among the documents 
she and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

49.

It was established that Respondent failed to retain assessment protocols as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook.  The blank protocols for the TOLD-4
and CASL, with only sparse information on the protocol cover pages, were not sufficient.

6 The acts and omissions that are the basis of the District's charges against Respondent 

are set forth in the Accusation at paragraphs 3 through 26, which are referred to in this 
Decision as Charges 3 through 26.

12

50.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student DC as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook.  She did not administer the TOLD-4
and CASL in accordance with instructions provided by the producer of the assessments, in 
that she used a separate notepad instead of the preprinted protocols for recording data and 
calculating the student's scores.  In addition, because the protocols contained no scoring data,
the confidential file contained no substantiating data for the scores and percentiles 
Respondent reported in the PEMA. The TOLD-4 and CASL are standardized tests. Proper
assessment using standardized testing requires that data substantiating the reported scores 
must be in the student's confidential file.  Such was not the case with Respondent's 
assessment of DC.

Charge 4 – Student ME

51.

On January 9, 2013, Respondent prepared a Speech-Language Diagnostic 
Report for student ME in which she indicated having administered the Early Functional 
Communication Profile (EFCP) and reported her observations and interpretation of the 
student's behavior during the assessment. However, student ME's confidential file contained 
an EFCP protocol that was blank.  For example, there was no data reported in the spaces on 
the cover page for identifying categories of skills as "emerging" and "mastered." Respondent
testified that she made notes of her observations on a separate notepad and then typed
information from her notes directly into the Speech-Language Diagnostic Report.
Respondent appears to have used a "cut-and-paste" method to copy and transfer information
from the EFCP protocol into her Speech-Language Diagnostic Report.

52.

It was not established that Respondent failed to retain an assessment protocol 

for the EFCP.  The EFCP is a criterion referenced assessment tool, and not a standardized 
test.  Consequently, it was appropriate for Respondent to make notes on a separate notepad 
and then type her observations directly into the Speech-Language Diagnostic Report and
copy applicable portions of the assessment tool into the Report.  Respondent was not 
required to place her notes in the student's confidential file.

53.

It was not established that Respondent failed to properly assess student ME 

using the EFCP. The Commission finds the evidence insufficient to make that 
determination.  Insufficient evidence was presented about student ME and the copy of the 
Speech-Language Diagnostic Report was incomplete. However, there were email 
communications between Respondent and Lindsey Murphy on January 7 and 8, 2013, 
regarding their respective observations about student ME.  (Exhs. 1261, 1262, and 1263.)
Based on the information presented, the Commission finds that Respondent's observations of
student ME, as reported in the Speech-Language Diagnostic Report, appear to be proper and 
appropriate.

Charge 5 – Student JL

54.

On April 11, 2013, a written PEMA report was prepared for student JL.

Respondent contributed to the Speech and Language Assessment section which indicates she

13

administered 10 diagnostic assessments.  (Exh. 1, p. 447.) Although not identified in the list
of 10 diagnostic assessments, the PEMA report also included raw scores, standards scores, 
and percentile ranks for the CASL and the Test of Auditory Processing and Reasoning 
(TARPS).  (Exh. 1, p. 449.)

55.

It was not established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Informal Speech and Language 
Sample diagnostic assessment, the Pragmatic Language Skills Checklist (ABC Unified), the
Informal Oral Motor Evaluation assessment, and the Damaico Clinical Discourse Analysis
assessment.  None of those assessments have protocols.

56.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test, Fourth Edition (PPVT-4) and the Expressive Vocabulary Test, Second Edition (EVT-
2). Respondent reported raw scores, scaled scores, and percentile ranks for the PPVT-4 and 
the EVT-2 in the PEMA report.  However, in the student's confidential file, the protocols for 
those two assessments were blank except that student JL's first name and his sex were 
indicated on the cover pages of the protocols.  (Exh. 1, pp. 454, 462.)  There was no data 
recorded in the protocols to substantiate the scores and percentile ranks that Respondent 
reported in the PEMA report. Respondent testified that the data for these assessments were 
recorded on a separate notepad, and those notes should have been in the speech office or 
among the documents she and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

57.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the CASL and TARPS. Those two
assessments have preprinted protocols to be used for recording data and calculating scores.
Respondent reported raw scores, scaled scores, and percentile ranks for these two
assessments.  However, the student's confidential file contained no completed protocols to 
substantiate the scores and percentile ranks for the CASL and TARPS reported in the PEMA 
report.  Respondent testified that she recorded data for the CASL and TARPS on a separate 
notepad, and those notes should have been in the speech office or among the documents she 
and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

58.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain a protocol, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Clinical Evaluation of 
Language Fundamentals, Fourth Edition (CELF-4).  A protocol for the CELF-4 was 
presented at the hearing showing student JL's name handwritten on the cover page, although 
it did not indicate the date of the testing.  (Exh. 1284.) The protocol is incomplete, as it does 
not include scoring calculations in the spaces provided on the cover page. Respondent
testified this was the protocol she completed for the CELF-4 scores she reported in the April 
11, 2013 PEMA.

59.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Pragmatic Language 
Observation Scale (PLOS). In the PEMA report, Respondent reported a total score of 110, a

14

percentile of 75, and a descriptive term of "average" for the PLOS. (Exh. 1, p. 452.) Only
the Summary Sheet and Rating Scale page for the PLOS protocol were presented at the 
hearing. (Exh. 1286.) The Summary Sheet is blank except for student JL's name 
handwritten in the section for the student's identifying information. The Summary Sheet has 
spaces for recording and interpreting scores and data. The Rating Scale page has ratings 
indicated for "Descriptor Items" numbered 1 through 30.  Respondent testified that the scores 
she reported in the PEMA report for student JL are based on notes she took on a separate 
notepad and the ratings shown on the Rating Scale page.  Respondent testified her notes
should have been in the speech office or among the documents she and Nicholas Dix 
retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

60.

It was not established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Language Processing Test-
Revised (LPT-R) assessment and the Social Language Development Test-Elementary
assessment.  Although the two assessments were listed in the PEMA report among the 
diagnostic assessments administered by Respondent, the PEMA report contains no scores or 
data or discussion for these two assessments.

61.

(A) It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student JL 

using standardized tests for which she reported scores and data in the PEMA report, namely,
the PPVT-4, EVT-2, CELF-4, TARPS, and CASL. For standardized tests, a proper 
assessment consists of properly completed protocols which provide the data and evidence to 
support the standardized test scores reported. The absence of protocols, blank protocols, or 
incomplete protocols, do not constitute a proper assessment. Respondent provided no 
interpretation in the PEMA report of the TARPS scores she reported, and her interpretation 
of the CASL scores, that the student recalled and formulated sentences in the average range, 
does not match the percentile ranks she reported for the recall sentences and formulated 
sentences subtests, which were not in the average range.  (Exh. 1, p. 449.)

(B) Further, it was established the Respondent failed to properly assess student 

JL with the aforementioned five standardized assessments in addition to the PLOS.  Proper 
assessment requires administering the assessment according to the testing company's
instructions, which in this case required use of protocols for recording scores and data, which 
Respondent did not do.  Finally, it was established that Respondent failed to properly assess
student JL with the Pragmatic Language Skills Checklist (ABC Unified), in that she reported 
a total score of 89, but there is no data reported in the PEMA or contained in the student's 
confidential file that explains the basis for that score or how it was calculated.  A proper 
assessment requires that substantiating data for reported scores must be maintained in the 
student's confidential file.

62.

Respondent testified that she recorded data and made notes on a separate 

notepad when she administered the PPVT-4, EVT-2, TARPS, CASL, and PLOS, which she 
intended to transfer to the preprinted protocols when she had time.  Respondent did not keep 
her notes in the student's confidential file.  Respondent testified that she kept her notes in the 
speech office at school, or they were among the documents that she and Nicholas Dix 

15

retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.  The Commission finds that Respondent's practice 
of recording data and scores on a separate notepad instead of the preprinted protocol 
provided by the testing company does not comply with special education laws requiring that 
assessments are to be administered according to the testing company's instructions.
Administering an assessment not in accordance with the testing company's instructions does 
not constitute a proper assessment.

Charge 6 – Student DP

63.

On April 21, 2013, Respondent completed a Speech-Language Assessment

report which indicates she administered seven diagnostic assessments.  (Exh. 1, p. 489.) She
reported raw scores, standard scores, and/or percentile ranks for the PPVT-4, EVT-2, CELF-
4, LPT-R, and the Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation Competence (Goldman-Fristoe),
which are standardized tests.  She reported her observations for the Informal Speech and 
Language Sample and the Oral Motor Peripheral Examination.

64.

It was not established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Informal Speech and Language 
Sample and the Oral Motor Peripheral Examination. Neither of those assessments has a 
preprinted protocol nor involves standardized test scores.

65.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the raw scores, standard scores, 
and/or percentile ranks she reported in the Speech-Language Assessment report for the 
PPVT-4, EVT-2, CELF-4, LPT-R, and the Goldman-Fristoe assessment. These assessments 
have preprinted protocols.  However, respondent recorded data for these assessments on a 
separate notepad, and her notes were kept in the speech office at school or were among the 
documents she and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

66.

By failing to use the preprinted protocols for recording data and scores for the 

standardized assessments in Finding 65, above, Respondent failed to administer the
assessments according to the testing company instructions and, thus, failed to properly assess
the student in accordance with special education laws and the Handbook. The Commission 
finds that Respondent's practice of recording data and scores on a separate notepad instead of 
the preprinted protocol provided by the testing company does not comply with special 
education laws requiring that assessments are to be administered according to the testing 
company's instructions and, therefore, do not constitute proper assessments. For
standardized tests, a proper assessment consists of properly completed protocols which 
provide the data and evidence to support the standardized test scores reported. The absence
of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete protocols, do not constitute a proper assessment.

Charge 7 – Student IP

67.

On January 18, 2013, a written PEMA report was prepared for student IP.
Respondent contributed to the Language and Communication Skills section of the report.

16

She listed seven diagnostic assessments as having been administered for this report.  (Exh. 1, 
p. 498.) Two of the assessments listed -- the Informal Speech and Language Sample and the 
Oral Motor Speech Evaluation -- are not standardized tests and do not have preprinted
protocols for recording and calculating standardized scores.

68.

Respondent reported a raw score, standard score, and percentile rank for the 
EVT-2. (Exh. 1, p. 500.) The confidential file for student IP contained a protocol for the 
EVT-2, but the evidence was unclear if the protocol was an original or a copy. (Exhibit 1, 
pp. 504-523.) The cover page of the protocol was only partially completed. The test date is
incomplete, in that the month and year are indicated (i.e., January 2013) but the day is
missing. The section entitled, "Calculating the Raw Score," was incomplete, in that a "Total 
Raw Score" of 78 was recorded, but no data for the "Ceiling Item" and "Total Number of 
Incorrect Items" for calculating the raw score was provided. There was data recorded in the 
"Score Summary" section, but no indication of the source of the data in the protocol.  Except 
for the cover page, the rest of the protocol was blank.  Respondent testified that the data for 
the scores reflected on the protocol cover page were recorded on her separate note pad, and 
those notes were either kept in the speech office or were among the documents retrieved 
from her home on May 2, 2013.

69.

Respondent reported a raw score, scaled score, standard score, and percentile 

rank for the TARPS. (Exh. 1, p. 501.) The confidential file for student IP contained only the 
cover page for the TARPS protocol.  (Exh. 1, p. 524.) Respondent completed the "Test 
Results" section of the cover page, but no other pages from the protocol were retained in the 
confidential file.  Respondent admitted that the TARPS protocol consists of more than the 
cover page.  Respondent testified that the scores reported in the "Test Results" section were 
based on data she had recorded during the assessment on a separate note pad, and those notes 
were either kept in the speech office or were among the documents retrieved from her home 
on May 2, 2013.  She calculated the scores from the data in her notes and in reference to the
TARPS manual. Respondent testified the District did not regularly stock protocols for the 
TARPS, so she borrowed a TARPS protocol from her private practice office.

70.

Respondent reported raw scores, standard scores, and percentile ranks for the 

PPVT-4 and for the various subtests on the CELF-4.  (Exh. 1, pp. 499, 500.)  Student IP's 
confidential file contained completed protocols for the PPVT-4 and CELF-4 assessments.
(Exhs. 1307, 1308.)

71.

In the PEMA report, Respondent reported information for the Goldman-

Fristoe Test of Articulation Competence related to student IP's speech and articulation skills.
Respondent testified she did not complete the protocol for this assessment. She testified that 
she used the Goldman-Fristoe assessment solely to gather information about the student's 
initial consonant sounds.  Respondent testified she used the assessment "informally" and not 
for generating standardized scores.

72.

The confidential file for student IP contained a protocol for the LPT-R.  The 
cover page for the protocol contained raw scores, age equivalencies, percentile ranks, and 

17

standard scores for six subtests, but the date of testing was not indicated. (Exh. 1, pp. 526-
531.) The LPT-R was not listed in the January 18, 2013 PEMA report as one of the 
diagnostic assessments administered by Respondent, and there was no reference to the LPT-
R in the report.

73.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the EVT-2 and TARPS, in that the
protocols for those assessments contained in student IP's confidential file did not contain 
complete information and/or pages.

74.

It was not established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Informal Speech and Language 
Sample and the Oral Motor Speech Evaluation, because those assessments do not have 
protocols for recording and calculating standardized scores.  Also, it was not established that 
Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as required by special education laws and 
the Handbook, for the PPVT-4 and the CELF-4 because completed protocols for those 
assessments were found in the student's confidential file. Finally, it was not established that 
Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as required by special education laws and 
the Handbook, for the Goldman-Fristoe assessment, because she used that assessment 
informally to gather information about the student's articulation and not to generate 
standardized test scores.  The Commission finds that Respondent's use of the Goldman-
Fristoe assessment in that manner was appropriate and did not require completion of a 
protocol.

75.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student IP using
the EVT-2 and the TARPS assessments, when she recorded data from the assessment on a 
separate note pad instead of using the preprinted protocols from the testing company, thereby
administering the assessment not according to instructions of the testing company, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook. For standardized assessments, such 
as the EVT-2 and the TARPS, a proper assessment consists of properly completed protocols 
which provide the data and evidence to support the standardized test scores reported. The 
absence of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete protocols do not constitute a proper 
assessment.

Charge 8 – Student JS

76.

On November 14, 2012, a written PEMA report was prepared for student JS.
Respondent contributed to the Language and Communication Skills section of the report.7
She listed 11 diagnostic assessments as having been administered for this report.  (Exh. 38, p. 
4217.)

7 Exhibit 1, pages 533-539, is an excerpt of the PEMA report and does not include the 
entire section regarding speech.  A complete copy of the PEMA report is found at Exhibit 38,
and the Language and Communication Skills section starts at page 4217. 

18

77.

The Informal Speech and Language Sample and the Oral Motor Speech 

Evaluation are not standardized tests and do not have preprinted protocols for recording and 
calculating standardized scores. Respondent testified that the Theory of Mind Development 
Chart does not have a formal protocol. Respondent did not report results for the PLOS, 
except to say that "[r]esults are pending completion of surveys from classroom teacher and 
parents at this time."  (Exh. 38, p. 4223.)

78.

In the PEMA report, Respondent reported raw scores, standard scores, and 
percentile ranks for the PPVT-4, the Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT), and the CASL, 
which are standardized assessments.  The confidential file for student JS did not contain 
completed protocols with supporting data for those scores. Respondent testified that she 
recorded data and scores on a separate note pad instead of using the preprinted protocols 
provided by the testing company.  She testified her notes were in the speech office or among 
the documents that she and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.
Respondent testified she utilized the Goldman-Fristoe assessment informally, to gather 
information about the student and not to generate standardized scores.  She did not complete 
a protocol for the Goldman-Fristoe assessment.

79.

In the PEMA report, Respondent reported results on the Social Development

Language Test – Elementary assessment that student JS "demonstrated skills generally
within the low average range at this time." She also reported results for the Damaico Clinical 
Discourse Analysis that the student's skills were "[g]enerally within normal limits" and his 
expressive skills were "within the low average range at this time."  These results are 
expressed as standardized scores.  As such, the student's confidential file must contain data to 
substantiate the standardized scores.  There was no such data in the confidential file for 
student JS.

80.

In the PEMA report, Respondent reported a raw score of 65/70 for the 

"Pragmatic Skills Checklist – Interpersonal Skills." (Exh. 38, p. 4223.) However, there was 
no data in the confidential file of student JS to substantiate this standardized score or explain 
how it was calculated.

81.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the PPVT-4, the EVT, and the 
CASL, which are standardized assessments with preprinted protocols for recording data and 
calculating standardized scores.  Respondent recorded her data and scores on a separate note 
pad instead of the protocols provided by the testing company. The student's confidential file 
contained no data to substantiate the standardized scores reported by Respondent.

82.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student JS with the 
PPVT-4, the EVT, and the CASL, in that she did not administer the assessments according to 
the testing company's instructions as required by special education laws and the Handbook, 
and thus did not properly assess student JS.  For standardized assessments, a proper 
assessment consists of properly completed protocols which provide the data and evidence to 

19

support the standardized test scores reported.  Protocols that are missing, blank, or 
incomplete do not constitute a proper assessment.

83.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Social Development Language 
Test-Elementary and the Damaico Clinical Discourse Analysis.  There was no data in the 
student's confidential file to substantiate the standardized results Respondent reported in the 
PEMA report. Consequently, it was also established that Respondent failed to properly
assess student JS using these two assessments.

84.

It was not established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Goldman-Fristoe assessment 
and the PLOS.  Respondent used the Goldman-Fristoe assessment informally to gather 
information about the student's articulation and not to generate a standardize score.  Thus, a 
completed protocol was not required. No completed protocol was required for the PLOS 
because the results for the PLOS were reported in the PEMA as still pending.

Charge 9 – Student AT

85.

On April 10, 2013, a written PEMA report was prepared for student AT.

Respondent contributed to the Language and Communication Skills section of the report.
Respondent reported a raw score, standard score, and percentile rank for the Goldman-
Fristoe assessment.  (Exh. 1, p. 545.)  She also reported results for the TARPS that student 
AT scored below the 7th percentile in certain areas.  (Exh. 1, p. 546.)  The confidential file 
for student AT did not contain completed protocols or supporting data for the Goldman-
Fristoe and TARPS scores reported in the PEMA. Respondent testified that she recorded 
data and scores for the TARPS using a separate note pad instead of the preprinted protocol 
and her notes were in the speech office at school or among the documents she and Nicholas 
Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.  Respondent testified she used the Goldman-
Fristoe informally to gather information but not to generate a standardized score.  But the 
PEMA report includes standardized scores for the Goldman-Fristoe assessment (i.e., a raw 
score, standard score, and percentile rank).

86.

It was established that Respondent failed to use and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the TARPS and Goldman-Fristoe
assessment.  Because she reported standardized scores for both assessments, she was 
required to have completed protocols in the student's confidential file with data to 
substantiate the standardized scores she reported.  There were no such protocols in student 
AT's confidential file.

87.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student AT with 

the TARPS and Goldman-Fristoe assessment. Respondent did not use the protocols for these 
assessments to generate the standardized scores she reported in the PEMA report.  By not 
using the protocols, Respondent failed to administer the assessments according to the testing 
company's instructions, as required by special education laws and the Handbook, and thus 

20

did not properly assess student AT. For standardized assessments, a proper assessment 
consists of properly completed protocols which provide the data and evidence to support the 
standardized test scores reported. The absence of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete 
protocols do not constitute a proper assessment.

Charge 10 – Student KW

88.

On April 29, 2013, a written PEMA report was prepared for student KW. The
findings of the PEMA report were discussed at student KW's IEP meeting on April 29, 2013, 
which the student's parent attended.  (Exh. 40.)  Respondent contributed to the PEMA report
as the SLP for student KW.  The PEMA report lists six diagnostic assessments administered 
by Respondent: Informal Speech and Language Sample, Damaico Clinical Discourse 
Analysis, Michelle Garcia-Winner Double Interview, Conversational Effectiveness Profile, 
CASL, and Social Responsiveness Scale. The District contends that the confidential file for 
student KW contained no substantiating data and/or protocols for the assessment information
reported by Respondent in the PEMA report. Respondent testified that she administered all 
of the diagnostic assessments listed in the PEMA report, and also administered the PLOS but 
did not report results in the PEMA report.

89.

The Informal Speech and Language Sample and Damaico Clinical Discourse 
Analysis are not standardized assessments and do not have a protocols for recording data to 
generate standardized scores.  All information and observations from Respondent's notes for
the two assessments are contained in the PEMA report. Similarly, the Michelle Garcia-
Winner Double Interview is not a standardized assessment and does not have a protocol.
Respondent testified that the information in the PEMA report for this assessment came from 
her notes, which she did not keep because all of the information from the notes is contained 
in the PEMA report.

90.

Respondent reported on the Social Responsiveness Scale.  She testified that 

she administered this assessment and recorded raw scores and T-scores in the spaces
provided on the cover page of the protocol.  (Exh. 1326.) Respondent testified that the 
scores are based on her notes and information reported by the parents.  Respondent testified 
that she had information available to her to complete the entire protocol by May 2, 2013, if 
she had been given an opportunity to do so.

91.

Respondent reported standard scores and percentile ranks for the CASL, which 

is a standardized assessment with a protocol for recording data and calculating standardized 
scores.  Respondent recorded her data and scores on a separate note pad instead of the 
protocol provided by the testing company.  The student's confidential file contained no data 
to substantiate the standardized scores reported by Respondent in the PEMA report.

92.

The Conversational Effectiveness Profile is listed in the PEMA report as one 
of the diagnostic assessments administered.  However, results from that assessment are not 
mentioned in the PEMA report.  Respondent testified she administered the Conversational 
Effectiveness Profile but gave two possible explanations as to why the results were not 

21

included in the PEMA report. Her first explanation was that the results of the Conversational 
Effectiveness Profile justified or corroborated the results of the other assessments given, so
Respondent determined, in her judgment, that it was not necessary to include the 
Conversational Effectiveness Profile in the PEMA report.  Respondent's second explanation 
was that she prepared her section of the PEMA report ahead of time and included items she 
anticipated completing but did not update the document to account for changed 
circumstances.  The Commission finds both of Respondent's explanations reasonable and 
plausible.

93.

Respondent testified that she administered the PLOS as she indicated in 

testimony regarding other students.  She recorded data on a separate note pad, and her notes 
were in the speech office at school or were among the documents that she and Nicholas Dix 
retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.  Two pages from a PLOS protocol were retrieved 
from Respondent's home. (Exh. 1, pp. 560-561.)  The Summary Sheet is blank except that 
student KW's first name is handwritten in the space for the student's name.  The Rating Scale 
contains ratings for the Descriptor Items numbered 1-30 and handwritten notations next to 
some of the items.  Respondent did not report scores or provide information about the PLOS
in the PEMA report.

94.

It was established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, as 
required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the CASL, which has a preprinted 
protocol to be used for recording data and calculating scores.  Respondent reported standard 
scores and percentile ranks for this assessment.  However, the student's confidential file 
contained no completed protocols to substantiate the scores and percentile ranks for the 
CASL reported in the PEMA report.  Respondent testified that she recorded data for the 
CASL on a separate notepad, and those notes should have been in the speech office or among 
the documents she and Nicholas Dix retrieved from her home on May 2, 2013.

95.

It was not established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, 

as required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Informal Speech and 
Language Sample, Damaico Clinical Discourse Analysis, Michelle Garcia-Winner Double 
Interview, Conversational Effectiveness Profile, and Social Responsiveness Scale.  These 
assessments do not involve standardized testing.  The Commission finds it was appropriate 
for Respondent to record her observations on a separate note pad and then transfer the 
information into the PEMA report, which she did.  It was not necessary that Respondent 
maintain her notes in the student's confidential file, where the information is reflected in the 
PEMA report.

96.

It was not established that Respondent failed to properly assess student KW 

using the assessments identified in Charge 10, except for the CASL. Respondent's failure to 
use and retain the protocol for the CASL constitutes a failure to administer an assessment in 
accordance with the testing company's instructions, as required by special education laws and 
the Handbook, and thus, constitutes a failure to properly assess the student.  For standardized 
tests, a proper assessment consists of properly completed protocols which provide the data 

22

and evidence to support the standardized test scores reported. The absence of protocols, 
blank protocols, or incomplete protocols, does not constitute a proper assessment.

Review of Files at Corona Del Mar High School

97.

Heidi McDowell testified that, after Respondent was placed on administrative

leave, she was asked by the Director of Special Education to go to Corona Del Mar High 
School and review some of the triennial assessments Respondent conducted to determine if 
Respondent's difficulty at Mariners "was a more chronic problem."  As directed, McDowell 
reviewed nine triennial assessments that Respondent had conducted and found "very similar
issues" as had occurred at Mariners, namely, no protocols or blank protocols in the 
confidential files to substantiate reported assessment data and results. The factual allegations
of the following Charges 11, 12, and 13, involve the confidential files for students at Corona 
Del Mar High School when Respondent was the assigned SLP.

98.

Respondent testified that she completed all assessments as reported in the 

PEMA reports for the Corona Del Mar students and, as far as she knew, all completed 
protocols were in the confidential files for each student.  She testified she administered all 
assessments stated in the PEMA reports and completed all required protocols. In response to 
Heidi McDowell's findings, Respondent argues that she had no access to the student files 
after she left Corona Del Mar High School at the end of the 2011-2012 school year.  She 
does not know who else may have had access to the student files.  The Commission is not
persuaded by Respondent's contention that her case files at Corona Del Mar High School 
may have been tampered with or sabotaged.  This argument is pure speculation, as no 
evidence was presented of any person having any motive to tamper with or sabotage the
confidential files of Respondent's students.  Respondent herself claimed she was happy
working at Corona Del Mar High School and there was no evidence of any difficulty in her 
relationships with the staff there.

Charge 11 - Student CL

99.

Student CL was a student at Corona Del Mar High School when Respondent 

was the assigned SLP. On May 2, 2011, a written PEMA report was prepared for student 
CL.  Respondent contributed to the report as the SLP.  She indicated having administered 10 
diagnostic assessments listed in the PEMA report, and reported data and results for each 
assessment.

100.

Four of the assessments listed in the PEMA report are not standardized 
assessments and do not have protocols used for generating standardized scores.  The 
assessments are: Informal Speech-Language Sample, Oral Motor Peripheral Examination, 
Functional Communication Profile-Revised, and Pragmatic Language Skills Rating Form 
(ABC USD).  No data for these assessments was found in the student's confidential file in the 
spring of 2013. Respondent was not required to utilize and/or retain protocols for these non-
standardized assessments.  Her findings were contained in the PEMA report.

23

101. The remaining six diagnostic assessments listed in the PEMA report are 

standardized tests with protocols.  They are: Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation 
Competence, PPVT-4, EVT-2, Structured Photographic Expressive Language Test-II
(SPELT-II), Test of Oral Language Development-Primary, 3rd edition (TOLD-P:3), and the 
Preschool Language Scale-4th edition (PLS-4). Respondent reported raw scores, standard 
scores, percentile ranks, and/or age equivalents for those assessments. No data or completed 
protocols were found in the student's confidential file in the spring of 2013.

102.

It was established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the PPVT-4, EVT-2, SPELT-II,
TOLD-P:3, and PLS-4. Because Respondent reported standardized scores or age-equivalents
for those assessments in the PEMA report, she was required to retain completed protocols 
containing the data which substantiates the reported scores.  Such data was not found in the 
student's confidential file during Heidi McDowell's review in spring 2013.  However, 
Respondent was not required to retain the protocol for the Goldman-Fristoe assessment 
because she did not report any standardized scores for that assessment.

103.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student CL.  She 
failed to use and retain the protocols for the standardized assessments in Finding 102, which 
constitutes a failure to administer an assessment in accordance with the testing company's
instructions, as required by special education laws and the Handbook, and thus, constitutes a 
failure to properly assess the student.  For standardized tests, a proper assessment consists of 
properly completed protocols which provide the data and evidence to support the 
standardized test scores reported.  The absence of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete
protocols, does not constitute a proper assessment.

Charge 12 – Student AM

104.

Student AM was a student at Corona Del Mar High School when Respondent 

was the assigned SLP.  On October 21, 2011, a written PEMA report was prepared for 
student AM.  Respondent contributed to the report as the SLP.  She indicated having 
administered five diagnostic assessments listed in the PEMA report:  Informal Speech and 
Language Sample, Damaico Clinical Discourse Analysis, Michelle Garcia-Winner Double 
Interview, CASL, and the Social Language Development Test-Adolescent (SLDT-A).  In the 
PEMA report, Respondent reported data and results with respect to each of these assessments 
(including scores, observations, and/or percentiles).  Heidi McDowell reviewed student AM's
confidential file and found no protocols to substantiate the five assessments.

105.

It was established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols for 

the CASL and SLDT-A, as required by special education laws and the Handbook.  These are 
standardized assessments for which Respondent reported standardized scores and percentiles.
As such, she was required to retain completed protocols with data to substantiate the 
standardized scores reported.  Further, by failing to utilize the protocols, Respondent failed to 
administer the assessments according to the testing company's instructions, as required by
special education laws and the Handbook, and thus failed to properly assess the student.  For 

24

standardized tests, a proper assessment consists of properly completed protocols which 
provide the data and evidence to support the standardized test scores reported. The absence 
of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete protocols, does not constitute a proper 
assessment.

106. The Commission finds there was no failure to utilize and/or retain protocols, 
and no failure to properly assess, with regard to the Informal Speech and Language Sample, 
Damaico Clinical Discourse Analysis, and the Michelle Garcia-Winner Double Interview.
These are not standardized assessments.  Respondent observations from these assessments 
are reflected in the PEMA report.

Charge 13 – Student KP

107. The confidential file for student KP contained a written PEMA report prepared 

on May 14, 2012.  Respondent contributed to the report as the SLP.  She reported having 
administered the 11 diagnostic assessments listed in the report.  (Exh. 1, p. 583-584.)  She 
reported data and results with respect to each assessment.  Heidi McDowell reviewed student 
KP's confidential file in or about May 2013 and found no completed protocols.

108.

It was not established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, 

as required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Informal Speech and 
Language Sample, Oral Motor Evaluation, [PLOS,] Michelle Garcia-Winner Double 
Interview, Damaico Conversational Profile, and Theory of Mind Checklist.  These 
assessments do not have protocols for recording data and generating standardized scores. It
was sufficient for Respondent to make notes of her observations on a separate note pad, and 
input the information from her notes directly to the PEMA report, which she did.  She was 
not required to retain her notes in the student's confidential file.

109.

It was not established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, 

as required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the Goldman-Fristoe Test of 
Articulation Competence.  Respondent did not report a standardized score for this assessment 
in the PEMA report.  Respondent used the Goldman-Fristoe assessment informally, to gather 
information and to explain her observations and clinical judgment about the student.  It was 
appropriate for Respondent to write her observations directly into the PEMA report.  She was 
not required to retain her notes in the student's confidential file.

110.

It was established that Respondent failed to utilize and/or retain protocols, as 

required by special education laws and the Handbook, for the PPVT-4, EVT, TOLD-4,
Social Language Development Test-Adolescent (SLDT-A). For these assessments, 
Respondent reported raw scores, standard scores, percentiles, and/or age equivalents in the 
PEMA report.  As such, she was required to maintain completed protocols with data to 
substantiate the scores reported.  Heidi McDowell's review in or about May 2013 found no 
protocols for these assessments in the student's confidential file.

25

111.

It was established that Respondent failed to properly assess student KP.

Respondent failed to administer the assessments in Finding 110 according to testing
instructions when she failed to use protocols. For standardized tests, a proper assessment 
consists of properly completed protocols which provide the data and evidence to support the 
standardized test scores reported. The absence of protocols, blank protocols, or incomplete 
protocols, does not constitute a proper assessment.

Charge 14 - Student AA

112. Charge 14 involves student AA's exit from special education. On November 

7, 2012, student AA's mother signed an Assessment Plan in which she agreed to an exit 
assessment of her child. (Exh. 1, p. 593-594). On November 20, 2012, student AA was 
assessed by graduate student intern Jessica Haffar, who administered the Goldman-Fristoe
Test of Articulation.  (Exh. 1408.)  An exit IEP meeting was subsequently held on December 
4, 2012.  Student AA's mother attended the meeting and signed the IEP, thereby indicating 
her consent for AA to be exited from special education.  (Exh. 1409, p. 3773.)   On 
CASEMIS, Respondent entered student AA's exit date from special education as December 
4, 2012.  (Exh. 1, p. 595.)

113.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 14, that Respondent failed to 

conduct a speech assessment regarding student AA, failed to prepare a written report, and 
failed to provide any documentation explaining why the student was to be exited from 
special education.  Student AA was assessed on November 20, 2012, by intern Jessica 
Haffar.  Student AA scored in the 24th percentile on Goldman-Fristoe assessment. (Exh. 
1408.)  Respondent testified that a student is ready for dismissal with a score above the 7th
percentile. The December 4, 2012 IEP indicates the reason for student AA's exit from 
special education is that he met his goals for articulation, he no longer demonstrates an 
articulation disorder, and he produces target sounds with 100 percent accuracy in
conversational and spontaneous speech.  The IEP also notes that the Goldman-Fristoe was 
used to assess AA's articulation skills.

(Exh. 1409, p. 3771.)

114.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 14, that Respondent failed to 

obtain written consent from student AA's parent for the IEP meeting held on December 4, 
2012. Written consent for a meeting must be obtained from the parent at least 10 days prior 
to the meeting date. No evidence was presented of written consent having been obtained 
from student AA's parent at least 10 days prior to the December 4, 2012 meeting.  However, 
the absence of evidence of the parent's prior written consent to the December 4, 2012
meeting date is mitigated by the fact that student AA's mother actually showed up and
attended the meeting on December 4, 2012, and signed the IEP at that meeting.  (Exh. 1, p. 
592; Exh. 1409, p. 3773.)

115.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 14, that Respondent failed to obtain 

the signature of an administrator or otherwise qualified local educational agency
representative on the Participants and Consent page of the December 4, 2012 IEP.  (Exh. 1, 
p. 592; Exh. 1409, p. 3773).   It was also established, as alleged in Charge 14, that 

26

Respondent herself failed to sign the IEP on that date. The Commission finds there were 
mitigating circumstances. The Meeting Notes for the December 4, 2012 IEP indicate that 
Mrs. Overstreet was introduced at the meeting as the administrative designee. (Exh. 1409, p.
3771.)  Respondent testified that Mrs. Overstreet had to leave the meeting early due to a 
family emergency. The Commission finds it understandable that Respondent did not get 
signatures on the IEP before the meeting concluded, given Mrs. Overstreet's unexpected 
emergency and the typical rush of activity at an IEP meeting. It is not uncommon that 
participants at an IEP meeting forget to sign the IEP document before they leave.
Respondent's failure to sign the IEP herself does not invalidate the IEP, when, as here, the 
parent consented to and signed the IEP.

116.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 14, that Respondent exited student 
AA from special education services effective December 4, 2012, without notice to or consent 
from student AA's parent.  As discussed above, student AA's mother attended the IEP 
meeting on December 4, 2012, and signed and initialed the IEP to indicate her consent that 
AA was no longer eligible for special education.  (Exh. 1, p. 592; Exh. 1409, p. 3773)
Respondent testified that, prior to December 4, 2012 meeting, student AA's mother had 
indicated to her that she wished to have AA exited from speech.  No evidence was presented 
that student AA's mother made any complaint about her child being exited from special 
education without her consent.

117.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 14, that Respondent failed to 

properly notice, obtain consent, and/or complete documentation for an IEP dated December
21, 2012. In the CASEMIS record for student AA, Respondent entered December 21, 2012, 
as the "Last IEP Date."  Respondent, in her testimony, could not explain the December 21, 
2012 entry in CASEMIS.  However, the IEP documents for student AA contain no reference
to any meeting on December 21, 2012, and no evidence was presented that Respondent held
any meeting for student AA on that date. In short, there was no meeting on December 21, 
2012, for which Respondent was required to give notice, obtain consent, and complete 
documentation.

Charge 15 - Student JA

118.

Student JA and student AA (discussed in Charge 14, above) are siblings.  As 

discussed above, their mother attended an IEP meeting on December 4, 2012, for student 
AA.  During that meeting, their mother expressed that she also wanted student JA exited 
from special education.  Both children were discussed at the December 4, 2012 meeting.
According to Respondent, the mother had indicated, prior to the December 4, 2012 meeting,
that she wanted both of her children exited from special education.

119.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 15, that Respondent failed to properly

notice and obtain consent from the parent for a December 4, 2012 IEP meeting for student 
JA.  In mitigation, the mother was present for an IEP meeting on December 4, 2012, that was 
arranged specifically to discuss student AA's exit from special education, but student JA's
exit was also discussed.  The mother wanted both of her children exited.

27

120.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 15, that Respondent failed to complete 

documentation regarding an IEP for student JA for December 4, 2012.  There are no 
signatures of required IEP team members on the IEP for student JA.  (Exh. 1, p. 597; Exh. 
45, p. 3832.)  The IEP is mostly blank. (Exh. 45.) The IEP cover page does not indicate that
the purpose of the meeting was to exit student JA from special education (see Exh. 45, p. 
3823), in contrast to student AA's IEP which stated on the cover page that the purpose of the 
meeting was "Exit from special ed."  (Exh. 1409, p. 3764.)

121.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 15, that Respondent negligently

recorded data in Workflow.  It was not established, however, that Respondent falsified data
in Workflow.  Respondent made entries in Workflow for the date November 19, 2012, 
indicating that student JA's mother attended a meeting on November 19, 2012, where she 
gave full consent to the IEP on that date. Respondent testified that she used Workflow as a 
calendar for her assessments.  Respondent testified that she considered Workflow dates to be 
"irrelevant" because only the CASEMIS data is reported to the State. The Commission finds 
that Respondent's Workflow entries for November 19, 2012, constitute negligent recording
because they do not reflect actual events, namely, that student JA's mother attended an IEP
meeting and gave consent on December 4, 2012. Respondent's use of Workflow as her own 
internal calendar does not excuse her failure to enter accurate dates in Workflow.

Charge 16 – Student IB

122. On December 12, 2012, an IEP meeting was held for student IB, who was a 

student on Respondent's caseload receiving only speech-related services.  The IEP document 
indicates a meeting was held on December 12, 2012, where Respondent, administrative
designee Mrs. Overstreet, and student IB's father were present.  (Exh. 1417, p. 3975)  The 
IEP indicated that the purpose of meeting was to exit IB from special education and speech 
services.  (Exh. 1417, pp. 3968, 3975.)  There are no signatures on the Participants and 
Consent page of the IEP. (Exh. 1417, p. 3977.)

123.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 16, that Respondent failed to properly
notice and obtain consent for the December 12, 2012 meeting.  Respondent testified that the 
father was present at the December 12, 2012 meeting, but he did not sign the IEP document
at meeting because he wanted to discuss it first with student IB's mother before signing.
Respondent's testimony that the father was present at December 12, 2012 meeting is 
unconvincing as there was no signature by the father on the Participants and Consent page of 
the IEP. Respondent admitted that it would have been better if she had obtained the father's 
consent in writing for student IB's exit from special education/speech services.

124.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 16, that Respondent failed to complete 

documentation regarding an IEP for student IB. The 2012 IEP looks like a copy of 2011
IEP. The teacher for 2012 was Stephanie Parole [Exh. 1, p. 600] and the teacher for 2011 
was Pat McLaughlin [Exh. 46, p. 3987], yet the "Input from General Education Teacher" in 
the 2012 and 2011 IEPs is identical.  (Compare Exhibit 46, page 3969 [2012 IEP] with page
3979 [2011 IEP].)

28

Charge 17 – Student SK

125.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 17, that Respondent failed to properly 

notice, obtain consent, and complete documentation regarding an IEP for student SK. An
IEP meeting for student SK was due by January 8, 2013. Respondent was the case carrier for 
student SK, and she does not dispute that she failed to hold an IEP meeting for student SK by
that date.  Student SK's parent testified she did not attend a meeting with Respondent and did 
not receive notice of any meeting with Respondent.

Charge 18 – Student CAL

126. On January 15, 2013, an IEP meeting was held where it was determined that 

student CAL "is not eligible for special education services."  (Exh. 1, p. 619.) The IEP states
that student CAL met his goals and demonstrated skills within normal limits, and he was 
found not eligible for special education.  (Exh. 1428, pp. 4160, 4152.) The IEP was signed
on January 15, 2013, by Respondent as case carrier, Lindsey Murphy as SLP, an 
administrator designee, and a general education teacher. The IEP was not signed by student
CAL's parent. (Exh. 1, p. 619; Exh. 1428.) As of April 2013, there was still no IEP signed
by the parent in student CAL's confidential file regarding his exit from special education.

127. The Synergy records indicate student CAL was exited from special education 
with an exit date of January 15, 2013.  The transfer/exit screen indicated student CAL's exit
from special education was "certified by" Respondent, meaning that Respondent entered the 
exit information in Synergy, including the exit date of January 15, 2013. (Exh. 1, p. 620.)

128. The confidential file for student CAL contained an IEP meeting notice dated
January 7, 2013, which proposed meeting dates of January 15, 2013, and January 22, 2013.
(Exh. 1, pp. 617-618.) The IEP meeting notice indicates that the parent's response should be 
returned to Respondent.  (Exh. 1, p. 618.) In the parent response section of the IEP meeting 
notice, the box is checked for the response "I will not attend but proceed without me and 
forward a copy of the IEP for my review and signature." The response, however, was not 
signed and dated by the parent.  (Exh. 1, p. 618.) As of April 2013, there was no IEP 
meeting notice signed by the parent confirming the parent's consent for the January 15, 2013 
meeting to go forward without the parent's attendance.

129. Respondent testified that Lindsey Murphy was the case carrier for student 

CAL and was responsible for the dates entered in Synergy and preparing the IEP 
documentation and obtaining the parent's signatures. Respondent's testimony is not 
supported by the evidence.  The Commission finds, despite Respondent's claims to the 
contrary, that Respondent was the case carrier for student CAL and responsible for all 
aspects of his IEP.  Respondent signed the January 15, 2013 IEP which identifies her as the 
case carrier.  (Exh. 1, p. 619.)  Lindsey Murphy was not case carrying any students until 
March 5, 2013, when she notified Heidi McDowell that she would be case carrying four 
students.  In April 2013, Respondent wrote a note reminding Lindsey Murphy to follow up 

29

with student CAL's case.  Respondent would not have needed to give such a reminder if 
Lindsey Murphy was, in fact, the case carrier for the student.

130. Respondent testified that she prepared the IEP meeting notice for the January

15, 2013 meeting.  She testified that she already knew the parent had agreed to student
CAL's dismissal from special education and that the parent would not be attending the 
January 15, 2013 meeting.  Respondent testified that she expected Lindsey Murphy to make 
sure the IEP documents were sent to student CAL's parents, and that Lindsey was responsible
for obtaining the parent's signature for the IEP documents. Nonetheless, Respondent was 
still the case carrier for student CAL and responsible for all aspects of his IEP.

131.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 18, that Respondent, as case carrier,

failed to properly notice, obtain consent, and complete documentation regarding student 
CAL's IEP and his exit from special education services.  Respondent failed to give proper 
notice to the parent regarding the January 15, 2013 IEP meeting.  The IEP meeting notice 
was not signed by the parent.  Respondent's testimony that the parent waived their right to 
attend the meeting is uncorroborated and, thus, insufficient to establish a waiver.
Respondent failed to obtain parental consent to exit student CAL from special education.
The IEP for the student's exit was not signed by the parent, yet Respondent went ahead and 
entered data in Synergy for an exit date of January 15, 2013.  Respondent failed to complete 
IEP documentation for student CAL, as the IEP for January 15, 2013, was still not signed by
the parent as of April 2013.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is noted that no evidence was 
presented of student CAL's parent making a complaint that CAL was exited from special 
education without the parent's consent.

Charge 19 – Student MG

132. On March 26, 2013, an IEP meeting was held for student MG for the purpose 

of exiting the student from special education.  The IEP indicates that the persons who 
attended the meeting were Respondent, administrative designee Susan Overstreet, general 
education teacher Joan Duncan, and student MG's mother.  (Exh. 1, p. 632.)  The IEP states 
that Respondent, as SLP, recommended MG's dismissal from speech services, noting that 
MG met all of his speech goals.  (Exh. 1, p. 632.) The IEP indicates the assessments used 
were "T-Mac, auditory discrimination test, and oral motor exam."  (Exh. 1, p. 628.) The IEP 
contains no signatures by the meeting attendees to evidence their participation at the March
26, 2013 meeting. However, the Participant and Consent page of the IEP was signed on
April 26, 2013, by student MG's mother, administrative designee Susan Overstreet, and 
Respondent, but there is no signature by the general education teacher Joan Duncan.  (Exh. 1, 
p. 634.)  Student MG's mother signed and initialed the IEP on April 26, 2013, to indicate her 
agreement that MG was no longer eligible for special education and giving consent for MG's
exit from special education.  (Exh. 1, p. 634) Student MG's mother testified she did not 
recall signing an IEP on April 26, 2013, but admitted that the signature on the document
appeared to be her signature. (Exh. 1, p. 634.) Student MG's mother testified she attended 
IEP meeting on June 18, 2013, and MG was exited from speech.  (Exh. 49, p. 4031.)

30

133. There are discrepancies with the dates reflected in the IEP and CASEMIS.
The "Last IEP Date" indicated in CASEMIS was February 27, 2013, which should match the 
"Date of This Meeting" on the IEP cover page, which in this case shows a date of March 27, 
2013.  (Exh. 1, pp. 622, 635.)  The dates do not match.  Further, the IEP itself shows 
different meeting dates. The IEP cover page indicates a meeting date of March 27, 2013, 
whereas the IEP meeting notes indicate the meeting occurred on March 26, 2013. (Exh. 1, 
pp. 621, 622.) Finally, the CASEMIS record shows student MG's exit date from special 
education was April 2, 2013.  However, student MG's mother did not sign the IEP for his exit 
until April 26, 2013.  The exit date in CASEMIS should be the date the IEP meeting was 
held and the parent consented to the exit, which in this case was April 26, 2013.  Respondent 
entered the exit date of April 2, 2013, in CASEMIS, which was prior to the student's mother 
giving consent on April 26, 2013.

134. Respondent testified that she had an IEP meeting scheduled with student MG's 

mother for February 27, 2013, but the mother could not attend.  The meeting had to be 
rescheduled to a time that mother could attend. Respondent testified the meeting was 
rescheduled to March 2013. Respondent attributed the different meeting dates shown in the 
IEP (i.e., March 26 versus March 27) to either her mistake or that she prepared the IEP ahead 
of time with the intent to update the meeting date later in Synergy and CASEMIS once the 
meeting date was finalized.  Respondent testified MG's mother was very busy and had to 
rush out of the meeting, but she verbally consented to MG's exit from speech as of March 26, 
2013.  Student MG kept coming to speech.  Respondent entered April 2, 2013, as the exit 
date in CASEMIS because that was the date student MG finally stopped coming to speech.
Respondent testified she did not wait for the mother's signature on the IEP before entering 
the April 2, 2013 exit date in CASEMIS since the mother had previously given verbal 
consent to the exit.  Respondent denied that she attempted to deceive anyone about missed 
deadlines by entering incorrect dates in CASEMIS.

135.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 19, that Respondent failed to properly

complete documentation regarding an IEP for student MG and his exit from special 
education.  Respondent failed to properly complete IEP documentation by failing to obtain 
signatures of the participants at the March 26 meeting, failed to obtain signatures of the
participants for at the February 27 meeting which the parent did not attend, and failed to 
obtain the signature of the general education teacher even though IEP meeting notes 
indicated the teacher attended the March 26 meeting. Further, Respondent made inaccurate 
entries in CASEMIS showing the exit date as April 2, 2013, when the mother's consent was 
not given until she signed the IEP on April 26, 2013.

136.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 19, that Respondent failed to 

properly notice and obtain consent regarding an IEP for student MG and his exit from special 
education services. The Commission finds the evidence was insufficient to establish this 
charge. Student MG's mother testified that she has no record indicating that she attended an 
IEP meeting on March 26, 2013, and does not know why the IEP meeting notes would 
indicate otherwise. Mother testified she did not recall signing and dating an IEP on April 26, 

31

2013, but admitted that the signature on the document appeared to be her signature.  The 
mother's testimony for this charge is inconclusive.

Charge 20 – Student ZR

137.

Student ZR's annual IEP meeting was due to be held by March 5, 2013.  (Exh. 

1, p. 637.) The CASEMIS record for student ZR showed an "Effective Date" of March 5, 
2013, which indicated March 5, 2013, was the date that the student's last IEP was put into 
effect.  (Exh. 1, p. 638.) In Workflow, Respondent made entries that she convened an IEP 
meeting on February 28, 2013, which the parent attended, and that partial consent was 
received from the parent on March 5, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 639.)  Respondent prepared an IEP 
document showing March 5, 2013, as the "Date of This Meeting" on the IEP cover page.
(Exh. 1, p. 640.) However, the meeting notes for the IEP indicate the meeting took place on 
March 27, 2013. (Exh. 1, p. 641.) There is no explanation in the IEP meeting notes whether 
the meeting occurred on March 5, March 27, or on both dates.  The IEP Participants and 
Consent page was not signed and dated until April 3, 2013. (Exh. 1, p. 644.) The IEP was 
signed by the parent on April 3, 2013. The IEP contains no signatures from the participants 
for a March 5 and/or March 27 meeting.

138. Laurie Smith was student ZR's third grade teacher for the 2012-2013 school 

year. Smith attended an IEP meeting for ZR in March 2013, where Respondent and
administrative designee Susan Overstreet were present. The purpose of the meeting was to 
exit student ZR from special education services. Student ZR's mother did not arrive at the 
scheduled meeting time. Smith suggested that Respondent call ZR's mother, as Smith had 
known the mother to be prompt to meetings. Respondent responded that it was not necessary
to call the mother because she had spoken to the mother two days earlier and the mother gave 
approval to exit ZR from services.  At Smith's insistence, during the meeting, Respondent
purportedly telephoned ZR's mother and, afterwards, stated that ZR's mother verbally
consented for her son to be exited. Respondent indicated to Smith and the administrative
designee that they should sign the IEP paperwork, which they did.  Smith asked if it was 
proper to sign without the parent present at the meeting, and Respondent indicated it was.
Later, Smith spoke with student ZR's mother, who was volunteering in Smith's classroom.
According to Smith, the mother indicated she had received no call from Respondent.

139.

Student ZR's mother testified that she did not have any recollection of 

attending meetings in March 2013 or April 2013.  She did not recall speaking by telephone
with Respondent or giving verbal consent to exit her son, ZR, from special education 
services. However, student ZR's mother testified that, in the 2012-13 school year, she agreed 
that student ZR and her other son should both be exited from speech.

140. Respondent contends that the IEP meeting was held on April 3, 2013, student 

ZR's mother gave consent over the phone for her son's exit from special education on that 
date, and the mother signed the IEP as of April 3, 2013.  Respondent testified that the March 
5, 2013 meeting date on the IEP cover page, and the March 27, 2013 meeting date in the IEP
meeting notes, were mistakes which she should have corrected.  Respondent testified that the 

32

IEP meeting for student ZR occurred on April 3, 2013, and any other date indicated as the 
meeting date would be incorrect and the result of human error.

141. During the March 22, 2013 conference with Heidi McDowell, Respondent 

admitted that the IEP for student ZR was late and not in compliance with IEP timelines.
(Exh. 1, p. 712.)  The Commission finds that the District's argument that Respondent
falsified dates in CASEMIS and Workflow to hide that student ZR's IEP was late was not 
persuasive.

142.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 20, that Respondent failed to properly

notice, obtain consent, and complete documentation for an IEP for student ZR and his exit 
from special education services.   Respondent failed to properly complete IEP 
documentation.  She prepared an IEP showing a meeting date of March 5 on the cover page, 
and a meeting date of March 27 in the meeting notes, both dates she admits were incorrect 
and the IEP should have reflected a meeting date of April 3, 2013. Respondent failed to 
properly obtain consent for an IEP meeting on April 3, 2013.  She created an IEP meeting 
notice dated March 21, 2013, which proposed a meeting date of April 3, 2013. (Exh. 1, p. 
645).  The IEP meeting notice indicates the parent's response should be completed and 
returned to Respondent. (Exh. 1, p. 646.)  In the parent response section, the box is checked
for the response "I will not attend but proceed without me and forward a copy of the IEP for 
my review and signature."  (Exh. 1, p. 646.) Respondent failed to obtain a parent signature 
on the consent form for an April 3, 2013 meeting. The student's confidential file did not 
contain a parent signature on the IEP meeting notice to indicate the parent's consent to the 
April 3, 2013 meeting being held without them. In mitigation, although the IEP meeting
notice is not signed, the parent did sign the IEP participant and consent page on April 3, 
2013.

Charge 21 – Student BW

143.

Student BW's annual IEP meeting was due to be held by March 7, 2013 (i.e., 

within one year of the prior year's IEP).  (Exh. 51, p. 3701.) The confidential file for student 
BW contained an IEP for a meeting date of March 27, 2013.  The purpose of the meeting was 
to exit student BW from special education.  (Exh. 1, p. 650.)  The IEP meeting notes indicate 
that student BW's mother attended the meeting by telephone conference.  (Exh. 1, p. 657.)
The Participants and Consent page contains signatures by Respondent and student BW's 
parent dated April 2, 2013, and a signature by administrative designee Susan Overstreet 
dated April 12, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 659.)  There are no signatures indicating participation at a 
meeting on March 27, 2013.  Respondent admitted to Heidi McDowell, at their conference 
on March 22, 2013, that she was not in compliance with IEP timelines for student BW's IEP.
144. The Workflow record indicates that the student's parents responded to an IEP 
meeting notice on February 18, 2013, and agreed to a meeting date, and that an IEP meeting 
was convened on February 18, 2013, which the parents attended. (Exh. 1, p. 649.) The
District contends that the February 18, 2013 meeting date in Workflow gives the impression 
that the IEP was timely held, given that the due date for the IEP was March 7, 2013.

33

145. The Workflow data and the IEP are inconsistent.  The Workflow record 
indicates that full consent was received on February 18, 2013, which was not possible if the 
IEP meeting was not actually held until March 27, 2013, or the IEP was signed by the parent 
on April 2, 2013. Further, the IEP indicates that the meeting notice was sent on March 14, 
2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 659.)  Such a meeting notice, however, could not have been sent for a 
February 18, 2013 meeting.

146. Respondent testified that she scheduled an IEP meeting for March 27, 2013.
She used Workflow informally and considered dates entered in Workflow "did not matter" 
because they were not reported to the State. Respondent admitted that the March 27, 2013
meeting date shown on the IEP cover page [Exh. 1, p. 650] was not accurate and needed to
be updated, given that the meeting participants signed the IEP on April 2, 2013 [Exh. 1, p. 
659].

147.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 21, that Respondent failed to properly
notice, obtain consent, and accurately complete documentation regarding an IEP for student 
BW. The IEP documentation prepared by student BW was not accurate, as evidence by the
date discrepancies in the IEP itself and the Workflow record.  Respondent admitted that the 
dates shown in the IEP were not accurate and needed to be updated.

148.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 21, that Respondent negligently
recorded data in Workflow, but it was not established that Respondent falsified data in 
Workflow.  The Commission finds that Respondent's informal use of Workflow as her own 
personal calendar constitutes negligent recording of data.  The Commission is not persuaded 
that Respondent falsified data in Workflow to hide her noncompliance with IEP timelines, 
given that she admitted to Heidi McDowell that she was late in completing student BW's 
IEP. (Exh. 1, p. 712.)

Charge 22 – Student MM

149. Claudell Gapultos is employed by the District as a lead occupational therapist.
He has been assigned to Mariners for the past seven years.  Tiffany Lang has been a teacher 
for 11 years.  She is presently assigned to Mariners as a second grade teacher. On April 29, 
2013, Gapultos and Lang arrived at Respondent's speech office at 3:15 p.m. for an IEP 
meeting for student MM.  They had each received an email invitation from Respondent for 
an IEP meeting at that date and time.  Student MM's parent was not present, which Lang 
thought was unusual because she knew that both of the student's parents were very involved
with their child.  Respondent, as case carrier, conducted a meeting with Gapultos and Lang, 
who each gave their input about student MM.  During the meeting, neither Lang nor
Gapultos asked Respondent about student MM's parents not being present. At the end of the 
meeting, Respondent had Gapultos and Lang sign and date an IEP Participants and Consent
page for the April 29, 2013 meeting, which they did. Gapultos and Lang left Respondent's 
office.  They checked their email and noted that Respondent had sent them a cancellation 
notice at 3:07 p.m. for the meeting they had just attended.  Lang sent an email to student 
MM's mother asking if she knew that Respondent held an IEP meeting that day for MM.

34

Student MM's mother responded that she was not aware of an IEP meeting scheduled for 
April 29, 2013. Respondent denied that she attempted to hold an IEP for student MM 
without the parents' presence or consent.

150. Respondent's IEP documentation and related Workflow records for student 

MM contain discrepancies. On March 14, 2013, Respondent sent an IEP meeting notice to 
student MM's parents which proposed meeting dates of March 22, April 12, or April 26, 
2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 661.) The parent response section of the IEP meeting notice contains no 
signature by the parents to confirm their attendance at a meeting or to indicate their 
agreement that the meeting could proceed without them.  (Exh. 1, p. 663.) The Workflow 
record for student MM indicates that the parents responded to an IEP meeting notice on
February 27, 2013, and agreed to a meeting date; Respondent convened an IEP meeting on 
March 13, 2013, which the parents did not attend; Respondent contacted the parents on 
March 14, 2013; and the IEP meeting could proceed in the parents' absence on April 29, 
2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 664.) It is noted that the April 29, 2013 meeting date in Workflow is not 
one of the proposed meeting dates in the March 14, 2013 IEP meeting notice.  The IEP for 
student MM shows a meeting date of March 13, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 666.)  However, the IEP 
meeting notes indicate the meeting was held on March 12, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 673.)  The IEP 
indicates that the IEP meeting notice was sent to the parents on March 14, 2013 [Exh. 1, p. 
675], which does not match the Workflow record indicating that the parents responded to an 
IEP meeting notice on February 27, 2013. Logically, the parents could not have responded 
on February 27, 2013, to an IEP meeting notice sent on March 14, 2013.

151.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 22, that Respondent failed to 

properly notice, obtain consent, and/or complete documentation regarding an IEP for student 
MM or to exit student MM from speech-related services. The Commission finds that the 
meeting on April 29, 2013, was not an IEP meeting because essential members of an IEP 
team were missing, namely, the student's parent and an administrative designee.  The
Commission finds that it would not be reasonable for Gapultos and Lang to conclude the 
meeting they attended on April 29, 2013, was an IEP meeting.  In any event, student MM 
could not be exited from speech-related services at the conclusion of the April 29, 2013 
meeting because it was not an IEP meeting and there was no consent for exit given by the 
student's parent.  The Commission finds that the April 29, 2013 meeting was nothing more 
than a staffing meeting.

Charge 23 – Student KB

152.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 23, that Respondent failed to conduct a 

timely IEP meeting for student KB. The student's IEP meeting was due to be held prior to 
March 6, 2013. At her conference with Heidi McDowell on March 22, 2013, Respondent 
admitted that she was not in compliance with IEP timelines for student KB's IEP.  However,
the Commission finds that the evidence was insufficient to establish that Respondent 
manually falsified data and/or negligently altered data in CASEMIS to reflect an effective
date of March 5, 2013, so as to avoid audit for failure to timely conduct an IEP meeting for 
this student. There was no reason for Respondent to hide that student KB's IEP was late, as 

35

she admitted the IEP was late to Heidi McDowell.  There was evidence that Respondent had 
delegated to Lindsey Murphy the responsibility for completing student KB's IEP, although 
Respondent was still listed in the Synergy as the case carrier for student KB.  Lindsey
Murphy testified that student KB's IEP was unremarkable and she did not recall creating the 
IEP or entering dates in CASEMIS. The Commission cannot determine from the evidence 
presented whether Respondent or Lindsey Murphy entered the March 5, 2013 effective date 
in the CASEMIS record for student KB.

Charge 24 – Student ZP

153.

Student ZP was a student who came to the District with an IEP from his prior 

school district in Alaska.  In January 2013, the District approved an interim placement 
request for student ZP.  During the 30-day period after approval of the interim placement, the 
District was required to provide services comparable to the services provided under student 
ZP's last agreed upon IEP from Alaska, review the student's IEP needs and goals, and hold an 
IEP meeting for development of a new IEP by the District.  Student ZP's IEP from Alaska 
was based on his disability of speech/language impairment.

154. The 30-day interim placement period for student ZP had a projected start date 
of January 10, 2013, and an end date of February 8, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 689.)  Respondent was 
required to complete her review of the student's IEP needs, goals, and services, and hold the 
30-day IEP for student ZP, in or about February 2013.  The exact date in February cannot be 
determined by the evidence because the interim placement request was not signed by student
ZP's parent, although the space for the parent's signature shows a typewritten date of January
17, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 689.)

155. The confidential file for student ZP includes an IEP which shows that 
Respondent convened an IEP meeting on March 15, 2013, to discuss student ZP's interim 
placement.  According to the IEP meeting notes, present for this meeting were Respondent,
administrative designee Susan Overstreet, and general education teacher Brenda Khoury.
Student ZP's parent was not present.  The Participants and Consent page for the IEP was not 
signed by any of the participants identified in the meeting notes. A box on the Participants
and Consent page is checked to indicate that the meeting was not completed and a follow up 
meeting would be scheduled to finalize the IEP.  The IEP indicates that an IEP meeting 
notice was sent to student ZP's parent on March 5, 2013.  (Exh. 1, p. 695.)

156. The Workflow record for student ZP indicates that student ZP's parent 
responded on January 17, 2013, to the IEP meeting notice and agreed to a meeting date; an 
IEP meeting was convened on January 18, 2013, which the parent attended; partial consent 
was received on February 15, 2013 ; and the IEP was finalized on March 15, 2013.  (Exh. 1, 
p. 690.)

157.

It was established that Respondent failed to obtain consent and complete

accurate documentation regarding an IEP for student ZP. The IEP for the March 15, 2013 
meeting is not consistent with the data entered by Respondent in the Workflow record for 

36

student ZP. Respondent admitted to Heidi McDowell, at their conference on March 22, 
2013, that she was not in compliance with IEP timelines for student ZP's IEP. (Exh. 1, p. 
712.)

Charge 25 – Student JI

158. Respondent was the case carrier for student JI.  The annual IEP meeting for 

student JI was due to be held by no later than March 6, 2013 (i.e., within one year of the prior 
year's IEP which was dated March 7, 2012).  (Exh. 55, p. 3748.)

159. Heidi McDowell reviewed the confidential file for student JI on or about May

9, 2013.  The brown file contained an IEP meeting notice dated March 11, 2013, which
proposed an IEP meeting date of March 19, 2013. (Exh. 1, pp. 698-699.) In the parent 
response section of the IEP meeting notice, a box is checked off indicating that the parent 
will attend the scheduled meeting on March 19, 2013.  The space provided for the parent's
signature is blank.  The date of March 18, 2013, is typewritten in the space for indicating 
"Date Signed" and in the space for indicating the date the parent response was received.
Heidi McDowell did not find a version of the IEP meeting notice actually signed by student
JI's parent in the brown file. The absence of a signed IEP meeting notice, however, is
mitigated by evidence that the parent gave verbal consent on March 12, 2013, to have the
meeting held the following week (i.e., March 19, 2013).  (Exh. 1485.) The parent also 
signed, but did not date, the Participants and Consent form for the IEP.  (Exh. 1, p. 701.)

160. The confidential file contained an IEP for student JI which indicated an IEP 

meeting was held on March 19, 2013. (Exh. 1, pp. 700-701.) This IEP was not timely, as the 
deadline for student JI's annual IEP meeting was March 6, 2013. Respondent did not sign 
the Participants and Consent form, and she failed to have the parent and general education 
teacher date the form next to their signatures. (Exh. 1, p. 701.)  However, the administrative 
designee, Susan Overstreet, signed and dated the IEP on March 19, 2013. The Commission 
finds that an IEP meeting for student JI was held on March 19, 2013.

161. The Workflow record for student JI indicates that Respondent convened an
IEP meeting on March 13, 2013, the parent attended, full consent was received from the 
parent, and the IEP was finalized.  (Exh. 1, p. 699). The Workflow record is not accurate, as 
the IEP meeting was actually held on March 19, 2013.

162.

It was established that Respondent failed to conduct a timely annual IEP for 

for student JI; failed to sign the Participants and Consent form; and failed to have the parent 
and general education teacher date the form. Although it was established that Respondent 
failed to obtain a signed response from student JI's parent to the IEP meeting notice for a 
March 19, 2013 meeting, the failure to obtain the parent's signature is mitigated by evidence
that the parent consented to the meeting and signed the Participants and Consent section of 
the IEP document.

//

37

Charge 26 – Student SD

163.

Student SD's mother wrote a letter dated March 24, 2013, addressed to Heidi 
McDowell, in which she requested SD's removal from speech therapy. (Exh. 1, p. 710.) In
the letter, the mother explained that SD attended speech therapy during his classroom's math 
time and she felt it was more important for SD to be in the classroom during that learning 
time.  Heidi McDowell received the letter by SD's mother on April 4, 2013.

164. On April 9, 2013, Heidi McDowell reviewed the brown confidential file and 
the CASEMIS and Workflow records for student SD.  The CASEMIS record indicated that 
student SD's IEP had an effective date of April 2, 2013, and his special education exit date 
was April 2, 2013. However, the confidential file did not contain an IEP for student SD for
an exit date of April 2, 2013. The only IEP document in the confidential file was a "draft" 
IEP that did not indicate a meeting date on the cover page or in the meeting notes section.
For the 2012-2013 school year, the annual IEP meeting for SD was due to be held by no later 
than February 27, 2013. The Workflow record included an entry for March 13, 2013, that 
SD's parent had responded to an IEP meeting notice and agreed to a meeting date.  However, 
there was no entry in the Workflow record indicating that an IEP meeting was actually held
for student SD. During her March 22, 2013 conference with Heidi McDowell, Respondent 
identified student SD's IEP as one of the IEPs for which she was not in compliance with IEP 
timelines.

165.

It was established that Respondent failed to timely complete student SD's 

annual evaluation by February 27, 2013, and failed to complete an IEP and obtain signatures 
on the IEP Participants and Consent page by that date.  As of April 9, 2013, there was no 
documentation in the confidential file and no entries in the CASEMIS and Workflow records 
establishing that an IEP meeting was actually held by the February 27, 2013 deadline.
Respondent herself admitted she was not in compliance with the IEP timelines for student 
SD's IEP during her March 22, 2013 conference with Heidi McDowell.

166.

It was established that Respondent failed to accurately document and report 

student SD's exit from speech-related services.

Other Findings

167. Respondent testified that she will change and modify her practices in using 

and maintaining assessment protocols, managing student confidential files, and using 
Synergy, CASEMIS, and Workflow.  She appears to have learned her lesson from the 
documentation and recordkeeping deficiencies that were the basis of the District's charges in 
this case.  She appeared sincere in expressing that she will be diligent in performing her 
duties related to recordkeeping and documentation in accordance with the District's policies
and procedures.

//
//

38

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1-3.8

The District has the burden of proof in this matter and the standard of proof is 

preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)

3.

Pursuant to section 44932, the grounds for dismissal alleged by the District
against Respondent are for immoral conduct [subdivision (a)(1)], dishonesty [subdivision
(a)(4)], evident unfitness for service [subdivision (a)(6)], and persistent violation of or refusal 
to obey school laws or reasonable regulations [subdivision (a)(8)]. The District also alleges
the ground for immediate suspension in section 44939, subdivision (b), of willful refusal to 
perform regular assignment without reasonable cause.

Immoral Conduct

4.

Grounds do not exist for Respondent's dismissal, pursuant to section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1), for immoral conduct. (Factual Findings 1-167.)

5.

The term "immoral conduct" has been defined to include conduct inconsistent 
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 
public welfare.  (Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) The Commission finds that Respondent's conduct established by the 
evidence in this case did not rise to the level of immoral conduct, e.g., it was not established 
that Respondent willfully entered false data into IEPs or computer programs or attempted to 
mislead any parent or school staff.

Dishonesty

6.

Grounds do not exist for Respondent's dismissal, pursuant to section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(4), for dishonesty. (Factual Findings 1-167.)

7.

Dishonesty "connotes a disposition to deceive" and "necessarily includes the 
element of bad faith."  It means "fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness," and "denotes an 
absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray."
(Midway School District v. Griffith (1946) 29 Cal.2d 13.)

8 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise

indicated.

39

8.

In this case, Respondent's deficient compliance with special education laws 
and the Handbook did not constitute dishonesty, because her conduct did not result from a 
purpose or intention to deceive or defraud the District, Mariners staff, or any students and 
their parents. The Commission is not persuaded by the District's contention that Respondent 
was dishonest by entering false information in Synergy to disguise and hide her non-
compliance with IEP timelines and requirements. Respondent admitted to Heidi McDowell 
that she was not in compliance with IEP timelines and was late in completing IEPs for her 
students.  The discrepancies in Respondent's documentation and computer records were due
to many factors, such as her use of Workflow as her own personal calendar, her failure to 
update records and documents to account for changes in meeting dates and failure to include 
explanations in the IEP meeting notes, her practice of writing assessment data on notepads 
and then later having to take time to transfer the information to the protocols, and her feeling 
overwhelmed by the Mariners workload and stress from her difficult relationship with the 
principal and Mariners staff. The totality of the circumstances led to Respondent's sloppy,
inaccurate, and incomplete documentation.  The Commission does not find Respondent 
engaged in conduct with a dishonest purpose or intent. 

Evident Unfitness for Service

9.

Grounds do not exist for Respondent's dismissal, pursuant to section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6), for evident unfitness for service. (Factual Findings 1-167.)

10.

Evident unfitness for service means "clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies."
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  Evident unfitness for service "connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district."  (Id.)

11.

To determine evident unfitness for service, "the criteria [for unfitness set out in 

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214] must be analyzed to determine,
as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.  If the 
Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the 'unfitness' is 
'evident'; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament."
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 2 
Cal.App.4th at 1445.)

12.

The Morrison case sets forth the following factors for determining a teacher's 
fitness to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 
fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of certificate held by the teacher; (5) extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood that the conduct 
in question will recur; and (8) the extent that discipline will cause an adverse chilling impact 

40

on the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. (Morrison v. State 
Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at 229.)

13.

(A) In applying the Morrison factors, it appears the likelihood that 

Respondent's conduct adversely affected students was minimal.  The District contends that
Respondent's conduct adversely affected special education students in that they were left 
with files and records that were incomplete and inaccurate.  There is no evidence that special 
education students were deprived of services or unable to pursue their due process rights
because of incomplete or inaccurate records. However, Respondent's conduct did adversely
affect the SLPs and other Mariners staff in that they were given additional work to bring 
Respondent's files and records into compliance with special education laws and the 
Handbook. Respondent's conduct was recent, having occurred during the 2012-2013 school 
year.  Respondent, as case carrier, was responsible for the files and records of her students,
and any failures in the completeness and accuracy of those files and records were properly
attributed to her.

(B) The Commission finds, however, that Respondent's workload issues at 

Mariners created extenuating or mitigating circumstances for her conduct. Respondent's case
carrying duties created a heavy workload, especially since SLP Lindsey Murphy was at 
Mariners only one day per week and spent that day primarily providing therapy.  Respondent 
had case carrying duties related to IEPs which were very labor intensive and involved,
among other things, contacting all IEP team members (including parents) to schedule a
mutually agreeable meeting day, preparing IEP meeting notices and other required IEP
documents; convening the meeting, and updating the Synergy, Workflow, and CASEMIS
records. In addition, Respondent, as SLP, was providing therapy to students, conducting 
assessments, completing Medi-Cal billing, and handling inquiries and other matters for the 
SLP team.  The Commission is not suggesting that Respondent's busy case load and 
workload excused her documentation and recordkeeping deficiencies and non-compliance
with IEP requirements; it does not. However, the labor intensive nature of Respondent's SLP
duties and workload at Mariners helps to explain why some of Respondent's deficient and 
non-compliant conduct occurred, and also refutes the District's characterization of 
Respondent's conduct as motivated by dishonesty or deceit. The Commission believes that 
Respondent's deficient and non-compliant conduct is fixable, in part, by adjusting her
workload to a reasonable level. Based on the foregoing, the Commission concludes that 
Respondent's conduct at issue in this case does not indicate she is unfit for service.

14.

Even assuming, arguendo, that Respondent was found to be unfit for service 

under the Morrison factors, the Commission finds that any unfitness is not due to any defect 
in temperament.  The Commission finds that the deficient and non-compliant conduct is
remediable and fixable. Respondent's incomplete files were due in large part to her practice 
of recording data and scores on a separate note pad instead of using the protocols provided 
with assessments.  Respondent's practice created more work for herself, as she needed
additional time to transfer information from her notes to the protocols.  The discrepancies in 
Respondent's Synergy, CASEMIS, and Workflow records were due, in part, by her use of 
Workflow as her own personal calendar and not as the District intended it to be used.  The 

41

Commission believes that Respondent's conduct is not due to a defect in temperament.
Respondent has expressed during her testimony that she will correct and modify her practices 
so that these issues will not recur in the future.

Persistent Violation of School Laws and Regulations

15.

Grounds exist for Respondent's dismissal, pursuant to section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8), for persistent violation of school laws and regulations, in that Respondent 
engaged in persistent violation of special education laws and the Handbook in performing 
her SLP duties at Mariners for the 2012-2013 school year.  (Factual Findings 1-167.)

16.

(A) In Governing Board of Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972)

28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82, the court stated:  "The word 'persistent' is defined by lexicographers as 
'refusing to relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering
. . . constantly repeated.' (Webster's New World Dict. (College ed.); see Webster's Third 
New Internat. Dict.)  And in the judicial decisions of this, as well as other states, the word
has been interpreted to mean 'continuing or constant.' [citations omitted]."

(B) The court in Seaman further explained that "a single violation of a school 
board's rules is not of itself cause for the dismissal of a permanent teacher under subdivision 
(g) of section 13403 [now section 44932, subdivision (a)(8)].  The subdivision pertains to
unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature, apparently to
allow opportunity for a correction, has decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to 
warrant dismissal; 'it is the persistent disregard' of school rules that the subdivision is 
designed to regulate." (28 Cal.App.3d at 84 [citation omitted].)

17.

Education Code section 56320, subdivision (b)(3), provides, in part, that tests 

and other assessment materials must be "administered in accordance with any instructions 
provided by the producer of the assessments."  (Exh. 1, p. 56.)  Section 56320, subdivision 
(f), provides that assessments shall be conducted in accordance with 34 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) sections 300.304 and 300.305.  (Exh. 1, p. 57.)  34 CFR 300.304, 
subdivision (c)(1)(v), requires that assessments and other evaluation materials used to assess 
a child "[a]re administered in accordance with any instructions provided by the producer of 
the assessments." (Exh. 1, p. 153-154.)  Title 20 United States Code section 1414, 
subdivision (b)(3), provides that assessments "are administered in accordance with any
instructions provided by the producer of such assessments."  (Exh. 1, p. 123.)

18.

School districts are required to retain special education assessment protocols 
containing student information as mandatory interim student records.  (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 
5, § 432 [Exh. 1, pp. 132-133].) Mandatory interim student records include records of 
"[p]articipation in special education programs including required tests, case studies, 
authorizations, and actions necessary to establish eligibility for admission or discharge."
(Ibid.)  Parents and guardians of students have a legal right to inspect such records upon 
request.  (Exh. 1, pp. 134-147.)

42

19.

During the 2012-2013 school year at Mariners, Respondent engaged in 

persistent violations of special education laws and the District's policies and procedures set 
forth in the Handbook by failing to utilize and retain protocols, failing to administer 
assessments according to instructions, failing to complete IEP documentation, failing to 
comply with IEP timelines, entering incomplete and/or inaccurate data in Workflow and 
CASEMIS, and failing to organize and maintain confidential files according to the 
procedures set forth in the Handbook. These violations were not one-time, isolated 
occurrences but, rather, involved multiple student files over the course of the school year.
Similar violations were discovered from a review of a sample of Respondent's student files at 
her prior school site, Corona Del Mar High School. The violations can be construed as 
"persistent," in light of Respondent's knowledge of IEP requirements from her 29 years' 
experience working as an SLP in public schools and her knowledge of the District's policies 
and procedures from having worked as an SLP for the District since 2006.

Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments

20.

Grounds do not exist for Respondent's suspension, pursuant to section 44939, 
subdivision (b), for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.
No evidence was presented of Respondent willfully refusing to perform her assignment as an
SLP at Mariners or Corona Del Mar High School. She did perform her SLP duties but not to 
the satisfaction of her employer, the District. (Factual Findings 1-167.)

Morrison Factors

21.

Cause for discipline against a teacher must relate to her fitness to teach within 
the meaning of the factors enumerated in the case of Morrison v. State Board of Education,
supra, 1 Cal.3d 214. Here, the Commission has found cause exists to dismiss Respondent 
pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), for persistent violation of school laws and 
regulations.  With regard to that cause for dismissal, the Commission considered all of the 
factors suggested by the Morrison case and compared them to the facts established above.
Not all Morrison factors need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied.  (Governing
Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) Moreover, the 
Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established but, rather, can
be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland Joint Unified School 
Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1457.) For the 
same reasons set forth in Legal Conclusions 12 and 13, above, the Commission finds that, 
under the Morrison factors, Respondent's conduct in this case does not demonstrate unfitness 
for service as an SLP for the District.

Disposition

22.

“The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 

unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.”
(California Teachers Association v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.)

43

Thus, even where cause for dismissal has been established, the Commission still has broad 
discretion to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted. (Fontana Unified 
School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)

23.

Respondent is an experienced and skilled clinician. She has worked as an SLP

in public school settings for 29 years.  She is an adjunct professor at Chapman University
and supervises master's degree students. She is innovative in her use of technology and other 
manipulatives as a way to engage students in therapy.  She presents a demeanor indicative of
a personable and knowledgeable clinician.  No evidence was presented in this case that any
parent made a complaint about the quality of Respondent's speech therapy services.  She has 
no prior record of discipline with the District.

24.

However, the evidence established that during her assignment at Mariners for
the 2012-2013 school year, Respondent had serious deficiencies in her documentation and 
recordkeeping and her compliance with IEP timelines. The Commission recognizes that 
documentation and recordkeeping are an important part of an SLP's duties in a public school 
setting. The Commission believes that Respondent's documentation and recordkeeping 
deficiencies are remediable.  For instance, Respondent can make sure she enters accurate 
dates in Workflow and ceases using it as her own personal calendar for assessments.  She can 
also record assessment data in protocols instead of her time-consuming practice of 
transferring data from her notepad to the protocols, which itself creates additional work on 
Respondent's already busy workload.  She can also change her practices with regard to 
maintaining original documents in the confidential file in accordance with the Handbook.
The Commission finds the District removed Respondent from her position as SLP without 
giving her the time and assistance to correct her deficient files and records. Respondent's
requests for help during the first half of the school year were not adequately addressed by
administrators. Respondent was ultimately given three weeks to bring her late IEPs into 
compliance, but she was not given assistance to do that until the week before she was placed 
on administrative leave, when Patti White was allowed to help for two days at the end of 
April.  Assistance was finally brought in to remedy Respondent's files and records, but only
after she was already removed and placed on administrative leave. Respondent testified that 
she will change her practices that resulted in the charges that are the basis of this disciplinary 
action.  The Commission believes her.

25.

Based on the foregoing, the decision of the Commission in this case is that 

Respondent shall not be dismissed from employment with the District.

//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//

44

ORDER

Respondent Lianne Pfister shall not be dismissed and shall remain employed with the 

Newport-Mesa Unified School District.

DATED:  _________________

January 6, 2017

Do

DATED: _________________

January 7, 2017

DATED: _________________

January 7, 2017

__________________________________
CHRISTIANNE OFF, M.A., CCC-SLP
Commissioner
Commission on Professional Competence

__________________________________
SUSAN SVENDSEN, M.S., CCC-SLP
Commissioner
Commission on Professional Competence

__________________________________
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER
Administrative Law Judge, Commissioner
Commission on Professional Competence

45

