 

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  Case  No.  2014020810 

BARBARA  HOMOKAY,  A  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  the  above- 

captioned  matter  in  Los  Angeles  on  April  22  and  23,  and  May  23,  2014.  The  Commission 
members  were  John  Gove,  Mary  Ann  Meysenburg,  and  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative 
Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  Complainant  was  represented 
by  Susan  E,  Hyman,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
(District).  Respondent  Barbara  Homokay  appeared  at  all  hearings  with  her  attorney,  James 
T.  Studer, 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  23,  2014.  The  Commission  hereby 

makes  its  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order. 

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

In  this  proceeding  the  District  seeks  the  termination  of  one  of  its  tenured  teachers, 

Respondent  Barbara  Homokay.  While  half a  dozen  statutory  grounds  are  asserted  as 
justifying  termination,  the  factual  claims  may  be  summarized  as  follows:  Respondent,  on 
three  occasions  in  a  two  year  period,  appeared  for  work  at  Chase  Street  School  while 
apparently  intoxicated, 

Respondent  does  not  deny  that  she  appeared  for  duty  within  hours  of  consuming  a 

substantial  amount  of  alcohol,  denying  that  she  was  actually  under  the  influence  in  some  of 
the  cases.  She  adduced  evidence  that  she  has  been  engaged  in  rehabilitation  efforts,  and  has 
been  heavily  involved  in  Alcoholics  Anonymous  for  nearly  two  years. 

As  detailed  below,  the  District  has  proven  the  vast  majority  of  its  factual  claims,  and 

has  established  that  Respondent  should  be  terminated. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1.  Justo  H.  Avila  executed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  while  acting  in  his  official 

capacity  as  Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District. 

2.  The  District  commenced  this  proceeding  on  November  26,  2013,  when  Vivian  K. 

Ekchian,  then  the  District's  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  executed  a  Statement  of 
Charges  against  Respondent.  That  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed  with  the  District's 
governing  board,  which  thereafter  determined  to  terminate  Respondent. 

3.  On  January  22,  2014,  the  District  gave  Respondent  written  notice  of  its  intent  to 

terminate  her,  and  served  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent 
made  a  timely  request  for  hearing,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of  the  Accusation.  She  then 
filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  and  this  hearing  endued.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met. 

4.  Respondent  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  District's  employ,  credentialed  to  teach 

special  education.  During  the  time  relevant  to  this  proceeding—May  2010  through  May 
2012—Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  special  education  students  at  Chase  Street 
Elementary  School  (Chase  Street)  in  Panorama  City,  California.  She  was  teaching  both 
fourth  and  fifth  grade  students. 

Findings  On  the  Factual  Allegations  Made  Against  Respondent 

The  Incident  in  May  2010 

5.  On  May  26,  2010,  Respondent  appeared  for  work  at  approximately  7:40  a.m, 

while  under  the  influence  of  alcohol.  She  physically  manifested  that  condition  by  slurring 
her  words  when  she  spoke,  and  by  swaying  when  she  stood.  Other  staff  members  could 
smell  aleohol  on  her  person. 
the  vice-principal. 

This  included  office  workers,  the  principal  of  the  school,  and 

6.  Respondent’s  condition  was  first  noticed  by  office  staff,  and  the  school’s  principal, 

Mr.  Andres  E,  Chait  (Chait).  He  confirmed  his  suspicions  in  conversation  with  the  office 
staff,  who  had  observed  Respondent  when  she  signed  into  work,  at  approximately  7:40  a.m. 
The  principal  then  asked  Ms.  Aleta  Johnson  (Johnson),  the  vice-principal,  to  go  and  speak  to 
Respondent  at  her  classroom.  The  two  went  there,  and  both  perceived  Respondent  to  be 
under  the  influence.  Respondent  went  with  Johnson  to  the  latter's  office,  while  the  principal 
waited  with  Respondent’s  class  until  another  teacher  could  come  and  cover  it. 

7. 

On  May  26,  2010,  after  meeting  with  the  principal  and  vice-principal,  Respondent 

was  driven  from  Chase  Street,  in  the  San  Fernando  Valley,  to  the  District's  main  office,  in 
downtown  Los  Angeles,  Respondent  met  with  Rosa  Mercado,  M.D.  Dr.  Mercado  perceived 

2

| 
i 

    

    

that  Respondent  was  disheveled  and  she  smelled  alcohol  on  Respondent's  person. 
Respondent's  speech  was  slow,  she  was  flushed,  and  she  appeared  impaired.  Respondent 
told  Dr.  Mercado,  as  she  had  told  the  principal  and  vice-principal,  that  she  had  had  much  to 
drink  the  night  before. 

8.  Dr.  Mercado  formed  the  opinion  that  Respondent  was  in  no  condition  to  do  her 

job.  That  was  not  just  a  function  of  alcohol  use;  Respondent  was  emotional,  alternating 
between  tears  and  composure. 

9,  Dr.  Mercado  obtained  a  urine  sample  from  Respondent  at  approximately  10:30 
am.  The  sample  was  tested  by  an  independent  laboratory,  and  were  positive  for  alcohol. 
The  test  results,  while  not  stated  in  terms  of  blood  alcohol  content  (BAC),  indicated  that 
Respondent's  BAC  was  between  0.11  and  0.13  percent,  above  the  legal  limit  for  driving. 

10, 

Dr.  Mercado  spent  some  time  talking  to  Respondent,  who  appeared  cooperative 

and  remorseful.  She  learned  that  Respondent  has  significant  challenges  at  home,  including  a 
disabled  child  and  a  husband  who  liked  to  drink.  Dr.  Mercado  also  learned  that  Respondent 
had  challenges  at  the  work  site,  Dr,  Mercado  recommended  that  Respondent  seek  help, 
including  a  rehabilitation  program,  and  ongoing  support.  She  informed  Respondent  that  the 
District  had  programs  available  that  might  assist  Respondent. 

11.  On  June  8,  2010,  Respondent  met  with  Chait  and  Johnson,  along  with  her  union 

representative,  Donna  Logan.  They  discussed  the  events  of  May  26.  At  that  time 
Respondent  advised  that  she  was  going  to  take  a  week  off  work.  Later,  Respondent  made  a 
written  statement  regarding  the  incident,  in  which  she  stated  that  she  had  been  upset  the  day 
before,  and  had  had  much  to  drink  on  the  night  of  May  25.  According  to  her  statement, 
when  she  came  to  school,  she  didn't  realize  she  still  had  alcohol  in  her  system,  and 
acknowledged  that  she  should  have  stayed  home.  She  told  Mr.  Chait  that  she  was  seeing  a 
doctor  about  stress,  and  had  begun  to  attend  meetings  once  a  week  at  a  local  church,  the 
nature  of  the  meetings  not  disclosed. 

12.  During  the  following  semester,  on  September  17,  2010,  Respondent  received  a 

written  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  Notice  of  Suspension,  for  three  days. 

The  September  6,  2011  Incident 

13,  On  September  6,  2011,  Respondent  arrived  late  to  work,  by  approximately  one 

hour,  and  appeared  to  be  under  the  influence  of  alcohol.  On  that  day,  no  classes  were 
scheduled;  school  was  to  start  the  next  day  and  staff  was  meeting  to  prepare  for  the  new 
school  year,  and  this  involved  various  presentations  by  the  school’s  new  principal,  Ms.  Susan 
Babit  (Babit),  When  there  was  a  break  in  the  activities,  the  assistant  principal,  Johnson, 
asked  Babit  to  speak  to  Respondent,  and  see  if  she  smelled  anything.  Babit  did  so,  and  to 
her,  Respondent  “reeked”  of  alcohol;  she  smelled  alcohol  on  Respondent's  body  and  breath,

14,  At  the  lunch  break  Babit  and  Johnson  went  to  speak  to  Respondent,  who  was  in 
her  class  room,  getting  it  ready  for  the  new  school  year.  When  Babit  expressed  her  concern 
about  Respondent's  condition,  Respondent  stated  she  was  fine,  and  expressed  surprise  that 
Babit  and  Johnson  smelled  alcohol.  Respondent  did  say  she  had  had  six  beers  with  her 
husband,  the  night  before  the  school  meeting.  In  the  discussion  that  followed,  Respondent 
did  not  deny  the  prior  incident,  and  said  she  was  trying  not  to  drink,  and  had  been  attending 
AA  meetings,  but  couldn't  find  a  sponsor;  such  was  her  next  step  in  the  process,  but  she 
claimed  it  was  hard  to  find  a  sponsor,  Respondent  acknowledged  that  there  was  much  stress 
at  home,  At  one  point  Respondent  admitted,  “I  kinda  fell  off  the  wagon.”  Babit  told 
Respondent  that  she  couldn't  drink  at  all,  and  that  she  needed  to  get  help;  Babit  pointed  out 
that  the  District  had  an  employee  assistance  line  that  could  be  cafled  for  help. 

15.  On  September  8,  2011,  Babit  spoke  further  to  Respondent  about  the  incident, 

reminding  her  that  it  is  never  appropriate  to  report  to  work  under  the  influence  of  drugs  or 
alcohol.  She  also  provided  a  copy  of  the  District's  Ethics  Policy  Statement  to  Respondent, 
and  Babit  emphasized  the  provision  that  states  that  the  District's  employees  are  entrusted 
with  the  physical  and  mental  well-being  of  the  students,  Respondent  was  also  provided  with 
a  District  Bulletin  which  gave  notice  that  the  District  was  implementing  a  zero-tolerance 
policy  for  establishing  a  drug,  alcohol,  and  tobacco  free  zone. 

16.  Babit  sent  Respondent  a  memorandum  that  detailed  and  documented  the  events 

that  occurred  betweeri  September  6  and  9,  2011,  That  memorandum  stated,  in  part,  that 
failure  to  adhere  to  directives  could  lead  to  disciplinary  actions,  including  to  dismissal.  The 
memorandum,  issued  on  September  9,  2011,  also  provided  that  Respondent  could  make  a 
response  to  the  memo,  in  writing,  within  five  days. 

17.  Respondent  waited  over  a  month  to  make  a  written  response  to  Babit's  September 
9,  2011  memorandum.  In  her  response,  dated  October  20,  2011,  she  claimed  she  was  only  25 
minutes  late,  because  she  had  been  up  a  good  portion  of  the  night  with  an  upset  stomach,  and 
she  had  overslept.  She  denied  smelling  of  alcohol,  and  stated  that  she  was  “ruddy”  faced 
because  of  a  skin  condition. 

18. 

In  October  2011,  Respondent  received  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  a 

Notice  of  Suspension,  for  10  days. 

The  May  9,  2012  Incident 

19,  On  May  9,  2012,  Respondent  reported  for  work  while  under  the  influence  of 

alcohol.  On  that  day,  state-wide  tests  were  being  administered  to  the  students,  described  as 
CST/CMA  tests.  Eric  Diance  (Diance),  who  had  been  a  teaching  assistant  with  Respondent 
for  approximately  four  years,  was  assigned  to  proctor  the  tests.  He  observed  Respondent  in 
the  classroom  at  approximately  8:30  a.m.,  while  she  was  with  her  students.

‘ 

' 
; 

; 
: 

: 

  

  

20.  Mr.  Diance  saw  that  Respondent  was  flushed,  and  looked  upset.  She  was 
reprimanding  a  student,  but  to  her  aide,  Diance,  she  was  not  using  a  normal  voice,  and  she 
looked  anxious,  uncomfortable,  and  disheveled,  She  did  not  seem  to  have  all  of  her  faculties. 

21.  After  Diance  took  some  students,  who  were  not  testing  that  day,  to  the  library,  he 

went  and  spoke  to  Donna  Logan  (Logan),  a  certificated  teacher  who  served  as  the  UTLA 
(United  Teachers  of  Los  Angeles)  representative  at  Chase  Street.  He  told  her  that  something 
seemed  to  be  wrong  with  Respondent,  and  asked  if  Logan  would  look  in  on  her.  Logan 
asked  if  it  looked  like  she  had  been  drinking,  and  he  stated  it  did.  Logan  called  the  office  to 
have  someone  check  on  the  situation. 

22.  Diance  went  back  to  the  classroom.  He  observed  Respondent  was  slurring  her 

words  while  giving  instructions  for  the  test  to  the  students,  She  was  swaying  while  she  was 
reading  the  instructions,  and  at  one  point  she  stopped  reading,  closed  her  eyes,  and  appeared 
to  go  to  sleep.  The  phone  in  the  classroom  rang,  and  after  Respondent  answered  it,  she 
appeared  agitated.  Shortly  after  that,  Babit  appeared  with  an  administrative  assistant,  and 
they  removed  Respondent  from  the  classroom. 

23.  Babit  had  a  brief  opportunity  to  see  Respondent  in  the  classroom,  before  the 

latter's  removal,  and  she  saw  Respondent  unsteady  on  her  feet,  red-faced,  and  slurring  her 
speech.  Babbit  smelled  alcohol  on  Respondent.  Babit  formed  the  opinion  that  Respondent 
was  then  unable  to  do  her  job. 

24,  Babit  spoke  to  a  District  Director,  who  advised  her  to  take  Respondent  downtown 

for  an  examination  by  Dr.  Mercado.  Dr.  Mercado  perceived  Respondent  to  be  under  the 
influence  of  alcohol,  and  she  conducted  another  urine  test.  That  test,  like  the  one 
administered  in  May  2010,  came  back  positive  for  alcoho!  in  Respondent's  system.  Dr. 
Mercado  again  estimated  the  BAC  between  .11  and  .13  per  cent. 

25.  Babit  met  with  Respondent  and  her  UTLA  representative,  Mr.  Kaz,  on  June  14, 

2012.  The  May  9  incident  was  discussed  in  some  detail.  Babit  provided  advice  and  counsel, 
including  the  advice  that  Respondent  review  the  District's  zero-tolerance  bulletin,  and  that 
she  continue  with  A.A.,  and  not  drink  alcohol  at  all.  Another  copy  of  the  ethics  policy, 
which  Respondent  had  received  in  June  2010  and  October  2011,  was  provided.  She  directed 
Respondent  to  enroll  in  and  complete  a  rehabilitation  program  by  August  19,  2012. 
Respondent  was  warned  that  she  remained  subject  to  discipline,  up  to  and  including 
termination.  A  memo  summarizing  the  June  14,  2012  meeting  was  given  to  Respondent. 

26.  On  June  19,  2012,  Respondent  made  a  written  response  to  Babit.  She  described 
the  conference  summary  prepared  by  Babit  for  the  June  14,  2012  meeting  as  “fabricated  and 
exaggerated  at  my  expense.”  (Ex.  22,  p. 
1.)  She  described  the  claims  of  her  inebriation  and 
the  symptoms  thereof  as  “grossly  misleading  and  false.”  (id.).  She  denied  that  her  speech 
had  been  slurred,  .or  that  she  was  unsteady  on  her  feet  or  that  she  smelled  of  alcohol,  she 
again  blamed  the  red  tone  of  her  skin  on  a  skin  condition,

 

27. 

In  March  2013,  Respondent  received  her  third  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and 

Notice  of  Suspension,  for  15  days.  The  third  Notice  stated  that  the  Section  Administrator 
was  recommending  her  dismissal. 

Respondent's  Efforts  at  Sobriety 

28.  Since  the  May  2012  incident,  Respondent  has  taken  steps  to  obtain  sobriety.  To 
be  sure,  she  may  have,  for  at  time  prior  to  that  incident,  attended  A.A.  meetings,  but,  as  she 
admitted  in  her  conversation  with  Babit  in  September  2011,  she  had  "fallen  off  the  wagon." 

29.  At  the  time  of  the  September  2011  incident,  it  appears  that  Respondent  was 

making  no  real  effort  at  obtaining  and  maintaining  sobriety,  and  she  was  not  being 
completely  honest  with  the  principal  about  her  efforts;  her  claim  of  not  being  able  to  find  a 
sponsor  after  a  period  of  weeks  or  even  months  strains  credulity. 

30. 

It  is  plain  that  Respondent's  efforts  at  sobriety  between  September  2011  and  June 

19,  2012,  when  Respondent  gave  her  written  response  to  the  previous  conference  summary, 
were  insufficient.  When  Respondent  wrote  her  June  19,  2012  response,  she  was  plainly  deep 
in  the  sort  of  denial  that  plagues  alcoholics  and  other  addicts.  Thus,  her  statement  claims  that 
the  conference  memo  was  fabricated  and  exaggerated;  she  called  the  claims  that  she  was 
slurring  her  speech  in  her  class  room  to  be  false.  She  denied  she  smelled  of  alcohol,  and 
before.  (Ex.  22.)  She  then  asserted  that  the  aleohol  would  stay  in  her  body  for  up  to  24 
hours,  and  that  what  was  in  her  body  was  minimal. 

31.  Respondent's  efforts  at  sobriety  improved  after  2012.  She  found  a  sponsor,  who 

she  speaks  to  every  day.  Respondent  began  attending  meetings  on  a  regular  basis,  and  has 
been  through  the  time  of  the  hearing.  She  has  begun  acting  as  a  sponsor,  and  has  become  a 
person  others  in  the  meetings  rely  on  to  get  things  done.  Her  sponsor,  who  has  sponsored 
scores  of  alcoholics,  believes  that  Respondent  has  a  very  positive  prognosis, 

32,  There  was  no  evidence  presented  that  two  of  the  main  stressors  in  Respondent's 

personal  life  have  been  diminished.  They  include  a  husband  who  likes  to  drink,  and  a 
disabled  son  who  presents  serious  challenges.  It  must  be  noted  that  the  position  held  by 
Respondent,  teaching  special  education  students  in  a  mixed  fourth  and  fifth  grade  class  is 
very  demanding.  In  these  circumstances,  and  given  the  plainly  obdurate  nature  of 
Respondent's  alcoholism,  as  illustrated  by  her  three  episodes  at  her  school  site,  and  her 
response  thereto,  it  cannot  be  found  that  Respondent's  sobriety  is  such  that  she  would  be 
unlikely  to  appear  for  work  under  the  influence  in  the  future, 

Other  Findings 

33.  The  District  has  promulgated  an  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  In  general  terms,  it 
proscribes  conduct  such  as  Respondent's,  that  is,  appearing  at  work,  to  teach  students,  while 
under  the  influence.  It  also  promulgated  a  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  treatment  of  children,  of 
which  a  provision  states  that  teachers  are  charged  with  not  engaging  in  behaviors,  in  the 

6 

  

presence  of  students,  which  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitive. 
The  provisions  of  that  policy  were  brought  to  Respondent's  attention  by  Chait  during  June 
2010  conference  with  him. 

34. 

In  2007,  the  District  enacted  a  zero  tolerance  policy  that  would  create  a  drug, 
alcohol,  and  tobacco-free  workplace.  That  bulletin  that  enunciated  that  policy  noted  that 
federal  law  mandated  the  District  to  take  steps  to  maintain  drug  and  alcohol  free  school  sites, 
and  that  failure  to  do  so  could  endanger  the  District's  ability  to  receive  federal  funds,  The 
written  bulletin  clearly  stated  that  it  was  the  District's  policy  to  prohibit  the  use  of  alcohol  on 
school  premises,  by  any  employee.  Respondent  was  made  aware  of  that  policy;  it  was 
distributed  to  all  employees.  Respondent  was  also  given  a  copy  of  the  bulletin  during  her 
September  2011  conference. 

The  Morrison  Factors 

35.  Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an  examination 

must  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  Respondent  in  question  is 
unfit  to  teach.  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal,3d  214,  229.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  factors  that  may  be  examined 
to  determine  fitness  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  and,  the  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of  certificate  held  by 
the  teacher;  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances;  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in 
question  will  recur;  and,  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on 
the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved,  or  other  teachers. 

36. 

(A)  Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the  degree  thereof. 

There  were  no  obvious  adverse  consequences  for  students,  but  plainly  such  may  have 
occurred.  To  have  a  clear  role  model  intoxicated  in  the  classroom  may  lead  to  disrespect  for 
that  teacher,  and  others,  and  in  such  circumstances,  no  learning  is  taking  place,  Taking  the 
Respondent  out  of  the  classroom  for a  trip  to  the  District's  physician  did  not  advance  the 
students’  education,  and  had  to  have  an  adverse  effect  on  other  teachers,  who  had  to  cover 
her  classroom. 

(B)  Proximity  in  time:  This  conduct  occurred  in  the  period  May  2010  to  May 

2012,  and  is  fairly  recent. 

: 

(C)  Type  of certificate  held  by  Respondent:  Not  fully  disclosed  by  the  record, 

but  it  must  be  inferred  that  she  holds  a  special  education  credential,  at  least. 

Hf 
Hf

(D)  Likelihood  of recurrence:  The  chance  of  recurrence  is  significant.  While 
Respondent  professes  sobriety  and  has  seemingly  been  working  her  AA  program,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  she  has  taken  steps  to  eliminate  the  stressors  in  her  home  life,  and  she  has  not 
been  under  the  stress  of  teaching  a  combined  fourth-fifth  grade  special  education  class  since 
June  2012.  While  she  has  made  strides,  and  there  are  grounds  for  optimism,  given  her  prior 
problems,  it  there  is  a  substantial  chance  of  a  recurrence.  | 

(E)  Implication  of constitutional  rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of  either  the 
A  teacher  has  no 

Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated. 
right  to  come  to  work  inebriated. 

(F)  Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances:  In  aggravation,  Respondent’s 
actions  occurred  more  than  once,  despite  warnings  from  her  supervisors,  and  advice  that  she 
get  help. 

37.  Under  all  the  circumstances,  Respondent’s  ongoing  conduct  establishes  that  she 
is  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Morrison  decision,  and  she  should 
be  terminated  as  a  teacher, 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Conclusions  Generally  Applicable  To  All  Claims: 

1,  The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44944,”  and  Factual  Findings  1  through  3. 

2.  “Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may  be 

defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v. 

' 

Complainant's  counsel  argued  that  an  alcoholic  may  not  teach  in  the  public  schools. 
That  unqualified  statement  is  untrue.  If  an  alcoholic,  including  Respondent,  has  attained  and 
can  maintain  sobriety,  then  they  can  teach  in  the  public  schools.  The  Commission  is  entitled 
to  evaluate  evidence  in  light  of  experience  and  training  (Govt.  Code,  §  11525.50,  subd.  (c)), 
and  the  ALJ  has  had  some  training  on  the  nature  of  alcoholism,  He  would  observe  that  he 
has  known  physicians,  lawyers,  and  judges  who  are  alcoholics,  who  have  been  able  to 
practice  their  high-stress  professions  because  they  have  attained,  and  can  maintain,  sobriety. 
The  Commission  hopes  that  at  some  point  in  the  future  Respondent  can  demonstrate  such, 
and  return  to  her  profession,  but  at  this  time,  believes  that  cause  for  termination  has  been 
established. 

2 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code, 

8

Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount  to 
unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

3.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 

properly  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 
reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,” 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  at  1444.) 

4,  “Immoral  conduct,”  of  which  Respondent  has  been  accused,  is  not  confined  to 

sexual  matters,  It  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that 
is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland);  San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

5, 

In  order  for  a  teacher  to  be  terminated  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for 
persistent  disobedience  of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  it  must  be  established  that  there 
has  been  continuous  and  constant  refusal  to  obey,  or  behavior  motivated  by  an  attitude  of 
continuing  insubordination;  a  single  instance  of  disobedience  is  insufficient.  (Governing  Bd. 
of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 

6.  Even  where  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  or  refusal  to  follow  rules  and  regulations  is  or  are  established,  it  must  also  be 
established  that  such  conduct  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d 
208;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445;  See  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

7. 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
y.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon

(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence”,  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  That  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in 
support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.  (Hutchinson  v. 
Contractors’  State  License  Bd,  (1956)  143  Cal.App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v. 
Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.295,  304.) 

Legal  Conclusions  Pertaining  to  the  Specific  Allegations  of the  Accusation: 

8.  Respondent  has  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct,  providing  cause  for  her 
termination  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  her  reporting  for  service  at  her 
school  site  on  three  occasions  while  under  the  influence  of  alcohol,  and  on  two  occasions 
after  receiving  warnings,  notices  of  unsatisfactory  acts,  and  suspensions,  This  conclusion  is 
based  on  Factual  Findings  4  through  27,  and  33  and  34. 

9,  Cause  has  been  established  to  terminate  Respondent  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  in  that  she  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  in  light  of  her  reporting  for  service 
at  her  school  site  on  three  occasions  while  under  the  influence  of  alcohol,  and  on  two 
occasions  after  receiving  warnings,  notices  of  unsatisfactory  acts,  and  suspensions.  This 
conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  4  through  27,  and  33  and  34, 

10.  Respondent  persistently  violated  the  school  laws  of  the  state  and  or  reasonable 

regulations  prescribed  for  the  governing  board  of  the  District,  by  appearing  for  work  on  three 
occasions  while  under  the  influence  of  alcohol,  in  violation  of  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(7).  This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  4  through  27,  33  and  34. 

11. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  has  suffered  from  alcoholism  which  makes  her 
unfit  to  associate  with  children,  and  she  is  therefore  subject  to  termination  pursuant  to  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(11).  This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  4  through  27,  33 
and  34. 

12. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent's  conduct  was  immoral,  despite  its 

reprehensible  nature;  to  suffer  from  an  addiction  is  not  necessarily  immoral.  (See  Rice  v. 
Alcohol  Beverage  Control  Appeals  Board  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  30,  37-38.)  Nor  was  it 
established  that  Respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments,  despite  the 
three  incidents, 

10 

| 

{ 
i 
4 i 

 

 

13. 

Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  it  must  be  concluded  that  Respondent's 

conduct  and  temperament  render  her  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  based  on  Factual  Findings 
35  through  37. 

14. 

(A)  Respondent  asserted  that  under  the  American's  with  Disabilities  Act,  and 
similar  legislation,  she  cannot  be  terminated  because  her  alcoholism  is  a  disease,  and  because 
termination  would  be  discriminatory.  Complainant  asserted  that  such  a  claim  will  not  lie  as 
an  affirmative  defense  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence. 

(B)  Leaving  aside  the  jurisdictional  issue,  on  which  the  Commission  makes 

no  explicit  finding,  it  is  noted  that  even  if  alcoholism  brings  Respondent  within  the 
protections  of  anti-discrimination  statutes,  she  is  not,  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case, 
protected  from  termination,  This  is  a  function  of  the  job  she  hold—where  she  is  entrusted 
with  the  health,  safety,  and  welfare  of  young  children—as  well  as  her  demonstrated  inability 
to  bring  her  addiction  under  control, 

(C)  In  Grosvenor  v.  Coastal  Corp.  (1996),  51  Cal-App.4th  805,  disapproved 

on  other  grounds  in  Colmenares  v.  Braemar  Country  Club,  Inc,  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  1019, 
1031,  fn.  6,  the  termination  of  a  refinery  superintendent,  who  suffered  from  alcoholism,  was 
upheld,  following  a  summary  judgment  in  the  employer's  favor.  There,  the plaintiff 
employee  had  more  than  one  opportunity  to  bring  his  alcoholism  under  control,  and  he  could 
It  was  noted  that  the  refinery,  located  near  a  residential  area,  was  often  supervised  by 
not, 
the  employee  alone,  Hence,  his  inability  to  manage  his  addiction  threatened  not  only  the 
employer's  property,  but  the  lives  of  other  workers,  and  local  residents.  The  employee  had 
had  more  than  one  opportunity,  and  more  than  one  warning,  and  the  appellate  court  noted 
that  if  the  employee  could  not  be  terminated,  the  employer's  warning  that  he  had  had  his  last 
chance  would  become  meaningless, 

(D)  Here  also  Respondent  is  entrusted  with  the  safety  of  others—children—as 

apart  of  her  job,  (This  leaves  aside  the  threat  she  posed  driving  to  school,  across  many 
miles,  while  inebriated,  a  concern  expressed  by  Babit  and  Johnson.)  She  had  more  than  one 
opportunity,  had  made  efforts  at  sobriety,  had  failed,  and  asserts  that  she  is  entitled  to  another 
chance  under  anti-discrimination  laws.  In  light  of  the  Grosvenor  decision,  she  cannot  sustain 
that  claim. 

15.  Based  on  all  the  foregoing,  Respondent  should  be  terminated  as  a  teacher  in  the 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

if 
Mf 
df 
Hf 
lif 
It 
Hf 

11 

ORDER. 

Respondent  Barbara  Homokay  shall  be  terminated  as  a certifical 

employee  of  the 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  forthwith. 

“ 
    

“a 

August  ‘J,  2014 

July  3/  ,2014 

July  3O,  2014 

   
Josepif  D.  Montoya 

Ze 

inistrative  Law  Judge 

   

ffice  of  Administrative  Hearings 

ys 

Mary 

Meysenbur; 

ee 

John 

fsove 

 

  

