BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 
 

 
OAH No. 2014051215 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
DAVE LUKKARILA, 
a permanent certificated employee, 
 
                                       Respondent. 
 
 

DECISION 

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter on 
January 19 and 20, 2016, in Los Angeles, California. Howard W. Cohen, Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, Kristi 
Harabedian, and Ray Gallardo constituted the Commission. ALJ Cohen presided. 

Milton Foster and Brian Bock, attorneys at law, of Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, 

represented complainant Kevin Ward, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, of the 
Claremont Unified School District (District). Respondent Dave Lukkarila, who was not 
represented by counsel, did not appear.  

Prior to and during the hearing the parties brought several motions, on which the ALJ 
ruled, as reflected on the record. Among those motions, respondent moved on the first day of 
hearing for a telephonic conference; he did not formally move to continue the hearing. For 
reasons set forth on the record and in an order dated January 19, 2016, respondent having 
received notice of the hearing and there being no good cause for a continuance or a 
telephonic conference, the motion was denied. Complainant moved to have deemed admitted 
facts set forth in two sets of requests for admissions served on respondent. The two sets of 
requests for admissions were collectively marked for identification and admitted as Exhibit 
37. For reasons set forth on the record and in an order dated January 20, 2016, and 
respondent filing no opposition, the motion was granted and the facts were deemed admitted. 
Complainant filed a trial brief, which was marked for identification as Exhibit 37. 

The ALJ ordered that any testimonial reference to the names of minor students be 

replaced in the hearing transcript by each student’s first name or first name and last initial. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received and argument was heard. The record 

was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on January 20, 2016. The Commission 
considered the record in executive session. 

Jurisdiction and Parties 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On April 3, 2014, complainant filed a Notice of Proposed Intent to Dismiss 

and Immediately Suspend Without Pay, and a Statement of Charges, with the District’s 
Governing Board of Education (Board), which the Board approved.1 On April 9, 2014, the 
District served the Statement of Charges on respondent, notifying him of his immediate 
suspension and proposed dismissal. On May 9, 2014, respondent timely requested a hearing. 

2. 

Acting in his official capacity, complainant filed and served an Accusation and 

Statement of Charges on June 11, 2014. Respondent timely served a Notice of Defense. By 
telephonic trial setting conference order dated January 15, 2015, the matter was set for 
hearing for May 21 through June 5, 2015. Complainant filed an Amended Accusation and 
Statement of Charges on January 22, 2015. By order dated May 20, 2015, the hearing was 
continued; by trial setting order dated July 20, 2015, served on both parties, the hearing was 
rescheduled for January 19 through January 28, 2016. On July 30, 2015, complainant 
properly served respondent with a Notice of Hearing, identifying again the new hearing 
dates. Complainant filed a Second Amended Accusation on September 3, 2015. Respondent 
participated telephonically in a pre-hearing conference on December 18, 2015; a pre-hearing 
conference order issued on December 22, 2015, notifying the parties that the hearing would 
proceed on January 19 through January 28, 2016, as previously noticed. 

3. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District on unpaid 
leave. Before being placed on leave, respondent was a high school social science teacher 
assigned to teach Advanced Placement Economics and U.S. History at Claremont High 
School (CHS). 

Complainant’s Charges Against Respondent 

4. 

In the Second Amended Accusation, complainant alleges cause exists to 

dismiss respondent as a permanent certificated employee of the District for: 

Immoral conduct, under Education Code sections 44932, subdivision 

a. 
(a)(1), and 44939;2 

b. 

Dishonesty, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(3)3; 

                                                

1 On March 5, 2014, the District provided respondent with a Notice of Proposed 
Intent to Immediately Suspend and Dismiss and with a Statement of Charges, notifying him 
of a March 21, 2014, Skelly conference. Respondent did not appear at the Skelly conference. 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 

3 Recodified, effective January 1, 2015, at section 44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

 

2 

c. 

Evident unfitness for service, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); 

d. 
Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by the 
State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7); and 

Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
e. 
cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
school district, under section 44939.  

Complainant’s Charging Allegations 

5. 

The Second Amended Accusation contains numerous charging allegations 

intermixed with a considerable amount of narrative. The charges discussed herein are 
identified and numbered using the number of the paragraph or paragraphs in which they 
appear in the Second Amended Accusation. Those portions of the narrative setting forth 
relevant actions the District took with respect to respondent are discussed at Factual Findings 
115 through 120. The remainder of the narrative is discussed only when necessary to explain 
the charging allegations. 

6. 

Complainant alleges at Charge 2 that on February 3, 2012, the District 

counseled respondent and presented respondent with a plan after having received complaints 
from parents, students, and staff in January 2012. According to the plan, respondent was to 
refrain from addressing his personal problems with students.4 (See also Factual Finding 115.) 
The complaints and concerns the District received were: 

Respondent inappropriately discussed his personal 

a. 
problems with students during classroom time; 

b. 
Staff members reported that Respondent's personal issues 
were negatively affecting the proper delivery of education to his 
students; 

Students reported that Respondent informed his class to 

c. 
“look busy” if, and when, an administrator enters the classroom; 

Respondent informed his students he had “tenure” and 

d. 
the District “can't do anything” to him; 

                                                

4 Complainant attached as an exhibit to the Second Amended Accusation a 
memorandum dated February 14, 2012, from Steven Patterson to respondent and others 
regarding the February 3, 2012, meeting and setting forth the counseling and plan, as alleged. 
(See Ex. 5.) 

 

3 

When absent, Respondent failed to provide specific and 

e. 
clear directions in his substitute plans; 

During the first semester final exam, Respondent initially 

f. 
distributed the final with the answers on the exam and had to 
collect the exam and redistribute it; 

Respondent was not teaching the required curriculum 

g. 
and further assigned grades in an inappropriate and unfair 
manner; 

Respondent failed to comply with timelines regarding 

Respondent cancelled parent-teacher meetings without 

h. 
goals and objectives; 

i. 
justification; and  

Respondent discussed school facilities needs and 

j. 
concerns during instruction time. (Ex. 4, pp. 3-4.) 

7. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed to have been admitted by respondent, established that the District received the 
complaints alleged in paragraph 2, and that the District counseled respondent and presented 
him with a plan on February 3, 2012.5  

8. 

Complainant alleges at Charge 3 that, after respondent complained about mold 

and water damage and the District investigated and remediated all damaged portions of the 
facilities, respondent violated prior directives. “Respondent continued to use classroom time, 
and other forums, to discuss the facilities conditions, speak about his family’s ongoing 
personal issues, and otherwise to bad-mouth the District and/or administration. The 
Respondent’s comments were inappropriate and served to unnecessarily scare parents, 
students, and faculty into believing that there were serious health risks at CHS which the 
District was unwilling or had neglected to address. The Respondent did this despite being 
informed of the District's ongoing efforts and progress to address these concerns.” (Ex. 4, p. 
4.) 

// 

                                                

5 The evidence also established that respondent engaged in the activity complained of, 

with one exception: the evidence did not establish that respondent lacked justification for 
cancelling parent-teacher meetings. Because complainant does not allege at Charge 2 that 
respondent engaged in the activity described in that charge and recites only that the District 
received complaints about respondent, the evidence establishing that he committed the acts 
described in Charge 2 is not used as the sole support for any factual finding in this decision. 

 

4 

9. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 3. 

10. 

Complainant alleges at Charge 4 that, in May 2012, “respondent’s failure to 
pay close attention to the students during administration of” an exam caused the following 
breaches of protocol: “a student in Respondent’s classroom had posted STAR test materials 
on the Internet using his cell phone.” Complainant alleges that respondent knew that 
“allowing such conduct is a serious security breach of testing protocol.” Complainant alleges 
further that “students reported that the testing environment was not appropriate in that 
Respondent allowed students to continue holding conversations with other students and have 
access to their cellular phones after commencement of the exam.” (Ex. 4, p. 4.) 

11. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established that respondent’s failure to pay close attention 
to his students during administration of an exam caused a breach of protocol, in that it 
allowed a student in respondent’s classroom to post STAR test materials on the Internet 
using his cell phone. The evidence established that respondent knew that allowing such 
conduct is a serious security breach of testing protocol. The evidence established that 
students reported other testing improprieties.6 

12. 

Complainant narrates in paragraphs 6 through 8 of the Second Amended 

Accusation that the District hired a private investigator, Nicole Miller and Associates, Inc., to 
investigate charges against respondent made in a petition signed by 49 CHS employees on 
March 22, 2013, and that the investigator found that the charges made in the petition were 
substantiated. This narration alone does not allege that respondent engaged in certain acts; it 
merely relates that CHS teachers signed a petition alleging certain acts, and that an 
investigator reached certain conclusions. (See Factual Finding 7, note 4.) Complainant 
alleges in Charge 5, however, that respondent did engage in the acts charged in the petition 
and in the investigation. Those acts are described in paragraph 7, as follows: 

Respondent’s behavior at the CHS campus has created a stressful and 
a. 
hostile work environment at CHS. . . [and] because of Respondent’s behavior 
on campus staff members: are concerned they will be “cornered” in areas of 
the campus and be lectured, pressed for information, and verbally harassed; 
avoid the staff work room after school and do not accept leadership and 
department positions; do not attend staff meetings or when they do, are fearful. 

Respondent’s performance in the classroom has declined to the point 

b. 
that CHS staff is concerned for the wellbeing of students. 

                                                

6 The evidence also established that respondent allowed students to continue holding 
conversations and to have access to their cellular phones after commencement of the exam. 
(Ex. 37, pp. 4-5.) That evidence is not used to support any factual finding or legal conclusion 
in this decision. (See Factual Finding 7, note 4.)  

 

5 

Respondent’s behavior on the CHS campus has caused staff to be in 

c. 
fear for their (and their students) physical safety. (Ex. 4, pp. 5-6.) 

Complainant alleges respondent’s conduct “affected the ability of his co-workers to conduct 
their jobs and thereby negatively impacted the students of CHS,” and, because staff members 
feared for their safety and the safety of students, “law enforcement professionals were 
required to be present during official meetings.” (Ibid.) 

13. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 5, as described in 
paragraphs 6 through 8 of the Second Amended Accusation. 

14. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 10 that respondent has “‘take[n] over’ faculty 
meetings and acted ‘hostile.’” Complainant alleges that the conduct was “off-putting to staff 
members.” (Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

15. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 10. 

16. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 11 that respondent “raised his voice and acted 

in a dominating manner when interacting with fellow staff members.” (Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

17. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 11. 

18. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 12 that respondent “consistently talked over 

others during meetings.” (Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

19. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 12. 

20. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 13 that respondent “used a confrontational and 

aggressive tone of voice at said meetings.” (Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

21. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 13. 

22. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 14 that teachers reported feeling bullied by 

respondent, and that respondent knows bullying is a violation of District policy. 

23. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established that teachers reported feeling bullied by 
respondent,  and that respondent knows bullying is a violation of District policy, as alleged in 
Charge 14. 

24. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 15 that, “Due to the level of discomfort created 

by Respondent, Social Science Department meetings at CHS had to be held in two separate 

 

6 

rooms.” (Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

25. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 15. 

26. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 16 that teachers reported they “needed to lock 
their classroom doors and sit next to the exit at staff meetings” because they fear respondent. 
(Ex. 4, p. 6.) 

27. 

 The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 16. 

28. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 17 that respondent “yelled and confronted 

teachers in the CHS staff lounge.” (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

29. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 17. 

30. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 18 that “CHS teachers have requested to be 

excused from attending staff meetings because of Respondent’s erratic and belligerent 
behavior.” (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

31. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 18. 

32. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 19 that respondent’s students reported to other 

faculty that respondent “was not teaching the required curriculum.” (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

33. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 19. Respondent was 
not teaching the required curriculum. Students reported this to other faculty. 

34. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 20 that respondent “spent classroom time 

talking about inappropriate and off-curriculum matters such as: his wife’s lawsuit, the 
alleged mold issue at CHS, religion, giving birth, ‘how to go to the bathroom in the woods’ 
and the ‘existence of alien life.’ Respondent showed a mold presentation in his class, told 
students that tenured teachers are impossible to fire and showed students the certificated staff 
salary schedules. These are inappropriate subjects for classroom instruction time. Respondent 
spending time discussing inappropriate and off-curriculum subjects impacts students’ ability 
to learn the required course curriculum. Further, Respondent’s discussions caused some of 
his students to worry and panic.” (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

35. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 20. 

36. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 21 that respondent told his students, “‘Humans 

have code in our DNA and if we crack the code, we will be able to communicate with our 

 

7 

alien ancestors.’ These types of statements are unrelated to the social science department 
curriculum, and are inappropriate topics for classroom discussion. Moreover, these 
statements caused students and colleagues to become concerned about Respondent’s mental 
stability and ability to follow approved curriculum during instruction time.” (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

37. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 21. 

38. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 22 that “Some students in Respondent’s classes 

have received grades that are not representative of their abilities and/or classroom 
performance. Witnesses state that low performing students in their classes received 
unexplained high grades in Respondent’s class. Further, a parent expressed concern 
regarding the lack of classroom instruction time and quality of instruction. This parent 
reported, ‘My son didn't do work and Mr. Lukkarila put grades in for him to save his grade.’ 
This conduct is unacceptable, unethical, and a violation of the District's grading policies and 
procedures. (Ex. 4, p. 7.) 

39. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 22. 

40. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 23 that teachers reported feeling that 

respondent is “unhinged” and would “lapse into erratic behavior” while at work at CHS. (Ex. 
4, p. 8.) 

41. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 23. 

42. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 24 that respondent “has failed to properly and 

consistently keep track of student class attendance.” (Ex. 4, p. 8.) 

43. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 24. 

44. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 25 that respondent has “repeatedly dismissed 
students from his classes before the end of the classroom instruction period. Such conduct is 
improper and further compromises the school's supervision plan which is staffed and 
predicated on students remaining in their classrooms during instruction time. As Respondent 
should be aware, release of students early creates a potential safety risk and further causes a 
potential lack of supervision concerning the students released.” (Ex. 4, p. 8.) 

45. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 25. 

46. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 26 that respondent “breached testing protocols” 

“during a test in one of his classes . . . . Specifically, Respondent called on a student, asked 
that student for the answer to a question on the test and then instructed the other students to 

 

8 

make sure to change their answer to the called on student's answer. This conduct is 
inappropriate, unethical, and encouraged students to cheat on the test. Furthermore, this yet 
another instance of Respondent’s failure to adhere to testing rules and protocols.” (Ex. 4, p. 
8.) 

47. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 26. 

48. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 27 that respondent “failed to maintain an 

accurate and up to date grade book. The substitute teacher for his classes while Respondent 
has been on administrative leave stated that Respondent had entered very few grades into the 
grading system at the time he took over the classes. As Respondent should be aware, such 
information is vital to allowing other teachers to continue instruction when a teacher is 
absent.” (Ex. 4, p. 8.) 

49. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 27. 

50. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 28 that on March 12, 2013, some of 

respondent’s students reported to other CHS teachers that a student in respondent’s class 
brought a gun into the classroom; the gun was variously described as an “Airsoft gun,” a toy 
gun, and a water gun; and “instead of confiscating the gun from the student and reporting 
him to CHS administration, Respondent played with the gun in front of students and 
eventually gave it back to the student. Respondent’s conduct and handling of this sensitive 
situation was highly inappropriate. Further, this behavior demonstrates a lack of proper 
judgment.” (Ex. 4, pp. 8-9.) 

51. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 28. 

52. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 29 that during the last two academic years in 

which respondent taught, 2011-12 and 2012-13, “there was a substantial decrease in the 
number of students in his Advanced Placement (AP) classes that took the AP exam. 
Specifically, in the 2011-12 school year, only 21 of 74 students attempted the exam. This 
number continued to decrease significantly the next year with only 10 of 70 students (less 
than 1.6% [sic]) signing up to take the AP exam. This is a very low percentage compared to 
other AP courses where roughly 75% of students sign up to take the AP test in that subject 
and is an indication of Respondent’s ineffectiveness and unfitness in the classroom.” (Ex. 4, 
p. 9.) 

53. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 29. 

54. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 30 that “Law enforcement had to provide 

security at CHS staff meetings to alleviate staff fears about physical harm from Respondent 
due to Respondent’s erratic behavior and yelling at prior staff meetings.” (Ex. 4, p. 9.) 

 

9 

55. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 30. 

56. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 31 that, “Shortly after the very-well publicized 

incidents involving rogue police officer Christopher Dorner, in or about February 2013, 
Respondent made statements to co-workers that Respondent ‘Understood what Christopher 
Dorner had to do because his union wasn’t helping him and the police department wasn’t 
helping. He was backed into a corner,’ and/or similar statements to the same effect. . . . 
Respondent’s statements about Christopher Dorner were highly insensitive and showed a 
tremendous lack of proper judgment. Further Respondent’s statements caused his co-workers 
to be fearful that Respondent would behave like Mr. Dorner.” (Ex. 4, p. 9.) 

57. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 31. 

58. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 32 that respondent “often has displayed, 

‘erratic and manic’ behavior around his co-workers that is so intense and loud that his co-
workers feel fearful.” (Ex. 4, p. 9.) 

59. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 32. 

60. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 33 that “Staff at CHS has become fearful that 

Respondent may bring a gun to school based on his erratic behavior and statements about 
Christopher Dorner, and other aberrant and threatening conduct and behavior.” (Ex. 4, p. 10.) 

61. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 33. 

62. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 34 that, “On multiple occasions, Respondent 

has demonstrated resistance and acted in a highly inappropriate manner in response to 
District personnel’s and site administrator’s directives. Respondent continued erratic and 
manic behavior coupled with his resistance to follow directives negatively impacts the 
morale of CHS.” (Ex. 4, p. 10.) 

63. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 34. 

64. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 35 and 36: On March 25, 2013, respondent 

“was scheduled to meet Mr. Ward and Mr. Bateman in the parking lot outside his classroom 
at 3:30 pm to retrieve items from his classroom,” but in violation of directives respondent 
had received from the District earlier on the same date in a notice of administrative leave (see 
Factual Finding 116), respondent “entered the building at approximately 3:20 pm and spoke 
with two staff members. These staff members knew Respondent had been put on leave 
earlier that day and were scared by Respondent's sudden appearance in the quad, without 
District administration.” (Ex. 4, p. 10.) 

 

10 

65. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 35 and 36. 

66. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 37 that respondent violated the District’s 

March 25, 2013, directives, in that, when Nicolle Miller and Associates, an investigative firm 
hired by the District, contacted respondent to arrange to interview him, “Respondent failed to 
respond to email and registered mail resulting in the District contacting Respondent 
regarding scheduling an interview on his first day of service for the 2013-14 school year.” 
(Ex. 4, p. 11.) 

67. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 37. 

68. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 38 that, “Despite the March 25, 2013 

directives, [Assistant Superintendent] Ward was forced to reschedule eleven (11) interviews 
with the investigator. Each time Respondent was scheduled for interview, Respondent would 
contact the District, many times just before the interview was scheduled to occur, with 
various reasons Respondent would not attend. Despite Mr. Ward’s numerous attempts and 
directives to attend the scheduled interviews with Ms. Miller, Respondent refused to do so. 
Respondent’s failure to attend the interviews is insubordination [and] has impeded 
[Investigator] Miller’s, and the District’s, ability to conduct an investigation into the 
allegations made against Respondent by his co-workers in the Petition.” (Ex. 4, p. 11.) 

69. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 38. 

70. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 39 that, “Since Respondent was placed on 

administrative leave, Respondent has committed multiple violations of the directives given in 
the March 25, 2013, notice of administrative leave. Additionally, Respondent has 
corresponded numerous times with the District asking who Respondent may or may not 
contact while on leave. Specifically, Respondent has contacted multiple District staff, in 
direct violation of an order not to have any contact with any District student or staff member 
. . . .” (Ex. 4, p. 11.) 

71. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 39. 

72. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 40, that on October 29, 2013, respondent “sent 
written correspondence to Frank D'Emilio, a teacher at Vista del Valle Elementary School. In 
this correspondence, Respondent discussed a number of topics including his 2010 Master 
Grievance and other grievances filed with the District, the District’s investigation into his 
conduct, as well as various other communications between Respondent and District 
administrators and/or his Association representatives. . . . Such conduct is completely 
inappropriate and clearly breaches the directives provided in the notice of administrative 
leave.” (Ex. 4, p. 12.) 

 

11 

73. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 40. 

74. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 41 that, “Despite being counseled and 

informed on multiple occasions that such conduct was expressly prohibited, Respondent 
continued to contact staff in violation of the directives. On or about December 21, 2013, 
Respondent sent written correspondence to Joe Tonan, another employee of the District. In 
his correspondence, Respondent discussed his ongoing and prior grievances with the District. 
Moreover, Respondent made threatening and harassing comments towards Mr. Tonan and 
his wife stating ‘[i]n time, your shameful behavior will be exhibited.’ The next day, Mr. 
Tonan reported Respondent’s conduct to the District, characterizing it as ‘threatening,’ 
‘extortion’ and ‘blackmail.’ He indicated that he was concerned about his safety at work and 
requested that the District intervene in order to stop any further contact.” (Ex. 4, p. 12.) 

75. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 41. 

76. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 42 that respondent’s actions “violate the 

requirements of Board Policy 4119.21-Personnel Professional Standards. . . . Respondent 
does not meet the standards of Board Policy 4119.21. Further, Respondent’s actions 
demonstrate a propensity to engage in threatening, dangerous and immoral behavior and an 
escalating disregard for the health, safety and welfare of students, staff and parents at CHS.” 
(Ex. 4, pp. 12-13.) 

77. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 42. 

78. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 43 that, on May 26, 2014, respondent “sent a 

threatening, hostile, and disturbing email to David Chamberlain, a teacher at CHS and 
president of the Claremont Faculty Association (‘CFA’) and at least 350 other District 
employees (nearly all of the District’s certificated personnel) in which Respondent targets 
School Board member Sam Mowbray. Among other hostile statements, Respondent stated 
that in his ‘opinion, Dr. Mowbray—a despicable coward—stomps on the due process rights 
of the Bill of Rights. Dr. Mowbray sends a clear message to every teacher in Claremont . . . 
your dreams can be destroyed by evil. I say Dr. Mowbray represents evil by his willingness 
to interfere with due process.’ Respondent further stated that he couldn’t ‘wait for . . . [Dr. 
Mowbray] . . . to show-up in any courtroom. . . . Even if I lose, I will piss and shit right on 
your gravestone. . . . To me, . . . [Dr. Mowbray] . . . represent[s] the epitome of a political 
coward, looking for final fame. Fuck you sam.’” (Ex. 4, p. 13.) 

79. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 43. 

// 

// 

 

12 

80. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 44 that, in his May 26, 2014 email, respondent 

“also stated the following: 

‘All CFA members should, not only carry legal pickets outside 
of Dr. Mowbray's home and children's, but CFA members 
should legally picket his personal gravestone.’ 

‘Dr. Mowbray has not just spit and shit on former Principal, 
Frank D’Emilio’s career and family.’ 

‘Fuck you Sam Mowbray.’ 

‘Sam, please, don't be shocked by simple language . . . [y]ou 
squat, shit, and piss like the rest of us.’ 

‘What you have done to destroy the real career and reputation of 
Mr. D’Emilio, his ancestors, his kids, and beyond is 
reprehensible. . . . Today, you try to do the same to me and my 
family. . . . Fuck you Sam. . . . Fuck your family too. . . . you 
shit and pissed on Mr. D’Emilio’s career and legacy. . . . You 
shit and piss on mine.’ 

‘I can’t wait to fight you. . . . You are the ultimate political 
coward.’ 

‘You—an experience philosopher-king—knew what you did to 
Mr. D’Emilio’s career and legacy.’ 

"I repeat, fuck you Sam, along with your family’s legacy." 

‘Sam, you are not a doctor but a thug. . . . I can’t wait for you to 
sue me so I can humiliate, piss, and shit on you in any real court 
room in the United States. . . . In the long-run I will defeat your 
arrogance and cowardice.’ 

‘I will pull out my dick and piss and shit on your family’s 
legacy like you even dared to pull out your dick to piss and shit 
on Mr. D’Emilio’s family legacy and my family’s legacy. . . . 
Bring it on Sam, I look forward to defeating you—with short-
term-losses—in several court-rooms. . . . In the long-run I will 
defeat your alleged Claremont nobility and fame. . . . I, having 
no income and benefits will defeat you. . . . Fuck you. . . . You 
are not a doctor—you are a coward.’” (Ex. 4, pp. 13-14.) 

81. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 44. 

 

13 

82. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 45 that respondent also stated in his May 26, 

2014 email that “‘Dr. Mowbray, along with his family should be shunned, wherever he 
turns;’ that Dr. Mowbray’s willingness to tolerate unknown incident reports of CFA 
members, anonymous petitions of CFA members, and armed-private investigators 
conducting interrogations of CFA members, reflects his willingness ‘to shun and stomp on 
the American dream;’ and that ‘Mr. Mowbray was elected as one of Plato’s ‘Philosopher 
Kings,’ but in reality he is the, ‘Mouse-King.’” (Ex. 4, p. 14.) 

83. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 45. 

84. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 46 that respondent concluded his May 26, 

2014, email by stating that “in his opinion, Mr. Chamberlain was a ‘back-stabbing coward, 
10X worse than Dr. Mowbray. I, along with 345 others—pay $345,000 to defend us from 
Mr. Mowbray’s hostility. . . I look forward to defeating you, too.’” (Ex. 4, p. 14.) 

85. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 46. 

86. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 47 that respondent “has repeatedly 
demonstrated a propensity to become aggressive and agitated in his interactions with District 
employees. Respondent’s hostile behavior and course of conduct during the 2011-2013 
school years has disrupted operations at CHS staff meetings and caused a ‘hostile and 
stressful work environment.’ Furthermore, Respondent’s course of conduct has caused 
District employees to fear for their physical safety and the safety of District students.” (Ex. 4, 
p. 14.) 

87. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 47. 

88. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 50 that respondent “has made numerous 

annoying telephone calls to District staff and administrators on May 15, May 22, May 23 and 
May 26, 2014. During several of these telephone calls Respondent used intimidating and 
forceful language causing staff, already well aware of his issues from being included on 
emails, to be in fear.” (Ex. 4, p. 16.) 

89. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 50. 

90. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 51 that on June 10, 2014, “the District filed a 

motion for a workplace restraining order against Respondent in the California Superior Court 
of Los Angeles, Eastern District. The court granted Petitioner’s temporary restraining order 
(TRO).” (Ex. 4, p. 16.) 

91. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 51. 

 

14 

92. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 52 that on July 20, 2014, respondent “sent 

another threatening, hostile, and disturbing email. This time Respondent’s email was 
addressed to the CFA Executive Board Members, which includes David Chamberlain, a 
teacher at CHS and president of CFA and at least 350 other District employees (nearly all of 
the District's certificated personnel) in which Respondent targets Assistant Superintendent of 
Human Resources, Kevin Ward. Among other hostile statements, in one of his many post 
scripts, Respondent stated: 

‘Mr. Ward is a real a dick [sic]-a penis-and will rape you.’ 

‘Mr. Ward is an unlawful dick.’ 

‘Fuck you Kevin.’” (Ex. 4, p. 16.) 

93. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 52. 

94. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 53 that in the July 20, 2014 email, respondent 
also wrote: “‘Fuck you Peter Weinberger.’ Mr. Weinberger is the publisher of the Claremont 
Courier. . . . This email is a further violation of the directives contained in the May 28, 2014 
Letter of Reprimand in which Respondent was reminded that ‘although, [he] is currently on 
unpaid suspension from [his] teaching position with the District pending the hearing on the 
dismissal charges against [him]; [he] still remains an employee of the District and 
appropriately the District expects that [he] communicate and interact with District 
employees, students, parents, Board Members, and others related to District concerns in a 
competent, courteous and civil manner at all times.’” (Ex. 4, pp. 16-17.) 

95. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 53. 

96. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 54 that on July 21, 2014, respondent “sent 

another harassing and threatening email correspondence. This email was addressed to what 
appears to be least one hundred CFA members with the subject ‘Sent to my family.’ In this 
email rant, Respondent states: 

‘All CFA Members Should Understand, If I Lose This Fight 
Without Financial Support, you [sic] Immediate Family and 
Extended Family will be Threatened.’ 

‘Fuck you Kevin Ward.’ 

‘Fuck you Kevin.’ 

‘I am not a criminal. You are.’ 

 

15 

‘Mr. Ward is a real dick-a penis-and will legally rape you with 
CUSD taxpayer dollars.’ Respondent goes on to ask for 
financial support for his family.” (Ex. 4, p. 17.) 

97. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 54. 

98. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 55 that on July 22, 2014, respondent “sent 

another threatening, hostile, and disturbing email. This time Respondent’s email was 
addressed to the CFA Representative, Kim Breen, with a carbon copy to at least 350 other 
District employees (nearly all of the District’s certificated personnel). In this email, 
Respondent proceeds to make the following inappropriate, hostile, unprincipled, threatening 
and uncalled for statements to Ms. Breen: 

‘Kim, please . . . fuck-off . . . quit trying to rape my career and 
family like Kevin Ward.’ 

‘God (forgive me) you must hit them like a lode-stone.’ 

‘If there is a hell, I hope the devil—on behalf of union 
members—whose careers were devastated by CTA officials, 
shoves that cross in your eye.’ 

‘I told CFA President Chamberlain that he was 10X worse that 
CUSD School Board Member Mowbray. Kim, you are 100X 
worse than Sam Mowbray.’ 

 ‘Kim, I am not alone, just ask me and I will introduce you to 
several CTA members that may wish far worse upon you, your 
family and Dean Vogel.’ 

‘What the fuck do you know, except for gossiping and a 
bitterness about life.’ 

‘Throughout history, whores have done well. I will not let you 
fuck my career. . . Kim, I move forward, despite your whoring. 
Keep whoring to CUSD Kim, in time, douching over protected 
activity will be ineffective.’” (Ex. 4, pp. 17-18.) 

99. 

The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 55. 

100.  Complainant alleges in Charge 56 that respondent’s July emails “are a further 
example of Respondent’s continuing highly inappropriate and reckless behavior and inability 
to conduct himself in competent, courteous and civil manner.” (Ex. 4, p. 18.) 

// 

 

16 

101.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 56. 

102.  Complainant alleges in Charge 57 that on July 23, 2014, in the California 

Superior Court, County of Los Angeles, Eastern District, Department A, Judge Steven D. 
Blades issued a permanent Workplace Violence Restraining Order (WVRO) protecting Sam 
Mowbray and David Chamberlain from respondent. “The WVRO included the following 
personal conduct orders to not do the following things to Mr. Mowbray and Mr. 
Chamberlain, ‘harass, molest, strike, assault, batter abuse, destroy personal property of, or 
disturb the peace of the person.’ Further, the WVRO ordered Respondent to not enter District 
offices, facilities or campuses. Respondent was also ordered to stay at least 100 yards away 
from Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Chamberlain, their respective immediate family members, and all 
District facilities and campuses.” (Ex. 4, p. 18.) 

103.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 57. 

104.  Complainant alleges in Charge 58 that, “notwithstanding the WVRO, 

Respondent continued his threatening and harassing behavior.” (Ex. 4, p. 18.) 

105.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 58. 

106.  Complainant alleges in Charge 59 that on April 14, 2015, respondent “sent 

written correspondence to over 150 District employees. In his correspondence, Respondent 
discussed his ongoing and prior grievances with the District. The correspondence was 
addressed, ‘Dear Assistant Supt. Of Business Services Shoemaker.’ Among other hostile 
statements, Respondent states: 

‘It will only be a matter of time before someone is hurt beyond 
repair.’ 

Calls Ms. Shoemaker ‘Black Widow.’ 

‘Maybe, your husband . . . killed himself for a reason.’ 

‘I will—deservedly—harm you because of it.’” (Ex. 4, pp. 18-
19.) 

107.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 59. 

// 

// 

 

 

17 

108.  Complainant alleges in Charge 60 that on April 14, 2015, respondent “sent 

written correspondence addressed to Mike Bateman, District Assistant Superintendent, 
Student Services and another 200 recipients. In this correspondence, Respondent, referring to 
Mr. Bateman, wrote: 

‘Fuck long-term friends.’ 

‘I do not carry a gun under my jacket or associate with AR-
15.com web-sites.’ 

Respondent also again discussed his ongoing and prior grievances with the District and 
another school district where his spouse was employed.” (Ex. 4, p. 19.) 

109.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 60. 

110.  Complainant alleges in Charge 64 that “on April 20, 2015, a Criminal 
Protective Order was issued against Respondent. The Criminal Protective Order provides that 
Respondent ‘must not harass, strike, threaten, assault, follow, stalk, molest, destroy or 
damage personal or real property, disturb the peace, keep under surveillance, or block the 
movements of . . .’ District Assistant Superintendent Business Services Ms. Shoemaker; 
District Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, Kevin Ward, Board Member Sam 
Mowbray; District employee Dave Chamberlain; Kim Breen; and District employee Barbara 
Bilderback. The Criminal Protective Order also provides that Respondent ‘must have no 
personal, electronic, telephonic or written contact with the protected persons.’” (Ex. 4, p. 20.) 

111.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 

deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charge 64. 

112.  Complainant alleges in Charges 65 through 67 that the Superior Court of 

California, County of Los Angeles, in case number KA109511, issued a temporary 
restraining order (TRO) against respondent on May 5, 2015, on behalf of Superintendent, 
James Elsasser, and Assistant Superintendents, Lisa Shoemaker, Kevin Ward and Michael 
Bateman, and that, on August 3, 2015, after a hearing, Judge H. Don Christian “found 
reasonable proof of a credible threat of violence by Respondent” and “issued a permanent 
Workplace Violence Restraining Order (‘WVRO’) protecting Superintendent, James 
Elsasser, and Assistant Superintendents, Lisa Shoemaker, Kevin Ward and Michael Bateman 
from Respondent for the next three years. The WVRO included the following personal 
conduct orders to not do the following things to Mr. Elsasser, Ms. Shoemaker, Mr. Ward and 
Mr. Bateman, ‘harass, molest, strike, assault, batter abuse, destroy personal property of, or 
disturb the peace of the person.’ Further, the WVRO ordered Respondent to not enter District 
offices, facilities or campuses for the next three years. Respondent was also ordered to stay at 
least 100 yards away from Elsasser, Ms. Shoemaker, Mr. Ward and Mr. Bateman, their 
respective immediate family members, homes, and all District facilities and campuses.” 
Complainant alleges that, “Accordingly, it has become impossible for Respondent to report 
to work at the District without violating civil and criminal orders against him.” (Ex. 4, pp. 

 

18 

20-21.) 

113.  The evidence, including testimony, corroborative documents, and matters 
deemed admitted by respondent, established the facts alleged in Charges 65 through 67. 

114.  Paragraph 9 comprises narrative. Paragraphs 48 and 49 describe a letter of 
reprimand the District issued to respondent; the letter is addressed at Factual Finding 117. 
Paragraphs 61 through 63 address legal actions taken by the District and actions taken by 
police and the court; these are addressed at Factual Finding 119. 

Notices Issued to Respondent and Other Actions Taken by the District 

115.  At a February 3, 2012, counseling meeting, described in a February 14, 2012, 
memorandum from Vice Principal Steven Patterson to respondent, respondent was directed 
to refrain from addressing his personal problems with students, to be conscientious of 
timelines, and to complete his in-service training. (Ex. 5.) 

116.  On March 25, 2013, Mr. Ward issued to respondent a Notice of Paid 
Administrative Leave and Related Directives. The letter notified respondent that he was on 
paid administrative leave effective immediately. The letter also notified respondent that he 
“may not enter Claremont High School, any of the District’s campuses, buildings or the 
District Office for any reason, unless directed by me.” The letter instructed respondent not to 
access the District’s computer, or to “have any contact (in person, via phone or via 
email/electronic means) with any District employees, student, or parents,” other than Mr. 
Ward or Mr. Chamberlain. (Ex. 12.) The letter further directed respondent to return all 
District property in his possession to Mr. Ward, and that, “[i]n the event that you need to 
retrieve any personal items from CHS, please let me know and I will retrieve them for you.” 
(Ibid.) Respondent was directed to remain available by telephone during working hours, and 
was advised that “any failure to comply with the aforementioned directives could be subject 
to disciplinary measures up to, and including, dismissal.” (Ibid.) 

117.  On May 28, 2014, the District issued to respondent a Letter of Reprimand as a 

result of his May 26, 2014 emails to Mr. Chamberlain, School Board Member Dr. Sam 
Mowbray, and numerous District staff and faculty members, which the District found to be 
disrespectful, rude, and inappropriate. The letter stated that respondent’s emails violated 
standards applicable to a public school teacher and directed respondent to: 

(1) utilize proper judgment as a school teacher (regardless of his 
present duty status) and maintain a professional demeanor at all 
times; (2) not use profanity, threats, or other abusive language in 
his communications with the District, its employees, parents, 
students and Board Members; (3) at all times, publicly model a 
standard of personal and professional behavior that is consistent 
with District standards for employees and in accord with 
conventional values. (Ex. 23.) 

 

19 

The letter also stated that, 

although, [respondent] is currently on unpaid suspension from 
[his] teaching position with the District pending the hearing on 
the dismissal charges against [him]; [he] still remains an 
employee of the District and appropriately the District expects 
that [he] communicate and interact with District employees, 
students, parents, Board Members, and others related to District 
concerns in a competent, courteous and civil manner at all 
times.” (Ibid.) 

118.  The Board on a date not clear from the evidence issued a Professional 

Standards Policy, which states that: 

The Board of Education expects district employees to maintain 
the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, 
follow district policies and regulations, and abide by state and 
federal laws. Employee conduct should enhance the integrity of 
the district and advance the goals of the district’s educational 
programs. Each employee should make a commitment to 
acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to fulfill his/her 
responsibilities and should focus on his/her contribution to the 
learning and achievement of district students. (Ex. 21.) 

119.  The District contacted the Claremont Police Department and notified them of 

respondent’s April 14, 2015, emails threatening Ms. Shoemaker and Mr. Bateman. 
Respondent was shortly thereafter arrested, arraigned, and charged with 13 counts, including 
two counts of felony criminal threats, two counts of felony stalking, and nine counts of 
making annoying telephone calls, all of which are misdemeanors. Bail was set at one million 
dollars ($1,000,000). (See Ex. 4, paras. 61-63.) The court issued the Workplace Violence 
Restraining Order described at Factual Finding 112. 

120.  Except as set forth in this Decision, all other allegations in the Second 
Amended Accusation and all other contentions by the parties lack merit or constitute 
surplusage. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter under section 

44944. (Factual Findings 1 through 3.) 

Jurisdiction 

// 

 

20 

Burden of Proof 

2. 

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, since it is seeking to 

dismiss respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The District must prove its 
case by a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardiner v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040.) 

Statutory Grounds for Dismissal 

3. 

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 

employee if one or more of the causes enumerated in section 44932, subdivision (a), or 
44939 is established. In the Second Amended Accusation, the District alleged five of those 
causes: immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of 
school laws or regulations, and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause. (Factual Finding 5.) The definitions of some of those causes have been 
further elucidated by the courts and by the legislature. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

4. 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness, or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 
public welfare. (Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

DISHONESTY 

5. 

“An approved definition of dishonesty connotes a disposition to deceive. 

[Citation omitted.]” (Midway School Dist. of Kern County v. Griffeath (1946) 29 Cal.2d 13, 
18 [absent teacher who went deer hunting acted dishonestly by telling school he was ill; 
discharge not warranted by single incident in context of 20 years of service]); see also 
Bassett Unified School Dist. v. Comm. on Professional Competence (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 
1444, 1450-1453 [teacher acted dishonestly when using paid sick leave at her school while 
teaching at other schools].) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

6. 

Evident unfitness for service is established by conduct demonstrating that the 

teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) 
“‘Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 
merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 
school district.” (Id.)  

 

21 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF SCHOOL LAWS OR REGULATIONS 

7. 

To establish cause for discipline based on the violation of school rules, there 
must be a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.” (San Dieguito Union 
High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 
1196.) The violation must be persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous 
insubordination.” (Governing Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.) Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a 
period of time are generally not considered persistent. (Bourland v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317 (Bourland).) 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT REASONABLE 

CAUSE 

8. 

The plain meaning of this cause for dismissal under section 44939, subdivision 

(b), applies. (See Board of Education of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 
556 [teacher who declined to accept teaching assignments subject to dismissal].) 

The Morrison Factors 

9. 

To determine whether there is cause for dismissal under section 44932, 

subdivision (a), based on immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service as alleged here, 
the Commission must evaluate whether the teacher’s alleged misconduct demonstrates the 
teacher’s unfitness for service using factors that the Supreme Court enunciated in Morrison 
v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230 (Morrison). 

10. 

The Morrison factors are: the likelihood that the conduct had or may have an 
adverse effect on students or fellow teachers; the degree of the adverse effect; the proximity 
or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching certificate held by the party 
involved; extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood 
of recurrence of the questioned conduct; and the extent to which disciplinary action may 
inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.7 

11. 

The Morrison court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching 
profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger 
of harm to students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a 
teacher.” (Id., at p. 235; see also Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 

                                                

7 There is no reason to apply the Morrison factors to analyze causes for dismissal for 
persistent violation of laws and regulations (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 227-230), or for 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. It may be presumed 
that such conduct is related to fitness to teach. 

 

22 

208 (Fontana); Woodland, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1444-1445; Bourland, supra, 174 
Cal.App.3d at p. 321.) 

12.  Not all Morrison factors need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. 

(Governing Bd. v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Nor must the Morrison analysis be 
conducted on each individual fact established; it may be applied to the accumulated facts 
established collectively. (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.) 

Analysis 

13. 

The Second Amended Accusation charged respondent with various acts to 

support the five statutory grounds for dismissal. The Commission examined each charged act 
to determine whether it was proven. For each charged act proven, the Commission 
considered whether the act supported one or more of the statutory bases for dismissal as 
alleged, and applied the Morrison factors where appropriate. 

14. 

Complainant established by a preponderance of the evidence that all the acts 
alleged in the Second Amended Accusation occurred, with a single exception: complainant 
did not establish that respondent lacked justification for cancelling parent-teacher 
conferences. (Factual Findings 4-120.)8 

15. 

Respondent’s acts constituted immoral conduct and evident unfitness for 
service. Applying the Morrison factors, respondent’s immoral conduct and his evident 
unfitness for service relate to his fitness to teach. Among other things, respondent’s conduct 
has had and would likely continue to have a severe adverse effect on students and their 
parents and on faculty and staff at CHS and throughout the District, causing them fear as a 
result of his verbal and physical actions and threats. Respondent has continued to engage in 
the objectionable conduct despite directives from the District and despite court orders that he 
cease engaging in that conduct. Respondent’s continued and repeated violation of assistance, 
guidance, and directives from school administrators, of District policies, and of court orders, 
is an aggravating factor. Respondent has persistently violated or refused to obey the school 
laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 
schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him, including the District’s Professional Standards Policy. Respondent has 
repeatedly behaved threateningly, stubbornly, and willfully. It is highly likely that his 
impermissible conduct will continue. The evidence does not support a finding that 
disciplinary action would have an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 
rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 

// 

                                                

8 The Commission unanimously agreed on the findings of fact and unanimously found 

cause to dismiss. 

 

23 

16. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(1), based on immoral misconduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 through 120 and 
Legal Conclusions 1 through 13.  

17. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(1), based on dishonesty, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 through 120 and Legal 
Conclusions 1 through 13. 

18. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(5), based on evident unfitness for service, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 through 120 
and Legal Conclusions 1 through 13. 

19. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(7), based on persistent violation of or refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed 
for the government of the public schools by the governing board of the school district 
employing him, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 through 120 and Legal Conclusions 1 
through 13. 

20. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44939, based on willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 4 through 120 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 13. 

21. 

Even where, as here, a school district has established cause for dismissal, the 

Commission has broad discretion to determine whether dismissal is warranted. (Fontana, 
supra, 45 Cal.3d at pp. 220-222.) “The Commission has broad discretion in determining 
what constitutes unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the 
appropriate sanction. [Citing Fontana.] ‘[A] disciplinary discharge often involves complex 
facts and may require a sensitive evaluation of the nature and seriousness of the misconduct 
and whether it warrants the grave sanction of dismissal.’ [Citation].” (California. Teachers 
Assn. v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.) 

22.  Dismissal is warranted in this case in order to protect students, parents, and 

District faculty and staff, in view of the serious nature of respondent’s misconduct and 
because of the likelihood that respondent will continue to engage in similar conduct in the 
future. 

// 

// 

 

24 

ORDER  

The Second Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges against respondent Dave 

Lukkarila are affirmed. Respondent Dave Lukkarila’s employment with the Claremont 
Unified School District is terminated. 

DATED: April __, 2016 

________________________________ 
HOWARD W. COHEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 

 
 

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above: 

DATED: April __, 2016 

________________________________ 
KRISTI HARABEDIAN 
Commission Member 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above: 

DATED: April __, 2016 

_________________________________ 
RAY GALLARDO 
 
Commission Member 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

25 

