 

BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

CATHERINE HOPP,

OAH No. 2014051105 

 

 

          Respondent. 

DECISION 

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional 

 
Competence in Los Angles, California on June 23, 24, 25, and 29, and on September 14, 15, 
and 16, 2015.  The Commission was comprised of the following members:  Administrative Law 
Judge Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Fernando Robles and Teresa Behnke.   

Mark Waterman, of Bergman, Dacey & Goldsmith, represented the Los Angeles 

 
Unified School District. 

Richard Schwab, of Trygstad, Schwab &Trygstad, represented respondent Catherine 

 
Hopp, who was present throughout the hearing.   

 

On October 14, 2015, the Commission met to deliberate and the matter was submitted.   

CASE SUMMARY  

The district alleged that in March 2013 it learned that on some unknown day in January 

 
2013, Ms. Hopp dragged a student across the classroom, dropped him on his head, refused to 
provide him ice, and did not file a report; that on some unknown day in February 2013, Ms. 
Hopp forcefully pulled the same student out of his chair; that Ms. Hopp called that student a 
“baby” or “big baby” on “no less than two occasions”; that she refused to give the student his 
snack; and that she failed to report that the student was being locked in an attic, spanked and 
having food withheld at home.  Additionally, the district further alleged that Ms. Hopp failed to 
report a staff member whom she suspected of abusing a student.  The district sought Ms. 
Hopp’s dismissal from employment with the district.   

The Commission unanimously determined that a preponderance of the evidence failed to 

 
establish any of the charges alleged and that no evidence provided cause to dismiss Ms. Hopp 

1

 

from employment with the district.  Moreover, the district’s two witnesses to the events alleged 
to have occurred in January and February 2013 came forward months after the alleged events 
occurred and only after Ms. Hopp notified their employer that she had concerns regarding their 
absences and tardiness.  Additionally, the two witnesses offered contradictory and conflicting 
information that changed over time, casting doubt on their credibility.  Moreover, other 
employees present in the classroom never witnessed the alleged incidents.  Furthermore, the 
parents of the student Ms. Hopp allegedly abused were never interviewed and the only evidence 
introduced regarding them supported Ms. Hopp’s testimony and the other evidence she 
introduced at this hearing.   

Insufficient evidence was offered to demonstrate that Ms. Hopp engaged in any 
 
unprofessional or immoral conduct, that she was evidently unfit to teach, or that she 
persistently violated laws, rules, regulations and/or policies, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44932, subdivision (a), subsections (1), (5), and (7), 44938, and relevant case law.  
The accusation and attendant charges filed against Ms. Hopp are dismissed.   

Jurisdictional Matters 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Ms. Hopp is a permanent certificated employee of the district.  She possesses a 

clear single subject teaching credential in early childhood special education, a Master’s 
degree in early childhood special education, and a Master’s degree in behavior analysis.  At 
all relevant times Ms. Hopp was a preschool teacher in the Early Childhood Education Kids 
Intensive Therapy (KIT) program at Shirley Avenue Elementary School in the Los Angeles 
Unified School District. 

2. 

On April 3, 2014, Justo H. Avila, the district’s Interim Chief Human 

 
Resources Officer, signed the statement of charges in his official capacity.  The statement of 
charges sought to immediately suspend Ms. Hopp and dismiss her from employment with the 
district on the grounds of unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for 
service, persistent violation or refusal to obey school and/or district rules, and willful refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.   

3. 

On April 23, 2014, the district served Ms. Hopp a 30-Day Notice of Intention 
 
to Dismiss.  Ms. Hopp timely appealed the dismissal action; and, on June 2, 2014, Justo H. 
Avila, Interim Chief Human Resources Officer, signed the accusation in his official capacity.  
The accusation set forth the same facts pled in the Notice of Charges.   

4. 

Ms. Hopp disputed the allegations, denying that grounds for her dismissal from 

employment existed, and this hearing followed.1
                                                           

1 The matter was continued several times when the parties had difficulty securing 

panel members to serve on the Commission.    

2

 

Motions in Limine 

5.

The district’s motion in limine to exclude character witness letters and power 
point slides was granted in part and denied in part.  Nothing requires character witnesses to 
observe the events at issue in the hearing.  Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), 
provides that, “No testimony shall be given or evidence introduced relating to matters that 
occurred more than four years prior to the date of the filing of the notice” to dismiss the 
employee.  A party may introduce “records regularly kept by the governing board concerning 
the employee.”  However, “no decision relating to the dismissal or suspension of any 
employee shall be made based on charges or evidence of any nature relating to matters 
occurring more than four years prior to the filing of the notice.”  The intent of that section is 
to prevent the prosecution of stale claims, not to prevent an employee from submitting 
documents evidencing satisfactory performances during their career.  Pursuant to 
Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), hearsay evidence may be used to 
supplement or explain other evidence, but, in and of itself, it is insufficient to support a 
finding unless the hearsay is admissible on other grounds.  The letters of support may be 
received as administrative hearsay.  The admissibility of the power point slides would 
depend on foundation laid for their introduction.     

6. 

The district’s motion in limine to exclude evidence of abuse committed by 

 
other district employees was denied without prejudice as being premature.  However, 
excluding evidence of discipline issued against other district employees was granted.   

7. 

Ms. Hopp’s motion in limine to exclude evidence of misconduct that was not 
 
alleged was denied without prejudice.  Parties may introduce non-pled evidence if it would 
impeach evidence offered by opposing parties.    

8. 

Ms. Hopp’s motion in limine to exclude the child abuse reports filed by the 

 
district was denied subject to the district laying a foundation for the reports and establishing 
their relevance to the charges.   

9. 

Ms. Hopp’s motion in limine to exclude interview notes not produced in 

 
discovery was denied without prejudice as being premature so long as Ms. Hopp was given 
an opportunity to review any such notes prior to their being offered or used at hearing.   

10.  Ms. Hopp’s motion in limine to exclude documents regarding the Skelly2

hearing and reassignment was denied without prejudice as those documents might be 
relevant to the issues before the Commission.     
                                                           

2 In Skelly v. State Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, 215, the California 
Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy due process, an agency considering disciplinary 
action against a public employee must accord the employee certain “preremoval safeguards,” 
including “notice of the proposed action, the reasons therefor, a copy of the charges and 
materials upon which the action is based, and the right to respond, either orally or in writing, 
to the authority initially imposing discipline.”  The Supreme Court’s directive gave rise to an 

3

 

Background Information  

11. 

Teaching is Ms. Hopp’s second career.  After enjoying a successful business 

 
career, Ms. Hopp obtained her teaching certificate and originally taught at the district’s Elam 
Early Education Center.  Because of her success at that program, she was recruited to be the 
KIT pre-school teacher at Shirley Avenue Elementary School.  The KIT program consisted 
of a morning and an afternoon session.  Each session had eight students.  Student #1, who 
was four years old, was one of Ms. Hopp’s students in the morning session.

12.

The district’s program description of KIT indicated that it provided “intensive 
therapy using a multidisciplinary team to support the development of learning to teach skills 
to children with significant needs.”  Intensive therapy was used to target core skills and 
children received intensive services aimed at capitalizing on a wide range of viable, 
evidence-based approaches that allowed skills to generalize into a classroom setting.  The 
key tenets of the program, its guidelines for placement, and the Transactional Support Plan 
were outlined in the district’s documents.   

Ms. Hopp adhered to the Transactional Support Plan and implemented it in her 
classroom.  Student #1’s records documented his Target Behavior and strategies to address it.  
Ms. Hopp complied with those strategies and followed the tenets of the KIT program and the 
Transactional Support Plan while teaching Student #1.    

Evaluation and Chronology of Events 

13. 

February 16, 2010, notes from Elam Principal Marietta Tambalo indicated she 

observed Ms. Hopp’s classroom on January 29, 2010, and February 11, 2010.  The notes 
contained several commendations.  In her evaluation of Ms. Hopp, Ms. Tambalo noted that 
the children were focused and attentive; that during circle time the children’s interests were 
sustained; that reenacting stories helped students understand the concepts; that the children 
were able to focus and participate actively; that there were smooth transitions; that Ms. Hopp 
utilized adults to assist during small group time, and worked collaboratively with them; that 
Ms. Hopp showed an awareness to adjust activities according to the children’s needs; that 
Ms. Hopp had hands-on activities that were implemented with Play-Doh and allowed 
children to participate; and that Ms. Hopp and her staff were actively involved during free 
play.  Ms. Tambalo recommended that Ms. Hopp have 10 to 15 minutes of circle time 
because small group activity worked best with young children; that Ms. Hopp implement two 
or more choices for practice activities that related to the weekly theme; that she inform her 
supervisor regarding the method of documentation she used to observe and obtain 
information; and that she post her lesson plans.   

14.  Ms. Hopp’s May 24, 2010, personnel evaluation, performed when she was still 

 
teaching at Elam, indicated that Ms. Hopp met all district standards except she needed to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
administrative procedure known as a Skelly hearing, in which an employee has the 
opportunity to respond to the charges upon which the proposed discipline is based. 

4

 

improve in the attendance category because she had exceeded the district’s expectation on 
absenteeism, having been absent eight days.3  Overall, Ms. Hopp had “standard”
performance scores and one “below standard” score.  The commendations section noted that 
Ms. Hopp maintained a good relationship with the parents, and assisted them by giving them 
strategies to help their children improve socially, emotionally, and physically.  Ms. Hopp 
was advised to continue to “team collaborate” with the general education teacher and staff, 
and she was given a copy of the employee attendance policy.  The comment section noted 
that Ms. Hopp worked collaboratively with the staff members to assist the children with 
special challenges; that she used different instructional materials in order to meet children’s 
individual needs; and that she provided learning opportunities for students to practice skills 
through play and other hands-on activities provided in the classroom. 

15.  While at the Shirley Avenue KIT Center, Carolyn (Cara) Gelfand, the KIT 

Center Program Administrator, performed Ms. Hopp’s evaluation on January 6, 2011.  Ms. 
Gelfand gave Ms. Hopp “outstanding” ratings in all personal qualities categories and 
“strong” ratings in all personal competence categories.  

16.  On April 20, 2012, Ms. Gelfand filed a suspected child abuse report regarding 
 
Ms. Hopp’s interactions with “Student #2.”  The incident information section indicated that 
Ms. Gelfand was advised “to have the school conduct an internal investigation [and] that 
they4 do not need to take the report.”  

17.  On May 14, 2012, Ms. Gelfand sent a letter to Ms. Hopp informing her that 

 
she had been “cleared of the allegations made against you.”  The letter noted that Ms. Hopp 
had been reassigned in order for staff to conduct an investigation and that it “was determined 
that the allegations were unfounded.”  The district returned Ms. Hopp to her duties at Shirley 
Avenue Elementary School effective May 8, 2012. 

18.  On May 14, 2012, Ms. Gelfand forwarded Ms. Hopp an e-mail she received 

 
from Juliana Brandes, of the Preschool Intake Team, who wrote that Ms. Hopp “does an 
awesome job out here.  She and her team work so hard and are so dedicated.  I am always 
proud to show that class.”  

19.  On August 14, 2012, Ms. Gelfand submitted a suspected child abuse report 
advising that Student #3’s mother alleged that their son reported that “Ms. Hopp hit me.”  
Ms. Gelfand also reported that the mother claimed Ms. Hopp was not “fit to teach.”  
                                                           

3 Ms. Hopp testified that she had emergency gallbladder surgery and then took time 

off when one of her brothers unexpectedly died of cardiac arrest.  She explained that the 
brother who died was the individual who helped her care for her special needs brother, so she 
needed time to find new help.   

4 As written, “they” referred to the authorities with whom Ms. Gelfand filed her 

report.

5

 

20.  On August 14, 2012, Ms. Gelfand completed a district incident report form 
 
documenting the call from Student #3’s mother and her filing the child abuse report.  The 
police officer who took the report told Ms. Gelfand not to perform an investigation at this 
point but to clarify the incident with general or generic questions.   

21.  Ms. Gelfand’s August 15, 2012, handwritten note regarding her interview with 
 
Angela Engle, an aide in Ms. Hopp’s KIT classroom, documented that Ms. Engle stated that 
Student #3’s parent was upset and was talking to Ms. Hopp on the first day.  The parent 
raised concerns regarding his son hitting his face with Play-Doh while playing.  Ms. Engle 
reported that Ms. Hopp and Student #3 had gone “back and forth with playing with [Play-
Doh] correctly.”  Ms. Hopp took the Play-Doh away from Student #3 and he was crying 
continually until his father came to pick him up.  The father raised his voice, inquired why 
his son was upset, Ms. Hopp explained the situation, and the father and Student #3 left 
abruptly.  Ms. Engle’s explanation of how Ms. Hopp “went back and forth” demonstrated the 
kind of patience Ms. Hopp exhibited in the classroom and further corroborated Ms. Hopp’s 
testimony about how she treated her students.     

22. 

In an undated letter, the former principal at Shirley Avenue Elementary School 
 
wrote that she had been asked to investigate the allegations made against Ms. Hopp and, after 
interviewing all the staff, she determined that Ms. Hopp was not guilty of any misconduct.  
Additionally, the principal described Ms. Hopp as an energetic, caring teacher who ran a 
very organized, structured program for students. 

23. 

E-mails exchanged between Ms. Hopp and Student #1’s mother from 

 
September 2012, and January 2013, corroborated Ms. Hopp’s testimony that she regularly 
communicated with Student #1’s mother about Student #1’s condition and things occurring 
at the center; specifically documenting in September 2012, that the “solution” they had
agreed upon regarding dealing with snack time was successful.  The e-mails also documented 
that Ms. Hopp regularly sent articles to help Student #1’s parents address his behavioral 
issues at home and provided them with strategies to use with Student #1 at home.  The e-
mails corroborated witness testimony about Ms. Hopp’s partnering with her students’ parents 
so that 24-hour wrap-around care could be provided.  Moreover, those e-mails cut against the 
district’s witnesses’ assertions that Ms. Hopp disliked Student #1.  To the contrary, the e-
mails demonstrated that Ms. Hopp took much time to assist him and his family.  More 
importantly, the e-mails began months before the allegations were made; they were not 
written afterwards in an attempt to refute any of the charges; and, many were written during 
the time Ms. Hopp allegedly dragged and dropped Student #1, making that allegation seem 
unlikely.  Furthermore, Student #1’s mother described Student #1’s “big boy shoes,” 
demonstrating that Student #1’s mother also used the terms in a non-demeaning way, lending 
further credence to Ms. Hopp’s explanations that she used those words with the family’s 
understanding.     

6

 

24.  On February 4, 2013, Ms. Hopp sent a letter to the scheduling department 
 
advising that one of her classroom assistants, Elizabeth Ramirez,5 was typically 10 to 20 
minutes late for two-thirds of her shifts.  Ms. Hopp noted that she is a “fantastic and pleasant 
person but that tardiness gives me stress at the beginning of each day.”  Ms. Hopp stated that
“we really like her interactions and everything else” and wanted to know what she could do.  
The director of Child and Adolescent Services sent Ms. Hopp a reply apologizing for Ms. 
Ramirez’s tardiness.  The director wrote that the tardiness was not acceptable because it 
created added stress in the morning, and advised that the issue would be “addressed directly 
with [Ms. Ramirez].”  The director asked Ms. Hopp to keep accurate logs of the time Ms.
Ramirez arrived so they could keep track of Ms. Ramirez’s “ongoing timeliness.”  Ms. Hopp 
introduced the documents she prepared keeping track of classroom aide Leticia Hernandez’s 
and Ms. Ramirez’s attendance and tardiness.  Of note, the documents tracked this 
information from August 2012, through March 8, 2014, just three days before Ms. 
Hernandez made her complaint to the district.   

Ms. Hopp testified that she reported Ms. Ramirez to her supervisor because Ms. 
Ramirez’s tardiness was negatively impacting the KIT center.  Ms. Hopp never filed a report 
regarding Ms. Hernandez, but spoke with her supervisor regarding her tardiness.  Neither 
Ms. Hernandez nor Ms. Ramirez voiced any concerns about Ms. Hopp at any time before 
Ms. Hopp complained about their attendance issues.   

It was understandable that Ms. Hopp would make this complaint because the tardiness 

of these two women would greatly upset the well thought out and organized schedule of 
classroom activities that Ms. Hopp planned each day.  Employee tardiness would cause 
chaos in the KIT classroom, a place where structure and routine are essential when working 
with autistic children.  Moreover, given that the tardy employees were employed by a vendor 
that contracted with the district to provide behavioral services, it was understandable that the 
vendor would be upset upon receipt of Ms. Hopp’s report since it would not want to risk 
losing its district contract.  As such, it would have great motivation to address the tardiness 
and absenteeism issues immediately with its employees; making it highly likely that those 
two women were concerned about their future employment; thereby giving them motivation 
to retaliate against Ms. Hopp and to deflect attention away from themselves and their poor 
attendance.  It was troubling the district put such stock in these two women’s unsubstantiated
claims.      

25.  Not surprisingly, within weeks of Ms. Hopp reporting the employees’ 
 
tardiness, on March 11, 2013, a handwritten note from Ms. Hernandez, one of Ms. Hopp’s 
classroom aides, documented three alleged incidents.  The complaints were vague as to dates 
and times and were witnessed only by Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez.  Ms. Hernandez 
wrote that in January 2013, Ms. Hopp attempted to remove Student #1 from one area to 
another.  Ms. Hernandez claimed that from a sitting position, Ms. Hopp grabbed a hold of 
Student #1’s hands and pulled them above his head and began to pull his body by his hands 
                                                           

5 Elizabeth Ramirez is now known as Elizabeth Anievas.  Since the district documents 

identified her as Elizabeth Ramirez, that name will be used in this decision. 

7

 

and drag him.  Student #1 fell from Ms. Hopp’s hands and hit the back of his head on the 
floor and began crying; the crying lasted about 30 minutes.  Ms. Hernandez claimed that Ms. 
Hopp refused to provide medical attention (ice pack) to his head and did not prepare an 
incident report. Ms. Hernandez wrote that the second incident was “ongoing” and involved 
Ms. Hopp telling Student #1 to “stop crying, you being a big baby [sic].”  Ms. Hernandez 
claimed the third incident occurred in February 2013, when Student #1 was sitting at the 
sensory table playing and Ms. Hopp told him that he could not choose where he was 
supposed to be and that he “belonged at yellow airplane.”  According to Ms. Hernandez, Ms. 
Hopp “grabbed a hold of Student #1’s left arm and yanked or pulled him forcefully out of the 
chair he was sitting at [sic].  Student #1 fell to the floor and his sweater and T-shirt he was 
wearing was [sic] pulled up over his head as a result of [Ms. Hopp] still holding onto his 
clothing.  Student #1 began to cry.  [Ms. Hopp] picked him up and took him to another area 
and he cried for about 30 minutes.”

26.  A March 11, 2013, district inter-office correspondence advised Ms. Hopp that 
she was being immediately reassigned to the Educational Service Center North operations.  
Ms. Hopp testified that she was not told why she was being reassigned and only learned 
about the allegations made against her several weeks later.    

27.  On March 13, 2013, Edward Rodezno, an aide in Ms. Hopp’s classroom, sent 
 
an e-mail to the district advising that he never “experienced or witnessed any circumstances 
that he would deem to be worrisome or of concern in regards to the interaction the classroom 
staff provides to the students.  On the contrary, the classroom staff seemed engaged and 
empathetic towards each child’s individual needs.”

28.  A March 14, 2013, district memo indicated “will contact with follow-up with 

 
Angela [Ramirez] for written statement.”  The memo further noted:  “Called Edward 
[Rodezno] to clarify and investigate.”  Thereafter, a series of questions and answers were 
written after Mr. Rodezno advised that he did not see or hear anything.  When asked if 
Student #1 was injured, Edward advised that Student #1 was screaming with verbal protest 
for five minutes because the other students were lining up and Student #1 wanted water.  The 
students went outdoors to class and Student #1 cried the whole way, but “no one did 
anything out of the ordinary.”  When asked how adults responded to Student #1’s 
crying/tantrums, Mr. Rodezno replied that “Angela [Ramirez] swooped him up” and took 
him to the front of the line as the class needed to leave.  Mr. Rodezno stated that he had 
never seen anything he considered unsafe for the kids and that “everyone is on top of their 
game.”

29.  On March 15, 2013, Mr. Rodezno sent an e-mail to Ms. Alina-Chambers, a 
 
district behavioral specialist who participated in the district’s investigation; following on 
their earlier conversation.  He wrote that the “questions you asked jogged my memory bank 
in a different manner than the questions [Ms. Gelfand] asked me on another day.”  He wrote 
that in “large part” the KIT staff was attentive towards all of the children’s needs and that 
there was “no doubt in my mind the adults mean well but would like to see the children 
prosper in their respective ways.”  Mr. Rodezno detailed an incident where Student #1 

8

 

refused to go with the class, and began to tantrum and Ms. Ramirez picked him up, told him 
it was time to go, carried him, and sat him down with the rest of the children.  The episode 
lasted approximately five minutes; all the while Student #1 cried loudly and verbally 
demanded water.  As the group was heading back to the classroom, Student #1 stopped 
walking, was still crying, and Ms. Ramirez again picked him up and carried him for several 
feet.  After 10-plus minutes of continued crying and protesting, Student #1 finally started to 
calm down.  Mr. Rodezno acknowledged that the incident “could have been handled better,”
but he concluded there was no doubt that the actions Ms. Ramirez displayed “were not ill 
intent.” “Although she did pick him up (a no-no in my mind) she did not do so in a vicious 
manner.  The stern voice she used was appropriate and she did not verbally attack the child.”  
Mr. Rodezno further noted that “perhaps having the classroom teacher present during the 
transition could have aided in defusing the situation.”  However, Mr. Rodezno noted that 
“overall the staff does not render any attention to warning[s] or red flags of inappropriate 
classroom management behaviors.”  Accordingly, when asked about any employees of 
whom he had concerns, the only employee that Mr. Rodezno identified as doing anything 
inappropriate was Ms. Ramirez; he never voiced any concerns about Ms. Hopp.   

30.  A March 15, 2013, district interoffice correspondence documented Ms. Hopp’s 

 
reassignment and noted that the reason for it was a staff member report of two incidents.  In 
one, Ms. Hopp was reportedly “moving a child [Student #1] from one instructional area to 
another by grabbing his hand and pulling them above his head and dragging him while then 
[sic] student falling and hitting his head.”  In the second incident, Ms. Hopp allegedly 
“grabbed a hold of the student’s arm and yanked or pulled him forcefully out of the chair.”
The interoffice correspondence noted that the incident had been reported to police, the 
appropriate forms were completed, and an investigation was being conducted.  The district’s 
decision to reassign Ms. Hopp was based on these two incidents and “two additional parents 
separately reporting that teacher injured their children.  Both [prior] parent complaints 
reported and investigated, with inconclusive findings.”  (This latter note referred to the 2012 
complaints involving Student #3 and Student #2 that the district previously determined were 
unfounded.)   

31.  A March 15, 2013, handwritten note from classroom aide Angela Engle, 

responded to the inquiry regarding an alleged injury sustained by Student #1.  Ms. Engle 
stated that she was not present during the morning session at the KIT center.  As to a second 
incident involving a possible injury or mishandling of Student #1, Ms. Engle wrote that she 
heard Ms. Hopp “state to Student #1, who was crying and refusing to transition, that she was 
going to move him away from a center.”  Ms. Engle wrote that she was fully engaged in the 
activities at her station and did not see the incident, but she “‘heard a thump’” and Student #1 
continued to cry.  Since the alleged January incident was “the first incident” it was unclear to 
what incident Ms. Engle was referring, but she certainly did not report that Student #1 was 
dragged, dropped on his head and refused first aid.   

32.  A March 18, 2013, district interoffice correspondence advised Ms. Hopp that 

 
she had been reassigned from the Education Service Center North site to the Beaudrey 
Administrative office, effective March 19, 2013. 

9

 

33.  Ms. Rebecca Quevedo, an aide in Ms. Hopp’s classroom, was interviewed and 
stated that she had no idea what the concerns were; that the physical prompting she observed 
was “a lot of handholding”; and that sometimes staff had to move students with their hands 
to a safe place to calm them down.  Ms. Quevedo could not recall any incidents taking place 
in January or February 2013 where she felt uncomfortable with staff and student interaction.  
She did not remember a specific incident when Student #1 was upset when he was moved 
from one area of the classroom to another.  She could not recall anything about Student #1 
that made her feel uncomfortable, and she never heard any comments made to students that 
made her feel uncomfortable.  She did not remember Student #1 being told to “stop crying, 
you are being a big baby” but recalled that the staff talked about “what babies do/what big 
kids do.”  

34. 

The notes from the district’s interview with Lauren Eisner, another aide in the 

Ms. Hopp’s classroom, documented that she stated that the physical contact with students 
involved holding hands.  She had never seen Ms. Hopp interact with Student #1 and could 
not recall any time in January or February that she was uncomfortable with interactions 
between staff and students.  She stated that Student #1 became upset during transition “lots 
of times” and he would generally “stand and cry and refuse to move until someone figures 
out what he wants to work for.”  She has heard people tell Student #1 to stop crying, but 
never heard anyone tell him that he was being a baby.  She had never heard staff make any 
comments to students that made her uncomfortable. 

35.  During her interview, Ms. Engle remembered an incident in January or 
February when Student #1 was at one station and was not ready to transition.  He was crying 
and was not finished with what he was doing.  Ms. Engle could not recall Ms. Hopp’s exact 
words, but Ms. Hopp intervened to get Student #1 to transition to the other station, however, 
Student #1 refused to move.  She heard Ms. Hopp tell Student #1 that she was going to move 
him to the other station, but she did not see Ms. Hopp and Student #1’s interaction because 
Ms. Engle’s line of sight was obstructed.  Ms. Engle heard Ms. Hopp tell Student #1 that she 
was going to move him to the break/library center.  Throughout this time Student #1 was still 
crying and then Ms. Engle heard a thump and then more crying.  The thump “sounded like a 
body.”  Ms. Engle recalled that Ms. Hernandez was present during the incident.  Ms. Engle 
did not report that Ms. Hopp dragged Student #1, that he hit his head, that Ms. Hopp refused 
to give him ice, or that the incident required a report to be filed.  During her interview, Ms. 
Engle also reported hearing Ms. Hopp tell Student #1 that she would not give him anything 
to eat when his parents did not send a snack.  Ms. Hopp would tell Student #1 that she could 
not give him anything and that he should talk to his parents about it.  Ms. Engle reported that 
her instinct was to feed the child and she would override Ms. Hopp and feed Student #1.  Ms. 
Engle was never asked if she was aware of any communications between Ms. Hopp and 
Student #1’s parents regarding a plan for his snack issues.  Ms. Engle stated that she also 
heard Ms. Hopp tell Student #1 to “stop crying, you are being a big baby,” but Ms. Engle 
acknowledged it was phrased more as a question, rather than an insult, more like asking him 
if that was what he was.  She heard Ms. Hopp make this comment two to four times.  Ms. 
Engle did not claim that Ms. Hopp used the term “big baby” in a demeaning way. 

10

 

36. 

The district’s notes of the interview of Amy Combs, a behavior specialist in 
Ms. Hopp’s classroom, documented that she recalled one time when the they were having 
difficulty transitioning Student #1 and Ms. Hopp held one of his hands and wanted Ms. 
Combs to hold the other, but Ms. Combs was not comfortable with this because it is possible 
to dislocate a child’s shoulders when holding them in this manner.  Ms. Combs modeled how 
to hold students under the armpits.  Ms. Hopp was concerned that they were reinforcing 
Student #1 with the attention, but Ms. Combs told her it was more important to transition 
him safely.  Ms. Combs acknowledged that this happened during her “very early 
interactions” with Ms. Hopp, and that she redirected Ms. Hopp to use different prompts.  Ms. 
Combs advised that Ms. Hopp “has a hard time with Student #1.”  She explained that often 
students did not complete an activity and that staff would tell the students that they could 
possibly earn a token the next time, but Ms. Hopp felt it was appropriate to give Student #1 a 
time out for not earning his tokens, and he would not get to do a unique activity if he did not 
stay on task.  Ms. Combs did not feel that that was an appropriate thing to do.  Ms. Combs 
could not recall Ms. Hopp telling Student #1 he was a baby.  Ms. Combs stated that Ms. 
Hopp had “difficulty avoiding a power struggle with transitions and Student #1,” but it was 
nothing that was “reportable.”  Ms. Combs did not testify in this hearing and the comments 
she made at her interview were received as administrative hearsay, pursuant to Government 
Code section 11513.6  While her statements may have supplemented or explained other 
witnesses’ testimony regarding transitions, no finding can be made that Ms. Hopp and Ms. 
Combs ever had a conversation regarding dislocating students’ shoulders or that Ms. Hopp 
gave Student #1 time outs.  Further, Ms. Hopp denied having this conversation with Ms. 
Combs and no admissible evidence contradicted Ms. Hopp’s testimony.  

37. 

The notes of the interview with Tina Valdez, a classroom aide, documented 

that she did not remember feeling uncomfortable about Ms. Hopp’s interactions with 
students any time in January or February 2013.  She noted that sometimes Ms. Hopp “talks to 
students in a babyish way that is not appropriate” and she stated that her “frustration working 
with [Ms. Hopp] is that [Ms. Hopp] doesn’t use proactive strategies and uses more reactive 
strategies,” examples of which are redirecting, ignoring, modeling, and complimenting 
others.  Ms. Valdez believed that Student #1 was “so advanced,” but Ms. Hopp had not 
tailored the curriculum to meet his needs and that was where the difficulties arose.  Ms. 
Combs did not testify in this hearing and the comments she made at her interview were 
received as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513.  While her 
statements may have supplemented or explained other witnesses’ testimony regarding Ms. 
Hopp’s use of the term “baby,” no finding can be made that Ms. Hopp used incorrect 
strategies or failed to meet Student #1’s needs.  

                                                           

6 The term “administrative hearsay” is a shorthand reference to the provisions of 

Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), to the effect that hearsay evidence that is 
objected to, and is not otherwise admissible, may be used to supplement or explain other 
evidence but may not, by itself, support a factual finding.  It may be combined with other 
evidence to provide substantial evidence sufficient to support a finding.  (Komizu v. Gourley
(2002) 103 Cal.App.4th 1001.) 

11

 

38.  On March 21, 2013, the district interviewed Ms. Hopp.  She stated that one of 
the ways she responds to a child having a difficult time following the routine is the “child [is] 
removed to rest.”  Ms. Hopp stated that she “escorts, walks the children, encourages them to 
move”; she will block their ability to escape; she will get behind them to make them move; 
she will pick them up calmly and move them to another spot; and she will herd them.  When 
children are hurt, she takes care of them; gets an icepack; contacts the nurse; and writes a 
report to the parents.  Ms. Hopp described the preventive strategies in place for Student #1 in 
the February 3, 2013, behavior plan that was developed for him.  Ms. Hopp stated that 
“numerous times” she had suggested that Student #1 needed to be promoted from KIT 
because he had achieved his goals.   

39.  On April 16, 2013, Ms. Hopp was questioned more specifically about the 

incidents involving Student #1.  She stated that nothing stood out about him, other than his 
frequent tantrums.  She had no recollection of ever moving him and denied that there was an 
incident where he fell and hit his head; she stated that if that had happened, she would have 
provided him an icepack and filled out a report.  If there had been such an incident, it would 
be documented in his file and she could not recall ever providing ice to him.  Ms. Hopp also 
denied an incident where he slipped out of his clothes.  When asked about allegations that 
she called Student #1 a “baby,” the district notes indicated that Ms. Hopp explained that what 
she told him was to not be a baby, that he is a capable child, and that he is five and should act 
like a five-year-old.  However, when testifying, Ms. Hopp denied ever making this statement.  
She explained that Student #1 was not five years old while he was in her classroom, so she 
would never have told him to act like a five-year-old.  Moreover, as Ms. Hopp credibly 
explained, since these children have special needs, they are not at the developmental 
milestones of children the same age without special needs, so telling them to act their stated 
age is something she never does, as it would be meaningless for these children.  The district 
notes also documented that when Ms. Hopp was asked if there was any other information she 
wanted to share, Ms. Hopp reportedly stated that she hoped the district was interviewing 
others, as they were also concerned about Student #1 because he indicated that he was being 
spanked, he tried to spank other children, he has advised that he has been locked in the 
closet, and stated that food has been withheld.  When asked if she had filed a report about 
these concerns, Ms. Hopp stated that she had not.  Again, Ms. Hopp denied making these 
statements and testified that she told the district she hoped they were interviewing everyone 
about these allegations and that she explained her interactions with Student #1.  As more 
fully described, below, Ms. Hopp’s explanations were credible and persuasive, and 
demonstrated, along with other credible evidence, that no violations had occurred.         

40. 

Following Ms. Hopp’s interview, Teresa Martin, the district’s Director of 

 
Early Childhood Special Education, filed a suspected child abuse report on April 16, 2013, 
regarding Student #1’s alleged claims of abuse.  

41.  An April 23, 2013, interoffice correspondence advised Ms. Hopp of an 

 
upcoming meeting on April 25, 2013, at which she would have an “opportunity to answer 
questions and provide additional information regarding these incidents.”  

12

 

42.

The district’s memo documenting the April 25, 2013, meeting, indicated that 
Ms. Hernandez, Ms. Ramirez and Ms. Engle reported that in January 2013, Ms. Hopp was 
observed grabbing Student #1 by the hands, pulling his hands and arms above his head when 
he was sitting, and dragging him, whereupon he fell and hit the back of his head.  Ms. Hopp 
did not provide ice, first aid, or file a report concerning the incident.  Ms. Hopp reportedly 
stated she did not remember the incident or the child hitting his head.  The memo also 
asserted that Ms. Hernandez, Ms. Combs, and Mr. Rodezno reported that in February 2013, 
when Student #1 was sitting at a table, Ms. Hopp grabbed a hold of his left arm and pulled 
him forcibly out of his chair whereupon he dropped the floor while his shirt was pulled up 
over his head.  The memo further documented that Ms. Engle, Ms. Hernandez, Ms. Combs, 
and Ms. Ramirez reported that during this time frame, Ms. Hopp was heard making 
disparaging comments to Student #1 such as, “Stop crying, you are being a baby.”  However,
the evidence established that those witnesses did not make those assertions and Ms. Hopp’s 
answers were understandable in light of the way the questions were posed to her.  The 
district’s memo also documented that during Ms. Hopp’s April 16, 2013, interview she stated
that she had no recollection of any of the incidents involving Student #1 and that Ms. Hopp 
raised concerns regarding Student #1’s welfare.  The memo further documented that Ms. 
Hopp later claimed her statements were taken out of context and that she had been told not to 
feed Student #1.  The district memo noted that during the April 25, 2013, meeting Ms. Hopp 
had produced a photograph of a staff member that she reportedly said showed the staff 
member being frustrated with a child and that Ms. Hopp was concerned about the staff 
member’s behavior.  The district reminded Ms. Hopp that she met previously with the district 
regarding allegations of inappropriate physical contact made in April and August 2012, and 
the district provided assistance and guidance on that topic and directed her not to use 
physical means to manage students’ behavior.  Additionally, the district wrote that the 
services of Ms. Valdez, a behavior interventionist, had been provided to Ms. Hopp since 
August 2012, and she was given additional training regarding positive behavioral support 
and strategies.  No documents or testimony identified what “assistance and guidance” the 
district provided Ms. Hopp and Ms. Hopp’s testimony that Ms. Valdez worked only a few 
days per week in the classroom and was hired to satisfy teacher/student ratios was unrefuted.  
The district memo noted that the district reviewed and provided Ms. Hopp with several of its 
governing documents and directed her how to act in the classroom.  The memo advised Ms. 
Hopp that her failure to follow the directive may lead to disciplinary action and that if Ms. 
Hopp were evaluated today, she would receive a “below standards” evaluation.  Of note, 
these directives were given to Ms. Hopp at this meeting and she was afforded no opportunity 
to comply with them, as she was never returned to the KIT classroom after she was removed 
in March 2013.  Thus, the causes of discipline for failure to follow these directives were 
unreasonable, at best.   

43. 

The handwritten notes from the April 25, 2013, meeting, called a “conference 

 
to dismiss,” purportedly documented Ms. Hopp’s statements made at that meeting.  The 
notes indicated Ms. Hopp had no recollection of any child hitting his head and she did not 
know why staff would say they saw that; Ms. Hopp discussed the steps she took to create and 
implement Student #1’s behavior plan; Ms. Hopp said that Student #1 reported in January 
about being locked in the attic at Christmas time, his parents withheld food and failed to give 

13

 

him additional food and he was “sent off as being naughty when he wanted food”; Ms. Hopp 
did not report Student #1’s comments because she knew his family; the child had food; and, 
the statements were taken out of context Ms. Hopp explained that when Student #1 made 
these statements his appearance was acceptable, they were discussing him being afraid of the 
attic and the closet, and Ms. Hopp did not feel his comments warranted filing a report; Ms. 
Hopp did not give Student #1 snacks because his parents told her not to feed him; if Student 
#1 did not have a snack Ms. Hopp would remove him from the snack table and tell him that 
his mother did not give him a snack, as instructed by his parents, but Ms. Hopp 
acknowledged there were no records of any of that in his file.  Ms. Hopp also produced a 
picture of Ms. Engle that she stated showed Ms. Engle acting aggressively towards a child 
when Ms. Engle became frustrated.  Ms. Hopp claimed that she was concerned about Ms. 
Engle’s actions but did not report the matter.  The report noted that the district believed that 
Ms. Hopp submitted the picture of Ms. Engle because she was contesting Ms. Engle’s
credibility.  Ms. Hopp refuted all of these points when testifying.  She credibly explained that 
the report was taken out of context and contained only “snippets” of much longer 
discussions.  As noted in more detail in this decision, the Commission did not find Ms. 
Hernandez’s and Ms. Ramirez’s allegations regarding Ms. Hopp’s negative interactions with 
Student #1 to be credible, Ms. Hopp’s explanation of the lesson she was reviewing with 
Student #1 when he made his comments was believable, as was her explanation of the 
circumstances under which she produced the photograph of Ms. Engle and the student.  The 
district’s summation of its meetings with Ms. Hopp appeared to be written in such a way as 
to cast Ms. Hopp in the worst light possible.  The district’s investigation and its 
documentation did not appear to be fair or unbiased.    

44.  On April 25, 2013, Ms. Gelfand filed a suspected child abuse report indicating 
 
that Ms. Hopp brought a photo to the April 25, 2013, conference showing Ms. Engle holding 
a child under the arm with an open hand.  Ms. Hopp was concerned that Ms. Engle was 
grabbing the child but she acknowledged that she had not reported the incident.  The police 
advised the district that they would not take the report, as there was insufficient evidence; 
they instructed the district to move forward with an internal investigation. 

45.  A May 1, 2013, interoffice correspondence memo from Ms. Gelfand to Ms. 

 
Hopp summarized what took place at the April 25, 2013, conference.  The document 
reiterated all that had been discussed, including what was discussed at the previous 
conferences.  The memo noted that when Student #1’s comments about being spanked,
locked in the closet, and having food withheld were discussed, Ms. Hopp advised that “the 
sentence was taken from a longer conversation and at the time, in [Ms. Hopp’s] perception, it 
did not cause a reasonable suspicion.”  Further, Ms. Hopp spoke at length about her 
understanding that Student #1’s parents asked her to withhold food from him during snack
time, stating that he ate his snack before he arrived at school or that there were days when his 
family did not send a snack and they told Ms. Hopp not to provide him with food.  Ms. Hopp 
stated that on those occasions she gives him a preferred item to play with in another area of 
the classroom, rather than having him sit at the snack table.  Ms. Hopp further stated that 
Student #1’s comment about being locked in the attic and the closet and having food 
withheld “did not stand out from the entire conversation” and Student #1 did not appear 

14

 

“malnourished.”  The memo also noted that Ms. Hopp provided a photo purportedly showing 
an aggressive staff member, but had not reported the incident, and was told that the district 
reported it after the April 25, 2013, meeting.  Ms. Hopp had also provided a photo showing 
an airplane-sized bottle of liquor that had been found in the classroom that she reported on 
January 25, 2013.  The memo noted that the district met with staff on January 29, 2013, and 
each staff person, including Ms. Hopp, stated that they did not believe any team member had 
placed the bottle in the classroom and that no team member ever appeared under the 
influence of alcohol during the work day.  Ms. Hopp was reminded of the two prior 
allegations in 2012 regarding inappropriate physical contact with students.  The district had 
provided her with “assistance and guidance” regarding appropriate treatment, positive 
behavior support strategies, and appropriate instructional strategies, and assigned a behavior 
interventionist to her classroom.  However, no evidence was introduced regarding what 
“assistance and guidance” had been offered in 2012.  Ms. Gelfand produced absolutely no 
documentation of any directives or instructions given to Ms. Hopp in the past and the 
absence of such evidence was very disconcerting and lent further credence to Ms. Hopp’s 
position.  The May 1, 2013, memo further noted that “assistance and guidance” was offered 
to Ms. Hopp during the April 25, 2013, conference and she had been given directives.  The 
memo ended by noting that Ms. Gelfand would be concluding her investigation, including 
reviewing any documentation Ms. Hopp submitted, and there may be disciplinary action.  
The memo advised Ms. Hopp that if she were evaluated today, she would receive a “below 
standard” evaluation. 

46.  Ms. Hopp’s May 7, 2013, evaluation noted that she had been observed on 
 
August 23, 2012, October 24, 2012, and January 29, 2013.  Conferences with Ms. Hopp 
allegedly took place on April 29, and May 8, 2013, but no documentation of any such 
conferences was introduced, although Ms. Gelfand and Ms. Hopp each signed the May 7 
evaluation on May 8, 2013.  Moreover, the only meetings evidenced at this hearing were 
those involving this investigation and the dates of those meetings did not correspond to the 
dates identified in this evaluation.  Be that as it may, the evaluation found that Ms. Hopp met 
district standards in all categories except for needing improvement in the area of guiding 
students to be self-directed; engaging them in problem solving, critical thinking and other 
activities; using a variety of instructional strategies to respond to their diverse needs; 
providing an effective classroom environment; and maintaining accurate and timely records.  
The evaluation noted that Ms. Hopp did not meet district standards for establishing and 
maintaining standards for student behavior; creating a climate that promotes fairness and 
respect; planning and implementing classroom procedures and routines that support student 
learning; communicating regularly with students and parents about instructional goals and 
student progress; following district and state policies, laws and regulations; and 
communicating and interacting with colleagues, staff, parents and students in an appropriate 
manner.  Ms. Hopp’s overall evaluation was “below standard performance.”  However, under
the commendations section, the evaluation noted that Ms. Hopp’s “classroom environment 
and physical space reflects thoughtful planning,” “activities are developmentally 
appropriate,” and “instruction is individualized.”  Attached documentation identified nine 
specific deficiencies, including the failure to use positive behavior support strategies, failure 
to follow protocols, failure to implement behavioral protocols, failure to use statements that 

15

 

stress what students should be doing, failure to report concerns regarding child safety and 
welfare, failure to report concerns regarding staff, inconsistent planning to meet the 
individual needs of students, ineffective or inconsistent use of data collection tools, and 
overreliance on negative reinforcers.  The evaluation contained six recommendations, noted 
that six types of assistance were provided, and that nine types of assistance were to be 
provided.  Ms. Hopp testified that none of the Education Code requirements for teacher 
evaluations was followed before or during the time this evaluation was performed.  Her 
testimony was not refuted by any of the district’s witnesses and no documents demonstrated 
that the district complied with the Education Code requirements during her evaluation.  The 
evaluation did not appear to have been properly conducted.       

47.  On May 10, 2013, Ms. Hopp filed a grievance appealing the district’s 

 
proposed action.  Ms. Hopp detailed her experience and positive results, explaining her 
teaching methods.  Ms. Hopp denied ever grabbing a student, dragging a student, or making 
disparaging remarks.  She asserted that she followed all district policies.  She denied that 
Student #1 struck his head and pointed out that it was inconceivable that three assistants 
would witness such an incident and not report it or document it.  Ms. Hopp denied failing to 
communicate with parents and pointed out documentation showing that she did so.  Ms. 
Hopp asserted that no report was filed because the alleged incident did not occur.  Ms. Hopp 
wrote that when Student #1 ate his snack at the wrong time, a strategy plan was created with 
behavior specialist Tina Valadez, and there were multiple conversations with other teachers 
regarding that behavior.  Ms. Hopp wrote that Student #1’s parents expressed concern about 
his eating habits and while Ms. Hopp did not agree with withholding snack, there was no 
indicated need to report suspected child abuse because of this matter.  Ms. Hopp also denied 
the need to report the attic statements as they were made in reference to a discussion 
regarding feeling afraid.   

 
48.  During the investigation, the district received a June 7, 2013, handwritten note 
from Ms. Ramirez documenting her version of the events.  Ms. Ramirez wrote that Ms. Hopp 
was at one of the stations with Student #1, who was having a hard time.  Student #1 threw a 
toy at another child and when Ms. Hopp attempted to intervene, Student #1 hit her.  Ms. 
Hopp then attempted to physically remove Student #1 to the library.  Student #1 was crying 
and fighting, making it difficult for Ms. Hopp to physically prompt him.  Halfway to the 
library, Ms. Hopp dropped him on the floor, “seemingly fed up with moving him.”  Student 
#1 fell to the ground and hit his head on the floor.  “The sound was a very loud ‘thump’” and 
“his cry went from upset to in pain.”  Ms. Hopp “remarked something to the effect of ‘that’s 
what happens when you don’t listen’ and sat him on the bench in the library, at which point 
she turned to [Ms. Ramirez] and said ‘God is [smiting] [brackets in original] him for being 
___, [Ms. Ramirez could not] remember the exact word, but for being 
disobedient/troublesome.”  Ms. Hopp next asked Student #1, “annoyingly,” if he wanted ice.  
Student #1 was “crying strongly” and did not answer.  Ms. Hopp “said something to the 
effect” that he needed to use his words if he wanted ice, but because he was crying he did not 
reply and Ms. Hopp “did not check in with his injury or give him ice.”  At this point, Ms. 
Hernandez intervened, gave him ice and checked on his injury.  Ms. Ramirez identified the 
witnesses present during this incident.  She also noted that Ms. Hopp seemed “to have a short 

16

 

temper and is easily frustrated by the students who exhibit non-compliant/defiant behaviors,” 
noting that Student #1 was a particular student with whom Ms. Hopp had a difficult time.  
This report conflicted with Ms. Ramirez’s initial statements to the district and contained 
many more details, including new claims of statements made by Ms. Hopp regarding “God 
smiting Student #1.”  These new details made Ms. Ramirez’s claims appear exaggerated and 
non-credible.  It was hard to fathom that she would omit these details when she was initially 
interviewed by the district.  Moreover, none of the other witnesses ever reported hearing Ms. 
Hopp make such memorable statements.  Ms. Ramirez also wrote about a concern she had 
with Ms. Hopp withholding snacks from Student #1, claiming that many times he came to 
school without snacks and would ask for some at snack time but, Ms. Hopp would “almost 
always” tell him no, tell him he should ask his mother to bring him snack, and tell staff that 
his parents would not listen to her when staff asked if the matter had been discussed with 
Student #1’s parents.  Ms. Ramirez wrote that she doubted the parents would act that way 
because when staff members brought it to the parents’ attention, they sent a large box of 
snacks to school.  In light of the e-mails between Ms. Hopp and Student #1’s parents 
regarding the plan to address his snack issues, Ms. Ramirez’s claims in this regard seemed 
contrived.  Ms. Ramirez expressed concern that Ms. Hopp’s physical prompts were “too 
strong/brash” and questioned Ms. Hopp’s “proper understanding to deal with children with 
special needs and provide the appropriate behavioral interventions.”  Ms. Ramirez claimed 
that when staff discussed interventions, Ms. Hopp would reject staff suggestions or not 
follow through with them.  Again; in light of the overwhelming documentation to the 
contrary, these claims, too, were not credible.   

49.  On August 19, 2013, Ms. Gelfand authored a note regarding her August and 

 
September 2012 meetings with Ms. Hopp after a second complaint of inappropriate physical 
contact with the student was raised.  The incident was reported to police, whose investigation 
resulted in “inconclusive findings.”  The district’s internal investigation revealed that the 
child was hitting himself with Play-Doh, Ms. Hopp repeatedly advised him not to hit himself 
or it would be taken away, the child continued hitting himself, and the child became further 
agitated until the class was dismissed.  Because this was the second complaint during the 
2012 year, a behavior support teacher, Ms. Valdez, provided weekly on-site consultation and 
coaching and, a behavior intervention provider was added full-time to the KIT team to assist 
daily with programming and instruction.  Ms. Hopp was also advised to “employ strategies 
that state what a child should be doing in lieu of telling a child to stop, or giving a negative 
command.”  Further, “reactive strategies to use when students become agitated such as 
redirection and employment of calming strategies” were discussed with Ms. Hopp.  Given 
that Ms. Gelfand authored this note more than one year after the district determined that the 
2012 complaints were “unfounded,” coupled with the fact that there were no documents 
supporting the statements Ms. Gelfand made in this note, its reliability and her assertions 
contained therein were highly doubtful.      

50.  A September 16, 2013, inter-office correspondence from Director Teresa 

 
Martin to Ms. Hopp advised that a meeting had been scheduled for September 23, 2013, to 
discuss the “tentative intention” to issue Ms. Hopp a notice of unsatisfactory acts with 

17

 

suspension without pay because of inappropriate physical contact and verbal interactions 
with students and the failure to report suspected child abuse or neglect. 

51.  On September 23, 2013, the district issued Ms. Hopp a Notice of 
 
Unsatisfactory Service or Act of Certificated Employee alleging she committed immoral 
conduct and/or unprofessional conduct and persistently violated or refused to obey the school 
laws of the state or reasonable regulations.  The attached charges were the same as those 
identified in the accusation.  The district also served Ms. Hopp with a Notice of Suspension 
and copies of documents supporting the district’s action.

52.  On October 15, 2013, the district sent Ms. Hopp a letter advising her that an 

 
administrative review meeting had been scheduled for October 28, 2013, to permit her to 
present any statements or documents responding to the charges.  A letter dated October 28, 
2013, rescheduled the meeting, pursuant to Ms. Hopp’s request, to November 8, 2013. 

53.  Notes from the November 8, 2013, administrative review documented the 

 
various arguments and statements made by Ms. Hopp’s attorney, Mr. Schwab, who 
represented her at this hearing.  Mr. Schwab indicated that Ms. Hopp denied the allegations 
of forcibly moving Student #1; that she communicated with Student #1’s mother; that she did 
not have a reasonable suspicion to report child abuse; and that the district misconstrued or 
took out of context the comments Ms. Hopp made at her meetings with the district.  Ms. 
Hopp produced a photograph to demonstrate the kinds of facial expressions used by staff 
when interacting with students.  During the meeting Ms. Hopp was asked if she was NCI 
(Nonviolent Crisis Intervention) trained, and she replied that she had never heard of it, and 
did not have that training.  However, Ms. Hopp testified that NCI training was originally 
offered to her and other staff; but the offer was later revoked because preschool teachers 
were not required to have that training so, the district elected not to send them to it.  
Additionally, while testifying, Ms. Gelfand admitted that pre-school teachers are not NCI 
trained because it is not a recommended practice for children under five years old, like the 
KIT students.  At this hearing the district attempted to impeach Ms. Hopp with the 
statements contained in the document written after the meeting; but, because most of the 
statements were made by her attorney, not Ms. Hopp, they did not impeach Ms. Hopp’s 
testimony.  More importantly, the document was only a few pages long, yet there were 
numerous errors contained therein, including wrongly identifying speakers and failing to 
identify speakers.  These errors further supported the Commission’s concerns regarding the
accuracy of the district’s reports and investigation.    

54.  On December 3, 2013, Sharyn Howell, the Executive Director of the district’s

 
Special Education Program, advised that she had “reviewed and deliberated over all the 
documents presented,” including documents Ms. Hopp submitted, and determined that:  

There was more than one witness of the incidents 

regarding your physical contact with Student #1.  I am also 
unconvinced by your explanation regarding the incidents of 
failure to report child abuse and have taken into consideration 

18

 

the fact that you were the one who presented the evidence of 
possible abuse in two cases, one involving a child’s parents and 
another with a classified employee to support your own 
innocence regarding interactions with students in your care.  
Your responses throughout the investigation lacked consistency.  
Therefore, I have decided to recommend that the District shall 
move forward with your dismissal, and if the board of education 
approves this recommendation, you will be suspended 
immediately from your duties without pay [and will be 
dismissed unless you request a hearing]. 

55.  An undated district interoffice correspondence reassigned Ms. Hopp from the 

 
17th to the 11th floor of the Beaudrey Building, effective immediately. 

District Codes, Bulletins, Memorandums and Policies 

56. 

The district’s Employee Code of Ethics, adopted in September 1998, and last 
 
revised in February 2003, noted that the district’s mission is to educate all students to their 
maximum potential and that the district is committed to three core ethical principles:  
commitment to excellence, district and personal integrity, and responsibility.  The code of 
ethics “plays a central role” in the district’s commitment to help district personnel “achieve 
the highest ethical standards in their professional activities and relationships.  Our goal is to 
create a culture that fosters trust, commitment to excellence and responsibility, personal and 
institutional integrity, and avoids conflicts of interest and appearances of impropriety.”  The
code of ethics applies to all district personnel.  When making decisions, personnel must 
evaluate the situation and identify ethical issues, follow the rules, ask for guidance from 
supervisors, and make and carry out decisions that are consistent with the rules and develop 
excellence, integrity and responsibility.  The Commitment to Excellence section noted that 
personnel are to set the example; create an environment of trust, respect and 
nondiscrimination; provide honest, accurate and timely information; identify problems and 
help create solutions; keep policies, procedures and rules; report improper conduct; and keep 
colleagues safe from retaliation. 

57. 

The district’s Ethics Policies, policy bulletin number BUL-4748.0, enacted 

 
May 18, 2009, stated that it was the responsibility of all personnel to be knowledgeable about 
the district ethics policies and “to take an active role in promoting an organizational culture 
that encourages ethical conduct.”  The bulletin referenced the four Board-approved ethics 
policies that all staff “should be familiar with.”  Those policies were identified as the 
employee code of ethics, the conflict of interest code, the contractor code of conduct, and the 
lobbying disclosure code.  District employees were responsible to set a good example of 
ethical conduct, be familiar with the ethics’ policies, contribute to proactive and transparent 
management of potential ethical concerns, seek guidance from supervisors, and know they 
are role models for peers and students.   

19

 

58. 

The district’s Code of Conduct with Students, enacted July 15, 2008, identified 

 
the district’s “most important responsibility” as being “the safety of our students.”  
Employees were expected to use good judgment and were cautioned to avoid situations 
including, but not limited to, engaging in any behaviors that were unprofessional, unethical, 
illegal, immoral, or exploitative; making statements or comments which may be considered 
demeaning; and touching or having physical contact that was not within the scope of duties. 

59. 

The district’s Code of Conduct with Students, policy bulletin number BUL-
 
5167.0, enacted July 1, 2010, identified students’ safety as the district’s “most important 
responsibility.”  Employees were to be provided with the Code of Conduct with Students on 
an annual basis at the beginning of each school year, and administrators/principals were 
required to stress the importance of the employees’ legal obligations, as mandated reporters 
of suspected child abuse, to telephone the appropriate child protective agencies and to 
follow-up with written reports “anytime” they received information regarding incidents, 
behaviors, or conduct “that may be an indication of suspected child abuse.”  

 
60.  On October 10, 1998, via a board resolution, the board reaffirmed its 
commitment to the respectful treatment of all persons, requiring students and adults at its 
schools to “treat all persons equally and respectfully and refrain from the willful or negligent 
use of slurs against any person . . . .”

61. 

The district’s Abolition of Corporal Punishment, policy bulletin number BUL-
 
5046.0, enacted February 23, 2010, stated that “corporal discipline, in any form, is not to be 
used within the District” and the “Superintendent encourages the use of positive approaches 
to discipline and classroom management . . . .”  

62.

The district’s Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Requirements, policy 

bulletin number BUL-1347.2, enacted July 1, 2011, documented the district’s policy that all 
“employees shall report instances of suspected child abuse or neglect by telephone 
immediately, or as soon as practically possible, to an appropriate child protective agency and 
shall prepare and send a written report thereof to the same child protective agency called 
within 36 hours of receiving the information concerning the incident.”  

63.

The district’s Behavior Intervention Regulations for Students with Disabilities 

with Serious Behavior Problems, policy bulletin number BUL-5376.0, enacted January 17, 
2011, set forth the district’s “policy to implement legal requirements regarding behavior 
interventions for students with disabilities who have serious behavior problems.”  The 
bulletin noted that prohibited interventions included interventions designed to, or likely to, 
cause physical pain; interventions that deny adequate food; or interventions that are designed 
to subject the student to verbal abuse, ridicule, humiliation or other procedures expected to 
cause excessive emotional trauma.  A Behavior Emergency Report must be completed when 
the behavioral emergency occurs, which was defined as a serious behavior problem which 
was not previously observed or for which the previously desired behavioral intervention was 
not effective.  A serious behavior problem was defined as one which was self-injurious, 
assaultive or causes serious property damage, or other behavior problems that were pervasive 

20

 

and maladaptive, for which behavior approaches in the student’s Individualized Education 
Program (IEP) were ineffective.   

Letters of Recommendation and Support 

64.  On June 30, 2010, Eileen Fiori, a district preschool program specialist, wrote a 
letter on Ms. Hopp’s behalf noting that Ms. Hopp had been with the district for two years as 
a special education teacher at the preschool program at Elam and that Ms. Fiori had provided 
technical support during those two years.  She wrote that Ms. Hopp was “an enthusiastic and 
dedicated teacher” and she had observed Ms. Hopp “influence the aggressive behaviors of at 
least three of her students.”  Ms. Hopp had decreased those students’ time and frequency of 
meltdowns with her use of positive behavior techniques and had decreased or extinguished 
negative behaviors.  For one child, Ms. Hopp had completely replaced his negative 
aggressive behaviors.  “This was one of Mrs. Hopp’s strengths.”  Ms. Fiori wrote that Ms. 
Hopp planned highly motivating lessons, while at the same time teaching the required skills 
to help children become successful in their transition to kindergarten.  Ms. Hopp was well 
loved by her young students and, although the district requires paperwork that can be quite 
challenging, Ms. Hopp had progressively proved her skills in that regard. 

65.  On June 30, 2010, Ms. Tambalo, the principal at Elam, wrote that Ms. Hopp 

successfully collaborated with the general education teachers to include the special education 
students in the school process.  Ms. Hopp supported the development of the special education 
children and modeled self-sufficiency, friendship, and group dynamics.  She learned the 
strengths and preferences of each student and appropriately modified the curriculum and 
provided scaffolding for the children.  Ms. Hopp demonstrated a strong ability to personalize 
the educational experience and focus on the students’ needs.  Facilitating interactions with 
non-disabled peers was one of Ms. Hopp’s strengths.  Ms. Hopp used positive discipline 
techniques to facilitate children’s behavior and modelled appropriate interactions for all 
children.  Ms. Hopp completed IEPs and communicated with parents and specialists as 
needed.  She was a professionally responsible employee.  

66.  Ms. Hopp introduced several letters of recommendation written by parents, 

teachers, colleagues, social workers and individuals who provided instruction or assistance in 
Ms. Hopp’s classroom.  Ms. Hopp testified that the letters were written when one mother of a 
student in the KIT classroom, who was very distraught that Ms. Hopp was abruptly removed, 
“rallied the troops” and asked parents to write letters, copies of which she sent to Ms. Hopp.  
During the investigation Ms. Howell asked Ms. Hopp for copies of the letters, which Ms. 
Hopp provided.  The letters introduced were written after the district removed Ms. Hopp 
from the KIT Center, but many of them did not specifically reference the allegations, making 
the extent of the authors’ knowledge of the charges unclear.  Be that as it may, the letters 
were extremely complimentary of Ms. Hopp and described her in glowing terms.   

67.  A social worker with the Department of Children and Family Services who 

worked with Ms. Hopp at Elam from 2009 through 2010, wrote that Ms. Hopp was an 
advocate, a compassionate special education teacher, versatile, and dedicated, with a solid 

21

 

focus on the individual needs of the students.7  The social worker wrote that Ms. Hopp was 
skilled in addressing student needs and ensuring children will thrive and develop in an 
adaptable educational atmosphere.  Ms. Hopp encouraged “firm behavioral management 
techniques, possessing excellent interpersonal and communication skills to develop an 
excellent rapport with all members of the school community.”  She described Ms. Hopp as 
kindhearted and empathetic, flexible and accommodating, a teacher who was able to discuss 
specific child needs with caregivers to enable them to provide well-rounded structure at 
home and school.   

The social worker also noted that Ms. Hopp facilitated each student’s IEP among the 
caregiver, social worker, and school professionals; provided useful information that included 
the strengths and weaknesses of the child; timely responded to all requests for records; and 
genuinely cared and provided educational site services for the children to assist them in 
obtaining stable lives.  The social worker described Ms. Hopp as being a great role model; 
having great communication skills and trust with teachers, children, families and 
professionals; being generous in teaching children; and having a personal commitment that 
allowed all to work as a team.  The social worker observed Ms. Hopp’s “character to be that 
of an excellent special education teacher.” 

68.  A licensed special education instructor, who worked collaboratively with Ms. 
Hopp for over five years, described her as being “more than instrumental in assisting fellow 
colleagues in the use of methodical and specific classroom strategies to help modify behavior 
and to guide students to exhibit more appropriate behavior.”  The instructor visited the KIT 
Center on several occasions.  She shared two students with Ms. Hopp, and observed her 
follow the KIT Transactional Behavior Support Strategies, determine the function of the 
students’ behavior, and extinguish negative, unwanted behavior.  The instructor described 
Ms. Hopp’s strategies as allowing the students to self- regulate and engage in self-calming 
behaviors.  Ms. Hopp welcomed many professionals into her classroom for observation on 
several occasions.  Ms. Hopp was extremely organized, reliable, and creative; demonstrating 
leadership qualities. 

69.  Another letter was written by Ms. Hopp’s neighboring teacher for two years 

who shared students with her.  She observed Ms. Hopp’s teaching methods, describing her as 
a well-planned and very thoughtful teacher whose classroom was set up for optimal success 
for students with autism.  Ms. Hopp used visual schedules and supports, reinforcers and 
positive behavior techniques in every aspect of the class, with every student and aide.  Ms. 
Hopp was kind to her students and accommodating of their needs.  The two teachers shared 
                                                           

7 This letter was written in 2013 and, during Ms. Hopp’s cross-examination, the 
district introduced a 2010 letter written by the same social worker, in which the body of the 
letter was the same as the 2013 letter.  However, because the social worker did not testify, 
there was no evidence refuting Ms. Hopp’s testimony that she received both letters from the 
social worker at two different points in time.  Further, the addressee section of the two letters 
was different, which corroborated Ms. Hopp’s testimony about receiving both letters from 
the social worker at two different points in time.  

22

 

Student #1, who was emotionally sensitive and protested during transition.  Ms. Hopp 
utilized appropriate behavior techniques intended to calm, redirect and re-engage him.  The 
teacher always observed Ms. Hopp addressing Student #1’s needs in an appropriate manner.  
The wall between the two teacher’s classes was a “paper thin” bungalow wall and Ms. Hopp 
never raised her voice to her students.  She described Ms. Hopp as being an excellent teacher 
who cared greatly for her students and each and every day and used all of her expert abilities 
to meet their unique needs. 

70.  A general education preschool teacher wrote that working with Ms. Hopp was 

a very enlightening experience.  They had a collaborative team approach that included 
working with many aides and they shared students and supplies.  Ms. Hopp planned creative 
and fun lessons for the students, her lessons were age appropriate, and provided supportive 
behavior techniques.  The teacher observed Ms. Hopp use gentle actions during every part of 
the day and she only used kind and positive words.  She described Ms. Hopp as being a great 
example of patience in a very busy classroom.  When the teacher would come to Ms. Hopp 
for help dealing with a child’s challenging behavior, Ms. Hopp would offer guidance, 
suggestions or would “just jump in and do the right thing.”  The teacher wrote that the shared 
students learned a lot about expressing their feelings and managing their emotions from Ms. 
Hopp’s life experiences and special education training.  Ms. Hopp stayed calm in a chaotic 
classroom while children were tantrumming, and she would keep smiling as she comforted 
the students and adults.  She praised Ms. Hopp for her excellence in teaching. 

71.  A student teacher mentor from Cal State Northridge, who has been Ms. 
Hopp’s colleague and friend since 2004, had “watched her hone her teaching craft into an art 
form.”  The mentor’s daughter was in Ms. Hopp’s preschool class and he “has only the 
highest respect for Ms. Hopp as a professional, veteran educator.”  He described her as being 
among the most knowledgeable special education teachers in the profession.  He noted that 
Ms. Hopp’s adeptness at her craft and her accomplishments stood out among her peers.  Ms. 
Hopp was always prepared completely for the instructional day, week and month ahead.  She 
had her curricular plans mapped out and tailored to meet the needs of her students.  Her 
lesson objectives were consistently clear to both students and parents.  Ms. Hopp always 
showed an interest in meeting the developmental needs of her students.  She was both 
analytical and compassionate; she had a knack and enthusiasm for integrating children’s 
social needs and special development delays into instructional plans that allowed her to 
inculcate in them a motivation for personal interests.  She had a reputation as being a relaxed 
professional who was confidently in control of her environment.  He recommended that Ms. 
Hopp not only be reinstated, but promoted. 

72.  A special education teacher, who shared students with Ms. Hopp, enjoyed 
collaborating with her and observed her react calmly through any type of problem.  Ms. 
Hopp always had a plan, used age-appropriate behavior methods of preparing a child for 
transitions, provided reinforcers, and consistently modified behavior.  She praised Ms. 
Hopp’s great patience, noting that she provided engaging activities for each child, purchasing 
or hand-making special items that motivated a child.  Ms. Hopp provided positive experience 
each day, from which her students benefited greatly.  The teacher noted that Student #1 was a 

23

 

mutual student that the two teachers shared and his development greatly improved due to Ms. 
Hopp modifying his program, including creating social stories to express his emotions.  Ms. 
Hopp created programs that decreased Student #1’s emotional outbursts and used correct 
behavior techniques when he tantrumed.  She properly intervened to restore calmness.  She 
positively affected her students’ numerous challenging behaviors by working collaboratively 
with aides, parents and teachers. 

73.  A district behavior therapist described Ms. Hopp as an excellent teacher, with 
whom she had worked numerous times at the KIT Center.  Ms. Hopp was a confident teacher 
and supervisor, patient, fast-thinking, knowledgeable, organized, and well-planned.  She 
provided a visually calm environment, limiting distracting noise.  Ms. Hopp explained job 
requirements to her staff, demonstrating how the schedule worked and the proper ways to 
interact with children.  Ms. Hopp was collaborative, concerned with student safety, worked 
in a composed, calm manner, even when children were noncompliant.  The teacher observed 
Ms. Hopp interact very gently with children, allowing them time to calm down, guiding them 
to try again and using positive reinforcement.  Ms. Hopp was involved with each child, 
supported their success, and had an advanced understanding of how to modify challenging 
behaviors and create a safe atmosphere that was engaging.  Ms. Hopp used all types of 
behaviorally and emotionally supportive items to make the day easy and fun.  The teacher 
described Ms. Hopp as having a positively energetic attitude, and wrote that working with 
Ms. Hopp “has always been a joy.”  Ms. Hopp emphasized collaboration, provided supplies 
to her staff, and was always kind in her actions and words with students.  The teacher wrote 
that Ms. Hopp was an excellent advocate for education and an excellent resource for parents. 

74.  An aide who worked with Ms. Hopp wrote that she learned many techniques 

from Ms. Hopp for dealing with special needs children.  Ms. Hopp always treated the 
children with respect, kindness, and compassion during every interaction.  The aide observed 
Ms. Hopp calm down even the most upset students many times and she was always very 
patient, never raising her voice or losing her patience with children or adults.  Ms. Hopp was 
very generous with her supplies and experience, and she made the classroom very interesting 
and entertaining.  Students learned a lot and improved very much as a result of Ms. Hopp’s 
kind and gentle ways.  Her interactions with students were very effective. 

75.  A special education assistant who worked with Ms. Hopp for four years noted 
that Ms. Hopp always had the utmost respect for children.  She spoke to them in a low voice 
to calm them down when they were having a meltdown.  She answered questions from her 
staff and was very knowledgeable of the students and their disabilities.  Staff learned much 
from Ms. Hopp. 

76.  Another staff member, who worked with Ms. Hopp at Elam, fondly recalled 

their time together at that school, because of Ms. Hopp’s dedication and kindness that 
exceeded that demonstrated by other teachers and staff.  She described Ms. Hopp as being a 
well-qualified, capable teacher who focused on teaching self-help skills and modified 
challenging behaviors of preschoolers with disabilities.  She praised Ms. Hopp's expertise 
and dedication, noting that because of student improvement, some students no longer 

24

 

required special education classroom placement.  Ms. Hopp taught staff about special 
education and behavior management teaching techniques, and was very experienced with 
special needs children.  She had engaging lessons and taught age-appropriate skills.  Students 
improved their independence and self-esteem due to Ms. Hopp’s thorough leadership and 
advice.  She wrote that Ms. Hopp was an extremely competent and effective teacher who 
interacted in the best interests of her students, only displaying age-appropriate, best practices 
in all of her words and actions.  

77.  A district speech-language pathologist who worked with Ms. Hopp at Elam, 

and has remained in contact with her since then, noted that Ms. Hopp demonstrated an 
outstanding knowledge and experience of the needs of her special education students, early 
childhood development, and preschool students.  She collaborated with Ms. Hopp on various 
age appropriate activities designed for the student’s speech, language, and overall 
development.  She described Ms. Hopp as being creative, thoughtful, and an educator who 
developed fun, age-appropriate and engaging activities.  Ms. Hopp incorporated positive 
behavior techniques into her lessons that were well received by students, parents, teachers, 
and administration.  Ms. Hopp maintained a positive and caring outlook that was evident in 
the way she approached any situation.  Ms. Hopp affected student development in a child 
friendly, caring and professional manner. 

78.  A district transition services facilitator at Shirley Avenue Elementary School 

interacted and observed Ms. Hopp.  She wrote that the progress children made in Ms. Hopp’s 
KIT program was very impressive.  Students went from lacking social and communication 
skills to being able to interact with peers, using interactive play, and demonstrating strong 
verbal skills.  She described Ms. Hopp as a very caring, creative, and hard-working teacher 
who continued to improve her knowledge about autism and classroom strategies.  Ms. Hopp 
remained enthusiastic; her love of teaching was always evident.  Ms. Hopp was willing to 
share her knowledge with parents and visitors to the classroom.  Ms. Hopp could always be 
counted on to make very anxious parents feel comfortable and excited about placing their 
child in the KIT program.  The facilitator believed Ms. Hopp would be an asset for any for 
any school.   

79.

A teacher from a district middle school wrote a letter praising Ms. Hopp’s 
support for their program and requested that the district facilitate Ms. Hopp being able to 
work at the middle school because of the positive experiences they had with her. 

80.  A speech language pathologist who worked with Ms. Hopp at the KIT 
program noted that Ms. Hopp easily built rapport with students and welcomed them into a 
caring, yet effective, classroom environment.  Ms. Hopp redirected behaviors with positive 
support and knew how to make children smile.  She brought out the best in all of her 
students.  She described Ms. Hopp as a dedicated and forward thinking teacher, one who 
positively interacted and taught both students and parents.  Ms. Hopp helped the parents 
learn, so they could reinforce the behavior at home, and kept parents updated as to what was 
taking place in the classroom; she made herself available on a daily basis to communicate 
with parents.  Ms. Hopp also sent home daily notes to keep parents informed, interacted with 

25

 

parents with ease, and always offered encouraging words to support the students and 
families.  Ms. Hopp easily worked with others in a professional and respectful manner, 
consistently demonstrating her knowledge of educating special-needs children and their 
families. 

81.  A special education teacher from Shirley Avenue Elementary School, who 

shared students with Ms. Hopp, including Student #1, noted that Ms. Hopp worked 
collaboratively towards the success of the students with autism.  She described Ms. Hopp as 
an enthusiastic teacher who really cared about her students and consistently worked towards 
helping her students progress both socially and academically.  The teacher observed Ms. 
Hopp being kind to her students and never observed any malicious or unprofessional 
behavior.  Ms. Hopp provided input on ways to promote Student #1 to do his work, which 
seemed to benefit him greatly.  Ms. Hopp was very kind to Student #1, and she never 
observed Ms. Hopp react negatively towards Student #1 or any other student.  She described 
Ms. Hopp as a good teacher and an asset to the KIT program and the district. 

82. 

There were numerous letters from parents.  The letters described the kind and 

gentle way Ms. Hopp spoke with their children and the positive, fun instruction she provided.  
Parents described how they used Ms. Hopp’s techniques at home with great success.  Parents 
described the strong bond that existed between their children and Ms. Hopp and how their 
children were negatively impacted when Ms. Hopp was removed from the classroom.  
Parents described the amazing progress children experienced with Ms. Hopp and how Ms. 
Hopp was always available at drop off or pick up to answer parents’ questions and provide 
support and advice regarding any challenges the children might be experiencing.  Parents 
described Ms. Hopp as always providing information regarding the children’s progress. 

83.  Ms. Hopp also introduced several thank you letters that parents had written 

over the years that attested to the positive influence she had on her students and commended 
her for her dedication, caring, and skills in the classroom.  The letters also referenced Ms. 
Hopp’s upbeat attitude and dedication to children with special needs. 

84.  A letter from Ms. Hopp’s friend for over 20 years mentioned that Ms. Hopp’s
work with special needs individuals began because of Ms. Hopp’s brother’s condition.  The
friend described Ms. Hopp as always being caring, kind, compassionate, and highly 
entertaining with children.  She described Ms. Hopp’s skill at using distraction and 
redirection as “awe-inspiring.”  She was highly complimentary of Ms. Hopp’s positive 
attitude and passion for helping children succeed.  She described Ms. Hopp as a gifted 
teacher, claiming the allegations against her were completely unfounded and out of character.  
She wrote about always observing Ms. Hopp in every situation being respectful, kind and 
thoroughly engaging with children in every situation.   

85. 

The UCLA Center for Autism Research and Treatment assessed the KIT 

program and observed Ms. Hopp, as well as other teachers at the other five KIT centers.  The 
UCLA team came to Ms. Hopp’s center on six different occasions and noted that the 
strategies Ms. Hopp used had a highly positive effect; that her students were incredibly 

26

 

Other Documents 

excited with lots of smiles and giggles; that it was a collaborative venture; and that students 
demonstrated a high rate and range of social communication, in part because of their 
interaction with Ms. Hopp. 

86.  Ms. Hopp sent the district a list of her personal belongings that she would like 

returned, noting that it had been 31 days and she still had not been given an explanation for 
her reassignment and removal from the KIT classroom.  The letter demonstrated that Ms. 
Hopp had spent much money and time providing supplies and tools for her KIT classroom, 
and it corroborated her responses given during the district’s investigation that she had no 
recollection of doing anything inappropriate.   

87. 

 Ms. Hopp introduced photographs and diagrams depicting the physical layout 

of her KIT center.  These showed that a lot of thought and care had gone into creating her 
KIT classroom environment.  The photos depicted a warm and engaging classroom with lots 
of visual stimulation and aides for autistic children.   

88. 

The list of students and the students’ schedule, as well as photographs of their 

cubbies and visual prompts, were introduced.  These documents further corroborated Ms. 
Hopp’s testimony about her dedication to her students.   

89.  Visual prompts that Ms. Hopp used to help children calm down and her 

strategies for intervening when a child threw himself or herself to the ground were 
introduced.  Ms. Hopp explained that these were documents she created to assist her, staff 
and parents in dealing with the child’s behaviors.  These documents also showed the care and 
detail Ms. Hopp had put into her classroom.   

90. 

The flashcards used to depict emotions were introduced.  These corroborated 

Ms. Hopp’s testimony about the visual prompts she used to assist her students and staff.   

91.

introduced. 

The district’s forms to be completed for first aid and head injuries were 

92.  Documents showing the client schedule for the Institute for Applied Behavior 

Analysis and a behavior intervention plan were introduced.    

93. 

The photograph of Ms. Engle using a hand over hand method to guide a 

student was provided by Ms. Hopp when she was interviewed by the district.  She testified 
that when explaining her techniques, one of the women interviewing her had no knowledge 
of dealing with children with autism and did not know what a hand over hand technique 
looked like.  Ms. Hopp testified that she pulled up this photograph from her cell phone to 
show the interviewer a hand over hand technique with exaggerated facial features.  Ms. Hopp 
testified that she never intended her statements to imply that she had concerns about how Ms. 
Engle treated children; this was the reason she never filed an abuse report against Ms. Engle.  

27

 

Ms. Hopp explained that Ms. Engle’s actions depicted in the photograph did not concern her 
and she never stated at her interview that they did.  Ms. Hopp denied the allegation that she 
should have reported the behavior and denied that she claimed the photograph showed 
frustration; Ms. Hopp testified that she used the terms “exaggerated facial features” when 
explaining the photograph.  Ms. Hopp also testified that the district’s documents 
misconstrued and took out of context the statements she made at that meeting.  Given the 
other inaccurate district documents, her explanation was plausible.  Further, the word 
“exaggerated” sounds like the word “exasperated” so it was easy to understand how the word 
could have been lost in translation and how Ms. Hopp’s statement was misunderstood or 
misconstrued over time.        

Witness Testimony 

Elizabeth Ramirez 

94. 

Elizabeth Ramirez, an employee of the Institute of Applied Behavioral 

 
analysis, an independent vendor that contracted with the district to provide behavioral and 
respite services for students.  Ms. Ramirez ran the behavior station in Ms. Hopp’s classroom, 
called the independent skills center, one of the four stations at the KIT Center.  Ms. Ramirez 
has no credentials, no license, and no graduate degrees.  She is a behaviorist, which is not a 
licensed position.  Ms. Ramirez took long pauses before answering questions, appearing 
unsure of her answers and her perceptions.    

Ms. Ramirez could not recall where on the spectrum Student #1 fell, and could not 

recall his accommodations.  She never read Ms. Hopp’s lesson plans or goals for Student #1 
and never talked to Student #1’s parents.  Ms. Ramirez did remember that noncompliance 
was a behavior they were trying to extinguish.  She recalled that Student #1 would tantrum, 
throw himself on the floor, stomp and kick his feet, and hit other students.  He initially had 
tantrums two to three times per week, but they diminished over time.  However, Student #1 
was very verbal, he could carry on conversations “very well,” and could follow verbal 
instructions.  Ms. Ramirez claimed that Ms. Hopp did not consistently implement Ms. 
Ramirez’s behavior plans.  She could not recall that Ms. Hopp disagreed with them, she 
would just not follow through on them, especially, the non-edible rewards part, such as 
candy, for behavior compliance.  There were no documents that supported this testimony, 
and the many letters of support contradicted it.   

Ms. Ramirez testified about an incident involving Student #1.  She could not recall 

the exact date, testifying that her best estimate was “maybe in January 2013.”  Ms. Ramirez 
identified the witness statement she was asked to write as part of the district’s investigation.  
Ms. Ramirez testified that Ms. Hopp was in the play skills area with Student #1 when he 
began protesting and physically throwing things at the other students.  Ms. Ramirez observed 
Student #1 behave this way before.  Ms. Ramirez could not recall Student #1’s mood before 
the incident, but recalled he was having a particularly difficult time, was being very physical 
with the other students, and was throwing objects at them.  Ms. Ramirez acknowledged that 
she had an obstructed view of Ms. Hopp and Student #1 because there were cubbies and a 

28

 

filing cabinet in her line of sight.  Due to her obstructed view, Ms. Ramirez did not see if 
Student #1 struck Ms. Hopp.  Ms. Ramirez heard Student #1 protesting, at one point he was 
crying.  She heard Ms. Hopp trying to get him to calm down.  Ms. Hopp wanted Student #1 
to move to a bench in the library.  Ms. Ramirez did not recall whether Student #1 stood up or 
whether Ms. Hopp helped him up before guiding him to the library.  Ms. Ramirez saw them 
moving together.  Ms. Hopp had her hands on Student #1 and he was resisting going to the 
library.  Ms. Ramirez saw Ms. Hopp physically guiding Student #1; no one else intervened.    

Ms. Ramirez then heard a “thump,” the sound of something hitting the floor, but did 

not hear either Ms. Hopp or Student #1 say anything after the thump.  Because of the 
bookcase, Ms. Ramirez could not see the floor, but could see that Ms. Hopp had her arms 
behind Student #1 and was guiding him; she could see Ms. Hopp let go of Student #1.  Ms. 
Ramirez testified that “you could tell” that he had not dropped to the ground; Ms. Hopp had 
let go of him.  Ms. Ramirez heard Student #1 crying.  She testified that he was crying 
throughout the whole situation, and the thump only made his crying louder.  Ms. Ramirez 
heard Ms. Hopp say something to the effect of “that’s what he gets” or “that’s God smiting 
him.”  Ms. Ramirez could not recall Ms. Hopp’s exact words, but she did recall her using the 
word “God.”  Ms. Hopp was looking at Ms. Ramirez when she made that comment.  After 
the thump, Ms. Ramirez “glanced over to see if he was okay” and offered to help, but she did 
not go over to check on Student #1.  Ms. Ramirez claimed that she offered to help when 
Student #1 was having bad behaviors, but Ms. Hopp never accepted Ms. Ramirez’s offers.
Ms. Hernandez provided medical aid to Student #1, giving him an ice pack that he put on the 
back of his head.  Ms. Hernandez did not ask if Student #1 wanted ice, she just grabbed it 
and brought it to him.  Ms. Hopp was asking Student #1 if he wanted ice, but he was crying 
and did not respond.   

Ms. Ramirez did not know what happened after Student #1 calmed down because she 
was involved in an activity at her own station, but she was “glancing over periodically.”  Ms. 
Ramirez admitted that she did not ask whether Student #1 needed to see the nurse and did not 
recall anyone asking about the nurse.  Student #1 did not say that Ms. Hopp had hurt him.  
Ms. Ramirez had never heard of the district bulletin regarding reporting incidents, had never 
been trained about such a requirement, and did not recall anyone filling out a form after this 
incident.  It was difficult to fathom that Ms. Ramirez was unaware of her obligations to 
report this incident, if it did occur.   

When asked why she waited until March 2013 to report the alleged January 2013 

 
incident, Ms. Ramirez testified, “I don't recall.”  She also could not recall whether or not she 
ever made reference to Ms. Hopp using the words “God was smiting” before making that 
claim in her June 2013 handwritten note.  Ms. Ramirez admitted that she never referenced 
those words in her other reports or during her two interviews with the district.   

Ms. Ramirez testified that approximately five to ten times, she could not be specific, 

she heard Ms. Hopp tell Student #1, “Don’t be a baby,” or “You are being a baby.”  Ms. 
Ramirez testified that Ms. Hopp used those words “all the time” with Student #1 and that her 
tone of voice was “not nice.”  Ms. Ramirez did not have a “particular, specific recollection” 

29

 

of Ms. Hopp using the word “baby.”  She admitted that she did not mention that issue in her 
report because, “I guess at that time I did not think it was important.”  She acknowledged she 
did not raise that allegation until much later in the investigation.   

Ms. Ramirez testified that parents provided snacks; they were not meals, and not all 
the students had snacks every day.  Student #1 rarely had a snack, but other children did not 
have snacks either.  She estimated that 90 percent of the time Student #1 did not have a snack 
and would ask teachers for a snack.  There were times Ms. Hopp provided snacks and times 
that she did not.  Ms. Ramirez did not recall anything Ms. Hopp said to Student #1, but she 
did not give him snacks more than 70 percent of the time.  Student #1 would cry when he did 
not have a snack.  Ms. Ramirez observed that when he was having a more difficult day or 
was being noncompliant, it was more likely that he would not receive a snack.  Ms. Ramirez 
recalled “a specific incident” when snack was not given to Student #1, but could not recall 
what happened before or after that incident.   

Ms. Ramirez assumed that Ms. Hopp spoke with Student #1’s parents about the snack 

issue, although Ms. Hopp never mentioned such a discussion.  When asked whether she 
knew about Student #1’s parents not wanting him to have snack, Ms. Ramirez replied that 
she did not understand why they would send a large box of goldfish if they did not want him 
to have snack, but admitted she knew nothing about any discussions between Ms. Hopp and 
the parents regarding snacks.  Ms. Ramirez was aware that Ms. Hopp was in regular contact 
with Student #1’s parents.  Ms. Ramirez agreed that Student #1 was being taught to follow 
rules and protocols and she agreed that the purpose of snack was to train the children to 
know when to eat.  She admitted that there was nothing inappropriate about teaching Student 
#1 that if he wanted to eat snack with the rest of the students, he had to wait until snack time.  
She also admitted that Student #1 received breakfast and lunch at school.      

When asked why she did not talk to Student #1’s parents about her snack concerns, 
 
Ms. Ramirez responded, “It is not my position to speak to parents, only the teacher could,” 
and that she was “not supposed to do that.”  When asked whether she ever called Student 
#1’s parents about her concerns or about having witnessed the “thump” incident, Ms. 
Ramirez testified that this “was not my position.”  

 
Ms. Ramirez testified that Ms. Hopp was more easily frustrated with Student #1.  She 
was short with him and her tone of voice sounded like she was fed up or tired of dealing with 
Student #1.  Her words were more curt and she was quicker to say that something was 
Student #1’s fault if he was misbehaving or crying.  Ms. Ramirez testified that Ms. Hopp 
would say that that was just how he was; rather than trying to find ways to help him. 

 

Leticia Hernandez 

95. 

Leticia Hernandez, a speech language pathology assistant in the KIT 

 
classroom, testified about her work in the classroom and with Ms. Hopp.  She does not hold a 
speech pathology license or credential.  Ms. Hernandez used to be a behavioral therapist, the 
type of position Ms. Ramirez held.  Ms. Hernandez did not read Student #1’s IEP and did not 

30

 

know his disabilities.  She recalled that he had “a lot of behaviors” but she could not recall 
whether he was louder than other students.  Student #1 had a hard time transitioning when it 
was not a preferred activity.  Student #1 cried a lot, typically because he did not want to 
follow through with requests made to him, and he had difficulty following direction.  Ms. 
Hernandez did not recall that Student #1 would tantrum, but recalled “we had a hard time 
with him.”  

Ms. Hernandez had a clear, unobstructed view of the incident when Ms. Hopp tried to 

 
move Student #1 across the room, but admitted that there were cubbies between her station 
and Ms. Hopp’s station.  Ms. Hernandez did not recall the date the incident occurred and did 
not see what happened in the play area beforehand.  She first saw Ms. Hopp walking out of 
the play area.  Student #1 was sitting; Ms. Hopp was standing, she was angry, and Ms. 
Hernandez heard Ms. Hopp say, “He bit me.”  After that, Ms. Hopp tried to move Student #1 
from one station to the bench in the library.  Ms. Hopp was holding Student #1 by the wrists, 
dragging him across the room.  His feet were on the ground and Student #1 was walking 
backwards.  Ms. Hernandez could not recall whether his buttocks were off the ground but his 
hands were “up above his head,” as Ms. Hopp was walking backwards and dragging him.8
Ms. Hernandez testified that Ms. Hopp was between Ms. Hernandez and Student #1.  Ms. 
Hernandez was not sure whether Student #1 slipped out of Ms. Hopp’s hands, but she saw 
him hit his head on the floor and cry in pain.  Ms. Hernandez described his head hitting the 
ground as a “thud.”  After that, Student #1’s crying became louder.

Ms. Hernandez did not go to Student #1’s aid during the incident because Ms. 
 
Hernandez was working at her own station.  Ms. Hernandez heard Ms. Hopp using the “big 
baby” statements as she tried to remove Student #1 and, when he was crying.  Ms. 
Hernandez asked Ms. Hopp if he needed an icepack for his head.  Ms. Hopp said that Student 
#1 said he did not want it.  Student #1 was holding the back of his head and looked to be in 
pain.  After a few minutes Ms. Hernandez got Student #1 an icepack that he did not hold on 
his head for very long.  She did not check to see if he needed the nurse or check to see 
whether he had a bump.  No one else left their stations.  When Ms. Hopp returned to her 
station to be with her other children, Student #1 remained sitting on the bench crying.  
Student #1 cried long enough for the team to do another rotation (15 to 20 minutes) and after 
approximately 20 minutes, he calmed down and “we all walked over to the door” to go 
outside.  Ms. Hernandez spoke with Ms. Engle and Ms. Ramirez because she felt 
uncomfortable and wanted to know whether they felt the same way.  Ms. Engle told her that 
she did not see anything.  However, Ms. Engle never stated in any of her district interviews 
that she spoke with Ms. Hernandez about this alleged incident.   

Ms. Hernandez admitted that she did not fill out an incident report and did not refer 

 
Student #1 to the nurse because “typically it is the teacher’s job to do that, not the 
assistant’s.”  Ms. Hernandez did not report the incident to Student #1’s parents.  Ms. 
                                                           

8 This description of how Ms. Hopp transitioned Student #1 differed from what Ms. 

Ramirez claimed she saw.  Moreover, it was hard to understand how Ms. Hopp could “drag” 
Student #1 if she was walking behind him.    

31

 

Hernandez spoke to the “overseer of the KIT Center” after Student #1 fell and hit his head, 
telling the overseer about her concerns.  Ms. Hernandez testified that she spoke to the KIT 
Center manager a few days later and reported the incident to CPS and the police, but could 
not recall the officer’s name and when pressed during questioning, could not recall whether 
she contacted CPS or the police department.  Ms. Hernandez claimed that she told her 
supervisor that she “had to do something that I never thought I would have to do and I would 
not wish it on anyone.”  Ms. Hernandez testified that “my supervisor is very ‘by the book’” 
and that she did not know whether she “had to tell her supervisor or not, but I did.”  She 
identified her supervisor and testified that she e-mailed her about the incident “probably the 
same day.”  Her supervisor e-mailed back thanking her for letting her know about the 
incident, but she did not say whether she was going to meet with Ms. Hopp.  This alleged e-
mail was never produced at this hearing and no witnesses or documents corroborated Ms. 
Hernandez’s testimony that she made any reports before writing her March 2013 note.  It was 
hard to imagine that she reported this incident to her “by the book supervisor” but the district 
did nothing for two months.  Moreover, in her statement to the district, Ms. Hernandez used 
the word “hands” but testified she meant “wrists.”  She testified that the school years that 
were referenced in the statement she provided to the district are also incorrect.  Thus, her 
testimony was at odds with her notes and the district’s summary of her interviews, further 
calling her testimony and her claims into question.   

Ms. Hernandez testified that she heard Ms. Hopp use the words “baby” or “big baby” 

 
when Student #1 was crying.  Ms. Hopp would tell him, “Don’t be a baby,” or “Don’t be a 
big baby,” when he was crying.  She heard Ms. Hopp say this “maybe two times.”  She 
described Ms. Hopp’s tone of voice as harsh, the statement was not made in a playful way; it 
was not said matter-of-factly.  However, when shown her written reports and her interview 
answers, Ms. Hernandez acknowledged that there was nothing in them about Ms. Hopp using 
that phrase.  Upon further questioning, Ms. Hernandez recanted her testimony and claimed 
that Ms. Hopp said, “You are a big boy, you do not need to act like a baby,” and she admitted 
she did not know whether Ms. Hopp used the words “big baby.”  

  
When asked whether she had other concerns regarding Ms. Hopp and Student #1, Ms. 
Hernandez testified that there was a time when Student #1 was in a chair at the art station and 
Ms. Hopp told him he was “not in the right area” and tried to move him to his correct station 
by pulling him out of the chair.  Student #1 was wearing long sleeves and Ms. Hopp was 
holding onto his arms.  As Ms. Hopp held Student #1 by one arm, he fell over the chair; she 
told him he was “out of the right area” and “did not have a happy tone.”  Student #1 “sort of 
fell out of the chair” with Ms. Hopp still holding on to him, “so his clothing was partially 
above his head and partially still on him.”  When he dropped to the ground, Ms. Hopp was 
holding his clothing and it came up over his head.  Student #1 was crying during the incident.  
Ms. Hernandez recalled that there was an aide present who did not know what to do.  Ms. 
Hernandez did not file a report.  No evidence of any other witness observing this incident 
was introduced, raising doubts about Ms. Hernandez’s claim.  Further, it was difficult to 
understand how Ms. Hopp could hold onto Student #1’s wrists and yank him up, yet 
somehow his shirt came up over his head, casting more doubt on Ms. Hernandez’s testimony 
about this incident.   

32

 

Ms. Hernandez also claimed that Ms. Hopp told the staff that Student #1’s parents did 

 
not want him to have a snack, “so we followed her ‘orders.’”  However, Ms. Ramirez “was 
sure” that Student #1 got food after he left the KIT Center so it was “not like he was 
starving.” Ms. Ramirez did not refute Ms. Hopp’s testimony about her discussions with 
Student #1’s parents about the snack issue.  

 
Ms. Hernandez never reported these incidents until March 2013, when she spoke to 
the KIT administrator.  Ms. Hernandez testified that “it was something that sort of bothered 
me.  [The administrator] said it was up to me to do what I need to do, but if I felt 
uncomfortable I should say something.”  After that, Ms. Hernandez reported the incidents.  
She called child protective services and told them what happened.  They told her that they 
did not deal with such incidents and directed her to call the police.  Ms. Hernandez testified 
that “as a mandated reporter” she was taught to give the facts and law enforcement would 
decide how to proceed.  She contacted police, testifying that she did so because “as a mom, 
who has a son, I feel if that were to happen to my son, I’d want someone to report it.”  She 
claimed, “As a mom it hurt me to see that, the child could not protect himself and someone in 
the class needed to say something.”  Ms. Hernandez was tearful while giving this testimony, 
but her tears seemed disingenuous.  Moreover, given her admission that she was a “mandated 
reporter” it was difficult to accept that she waited several months to report these alleged 
incidents to the district and that she did so only after Ms. Hopp complained about Ms. 
Hernandez’s and Ms. Ramirez’s tardiness and absenteeism.    

Ms. Hernandez testified about the liquor bottle that was found in the classroom and 
the staff meeting regarding it.  She made a self-deprecating joke that, “Of course everyone 
will think the Mexican did it.”  She admitted that Ms. Hopp never accused her of bringing 
the alcohol to the classroom and no one was disciplined because of it.  Although this 
testimony was offered to demonstrate that Ms. Hernandez thought nothing of the liquor 
bottle incident and was not fabricating her testimony as retribution against Ms. Hopp, it was 
unpersuasive because the Commission determined that the impetus behind Ms. Hernandez’s 
allegations was Ms. Hopp’s complaint to her employer.    

Carolyn Gelfand 

96. 

 
Carolyn (Cara) Gelfand, the KIT Center Program Administrator, was the lead 
investigator in this matter, but because she was transitioning to a different program, the new 
administrator, Amy Alina-Chambers, jointly investigated the matter.  Ms. Gelfand testified 
about her investigation, the KIT center philosophy, the training provided employees, and 
district policies and procedures.  She explained that all district employees were mandated 
reporters and were required to report a “reasonable suspicion of child abuse.”  Ms. Gelfand 
testified about the appropriate ways to treat children and the issues that can occur if they are 
grabbed or improperly held.  Ms. Gelfand testified about the aides who worked in Ms. 
Hopp’s KIT classroom and the additional supports she provided during the 2012-13 school 
year, which included adding a behavior specialist, Tina Valdez, to assist in the classroom one 
or two days per week.  Ms. Gelfand admitted that she often discussed with Ms. Hopp 
behavioral supports for children in the KIT center.   

33

 

Ms. Gelfand knows Ms. Hopp well.  She met her professionally in 2010, and 
recommended her for the KIT program.  Ms. Gelfand evaluated Ms. Hopp in 2011, giving 
her “outstanding” and “strong” ratings.  Ms. Gelfand testified that the 2012 allegations 
against Ms. Hopp were “unfounded.”  The Spring 2012 parent concern happened during a 
transition between classes.  Ms. Hopp was holding a student’s hand and when the child saw 
his mother, he became excited and wanted to run across the school yard, but Ms. Hopp held 
onto his hand so he would not stumble and fall.  Ms. Gelfand talked to Ms. Hopp about the 
transition process.  Another parent complained in 2012 that his child claimed that Ms. Hopp 
hit him.  That complaint was determined to be “unsubstantiated” because the child was 
actually hitting himself with Play-Doh.  Ms. Gelfand testified that although the complaints 
were determined to be unfounded, and even though they did not result in any discipline, she 
“still had concerns.”  Because of those allegations, Ms. Gelfand discussed with Ms. Hopp 
appropriate behavior with children, ways to redirect them, and the language that staff should 
use with children.  There were no complaints of Ms. Hopp using physical prompting to move 
students before Ms. Hernandez’s March 2013 complaint.  

 
Ms. Gelfand testified that the first person to report any concerns regarding Student #1 
was Ms. Hernandez in early March of 2013.  Ms. Hernandez reported three incidents that had 
occurred in January and February with Student #1.  The first incident happened when 
Student #1 was upset and Ms. Hopp held both of his hands to move him from one area to 
another.  He was crying and she maneuvered him by his hands to calm him down.  He fell 
and hit his head, there was a thump on the ground and it made him cry more.  He asked for 
ice but Ms. Hopp did not respond, so Ms. Hernandez got him ice.  The second incident 
occurred in February 2013 when Student #1 was in an area he was not supposed to be.  He 
protested leaving and Ms. Hopp took him by the arm to physically move him.  He slipped out 
of his shirt, fell to the ground, and he cried for a period of time.  The third incident occurred 
when Ms. Hopp used disparaging comments, telling Student #1 that he was “being a baby,”
“to stop crying like a baby,” “to stop being a baby.”  Ms. Hernandez felt Student #1 was 
being picked on or targeted by Ms. Hopp.  Ms. Gelfand admitted that any staff member can 
file a suspected child abuse report and that Ms. Hernandez could have reported each of these 
alleged incidents.  Ms. Gelfand offered no explanation for Ms. Hernandez’s failure to file a
report, especially since she was a “mandated reporter.”  

 
During the investigation, Ms. Hopp was assigned to an alternate location.  Ms. 
Gelfand interviewed individuals working in the KIT center, at first asking general questions, 
then conducting follow-up interviews with specific questions.  After the oral interviews, she 
obtained written statements.  When they interviewed Ms. Hopp for the first time, they asked 
her questions that were “more generic in nature,” they did not ask her questions regarding the 
specific charges.  At the second interview in April 2013, they asked her specific questions 
regarding Student #1.  Ms. Hopp had no recollection of the incidents.  However, Ms. Hopp 
said that if a child was injured, she would have provided first aid, completed a report, and 
notified the child’s parents.  Also, since the team worked collaboratively, it would not be 
unusual for assistants to get ice if a child was injured.  When asked about the use of the word 
“baby,” Ms. Hopp explained that she did not use it in the context they were claiming; she 

34

 

was trying to label feelings or emotions in a factual way and would point out to Student #1 
during an emotional state that he was “a big boy” to get him to use his words. 

 
Ms. Hopp told the district officials that she hoped they were interviewing others about 
what happened because she had concerns regarding Student #1’s life outside of school.  Ms. 
Hopp purportedly stated that she was worried about what was going on at home because he 
was spanking other children, came to school disheveled, claimed he was locked in a closet, 
and said his family was not providing him food.  Ms. Gelfand testified that she was “taken 
aback and a bit shocked” by those statements and asked Ms. Hopp if she had filed a report 
but Ms. Hopp said she had not done so because she was sharing the information to “speak to 
Student #1’s profile and person,” and was “not as concerned about whether or not the 
instances were occurring.”  After this meeting, Ms. Gelfand filed a suspected child abuse 
report because Student #1’s statements provided a “reasonable suspicion of suspected child 
abuse.”  Ms. Gelfand admitted that she never spoke with Student #1’s parents and they never 
complained that Ms. Hopp hurt their son or failed to communicate with them.  Ms. Gelfand 
acknowledged that Ms. Hopp had regular contact with Student #1’s parents.   

After the second interview, there was a conference with Ms. Hopp in which she was 
 
notified of the charges.  Ms. Hopp could not recall the incidents and said that Student #1’s 
parents told her not to give him any more snacks.  Ms. Gelfand testified that during this 
meeting, Ms. Hopp produced a photograph of the alcohol bottle allegedly to question the 
credibility of the reporting witnesses.  Ms. Gelfand was “perplexed” as to why Ms. Hopp 
produced the photograph because previously when it was discovered in the KIT Center, Ms. 
Gelfand met with staff and Ms. Hopp did not think it came from any of her staff.  Ms. Hopp 
also produced a photo of Ms. Engle that she said demonstrated another assistant exhibiting 
frustration and using typical classroom behavior to deal with students.  Ms. Hopp admitted 
that she had not reported Ms. Engle.  Ms. Gelfand was also perplexed about the photograph 
of Ms. Engle and was not certain why it was being offered other than to question Ms. Engle’s 
credibility. 

Ms. Gelfand testified that Ms. Hopp’s actions violated several district policies.  Ms.

Gelfand lost confidence in Ms. Hopp as a teacher and role model.  According to Ms. 
Gelfand, retaining Ms. Hopp would have an adverse impact on employees and would 
adversely affect students and parents.  Ms. Gelfand testified about the likelihood that the 
behavior would reoccur because even though the district provided Ms. Hopp with additional 
classroom support, there were still issues with how Ms. Hopp treated Student #1.  Ms. 
Gelfand had serious reservations about Ms. Hopp remaining in the classroom, and she would 
give Ms. Hopp an overall rating of “below standard.”  

Ms. Gelfand observed Ms. Hopp three times for the 2013 evaluation, but admitted she 

had no documentation of scheduling those observations or discussing her findings with Ms. 
Hopp.  There was no initial planning sheet and Ms. Hopp did not fill one out even though 
one must be completed by the teacher before an evaluation is conducted.  Ms. Gelfand was 
“not certain” and “not sure” whether there was any correspondence with Ms. Hopp regarding 
the 2013 evaluation.  There was no conference memo and no documentation that comports 

35

 

with Education Code requirements for evaluations.  In fact, Ms. Gelfand had absolutely 
nothing in writing regarding the 2013 evaluation process.  She was not aware that Ms. Hopp 
had filed a grievance.   

Ms. Gelfand was asked about the inconsistencies in her 2013 evaluation.  She 
explained that she gave Ms. Hopp good reviews because of her ability to engage students in a 
way that positively affected the classroom.  Ms. Gelfand testified that the commendations 
related to the physical environment, whereas she gave Ms. Hopp deficiencies in instructional 
areas as there continued to be struggles between Ms. Hopp and Student #1 regarding his 
behavioral challenges.  Ms. Gelfand’s explanations were not persuasive and appeared 
contrived.  When asked about the inconsistencies between the witnesses to the three incidents 
involving Student #1, Ms. Gelfand testified that there was “enough consistency” to raise 
concerns. Ms. Gelfand explained that “a number of people were aware of the incident, that 
something happened, and for Ms. Hopp to say nothing happened and she did not remember, 
seemed inappropriate.”  

Ms. Gelfand admitted that Mr. Rodezno stated that nothing happened, even though in 

her letter to Ms. Hopp she had claimed he observed the incidents.  Ms. Gelfand’s incorrect 
assertion that Mr. Rodezno had witnessed the incidents raised concerns about her impartiality 
and fairness when investigating this matter.  Moreover, Ms. Gelfand admitted that she did 
not rely on Mr. Rodezno’s statement; she relied on Ms. Hernandez’s and Ms. Ramirez’s, 
which was troubling because, unlike those two women, Mr. Rodezno had no reason to be 
biased against Ms. Hopp.  Additionally, Mr. Rodezno only mentioned Ms. Ramirez 
physically moving Student #1; he had no criticisms of Ms. Hopp.  The omission of this vital 
evidence raised further concerns about the fairness and impartiality of the district’s 
investigation.     

Ms. Gelfand acknowledged that the district reports containing what Ms. Hernandez 

and Ms. Ramirez allegedly claimed had occurred were inconsistent with their sworn 
testimony; agreeing that contrary to the reports, Ms. Hernandez did not leave her station to 
assist, she only gave ice, and that Ms. Engle only heard, but did not see, the incident.  Neither 
witness gave any dates or times and the reports were filed after the alcohol and tardy 
incidents was reported.  Ms. Gelfand acknowledged that she and Ms. Hopp discussed Ms. 
Hopp’s concerns regarding Ms. Hernandez’s tardiness, stating that they had discussions 
regarding multiple staff members not being on time.     

Ms. Hopp told Ms. Gelfand that she discussed the snack issue with Student #1’s 

parents, asking them how to handle the issue.  Ms. Hopp told her Student #1 ate breakfast 
and lunch at school, full meals; he was excessively eating; and there were concerns regarding 
his weight gain.  Ms. Gelfand did not know what snacks Student #1 ate.  Ms. Hopp and 
Student #1’s parents had agreed on a plan.  That plan required Student #1 to sit at a preferred 
activity during snack time if he had eaten his snack already.  Ms. Gelfand testified that the 
snack issue “emotionally caused difficulty.”  She said if it were up to her, she would have 
figured out the best way for the child to eat snack at snack time.  She testified that she would 
have talked with the parents about the best way to handle it.  Ms. Gelfand was aware that Ms. 

36

 

Hopp had been in contact with Student #1’s parents, but she did not know there were e-mails 
between Ms. Hopp and Student #1’s parents about snacks and she admitted that Student #1’s 
parents never complained that Ms. Hopp was depriving their child of a snack.   

Ms. Gelfand claimed that what Ms. Hopp wrote in her May 7, 2013, statement was 
different and contained more information than what she said when they met.  Ms. Gelfand 
said that Ms. Hopp said Student #1 was modeling spanking on students, which made Ms. 
Hopp believe he was being spanked at home.  She also told them that Student #1 was locked 
in a closet and was having food withheld.  Ms. Gelfand stated that this was enough of a 
“reasonable suspicion” to file a report.  Ms. Gelfand testified that Ms. Hopp did not say she 
was giving a lesson on emotions when Student #1 made his comments about the attic, 
although she admitted that Ms. Hopp said she was “going through the emotions of the 
children” when that discussion took place.  Ms. Gelfand testified that Ms. Hopp stated that 
the photograph of Ms. Engle showed Ms. Engle with a look of frustration, grabbing the 
child’s arm, “words to that effect.”  Ms. Gelfand testified that what Ms. Hopp later wrote 
about the photograph was not what she stated at the April 25, 2013, conference.  Ms. Gelfand 
filed a report about Ms. Engle because of the photograph.   

Ms. Gelfand testified that the letters of support did not change her opinion and that 
she did not receive any positive feedback or e-mails from parents.  Given the voluminous 
letters written, Ms. Gelfand’s testimony was difficult to believe.  More importantly, the fact 
that these letters of support, written by so many education specialists and parents, attesting to 
Ms. Hopp’s excellent teaching skills, did not sway Ms. Gelfand’s opinions called her 
objectivity into question.   

Teresa Martin 

97.

Teresa Martin, the district’s Director of Early Childhood Special Education, 
testified that her understanding of the allegations was that Ms. Hopp pulled a child by the 
arms from a sitting position and he hit his head; the child was pulled by the arms and his 
clothes were lifted over his head and that Ms. Hopp made disparaging remarks to students.  
There were two interviews of Ms. Hopp, and Ms. Martin was the note-taker.  At the first 
interview, no specific incidents were discussed; at the second interview the interviewers 
asked Ms. Hopp specific questions.  Ms. Hopp said nothing about the incidents charged in 
the accusation at the first interview; at the second interview, she had no recollection of such 
incidents and answered “no” when asked if they occurred.  Ms. Hopp explained that she used 
the word “baby” in a factual context, telling the students, “Don’t be a baby, you are five, 
don’t be a baby.”  

At the end of the second interview the district representatives asked Ms. Hopp 

whether there was anything else she wished to add and she said that she hoped they were 
interviewing others, as she was concerned that Student #1 was locked in a closet, spanked, 
and had food withheld.  Ms. Hopp had not reported the incidents; however, Ms. Martin did 
so after the interview.  Ms. Martin testified that Ms. Hopp did not state that she was having a 
discussion with students about emotions when Student #1 shared his story of being locked in 

37

 

a closet, and Ms. Hopp told them the picture of Ms. Engle showed that “the assistant was 
angry.”  Ms. Martin filed a suspected child abuse report after the picture of Ms. Engle was 
produced.  Ms. Martin testified that what Ms. Hopp wrote in her written response was not 
what she said during her interview.   

After reviewing all the documents obtained as part of the investigation, Ms. Martin 
recommended that Ms. Hopp be dismissed.  Ms. Martin testified that Ms. Hopp was a role 
model for staff and students who observe her behaviors.  Ms. Martin was concerned that 
there would be a risk of recurrence because Ms. Hopp was given assistance and guidance 
before the incidents occurred.  No testimony about what the “assistance and guidance” 
entailed was offered by Ms. Martin.     

On cross examination, Ms. Martin admitted that no dates or times for the incidents 
were provided and the incidents were reported two months after they allegedly occurred.  
Ms. Martin did not know any of the antecedent events.  She could not recall who witnessed 
what “specifically,” but “could identify the witnesses globally.”  Ms. Martin was not aware 
that Ms. Hopp had reported Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez as being tardy before those two 
women reported the alleged incidents, but she testified that would not have made a difference 
to her. This testimony raised concerns regarding Ms. Martin’s impartiality.  Ms. Martin 
admitted that the assistants could have written an incident report about either event.  Ms. 
Martin testified that Ms. Hopp should meet with Student #1’s parents to create a plan if there 
were snack issues taking place and she “presumed” no such discussion with Student #1’s 
parents took place.  Ms. Martin testified that she never contacted Student #1’s parents and 
never interviewed them as part of her investigation.  Ms. Martin was unaware that Ms. Hopp 
filed a grievance and did not know whether proper Education Code provisions had been 
followed.   

Sharyn Howell 

98. 

Sharyn Howell, the district’s Executive Director of Special Education, 

conducted the Skelly meeting.  A document was prepared following the Skelly meeting, but 
as Ms. Hopp’s attorney made most of the statements at the meeting, the district’s attempts to 
impeach Ms. Hopp’s testimony with that document were unsuccessful.  Moreover, a review 
of that document indicated that the statements allegedly made were incorrectly attributed to 
different speakers and were incomplete.  The reliability of that document was questionable.  
Moreover, the document did not contain statements that Ms. Howell claimed Ms. Hopp made 
during the Skelly meeting, further raising doubt as to its accuracy.     

Ms. Howell relied entirely on the documents she reviewed; she did not independently 
talk to any witnesses.  She never saw Mr. Rodezno’s e-mail, even though it was dated before 
the Skelly hearing, but it would not have changed her mind.  This testimony raised concerns 
regarding her impartiality.  Ms. Howell admitted that the district never received any 
complaints from Student #1’s parents and that all the other letters she received from parents 
praised Ms. Hopp.  Ms. Howell did not interview any of the students’ parents because she 
did not think it was significant to do so.  She did not know whether Ms. Gelfand spoke with 

38

 

any parents.  If parents had given positive feedback, it would not have changed her opinion 
because the parents would have needed to be present in the classroom on a consistent basis to 
provide an informed opinion.  Given that the parents who testified and who wrote letters 
were present on a consistent basis, this testimony cast doubt on Ms. Howell’s objectivity.  
Ms. Howell testified that Ms. Hopp’s failure to file reports “weighed heavily” in her 
decision.  Ms. Howell testified about how Ms. Hopp’s actions violated district policies.  
Further, Ms. Howell did not observe anything in the documentation that indicated Ms. Hopp 
was remorseful or would do anything differently.  This testimony was only persuasive if one 
believed the alleged incidents occurred, and, as noted, the Commission did not believe these 
incidents took place.    

Ms. Howell was shown many of the letters of recommendation produced in this 

hearing but she could not recall reviewing any of them.  She testified that if she did review 
any letters, she did not rely upon them.  Ms. Howell admitted that “it is extraordinary when 
parents write recommendations for teachers,” but her initial reaction to the letters was to 
wonder who was soliciting them, which was the reason she did not consider them when 
making her determination.  However, she admitted that she asked Ms. Hopp to submit any 
documentation to support her position during the investigation.  It was disconcerting that Ms. 
Howell would ask Ms. Hopp to submit documents and then not review or consider them.   

When interviewed, Ms. Hopp could not recall an incident where Student #1 fell and 

hit his head.  Ms. Hopp said that she did nothing wrong and that, if she had engaged in 
wrongdoing, there were so many people in the classroom that someone would have 
intervened and/or reported the incident in a timely manner.  Ms. Howell admitted that she did 
not know the date when the first incident occurred and does not know when it was first 
reported.  However, it would not make a difference to her if it was reported two and one half 
months later.  No one provided a date when the second incident occurred and only one 
witness observed that alleged incident.  Ms. Howell believed that using the word “baby” is 
demeaning.  She was not sure who alleged that incident, but it was not one of the charges she 
“used the most” in recommending Ms. Hopp’s dismissal.  Ms. Howell testified about 
appropriate ways to handle the snack issue, including discussions with the parents about it.  
Her testimony was not contrary to the steps Ms. Hopp took regarding Student #1’s snack 
issue.     

Ms. Hopp stated she was “role playing” with the children when Student #1 made his 
comments about the closet.  Ms. Hopp admitted she did not report the incident, telling Ms. 
Howell that she knew his family, that they were a very nice family, and that there were no 
problems.  Ms. Howell testified that that explanation that Ms. Hopp provided was 
insufficient, as it has nothing to do with the family or one’s perception of the family; if there 
is reasonable suspicion, child abuse must be reported.  Ms. Howell claimed that Ms. Hopp 
provided three different responses related to Student #1’s comments about the closet.  In one 
version Ms. Hopp said the family was nice, she knew them, and Student #1 did not always 
have a truthful story; in another version Ms. Hopp said the comments were made during a 
social story discussing “fears” and that Student #1’s statements may have been taken out of 
context; and in the third version Ms. Hopp said the statement was a childish protest.  

39

 

However, in one of the district’s documents that Ms. Howell reviewed, Ms. Hopp said she 
and the staff were concerned about Student #1 being spanked, locked in a closet and deprived 
food, so that would have led to a reasonable suspicion requiring a report to be filed.  Ms. 
Howell accepted these documents as being accurate and, as noted, the Commission had grave 
concerns regarding the accuracy of these documents.  Moreover, Ms. Howell admitted that 
the context in which statements are made goes into the determination as to whether there is a 
reasonable suspicion that supports the filing of a child abuse report.  Further, Ms. Howell 
agreed that Ms. Hopp said she was using cards with children to discuss their emotions when 
Student #1 made his comments.   

Another time that Ms. Hopp should have filed a report was regarding the photograph 
of Ms. Engle.  Ms. Hopp showed a picture of Ms. Engle grabbing a child and making a mean 
face as an example of how the staff handled the students and said it was not unusual to place 
hands on children.  Ms. Hopp stated it showed Ms. Engle making an angry face.  However, 
Ms. Howell admitted that someone said Ms. Hopp had shown the photograph to demonstrate 
the use of exaggerated facial features used with students.  After Ms. Hopp provided that 
photograph, the district filed a suspected child abuse report. 

Amy Alina-Chambers 

99.  Amy Alina-Chambers, a board certified behavior analyst, worked as a 
preschool autism support teacher for the district from September 2008 to October 2012.  She 
was the district’s behavior specialist for charter schools beginning in October 2012, and the 
district’s specialist for early childhood special education beginning in March 2013.  She 
previously taught in the Glendale Unified School District.  She has a Bachelor of Arts degree 
from the University of California, Davis.  She holds a clear credential in early childhood 
special education; a Master’s degree in early childhood special education; a certificate in 
autism from California State University, Los Angeles; and she completed the Behavioral 
Analyst Certification Board program at California State University, Northridge.   

Ms. Alina-Chambers testified about the escalation cycle of behavior and appropriate 

interventions.  Teachers are required to use the least restrictive interventions to address 
behaviors.  The wrist is one of the most fragile parts of the body, so grabbing a child by the 
wrists would be improper.  She testified about approved and non-approved district behavior 
interventions and the paperwork that must be completed if a student is injured or injures a 
teacher.  She stated that calling a child a “baby” or “big baby” would violate district policy 
because it is an intervention that could cause humiliation.  Denying a child a snack “could
be” a prohibited restraint “in certain circumstances.”   

Ms. Alina-Chambers was involved in the creation of the KIT program, working with 
teachers to develop protocols and supports.  She knows Ms. Hopp, having collaborated with 
her at the KIT center.  In fact, Ms. Alina-Chambers recommended Ms. Hopp for the KIT 
Center, having observed her at the Elam collaborative pre-K program.  At that program she 
observed Ms. Hopp acting “very appropriately” and having “developmentally appropriate
instruction” for the students.  Ms. Alina-Chambers visited Ms. Hopp’s KIT classroom a 

40

 

number of times and Ms. Hopp invited Ms. Alina-Chambers to do an in-service training for 
Ms. Hopp’s classroom.

Ms. Alina-Chambers prepared the questions for the district interviews in this 
investigation.  She admitted on cross-examination that her opinions would change if the facts 
were different than as she understood them to be.  She was not present during any of the 
alleged incidents.  She admitted that there were many people present when the incidents 
allegedly took place, but only a few had information regarding them.

K  M

100. K  M

 had a child in Ms. Hopp’s KIT program and visited the 
 comes “from a psychology-based background” and 

classroom daily.  Ms. M
was concerned about how teachers would interact with her son.  However, she was very 
satisfied with Ms. Hopp’s interactions and observed Ms. Hopp use behavioral, psychology-
based techniques with her son and the other students.  Ms. M
observed very 
clear, positive changes in her son after being in Ms. Hopp’s classroom.

Ms. M

’s son does not like to get up in the morning, that is one of his 
behavior issues, so he was “notoriously late” to the classroom, which caused her to have to 
go into the classroom each day.  Because of this, she was able to observe Ms. Hopp with the 
students almost daily.  She never observed Ms. Hopp lose her patience, raise her voice, grab 
a child, use inappropriate language, or be physical with any of the students.  She described 
Ms. Hopp’s demeanor as being “extremely professional.”  She observed that when children 
became louder and more excited, Ms. Hopp would do the opposite, lowering her voice to 
calm the children. She observed Ms. Hopp treat all students equally; Ms. Hopp never treated 
 referred to Ms. Hopp as the “Mary Poppins of 
any student differently.  Ms. M
the Los Angeles Unified School District.”  

Ms. Hopp sent home notes to parents on a daily basis and provided comprehensive 

reports on how the students were doing. Ms. Hopp respected the parents, keeping them very 
informed and she assisted them with utilizing techniques at home so they could provide 24 
hour wrap-around service to their child.  Ms. M
also expressed the same experiences with Ms. Hopp.  She recommended Ms. Hopp to other 
parents and would still do so today.

spoke with other parents who 

Ms. M

testified that Ms. Hopp was removed so quickly from the 

classroom, that parents were not even aware that had taken place.  She immediately reached 
out to Ms. Hopp when she learned of her removal, asking what she could do to help.  The 
letter of support she wrote was written after another parent asked her to write a letter on Ms. 
Hopp’s behalf, and she was happy to do so.  She did not know the charges before she agreed 
to testify on Ms. Hopp’s behalf and met with Ms. Hopp and another parent after Ms. Hopp 
was dismissed from the classroom.  Based on their discussions, it was her understanding that 
Ms. Hopp was alleged to have touched a child when she was moving the child and that Ms. 
 testified 
Hopp moved one way when the child moved the other way.  Ms. M

41

 

that this type of contact happens with her son.  Ms. Hopp said she did not make the “baby” 
statement and that what was being alleged did not happen.  Ms. Nady testified that she was 
“shocked” that Ms. Hopp had been accused of these things because was it “very much out of 
her nature.”  

Ms. M

was shown the charges and admitted that she was unaware of 
most of them.  She agreed that if they were true, it would change her opinion and that she 
would not want that teacher in a classroom.  However, the charges were inconsistent with 
what she observed, what she has heard from other parents, and what she has been told by her
son.  She was in the classroom many times, asked a lot of questions, and never saw any 
evidence of this behavior alleged.  Moreover, the “baby” allegation would depend on the 
context and, in the special needs world, a lot depends on the context of what happened.  In 
this environment, what you see and what is happening are often two very different things. 
That being said, Ms. M
had never observed any sort of the conduct alleged
and had never heard any negative feedback from any parents.  Additionally, her son, who is 
verbal, never had anything negative to say about Ms. Hopp.  He cries and throws tantrums,
but he never claimed Ms. Hopp called him a baby.  Ms. M
also testified that 
the student in the photograph with Ms. Engle was her son and she was not concerned about 
what she observed in the picture because it was “ABA training taking place.” 

G  G

101. G  G ’s son was in Ms. Hopp’s KIT classroom.  He observed Ms. Hopp in
the classroom on numerous occasions because he and his son often arrived late.  Due to their 
arriving late, the instruction had often already begun and so he would have to wait with his 
son for the rotation to end, giving him lots of time to observe Mrs. Hopp.  He also was able 
to talk to Ms. Hopp on many occasions and he would stay in the classroom to observe how 
his son was doing.  Everything he saw in the classroom was positive.  There was 
encouragement, praise, rewards, “the typical things that you do with children with special 
needs.”  He saw improvements in his son because of Ms. Hopp.  He never saw Ms. Hopp 
lose her patience, raise her voice, grab a student, or become physical with a student.  He 
never observed Ms. Hopp treat students differently or show dislike for any student.  Mr. G  
described Ms. Hopp as very calm, very supportive, “just great,” he “never met anyone else 
like her” and “the whole program was nothing like I have ever experienced.”

Ms. Hopp always wanted to show him the progress his son was making.  She 

provided parents with “regular progress notes” through notes, text messages, and other 
means.  There was an incident where his son fell. Ms. Hopp photographed the injury, sent it 
to him, wrote a “boo boo” note, and sent a text message about the incident.  Thus, he found
the allegation that she failed to report an injury to another student hard to believe, although 
he acknowledged that in his son’s case, the injury was not caused by Ms. Hopp. 

The KIT program with Ms. Hopp was fantastic.  He described it as “a wow factor.”  

He stated that the whole program, the feedback and the encouragement their son received 
was wonderful.  His son never said anything negative about Ms. Hopp, his son liked Ms. 

42

 

Hopp, and everything he ever heard about Ms. Hopp from his son and from other parents was 
positive.  Mr. G  testified that after Ms. Hopp was removed from the classroom, “the heart 
and soul of the program” was gone; they never got the 1:1, the daily notes, the 
encouragement, the texts, or the feedback that they received from Ms. Hopp.  No one seemed 
to care about the KIT program after Ms. Hopp was removed.

Mr. G  and his wife wrote a letter of support that was introduced at this hearing.  He 
explained that he was shocked by “the whole process of Ms. Hopp disappearing,” getting no 
answers from the district about what had happened, and the dramatic difference in how the 
KIT program was run after Ms. Hopp was removed.  He and his wife wrote their letter to the 
district because of their concerns; no one told him to write that letter.  He did not know how 
Ms. Hopp came into possession of that letter.  

Mr. G  voluntarily agreed to be a witness on Ms. Hopp’s behalf because he believed 

 for 
it was important to do so.  Mr. G  met with Ms. Hopp and Ms. M
breakfast when she contacted him and asked him to testify in this matter.  They did not 
discuss the substance of the case, just whether he would be willing to testify for Ms. Hopp.
He admitted that he did not know the specific charges against Ms. Hopp.  At this hearing he
was shown the accusation and testified that all the charges were “completely inconsistent”
with what he observed. It would surprise him if Ms. Hopp had called a child a “baby” or “a 
big baby.”  He testified that he was “stunned, shocked, by those charges” and he appeared to
be shocked. Mr. G admitted that if the allegations were true, he would not want his child 
in that classroom with such a teacher.  However, based upon his knowledge and 
observations, “the charges are highly inconsistent with Ms. Hopp.”  He testified that when he 
reads the charges, “It stuns me” because “that is not the Ms. Hopp that I know.”  

Elizabeth Leone

102. Elizabeth Leone has been employed by the district since 2011 as an early 
childhood special education teacher.  She has a teaching credential in early childhood special 
education and a Master’s degree in the same field.  She worked with Ms. Hopp in the 
classroom in 2009 and took classes with her in their graduate school program in 2011.

In the 2009 school year she observed Ms. Hopp daily in the classroom for four hours 

per day.  She never observed Ms. Hopp grab a student, lose patience with a student, or do 
anything that made her feel uncomfortable.  In fact, Ms. Hopp was “exceedingly patient with 
children.”  Ms. Leone never saw Ms. Hopp raise her voice or use inappropriate language. 
She described Ms. Hopp as very calm, very caring and very patient.  The students had a lot 
of aggressive behaviors that could escalate very quickly. Ms. Hopp always modelled good
behavior for the students and staff.  According to Ms. Leone, Ms. Hopp “researches the
latest, innovative behavioral implementations” and she admires Ms. Hopp greatly for that.
She described Ms. Hopp as “a role model and a colleague I look up to greatly.”  When asked 
about her opinion regarding Ms. Hopp’s professionalism, she testified “I think she has an 
amazing way with students, she is very supportive, not just with the students but also the 
family in terms of using positive support and reinforcement.”  

43

 

Ms. Leone admitted that she did not know a lot of the details related to the charges, 

other than another employee in the classroom claimed that Ms. Hopp inappropriately moved 
a child.  Ms. Hopp told Ms. Leone that the allegations made against her did not occur.  Ms. 
Leone admitted that if the charges were true, it would change her opinions; however, the 
charges were inconsistent with her knowledge of Ms. Hopp.  

Catherine Hopp 

103.  Catherine Hopp received a bachelor of psychology degree from UC Irvine in 
1987.  She received an Associate’s degree from the Fashion Institute in interior design and 
management.  She received a teaching credential in early childhood education and a Master’s 
degree in special education, both from Cal State Northridge.  She received a certificate in 
applied behavior analysis from the Florida Institute of Technology and sat for her board 
certification examination, but did not pass it.  She was hired by the district as a special 
education teacher in a collaborative program in August 2008, and thereafter recruited to run 
the KIT program.  

Ms. Hopp became interested in special education because her older brother has 
multiple disabilities and was a special education student.  Growing up, she attended all of his 
therapy and special education programs.  She volunteered for over 20 years as a coach with 
the Special Olympics and continues to work with that program.  She also worked as a 
preschool teacher at her church for two and one-half years and was drawn to children with 
disability and speech issues.  She went back to school to learn the latest strategies because of 
her interest in this area.  When Ms. Hopp was taking classes at Cal State Northridge, she was 
regularly observed.  Ms. Hopp worked at the Shirley Avenue Elementary KIT center, a pilot 
program for pre-K special education students.  The program provided mixed special 
education classes and the KIT program for pre-K students.  It was an evidence-based 
program that had been very thoroughly researched. 

Ms. Hopp testified about all the time, effort and expense she put into creating the 
classroom, explaining that there was nothing in the room when she was assigned to it and 
how she brought in her own supplies, and crafted her own teaching implements to help 
address students’ needs.  Her background in design aided her in creating a very well designed 
classroom setting.  She testified about the many photographs of the students she took to teach 
them how to address their emotions.  Ms. Hopp laminated pictures on cardboard to help 
students learn positive behaviors.  She purchased supplies to help with instruction.  The KIT 
center was designed with stations and had scheduled consistent routines that made the 
classroom “as consistent as possible” to address the students’ autism and behavioral issues.  
There was a “hierarchy of prompts” the staff used to redirect behaviors.

Ms. Hopp explained the classroom routine.  She arrived 15 to 20 minutes early every 
day to make sure each station was set up completely with the appropriate documentation and 
supplies.  She checked the students’ schedules to determine whether she needed to make any 
last-minute changes.  When her assistants arrived they discussed the stations, the supplies, 
and any questions they had.  They then walked to the far end of campus to retrieve their 

44

 

students off the bus.  They went to the restroom and then to the classroom to begin the 
rotations.  The classroom was designed for students to work in pairs and in a sequence.  Ms. 
Hopp spent a lot of time pairing appropriate students together.  During rotations there was a 
time for snacks which were provided by the parents.  At the end of the rotations, she and the 
assistants helped students get their backpacks.  Ms. Hopp provided notes for all the parents 
regarding the daily activities, provided copies of any photographs taken, and then took the 
students to their afternoon classroom where she received the afternoon students; and, the 
rotations would begin again with those students. 

Ms. Hopp testified that consistency and routines were essential to the program.  She 
explained how important it was to know the students to help them implement the routines.  
She explained that if a child refused to leave a station, the stations were large enough to 
permit the child to remain at the station when new students came to that rotation.  There were 
only eight students in each session, two per rotation, so there was plenty of room to do an 
activity when a student refused to transition to the next station.  It was pretty common for 
students to have tantrums and Ms. Hopp allowed them to sit wherever they wanted as long as 
they were calm and not hurting anyone.  Ms. Hopp described the various techniques she used 
with students to redirect their behaviors and the hierarchy of prompts; a set of techniques to 
address behaviors in an orderly fashion. 

Ms. Hopp testified about one of the previous unfounded charges in 2012.  There was 

a student who repeatedly hit himself in the head; she redirected him with another activity; 
she thought the incident was over until the parents filed a complaint.  The district 
investigated the incident and determined that it was unfounded.  Ms. Hopp refuted Ms. 
Gelfand’s testimony that a behavioral specialist was provided because of the 2012 incident.  
Ms. Hopp testified that the additional behavior specialist was added to the KIT classroom to 
satisfy the 2:1 ratio mandated by the students’ IEPs.  Ms. Hopp was never informed that the 
staff member was added because of the 2012 claimed incident and no documents refuted Ms. 
Hopp’s testimony.  Given the fact that that there were never any “surplus teachers” in the 
KIT classroom, Ms. Hopp’s testimony about why a behavior specialist was added was more 
persuasive and credible than Ms. Gelfand’s testimony.     

Ms. Hopp testified about Student #1’s disabilities, the behaviors being addressed, and 

the progress he was making.  His primary targeted behavior was complying with requests.  
He had preferred and non-preferred activities.  Having tantrums was a normal occurrence for 
Student #1 and many steps were taken to facilitate transitions and good behavior.  Ms. Hopp 
had a number of students who did not comply with requests, but she referred consistently to 
the hierarchy of prompts to redirect them and alter their behavior.  Ms. Hopp was struck by 
children numerous times; “it’s part of the job.”  As she explained, this is the field she chose 
to enter and she understands that it is “a behavior thing by the child, not intentional.”  Ms.
Hopp denied disliking Student #1.  She worked with his parents, created a booklet for them 
to use at home and provided them with articles regarding behavioral supports they could 
implement at home.  Ms. Hopp never received any complaints from Student #1’s parents or 
any other parents; other than the two unfounded complaints occurring in 2012.  Ms. Hopp 
denied having any animosity towards Student #1 or trying to get him removed from the KIT 

45

 

program.  As she credibly and persuasively testified, Ms. Hopp had multiple discussions with 
administrators about promoting many of her students.  Given that the KIT program was for 
pre-K students, graduation was both routine and expected.    

Ms. Hopp denied ever dragging or forcing Student #1 to change stations.  She denied 

lifting him out of a chair.  She denied dragging him or causing him to hit his head.  There 
was never a time when he needed ice nor was there a time when she failed to give ice or 
failed to file a report.  Ms. Hopp testified that she consistently followed the appropriate 
behavioral strategies, and she never grabbed or dragged a student, and she never would.  Ms. 
Hopp denied stating that Student #1 deserved to fall, that God was smiting him or that she 
refused to provide him ice.  Ms. Hopp denied this alleged incident occurred, and, if it had, 
she noted that her classroom assistants were also mandated reporters and that they would 
have been required to intervene and file reports.   

Ms. Hopp testified that she answered the questions the district asked in the manner 

the district asked them; the district asked whether she “remembered a time when she dragged 
a child and he fell and hit his head” and she answered that she “did not remember” such a 
time.  Ms. Hopp testified that she thought she was answering no, because no such incident 
happened, and she simply used the words the district used in her answer; Ms. Hopp never 
intended her answers to imply that these alleged incidents actually occurred and now she 
could no longer recall them.  Ms. Hopp’s explanation was credible and it appeared that 
unsubstantiated and improper conclusions were drawn.  Moreover, Ms. Hopp testified that 
she was not told which student she allegedly struck or hit; making it even more difficult for 
her to answer the questions posed to her.  The district knew which student it was talking 
about, but did not inform Ms. Hopp.    

Ms. Hopp testified that if a student was injured, she would immediately inspect to 

determine the nature and extent of any injury, apply ice, contact the nurse, complete the 
appropriate documentation, and notify the student’s parents via a text message or phone call.  
Ms. Hopp would also send a report home to the parent and prepare reports for the classroom 
and nurse files.  These were the protocols Ms. Hopp always followed when a students was 
injured.  Ms. Hopp and her assistants worked in close proximity in the classroom, helped 
each other out, and worked as a team; if the charged incidents actually occurred, her 
assistants “would have told her and they never did.”

Ms. Hopp admitted she used the word “baby” with Student #1 because he had a baby 

sister of whom he was very proud.  She used the word to help explain to him that he was a 
big boy, he was not a baby, and he could use his words to express his needs; he did not need 
to scream and tantrum.  She denied using the word “baby” in a demeaning way.  Ms. Hopp 
testified that she tried to motivate Student #1 because he was one of the older, bigger 
students; and she never used the word baby in a harsh, frustrated or curt tone.  She testified 
that she used the words in a loving manner to help calm him down; she admitted she now 
understand how those words might be misperceived.  While her use of the word “baby” was 
perhaps not the best choice of words, nothing about how Ms. Hopp used those words was 
inappropriate.  More importantly, Ms. Hopp’s acknowledgment that her words could be 

46

 

misinterpreted demonstrated that she is capable of change and redirection, for this reason it 
cannot be concluded that Ms. Hopp has a “temperamental defect or inadequacy” that would 
make her evidently unfit to teach.  Further, the district reports and witness testimony alleging 
that Ms. Hopp stated at her interviews that she told Student #1 that he was “five and should 
act like a five-year-old” was clearly erroneous because Ms. Hopp knew Student #1 was less 
than five years old, so Ms. Hopp never would have made that statement.  Additionally, as 
Ms. Hopp credibly explained, she would never tell a student to act a certain chronological 
age because the students’ ages and their abilities were not the same, making such a statement 
both derogatory and ineffective. 

Ms. Hopp explained that Student #1 had a very strong interest in food and would eat 

his snack at inappropriate times.  She denied telling him that his parents did not give him 
food.  She frequently discussed his snack behavior with his parents and asked them what they 
would like her to do.  The parents’ decision was to send one snack with Student #1 and if he 
chose to eat it at the wrong time, he would have nothing to eat at snack time.  Student #1’s 
parents asked Ms. Hopp to do a preferred activity with him instead.  Ms. Hopp explained that 
she had known Student #1 for several years and his parents were very consistent with their 
parenting.  Student #1 was fed a breakfast and a lunch at the district, so Ms. Hopp was not 
overly concerned if he did not have snack at snack time.  Ms. Hopp’s e-mails to Student #1’s 
parents corroborated her testimony.  

As to Ms. Hopp’s alleged failure to report the attic, spanking, and locked in a closet 
incidents, Ms. Hopp testified that her statements were taken out of context.  She explained 
that she did not file a report because she did not have a reasonable suspicion that these evens 
actually occurred.  Ms. Hopp was reading a book about emotions and explaining those 
emotions to the students.  She asked them to look at the pictures of emotions and to view 
their faces in a mirror to see what they looked like when experiencing those emotions.  In 
order to see whether the students understood the concept, she asked of them for examples of 
when they would be afraid.  Student #1 said he would be afraid if he was locked in the attic.  
It was Ms. Hopp’s understanding that he was not claiming he had been locked in an attic, 
spanked or had food withheld.  He was expressing what kinds of things would make him feel 
various emotions.  Thus, Student #1’s statements were made in the context of the lessons and 
were not reported as events that had actually happened.  Moreover, Student #1 was a very 
verbal child and if those things were taking place, he would have told staff.  Student #1 
would have talked about food being withheld at home because he perseverated on food due 
to his autism.  In fact, he told staff when his mother would not give him more ice cream, but 
he never claimed that food had been withheld.  Because of his food issues, his parents 
monitored his food. 

Ms. Hopp never observed any bruising on Student #1, never witnessed him being 

fearful of his parents, and he never displayed any indicators that would cause her to be 
suspicious of parental abuse.  Ms. Hopp had filed suspected child abuse reports on two other 
occasions regarding other students.  She was aware of her reporting obligations, but she did 
not file a report concerning Student #1 because she saw no need to do so.  Moreover, in 
support of Ms. Hopp’s claim, it is noteworthy that when Ms. Hopp found the small vodka 

47

 

bottle in her classroom, she immediately reported it to her supervisor; doing so demonstrated 
that Ms. Hopp followed district reporting requirements.  Moreover, as Ms. Hopp repeatedly 
asserted, the district’s documentation of what she said merely contained “part of the 
conversation” that Ms. Hopp actually had with district officials, “the rest of the 
conversation” was not in the reports, thereby making them unreliable.     

Ms. Hopp testified that her comments regarding her concerns for Student #1 were 

misconstrued.  Ms. Hopp testified that she told the district that she hoped they were talking to 
everybody because of their concern; “their” meaning the district, not the other staff members.  
Ms. Hopp intended her comment to mean that because Student #1 had multiple district 
employees participating in his care, she hoped that all of them were being asked about this 
incident.  Ms. Hopp was never concerned about Student #1’s health, safety or welfare, and 
she never said that he was spanked, locked in a closet or had food withheld at home.  The 
statements in the report asserting Ms. Hopp made those statements are inaccurate, as they 
were taken from a long discussion with investigators regarding the emotional story she had 
read with the class, and only snippets of that entire discussion are contained in the report.  
The district asserted that Ms. Hopp made allegations against Student #1’s parents at this 
interview because she thought they were the ones who complained, but when she learned it 
was staff, Ms. Hopp changed tactics and made allegations against staff members.  However, 
the evidence did not support that argument; instead, the evidence supported Ms. Hopp’s 
position. 

As to the photograph of Ms. Engle that she produced at her interview, Ms. Hopp also 

disagreed with how that exchange was documented in the district reports.  During 
questioning, Ms. Hopp was asked whether there was ever a need to touch students and she 
explained that she and the staff do so during hand over hand techniques.  The woman asking 
the questions did not understand what Ms. Hopp meant, so Ms. Hopp opened her phone and 
found a picture depicting Ms. Engle doing hand over hand technique.  When she produced 
the picture, Ms. Hopp stated that it was an example of staff using an “exaggerated face” to 
communicate with the student.  Ms. Hopp testified that special education teachers are 
encouraged to use animated or exaggerated facial expressions or gestures when teaching 
autistic children because these children do not recognize emotions as well as other children.  
Ms. Hopp denied stating that the photograph showed a “frustrated face,” and testified that if 
she had ever observed inappropriate physical contact by staff, she would have intervened and 
reported it.

Ms. Hopp’s employee evaluations were excellent until the investigation in this matter 

began; her supervisors repeatedly praised her work as “excellent.”  The only criticism she 
received before 2013 pertained to her absences, which were due to emergency gallbladder 
surgery and the sudden, unexpected death of one of her brothers who helped her care for 
their other, disabled brother.  Ms. Hopp testified that the negative 2013 performance 
evaluation was the only negative evaluation she ever received.  Most concerning was that, 
unlike her other evaluations, before this 2013 evaluation, Ms. Hopp was not given a 
preplanning sheet, there were no pre-conferences held about the evaluation, there were no 
meetings with administrators either before or during the evaluation, there were no 

48

 

memorandum contemporaneous with any of the dates set forth as the observation dates, there 
were no notes about the evaluation or any information regarding any weaknesses Ms. Hopp 
allegedly demonstrated on observation, and no discussions regarding any needs for 
improvement.  The deficiencies identified in the 2013 evaluation were never discussed with 
Ms. Hopp before she received the evaluation.  During the May 7, 2013, meeting, Ms. Hopp 
received a number of compliments regarding how her classroom was run, how clean it was, 
and she was told that her class “was nicely run under her direction.”  In fact, Ms. Hopp 
received commendations for her classroom that were at odds with the “needs to improve”
section of the 2013 evaluation.  Lastly, Ms. Hopp testified that Ms. Gelfand told her it was “a
very challenging report to give knowing how much effort was put into how the classroom 
was set up and it was hard to put something negative in the evaluation when observing how 
nicely designed, organized and prepared the classroom appeared.”  Ms. Gelfand never 
refuted Ms. Hopp’s testimony on this point.  

Ms. Hopp was “appalled” by the charges.  The fact that “someone as open and 

obviously interested in learning” was not given an opportunity to discuss or remedy these 
alleged problems, whatever had occurred, was “repulsive” to her.  She was tremendously 
hurt and felt that she can never again be as dedicated as she once was.  Ms. Hopp did not feel 
she did anything wrong.  She did not feel she violated any district policy.  She admitted that 
if the incidents charged in the accusation had occurred, she would have had to file reports, 
but these incidents never took place.  When Ms. Hopp was interviewed she did not know the 
charges against her.  Sometime later, “vague, ambiguous information came out,” but she did 
not find out the specific charges until May of 2013.  Ms. Hopp was removed in March 2013, 
and spent “weeks and weeks” not knowing the reason for her removal.

Ms. Hopp made a very credible, personable, and forthcoming witness.  She could 
have easily denied making the baby statements, but, instead, acknowledged making them and 
explained the context in which she made them.  Her admissions and her explanations were 
believable.  Her testimony was supported by the reliable documentation.  The tremendous 
outpouring of support from parents and educators, alike, spoke volumes about Ms. Hopp’s 
character, ability to teach, and positive impact on her classroom and her students.  It was 
wholly inconsistent with Ms. Hopp having engaged in the conduct alleged in the accusation.    

Applicable Code Sections 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44934, and 44944.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 

permanent employee.  Subdivision (1) authorizes dismissal for immoral or unprofessional 
conduct.  Subdivision (5) authorizes dismissal for evident unfitness for service.  Subdivision 

49

 

(7) authorizes dismissal for the persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws or 
reasonable regulations.   

3. 

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the process 

for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and sets forth the 
Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision.      

4. 

Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing board 

must follow before acting on any charges brought against a teacher.   

5. 

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the dismissal of an employee who 

willfully refuses to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause as described by the 
district’s reasonable rules and regulations.   

Burden and Standard of Proof 

6. 

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of 
the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 
1035, 1039-1040.)  This standard requires a party to convince the trier of fact that the 
existence of a fact is more probable than its nonexistence.  (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s 
Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.)   

Relevant Judicial Authority 

 

Unprofessional Conduct 

7. 

The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of 

 
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  There the Supreme Court held that where charges of 
unprofessional conduct are raised in teacher dismissal cases, the applicable standard is 
whether the person is fit to teach.  The criteria must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold 
matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.  (Id., at p.229.)   

8. 

Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by the 

 
Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach.  (Board of Education v. Jack M. (19 70) 
19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697; Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 
Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-1174.) 

Evident Unfitness to Teach 

9. 

The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases is 

whether the person is fit to teach.  “Fitness to teach” is probably a question of ultimate fact.  
(Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 
555, 560-561.) 

50

 

10. 

Evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(5), is established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or 
suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” 
(Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria must be examined to 
ascertain whether the conduct in question indicates unfitness for service.  “If the Morrison
criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident,’ i.e., 
whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.”  (Id., at p.1445.) 

11. 

In Board of Education v. Jack M., supra, the court delineated the process to be 
considered when determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the standard established 
in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in which not only his 
alleged conduct but the following factors must be analyzed:  (1) likelihood of recurrence of 
the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the 
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ relationships; (5) 
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of 
conduct.   

 

Persistent Violation of or Refusal to Obey Laws 

12.

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent; 
continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly 
repeated.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.)  Subdivision (7) pertains to unintentional as well as intentional 
transgressions, and hence the Legislature has decreed that a single violation is not sufficient 
to warrant dismissal, apparently to allow for correction; “it is the persistent disregard” of 
school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate.  (Id. at p.84.) 

13.  A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be 

established by reference to the Morrison factors.  If unfitness to teach is shown, then the District 
must further establish that employee’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” 
i.e., “stubborn and continuing.”  (San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.)  Isolated incidents or incidents 
involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered “persistent.” 
(Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.)  

  

Evaluation of the Charges 

14.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that in January 2013 Ms. 
 
Hopp grabbed Student #1 by both hands and pulled his hands above his head while he was 
seated; dragged him towards a different learning/play center causing him to fall and hit the back 
of his head; failed to provide ice or other first aid; failed to complete an incident form; and 
failed to complete the district bulletin regarding physical actions taken with students.  To begin 
with, it was difficult to believe that this event occurred in January 2013 yet was not reported it 
until March 2013.  It was hard to imagine that other employees in the same classroom did not 

51

 

observe this incident taking place, or if they did, failed to intervene and/or report it.  The two 
witnesses who claimed they observed the event, Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez, had 
extremely strong motives to fabricate the incident because Ms. Hopp had notified their 
employer that they were absent and tardy to work.  Their employer was an outside vendor who 
had contracted with the district to provide behavior services.  The vendor had ample cause to be 
concerned about this complaint, as tardy employees could potentially risk the vendor losing its 
contract with the district.  The vendor/employer apologized to Ms. Hopp for Ms. Hernandez’s 
and Ms. Ramirez’s unprofessional conduct and promised to address it with them.  A short time 
thereafter, these women notified the district of the alleged January 2013 incident with Student 
#1.  The timing of their complaint made the validity of their claims dubious, at best.  Moreover, 
Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez changed and expounded on their versions of the January 2013 
event, with Ms. Ramirez even claiming that Ms. Hopp made “God is smiting him” and Student 
#1 “deserved it” comments.  That testimony appeared contrived and overreaching.  The 
testimony of these two witnesses, coupled with their varying versions of events, as well as their 
statements, was not credible and was not persuasive.  Additionally, others in the classroom did 
not witness this event.      

15.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that in February 2013 Ms. 

 
Hopp grabbed Student #1’s left arm and pulled him forcefully out of his chair, causing him to 
drop to the floor and causing his shirt to be pulled up over his head.  Again, the only “witness” 
to this incident was Ms. Hernandez whose credibility was highly doubtful, for the reasons noted 
above.  Moreover, Ms. Hernandez’s explanation of what occurred, and how it occurred, made 
little sense, casting further doubt on her credibility. 

16.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that during the period 

 
commencing in December 2012 through April 16, 2013, Ms. Hopp told Student #1 to stop 
crying and that he was being a “baby” or “big baby” on no less than two occasions.  Ms. Hopp’s 
explanation for how she used the word “baby” with Student #1 and why she used that word was 
reasonable and persuasive.  There was no ill intent and, given that Student #1 had a baby sister, 
using the word “baby” as a point of reference made sense.  Furthermore, other witnesses 
corroborated Ms. Hopp’s testimony that she did not use the word in a malicious way, and, 
again, the testimony of Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez concerning Ms. Hopp’s use of the 
word “baby” was not credible.  More importantly, the use of the word must be viewed in the 
context of how it was used.  As Ms. Hopp credibly testified, the context in which she used the 
word was appropriate.     

17.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that between January and 

 
April 2013, Ms. Hopp commented to Student #1 during snack time that his parents did not give 
him a snack saying: “We can't give you anything.  Go talk to your parents about that,” and “No 
your mom did not give it to you.”  The evidence clearly established that Ms. Hopp devised a 
plan with Student #1’s mother to address his snack-eating issue as early as September 2012, 
long before these allegations were made.  If a parent reasonably directs a teacher how to address 
a student’s particular issue, the teacher should comply with the parent’s reasonable wishes.  
Again, the testimony of Ms. Hernandez and Ms. Ramirez was not credible and was refuted by 
the documentary evidence introduced at hearing.   

52

 

18.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that during the period 
 
commencing January 2, 2013, through April 16, 2013, Ms. Hopp failed to report that Student #1 
was being spanked, locked in a closet and/or attic, and food was withheld at home.  Ms. Hopp’s 
explanation of what she said during her district interviews was logical, credible, and supported 
by other evidence.  The district reports allegedly summarizing the statements Ms. Hopp made 
during the interviews were incomplete, omitted key points, and appeared contrived to place Ms. 
Hopp in the worst light possible.  It was difficult to believe that Ms. Hopp, knowing she was a 
mandated reporter, would make the statements the district attributed to her; she would have 
been aware of the trouble she would cause herself by failing to report those incidents if she 
believed them to be true.  Ms. Hopp’s explanation of the statements she made during her 
discussions with the district made much more sense than the version ascribed by the district.  
The district’s witnesses’ conclusions about what was said at the meetings were unpersuasive, 
especially given the incomplete and inaccurate documents prepared following those meetings.   
      

 
19.  A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that during the period 
commencing in December 2012 through April 16, 2013, Ms. Hopp failed to report child abuse 
when she observed and photographed another employee using what Ms. Hopp allegedly stated 
was inappropriate physical means to manage student behavior and frustration.  To begin with, a 
preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Ms. Hopp ever said the photograph 
depicted an employee who was actually frustrated.  As Ms. Hopp credibly explained, during her 
interview, when she was trying to describe hand over hand technique, she produced this 
photograph to visually depict that technique; she did not produce the photograph to show 
frustration, she produced it to show that an “exaggerated expression” was used when 
performing hand over hand technique.  Again, it was hard to believe that Ms. Hopp, a mandated 
reporter, would say what the district alleged she said at the meeting.  Ms. Hopp’s explanation 
was much more reasonable and believable.   

20.  A preponderance of the evidence failed to establish that Ms. Hopp, despite 

 
repeated assistance, guidance, counseling and warnings, failed to comport herself to the 
acceptable level of professional conduct and failed to obey district guidelines, procedures, laws 
and regulations.  Since the evidence did not establish that any of the alleged incidents occurred, 
there were no district policies that Ms. Hopp disobeyed.  Moreover, it would be impossible for 
her to comply with the notice of unsatisfactory service and claims of below standard 
performance evaluation, because those documents were not prepared until after she had been 
removed from the classroom and after the investigation began.  As noted above, those two 
documents were based on statement s and testimony that were unreliable and non-credible.  
Furthermore, a teacher must be given an opportunity to participate in the evaluation process and 
demonstrate an ability to comport with directives.  Ms. Hopp was not given that opportunity.  
However, the Commission found it noteworthy that even though Ms. Hopp’s use of the word 
“baby” was not inappropriate under the circumstances, Ms. Hopp testified that she would 
refrain from using that word in the future, thereby demonstrating that she is capable of 
following directives and learning from her alleged mistakes.   

21. 

In all, the evidence substantially established that the district’s investigation relied 
 
on incorrect information, that the charges were unfounded, and that Ms. Hopp was not given an 

53

opportunity to correct alleged deficiencies in her classroom.  The letters of support explained 
and supplemented credible testimony that established that Ms. Hopp was a professional, caring, 
dedicated, well-loved, and well-respected teacher.  Because of her outstanding qualities, she 
was recruited to be a KIT teacher.  Given her excellent performance evaluations and the letters 
of recommendation introduced at hearing, it was extremely disconcerting that charges were 
brought against her.  It was all the more troubling that the two witnesses who claimed to have 
observed the alleged incidents were the very same witnesses against whom Ms. Hopp had made 
a complaint about their absences and tardiness, and that the district had relied on their testimony 
despite the existence of evidence to the contrary.    

Cause Does Not Exist to Dismiss Ms. Hopp 

22. 

 
Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Hopp pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a), subsection (1), because the evidence did not establish that Ms. Hopp 
engaged in unprofessional conduct.  

23. 

 
Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Hopp pursuant to Education Code sections 
44932, subdivision (a), subsection (1), and 44939, because the evidence did not establish that 
Ms. Hopp engaged in immoral conduct.  

24. 

 
Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Hopp pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a), subsection (5), because the evidence did not establish that Ms. Hopp 
was evidently unfit for service.   

25. 

Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Hopp pursuant to Education Code section 
 
44932, subdivision (a), subsection (7), because the evidence did not establish that Ms. Hopp 
persistently violated laws, rules, regulations and/or policies related to education.  

26. 

Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Hopp pursuant to Education Code section 

 
44939, because the evidence did not establish that Ms. Hopp willfully refused to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause as described by the district’s reasonable rules 
and regulations.   

 

//

//

//

54

ORDER 

Ms.  Hopp’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  is  granted.  Ms.  Hopp  shall  not  be  dismissed  from  her  employment  with  the 
district.  The  charges  and  accusation  filed  against  Ms.  Hopp  are  hereby  dismissed. 

Dated: 

f2-  1-145 

   
es  Matyszewski 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

Dated: 

Dated: 

Ms.  Teresa  Behnke 
Commission  Member 

Mr.  Fernando  Robles 
Commission  Member 

55

  

ORDER 

Ms.  Hopp’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  is  granted.  Ms.  Hopp  shall  not  be  dismissed  from  her  employment  with  the 
district.  The  charges  and  accusation  filed  against  Ms.  Hopp  are  hereby  dismissed. 

Dated: 

Dated: 

Dated!  W6y.30.20/5 

Fe.  Lenten,  Blnke 

Mary  Agnes  Matyszewski 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Ms.  Teresa  Behnke 
Commission  Member 

Mr.  Fernando  Robles 
Commission  Member 

54 

 

ORDER 
Ms.  Hopp’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  fram  emplayment  withthe  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Districts  granted  Ms.  Hopp  shall 
and  accusation 
‘he  charges 

fled  against  Ms.  Hop are hereby  dismissed, 

rot be  dismissed  fram  her  employment  with  the  strict. 

Date 

Dad 

ome 

HD  LAS 

Mary  Agnes  Matyszewski 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Ms.  Teresa  Behnke 
Commission  Member 

‘Me.  Fernand  Robles 
Commission  Member

