BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

ARLENE SCHERY, 

Respondent.

OAH Case No. 2014100674

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard the above-

captioned matter in Los Angeles on November 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, and 12, 2015.  The 
Commission members were John Davis, Andrea Adauto, and Joseph D. Montoya,
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH).  Complainant 
was represented by Michelle M. Goldsmith, Bergman Dacey Goldsmith, and Susan E. 
Hyman, Assistant General Counsel, Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or 
District).  Respondent Arlene Schery appeared with her attorney, Ronald C. Lapekis.

At the end of the hearing Complainant moved to amend the First Amended 
Accusation (FAA), which motion was granted.  The amendments, described below, were 
interlineated into the FAA, exhibit 21, as follows:

At page 2, line 6, paragraph 1, the words “on or about May 14, 2009,” were inserted 

in place of the words “in or about the 2008-2009 school year.”

At page 2, line 9, paragraph 2, the words “on or about May 14, 2009,” were inserted 

in place of the words “in or about the 2008-2009 school year.”

At page 2, line 20, paragraph 5, the word “Alexandria” was changed to “Alexandra,” 

and on that same line the word “Summer” was changed to “Sommer.”

At page 2, line 25, the paragraph was designated as paragraph 6c, and the first words 

were changed to read “Said, ‘Need an oil change?’.”

At page 2, line 27, the subparagraph designation was changed from “c” to “d.”

The matter was submitted for decision on November 12, 2015.  The Commission 

hereby makes its factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE

In this proceeding the District took steps to terminate Respondent, and she demanded 

a hearing on the matter.  Four statutory grounds were asserted as justifying termination:
unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)); immoral conduct (Ed. Code, §§ 
44932, subd. (a)(1) & 44939); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code § 44932, subd. (a)(5)); 
and, persistent violation of state laws or regulations, or the district’s regulations, for the 
governance of schools (§44932, subd. (a)(7)). 1

It was alleged that on several occasions Respondent treated students in a demeaning 

and insulting way.  It was also alleged that Respondent violated her school’s cell phone
policy on more than one occasion, despite written warnings to comply.

Respondent provided evidence regarding the facts and circumstances of the events 
referenced in the FAA, and otherwise provided evidence in support of her retention by the
District. However, the District proved the vast majority of the allegations against 
Respondent, and the Commission finds and concludes, unanimously, that cause for 
termination has been established.

The Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Complainant Justo H. Avila executed the Accusation and the FAA while

acting in his official capacity as Chief Human Resources Officer of the District.

2.

The District commenced this proceeding on April 26, 2013, when Vivian K. 
Ekchian executed a Statement of Charges against Respondent.  That Statement of Charges 
was filed with the District's governing board, which thereafter voted to terminate 
Respondent.

3.

On May 14, 2013, the District gave Respondent written notice of its intent to 
terminate her, and served Respondent with a copy of the Statement of Charges.  Respondent 
made a timely request for hearing, which led to the issuance of the Accusation.  She then 
filed a Notice of Defense, and this proceeding ensued.  On October 23, 2015, ALJ Michael 
Scarlett granted the District’s motion to file an amended accusation.  By operation of law, 
Respondent is deemed to have denied the allegations of the FAA.  All jurisdictional 
requirements have been met.

4.

Respondent is a certificated teacher employed by the District, and at the times 

relevant to this decision was teaching history and anthropology to high school students.
Respondent holds a clear single subject teaching credential, with a social studies 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

authorization.  She also holds a Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development 
credential (CLAD).  During the time relevant to this proceeding—May 14, 2009, to October 
25, 2012—Respondent was assigned to teach at Eagle Rock High School.

Findings on the Allegations of the FAA 2

5.

(A)  It was established that during the period between May 14, 2009, and May

28, 2009, Respondent treated her student, C
demeaning manner.  Respondent referred to the student as being “dumb.”  Respondent would 
mispronounce the student’s name and when the student would explain how to pronounce her 
name correctly, Respondent would make no real effort to get the name right.  Instead, she 
would repeat the name, improperly in two or three ways, and then say “whatever.”  This 
showed both disrespect to the student and an unprofessional attitude.

 S., in a derogatory manner and a

(B)  Respondent’s failure to make a real attempt to learn how to say her 

 to pronounce certain 
 was an ESL (English as a Second Language) student, one whose 

student’s name properly is juxtaposed to her efforts to teach C
words properly.  C
primary language was not English, but Spanish.  When the student would give presentations, 
she would mispronounce some words, and Respondent would correct her pronunciation in 
front of the whole class, who often laughed, to the discomfort of C
.  The Commission 
recognizes that Respondent should teach her students in a way that expands their vocabulary, 
and that correcting pronunciation is not unprofessional in and of itself.  However, the 
evidence indicates that Respondent went about the task in an insensitive way that exposed 
C
student’s name.

 to ridicule, while she herself was not exposed to ridicule for mispronouncing the 

6.

During the period after May 14, 2009, and through the end of the 2009 school 

year, Respondent made disparaging remarks about people who speak Spanish, and about 
Mexicans.  She did this in class, and her classes had many students who were of Mexican or 
other Hispanic descent. She also referred to a neighborhood where some of the students 
lived, and which was known to have gang elements, in a way that painted all of her students 
as involved in gangs.

7.

(A)  On or about October 12, 2012, Respondent confiscated a cell phone from 
one of her students, A
 O., because he was violating the Eagle Rock High School Cell 
Phone Policy (Phone Policy).  The Phone Policy essentially forbade students from using cell 
phones during the school day.

(B)  Teachers who confiscated cell phones were, required to turn the devices 
over to the Dean before the end of the day, because the students were authorized to retrieve 
their confiscated cell phones at the end of the day, if they were accompanied by a parent. If 
the Dean was unavailable, the phone could be left at the administration office, as it was open 
until 4:30, and there was a place to secure the phone at that office.

2 As amended at the end of the hearing

3

(D)  On three occasions between November 20, 2009 and June 6, 2012, 
Respondent had been reminded, in writing, that confiscated phones or other electronic 
devices had to be turned in the day they were confiscated.

(D)  Respondent did not turn the phone over to the Dean, or the administration 
office, on October 12, 2012.  Instead, she took it home, despite knowledge of her obligations, 
thereby failing to follow policy and directives previously given to her.  Her excuse was that 
she could not find the Dean in his office, and that her work day was over at 3:07 p.m., and 
that she was entitled, under the union contract to go straight home, and she was not 
obligated, after school, to locate the Dean, or otherwise take steps to turn the phone in.  This 
ignores the fact that she could have taken the phone to the administration office on her way
out of school, which would have secured the phone but left it accessible to the Dean or 
another administrator if the student and their parent came to retrieve the phone.

(A)  In approximately September 2012, Respondent directed a student named 

8.
E
 to tape a picture of a creature that looked like a monkey or an ape onto the chest of 
another student, M .  Respondent then told M  to come to the front of the room, which 
he refused to do.

(B)  The picture in question was, according to Respondent, an artist’s likeness 

of “Lucy,” considered to be the oldest hominid, and precursor in the evolutionary chain, to 
humans.  However, to a casual observer, it would appear to be a picture of some sort of ape.

(C)  At some point during the interaction, Respondent stated that the picture 
was a picture of M .  M  and other students took this to be Respondent making fun of 
M , who is somewhat hairy, with heavy eyebrows, and who, as a child, was sensitive to 
being “hairy.”

(D)  By telling M  to come to the front of the room, Respondent intended to 

make him the butt of some joke she had in mind.  That he would not go to the front of the 
room indicates he perceived he was to be made the butt of her joke.  Respondent’s conduct 
was demeaning to M  and was perceived that way by other students.3

9.

(A)  On October 25, 2012, Respondent discussed confidential information 

 with the another student, and the other student’s mother.

pertaining to her student A
It was improper for her to do so.

(B) The discussion took place during a student-led parent teacher conference 
that took place in Respondent’s classroom on the evening of October 25, 2012.  Respondent 
was meeting with her student, K.S., and the student’s mother (Mom).  At some point during 
the conference, Mom told Respondent that her daughter’s grades had been declining, and she 
 

3 See exhibit 41, p. 3, where a student named S

 described this event to a police 

investigator.

4

asked Respondent if she could explain the drop in performance.  Respondent replied that the 
daughter, K.S., was hanging around with the wrong friends, and then named A
the negative influence on K.S.  Respondent told Mom that A
around, and that she had demonstrated behavioral issues around school.

 just wanted to fool 

 as 

(C)  At some point during this conversation, Respondent discussed

A
manner, that Respondent told them about A
and Respondent told them about A

’s grades with K.S. and Mom.  Mom and her daughter both testified in a credible 
’s grades in Respondent’s history class,

’s Spanish class.

(D)  As a result of Respondent’s statements about A

.  K.S. told A

, Mom told K.S. 

 of her mother’s 

 that Respondent had told her and her mother about

that she could no longer be friends with A
edict the next day, and she told A
A

’s grades.

10.

(A)  On October 24, 2012, Respondent engaged in assaultive and abusive 

behavior toward a student, known as Z , when Z 4 was sent to her classroom by another 
teacher.  The facts and circumstances follow.

(B)  On the day in question, Z and A

(referenced in Factual Finding 
9), were brought to Respondent’s classroom by Mr. Dominguez, who taught the two students 
Spanish in a nearby classroom.  Dominguez asked Respondent if the two students could be 
placed in her room for awhile, as they were acting up in the Spanish class.  Mr. Dominguez 
said he had some work that the two students could do. Respondent agreed with Dominguez’s 
request.

(C)  While discussing the matter, Dominguez said of Z that the student was 
acting up, and that he had the devil in him, or words to that effect.  Respondent told Z and
A

where to sit, which was in desks near the back right section of the classroom.

(D)  Respondent went to the back of the room near Z and splashed or poured 

some water on him, and sprayed him with a spray bottle labeled as whiteboard cleaner.  She 
said words to the effect that the water was to get the devil out of him, implying some sort of 
exorcism needed to take place.

(E) Z was surprised and shocked by Respondent’s conduct.  An exchange 

followed, and during the course of that exchange Respondent told Z to get his finger out of 
his ass.5

4 The student’s first and middle name was R

, and he went by the name 

 Z
.  (See ex. 41, p. 3.)  

Z .  Some of the students knew him as R

5 Respondent told a police officer, when interviewed by him the next day, that she 

told Z to get his head out of his ass and to get some work done. That version of the event is 

5

(F)  At another point during the exchange, Respondent held a metal rod, at 

times during the proceeding described as a dipstick for an automobile engine, and said it was 
for checking Z ’s oil, and moved the stick up and down in a gesture perceived as obscene 
by Z .

(G) Z , who is openly gay, perceived that Respondent was attacking him on 

that point.  He made a complaint to the school administration before the day was out.

(H)  The interchange was witnessed by several students.  One of them, S

, 
later described Z as “that poor guy” who “looked like he was in shock.”  He went on to say
“that poor guy [Z ] just looked freaked by the time he left the class.”  (Ex. 41, pp. 2-3.)

11.

The District established that Respondent had, during the relevant time period, 
received direction and counseling regarding her behaviors.  The District has had policies in 
place that governed the actions of permanent teachers such as Respondent, and Respondent 
had notice of those policies.  Those policies proscribed Respondent’s misconduct.

12.

(A)  On May 29, 2009, following the events involving C

, Respondent 

had a conference with an assistant principal that dealt, in part, with the events regarding that 
student.  Respondent received a memo regarding the conference.  That memo cited 
provisions of the California Standards for the Teaching Profession (Cal. Standards), the 
LAUSD Code of Conduct (Conduct Code), LAUSD Code of Ethics (Ethics Code), and the
LAUSD Respectful Treatment of All Others Policy (Respect Policy).

(B)  According to the memo, Cal. Standards sections 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 were 
discussed with Respondent.  Also discussed was the Conduct Code, numbers 3 and 5, the 
Ethics Code, wherein it is stated teachers must treat students with respect, as well as similar 
provisions of the Respect Policy.

(C)  Copies of the Conduct Code, Cal. Standards, Ethics Code, and Respect 
Policy were transmitted to Respondent along with a copy of the memo issued after the May
28, 2009 meeting.

13.

(A)  At the beginning of every school year, all the teachers at Eagle Rock High 

School received a number of documents that set out District policies and procedures.  In the 
school years 2010-2011, 2011-2012, and 2012-2013, Respondent received copies of such 
documents at the beginning of each school year.

(B)  The documents received by Respondent at the beginning of each school 

year included the District’s Code of Conduct with Students, Conduct Code, Ethics Code, Cal. 

not credited by the Commission, but is a tacit admission of improper conduct.  She also 
attacked Z ’s credibility, claiming he had a chip on his shoulder.  (Ex. 41, p. 3.)

6

Standards, and the School Board’s Resolution pertaining to the respectful treatment of all 
persons.

(C)  The aforementioned documents put Respondent on notice of what she 

should know in any event:  that conduct tending to insult or demean students was improper.

14.

During the hearing Respondent stated she had never read the Ethics Code.  It 
is inferred she had not read the other policy materials that had been transmitted to her on a 
yearly basis.

Other Matters

15.

(A) Z did not testify at the hearing because he now resides in Arizona, 

beyond the reach of a subpoena.  He was deposed by both parties in June 2015.  Respondent 
argued that the credibility of his testimony should be scrutinized in light of the many times
he claimed, while being examined by Respondent’s counsel, not to recall something. 

(B)  As noted in the Legal Conclusions below, discerning a witness’s 

credibility from a cold transcript is problematic.  Z ’s nearly complete refusal to answer 
questions put to him by Respondent’s counsel, following a barrage of objections by District’s
counsel has harmed, but not destroyed, Z ’s credibility regarding the incident in October 
2012.  However, the bulk of his claims were corroborated by other witnesses and 
contemporaneous statements.  In this regard, the statements by S
day, memorialized in exhibit 41, supported the findings made on the incident with Z .

 to the police the next 

16.

Respondent’s credibility suffered during her testimony, in that she herself had 
memory lapses, and sometimes had a truculent demeanor during cross examination.  Further, 
testimony she gave in a deposition taken in connection with this proceeding, a deposition 
taken in connection with her workers’ compensation claim against the District, and testimony
during a workers’ compensation hearing, provided inconsistent positions on some of the key
events.  And, Respondent had made some damning admissions. As noted above, when
questioned by police the day after the incident with Z , she denied telling him to get a digit 
out of his ass, instead saying she told Z  to get his head out of his ass.  During the 
conference in May 2009, where her attitude toward Hispanic students was questioned, she 
said “you get called a racist all the time.  Doesn’t everyone?”  (Ex. 32, p. 105.)

17.

Respondent attempted to make these issues of her conduct into a case against 
the way the District is administered, and not about her behavior.  At times she claimed that 
she was being let go because the District wants to fire its higher-paid teachers.  There was no 
evidence she is among the highest paid teachers, nor was there a hint of such a motive on the 
District’s part.  When she received the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and Notice of 
Suspension in January 2013, she stated that the principal and other administrators in the 
District were acting like Nazis, “just following orders” like the senior Nazis claimed they had
been doing when they were brought to justice at Nuremberg after the Second World War.

7

Such pernicious insults had no justification. She has made claims of sexual harassment and 
retaliation that went unsupported.

18.

The record establishes that Respondent was counseled, informally and

formally, that she had to watch her behavior and guard against making hurtful statements.
The former principal at Eagle Rock High School testified that Respondent made hurtful 
comments about his accent, and he tried to get her to understand that she was being 
inappropriate.  Other supervisors testified to hearing occasional complaints from students 
that Respondent was saying inappropriate things in class, often with racial overtones or 
making statements that were demeaning of some of the students. Those supervisors 
counseled Respondent to take care not to act in an offensive manner.  Respondent failed to 
heed those warnings.

19. While trying to shift the focus in this case to the conduct of the students and 

District administrators, Respondent has failed to take any responsibility for her failure to 
abide by State and District standards of conduct, and her failure to abide by what most would 
consider good manners.  She has been unapologetic.

The Morrison Factors

20.

(A) Where there is conduct that might justify termination of a teacher, an 

examination must still be made of whether or not that conduct indicates that the Respondent 
in question is unfit to teach.  The misconduct must be shown to have some rational
connection, some nexus, to the teacher’s ability to teach in the District.

(B) This requirement was first set forth in Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 (Morrison). In that case a teacher had been discovered 
to be homosexual, though there had been no inkling of that fact within the school.  The
California Supreme Court held that such alone was not enough to discipline his teaching 
credential, requiring that some connection of his private conduct be made to his job duties 
and performance had to be shown. The court listed a number of factors that might be 
considered in determining whether or not unfitness to teach had been established.

21.

(A)  The first factor to consider is the likelihood that the conduct may have

adversely affected students or fellow teachers.  In this case, the record establishes an adverse 
.
effect upon students, especially C

, K.S., and her former friend A

, Z , S

(B)  Another factor is the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. In

this case the misconduct occurred over a four year period between 2009 and 2012.  The 
conduct is relatively recent.

(C)  Another factor is the type of certificate held by the teacher, which in this 

case is a single subject credential allowing Respondent to teach high school students.

8

(D)  Extenuating or aggravating circumstances is another factor under the 

Morrison case.  In this case there are no extenuating circumstances.  In aggravation,
Respondent had notice of District policies.  However, she kept herself in ignorance of the 
District’s Ethics Code and, inferentially, other policies.  (Factual Findings 11-14.)  She had 
been counseled on a formal and informal basis to watch her behavior and language. She did 
not.

(E) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct should be considered.  There is no praiseworthiness to the Respondent’s conduct.  It 
was blameworthy to act in a manner that would tend to cause hurt.  Further, to disclose 
A
justified on the grounds that the parent of K.S. wanted to know why her daughter’s 
performance was slipping.

’s grades to another student and parent was wholly inappropriate, and cannot be 

(F)  Another factor is the likelihood that the conduct in question will recur.

The Commission believes, based on all the evidence that there is a very high likelihood that 
Respondent’s misconduct will recur.  This is evidenced, in part, by her attitude toward the 
District and its administrators.  It is also shown by her attitude generally, as illustrated in her 
statements to the police about Z , and as described in Factual Findings 14 and 16 through 
19.

Legal Conclusions of General Application:

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to section

44944, and Factual Findings 1 through 4.

2.

“Unprofessional conduct” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), may be
defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct 
that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of Education v. 
Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)  However, the conduct in question, to amount to 
unprofessional conduct, must indicate unfitness to teach.  (Perez v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

3.

“Evident unfitness for service” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), 

properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by
reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” 
“evident unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 
merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing
school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at 1444.)

9

4.

“Immoral conduct,” of which Respondent has been accused, is not confined to 
sexual matters.  It has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals.  It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness.  Or, it can be conduct that 
is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. 
Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland); San Diego Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)

5.

In order for a teacher to be terminated under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), 

for persistent disobedience of applicable rules and regulations, it must be established that 
there has been continuous and constant refusal to obey, or behavior motivated by an attitude 
of continuing insubordination; a single instance of disobedience is insufficient.  (Governing
Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.)

6.

Even where unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for 

service, or refusal to follow rules and regulations is or are established, it must also be 
established that such conduct renders the Respondent unfit to teach.  (Morrison,supra;
Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208; Woodland Joint Unified 
School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1444-1445; See Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 
Cal.App.3d 317, 321.)

7.

(A) It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a 

witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens
v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 
testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions 
with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a 
cloth of truth out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)  Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a 
witness, even an expert, although not contradicted.  (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon
(1971) 3 Cal.3d  875, 890.)  And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute
substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality 
Assurance (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.)

(B)  The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to that which 

is deemed untrustworthy.  That is, disbelief does not create affirmative evidence to the 
contrary of that which is discarded.  That the trier of fact may disbelieve the testimony of a 
witness who testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself furnish any evidence in 
support of the affirmative of that issue, and does not warrant a finding in the affirmative 
thereof unless there is other evidence in the case to support such affirmative.  (Hutchinson v. 
Contractors’ State License Bd. (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. 
Central California Traction Co. (1923) 191 Cal.295, 304.)

10

(C) “On the cold record a witness may be clear, concise, direct, unimpeached,

uncontradicted—but on a face to face evaluation, so exude insincerity as to render his 
credibility factor nil. Another witness may fumble, bumble, be unsure, uncertain, contradict 
himself, and on the basis of a written transcript be hardly worthy of belief. But one who sees,

hears and observes him may be convinced of his honesty, his integrity, his reliability.”
(Wilson v. State Personnel Board (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 865, at 877-878, quoting Meiner v.
Ford Motor Co. (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 127, 140.)

Legal Conclusions Pertaining to the Specific Allegations of the FAA:

8.

Respondent’s conduct can be deemed unprofessional conduct.  However, 

Respondent may not be terminated for unprofessional conduct.  This is because complainant 
has not established that Respondent was served with a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and 
then provided with an opportunity to cure her unprofessional conduct after receiving such a 
notice.  The record indicates that Respondent was served with a Notice of Unprofessional 
Conduct on January 23, 2013.  (FAA, ex. 21, p. 3, l. 13; ex. 46..)  The record indicates that 
Respondent had been removed from the classroom thereafter, and not returned to the 
classroom.  This is fatal to the unprofessional conduct claim because she was not given the 
opportunity to cure her unprofessional conduct; a jurisdictional defect.
Commission on Professional Competence (1978) 84 Cal.App.3d 251; Woodland Joint 
Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1446.)  Further, there is no evidence of unprofessional conduct occurring after January 23,
2013.

(Tarquin v. 

9.

It was established that Respondent is evidently unfit for service within the 

meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), as further defined in Legal Conclusion 3.  It 
was established that she has fixed character traits that make her unsuitable for teaching in the 
District. While there is evidence of positive attributes—her development of an anthropology
course is to be credited—her temperament is such that she will invariably say hurtful and 
negative things to her students, and then attempt to fob off her maladroit statements as a joke 
gone awry.  Despite counseling and advice, she did not change her ways.  In the course of 
this process, which began with the service of the Notice of Unsatisfactory Performance,
Respondent has been defiant and unapologetic.

10.

It was not established that Respondent engaged in immoral conduct within the 

meaning of sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939, and the cases cited in Legal 
Conclusion 4.  Even the most serious incident—the incident involving Z —did not quite 
cross the line to immoral conduct.

11.

It was established that Respondent has engaged in persistent disobedience of 
applicable rules and regulations, because it was established that Respondent’s behavior was 
motivated by an attitude of disregard for applicable rules and policies.  That she kept herself 
ignorant of those rules speaks volumes.  There has been a consistent refusal to follow rules 

11

and regulations.  Her attitude toward her supervisors during office conferences, and during 
the hearing, indicates that Respondent has an insubordinate attitude.

12.

The Commission agrees unanimously that grounds for termination have been 

established; this includes consideration of the Morrison factors as set forth in Factual 
Findings 20 and 21.

ORDER

Respondent Arlene Schery shall be terminated as a certificated employee of the Los

Angeles Unified School District, forthwith.

February 12, 2016

February ____, 2016

February ____, 2016

DecuSigned  by: 

(dosent  D.  Menteya

___________________________
Joseph D. Montoya
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

____________________________
Andrea Adauto

____________________________
John Davis

12

motivated  by  an  attitude  of  disregard  for  applicable  rules  and  policies.  That  she  kept  herself 
ignorant  of  those  rules  speaks  volumes.  There  has  been  a  consistent  refusal  to  follow  rules 
and  regulations.  Her  attitude  toward  her  supervisors  during  office  conferences,  and  during 
the  hearing,  indicates  that  Respondent  has  an  insubordinate  attitude. 

12. 

The  Commission  agrees  unanimously  that  grounds  for  termination  have  been 

established;  this  includes  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  20  and  21. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Arlene  Schery  shall  be  terminated  as a  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District,  forthwith. 

January 

,  2015 

January 

,  2015 

January 

_,  2015 

; 
4 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Andrea  Adauto 

Jo: 

avis 

\ 

12

1446.)  Further,  there  is  no  evidence  of  unprofessional  conduct  occurring  after  January  23, 
2013. 

9, 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  as  further  defined  in  Legal  Conclusion  3. 
was  established  that  she  has  fixed  character  traits  that  make  her  unsuitable  for  teaching  in  the 
District.  While  she  there  is  evidence  of  positive  attributes-——her  development  of  an 
anthropology  course  is  to  be  credited—her  temperament  is  such  that  she  will  invariably  say 
hurtful  and  negative  things  to  her  students,  and  then  attempt  to  fob  off  her  maladroit 
statements  as  a  joke  gone  awry.  Despite  counseling  and  advice,  she  did  not  change  her  ways. 
In  the  course  of  this  process,  which  began  with  the  service  of  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Performance,  Respondent  has  been  defiant  and  unapologetic. 

It 

10. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the 

meaning  of  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939,  and  the  cases  cited  in  Legal 
Conclusion  4.  Even  the  most  serious  incident—the  incident  involving  ZJ}  did  not  quite 
cross  the  line  to  immoral  conduct. 

11. 

‘It  was  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  persistent  disobedience  of 
applicable  rules  and  regulations,  because  it  was  established  that  Respondent’s  behavior  was 
motivated  by  an  attitude  of  disregard  for  applicable  rules  and  policies.  That  she  kept  herself 
ignorant  of  those  rules  speaks  volumes.  There  has  been  a  consistent  refusal  to  follow  rules 
and  regulations.  Her  attitude  toward  her  supervisors  during  office  conferences,  and  during 
the  hearing,  indicates  that  Respondent  has  an  insubordinate  attitude. 

12. 

The  Commission  agrees  unanimously  that  grounds  for  termination  have  been 

established;  this  includes  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  20  and  21. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Arlene  Schery  shall  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District,  forthwith. 

January 

,  2015    

January  %  ,  2015 

January 

»  2015 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of Administrative  Hearings 

eden.  (Mogi 

Andrea  Adauto 

  

John  Davis 

12 

  

a
T

 
a

 
a
e

 
e
d
n

 
e
H

 
k
c
m

 
A

 
a

 
p
l

 
N
C

