 

 

BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
OCEANSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

 
 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
DAVID STELMACH,  
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
 
 
 
 

                                   Respondent. 

 

OAH No. 2014061028 
 
 
 
 

DECISION  

On December 17, 18 and 19, 2014, and January 20 and 21, 2015, a Commission on 

 
 
Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in Oceanside, California.  The 
Commission consisted of the following members:  Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law 
Judge; Haywood Finder, selected by respondent; and Rebeca Bravo, selected by the 
Oceanside Unified School District. 
 
 
Daniel R. Shinoff, and Amir Azimzadeh, Attorneys at Law, Stutz Artiano Shinoff & 
Holtz, represented Shelly Morr, Ed.D., Complainant, the District’s Associate Superintendent 
of Human Resources. 
 
 
David Stelmach, Respondent. 
 

Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented 

  On January 21, 2015, the matter was submitted.    
 
 

ISSUES 
 
Do grounds exist to terminate Mr. Stelmach’s employment with the Oceanside 

If so, is dismissal an appropriate discipline under all the circumstances? 

 
Unified School District?  
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 

 

 

SUMMARY 

 

David Stelmach, a high school English teacher, is a permanent certificated employee 

of the Oceanside Unified School District.  Complainant seeks to terminate Mr. Stelmach’s 
employment due to Mr. Stelmach’s alleged evident unfitness for service and alleged 
persistent violation of the District’s directives, rules and regulations.  

 
A preponderance of the evidence established that between October 24, 2012, and 

March 12, 2014, Mr. Stelmach behaved in a manner unbecoming an educator, persistently 
violated District policies and applicable rules, and demonstrated evident unfitness to serve as 
a teacher in the District.    
 

After applying relevant Morrison criteria, the Commission on Professional 
Competence concluded that Mr. Stelmach’s employment with the District must be 
terminated. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

1 

2. 

3. 

The accusation and other jurisdictional documents were served on Mr. 

On June 20, 2014, Complainant signed the accusation in her capacity as the 

On April 22, 2014, the District notified respondent of its intent to dismiss him 

Jurisdictional Findings 
 
 
from employment under Education Code sections 44934 and 44938.   
 
 
District’s Associate Superintendent of Human Resources.    
 
 
Stelmach, who timely filed a notice of defense and requested a hearing. 
 
 
On December 17, 2014, the record in the administrative action was opened.  
The parties argued motions in limine, and the administrative law judge decided the motions 
in limine outside the presence of the other Commission members.  After the administrative 
law judge ruled on the motions in limine, the Commission heard the parties’ opening 
statements.  Sworn testimony and documentary evidence were received.  Closing arguments 
were heard.  On January 22, 2015, the record was closed and the matter was submitted.   
 
Motions in Limine 
 
 
Education Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), to exclude all evidence pertaining to 
matters occurring more than four years prior to the District’s filing of the notice of intent to 

Mr. Stelmach’s motion in limine to exclude all evidence, pursuant to 

4. 

5. 

2 

 

 

 

dismiss, was granted in part and denied in part.1  Proposed Exhibits 61, 62, and 62, which 
involved purported incidents in 1998, were deemed time barred and excluded.  Exhibit 24, 
which involved an incident on August 26, 2012, was admitted for impeachment purposes 
only.2   
 
David Stelmach’s Background and Employment 
 

6. 

Mr. Stelmach possesses single subject credential in English.  Since 2010, Mr. 

Stelmach has taught English at El Camino High School (ECHS).    

 
7.  While at ECHS, Mr. Stelmach was supervised by Principal Robert Rowe and 

by Vice Principals Freddie Chavarria, Oscar Felix, Stephanie Locasio, and Kevin Thompson.   

  

8. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), complainant 

Disciplinary Action and Relevant Board Policies 
 
 
alleged that Mr. Stelmach is unfit to serve as a teacher and that he persistently violated 
District policies and applicable rules and regulations in violation of Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(7).  Specifically, the accusation details numerous alleged instances 
where Mr. Stelmach exhibited poor judgment and behavior and violated applicable District 
policies and rules.  The accusation alleges that Mr. Stelmach failed to refer a male student to 
administration for possible discipline after the student handcuffed a female student during 
class, that he returned the handcuffs to the student, and that he made inappropriate comments 
to the female student after the incident.   The accusation alleges that Mr. Stelmach allowed a 
non-student to remain in his class for an extended period of time and the non-student 
disrupted the class and upset a female student.  The accusation also alleges that Mr. Stelmach 
ignited incense in his classroom; smoked e-cigarettes during class; failed to report absences; 
and left his class unattended.    
 
 
9. 
were in effect.   
 

During Mr. Stelmach’s employment at OUSD, the following District policies 

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 1120 “Visitors/Students” stated in relevant part:  

To ensure the safety of students and staff and avoid potential 
disruptions, all visitors shall register immediately upon entering 
any school building or grounds when school is in session. 

                                                           

1 Pursuant to AB 215, effective January 1, 2015, this section of the Education Code 

was reorganized and renumbered.  The Education Code section cited here was in effect when 
the Notice of Charges was served on Mr. Stelmach.  

 
2 Government Code section 11513, subdivision (b), permits parties to impeach any 
witness.  A witness’s credibility may be impeached by “(t)he existence or nonexistence of 
any fact testified to by him.”  (Evid. Code § 780, subd. (i).)   

3 

 

 

 

 

 

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 1313 “Civility” stated in relevant part:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

It is the intent of the Board of Education to provide an orderly 
and safe learning environment in which students and adults feel 
comfortable, share the responsibility for maintaining a positive 
school climate and take pride in their school, its achievements, 
and its environment.   

This policy promotes mutual respect, civility, and orderly 
conduct among members of the school community including all 
employees, parents/guardians, students, and the public at all 
schools, district facilities . . . . 

The basic purpose of this policy is three-fold:  

1.  To promote a work and learning environment that is safe, 
productive, and nurturing for all staff and students and to 
encourage the free flow of ideas without fear of intimidation.  

2.  To provide our students with appropriate models for 

respectful problem-solving and conflict resolution, and 

3.  To reduce the potential triggers for violent conduct, such as 
fear, anger, frustration, and alienation, especially by making 
problem-solving procedures and alternatives to violence 
readily accessible to both students and adults.  

The Board of Education expects district employees to maintain 
the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, 
follow district policies and regulations, and abide by state and 
federal laws.  Employee conduct should enhance the integrity of 
the district and advance the goals of the district’s educational 
programs.  Each employee should make a commitment to 
acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to fulfill his/her 
responsibilities and should focus on his/her contribution to the 
learning and achievement of district students.  

[¶] . . . [¶]   

The Educator strives to help each student realize his/her 
potential as a worthy and effective member of society.  The 
educator therefore works to stimulate the spirit of inquiry, the 

4 

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 4119.21 Professional Standards stated:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

acquisition of knowledge and understanding, and the thoughtful 
formulation of worthy goals. 

In fulfillment of the obligation to the student, the educator:  

[ ] Shall make reasonable efforts to protect the student from 
conditions harmful to learning or to health and safety. . . .  

[ ] Shall not intentionally expose the student to embarrassment 
or disparagement . . . .   

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 3513.3 “Tobacco Free Schools” stated:  

The Board of Education recognizes the health hazards 
associated with smoking and the use of tobacco products, 
including the breathing of second-hand smoke, and desires to 
provide a healthy environment for students and staff.  

(cid:120)  OUSD/ BP 5114 “Attendance Records/Registers/Legal Surnames Attendance 

Records/Registers” stated:  

Attendance in all schools and classes shall be recorded and kept 
according to pertinent state laws and regulations of the State 
Board of Education.  

Teachers are required to take attendance in classes taught by 
them and shall do so personally.  Attendance taking and 
recording shall not be delegated to students.  

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 5131.62 “Tobacco” stated: 

The Board of Education recognizes that tobacco use presents 
serious health risks and desires to provide support and assistance 
in reducing the number of students who begin or continue to use 
tobacco.  The Superintendent or designee shall establish a 
comprehensive program that includes consistent enforcement of 
laws prohibiting tobacco possession and use by students, 
tobacco-use prevention education, and intervention and 
cessation activities and/or referrals.  

(cid:120)  OUSD/BP 5142 “Safety” stated:  

The Board of Education recognizes the importance of providing 
a safe school environment that is conducive to learning and 

5 

 

 

helps ensure student safety and the prevention of student-injury.  
The Superintendent or designee shall implement appropriate 
practices to minimize the risk of harm to students including, but 
not limited to, practices relative to school facilities and 
equipment, the outdoor environment, educational programs, and 
school-sponsored activities.   

(cid:120)  Education Code section 48901 provides as follows;  

(a) No school shall permit the smoking or use of tobacco, or any 
product containing tobacco or nicotine products, by pupils of 
the school while the pupils are on campus, or while 
attending school-sponsored activities or while under the 
supervision and control of school district employees.  

(b) The governing board of any school district maintaining a 
high school shall take all steps it deems appropriate to 
discourage high school students from smoking.  

(cid:120)  California Code of Regulations, title 19, section 3.25, provides as follows:  

(a) Open flame devices shall be prohibited in every Group A, E, 

I, R-2, R-3.1 and R-4 Occupancy.  

[¶] . . . [¶]   

(b) Under no circumstances shall hand held open flame devices 
such as exposed candles be permitted for any purpose in any 
occupancy within the scope of these regulations.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

10. 

TESTIMONY OF FREDDIE CHAVARRIA AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE  

The District’s Evidence  
 
 
 
 
duties include responding to parents’ concerns, evaluating teachers, and monitoring 
attendance.  At one point, he was responsible for security at the school.  In 2007 he was 
named San Diego County teacher of the year and was named administrator of the year by the 
Chamber of Commerce in 2012.  
 

Freddie Chavarria has been an Assistant Principal at ECHS since 2012.  His 

Bonnie Nicosia, the administrative assistant to the school’s principal, Mr. Rowe, told 
Mr. Chavarria that Mr. Stelmach was not attending to students in his class due to excessive 
absences.  As a result of Mr. Stelmach’s absences, security staff was required to supervise 
students until a substitute teacher could be found.  Based on the information he received from 

6 

 

Ms. Nicosia, Mr. Chavarria became concerned that Mr. Stelmach’s absences were becoming 
a pattern of conduct that might compromise student safety and learning and be inconsistent 
with District policy.   

 
Mr. Chavarria met with Mr. Stelmach in Mr. Chavarria’s office on an unspecific date 
in 2012 to discuss his concerns about Mr. Stelmach’s absences.  Mr. Chavarria believed that 
a teacher with Mr. Stelmach’s experience should understand the importance of having his 
classes covered when he was absent.  It was a given that a teacher would know to contact the 
school’s office when he or she was going to be absent on short notice.   

 
In the meeting, Mr. Chavarria expressed concern about Mr. Stelmach leaving his class 
unattended.  While Mr. Chavarria understood that Mr. Stelmach needed to leave school early 
due to his and his wife’s health issues and other personal problems, he stressed to Mr. 
Stelmach that he was required to notify Ms. Nicosia when he was going to leave early.  He 
also discussed with Mr. Stelmach that it was important for Mr. Stelmach to utilize the 
AESOP program (a program teachers accessed to arrange for substitutes to cover classes in 
their absence) and to utilize his calendar effectively to ensure that there was coverage for his 
classes.  Mr. Chavarria commented that it was frustrating that Mr. Stelmach didn’t know how 
to utilize AESOP effectively.  But, Mr. Chavarria felt that, overall, the meeting with Mr. 
Stelmach was positive.  

 
11.  On April 17, 2013, Mr. Chavarria visited Mr. Stelmach’s class after he 
encountered a student in the hall with a pass directing him to go to on-campus suspension.  
The student should have been in Mr. Stelmach’s class.  Mr. Chavarria testified that teachers 
do not have the authority to send students to OCS; only school administrators possess that 
authority.  OCS is not a study hall.  Mr. Chavarria summarized what he observed in an email 
he wrote the next day.   

 
In his email, Ms. Chavarria noted that, before he attended Mr. Stelmach’s class, he 
encountered a student with the OCS pass.  The student said he wanted to go to OCS to get 
work done instead of attending Mr. Stelmach’s to class.  This student told Mr. Chavarria that 
“all they have been doing is watching a movie (the Odyssey) for the last 4 days, and he 
wasn’t learning much from it.”  Mr. Chavarria escorted the student back to Mr. Stelmach’s 
class.  He decided to stay in his classroom and observe the class for about 20 minutes.  In his 
email, he summarized his concerns as follows:  Students were given about 15 minutes to 
copy and respond in their journals.  But the students completed the assignment in 5 minutes, 
and there was no follow through with the journal exercise.  Mr. Stelmach read pages from the 
Odyssey.  Some of the students were not following the classroom exercise, and Mr. Stelmach 
was not checking whether the students understood the materials.   

 
Mr. Chavarria also noted that one of Mr. Stelmach’s two teaching assistants was in 

his class when she should have been in Spanish class.  In addition, he learned that Mr. 
Stelmach sent two students to OCS on April 18, 2013.  Mr. Chavarria suggested to Mr. 
Stelmach that they meet to go over Mr. Chavarria’s concerns.  

 

 

7 

 

 

12.  Mr. Stelmach forcefully responded to Mr. Chavarria’s email on April 19, 
2013.  Mr. Stelmach questioned why Mr. Chavarria would “put any stock into what [the 
student Mr. Chavarria met in the hallway] says is going on in a class” because that student 
“HAS A 0.00 CUMULATIVE GPA.”  Mr. Stelmach explained that he sent two students to 
OCS because those students arrived at his class after the bell rang.  With reference to the two 
students in his class who were not enrolled in his class, Mr. Stelmach admitted these students 
were in his class.  Mr. Stelmach advised Mr. Chavarria that Mr. Drago, a Spanish language 
teacher, had issued passes authorizing these students to be in the classroom.  

 
Mr. Stelmach added the following comment regarding the issuance of passes by other 

teachers:  

 

I have his pass allowing them into my class with his signature.  
Some teachers, and you know this as well, as I do (but I’m not 
about to snitch them off), send students out with passes to my 
class and others every single day.  

 
Mr. Stelmach’s email dismissed Mr. Chavarria’s other concerns, particularly 

regarding the quality of classroom instruction.   

Principal Rowe and Mr. Stelmach exchanged a series of emails dated April 

19th, April 20th, and April 23rd.  Mr. Stelmach copied Mr. Chavarria on each of these 
emails.  Initially, Principal Rowe contacted Mr. Stelmach to arrange a meeting based on Mr. 
Chavarria’s concerns.  He was specifically concerned that students who were not enrolled in 
Mr. Chavarria’s class were in his classroom.   

 
In his two emails to Mr. Rowe, Mr. Stelmach conveyed irritation because Principal 
Rowe scrutinized his classroom teaching methods, expressed concern about students in his 
class who were not enrolled in his class, and expressed concern about his sending students to 
OCS.  In his email dated April 20, 2013, Mr. Stelmach insisted that he had the right to send 
students to OCS.  He wrote the following:  

 
13. 

 

As far as sending kids to OCS (study hall) b/c they are 
wandering campus.  Well for goodness sakes, isn’t keeping 
them in detention or even the library for that matter, better than 
allowing them to wander around campus?  One again [sic], this 
is a security question . . .  If you knew how many times I have 
called security on wandering students, and there have been no 
consequences.   

 
Mr. Stelmach attempted to explain why he should be allowed to send students to 

OCS, stating:  
 

I’m from the “Old School” regime.  I suffered plenty of 
consequences and was held accountable for the things I did 

8 

 

 

wrong in my formative years.  It just seems that the “coddling 
and pampering” of students nowadays is getting out of hand . . . .  

 
On April 23, 2013, Mr. Stelmach sent another email to Principal Rowe.  Again, Mr. 

Stelmach copied Mr. Chavarria.  In this email, Mr. Stelmach questioned why Principal Rowe 
faulted him for issuing OCS passes when other teachers did so.  Mr. Stelmach wrote the 
following to Principal Rowe:  

 

Obviously, I’m tired of this, and do not wish to be questioned 
anymore about students “hanging out” in my class.  NO PASS 
NOT ALLOWED IN MY CLASS.  No student is ever allowed 
into my class without a pass.  I don’t think I can make that any 
clearer.  
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
But when you feel like you are being “slung through the mud” 
as I do, well I guess it’s time for others to get dirty too.  I’d 
rather be judicious and professional myself, but what can you do 
when you are getting blamed for the actions of others? 
 

14. 

TESTIMONY OF BONNIE NICOSIA AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

Bonnie Nicosia is an administrative assistant at ECHS and secretary to the 

 
 
 
school principal.  She has been at ECHS since 2012.  Her duties include arranging for 
substitute teachers.   
 
 
Ms. Nicosia learned that Mr. Stelmach had a number of same-day absences where he 
left school before lunch or after lunch.  She told Mr. Chavarria about her concerns.  On two 
occasions that she could recall, security notified her that students were waiting unattended 
outside Mr. Stelmach’s classroom when Mr. Stelmach was absent.  She checked to see if Mr. 
Stelmach notified administration of his absences and determined he had not.  She contacted 
administrators to find out why Mr. Stelmach was not in the classroom and to get someone to 
fill in for him.   
 

Ms. Nicosia had advised all teachers that they were required to input any planned 

absence into the AESOP system.  In the event a teacher needed to leave early, it was 
imperative that the teacher contact Ms. Nicosia or the administration to arrange for a 
substitute.  It was the teacher’s responsibility to do this.  Ms. Nicosia stressed that a teacher 
was permitted to input an absence into AESOP as little as one hour before the intended 
absence; however, if it were less than an hour before the absence, the teacher was required to 
contact Ms. Nicosia directly to enable her to arrange for a substitute.  If Ms. Nicosia could 
not locate a substitute to supervise a class, Ms. Nicosia would attempt to find an 
administrator or a teacher who was on his or her preparation time to supervise the absent 
teacher’s class.   

9 

 

 

15.  A print out from the AESOP system was received in evidence.  It showed that 

 
from January 1, 2014, to April 4, 2014, Mr. Stelmach had seven absences, six of which 
required a substitute.  From January 1, 2013, to December 31, 2013, Mr. Stelmach had 24 
absences; 22 of those absences required a substitute; and five of those absences were not 
filled.  From January 3, 2012, to December 31, 2012, Mr. Stelmach had 22 absences, 21 of 
which required a substitute.  Seven of those absences were not filled.  

16. 

 
TESTIMONY OF STEPHANIE LOCASIO AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

Stephanie Locasio has been an Assistant Principal at ECHS for two years.  She 

 
 
 
supervises the special education program and is involved in discipline.    
 
 
On March 25, 2013, as part of a school-wide sweep, Assistant Principal Locasio 
visited Mr. Stelmach’s class with a drug sniffing dog.  She immediately noticed that Mr. 
Stelmach was burning incense in the classroom.  Assistant Principal Locasio spoke with Mr. 
Stelmach about that activity.  Mr. Stelmach told her that he needed to burn incense to cover a 
dead animal odor in the classroom.  Assistant Principal Locasio confirmed that Mr. Stelmach 
was not authorized to burn incense in the classroom.  She learned that applicable fire codes 
prohibited open flames in the classroom.  In an email Assistant Principal Locasio sent to Mr. 
Stelmach on March 25, 2013, she documented the fact that he was burning incense in his 
classroom, that she had asked him to refrain from doing so, and that doing so violated fire 
codes.  She copied Principal Rowe in this communication.  
 
 
absences from school and children being left unsupervised as a result.  Assistant Principal 
Locasio observed unsupervised students from Mr. Stelmach’s class in the hallway due to his 
classroom absences.  She explained that unsupervised high school students pose a particular 
problem because they will wander from their classrooms and cause trouble.  To have a 
teacher cover Mr. Stelmach’s class, she tried to persuade teachers on their preparation time to 
supervise students in his classroom.  She noted that it was difficult because teachers always 
feel their preparation time is important. Assistant Principal Locasio spent considerable effort 
to get teachers to cover Mr. Stelmach’s classes.  
 

17.  Assistant Principal Locasio was aware of issues involving Mr. Stelmach’s 

 

TESTIMONY OF KL AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE  
  
18.  KL is the mother of CL, who was a junior in Mr. Stelmach’s English class in 
2013.  KL was concerned because her daughter was getting unexcused absences.  She was 
also concerned about her daughter’s education in Mr. Stelmach’s class.  CL told her that 
there were students in her class who shouldn’t be there.  KL talked to administrative assistant 
Sue Degraft about her concerns, and Ms. Degraft suggested that she sent an email to 
Principal. Rowe.  KL elected not to send her concerns directly to Mr. Stelmach.  On May 16, 
2013, she sent an email that documented her concerns to Principal Rowe.  The document  
reads as follows:  
 
 

10 

 

 

 

Bob,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

I have a few concerns concerning (CL’s) English teacher, Mr. 
Stelmach 

-In the past two months I have received tel-a-parent call from 
attendance stating that (CL) wasn’t in class, when in fact she 
was.  Last semester she also had to [sic] unexcused [sic] that 
were do [sic] to early release for her water-polo games with EC.  
Those are still showing unexcused.  

-My daughter informed me that there are numerous times that 
the teacher is doing this own things instead of teaching . . . 
doing his taxes or working on personal things.  

-In my opinion movies are watched way too often in this class.  

-also it has been observed there are students in his class do not 
belong in the class and passes are issued to students when they 
are not Mr. Stelmach’s students.  

As always thank you for caring about all the EC kids and 
pushing them to do their absolute best in school.  

Thanks for calling out your concerns to Mr. Rowe, after all he is 
in charge of ECHS, and that’s fine.  As for concerns about your 
daughter, who transferred into my class mid semester, it is 
always a fine idea to consult that adult, per the notion that we, as 
consenting adults, have a more direct communication as to what 
is transpiring.  To address your concerns we will start with 
(CL’s) attendance.  If she does not check in and goes into Mary 
Noble’s room . . . if she doesn’t check in with me then (CL) will 
most likely be marked absent.  (I have no problem with Mrs. 
Noble, who emails me quite frequently about [CL]; and [CL’s] 
desire to see her boyfriend who is also in that class). . . .  
 
The bottom line is that (CL) is rarely in my class to observe 
much, much less comment much on what is taking place.  There 
are no students allowed in my class without a pass, and the one 

11 

19.  KL was surprised when Mr. Stelmach replied directly to her in an email dated 

May 28, 2013, because she thought she was expressing her concerns confidentially to 
Principal Rowe.  Mr. Stelmach’s email made her upset and angry because he appeared to 
criticize and punish CL.  She found the email rude.  Mr. Stelmach’s e-mail contained the 
following:  
 

 

 

 

boy  . . . who tries to sneak in gets removed under duress of 
punitive action by security.  

The end result is that (CL) will not be allowed out of period 6 
anymore . . .  She will report on time, take a seat, hopefully not 
argue or challenge me on this.  (The original includes a digital 
happy face.) . . . . 

 

 

. . . .  

20. 

Subsequent to sending the email to Principal Rowe, KL learned that her 

daughter had been handcuffed in the classroom by another student and that Mr. Stelmach had 
accused CL of plagiarism soon after KL sent the email to Principal Rowe.  KL felt that Mr. 
Stelmach had retaliated against her daughter for the email KL sent to Principal Rowe.  KL 
further discovered that Mr. Stelmach shared the email she sent to Principal Rowe with CL’s 
class.  At that point she felt that her daughter was no longer safe in Mr. Stelmach’s 
classroom.  As a result, KL had CL transferred to another classroom.  

 
TESTIMONY OF CL AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
 
21. 

CL graduated in 2014.   

CL attended Mr. Stelmach’s Junior English class the second semester in 2013.  

 

 
In February 2013, during Mr. Stelmach’s class, a male student, D, brought handcuffs 
to the class.  D, tried to handcuff CL to a bar in the class.  Other male students held her down 
so D could place the handcuffs on her.  The handcuffs were tight on her wrist, and several 
times, CL told D to stop.  CL broke free “from them” and asked D to give her the key so that 
she could unlock the handcuffs.   

 
CL was upset and left the classroom.  There were bruises up and down her arm, and 
the skin was broken.  Mr. Stelmach followed CL as she left the class room.  Mr. Stelmach 
asked her if she was ok.  He then told her “not to worry about it because boys will be boys.”  
CL did not return to class that day.  

To CL’s surprise, a few days after the incident, D came to class with the 

handcuffs and proudly displayed them so that the class could see them.  Mr. Stelmach told 
the class, “Don’t handcuff (CL) again or she’ll cry and tell on you again.”  CL testified that 
D attempted to handcuff other students.  In his hearing testimony, Mr. Stelmach admitted 
that he returned the handcuffs to D.  The handcuffing incident came to Principal Rowe’s 
attention several months after it occurred, when Principal Rowe spoke with CL after her 
mother sent him the email.  CL completed a statement for Principal Rowe.  CL adopted her 
statement in her hearing testimony. 

 
22. 

 

12 

 

 

 

CL testified that because of the handcuffing incident, she didn’t want to attend Mr. 

Stelmach’s class.  She then went, at times, to another teacher’s class, Ms. Noble’s class, 
before she transferred to Mr. Miller’s class.   

 
23.  After her mother sent the email to Principal Rowe, CL went to class and saw 

that Mr. Stelmach was typing on the computer.  Her mother’s email was projected on the 
class screen so that the entire class could see it.  Mr. Stelmach told the class, “No one is 
leaving because a parent called and complained, and there will be no more movies being 
watched.”  Mr. Stelmach then told the class, “I’m going to read the email, but keep it 
anonymous.”    
 
24. 

In the statement CL wrote for Principal Rowe, CL described a number of 

incidents that took place in Mr. Stelmach’s classroom.  CL also testified about these 
incidents.  According to CL, when Mr. Stelmach had his computer on in class, whatever was 
on his computer was displayed on a screen for the entire class to see.  This included emails 
from parents, student grades, and Google searches.  

 
CL also testified that Mr. Stelmach smoked “Blu” brand e-cigarettes in the classroom 

and that he permitted students to smoke e-cigarettes.  She was familiar with “Blu” brand e-
cigarettes because her brother smoked that brand.  CL observed that Mr. Stelmach burned 
incense in class, and she saw students playing with the incense sticks in the classroom.   

 
CL described Mr. Stelmach as a teacher who was not focused on teaching or the 

students.  She testified that Mr. Stelmach showed a lot of movies in class and talked about 
his personal problems.  Specifically, he told the class about the problems he was having with 
his wife and why they were having marital problems.  Mr. Stelmach also used classroom 
time to prepare his taxes.  When he was preparing his taxes, he told the students that they 
could do whatever assignments they had.   

 
CL said that student D, the student involved in the handcuffing incident, brought three 
laser pointers to class and flashed one of them at her during testing.  This incident appears to 
be the incident that Assistant Principal Felix witnessed.  When CL complained about D using 
the laser pointer, CL said other students took it from him to “save” him from discipline.   

 
CL did not believe that she plagiarized her essay.  CL testified that, when Mr. 

Stelmach assigned the essay, he said students were permitted to use outside sources.  CL 
believed that Mr. Stelmach accused her of plagiarizing the essay and lowered her grade in 
retaliation for her mother’s email to Principal Rowe.   

The Commission found CL fully credible.  

 
25. 
 
TESTIMONY OF OSCAR FELIX AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

26.  Oscar Felix has been an Assistant Principal at ECHS for three years.  He has 

credentials as a counselor and administrator.   

13 

 

 

 

 

On April 24, 2013, Assistant Principal Felix walked into Mr. Stelmach’s classroom 
when students were taking the California Standard Test (STAR).  Mr. Stelmach was on the 
phone and didn’t notice Assistant Principal Felix until he was one foot from his desk.  
Assistant Principal Felix noticed a student using a laser pointer to distract other students who 
were taking the test.  After the class, the student admitted to Assistant Principal Felix that he 
was using a laser pointer to distract other students.  Assistant Principal Felix sent Mr. 
Stelmach an email summarizing his concerns.  It stated: 
 

On Wednesday it was brought to my attention that there was a 
student using a laser pointer during testing to distract students 
while testing was going on.  It is very important that we monitor 
students throughout the entire testing period.  These are high 
stakes and may be compromised rather easily by our students.  
 
When I walked in to your classroom, to take the student to my 
office, I found it concerning that you were sitting at your desk 
on your phone and it took for me to be a foot from your desk for 
you to look up.  During this time a student could have walked 
out of class or engaged in cheating or other behaviors that are 
inappropriate during testing  . . . .  

27.  Mr. Stelmach responded to Assistant Principal Felix’s email a few minutes 

later.  He began with the comment, “And the hits keep coming.”  Mr. Stelmach added that he 
didn’t need “to be questioned on whether I can have my phone out looking at calendar dates 
during testing.”  He said he had “no idea” that a student had a laser pointer.  He said he 
hoped that the student who used the laser pointer would be suspended. 
 
 
Principal Felix that stated:  
 

Mr. Stelmach, then, a few minutes after this email, sent a second email to Assistant 

You have afforded me no respect in your last email . . .  Please 
don’t sign “Respectfully.”  BTW-I love the Emerson and Twain 
quotes at the end of your email.  Those are cool.  And that is an 
example showing a sign of respect.  You have shown me none.  

Assistant Principal Felix testified that he was surprised by the hostile tone of Mr. 

Stelmach’s email. 

 
28.  Assistant Principal Felix had contact with one of Mr. Stelmach’s students, EH, 
on March 12, 2014.  EH was referred by administrative assistant Maile Lombard, who found 
EH crying in the hall and was concerned about her safety.  EH told Assistant Principal Felix 
that she was upset because, while she was in Mr. Stelmach’s classroom, EQ, who was a 
visitor at ECHS, displayed images of Satan on the class projector screen and talked about 
satanic worship.  This greatly upset EH.  EQ was a former student, whom Mr. Stelmach 
allowed in the class.     

14 

 

 

 

 

29.  After speaking to EH, Assistant Principal Felix sent a confidential email to 

staff regarding EQ.  In this email, Mr. Felix advised staff, “Former student EQ has been seen 
coming on campus and being disruptive.  It is important that we inform security or an 
administrator if EQ is seen on campus.”  Assistant Principal Felix later learned that Mr. 
Stelmach displayed this email to his class.  Assistant Principal Felix commented that Mr. 
Stelmach should not have displayed the email for security reasons.  Assistant Principal Felix 
also said he was concerned that Mr. Stelmach was unable to provide a safe environment for 
EH to learn and be productive.   
 

30.  Mr. Stelmach replied to Assistant Principal Felix in an email dated March 12, 
2014.  Mr. Stelmach acknowledged that he had allowed EQ to be in his class, but he blamed 
security for allowing him to be in his class in the first place, claiming, EQ “slip(ped) by 
security.”  Mr. Stelmach also confirmed that EQ was engaging in troubling behavior in his 
class.  He wrote that EQ likes “to shock people with his Satanist philosophies” and added 
that “it is better that he stays at home and keeps it to himself.”  

 

 
TESTIMONY OF EH AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

31. 

EH was Mr. Stelmach’s student during the 2013/2014 school year.   

32.  On March 12, 2014, EH became upset because EQ, the former student, was 
present in Mr. Stelmach’s classroom and often talked about the devil.  On March 12, 2014, 
EQ displayed to the class on Mr. Stelmach’s computer the satanic “image of how to sacrifice 
a goat”.  EH asked EQ to take down the image.  She left the classroom upset and went to Ms. 
Lombard’s office.  Ms. Lombard asked that EH speak with Assistant Principal Felix.  
Assistant Principal Felix asked that EH complete a witness statement detailing the incident.  
 

33. 

In her statement, EH said that EQ had been coming into Mr. Stelmach’s class 
every day for over a month, and he always talked to Mr. Stelmach about Satan.  EQ claimed 
that Satan means “truth” and “the history of Satan should be respected and seen as he should 
be-our lord not God.”  As Mr. Stelmach started to teach the class, EQ sat down at Mr. 
Stelmach’s desk.  He accessed a website that had a “star on it and Satan written in red 
letters.”  Others students yelled, “You’re a Satanist?”  EH asked EQ to please take the 
website off the projector.  EQ replied, “Why, do you have a problem with it?”  EQ removed 
the image.   
 
 
stomach.”  She described herself as a “strong believer in God.”  EH commented that she 
didn’t think a student who had already graduated should be allowed to come into a class and 
make people feel unsafe.  
 

In her statement, EH added that EQ made her uncomfortable, “like the sinking in your 

34. 

In response to EH’s concerns, Assistant Principal Felix sent the confidential 
email mentioned above to teachers and classified staff at ECHS.  The following day, before 
class started, Mr. Stelmach displayed Mr. Felix’s email on the classroom projector screen 
“for a couple of minutes.”     

15 

 

 

 

35. 

Shortly afterwards, on March 17, 2014, EH met with Principal Rowe about the 
incident.  Principal Rowe wrote a note summarizing EH’s statement.  According to the note, 
EH told Principal Rowe that Mr. Stelmach asked EH, after he displayed Assistant Principal 
Felix’s email regarding EQ to the class, “Were you the one that told the office about (EQ)?” 
She said that she felt Mr. Stelmach blamed her for getting EQ kicked out.  EH also stated that 
Mr. Stelmach said, “You made it sound like he is a fugitive” and “It was not his fault because 
the office gave (EQ) a pass.”  EH acknowledged at the hearing that she made these 
statements.  
 
 
concerns to go this far.  She felt that Mr. Stelmach was a good teacher.  
 

EH said she didn’t want to get Mr. Stelmach in trouble and that she didn’t want her 

36.   The Commission found EH’s testimony fully credible.  
 
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT ROWE AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

37. 

Robert Rowe was principal at ECHS during the relevant period in this matter.  
He has worked at the District for 34 years.  He has served as principal at four schools within 
the District.  He holds a multi-subject teaching credential and an administrator’s credential.   

 
ECHS has over 3000 students, 115 teachers and a staff of around 50 persons.  The 

physical plant of the school is large, approximately 50 acres.  

 
38. 

 
39. 

 
40. 

Principal Rowe described the primary duty of a principal as being to help 

create a safe and challenging work environment for students and teachers.  To achieve the 
goal of a safe and challenging learning environment for all students and staff, Principal Rowe 
stressed that teachers must effectively utilize every minute of class time.  He emphasized that 
teachers may refer disruptive students to administrators, but it is a long-standing policy that 
teachers do not have the authority to refer students to OCS.  Only administrators have that 
authority.  For safety and security reasons, a teacher may not issue a pass to a disruptive 
student.   A teacher’s lack of authority to issue a pass also applies to a student who is not 
achieving in a teacher’s class.  A teacher cannot issue a pass to an underachieving student 
that permits the student to attend another class.  Principal Rowe emphasized that the teacher 
has the responsibility to continue to work with an underachieving student.  Similarly, for 
safety and security reasons, a teacher may not have students in the classroom who are not 
enrolled in the class.  

Principal Rowe is familiar with Mr. Stelmach through two letters of reprimand 

he issued to Mr. Stelmach and through his work with Mr. Stelmach to improve Mr. 
Stelmach’s teaching aptitude.    

Principal Rowe issued a first letter of reprimand to Mr. Stelmach on May 2, 

2013, for these reasons:  On October 24, 2012 (although the letter incorrectly references 
October 24, 2013) Mr. Stelmach left school after the 3rd period without notifying anyone on 
the staff as he had been previously instructed to do.  On March 25, 2013, he lit incense in his 

16 

 

 

classroom; on several occasions, Mr. Stelmach had students in his classroom who were not 
on his roster.  On April 16, 2013, Mr. Stelmach issued a pass during the third period for two 
students who were enrolled in other classes.  In an email he sent to Mr. Stelmach on April 
19, 2013, Principal Rowe noted that he received a “note/pass on April 16, 2013 with Mr. 
Stelmach’s signature sending two students to the library at 9:42 a.m. when one of them was 
supposed to be in Algebra I.”  On April 23, 2013, Mr. Stelmach sent two students outside his 
classroom with State STAR CST (California Standards Tests) testing material while they 
waited for security to pick them up.  

In the letter of reprimand, Principal Rowe advised Mr. Stelmach that he was 

not to have non-roster students present in his classroom unless he has an agreement with the 
teachers and administrators.  He instructed Mr. Stelmach to stop burning incense.  Principal 
Rowe directed Mr. Stelmach to use the AESOP system in a timely manner and to notify 
administration if an emergency arises that causes him to need to leave school early.    

In his testimony, Principal Rowe noted that Mr. Stelmach empowered students 

to ditch classes they did not want to attend, allowed non-roster students into his classroom, 
and issued passes for students to leave his class.  Mr. Stelmach’s practices in this regard 
created anger and concern among high school staff.  Principal Rowe found such behavior 
very unprofessional.  He commented that Mr. Stelmach, in his response to the reprimand, did 
not deny that he had issued the passes to students.   

Principal Rowe was also concerned about Mr. Stelmach’s excessive absences 

and his failure to notify staff when he left school despite being counseled to notify staff when 
he left school early.   

Principal Rowe said that Mr. Stelmach violated the STAR testing protocols by 

allowing students to leave the classroom with the testing materials.  All teachers receive 
extensive training concerning how to proctor the tests.  Teachers also sign affidavits wherein 
they acknowledge the testing protocols.  Due to Mr. Stelmach’s protocol breach, Principal 
Rowe notified the State Department of Education.   

 
45.  With respect to Mr. Stelmach burning incense in his class, Principal Rowe said 

that Mr. Stelmach told him that he had been using the incense for one and one-half years to 
cover up a dead animal odor in the classroom.  

In his response to this reprimand dated May 31, 2013, Mr. Stelmach did not 

deny that he committed the violations Principal Rowe documented.  He attributed the 
violations to “human error” and acknowledged that “there have been a few minor incidents.”  
At the same time, he accused Principal Rowe of embellishing the infractions he committed.  
Mr. Stelmach’s response was noteworthy for its flippant tone.  He wrote:  

 
41. 

 
42. 

 
43. 

 
44. 

 
46. 

 

On 10/24/13 I certainly intend to follow these expectations 
(oops, but you have to admit this sarcasm evokes a slight grin.)  
That’s about it.  No more incense.  No more unexpected 

17 

 

 

stairwell plunges.  No more writing library passes to late 
students or students not in my class that period.  And no more 
CST “slip ups.”  One more thing, if the CST violation was so 
egregious and unprofessional, then why wasn’t I removed as a 
proctor?  After all, the incident in question did happen on day 1 
of CST testing.   

 
Mr. Rowe reprimanded Mr. Stelmach again on June 3, 2013, following his 
investigation into CL’s mother’s concerns.  Principal Rowe reprimanded Mr. Stelmach for 
these reasons:  Mr. Stelmach failed to refer the student who handcuffed CL to administration 
for discipline; Mr. Stelmach smoked “Blu” brand e-cigarettes, a nicotine based product, in 
the classroom; and Mr. Stelmach had used all his allotted sick time and had gone into a 50% 
pay status for every year since 1999/2000.  Mr. Rowe noted CL’s mother’s concern that Mr. 
Stelmach had punished CL because of the email her mother sent on May 8th.   
 

Mr. Rowe emphasized that Mr. Stelmach should have reported the student who 

handcuffed CL to administration because the handcuffing incident involved “an egregious 
act of violence.”  He cited numerous Education Code sections3 in support of this conclusion.  
He advised Mr. Stelmach to notify administration in the future of any similar misconduct.  
He also directed Mr. Stelmach to refrain from smoking e-cigarettes in class.  

 
47.  Mr. Rowe learned about the handcuffing incident after he interviewed CL on 
May 29, 2013.  Mr. Rowe interviewed students JF and LG on June 12, 2013.  During those 
interviews, he discovered other conduct of concern.  Both students reported that Mr. 
Stelmach smoked e-cigarettes in class.  In particular, JF heard Mr. Stelmach tell a student, 
“I’m 43 years old, and I can do what I want.”  LG said that she saw Mr. Stelmach smoke an 
e-cigarette when students were taking a test.  

 
48.  Mr. Stelmach responded to the letter of reprimand in a letter dated June 24, 

2013.  In his response, Mr. Stelmach minimized the handcuffing incident and portrayed 
himself as the victim of Principal Rowe’s investigation.  He wrote:  

 

Yes, I took care of the situation with security present (February 
2013).  The boy in question was reprimanded and presented 
with a mini-restraining order.  My mini-restraining order, of 
course, and the boy was not to have any more contact or be 
within 20 ft of (C.L.), for the rest of the semester.  I spoke with 
(C.L.) outside at the end of class, and explained this to her.  She 
seemed relieved and grateful.  Little did I know that this issue 
would be brought up four months later, as a result of a 

                                                           

3 Pursuant to Education Code sections 48900, subdivision (a)(1), 48900a.2, 48900, 

subdivision (a)(2), 48900, subdivision (k), 48900, subdivision (o), a superintendent or 
principal may suspend or discipline a student who engages in acts or threats of violence, 
intimidation, or harassment.  

18 

 

 

 
49. 

 

 
51. 

 
52. 

plagiarized paper as the catalyst for Bob Rowe’s investigation.  
If it was so “egregious” as Mr. Rowe stated, then why did it take 
four months to be initially raised by either parent or student?  
And why wasn’t it included in the original May 8, 2013 email 
concern from (C.L.’s mother) to Mr. Rowe?   

In this letter, Mr. Stelmach also said that he did not understand why Mr. Rowe 

even investigated CL’s mother’s concerns.  He insisted that she should have contacted him, 
instead of going to administration, about her concerns about her daughter’s instruction in the 
classroom.  He wrote, in part:  

Why perform an investigation because of one parent’s claim of 
retaliation?  What about “keys to excellence” and 
OWNERSHIP?  Did (CL and her mother) want to become 
accountable for her plagiarized essay, or just shift the focus of 
the blame my way with the bogus claim of retaliation? 
. . .  Mr. Stelmach becomes the third teacher for (C.L.) in less 
than 6 months??? . . .  Once again, out of 2500 students, why 
send out preferential treatment to this student?  And is there a 
pattern here?  Should there be an investigation based on her 
situation rather than on a parent complaint?  I maintain my 
belief that the parent . . . should have contacted me directly 
about her daughter. 
 

50.  Mr. Stelmach did not deny that he smoked e-cigarettes in class.  But Mr. 

Stelmach was puzzled as to why he should be reprimanded for this because the e-cigarettes 
contained only water vapor.  He also disagreed that he should be reprimanded for his 
absences.   

In his testimony, Principal Rowe elaborated on the June 3, 2013, letter of 

reprimand.  He stressed that Mr. Stelmach did not have the right to take care of the 
handcuffing incident on his own with a “mini-restraining order.”  He described the 
handcuffing incident as involving an “egregious” lack of supervision.  Because the incident 
involved violence, Mr. Stelmach was required to refer the offending student to 
administration, who would determine the appropriate level of discipline.  Principal Rowe 
added that, as a role model for students, it was not appropriate for Mr. Stelmach to smoke e-
cigarettes at school, whether or not the product contained nicotine, and it also was not 
appropriate for him to allow students to smoke e-cigarettes.  Principal Rowe said the District 
expected teachers to model good behavior and that smoking anything in the classroom 
conflicted with good behavior.      

Principal Rowe believed that though CL had plagiarized the essay, Mr. 

Stelmach’s response still involved his retaliation against CL because her mother complained.  
Principal Rowe found the following noteworthy:  within 20 minutes after Principal Rowe 
sent the email to Mr. Stelmach, Mr. Stelmach contacted him to tell him that CL had 

19 

 

 

plagiarized the essay; Mr. Stelmach never approached Mr. Rowe before about plagiarism; 
and soon after CL’s mother complained about Mr. Stelmach, Mr. Stelmach changed CL’s 
class grade from an A to C.   

 
53.  An email Mr. Stelmach sent to Principal Rowe on May 29, 2013 substantiates 

Principal Rowe’s concern that Mr. Stelmach targeted CL.4  At the beginning of this email 
Mr. Stelmach stated, “Our dear (CL) has turned in a plagiarized essay.”  Mr. Stelmach then 
included a link and copied the material from the link into the email he sent to Mr. Rowe.  
With evident anger, Mr. Stelmach wrote the following:  

 

 

 

 
55. 

The majority of her essay has been copied from the internet.  
This was a huge portion of their recent grade.  She turned in her 
Controversial Historical topic essay on time but it is entirely 
someone else’s work.  I will immediately bring this to the 
attention to her mom, the district, and governing authorities who 
copyrighted the website.  

 

The Moral of this parable is:  People who live in glass houses 
shouldn’t throw stones.  Biblical version:  “Let he who is 
without sin cast the first stone.”  

 
54.  After Mr. Rowe issued the reprimand to Mr. Stelmach, Mr. Rowe learned that, 

as CL testified, Mr. Stelmach read CL’s mother’s email for the whole class and he told the 
class, “No one is leaving because a parent called and complained, and there will be no more 
movies being watched.”  Mr. Rowe described that conduct as very unprofessional.  He noted 
that it was inappropriate to share the concerns of a parent with the entire class.  The email 
embarrassed CL, and it made her feel awkward among her peers.  Mr. Rowe said, “It was 
like saying we are not going to have fun anymore.”   

Principal Rowe also testified about the incident involving former student EQ.  

On March 13, 2014, Principal Rowe sent Mr. Stelmach an email that stated:   

I learned yesterday that a past student (EQ) who graduated last 
year has been in your class for the past couple of months 
without authorization.  EQ did have permission to work in the 
AARC under Mr. Vince Daughtery’s supervision.  However, 
EQ did not have permission to be in your room.   

I am especially concerned because in a formal Letter of 
Reprimand dated May 2, 2013, you were specifically instructed 
to not have students who are not in your classroom without pre-

                                                           

4  An hour before Mr. Stelmach sent the email to Mr. Rowe, he sent an email to CL’s 
mother that criticized CL for matters unrelated to plagiarism.  CL’s mother was bothered by 
the email and found it “rude.”  This email is quoted above.    

20 

 

 

arrangement with administration.  I realize (EQ) graduated last 
June and may or may not be a student, but the intent is not to 
have anyone in you room without pre-arrangement with 
administration.  I would think it is common sense. 

 

 

She also reported in a written statement . . . that EQ was allowed 
to get on your teacher computer.  Subsequently, EQ projected 
on the class big screen images from a “Satanist” website for the 
entire class to see while you were moving to the front of the 
class to begin reading.  She said, the class saw a “red star on a 
black background and the word “Satan” [sic] written in red 
letters next to it.”  She states that she asked you take down the 
offense pictures and you told her “why do you have a problem 
with it.”  
 
She went on to write about how the entire situation made her 
uncomfortable and how it “makes people feel unsafe.”  

To compound the issues, you created a hostile and intimidating 
situation on the following day, March 13, 2014 by displaying a 
“confidential” email from Mr. Oscar Felix dated March 12, 
2014, which notified all staff to contact security or an 
administrator if they saw (EQ) on campus.  She informed me 
that she felt you blamed her for EQ being kicked out of the class 
and the school.  

 
56.  Mr. Stelmach sent two emails to Mr. Rowe on March 17th.  Mr. Stelmach sent 

the first email at 8:03 a.m.  It stated that EQ was never a “disruption.” Mr. Stelmach wrote 
that he was “mentoring” EQ because he saw EQ as “a confused young adult.”  The email 
added that, because EQ had a visitor’s pass, EQ had a right to be in his class.  He suggested 
that Mr. Rowe “demeaned,” “vilified,” and slandered him by the way he described the 
incident.  Mr. Stelmach, in particular, disputed discussions he purportedly had with EQ 
regarding Satan.  He requested that Principal Rowe interview the majority of the students in 
his class to determine whether these students felt unsafe. 

 
Mr. Stelmach sent his second email to Mr. Rowe at 9:48 a.m.  This email stated:  
 

If she feels so “UNSAFE” then why is was [sic] attending my 
class on Friday?  And today? And why does she get to wear 
earbuds in class?  She is the only one with them on.  Is she 
exempt from the rules?  I asked her on Friday not to wear them.  
Should I write her a referral for breaking rule #8 on the Teacher 
to Student to Parent Contract?  Or is that considered 
“retaliation?”  Please let me know ASAP b/c I WANT TO DO 
THE RIGHT THING by your standards.  

21 

 

 

 

 
57.  Another allegation involved the claim of a substitute teacher, Mike Heinz, who 

complained about the state of Mr. Stelmach’s class on February 11, 2014.  In his note, Mr. 
Heinz described Mr. Stelmach’s class as “total chaos.”  He said he could not find any lesson 
plans until late in the class period because the plan was at the bottom of a stack of papers.  
He said there were no seating charts for the class, and he was unable to take class attendance.  
He said the class phone was not operable.    
 

In response, Principal Rowe sent Mr. Stelmach an email directing him to have a 

seating chart and lesson plans readily available for substitute teachers.   
 

58. 

In addition, Principal Rowe testified that Mr. Stelmach failed to timely turn in 

weekly classroom attendance reports.  Principal Rowe received an email from Jill Rizzuto, 
Attendance Clerk at ECHS, dated June 3, 2013, concerning that matter.  In her email, Ms. 
Rizzuto noted that for the 2012/2013 school year, Mr. Stelmach did not return any of his 
weekly attendance reports.    
 

59.  On cross-examination, Principal Rowe acknowledged that, in an email dated 

December 12, 2011, he had described Mr. Stelmach as “not being the strongest teacher.”  At 
the hearing, Mr. Rowe admitted he made a mistake when he sent the email containing this 
characterization.   

 
TESTIMONY OF SHELLY MORR AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

60. 

Shelly Morr, Ed.D., is currently the Superintendent of the Santa Rita School 
District in Monterey, California.  She has held this position since 2014.  Between 2000 and 
2014, Ms. Morr was the District’s Associate Superintendent and Director of Human 
Resources.  Previously, she was Principal at two different district schools.  In her capacity as 
Associate Superintendent, Dr. Morr was familiar with the District’s collective bargaining 
agreement, employee due process rights relating to discipline, and Board Policies.   

 
61.  Dr. Morr was familiar with Mr. Stelmach.  She transferred him to Ocean 
Shores High School, where he taught English before he transferred to ECHS.  On September 
8, 2009, Dr. Morr reviewed a “Warning of Unsatisfactory Performance” that Principal Duane 
Legg issued to Mr. Stelmach when Mr. Stelmach was working at Ocean Shores.  The 
warning was issued because Mr. Stelmach failed to report to work until 12:45 p.m. on 
August 26, 2009.  This conduct violated the policy of working required contract time and 
reporting absences to his supervisor.  

 
In this letter, Mr. Stelmach was advised to contact AESOP to record all absences prior 

to the absence and contact the principal regarding his need to balance personal and 
professional responsibilities during difficult times.   

 
62. 

Since September 2009, Mr. Stelmach had attendance issues that caused him to 

go into 50% pay status.  That meant that he had used up all his sick leave.  Dr. Morr was 

22 

 

 

concerned that these absences might cause students to be left unsupervised.  These absences 
were hard on staff because someone had to fill in for Mr. Stelmach.  

 
63.  Dr. Morr also became concerned about Mr. Stelmach’s teaching performance.  

In this regard, Principal Rowe was working with Mr. Stelmach on an assistance plan to 
improve his instruction.  If Mr. Stelmach did not receive satisfactory marks as part of this 
assistance plan, the District would move for his dismissal, Ms. Morr noted.  She told Mr. 
Stelmach that the District would do this if he didn’t receive satisfactory marks.  

 
64.  Dr. Morr was concerned about Mr. Stelmach’s professionalism.  She testified 
that teachers are provided with Board Policies regarding the professional standards teachers 
are expected to meet each year.  Dr. Morr commented that unsatisfactory performance and 
unprofessionalism are two sides of the same coin.  Specially, she received reports from 
Principal Rowe and Assistant Principal Chavarria that Mr. Stelmach smoked e-cigarettes in 
class and allowed students to smoke e-cigarettes in class; that Mr. Stelmach had non-roster 
students in his classroom; and that one non-roster person in particular posted materials on the 
board that were not part of the instruction.   

 
65.  Dr. Morr emphasized that non-roster students, in general, distract students 

from instruction because classes are full.  She noted that non-roster students weren’t on task 
because they were not in their assigned classes.   

 

 
66.  Dr. Morr reiterated that Mr. Stelmach did not have authority to send students 

to OCS.  Dr. Morr stressed that a teacher must work to engage and involve every student, 
including a student with a 0 grade point average.  A school district and teacher’s goal, she 
added, is for every student to be successful.  

To Dr. Morr, Mr. Stelmach’s judgment was “off.”  In the two conversations 
she had with him, Mr. Stelmach didn’t believe the incidents involving his conduct were as 
serious as she believed they were.  In these conversations, Mr. Stelmach blamed 
administration.   
 
Mr. Stelmach’s Evidence   
 

TESTIMONY OF DAVID STELMACH AND DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 

 
67. 

 

68.  Mr. Stelmach has taught at several schools within the District since the 1997-

1998 school year.  He came to ECHS in the 2010 school year.  He has taught mostly English, 
but he has also taught expository reading and writing and a reading intervention course for 
struggling students.    

 
69.  Mr. Stelmach felt that Principal Rowe unfairly targeted him.  He noted that 

Mr. Rowe sent an email in which he claimed that Mr. Stelmach “was not the strongest 
teacher.”  As a result, Mr. Stelmach felt frustrated, demoralized, and angry towards Principal 
Rowe which, in turn, he extended toward other administrators.  In numerous email 

23 

 

 

communications, Mr. Stelmach expressed this hostility and anger towards administration.  
Mr. Stelmach testified that he now regrets his “belligerent” posture, as these emails evidence.  

71. 

Regarding the incident involving former student EQ and student EH, Mr. 

  
70.  Mr. Stelmach had a number of medical issues that required attention, including 
 
heart problems while he was at ECHS.  Due to these problems, he needed to take time off for 
medical appointments.  But, he testified, he “always reported” his absences in the AESOP 
system.  With this said, he acknowledged that he did not report an absence on one occasion, 
October 24, 2012, due to an emergency involving his wife.  Mr. Stelmach explained that he 
contacted Vicki Barnett at the District, instead of Ms. Nicosia at ECHS, because he saw Ms. 
Barnett as a more direct pipeline.  He added that he “always” contacted Ms. Nicosia when he 
had to leave early.   
 
 
Stelmach saw EQ as a troubled kid who had problems at home.  Mr. Stelmach said he was 
trying to steer EQ in the right direction.  EQ helped Mr. Stelmach grade quizzes.  EQ also 
participated in classroom discussions.  While Mr. Stelmach spoke with EQ while students 
were present, he did not discuss EQ’s religion.  Mr. Stelmach “could tell” that a student in 
his class had issues with EQ’s religious beliefs based on her dealings with him the prior year.  
  
 
didn’t check with administration to determine whether that was be permissible.  Mr. 
Stelmach asked school security whether it would be okay if EQ to help him grade quizzes 
and copy documents.  He said he asked security, as opposed to administration, for 
“clarification.”  Mr. Stelmach didn’t think he violated Principal Rowe’s prohibition against 
having non-roster students in his class because EQ was a college student who had already 
graduated from high school.  Mr. Stelmach believed EQ was entitled to be present in his 
class because he had a visitor’s pass.  At the same time, he now wishes he checked with 
administration on the issue. 
    

EQ was in his class, he recalled, for about two weeks before the incident.  He 

 
73.  As Mr. Stelmach recalled the incident, something was displayed on the 

72. 

classroom screen; EH gasped at the “Satan website” and left the classroom; Mr. Stelmach 
had the image taken down; and EQ took his backpack and left.  When EQ came back after 
lunch, Mr. Stelmach told EQ that he couldn’t return.  Mr. Stelmach agreed that the incident 
was egregious.    
 
74.  Mr. Stelmach said EH was “happy” that EQ would not return to his class and 

continued to remain in his class.  Mr. Stelmach complained that no one in administration 
gave him the opportunity to explain his side of the story.  He wanted to explain to Principal 
Rowe why EQ was in his class room, but he was never given the opportunity.   

 
75.    Mr. Stelmach specifically denied that he intentionally posted Assistant 
Principal Felix’s email regarding EQ for the class to see.  He said he accidentally displayed 
that email.  The email, he said, was on the class screen for no more than a second.  

 

24 

 

 

 

76. 

Regarding the handcuffing incident involving CL, Mr. Stelmach said his desk 

was on the other side of the classroom when CL was handcuffed and he did not see the 
incident occur.  Mr. Stelmach confirmed that CL was upset and that he had to put the class 
on hold to deal with the incident.  Mr. Stelmach did not observe any injuries.  Mr. Stelmach 
said he did not report the incident to administration because he did not trust administration.  
If he had a stronger administration backing him or garnering his trust, Mr. Stelmach said he 
would have handled the handcuffing incident differently.  Mr. Stelmach also said that he 
wanted to give M the benefit of the doubt because he was 17 years old.5  Mr. Stelmach had 
M sign a paper to stay 25 feet from CL and confiscated M’s handcuffs.  He returned the 
handcuffs to M.  He admitted that he should have, at the minimum, contacted M’s parents 
and told them of it.   

 
77.  Mr. Stelmach conceded that he referred to CL as “a little girl” in an email he 

sent to Principal Rowe after the handcuffing incident.  When asked whether it was 
appropriate to refer to a 17-year-old female student as “a little girl,” Mr. Stelmach said at 
first that he had been called worse.  He then agreed that it was not appropriate.  Mr. Stelmach 
recognized that he wasn’t respectful when he referred to CL as “Our dear (CL)” in the email 
he sent to Principal Rowe that accused her of plagiarism.  Mr. Stelmach explained that he 
said this “sardonically.”   

 
78.  Mr. Stelmach denied that he told the class, “Don’t handcuff (CL) again or 
she’ll cry and tell on you again.”  He denied telling her, “Boys will be boys.”  He also denied 
that he read CL’s mother’s email to the class.  The Commission members find that Mr. 
Stelmach’s testimony was not credible and in conflict with CL’s more credible testimony.   

 
79.  Mr. Stelmach testified that that he did not retaliate against CL.  He said that he 
was grading CL’s essay when Mr. Rowe sent him CL’s mother’s email and, as proof that he 
didn’t retaliate against CL, he said he determined that two other students had plagiarized 
their essays.  Mr. Stelmach added that those students were disciplined more harshly than CL.  
He further noted that he lowered CL’s class grade to D from A because of the plagiarism.6   

 
80.  Mr. Stelmach disputed a number of the district’s other allegations.  He said the 

smoked e-cigarettes only in “passing period” and that he only did so in front of a few 
students.  At the same time, Mr. Stelmach agreed that part of a teacher’s job was to serve as a 
role model for students.   

 
81.  Mr. Stelmach denied that he attended to personal matters during class.  His 

discussion of his personal problems with his wife occurred was within the context of a class 

                                                           

5 Mr. Stelmach referred to the student who handcuffed CL as “M” while CL referred 

to the student as D.  D was M’s nickname.   

6 Principal Rowe testified that Mr. Stelmach lowered CL’s grade to a C.  

25 

 

 
 
 

 

discussion on a controversial subject, divorce.  His testimony in this regard conflicted with 
the more credible evidence to the contrary, including CL’s testimony.  

 
82.  Mr. Stelmach agreed that he did not timely turn in the majority of his weekly 

reports, although he turned them in a day after the end of the school year.  

 
83.  Mr. Stelmach stopped the conduct that concerned administration.  He never lit 

incense after he received Mr. Rowe’s email; he contacted Ms. Nicosia when he needed to 
leave early and used the AESOP system; he stopped issuing passes to students; and he didn’t 
allow non-roster students to attend his class.  

 Mr. Stelmach presented evidence that Principal Rowe commended him for his 

classroom instruction.  In note dated November 22, 2013, Principal Rowe effusively 
complimented Mr. Stelmach on a class lesson he taught.  In that note Principal Rowe thanked 
Mr. Stelmach for his hard work in implementing close reading through an instructional 
activity.  Mr. Rowe documented his observations in a professional growth system report 
dated December 6, 2013.  Ms. Nicosia sent Mr. Stelmach an email that congratulated Mr. 
Stelmach on his lesson with the comment:  “Bob was very impressed and wished that he 
would have taped it to show everyone!”   
 

85.  Mr. Stelmach received similar positive feedback from Quantum Learning, a 

professional development program for teachers.  Mr. Stelmach was described as funny, cool, 
and engaging in that feedback.    
 

86.  Mr. Stelmach received praise from a substitute who replaced him at ECHS.  

Shawna Admire, the substitute, said Mr. Stelmach had an impact on the students and the 
students loved and missed him.   

The Commission found Mr. Stelmach’s testimony not entirely credible 

because it conflicted with the more credible testimony of students CL and EH and other 
evidence of record.  

 
THE TESTIMONY OF FORMER STUDENTS  

Four former students testified on Mr. Stelmach’s behalf.  

88.  Adam Sohayda, who works for the Department of Homeland Security, was 

Mr. Stelmach’s student from 2000 to 2002.  Mr. Sohayda described Mr. Stelmach as a caring 
individual.  He said Mr. Stelmach checks up on him from time to time to see how he is 
doing.  
 

Adam Joseph Crawley, who is an officer candidate with the National Guard and is 

employed as a security guard, was Mr. Stelmach’s student from 1999 to 2003.  Mr. Stelmach 
helped him proof read his college papers and obtain employment as a security guard.   

 
84. 

 
87. 

 

26 

 

 

Ricardo Vasquez was Mr. Stelmach’s student in 2002.  He described Mr. Stelmach as 

a caring individual who helped him develop a sense of self-worth and confidence.  

 
Jessica Morales also testified.  Ms. Morales was Mr. Stelmach’s student in 2013 to 

2014.  Mr. Stelmach listened to students and went out of his way to help them.  Mr. Stelmach 
encouraged her to participate in soccer.  
Assessment of the Evidence  
 

89. 

The Commission members unanimously agreed that Mr. Stelmach exhibited 

poor judgment and inappropriate behavior on numerous occasions sufficient to establish that 
he lacks the good judgment and temperament required of a teacher.  The Commission 
members also unanimously agreed that Mr. Stelmach persistently violated District policy 
directives and applicable rule and regulations.       
 

90. 

Two serious incidents highlight these conclusions.  In both incidents, which 

involved two female students, Mr. Stelmach allowed his frustration and conflicts with school 
administration to affect his professional judgment.  Most glaringly, Mr. Stelmach did not 
refer the student who handcuffed CL to administration for discipline because he didn’t trust 
administration.  Instead, he handled the matter, ineffectively, on his own.  He told an upset 
CL, “Boys will be boys”; and he told the class after he returned handcuffs to the offending 
student, “Don’t handcuff (CL) again or she’ll cry and tell on you again.”   By his actions and 
comments, Mr. Stelmach dismissed the extremely serious nature of the incident and caused 
CL to feel unsafe and unprotected in his classroom. 

 
Mr. Stelmach sought to punish CL by intentionally demeaning her in front of her 

classmates because her mother had complained to Principal Rowe about the quality of his 
classroom instruction.  Mr. Stelmach said as much when he told the class, “No one is leaving 
because a parent called and complained, and there will be no more movies being watched,” 
and he displayed CL’s mother’s email to the class.  In communications with Principal Rowe, 
Mr. Stelmach angrily referred to CL as “a little girl” and called her “our dear (CL)” when he 
reported that she had plagiarized an essay.  Mr. Stelmach accused her of being entitled.  In 
his email response to her mother’s complaint about his teaching methods, for no apparent 
reason, he said that CL visited her boyfriend in another class.   

 
Mr. Stelmach, further, retaliated against CL when he told Principal Rowe that he 

would “immediately bring (CL’s plagiarism) to the attention to her mom, the district, and 
governing authorities who copyrighted the website.”7  This uncompromising attitude exists in 
sharp contrast with the compassion Mr. Stelmach showed the student who handcuffed CL.  
Aside from not reporting that student to administration, Mr. Stelmach chose to not even call 
this student’s parents.  Given the anger he displayed towards CL and her mother, the fact that 
CL plagiarized the essay is no defense to the strong evidence of retaliation. 

 

                                                           

7 The Commission reached this conclusion by a majority vote.  Commission Member 

Finder did not agree that Mr. Stelmach retaliated against CL.  

27 

 

 

Similarly, a year later, in March 2014, Mr. Stelmach elected not to contact 

administration when EQ wanted to visit his class and help him grade quizzes.  Mr. Stelmach 
admitted that was a mistake.  He said he told security, as opposed to administration, for 
“confirmation,” but the meaning of this statement was unclear and appears to be a belated 
effort to justify his error.  In the May 2, 2013, letter of reprimand he received, Mr. Stelmach 
was advised not to have non-roster students in his classroom unless administration had given 
approval.   

 
Mr. Stelmach showed both poor judgment and insubordination by ignoring Mr. 

Rowe’s May 2, 2013, advisement when he allowed EQ to remain in his class and when he 
failed to inform administration that EQ was in his class.  His defense that EQ was not a 
student ignores the purpose of Principal Rowe’s advisement:  Mr. Stelmach was required to 
inform administration when non-roster persons were in the classroom.  EQ acted as a student 
according to Mr. Stelmach.  EQ actively participated in class discussions for an extended 
period of time.  To the students in the classroom, EQ appeared as a student.   

 
By allowing a troubled young man who liked to shock people to be in his classroom 

for an extended time, Mr. Stelmach compromised the learning environment for EH and other 
students.  According to EH, EQ was in the classroom for a month before the final incident on 
March 12, 2014, occurred.  When he was there, he talked about his satanic beliefs.  EQ’s 
presence in the classroom was unsettling to EH, “like the sinking in your stomach.”  EQ’s 
presence in the classroom made EH feel unsafe and uncomfortable.   

 
As happened with CL, Mr. Stelmach shared a confidential or sensitive email with his 
class.  It is questionable that Mr. Stelmach accidentally showed this email to the class when 
one considers that he displayed CL’s mother’s email to his class the previous year.  Mr. 
Stelmach showed his class Assistant Principal Felix’s email to ECHS teachers and staff that 
security was to be notified if EQ was seen on campus.  It reasonably made EH feel that she 
caused EQ to be banned from Mr. Stelmach’s classroom.  This was a further reason that EH 
felt uncomfortable and unsafe in Mr. Stelmach’s class, as she told Principal Rowe.  
 
Despite the egregiousness of this incident, when Principal Rowe asked Mr. Stelmach 
 
about EQ, Mr. Stelmach attacked EH and dismissed her concerns as being illegitimate.  His 
attack on EH was similar to his attack on CL (a fact he ironically noted) and was a sharp 
contrast to the understanding he showed towards EQ, whom he wanted to mentor.  He wrote:   
 

If she feels so “UNSAFE” then why is was [sic] attending my 
class on Friday?  And why does she get to wear earbuds in 
class?  She is the only one with them on.  Is she exempt from 
the rules?  I asked her on Friday not to wear them.  Should I 
write her a referral for breaking rule #8 on the Teacher to 
Student to Parent Contract?  Or is that considered “retaliation?” 
Please let me know ASAP. . . .  

 

28 

 

 

91.  While these two incidents are the most serious examples of Mr. Stelmach’s 

poor judgment and lack of professional temperament, Mr. Stelmach exhibited poor judgment 
and immature and unpredictable behavior on many other occasions.  Mr. Stelmach allowed 
two students to walk out of his class with STAR testing materials, a serious violation of 
testing protocols; he lit incense in his classroom for a year, a violation of fire codes; he 
smoked e-cigarettes in his classroom in front of students and permitted students to smoke e-
cigarettes in the classroom; he issued passes to students who were not enrolled in his class 
when he did not have authority to do so; he failed to notify administration when he left 
school early and left his class unattended; he allowed non-roster students in his class who 
should have been present in other classrooms; he failed to supervise his class adequately, as 
was evident when a student used a laser pointer to distract students during testing; and he 
used class time to take care of personal affairs.    

 
92. 

In addition to repeatedly displaying poor judgment and troubling behavior, Mr. 

Stelmach persistently violated District polices and applicable rules and regulations.  
Specifically, Mr. Stelmach violated District Directives Nos. 1313 and 5142 when he failed to 
provide a safe learning environment for CL and EH; he violated District Directives No. 
4119.21 when he intentionally exposed CL to disparagement and embarrassment when he 
told the class, “Don’t handcuff (CL) again or she’ll cry and tell on you again” and, “No one 
is leaving because a parent called and complained, and there will be no more movies being 
watched”; he violated District Directive 4119.21 when he failed to make reasonable efforts to 
protect EH from conditions harmful to learning or to health and safety when he allowed EQ 
to attend his class for a month; he violated District Directive No. 4119.21 when he 
intentionally embarrassed EH when he displayed Assistant Principal Felix’s confidential 
email to the classroom; he violated District Directive No. 4119.21 when he smoked e-
cigarettes in his classroom, when he allowed students to smoke e-cigarettes in his classroom, 
and when he burned incense sticks in his classroom;  he violated District Directive No. 
3513.3 when he smoked “Blu” brand cigarettes, a nicotine based product, in his classroom; 
and he violated California Code of Regulations, title 19, section 3.25, when he burned 
incense sticks for a year in his classroom.   

 
93.  When confronted with these matters, including the incidents involving CL and 
EH, Mr. Stelmach belligerently challenged administration and refused to take responsibility.  
He claimed Assistant Principal Felix showed him no respect; he claimed Principal Rowe 
slandered him when he raised the EQ incident, and he threatened legal action; he said EQ 
slipped by security; and he attacked both EH and CL.  In other emails, he was sarcastic, 
flippant, and insistent that he had behaved correctly.  He represented that EQ was never a 
disruption when that was not the case; he questioned why anyone would take seriously what 
an underachieving student said; he said he would not “snitch” on other teachers; he 
questioned why Principal Rowe took the handcuffing incident seriously; and he insisted that 
CL’s mother should have contacted him to express her concerns and that it was inappropriate 
for her to contact administrators with her concerns.   

 
94. 

Based on all the evidence, considered as a whole, and consistent with the 

Morrison criteria, the Commission unanimously agreed that the preponderance of the 

29 

 

 
 

 

evidence demonstrated that Mr. Stelmach is evidently unfit to serve as a teacher in the 
District.8     

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Due Process under the Education Code 
 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) 
 

Under Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b), the dismissal hearing must be 
conducted by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence.  Two members of 
the Commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the teacher and one chosen by 
the district.  The third member of the Commission must be an administrative law judge from 
the Office of Administrative Hearings.  

 
When a school board seeks dismissal for cause, the Commission may vote only for or 

against dismissal.  The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by 
imposing probation or some other alternative sanction.  (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (c)(1)-(3).) 

Burden and Standard of Proof 
 

2. 

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of 
the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 
1035, 1039-1040.)  This standard requires a party to convince the trier of fact that the 
existence of a fact is more probable than its nonexistence.  (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s 
Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.)   

 

 

Relevant Statutory and Constitutional Authority  

3. 

Education Code section 44932 provides in part: 

(a)  No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one 
or more of the following causes: 
 
[¶] . . . [¶]   
 
(5) Evident unfitness for service. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶]   

                                                           

8 The Commission did not find that the fact that Mr. Stelmach was in 50% pay status; 
or that he submitted class attendance reports late; or that he left his classroom as Mr. Heinz 
stated, as bases to conclude that he is unfit to serve as a teacher or that he persistently 
violated District directives or applicable rules. 

 

 

30 

 

 

(7) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the State Board of 
Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him or her . . .  
 
Under the California Constitution, students and employees “have the 

4. 

 
5. 

inalienable right to attend campuses which are safe, secure and peaceful.”  (Const. art. 1, 
§28.)  It is an explicit duty of teachers to reasonably control the conduct of students to 
maintain a safe and healthy learning environment.  (Ed. Code, § 44807). 
 
Relevant Judicial Authority 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the Supreme 

 
Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 
school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  The court 
delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he or 
she is not fit to teach:  (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students 
or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood 
of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may 
inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.  (Id., at pp. 229-230.) 
 
Evident Unfitness for Service 
 

6. 

Evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(5), is established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or 
suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  
(Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria must be examined to 
ascertain whether the conduct in question indicates unfitness for service.  “If the Morrison 
criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident,’ i.e., 
whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.”  (Id., at 1445.)  A 
Commission has broad discretion to determine what constitutes unfitness to teach, and in 
deciding whether the teacher should be sanctioned.  (California Teachers Association v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Ca1.4th 327, 343.) 

 

7. 

In Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the Supreme Court 

detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the 
standard established in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in 
which not only his conduct but also these factors are analyzed:  (1) likelihood of recurrence 

31 

 

 

of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the 
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ relationships; (5) 
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of 
conduct.  (Id., at f.n. 5.)  
 
Persistent Violation or Refusal to Obey School Laws or Regulations 
 

8. 

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent; 
continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly 
repeated.”  And, in judicial decisions, the word has been interpreted to mean “continuing or 
constant.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.)  The Morrison factors should be applied in determining whether a 
permanent certificated employee’s persistent violation or refusal to obey laws and 
regulations supports the employee’s termination.  (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. 
Commission On Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1182.) 

A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be 

established by reference to the Morrison factors.  If unfitness to teach is shown, then the 
District must further establish that the employee’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was 
“persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.”  (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. (1985) 
174 Cal.App.3d at 1183.)  Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a 
period of time are not generally considered “persistent.”  (Bourland v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317, 320.)  

  

Cause Exists to Dismiss David Stelmach 

Cause was established under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

 
(a)(5), to dismiss David Stelmach from his teaching position with the Oceanside Unified 
School District.  As the Commission detailed in the Factual Findings, the preponderance of 
the evidence established that Mr. Stelmach repeatedly exhibited poor judgment and immature 
and unpredictable behavior in the classroom and in his interaction with students and staff due 
to a defect in his temperament that is inconsistent with the demands of effective teaching.   

Cause was established under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

 
(a)(7), to dismiss David Stelmach from his teaching position with the Oceanside Unified 
School District.  As the Commission detailed in the Factual Findings, the preponderance of 
the evidence established that Mr. Stelmach persistently violated or refused to obey the school 
laws of the state or the regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 
State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing David 
Stelmach.   
 

12. 

The Commission has considered the Morrison factors in light of the record as 
a whole.  When these factors are analyzed,  Mr. Stelmach’s conduct negatively impacted his 
ability to function in the District as a teacher; his conduct negatively impacted his ability to 
act as a role model for students; Mr. Stelmach failed to properly teach and hold students 

 
9. 

 

 
10. 

 
11. 

32 

 

 

accountable for their actions; he failed to effectively work with students; he failed to 
effectively work with administration; he failed to maintain credibility with parents and 
faculty; and due to his conduct as a whole, Mr. Stelmach’s ability to teach effectively has 
been irreparably compromised within the District.  Moreover, Mr. Stelmach repeatedly made 
the task of supervising him very difficult to accomplish; he resisted and refused the District’s 
reasonable efforts to have him change his behavior.  Mr. Stelmach thus is either unable or 
unwilling to comport himself to the behavior reasonably expected of a teacher, and his 
 
negative conduct would likely reoccur if he were to remain a teacher in the District. 

 
Based on the facts and circumstances, the District established that respondent is 

“unfit” to teach and that his conduct amounted to a persistent violation of or refusal to obey 
school laws or reasonable regulations.  The misconduct, which is supported by a 
preponderance of the evidence, establishes Mr. Stelmach’s unfitness, and is serious enough 
to support his dismissal from employment.  (Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 
45 Cal.3d 208, 219.)  

 
13. 

The District sustained its burden of proving, by a preponderance of the 

      
evidence, the allegations set forth in the Accusation and Notice of Charges.  Mr. Stelmach 
shall be dismissed as a teacher from the Oceanside Unified School District, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(5), and (a)(7). 
 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
 

33 

The Accusation and Notice of Charges are affirmed.  David Stelmach is dismissed as 

ORDER 

 
 
a permanent certificated employee of the Oceanside Unified School District.   
 
 
 
DATED:  2/25/2015 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

______________/s/_____________________ 
REBECCA BRAVO 
Certificated English Teacher/Administrator 
Sweetwater Union High School District 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
DATED: 3/7/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
DATED: 3/20/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
_______________/s/____________________ 
HAYWOOD FINDER 
Certificated English Teacher 
Anaheim Union High School District 

 

 
_____________/s/______________________ 
ABRAHAM M. LEVY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

34 

