  

  

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  Case  No.  2014051108 

ALYSE  BREITBACH,  a  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  the  above- 
captioned  matter  in  Los  Angeles  on  April  7,  8,  9,  and  13,  2015.  The  Commission  members 
were  Susie  Livingston,  Heriberto  Garza,  and  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge 
(ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH).  Complainant  was  represented  by  Mampre 
R.  Pomakian,  Associate  General  Counsel,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (LAUSD  or 
District).  Respondent  Alyse  Breitbach  appeared  with  her  attorney,  Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  of 
Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  13,  2015.  The  Commission  hereby 

makes  its  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order. 

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

In  this  proceeding  the  District  seeks  the  termination  of  one  of  its  tenured  teachers, 

Respondent  Alyse  Breitbach.  Four  statutory  grounds  were  asserted  as  justifying  termination: 
unprofessional  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1);  immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §§ 
44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  44939);  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)); 
and,  persistent  violation  of  state  laws  or  regulations,  or  the  district’s  regulations,  for  the 
governance  of  schools  (§44932,  subd.  (a)(7)).' 

In  the  main,  it  is  alleged  that  Respondent,  on  five  occasions  acted  with  bad-temper, 

spoke  to  children  and  colleagues  in  a  negative  way,  and  failed  to  supervise  students  properly. 
In  one  case  she  allegedly  encouraged  one  student  to  try  to  remove  a  recalcitrant  student  from 
the  classroom,  leading  to  an  injury. 

' 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.    

  

  

Respondent  did  not  deny  all  of  the  allegations,  and  she  provided  evidence  regarding 

the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  events  referenced  in  the  Accusation,  and  otherwise 
provided  evidence  in  support  of  her  retention  by  the  District.  While  the  District  proved  some 
of  the  factual  allegations  against  her,  the  Commission  finds  and  concludes,  unanimously,  that 
cause  for  termination  has  not  been  established. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

Complainant  Justo  H.  Avila  executed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  while 
acting  in  his  official  capacity  as  Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

The  District  commenced  this  proceeding  on  April  3,  2014,  when  Complainant 
executed  a  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent.  That  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed 
with  the  District's  governing  board,  which  thereafter  determined  to  terminate  Respondent. 

3. 

On  April  22,  2014,  the  District  gave  Respondent  written  notice  of  its  intent  to 
terminate  her,  and  served  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent 
made  a  timely  request  for  hearing,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of  the  Accusation.  She  then 
filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  and  this  hearing  endued.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met. 

© 

4, 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  District's  employ,  credentialed to 
teach  middle  school  students.  During  the  time  relevant  to  this  proceeding—May  2012  and 
September  2012—Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  at  Virgil  Middle  School  (Virgil)  in  Los 
Angeles,  California. 

Findings  on  the  Factual  Allegations  Made  Against  Respondent 

The  May  25,  2012,  Incident 

5. 

On  May  25,  2012,  Respondent  was  working  in  her  third  period  class,  and  the 

bulk  of  the  students  were  not  behaving  or  properly  participating  in  class.  The  class  was  a 
difficult  one,  with  a  number  of  students  who  had  behavior  problems,  or  other  issues,  matters 
acknowledged  by  Respondent’s  supervisors.”  Respondent  was  trying  to  get  the  class  under 
control,  but  was  having  trouble  doing  so.  She  decided  to  reconfigure  the  room,  so  that  two 
students  would  be  at  a  table,  instead  of  four  at  a  table.  She  told  the  students  to  move  the 
tables,  but  they  did  not.  Respondent  then  started  moving  the  tables.  While  doing  so,  she 
struck  a  student,  RIM  with  one  of  the  tables,  while  Respondent  was  moving  it. 

  

The  problems  in  the  class  are  noted  in  a  conference  memo,  exhibit  14,  and 
corroborated  by  the  written  statements  of  another  teacher,  Vernon  Humphries,  in  exhibit  Z. 

2 

   

  

  

  

6. 

The  Accusation  implies,  by  alleging  that  Respondent  struck  REith  the 
mm 
table  “without  provocation,”  that  Respondent  acted  in  some  deliberate  way  to  harm 
While  there  was  evidence  that  Respondent  was  angry  or  frustrated  with  the  class  when  she. 
was  moving  the  tables  around,  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  was  angry  with  im  who 
was  a  child  who  wanted  to  learn.  Respondent  did  not  act  with  intent  to  harm  anyone;  the 
event  was  an  accident,  as  acknowledged  by  one  of  her  supervisors.”  Respondent  was  likely 
hurrying  the  process  of  moving  the  tables—again,  the  students  had  not  been  helpful  in  the 
matter—but  she  is  not  culpable  of  misconduct. 

The  May  31,  2012  Incident 

7. 

On  the  afternoon  of  -  31,  2012,  after  school  was  out,  Respondent  was  in 

her  classroom  with  two  students, 
make-up  work  so  that  they  could  have  an  opportunity  to  walk  the  stage  at  graduation,  which 
was  days  away.  The  make-up  work  had  to  be  completed  on  the  31st. 

She  was  allowing  them  to  do  some 

and 

8. 

Another  student, 

|  came  to  the  classroom.  He  wanted  Respondent  to 
give  him  back  his  cell  phone,”  which  Respondent  had  confiscated  earlier  in  the  day  because 
the  student  had  misused  the  device  in  class. 

9, 

There  was  some  discussion  between  Respondent  and whl.  arding  the 

to  give  it  back,  and  WHEE  as  not 
phone,  the  upshot  being  that  Respondent  was  not  going 
going  to  leave  without  it.  Respondent  then  said  to  A  she  would  give  him  extra  credit 
points  for  showing 
hearted  way,  not  intending  that 
responded  by  going  over  to 
classroom.  | 

out.  At  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  she  said  it  in a  light 

try  to  take 
and  then  offering 

ut  of  the  room,  but 

$2.00  to  leave  the 

   

   

   

up,  telling RE 

Respondent  Bron 

oot  to  give WEEE  money.  RE  tried  to 
10. 
tom  behind,  apparently  trying  to  pick  him  up  and  move  him  out 
physically  remove. 
of  the  classroom.  Respondent  was  about  15  feet  away  from  the  two  boys.  As Rm  grabbed 
Respondent  got  to  her  feet  to  move  toward  the  boys,  and  verbally  tried  to  stop what 
vill 
was  turning  into  a  wrestling  match.  Before  she  could  get  to  the  boys,  they  fell  backwards, 
and RA 

hit  his  head  on  a  cabinet  as  he  fell. 

Respondent  saw  that Rivas  hurt,  and  she  left  the  classroom  to  find  the 
school  nurse,  or  some  other  help.  She  found  the  assistant  principal,  who  went  back  to  her 

11, 

  

>  Notwithstanding  that  acknowledgement,  the  subsequent  conference  memo  (ex.  14) 
at  times  has  the  tone  of  a  response  to  an  act  of  corporal  punishment  or  assaultive  behavior  by 
Respondent  that  is  not  justified  by  the  evidence. 

*  There  are  references  in  the  record  to wh  ;  cell  phone,  but  also  a  reference  to  a 

cell  phone  cover.  In  either  event, WHE 

anted  it  back. 

 

  

  
     

  

  

  

classroom  with  her.  An  ambulance  was  summoned,  and REwas  taken  to  a  local  hospital 
for  an  examination.  He  did  not  suffer  a  serious  injury. 

12.__ 

During  the  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  she  was  not  really  serious  when 
out  of  the  classroom,  but  he  tried  to  do  so,  and  the  situation 

she  told  REO  take 
escalated  rapidly.  She  had  been  across  the  room,  away  from  the  two  boys,  and  was  unable  to 
that  he  could 
immediately  intervene.  Respondent  acknowledged  that  her  statement  to 
earn  extra  credit  for  taking 
she  acknowledged  her  very  poor  judgment  in  this  matter. 

ut  of  the  classroom,  was  absolutely  inappropriate,  and 

The  September  7,  2012  Conference  with  Ms.  Kasubuchi  and  Ris 

, 

13. 

 Inearly  September  2012,  student Ra.  was  assigned  to  Respondent’s 

classroom.  She  was  not  satisfied  with Ri;  behavior  in  class,  and  spoke  to  him  about  it. 
That  did  not  bring  improvement.  She  decided  to  set  up  a  mediation  with 
counselor,  Ms.  Tammy  Kasubuchi  (Kasubuchi),  in  the  hopes  of  improving  the  situation. 

|  and  a 

14. 

Respondent  and  Kasubuchi  had  differing  memories  of  how  the  meeting  was 

set  up,  and  whether  there  was  one  attempt  or  two  attempts  to  go  forward.  Respondent’s 
testimony  that  there  were  two  attempts  to  meet  with 
stated  that  was  what  occurred  during  an  office  conference  that  took  place  approximately  two 
weeks  after  the  events  of  September  7,  2012.  (See  ex.  18,  at  p.  138.)° 

is  credited,  in  part  because  she 

15.  |  Respondent  approached  Kasubuchi  on  or  about  September  6  and  told  the  latter 

that  she  was  having  behavior  problems  with 
and  wanted  help  in  curbing  his 
serving  as  class  president,  a  leadership 
misbehavior.  She  had  supported  the  idea  of 
position  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  was  under  the  impression  that  Kasubuchi  was  going 
to  have RE 
She  sat  around  for  a  few  minutes,  and  she  and  Kasubuchi  spoke,  and  it  was  established  that 

come  to  the  latter’s  office  on  September  6,  and  so  Respondent  went  there. 

   

had  not  been  summoned.  It  was  decided  they  would  try  again  on  September  7. 

16. 

The  next  day,  Respondent  again  went  to  Kasubuchi’s  office.  Ria  not 

appear  right  away.  He  was  then  contacted  and  asked  to  come  to  the  counselor’s  office. 

17. 

When  MEE  scivea,  Kasubuchi  began  to  have  a  conversation  with  him.  He 

did  not  know  why  Kasubuchi  had  summoned  him.  She  asked  him  about  his  summer,  and 
asked  him  about  his  classes.  During  the  hearing,  she  explained  that  she  was  trying  to 
ascertain  if  there  were  any  problems  at  home  that  might  be  impacting  his  behavior. 
Kasubuchi  did  not  give  such  an  explanation  to  Respondent  prior  to Res  arrival;  prior  to 
the  student’s  arrival,  she  did  nothing  to  explain  to  Respondent  how  she  wanted  to  handle  the 
matter.  Once RE 
explanation  to  the  student  and  Respondent  about  why  they  were  meeting,  and  how  they 

arrived,  Kasubuchi  did  not  set  the  stage  for  the  “mediation”  with  an 

  

>  The  page  citation  is  to  the  Bates  stamp  number,  as  is  the  case  with  most  of  the 

citations  that  follow.

    

  

  

might  work  together  on  the  problem.°  At  the  same  time,  she  had  not  taken  steps  to  arrange 
the  space  so  that  Respondent  was  part  of  the  discussion;  the  latter  was  seated  over  by  the 
door,  away  from  the  counselor  and  student.  Because  of  her  location,  she  was  not  clearly 
involved  in  the  matter. 

18.  | Kasubuchi  began  to  talk  to  RE 

about  his  classes.  He  had  stated  that  he  was 

that  he  had  been  raising  his  hand  in  class  for 

talking  out  in  one  of  his  classes,  which  was  one  of  the  reasons  Respondent  had  wanted  to 
involve  Kasubuchi;  the  counselor  told RE 
many  years.  At  some  point,  Respondent  spoke  up  and  stated  that  she  would  like  to  be 
acknowledged.  (Kasubuchi  testified  that  Respondent  stated  that  she—Respondent—felt  she 
was  not  in 
to  talk  to 
of  the  process.  Respondent  was  frustrated,  and  said  she  was  glad  that  someone,  meaning 
Kasubuchi,  had  a  good  relationship  with 
At  this  point,  Respondent  had  raised  her 
voice.  (Kasubuchi  testified  that  Respondent  stated  to  the  counselor,  “If  you  want  to  have  a 
personal  conversation  with 
Respondent  stated  she  had  other  things  to  do,  such  as  parents  to  call,  and  she  got  up  to  leave. 

om.)’  Although  Kasubuchi  could  tell  that  Respondent  was  upset,  she  began 
about  his  concerns,  rather  than  responding  to  Respondent’s  need  to  feel  part 

aybe  I  should  leave,”  or  words  to  that  effect.) 

19. 

A  verbal  exchange  then  followed  wherein  Respondent  asked  Kasubuchi  if  she 

had  ever  been  a  teacher,  and  when  the  counselor  said  she  had,  Respondent  then  asked  if 
Kasubuchi  had  ever  taught  middle  school.  Kasubuchi  was  offended  by  such  questions. 

20. 

Respondent  left  the  meeting. RBBB  uttimatety 

told  Kasubuchi  that  he  would 

like  to  transfer  out  of  Respondent’s  class. 

21. 

rm  was  made  uncomfortable  by  the  conflict  between  the  two  adults  but  he 

suffered  no  ill  effect  or  harm.  Kasubuchi  was  offended  by  Respondent’s  questions  and 
comments,  and  the  fact  that  Respondent  had  become  loud  and  agitated. 

22. 

(A)  Respondent  should  not  have  raised  her  voice  when  she  became  frustrated 

by  Kasubuchi’s  handling  of  the  “mediation,”  and  she  should  not  have  questioned  the 
counselor  regarding  her  teaching  experience.  Further,  it  was  improper  for  her  to  behave  that 
way  in  the  presence  of  a  student. 

(B)  In  mitigation,  it  is  found  that  although  the  counselor  was  supposed  to  be 

mediating  a  problem  between  Respondent  and  her  student,  she  had  not  set  the  stage  properly. 
She  failed  to  tell  RE 
about  how  she  was  going  to  conduct  the  meeting.  Recognizing  that  Respondent  was  upset 
because  she  felt  she  wasn’t  even  in  the  room,  let  alone  in  the  discussion,  Kasubuchi  did  not 
remedy  that  problem,  which  tended  to  further  alienate  Respondent’s  role  in  the  process. 

why  she  wanted  to  see  him,  and  she  failed  to  talk  to  Respondent 

  

°  Robert  testified  that  Kasubuchi  didn’t  say  why  the  three  were  meeting. 

"  This  statement  by  Respondent  was  confirmed  by  REx  his  written  statement 

made  shortly  after  the  meeting.  (Ex.  30,  p.  044.) 

 

  

  

Kasubuchi,  who  testified  she  had  received  mediation  training  at  the  University  of  LaVerne, 
but  does  not  have  a  certificate  in  mediation,  created  a  situation  where  there  was  a  chance  of 
conflict,  and  she  increased  that  chance  by  ignoring  Respondent’s  feelings. 

The  events  of  October  19,  2012 

23. 

Two  allegations  are  made  regarding  Respondent’s  behavior  on  October  19, 

2012,  and  both  involve  Respondent’s  presence  in  the  classroom,  and  alleged  failure  to 
supervise  students.  Some  of  the  allegations  are  sustained,  and  some  are  not. 

24. 

Inthe  more  serious  incident,  Respondent  was  in  the  rear  doorway  of  her 

classroom,  speaking  to  a  special  education  teaching  assistant,  Ms.  Charlotte  Watley 
(Watley).  The  assistant  was  tasked  with  working  with  some  of  Respondent’s  students,  often 
in  a  one-on-one  capacity.  Watley  would  sometimes  work  one-on-one  in  a  classroom 
adjacent  to  Respondent’s  classroom. 

25. 

While  Respondent  and  Watley  were  talking,  two  students,  J  nd 
each  other,  thereby 
threatening  to  slap 

who  were  sitting  across  from  each  other,  were  tapping 
each  other.  Their  interactions  escalated,  with  J 
He  thought  she  was  joking,  but  she  did  slap  him,  in  the  face.  He  retaliated  by 

bothering 
5 
punching  her.  By  his  own  admission,  yo punched  the  girl  two  or  three  times. 
Respondent  did  not  perceive  the  beginning  of  the  conflict,  but  once  she  realized  what  was 
happening,  she  took  steps  to  end  it. 

26. 

Respondent  spoke  to  the  students  about  the  matter.  SHEE  was  crying, 

| 

27. 

because  he  was  upset,  but  he  told  Respondent  he  was  not  hurt.  He  did  not  believe  J 
was  hurt  either.  Respondent  did  not  send  either  student  to  the  nurse’s  office,  though  y 
went  to  the  nurse  later  in  the  day,  during  sixth  period.  Respondent  did  not  report  the 
altercation  to  an  administrator.  She  did  spend  time  talking  to  the  class  about  the  incident. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged,  that  the  altercation  took  place  while 
Respondent  was  out  of  the  classroom.  Watley’s  credible  testimony  established  that 
Respondent  was  in  the  doorway,  and  that  this  was  a  typical  way  that  a  teacher  would 
communicate  with  another  adult  while  class  was  otherwise  in  session.  Testimony  from 
another  teacher  established  that  this  was  also  how  teachers  would  speak  with  administrators 
who  might  come  by  the  classroom.  It  was  necessary  for  Respondent  and  Watley  to  speak  in 

    

if 
if 
if 
if 
/] 
i} 

 

this  way  because  they  were  talking  about  the  performance  of  some  of  the  students,  and  such 
conversations  needed  to  be  confidential,  and  therefore  away  from  immediate  earshot  of 
students.° 

28. 

On  that  same  day,  as  the  fourth  period  began,  Respondent  was  not  in  her 

classroom  for  a  few  moments.  She  was  observed  by  Mr.  Garcia,  Assistant  Principal,  and  Mr. 
Thompson,  a  coordinator,  to  be  about  five  yards  away  from  the  door  of  her  classroom,  in  the 
hallway.  Respondent  was  there  because  she  had  stepped  out  of  her  classroom  to  make  sure 
that  the  doors  to  the  adjacent  classroom—the  room  typically  used  by  Watley—were  locked. 
No  untoward  incidents  occurred  while  Respondent  was  in  the  hallway  and  not  in  her  room. 
However,  she  should  not  have  left  her  students  unattended,  even  for  a  brief  time. 

Other  Matters 

29. 

Respondent  had  office  conferences  with  her  supervisors;  they  followed  the 

incidents  above.  She  was  allegedly  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  in  February  2013 
and  a  second  in  April  2013.  (Accusation,  ex.  6,  p.  3.)  However,  the  Notices  were  not 
received  in  evidence,  nor  were  the  Stull  evaluations  that  should  accompany  them  pursuant  to 
section  44938.  There  is  no  evidence  of  improper  conduct  after  February  and  April  2013. 
The  office  conference  memos  are  denominated  as  memos,  and  typically  state,  at  the  end  of 
the  document,  that  further  problems  with  Respondent  might  lead  to  disciplinary  steps, 
including  the  issuance  of  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts.  (E.g.,  ex.  14,  at  p.  065.) 

30. 

Respondent  has  been  responsive  to  direction  given  to  her  by  her  supervisors. 

For  example,  after  rim  was  struck  by  the  table  that  Respondent  was  moving,  the  Assistant 
Principal,  Mojgan  Moazzez,  advised  Respondent  to  take  an  anger  management  class,  which 
she  did. 

31. 

By  her  training  and  education,  Respondent  is  a  very  qualified  teacher.  She 

She  wanted 
was  a  Fullbright  Scholar,  and  with  that  scholarship  taught  for  a  year  in  Turkey. 
an  assignment  such  as  Virgil,  and  was  committed  to  doing  well  by  her  students.  Respondent 
was  assigned  to  leadership  roles  at  Virgil.  She  was  ESL/English  Department  Chair,  and  a 
member  of  the  Advanced  Global  Learning  Acadamy  Team.  Character  witnesses  who 
appeared  on  her  behalf  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  was  hard-working,  dedicated  to 
her  profession  and  calling,  caring  of  her  students  and  caring  that  they  receive  a  solid 
education.  They  also  established  that  she  always  stood  ready  to  assist  the  other  teachers  on 
the  campus  in  any  way  she  could,  so  that  the  educational  needs  of  the  students  would  be  met. 

    

Written  statements  obtained  from  some  of  the  students  differ  regarding 
Respondent’s  location,  some  putting  her  “outside”  the  door  while  talking  to  another  teacher. 
Notably,  one  student  wrote  that  Respondent  “was  talking  to  another  teacher  in  the  door.” 
(Ex.  37.)  One  student  who  placed  Respondent  outside  the  room  confirmed  she  was  speaking 
to  Watley,  identified  as  “Ms.  Charlot.”  (Ex.  34.) 

 

  

* 

  

32. 

(A)  Respondent  had  received  positive  Stull  evaluations  for  many  years  prior 

to  the  events  of  May  and  September  2012.  In  many  ways,  the  evaluations  confirm  the 
testimony  of  Respondent’s  character  witnesses,  including  those  who  wrote  letters  or 
declarations  in  her  support. 

(B)  For  example,  in  March  2009,  Respondent  received  an  evaluation  that 

stated  that  she  met  standard  performance  in  every  area.  All  comments  were  positive.  The 
2009  evaluation  stated  that  Respondent  “is  well  planned  and  set  rigorous  goals  for  her 
students.  Her  planning  is  evidenced  by  differentiation  of  instruction  and  the  use  of  multiple 
learning  strategies  to  foster  student  engagement.”  (Ex.  I,  p.  1.)  The  evaluator  also 
commented  that  Respondent  “sets  high  professional  standards  for  herself  as  evidenced  in  her 
planning  and  instruction”  and  that  “she  shows  a  commitment  to  her  students  and  their 
learning.”  She  had  not  been  tardy  once.  (/d.,  p.  2.) 

(C)  Respondent’s  June  2011  evaluation  was  also  exemplary.  As  in  2009, 

Respondent  met  standards  in  every  category,  and  the  comments  provided  by  the  evaluator 
were  quite  positive.  She  was  noted  to  provide  “structure  yet  freedom”  for  students  to  engage 
in  problem  solving,  and  described  as  “always  well-prepared  for  her  lessons.”  In  the  general 
area  of  classroom  performance,  the  comment  pronounced  her  “a  superior  teacher.”  (Ex.  DD, 
p.  1.)  Regarding  professional  development,  Respondent  was  described  as  “very  active  in 
sharing  newly  acquired  strategies  and  information  regarding  children  with  her  team.  She 
proactively  organizes  the  team  to  utilize  the  same  rules,  strategies,  and  is  encouraged  to 
continue  to  draw  upon  the  strength  of  the  team.”  (/d.,  p.  2.) 

(C)  Near  the  end  of  the  2011  evaluation,  under  the  subject  of  overall 

evaluation,  the  evaluator  wrote:  “Commendations:  Ms.  Breitbach  is  passionate  about  lesson 
study.  She  has  worked  tirelessly  to  build  accountability  with  in  [sic]  the  English  Department. 
She  contributed  significantly  to  building  ESL  teaching  capacity.”  (/d.) 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Conclusions  of  General  Application: 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944,  and  Factual  Findings  1  through  4. 

2. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount  to 
unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

 

  

  

3. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 

properly  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 
reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,” 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  at  1444.) 

4. 

“Immoral  conduct,”  of  which  Respondent  has  been  accused,  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters.  It  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that 
is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland);  San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

5. 

In  order  for  a  teacher  to  be  terminated  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7), 

for  persistent  disobedience  of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  it  must  be  established  that 
there  has  been  continuous  and  constant  refusal  to  obey,  or  behavior  motivated  by  an  attitude 
of  continuing  insubordination;  a  single  instance  of  disobedience  is  insufficient.  (Governing 
Ba.  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 

6. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 

service,  or  refusal  to  follow  rules  and  regulations  is  or  are  established,  it  must  also  be 
established  that  such  conduct  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison),  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d 
208;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445;  See  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

7. 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence,”  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

  

 
  

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  That  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in 
support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.  (Hutchinson  v. 
Contractors’  State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal.App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v. 
Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.295,  304.) 

Legal  Conclusions  Pertaining  to  the  Specific  Allegations  of  the  Accusation: 

8. 

While  two  of  Respondent’s  acts  might  be  deemed  unprofessional  conduct,  i.e., 

telling  one  student  to  get  another  out  of  the  classroom,  or  engaging  in  an  argument  with  a 
counselor  in  front  of  a  student,  Complainant  cannot  establish  that  Respondent  may  be 
terminated  for  unprofessional  conduct.  This  is  because  Complainant  has  not  established  that 
Respondent  was  served  with  a  proper  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  then  provided 
with  an  opportunity  to  cure  her  unprofessional  conduct  after  receiving  such  a  notice. 
(Factual  Finding  29.)  This  is  fatal  to  the  unprofessional  conduct  claim. 
(Tarquin  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1978)  84  Cal.App.3d  251;  Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429, 
1446.)  Further,  there  is  no  evidence  of  unprofessional  conduct  occurring  after  February  25, 
2013. 

| 

: 

9. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  as  further  defined  in  Legal  Conclusion  3. 
It 
was  not  established  that  she  has  fixed  character  traits  that  make  her  unsuitable  for  teaching. 
The  record  establishes  many  years  of  good  service  to  the  District  and  its  students.  (Factual 
Finding  32.)  And,  her  temperament  was  described  as  positive  by  witnesses  who  have 
worked  with  her.  (Factual  Finding  31.)  In  this  case,  there  was  one  incident  when 
Respondent  lost  her  composure—the  incident  with  the  counselor—and  one  where  frustration 
may  have  played  a  part.  Two  such  incidents  to  do  not  establish  a  defect  in  temperament,  and 
given  the  testimony  and  statements  of  teachers  familiar  with  her,  and  her  evaluations,  these 
two  matters  appear  aberrant. 

10. 

_—‘[t  was  not  established  that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the 

meaning  of  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939,  and  the  cases  cited  in  Legal 
Conclusion  4.  Even  the  most  serious  incident—asking 
out  of  the 
classroom—did  not  involve  immoral  conduct,  only  poor  judgment.  The  same  can  be  said  for 
the  incident  involving  Ms.  Kasubuchi. 

to  get 

11. 

‘It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  persistent  disobedience 
of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  in  part  because  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s 
behavior  was  motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuing  insubordination,  nor  has  there  been  a 
continuous  refusal  to  follow  rules  and  regulations.  In  sum,  three  or  four  incidents  spread 
across  parts  of  two  semesters,  in  a  career  spanning  several  years,  do  not  establish  persistent 

10

  

  

disobedience.  At  the  same  time,  her  attitude  toward  her  supervisors  during  office 
conferences,  and  during  the  hearing,  indicates  that  Respondent  does  not  have  an 
insubordinate  attitude. 

12. 

|  The  Commission  agrees  unanimously  that  grounds  for  termination  have  not 
 
|
been  established,  and  that  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors  is  therefore  not  necessary. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  Commission  condones  all  of  Respondent’s  acts.  Plainly,  she  used 
and  allowing  herself  to  lose 
very  poor  judgment  in  her  interaction  with R&B and  WwW 
her  composure  with  Kasubuchi  is  disappointing,  notwithstanding  the  mitigating 
circumstances.  The  Commission  does  not  deem  these  two  incidents,  and  a  brief  absence 
from  her  classroom  to  be  sufficient  cause  to  terminate  Respondent,  especially  in  light  of  her 
positive  attributes  and  contributions  to  Virgil  and  its  students. 

|

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Alyse  Breitbach  is  hereby  dismissed,  and  she 

shall  not  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District. 

Gaby  L Ab  D0/ 5 

  

Date: 

Date: 

  

  

2/- 2r  fh: ‘a    ‘ce  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

 

  

Il 

   
   
    

<=-—-  disobedience.  At  the  same  time,  her  attitude  toward  her  supervisors  during  office 
conferences,  and  during  the  hearing,  indicates  that  Respondent  does  not  have  an 
insuberdinate  attitude. 

12.  - 

..  The  Commission  agrees  unanimously  that  grounds  for  termination  have  not  \ 

been  established,  and  that  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors  is  therefore  not  necessary. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  Commission  condones  all  of  Respondent’s  acts.  Plainly,  she  used 
very  poor  judgment in  her  interaction  with  Richy  and  Winston,  and  allowing  herself  to  lose 
her  composure  with  Kasubuchi is  disappointing,  notwithstanding  the  mitigating 
circumstances.  The  Commission  does  not  deem  these  two  incidents,  and  a  brief  absence-- 
from  her  classroom  to  be  sufficient  cause  to  terminate  Respondent, especially  i in  light  of  her 
p@sitive  attributes  and  contributions  to  Virgil  and  its  students. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Alyse  Breitbach  is  hereby  dismissed,  and  she 
shall  not  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School District. 

       

Susie  Livingston,  Commissioner 

Date: 

_—_ 

    
   

  

    
  

 

