BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2014020005 

AMNUAY  PORNBIDA, 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  September  14,  15  and  16,  2015. 
The  Commission  consists  of  the  following  members:  .Helen  Shepard,  teacher; 
Jimmy  Marin,  teacher;  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who  presided. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Kristine  E. 

Kwong,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondent  Amnuay  Pornbida  (Respondent)  was  present  and  was 
represented  by  Carl  Joseph,  General  Counsel,  United  Teachers  of  Los  Angeles. 

Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  Oral  and 

documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive 
session.  After  due  consideration  of  the  record,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual 
findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Vivian  Ekchian,  in 

her  official  capacity  as  Chief  Human  Resources  officer  of  the  District. 

2. 

On  January  22,  2014,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the  District’s 

intention  to  dismiss  him  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  submitted  a  timely  demand 
for  a  hearing. 

 

  

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  dated  November  26,  2013  and  the  Accusation  dated 

February  4,  2014,  both  recommend  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  the  District  for  the 
following  legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1)  unprofessional 
conduct;  (2)  immoral  conduct;  (3)  unsatisfactory  performance;  (4)  evident  unfitness  for 
service;  and  (5)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  employing  Respondent. 

4. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

5. 

District  contends  that  Respondent  demeaned  and  humiliated  students,  was 

verbally  abusive,  feigned  hitting  students,  coerced  students  into  making  written  statements 
about  other  students,  retracting  allegations  against  him  and  writing  new  statements  and  failed 
to  change  his  behavior  despite  specific  directives  to  do  so. 

6. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  had a  difficult  group  of  students  that  made  up 

stories  about  him.  He  also  contends  that  although  he  often  told  students  to  "shut  your  front 
door,"  he  did  not  make  the  other  comments  attributed  to  him.  Respondent  admitted 
obtaining  statements  from  students,  but  asserts  that  some  of  the  statements  were  needed  to 
offer  proof  of  a  student's  behavior  to  parents  and  others  were  to  prove  to  administrators  that 
students  had  lied  about  his  conduct. 

Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  has  been a  teacher  in  the  District  for  approximately  12  years  and 

is  a  permanent  certificated  employee.  Respondent  has  a  Bachelor's  degree  and  a  Master's 
Degree  in  Education.  He  also  obtained  a  law  degree  in  Bangkok,  but  never  worked  as  a 
lawyer.  Respondent  has  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  math  supplement  and a  tier  one 
administrative  credential.  Respondent  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  District  for  two 
years.  Respondent  taught  Math  and  Science  in  6th,  7th  and  8th  grades  at  Curtis  Middle 
School  for  two  years.  Respondent  requested,  and  was  granted,  a  transfer  to  South  Gate 
Middle  School.  Both  schools  are  in  lower  socio-economic  areas  and  predominately 
comprised  of  ethnic  minority  students.  At  Curtis  Middle  School,  the  student  population  is 
predominately  African-American  and  at  South  Gate  Middle  School,  the  student  population  is 
predominately  Latino.  Respondent  taught  sixth  grade  Math,  Science,  and  Health  during  the 
time  period  at  issue  in  this  case.  He  also  taught  Saturday  school. 

8. 

On  April  27,  2010,  Leticia  Galvan,  Assistant  Principal  at  South  Gate  Middle 
School,  became  aware  of  some  complaints  from  students  about  Respondent.  She  asked  the 
students  to  put  their  complaints  in  writing.  She  received  the  following  complaints: 

 

  

(1)  KM’.  claimed  that  Respondent  rolled  up  a  paper  and  hit  him  for  reading 
last  semester  grades  he  found  on  the  ground. 

(2) Li.  claimed  that  he  saw  Respondent  hit  his  friend  in  [on]  the  foot. 

(3)  Offo.  claimed  that  Respondent  used  inappropriate  language  in  Saturday 
school. 

(4) DE.  claimed  that  Respondent  used  innapropriate  language  in  Saturday 

te  claimed  that  he  heard  Respondent  use  inappropriate  language  during 

school. 

(5)  y 
class. 

9. 

After  receiving  the  written  complaints,  Ms.  Galvan  called  the  Los  Angeles 
County  Sheriff  and  made  a  suspected  child  abuse  report.  After  investigation,  the  Sheriff 
concluded  that  there  was  not  enough  evidence  to  establish  that  a  crime  had  taken  place. 
Next,  following  District  protocol,  Ms.  Galvan  conducted  an  administrative  investigation. 
Ms.  Galvan's  investigation  consisted  of  interviewing  the  students  who  gave  the  statements  as 
well  as  randomly  selected  students  from  Respondent's  various  classes.  After  her 
investigation,  Ms.  Galvan  concluded  that  there  was  not  sufficient  evidence  to  substantiate  the 
complaints. 

10. 

Ms.  Galvan  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  on  April  27,  2010.  In  the 

aR.  Respondent  admitted 
R.  because  he  was  a  bad  influence. 

conference,  Respondent  advised  Ms.  Galvan  that  J§JR.  was  not  his  student,  but  had 
given  him  several  problems  and  he  was  concerned  about  J 
telling  other  students  not  to  hang  around  with  J 
Respondent  denied  that  he  ever  hit  students.  Respondent  brought  additional  written 
statements  from  students  to  the  conference.  In  the  new  statements,  some  of  the  students 
retracted  their  previous  accusations  against  Respondent.  Ms.  Galvan  told  Respondent  that  he 
could  offer  advice  to  students,  but  could  not  influence  students’  choice  of  friends.  Ms. 
Galvan  provided  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  District  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students.  She 
stressed  that  item  number  5  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  provides  that  teachers 
should  refrain  from  "making  statements  or  comments,  either  directly  or  in  the  presence  of 
student(s),  which  are  not  age-appropriate,  professional,  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual  in 
nature,  harassing,  or  demeaning." 
or  there  would  be  disciplinary  consequences.  The  conference  was  memorialized  in  a  written 
conference  memorandum  dated  April  28,  2010,  which  was  provided  to  Respondent.  (Exhibit 
15) 

She  further  directed  him  not  to  retaliate  against  students 

11. 

On  May  18,  2011,  Respondent  was  evaluated  by  Assistant  Principal  Susan 

Marquez-Gawthrop.  The  evaluation  was  approved  by  Principal  Musetta  Malone. 

  

1 

First  names  and  last  initials  are  used  in  the  Accusation  and  the  Decision  to 

protect  the  privacy  of  minors. 

 

  

  

Respondent  received  an  overall  rating  of  "meets  standards."  However,  Ms.  Marquez- 
Gawthrop  noted  two  areas  as  needing  improvement.  Those  areas  were  "engages  students  in 
problem  solving,  critical  thinking  and  other  activities"  and  "regularly  in  attendance  for  the 
total  contract  day." 
September  30,  2010,  October  4,  2010,  October  12,  2010,  November  17,  2010,  December  15, 
2010,  April  13,  2011,  April  25,  2011,  May  4,  2011  and  May  16,  2011  and  conferences  held 
on  October  22,  2010,  October  26,  2010,  October  29,  2010  and  May  18,  2010.  (Exhibit  13) 

The  evaluation  was  based  upon  classroom  observations  made  on 

12. 

On  February  9,  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Audrey  Criss  had  a  conference  with 

Respondent  regarding  complaints  made  by  Students  to  her  about  Respondent's  conduct  on 
February  1,  2012  and  February  3,  2012.  Students  made  the  following  allegations: 

(1) 
On  February  1,  2012,  Respondent  stated  that  ME  's 
father  was  not  in  the  home  and  "that  is  why  you  are  so  messed  up"  and 
"that  is  why  no  teachers  like  you." 

(2) 
Student  DIA.  reported  that  on  February  1,  2012,  Respondent  said 
"If  you  come  to  school  mad  it's  because  you  are  having  problems  at  home  and 
you  take  ail  the  stress  out  here  at  school." 

(3)  <  Of  reported  that  during  first  period  on  a  7:  2012,  that 
Respondent  told  student  Ma.  to  be  quiet.  When 
A.  did  not 
comply,  Respondent  screamed  "shut  up"  and  then  took 
outside  of 
the  classroom  and  screamed  at  him. 

   

AM...  and  DE.  reported  that  on  February  1, 
or  throwing  paper  at  him  and  told 
that  he  was  "stupid."  Student  DMA.  also  reported  that  when  she 

(4)  » 
2012,  Respondent  accused  student  ME 
M 
asked  Respondent  if  he  could  speak  to  students  in  that  way,  he  stated  "I  just 
did,  didn't  I  [?]" 

(5) 
Students  RAC.,  BEC.  and  JM.  reported  that  on 
February  3,  2012,  during  nutrition  break,  Respondent  pursued  students  who 
were  involved  in  a  water  balloon  fight  and  hit  student 

Student  DEE.  also  reported  that  Respondent  pushed  students  with 

(6) 
his  fists  during  the  water  balloon  incident  on  February  3,  2012. 

(7) 
Student  cH.  reported  that  Respondent  said  "Don't  fuck  around 
with  me”  and  screamed  at  students  while  he  tried  to  confiscate  water  balloons 
on  February  3,  2012. 

13. 

——  In  the  February  9,  2012,  conference,  Respondent  denied  hitting  any  student, 

yelling  at  students  or  calling  anyone  "stupid."  Respondent  informed  Assistant  Principal 
Criss  that vi.  often  interrupted  class  instruction  and  threw  papers  at  Respondent, 

 

  

  

and  that  he  spoke  to  MEA.  outside  of  the  classroom  in  a  calm  and  quiet  voice. 
Respondent  also  acknowledged  that  he  had  tried  to  get  the  students  to  give  him  the  water 
balloons  without  success.  He  advised  Ms.  Criss  that  the  students  had  "made  up  stories."  At 
hearing,  Ms.  Criss  testified  that  she  had  no  reason  not  to  believe  the  students.  A  report  of 
suspected  child  abuse  was  made  to  the  Los  Angeles  County  Sheriff  as  is  standard  District 
policy  in  such  cases.  The  Sheriff's  Department  did  not  find  evidence  of  a  crime.  During  the 
conference,  Ms.  Criss  gave  Respondent  copies  of  the  District  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect 
Reporting  Requirements  Bulletin,  District  Board  Resolution  Regarding  Respectful  Treatment 
of  All  Persons,  District  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  District  Employee  Code  of  Ethics 
and  District  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  Bulletin.  During  the  conference  Assistant 
Principal  Criss  directed  Respondent  to  adhere  to  the  written  policies  provided  to  him,  treat  all 
school  stakeholders  with  courtesy  and  respect,  not  to  use  profanity  or  demean  and/  or  insult 
any  school  stakeholder,  and  not  to  retaliate  against  anyone  who  provided  information  about 
the  complaints. 
written  by  Rick  Morris.  Mr.  Morris  was a  trainer  that  had  provided  a  seminar  on  classroom 
management  at  the  school.  (Exhibit  17) 

Ms.  Criss  also  gave  Respondent  a  book  about  Classroom  Management 

14. 

On  April  23,  2012,  Principal  Malone  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  to 
Respondent  alleging  failure  to  follow  district/school  policies  and  procedures,  poor  judgment 
and  inappropriate  language  based  upon  the  above  referenced  complaints  by  students  about 
his  conduct  on  February  1,  2012  and  February  3,  2012  as  set  forth  in  conference 
memorandum  of  February  9,  2012.  Respondent  refused  to  sign  the  acknowledgment  of 
receipt  of  the  Notice.  (Exhibit  22.) 

15. 

On  May  3,  2012,  Respondent  was  evaluated  by  Assistant  Principal  Criss.  The 

evaluation  was  approved  by  Principal  Musetta  Malone.  Respondent  received  a  "meets 
standard  performance"  evaluation  with  notations  of  needing  improvement  in  two  areas.  The 
areas  that  were  designated  for  improvement  were  in  (1)  "Classroom  Performance”  where  it 
was  noted  that  Respondent  needed  to  improve  in  the  areas  of  establishing  and  maintaining 
standards  for  student  behavior  and  creating  a  climate  that  promotes  fairness  and  respect  and 
(2)  in  "Developing  as  a  Professional"  where  it.was  noted  that  he  needed  to  improve  in 
communication  with  colleagues,  staff,  parents  and  students  in  an  appropriate  manner. 
(Exhibit  14.) 

16. 

On  May  24,  2012,  Principal  Malone  held  a  conference  with  Respondent 

concerning  the  written  statements  from  students  that  Respondent  had  presented  in  the  April 
23,  2012  meeting  with  Ms.  Malone.  Also  in  attendance  were  Assistant  Principal  Stephen 
Foster  and  United  Teachers  of  Los  Angeles  (UTLA)  Chapter  Chair  Dimitrios  Manikas. 
During  the  conference,  Ms.  Malone  discussed  the  written  statements  that  Respondent  had 
obtained  from  student  Mi.  's  classmates  during  class  time.  The  statements  were 
obtained  to  contradict  MIA.  and  support  Respondent's  position.  Some  of  the 
statements  were  retractions  of  earlier  written  statements.  Ms.  Malone  stressed  that  it  was 
inappropriate  for  Respondent  to  use  class  time  to  obtain  statements  and  that  it  was  coercive 
for  him  to  have  students  write  statements  because  he  controiled  their  class  grades.  The 
statements  concerned  the  February  9,  2012  allegation  that  Respondent  yelled  at  student 

 

  

MMB A.  and  made  remarks  concerning  his  home  life.  Ms.  Malone  gave  Respondent 
another  copy  of  February  9,  2012  conference  memorandum,  the  District  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students,  and  the  District  Code  of  Ethics.  Principal  Malone  also  gave  Respondent 
written  directives  as  follows: 

(a)  I  am  directing  you  again  to  follow  the  directives  given  to  you  in  the 
February  9,  2011  conference  memo. 

I  am  directing  you  again  not  to  discuss  this  incident,  retaliate 

(b) 
against  students,  parents,  and/or  staff  members  who  have  provided 
information,  were  involved,  and/or  gave  statements. 

(c)  Iam  directing  you  to  use  instructional  time  appropriately  and  not  to 
interview  students  during  class  time  and  or  have  them  write  statements 
for  your  personal  purpose. 

(d)  I  am  directing  you  to  follow  the  district  Code  of  Conduct  with 
Students. 

(e)  1  am  directing  you  to  follow  the  district  Employee  Code  of  Ethics, 
Do  not  to  (sic)  to  discuss  this  incident,  retaliate  against  students, 
parents,  and/or  staff  members  who  have  provided  information,  were 
involved,  and/or  gave  statements. 

At  the  conference,  Respondent  said  he  would  provide  a  written  response  to  the  allegations. 
Principal  Malone  memorialized  the  conference  in  a  memorandum  dated  May  30,  2012. 
(Exhibit  18.)  While  there  was  no  evidence  of  a  written  response,  Respondent  filed  a 
grievance  through  his  union.  The  outcome  of  the  grievance  was  not  established  by  the 
evidence  offered in  the  case. 

17. 

Ona  date  not  established  by  the  evidence,  Ms.  Criss  made  Respondent  aware 

that  there  were  allegations  that  he  had  videotaped  students  in  his  classroom.  On  February  22, 
2013,  Respondent  provided  Ms.  Criss  with  a  written  memorandum  wherein  he  denied  the 
allegations.  Respondent  wrote: 

Regarding  to  photo  (sic)  taking  in  my  classroom:  I've  never  took  (sic) 
Any(sic)  pictures  of  students  in  or  outside  of  my  classroom  during  the  period 
of  November  2012,  December  2012,  January  2013  and  February  2013 

18. 

On  March  7,  2013,  Assistant  Principal  Criss  issued  a  directive  to  Respondent 

"to  cease  photographing  students  in  any  manner,  students  attending  South  Gate  Middle 
School"  and  warned  that  "Failure  to  make  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  regarding 
this  directive  may  lead  to  the  issuance  of  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation  and/or  discipline  such 
as  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District."  (Exhibit  20.) 

 

  

19. 

On  March  15,  2013,  Assistant  Principal  Criss  held  a  conference  with 

Respondent.  UTLA  representative  Tobie  Priest  and  Assistant  Principal  James  Hooker  also 
attended  the  conference.  At  the  conference,  Ms.  Criss  discussed  the  following  conduct 
which  had  been  reported  to  her  by  the  students. 

Students Lis.,  Ar .  YEE... AR  -  im.  and 

A. 
CHL.  reported  that  during  fourth  period  on  March  6,  2013, 
Respondent  asked  for  student  volunteers  and  subsequently  allowed  the 
student  volunteers  to  search  the  backpacks  of  the  class  looking  for  a 

wallet  belonging  to  YK.  that  had  been  reported  stolen. 

B. 
Students  Sir.,  REBBR.  and Ba.  reported  that 
on  January  22,  2013,  Respondent  used  his  cell  phone  to  videotape  students 
in  his  class  as  documentation  to  provide  to  their  parents  to  demonstrate  their 
behaviors. 

Students KER.  and  Ba.  reported  that  xm 

C. 
asked  them  to  prepare  letters  to  the  parents  of  Student 
Kos  behavior  and  to  write  in  the  letters  that  Respondent  "did 
not  pick  on  KJ"  It  was  also  reported  by  the  students  that 
Respondent  requested  that  the  students  maintain  confidentiality 
regarding  his  requests  for  the  letters. 

.  about 

Students  AF.  and  Ba.  reported  that  Respondent 

D. 
often  screams  and  yells  at  students  and  makes  negative  remarks  about 
students’  physical  characteristics  in  front  of  the  class.  The  students 
also  reported  that  during 
M.  "When  I  see  you  I  only  see  black"  and 
Respondent  said  to 
referred  to  REQIR.  as  fat  by  making  remarks  such  as  "Stop  eating. 
You're  too  big.  I'm  going  to  tell  Mr.  Howe  to  make  you  run  more 
laps.” 

the  first  semester  in  January  2013, 

  

E.  Ba.  reported  that  Respondent  said  "I  wish  it  were  the 
time  of  hitting  so  I  can  smack  you"  and  Students  CHL. 
and  AMS.  reported  that  Respondent  said  he  wished  he  could  hit 
students  and  routinely  walked  up  to  students  and  moved  his  hand 
forcefully  up  to  their  faces  as  if  he  was  going  to  hit  them  and  stopped 
short  of  hitting  them  in  the  face. 

R., 

| 

At  the  conference,  Respondent  denied  the  allegations  and  his  union  representative  said  that  a 
written  response  would  be  made.  Assistant  Principal  Criss  gave  Respondent  copies  of  the 
District  Child  Abuse  Bulletin,  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons, 
District  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  District  Code  of  Ethics  and  District  Abolition  of 
Corporal  Punishment  Bulletin  and  directed  him  to  adhere  to  the  policies.  Ms.  Criss  also 

 

  

  

directed  Respondent  to  treat  all  school  stakeholders  with  courtesy  and  respect,  not  to  use 
profanity  or  demean  or  insult  any  school  stakeholder  and  not  to  retaliate  against  anyone  who 
provided  information  concerning  the  matters.  The  conference  was  memorialized  in  a 
memorandum  dated  March  20,  2013.  (Exhibit  21) 

20. 

On  April  10,  2013  Respondent  was  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service 
or  Acts  and  a  15  day  suspension  based  upon  allegations  of  conduct  from  August  14,  2012  to 
March  6,  2013.  The  Notice  also  included  a  recommendation  by  Principal  Malone  that 
Respondent  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  District.  Respondent  filed  a  grievance 
through  his  union,  but  the  outcome  of  the  grievance  was  not  in  evidence.  (Exhibit  23) 

21. 

On  April  25,  2013,  Respondent  received  his  annual  evaluation.  The  evaluation 

rated  Respondent's  performance  as  below  standard.  Assistant  Principal  Criss  was  the 
evaluator  and  Principal  Mallone  was  the  approving  administrator.  According  to  the 
evaluation,  Respondent  needed  improvement  in  five  areas  of: 
self-directed  and  assessing  their  own  learning,  (2)  provides  an  effective  classroom 
environment,  (3)  establishes  professional  goals  and  demonstrates  continuous  growth,  (4) 
communicates  regularly  with  students  and  parents  about  instructional  goals  and  student 
progress,  and  (5)  follows  district  and  state  policies,  laws  and  regulations.  Assistant  Principal 
Criss  also  rated  Respondent  as  falling  below  standards  in  the  following  three  areas:  (1) 
establishes  and  maintains  standards  for  student  behavior  and  creates  a  climate  that  promotes 
fairness  and  respect,  (2)  provides  effective  supervision  of  students  and  (3)  communicates  and 
interacts  with  colleagues,  staff,  parents,  and  students  in  an  appropriate  manner.  (Exhibit  15) 

(1)  guides  all  students  to  be 

22. 

On  September  18,  2013,  James  Noble,  Ed.D.,  Administrator  of  Operations  for 

the  District,  conducted  an  administrative  review  of  the  proposed  dismissal  of  Respondent. 
As  part  of  the  review,  Dr.  Noble  met  with  Respondent  and  reviewed  the  following 
documents:  (1)  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  issued  on  April  10,  2013,  (2)  Notice  of 
Suspension  for  15  days  issued  on  April  10,  2013,  (3)  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  issued 
on  April  23,  2012,  (4)  Notice  of  Suspension  dated  April  23,  2012,  (5)  Conference 
memorandum  issued  by  Assistant  Principal  Audrey  Criss  dated  March  7,  2013,  (6)  Written 
Directive  issued  by  Assistant  Principal  Audrey  Criss  dated  March  7,  2013,  Below  Standard 
Evaluation  dated  April  29,  2013  issued  by  Assistant  Principal  Audrey  Criss,  Evaluation  dated 
May  4,  2012  issued  by  Assistant  Principal  Audrey  Criss  and  Evaluation  dated  May  18,  2011 
issued  by  Assistant  Principal  Susan  Marquez-Gawthrop.  Respondent's  UTLA  representative 
Scott  Gerber  and  District's  Field  Director  for  the  Office  of  Staff  Relations,  Dr.  Maribel  Luna, 
were  also  present.  At  the  meeting,  Respondent  provided  Dr.  Noble  with  copies  of  the  student 
statements  he  had  obtained  in  an  effort  to  dispute  the  allegations  made  against  him  and 
denied  that  he  had  engaged  in  any  of  the  conduct  of  which  he  had  been  accused.  Dr.  Noble 
asked  Respondent  where  he  had  obtained  the  statements  and  Respondent  informed  him  that 
the  statements  were  obtained  from  the  students  as  evidence.  At  hearing,  Dr.  Noble  testified 
that  he  was  concerned  about  the  statements  that  Respondent  obtained  from  the  students.  Dr. 
Noble  asserted  that  it  was  inherently  coercive  for  Respondent,  a  teacher  who  has  conirol  of 
the  students'  grades,  to  ask  students  for  statements  in  his  support  and  to  ask  them  to  retract 
statements.  After  consideration,  Dr.  Noble  forwarded  the  proposed  disciplinary  action  to  the 

  

 

District  Board  of  Education  for  action.  Respondent  felt  that  Dr.  Noble  did  not  give  any  real 
consideration  to  his  evidence. 

23. 

Ona  date  not  established  by  the  evidence,  Respondent  was  removed  from  the 

classroom  and  "housed"  at  a  local  District  office.  A  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  was 
served  on  Respondent  on  January  22,  2014. 

24. 

©  The  Commission  found  the  testimony  of  Assistant  Principal  Criss  credible. 

Ms.  Criss  reluctantly  followed  through  with  the  evaluation  of  Respondent.  The  number  and 
seriousness  of  the  student  complaints  made  it  impossible  for  her  to  ignore  Respondent's 
conduct.  During  her  observations,  Ms.  Criss  noted  that  Respondent  did  not  post  student 
work,  the  classroom  was  not  clean  and  the  environment  was  chaotic.  She  observed  students 
out  of  their  seats  and  generally  an  environment  that  was  noisy  and  chaotic.  When  asked 
about  her  opinion  of  Respondent,  Ms.  Criss  opined  that  Respondent  was  untruthful  and  never 
"owned  up  to  anything.”  She  also  opined  that  Respondent  was  not  fit  to  be  a  teacher. 

25. 

The  Commission  found  the  testimony  of  Principal  Mallone  credible.  Ms. 

Mallone  also  observed  Respondent's  classroom  to  be  chaotic  and  out  of  control.  After 
observing  Respondent's  class  Ms.  Mallone  concluded  that  Respondent  had  no  command  of 
the  classroom  and  no  classroom  management  skills.  She  was  concerned  about  the  allegations 
made  by  students  about  Respondent's  behavior  and  became  more  concerned  when  she 
learned  that  Respondent  had  asked  students  to  retract  statements  and/or  prepare  statements 
for  him. 

26. 

Student  Ba.  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  frequently  displayed 

anger.  In  her  experience,  Respondent  spoke  in  a  loud  voice  which  she  described  as  a  "9"  on 
a  scale  of  1  to  10.  He  also  hit  her  desk  with  a  ruler  in  a  display  of  anger.  He  sent  her  to  an 
adjacent  unoccupied  classroom  with  dim  lights  as  a  disciplinary  measure  on  more  than  one 
occasion.  BV.  wrote  a  statement  about  Respondent's  conduct  and  then  retracted  it  at 
his  request.  At  hearing,  she  credibly  testified  that  her  original  statement  was  truthful. 
Although  B 
was  not  searched. 

V.  saw  backpacks  searched  by  students  in  the  classroom,  her  backpack 

| 

27. 

Student  LIMBA.  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  used  the  word  "stupid" 

"I  knew  he  wouldn't  hit  us."  However,  he  did  not  like 

often  in  reference  to  student  activities  or  behavior.  LAA.  never  heard  Respondent  call  a 
student  stupid.  LBA.  often  saw  Respondent  strike  desks  with  rulers,  feign  striking  students 
with  his  hand,  and  often  told  students  to  "shut  up."  LIMA.  did  not  feel  intimidated  by 
Respondent  and  stated  that 
Respondent  and  testified  that  Respondent  was  "not  my  kind  of  teacher." 
Respondent  called 
7  father  on  at  least  one  occasion  which  resulted  in LEB  being  disciplined  at  home.  Lm 
A.  opined  that  Respondent  did  not  care  about  the  students  and  expressed  that  being  in 
Respondent's  class  made  him  "feel  bad."  Respondent  once  told  LBBA.,  "Just  fail,  I  don't 
care."  LMA.  remembered  that  Respondent  had  authorized  students  to  search  backpacks  for 
a  lost  wallet  on  one  occasion.  He  was  not  comfortable  with  the  backpack  search  because  he 
was  concerned  that  someone  would  steal  his  things  from  his  backpack.  Li 

A.  admitted  that 

9 

 

  

  

  

he  did  not  like  Respondent  and  opined  that  many  of  the  students  did  not  like  Respondent 
because  of  Respondent's  behavior.  Ultimately, 

A.  failed  Respondent's  class. 

28. 

Student  AIK.  credibly  testified  that  Respondent  raised  his  hand  to  students, 

stopped  close  to  their  faces,  and  pretended  to  hit  them  in  the  face.  ABB.  opined  that 
Respondent  had  an  angry  expression  on  his  face  when  he  pretended  to  hit  the  students. 
S.  also  heard  Respondent  talk  about  the  "old  days"  when  a  teacher  was  allowed  to  physically 
third 
discipline  students.  AMS.  had  Respondent  as  her  teacher  for  Math  and  Science  during 
and  fourth  periods.  AMK.  witnessed  Respondent  making  comments  about  student  rl 
M.'s  dark  skin  and  Student  REEEEEBR.  being  fat.  AIS.  was  in  class  the  day  that  student 
YEEc.'s  wallet  was  missing.  The  students  were  not  allowed  to  leave  the  classroom  until  the 
back  packs  were  searched.  She  thought  it  was  wrong  that  the  backpacks  were  searched  and 
reported  the  incident  to  the  Dean. 

29. 

Student » 

wrote  a  Statement  about  Respondent's  conduct  and  later 
retracted  it  at  Respondent's  request  because  he  told  her  the  statement  would  result  in  him 
   
losing  his  job.  DIBBA.  retracted  her  statement  at  his  request  for  that  reason.  DE. 
credibly  testified  that  Respondent  commented  that  she  had  "vampire  teeth"  and  told  her  that 
if  she  was  concerned  about  other  people  calling  her  a  "Hoochi  Mama"  then  she  should  not 
loud  in  the 
dress  like 
a  "Hoochi  Mama."  According  to  Dim.  Respondent  was  very 
classroom  and  used  the  words  "stupid"  and  "shut  up"  a  lot.  Nevertheless,  D 
.  did 
return  with  friends  to  visit  Respondent's  classroom  on  occasion  when  she  was  no  longer  a 
student  of  his. 

30. 

|  Respondent  was  the  only  defense  witness  proffered.  The  Commission  found 
Respondent's  testimony  not  credible  for  the  most  part.  He  was  inconsistent  and  seemed  to 
change  his  answers  to  questions  as  his  testimony  progressed.  Respondent  admitted  that  he 
had  a  cellphone  in  the  classroom,  but  denied  videotaping  the  students.  He  offered  the 
telephone  to  Ms.  Criss  during  a  meeting  and  told  her  she  was  free  to  search  for  video  of  the 
students  on  his  telephone.  At  hearing,  Respondent  denied  telling  students  to  "shut  up,"  but 
seemed  to  be  amused  by  describing  the  many  times  he  told  his  students  to  "shut  your  front 
door"  to  quiet  them  down  and  "make  them  think."  Respondent  also  admitted  that  one  of  his 
classroom  management  tools  was  to  loudly  talk  over  the  students  until  he  got  their  attention. 

31. 

Respondent  also  admitted  that  he  discussed  corporal  punishment  administered 

in  school  and  in  other  countries  with  his  students.  Respondent  asserted  that  the  discussion 
was  important  and  related  to  social  studies,  however  he  did  not  teach  social  studies. 
Respondent  denied  ever  raising  his  hand  to  students  or  pretending  to  hit  them.  Respondent 
admitted  asking  students  to  prepare  written  statements  for  his  defense  and  admitted  asking 
students  to  retract  their  statements.  Respondent  denied  ever  kicking  students.  Respondent 
asserted  that  students  frequently  attempted  to  trip  him  as  he  walked  around  the  classroom  and 
it  was  possible  that  during  one  of  those  episodes  he  made  accidental  contact  with  a  student's 
foot. 

7 

10 

 

  

32. 

With  respect  to  Ma...  Respondent  asserted  that va.  was  off- 

A.,  "what  do  you  need?"  He  claimed  to  have  noticed  that 

was  not  himself"  and  sent  him  to  the  counselor.  When  MAJA.  returned  from 

task  and  he  asked  M 
ME 
the  counselor's  office  he  threw  a  piece  of  paper  on  a  table.  Respondent  determined  that 
MIA.  was  still  "not  ready  to  be  there"  and  told  him  to  go  back  to  the  counselor's  office. 
Respondent  stated  that  he  asked  MEA.  "What  is  bothering  you?"  and  Mies.  told 
him  that  he  would  be  leaving  to  go  to  another  school.  Respondent  claimed  not  to  know  that 
va.  's  father  was  not  in  the  home  and  he  did  not  comment  on Ma.  's  father. 
Respondent  asserted  that MEA.  did  not  usually  do  his  classwork  and  was  disruptive. 

33. 

Respondent  also  admitted  that  he  asked  two  students  that  were  friends  of 

.  to  write  statements  about  KM .s  behavior  in  the  classroom  so  that  he  could 

give  the  statements  to  KM.'s  mother.  Respondent  rationalized  his  request  because 

.'s  mother  did  not  believe  him,  he  assumed  that  she  would  believe  the  students  that 
were  familiar  to  her.  When  he  raised  the  concept  with  K§JM.'s  mother,  she  told  him  that 
she  would  be  interested  in  seeing  such  statements. 

34, 

Respondent  testified  about  an  incident  wherein  student YEE.  was  upset  and 

crying  about a  lost  or  stolen  wallet  that  was  given  to  him  for  his  birthday  by  his  father. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  told  YG.  to  tell  the  dean  and  that  he  was  aware  some 
students  had  searched  backpacks  of  other  students  as  the  bell  rang,  but  he  had  not  instructed 
them  to  do  so.  Respondent's  testimony  was  not  credible  on  this  point. 

35. 

Respondent  testified  inconsistently  about  placement  of  aa.  in  an 

adjacent  classroom.  Early  in  his  testimony,  he  asserted  that  BE.  was  removed  from 
the  classroom  because  she  needed  to  be  separated  from  her  friends.  Later  in  his  testimony, 
he  asserted  that Ba.  was  asked  to  sit  in  the  adjacent  classroom  only  once  or  twice  to 
take  tests.  He  insisted  that  the  classroom  was  not  dark,  he  could  adequately  supervise  her  in 
the  adjacent  classroom,  and  that  it  was  not  a  room  he  used  for  discipline. 

Findings  related  to  Specific  Allegations 

36. 

In  paragraph  1  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  April  21,  2010,  PORNBIDA  rolled  up  a  newspaper  and 
struck  student  KM.  after Kio.  was  observed  reading  last 
semester  grades  found  on  the  floor. 

37. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  struck  student 

38. 

In  paragraph  2  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  24,  2010,  PORNBIDA  kicked  student  LAH.  as 
LE 

walked  by. 

11 

 

  

  

39. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  kicked  student  LEH. 

40. 

In  paragraph  3  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

During  the  month  of  March  2010,  PORNBIDA  said  to  student  J [ 
R.,  "Get  the  fuck  out  of  my  class." 

41. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  made  the  statement  alleged  in  paragraph  3  to  student  yo R. 

42. 

In  paragraph  4  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2012,  PORNBIDA  made  the  following 

statements  to  student  MIA.: 

a. 

AS  wl 

was  talking  and  raising  this  hand,  PORNBIDA 

"What's  wrong  with  you?  Is  somebody  at  your  house  not  living  with 

yelled, 

you?" 

b.  MBB 
PORNBIDA  replied,  "That  is  why  you  are  so  messed  up."  M 
informed  PORNBIDA  that  he  wanted  to  see  his  counselor. 

that  his  father is  not  living  with  him. 

responded 

then 

43. 

  

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  M§iiwas  upset 
when  he  came  to  Respondent's  class,  that  Respondent  had  a  conversation  with  M§iJabout 
father  not  being  in  the 
M 
home  and  that  being  why  Mijas  having  problems  that  day.  However,  Complainant 
failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  the  exact 
statements  alleged  in  paragraph  4. 

s  father,  and  that  Respondent  made  reference  to  ME 

44. 

In  paragraph  5  of  the  Accusation,  Compiainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2012,  student  Ma.  returned  from  the 
counselor  and  approached  PORNBIDA  with  his  note,  PORNBIDA  told 
him  to 
M 

go  back  to  the  counselor  because  PORNBIDA  believed  that 

threw  his  note  down. 

45. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  MIA.  was 

upset  when  he  returned  from  the  counselor's  office  and  Respondent  told  him  to  return  to  the 
counselor's  office  because  he  did  not  believe  that 

A.  was  ready  to  be  in  the  class. 

MI 

46. 

In  paragraph  6  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

12 

 

  

On  or  about  February  1,  2012,  PORNBIDA  slammed  his  classroom 
door  and  walked  outside  with  student  MEA.  after  MEA. 
returned  from  the  counselor's  office,  PORNBIDA  yelled  at  MEE 
and  called  him  "stupid." 

47. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
o«  called  him  "stupid."  However,  it  was  established  that  Respondent 

yelled  at  ME 
frequently  used  "stupid"  and  yelled  in  the  classroom. 

48. 

In  paragraph  7  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  1,  2012,  when  student DE..  asked 
PORNBIDA  if  he  could  speak  to  students  in  that  matter,  PORNBIDA 
responded,  "I  just  did.  Didn't  I?" 

49. 

Complainant  established  that  in  some  context  Respondent  said  "I  just  did. 

Didn't  I."  However,  the  context  and  what  the  statement  was  in  response  to  were  not 
established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

50. 

 Inparagraph  8  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  3,  2012,  while  confiscating 
nutrition,  PORNBIDA  shouted  at  student 
around  with  me!" 

water  balloons  during 
M.,  "Don't  fuck 

51. 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  Respondent  confiscated 
water  balloons  during  nutrition  on  February  3,  2012  and  was  not  happy  that  students  were 
throwing  water  balloons.  However,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
he  shouted  "Don't  fuck  around  with  me!"  at  student 

52. 

In  paragraph  9  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  February  3,  2012,  PORNBIDA  pushed  at  least  three 

students 

with  his  fist  and  lined  them  up  against  the  wall. 

53. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  of  paragraph  9  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

54. 

In  paragraph  10  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  6,  2013,  student  YEG.  alleged  that  his  wallet  had 
been  stolen.  PORNBIDA  asked  students  in  his  third  period  class  to 
volunteer  to  through  the  backpacks  and  pockets  of  other  students  in 
class 

13 

 

  

  

In  an  effort  to  recover  the  wallet. 

55. 

Complainant  established  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  10  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

56. 

In  paragraph  11  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  directed  the  student 
volunteers  in  his  third  period  class  to  search  through  the  backpacks  of 
students  in  the  class  in  an  effort  to  recover  student YEc's  missing 
wallet. 

57. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  on  or  about 

March  6,  2013,  students  in  Respondent's  third  period  class  searched  through  the  backpacks  of 
students  in  the  class  in  an  effort  to  recover  student YEc's  missing  wallet.  While 
Complainant  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  directed  the  students  to  make  the  search,  it 
was  Clear  that  Respondent  made  no  effort  to  stop  the  search. 

58. 

In  paragraph  12  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  or  about  January  22,  2013,  PORNBIDA  used  his  ceil  phone  to 

make  video  recordings  of  his  students.  He  claimed  he  intended  to  use  the 
video  to  show  parents  how  their  children  behaved  in  class.  He  had  previously 

been  directed  not  to  do  so. 

59. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
had  a  cellphone  out  in  class  and  that  the  flashlight  from  the  cellphone  was  on  leading  some 
of  the  students  to  believe  that  he  was  videotaping  them,  but  it  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  any  actual  recording  of  the  students. 

60. 

In  paragraph  13  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

on  or  about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  instructed  students 
     
.  to  write  statements  about  the  behavior  of 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  7,  2013,  and 
ending 
Ke  and 
another  student,  KQ§JM.,  so  that  PORNBIDA  could  share  the 
statements  with  K§JM.'s_  parents. 

61. 

|  Complainant  established  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph 

13  of  the  accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

62. 

In  paragraph  14  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

 

  

14 

onor 

During  the  period  commencing  or  about  January  7,  2013,  and  ending 
about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  referred  to  one  or  more  students  as  a 
"piece  of  crap." 

63. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  set  forth  in 

paragraph  14  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

64. 

In  paragraph  15  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  7,  2013,  and 
ending  on  or  about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  told  student 
M.,  "When  I  see  you,  I  only  see  black." 

65. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  15  of  the 

accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  However,  Complainant  did  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  referred  to 
negative  way. 

'  M.'s  skin  color  in  a 

66. 

In  paragraph  16  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  August  14,  2012,  and 
ending  on  or  about  January  7,  2013,  PORNBIDA  made  the  following 
comments  to  student  RAR .: 

"Stop  eating." 
"You're  too  big." 
"I'm  going  to  tell  Mr.  Howe  to  make  you  run  more  laps." 
"[Y¥]Jou  can  be  a  sumo  wrestler. 

67. 

|The  preponderance  of  evidence  established  that  Respondent  told  Respondent 

to  "stop  eating"  and  said  "I'm  going  to  make  you  run  more  laps."  These  statements  were 
made  by  Respondent  in  the  context  of  a  discussion  about  R 
was  not  shown  that  the  other  two  specific  statements  were  made-the  statements  are  consistent 
with  the  tone  and  content  of  the  conversation  about  RR.  's  weight.  Complainant's 
witness  7.  credibly  testified  that  she  heard  Respondent  call  RAR.  "fat"  in  the 
classroom  and 

that  she  heard  Respondent  tell RE 

R.'s  weight.  Although  it 

R.  to  stop  eating  donuts. 

68. 

In  paragraph  17  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  7,  2013,  and 
on  or  about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  stated  to  student 

V.,  "I 

wish  [  could  go  back  in  time  so  that  I  could  hit  you." 

ending 
B 

69. 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  Respondent  had 

discussions  with  students  about  times  "back  in  the  day”  and  in  other  countries  including 

15 

 

  

  

  

  

  

China,  South  Korea,  England,  Japan  and  Thailand,  that  students  were  hit  as  physical 
discipline  and  he  discussed  the  caning  of  a  prisoner  in  South  Korea.  These  discussions  were 
not  germane  to  or  related  to  the  curriculum.  Although  he  discussed  physical  discipline  with 
the  class,  it  was  not  proven  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  told  BEV.  that 
"TI  wish  I  could  go  back  in  time  so  that  I  could  hit  you." 

70. 

In  paragraph  18  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  7,  2013,  and 

ending 
in  his  class 
their  faces 
with  their 

on  or  about  March  6,  2013,  PORNBIDA  walked  up  to  students 
on  more  than  one  occasion,  moved  his  hand  forcefully  toward 
as  if  to  strike  them,  then  stopped  just  short  of  making  contact 
faces. 

: 

71. 

Complainant  established  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  18  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant  Education 

Code’  section  44944.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivisions  (a)  and  (d),  when  a  school  board 

recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise, 
when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension. 
The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an 
alternative  sanction. 

3. 

District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee. 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039.)  The  “preponderance  of  the  evidence”  standard  requires  the 
trier  of  fact  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (Jn 
re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63  Cal.App.4th  700,  709.) 

The  standard  of  proof  is 

A. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  set  forth  specifically  which 

of  District’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  five  alleged  grounds  for  dismissal: 
unprofessional  conduct,  (2)  immoral  conduct,  (3)  unsatisfactory  performance,  (4)  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  and  (5)  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district. 

(1) 

  

2 

All  further  references  to  section  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

specified. 

16 

 

  

5. 

Section  44932,  as  amended,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 

~~  Immoral  conduct,  including  but  not  limited  to,  egregious 

(a) 
following  causes: 

(1) 
misconduct... 

AG.  {T) 

(5) 

(6) 

(8) 

AG)... 

(2)  —  Unprofessional  conduct. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  of 
or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing 
him  or  her. 

6. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision(a)(2), 
as  amended,  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a 
profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good 
standing.  (Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553;  Perez  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174.) 

8. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6),  as  amended,  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness 
be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which  connotes a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 

17 

 

  

  

expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(fd.  at  p.  1444.) 

9. 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  as  amended,  the  violation  of 

school  rules  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous 
insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman 
(1972)  28  Cal.App.  3d  77,  84.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of 
school  rules.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

10. 

With  respect  to  determination  of  witness  credibility: 

On  the  cold  record  a 

witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached,  uncontradicted  --  but  on  a  face  to  face 
evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his  credibility  factor  nil,  Another  witness  may 
fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict  himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written 
transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who  sees,  hears  and  observes  him  may  be 
convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.  (Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17 
Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and 
reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke 
Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony 
of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of 
testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth 
out  of  selected  material.”  (Id.  at  pp.  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161 
Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an 
expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875, 
890.) 

11. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are 

established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident  unfitness 
renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal. 
3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d 
208;  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.  4th  at  pp.  1444-1445.)  Under  the  facts  of  the  Morrison 
case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may 
consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the 
existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
(6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 
discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher. 

12. 

In  Morrison,  the  California  Supreme  Court  noted  that  legislation  authorizing 
disciplinary  action  against  the  holders  of  a  variety  of  certificates,  licenses  and  government 
jobs  other  than  teaching  contain  general  terms.  The  Court  had  not  attempted  to  formulate 
explicit  definitions  of  those  terms,  but  had  given  those  terms  more  precise  meaning  by 
referring  to  the  particular  profession  or  specific  governmental  position  to  which  they  were 

18 

 

  

applicable.  (fbid.,  at  p.  220).  With  regard  to  such  general  terms  “immoral”  or  unprofessional 
conduct”  and  “moral  turpitude,”  those  terms  had  to  be  interpreted  in  a  manner  bearing  upon 
the  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach.  “Without  such  a  reasonable  interpretation,  the  terms  would  be 
susceptible  to  so  broad  an  application  as  possibly  to  subject  to  discipline  virtually  every 
teacher  in  the  state.”  (Ibid.,  at  p.  225.)  Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not 
merely  to  determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the 
conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach. 
(Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.  3d.  at  220.)  The  Morrison  factors  are  analyzed  with  Respondent  to 
Respondent’s  conduct  as  follows: 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  The  conduct  had  an  adverse  effect  on  students, 
fellow  teachers,  and  the  educational  community  as  a  whole.  The  students  in  Respondent's 
class  experienced  the  negative  effects  of  Respondent's  lack  of  classroom  management  and 
inappropriate  conduct.  Fellow  teachers  were  effected  by  his  conduct  when  the  students 
moved  to  the  next  class  after  having  been  in  the  chaotic  environment  that  existed  in 
Respondent's  classes.  Fellow  teachers  had  to  work  with  students  to  readjust  expectations  for 
classroom  behavior.  The  entire  educational  community  and  the  community  loses  confidence 
in  the  school  and  the  teacher  when  such  behavior  occurs.  Respondent's  conduct  had  a 
significant  impact  on  students  and  a  moderate  impact  on  fellow  teachers  and  the  community. 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The  conduct  was 
proximate  in  time  and  repeated. 

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher.  Respondent  held  a 
multiple  subject  credential  and  a  math  supplement  which  were  the  appropriate  credentials  for 
the  teaching  assignment. 

(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct. 
time  while  the  administration  failed  to  monitor  and  intervene  appropriately  and 
expeditiously,.  which  resulted  in  an  escalation  of  the  situation.  Furthermore,  the 
administration  did  not  support  the  students  and  teacher  and  intervene  in  an  appropriate 
manner.  There  was  not  any  publicity  about  Respondent's  conduct. 

The  conduct  went  on  for  an  extended  period  of 

(e)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct.  There  was  nothing  praiseworthy  about  Respondent's  conduct.  Respondent 
displayed  poor  judgment  and  inappropriate  behavior  in  multiple  situations  by  raising  his 
hand  to  students,  calling  students  "stupid,"  using  the  word  "stupid"  often,  yelling,  engaging 
in  inappropriate  discussion,  and  lack  of  impulse  control. 

(f)  Morrison  Factor:  Likelihood  of Recurrence:  The  conduct  is  likely  to  reoccur  unless 
Respondent  makes  significant  changes.  However,  Respondent  might  be  assisted  by 

19 

 

  

  

concentrated  and  extensive  training  in  classroom  management,  impulse  control  and  anger 
management.  Such  training  should  provide  specific  direction  and  guidance. 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling 
effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse.effect  on  constitutional  rights 
was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination  of  Respondent  from  the 
District. 

13. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral.  It  was  not  established  that 
Respondent’s  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency, 
depravity,  dissoluteness;  nor  that  he  displayed  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct 
showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  or  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  The  Commission 
determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-71  and 
Legal  Conclusions  1-6. 

14. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of 

the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional.  Respondent's  demeanor, 
comments,  lack  of  classroom  management  and  conduct  associated  with  obtaining  statements 
from  students  occurred  over  a  substantial  period  of  time  and  constituted  conduct 
unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing  pursuant  to  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(2).  (Factual  Findings  1-71  and  Legal  Conclusions  1,  2,  3,  5,  7,  10,  11,  and 
12.) 

15. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  service  was  unsatisfactory  pursuant  to  section  44932  (a)(5). 
Respondent  was  given  several  opportunities  and  clear  directives  about  his  conduct, 
demeanor,  and  comments,  but  he  failed  to  improve.  (Factual  Findings  1-71  and  Legal 
Conclusions  1,  2,  3,  5,  7,  10,  11  and12.) 

16. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of 

the  evidence  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  It  was  established  that  Respondent  has  a 
defect  in  his  temperament  and  a  fixed  character  trait  that  makes  him  unfit  to  teach  as 
demonstrated  by  his  disturbing  behavior  with  students,  refusal  to  change  his  conduct  and 
apparent  failure  to  comprehend  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct.  The  Commission 
determined  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant 
to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-71  and 
Legal  Conclusions  1,  2,  3,  5,  8  and  10-12. 

17. 

The  Commission  determined  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for 

persistent  violation  of  school  laws  of  the  state  or  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  board  of  the  school  district 

20 

 

  

  

employing  him  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in 
Factual  Findings  1-71  and  Legal  Conclusions  1,  2,  3,  5,  9-12. 

18.  |  Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  dismissal  is  warranted.  (Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at 
pp.  220-222.)  A  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may  require  a 
sensitive  evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it  warrants 
the  grave  sanction  of  dismissal.  (Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  Cal.  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327, 
343-344.) 

19, 

The  Commission  found  that  Respondent’s  practice  of  yelling  at  students, 

raising  his  hands  to  students,  calling  students  "stupid,"  and  making  demeaning  and 
humiliating  comments  to  them  was  unacceptable.  Respondent  displayed  a  complete  lack  of 
classroom  management  skills  and  placed  the  students  at  risk  by  allowing  such  a  chaotic 
environment.  Respondent  also  displayed  no  respect  for  the  privacy  of  his  students  when  he 
allowed  students  to  search  backpacks  of  others  during  class  time  instead  of  contacting  the 
administration.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  comprehend  that  it  was  inappropriate  and 
coercive  to  ask  students  to  write  statements  about  the  behavior  of  their  friends  and  classmates 
and  to  retract  or  write  new  statements  for  his  defense.  Respondent's  behavior  is  disturbing 
and  indicative  of  bully  behavior  that  must  not  be  tolerated.  The  Commission  determined  that 
the  instances  of  unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  violation  of  school  laws 
and  board  policies  continued,  despite  repeated  opportunities  and  specific  direction  from  the 
administrators  for  Respondent  to  correct  his  practices.  By  his  conduct,  Respondent  has 
demonstrated  an  unfitness  to  teach,  and  as  such  warrants  dismissal  under  section  44932, 
subdivisions  (a)(2),  (5),  (6)  and  (8).  The  Commission  members  agree  unanimously  that 
dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect  students,  and  to  deter  Respondent  from  engaging  in  similar 
conduct  in  the  future.  Accordingly,  all  evidence  having  been  considered,  the  Commission 
found  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  and  should  be  dismissed. 

it 

it 

i 

if 

  

21 

 

  

ORDER. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  affirmed.  Amnuay  Pornbida  shall  be 

dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District. 

Dated:  November  413  ,  2015 

     

.  Gomez, 
Glynda 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

Dated:  November  4  ,  2015 

Dated:  November. 

,  2015 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Jimmy  Marin 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

22 

  

 

  

FROM  : 

PHONE  NO. 

:  6263318873 

Nov. 

24  2415  G2:4aPM  Pi 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  affirmed.  Amnuay  Pornbida  shall  be 
dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District. 

Dated:  November 

;  2015 

Dated:  November 

,  2015 

Dated:  November 2 ¥,  2015 

  

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Helen  Sheperd 
Membet 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

, 
(A 

: 

eo 
Jiwithy  Marin 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

  

  

22 

 

