BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2014100389 

WILFREDO  CORNEJO  (EN  597426), 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

On  March  2,  3,  4  and  9,  2015,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of 
Michael  A.  Scarlett,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  Bonnie 
Macdonald,  and  Luciano  Ortiz. 

L.  Carlos  Villegas,  Attorney  at  Law,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented 
complainant,  Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District  (LAUSD  or  District). 

Rosemary  O.  Ward,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Richard  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law, 

Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondent  Wilfredo  Cornejo  (respondent),  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  closed  on  March  9, 
2015.  On  March  10,  2015,  the  Commission  reconvened  to  deliberate  regarding  the  decision 
in  this  case.  On  March  13,  2015,  the  record  was  reopened  to  provide  notice  of  a  March  10, 
2015,  ex  parte  communication  to  one  of  the  panel  members.  Consequently,  following  notice 
and  an  opportunity  for  the  opposing  party  to  respondent  to  the  Notice  of  Ex  parte 
Communication,  the  record  was  closed  on  March  23,  2015,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 
decision.  The  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

Jurisdiction  and  Allegations 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

il 

On  May  2,  2014,  complainant  made  and  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges,  and 
on  October  2,  2014,  respondent  submitted  a  request  for  hearing  to  the  District.  On  October 

1

14,  2014,  complainant  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity,  and  on  October 
24,  2014,  respondent  submitted  a  second  request  for  hearing  and  notice  of  defense.  All 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  to  proceed  to  hearing  before  the  Commission. | 

Be 

The  District  alleges  that  respondent  is  subject  to  dismissal  from  his 

employment  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  for  immoral  conduct,  in 
violation  of  Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  449397;  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  in  violation  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)*;  and  persistent 
violation  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed 
for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
Governing  Board  of  the  school  district,  in  violation  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7)*. 

J 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  the  following 

misconduct  as  a  basis  for  dismissal: 

(1)  —  From  about  September  13,  2011  to  approximately  December  31,  2011, 
respondent  on  multiple  occasions  placed  his  hands  in  the  pants  pockets  of  seven-year- 
old  student  M 

.  and  touched  MA.’ s  “private  parts.” 

(2) 

|  From  about  September  13,  2011,  to  June  30,  2012,  respondent  on 

multiple  occasions  placed  his  hands  in  the  pants  pockets  of  seven-year-old  student 
i.  and  touched Ki.’  genitals. 

(3) 

From  about  September  13,  2011,  to  June  2012,  respondent  on  multiple 
occasions  placed  his  hands  under  Mi.’  s  armpits,  lifted  him  off  the  ground,  and 
placed  him  in  a  chair  in  front  of  the  computer. 

(4)  |  From  about  September  13,  2011,  to  June  2012,  respondent  on  multiple 
occasions  placed  his  hands  under  Ka.’s,  armpits,  lifted  him  off  the  ground,  and 
placed  him  in  a  chair  in  front  of  the  computer. 

  

*  The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  indicate  that  on  December  5, 

2013,  the  District  issued  respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service/Acts  and  a  Notice  of 
Suspension  (15  Days)  for  the  alleged  misconduct.  Although  the  District  did  not  offer  these 
documents  into  evidence,  respondent  did  dispute  their  accuracy. 

*  All  further  statutory  references  shall  be  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

specified. 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(8).

*  Effective  January  1,  2015,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  was  changed  to  section 

*  Effective  January  1,  2015,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  was  changed  to  section 

  

(5) 

From  about  September  13,  2011,  to  June  2012,  respondent  on  multiple 
.s  armpits,  lifted  him  off  the  ground;  and 

occasions  placed  his  hands  under  M 
placed  him  in  a  corner  to  sit  down. 

(6) 

From  about  September  13,  2011,  to  June  2012,  respondent  on  multiple 

occasions  placed  his  hands  on 

.s  shoulders. 

(7) 

From  August  14,  2012,  to  about  February  18,  2013,  respondent  on 

multiple  occasions  massaged  the  shoulders  of  seven-year-old  student  Is. 

Background 

4, 

Respondent  was  hired  as  a  kindergarten  teacher  by  the  District  at  Dayton 

Heights  Elementary  School  in  approximately  1998.  In  or  about  2010,  he  was  hired  at  10th 
Street  Elementary  School  (10th  Street)  where  he  taught  second  grade.  Respondent  was  a 
second  grade  teacher  at  10th  Street  during  the  2011-2012,  and  2012-2013  school  years,  the 
relevant  time  period  in  the  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges.  Linda  K. 
Ariyasu  (Ariyasu)  was  the  principal  at  10th  Street  during  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Juan 
Alfayate  (Alfayate)  was  hired  as  the  principal  at  10th  Street  on  February  1,  2013,  and  held 
that  position  until  September  2014. 

3. 

On  May  5,  2011,  Ariyasu  gave  respondent  an  Evaluation  of  Instructional 
Personnel  Evaluation  (STULL  Evaluation)  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  The  STULL 
Evaluation  indicated  that  respondent  “Meets  Standard  Performance”  and  commended 
respondent  for  “providing  a  rigorous  academic  program  that  challenges  each  student  in  his 
class  to  achieve  his/her  potential.”  (Exh.  P.) 

6. 

At  all  times  relevant  to  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  the  following 

District  policies  or  guidelines  were  in  effect:  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students 
(CCS)  (effective  July  15,  2008);  the  LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting 
Requirements  Policy  Bulletin  (Bul-1347.2,  dated  July  1,  2011);  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics  (ECE)  (adopted  September  1998;  Revised  December  2000  and  February  2003);  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  Bulletin  (Bul-3349.0,  dated  November  29,  2006);  and  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  (effective  June  2006)  and  the  LAUSD  Board  of 
Education  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  (October  1988). 
Respondent  was  familiar  with,  and  received  annual  training  on,  these  policies  and  guidelines. 
On  September  13,  2011,  respondent  attended  a  faculty  meeting  at  which  time  these  policies 
and  guidelines  were  discussed,  disseminated  and/or  made  available  to  all  teachers  in 
attendance. 

7, 

The  CCS  prohibits,  among  other  things,  engaging  in  any  behavior,  either 
directly  or  indirectly  with  a  student  or  in  the  presence  of  a  student  that  is  unprofessional, 
unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative.  (Exh.  13.) 
physical  contact  with  a  student  that  is  not  age-appropriate  or  within  the  scope  of  the 
employee/individual’s  responsibilities  and/or  duties.  The  District’s  child  abuse  and  reporting 
policy  requires  District  employees  to  report  child  abuse  immediately.  (Exh.  14.)  The  child 

It  also  prohibits  touching  or  having 

3

abuse  policy  defines  “child  abuse”  as  “physical  abuse,”  which  means  physical  injury  such  as 
a  bruise,  welt,  burn  or  cut,  inflicted  by  other  than  accidental  means,  and  hazing.  Child  abuse 
is  also  defined  as  “sexual  abuse”  which  includes  sexual  assault.  “Sexual  assault”  includes 
specified  acts  committed  against  a  child  including  the  “intentional  touching  of  the  genitals  or 
intimate  parts  of  the  clothing  covering  them,  or  child  molestation.”  The  District’s  Sexual 
Harassment  policy  defines  “sexual  harassment,”  in  relevant  part,  as  unwelcome  sexual 
advances,  requests  for  sexual  favors,  or  other  verbal,  visual,  or  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual 
nature,  made  in  the  work  or  educational  setting,  which  has  the  purpose  or  effect  of  negatively 
impacting  the  individual’s  work  or  academic  performance,  or  creating  an  intimidating, 
hostile,  or  offensive  work  or  educational  environment.  (Exhs.  16  and  17.) 

8. 

Respondent  had  a  classroom  rule  or  policy  that  prohibited  his  second  grade 

students  from  bringing  candy  and  toys  into  the  classroom.  If  respondent  noticed  that  a 
student  had  candy  or  toys,  he  would  confiscate  the  items  and  hold  them  to  the  end  of  the  day. 
In  some  instances  he  would  throw  the  candy  away.  Respondent  prohibited  candy  and  toys 
because  seven  and  eight-year-old  second  grade  students  are  easily  distracted  by  these  items. 
Respondent’s  rule  or  policy  was  not  a  school  wide  or  District  policy,  but  it  was  not 
established  that  the  rule  violated  any  10th  Street  or  District  laws  or  regulations. 

mM 

86 

‘Ss  Complaint  and  District's  Investigation 

9, 

MES.  was  seven  years  old  and  a  student  in  respondent’s  second  grade 
class  at  10th  Street  during  the  2011-2012  school  year.  He  is  now  ten  years-old  and  in  the 
fifth  grade.  Alfayate  testified  that  in  February  2013, MES.’ s  parents  came  to  the  10th 
Street  school  office  and  told  him  that  respondent  had  put  his  hand  into  MES.’  pocket 
and  touched  his  “private 
grade  class. 
Alfayate  recalled  that  VS  °s  parents  stated  respondent  touched  iS.  in  this 
manner  on  two  occasions  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Mis.  began  his  third  grade  year 
at  10th  Street,  but  prior  to  the  end  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  he  transferred  to  another 
school.  He  was  no  longer  a  student  at  10th  Street  when  his  parents  filed  their  complaint  in 
February  2013.  Alfayate  conducted  the  District’s  investigation  into  the  allegations  against 
respondent.  Alfayate  did  not  know  respondent  prior  to  February  2013,  and  did  not  contact 
principal  Ariyasu  regarding  the  investigation. 

parts”  while  Meas.  attended  respondent’s  second 

10.  —- After  receiving  Mi.  parents’  complaint,  Alfayate  filed  a  child  abuse 
report  with  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  (LAPD).  On  or  about  February  13,  2013, 
officers  from  the  LAPD  interviewed  Mi.  and  completed  a  “Crime  Against  a  Child” 
investigation  report.  (Exh.  20.)  The  report  indicated  that Mis.  stated  that_every 
time 
he  had  to  use  the  restroom,  respondent  searched  his  pants  pocket  for  candy.  M 
.  told 
officers  that  whenever  he  had  to  use  the  restroom,  he  had  to  approach  respondent’s  desk,  and 
respondent  would  place  his  left  hand  into  vi 
right  front  pocket  and  “fondle  around 
in  search  of  candy.”  M 
S.  stated  that  respondent  would  “always  rub  his  index  finger 
against  his  penis”  when  he  searched  his  pant  pockets.  He  also  told  officers  that  respondent 
searched  him  because  he  did  not  want  “kids”  eating  candy  in  class,  and  that  respondent  only 
searched  the  boys  and  not  the  girls.  Via.  told  officers  that  respondent  never  said 
anything  during  the  searches,  and  that  respondent  searched  him  “numerous  times.”  Criminal 

sae 

4

  

  

charges  against  respondent  were  ultimately  not  pursued.  The  LAPD  supplemental 
investigation  report  dated  March  23,  2013,  indicated  that  the  Matthew  S.  case  was  “rejected” 
for  criminal  prosecution  “due  to  MSs.  declining  to  testify.”  (Exh.  24.) 

11. 

From  April  to  August  2013,  Alfayate  interviewed  several  students  from 

respondent’s  2011-2012  second  grade  class  as  part  of  his  investigation.  The  District  offered 
into  evidence  several  written  statements  from  students  who  were  interviewed  by 

Alfayate. 

P.  provided  a  written  statement  that  respondent  always  checked  MES  °s 

S 

  

(Exh.  5.)  SIp.  did  not  specifically 

.  provided  a  written  statement  that  if  students  had  “toys,”  respondent  checked 

pockets  for  “things”  or  “stuff”  by  putting  his  hands  into  MIEEEEES.’s  pockets.  (Exhs.  2  and 
18.) 
their  pockets  by  putting  his  hand  inside  their  pockets. 
indicate  that  respondent  put  his  hand  inside  of  as.  ockets.  Ki 
written  statement  that  respondent  put  his  hand  inside  of  a:  pocket  whenever 
respondent  checked  his  school  work,  and  that  he  thought  respondent  put  his  hand  into 
,  4  and  ABIT.’s  pockets.  (Exh.  4.)  However,  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  from 
   
KGAA .’s  April  2013  interview  indicate  that Ka.  did  not  see  respondent  do 
anything  inappropriate  in  the  classroom  and  that  K§MBMA.  did  not  see  respondent 
hands  on  M 
second  time.  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  indicate  that  in  response  to  the  question:  “Did  he 
touch  your  private  parts?”, 
private  parts  when  respondent  searched  his  pockets.  (Exh.  27.)  When  asked:  “Did  he  touch 
your 
M 
his  hand inside  of  MIMMMS.’s  pocket.  (Exhs.  3  and  19.)° 

.  responded  “yes.”  NEV.  stated  that  respondent  checked 

.'§  pockets  by  feeling  or  tapping  the  “front”  or  “top”  of  his  pockets,  not  by  putting 

.  (Exh.  YY.)  On  August  15,  2013,  Alfayate  interviewed 

.  Stated  that  respondent  “sometimes”  touched  his 

put  his 
an.  a 

.  provided  a 

penis?”, 

   

12. 

On  April  24,  2013,  Alfayate  interviewed  respondent,  and  on  April  30,  2013, 

respondent  provided  a  written  response  to  Alfayate’s  interview  questions.  (Exh.  9.) 
Respondent  denied  that  he  ever  touched  any  student  inappropriately,  including  MIS.. 
and  stated  that  he  “never  searched  any  student’s  pocket  in  all  my  years  of  teaching.”  He 
denied  ever  being  alone  with  any  student,  stating  that  “I  am  always  careful  to  never  be  alone 
with  any  student.”  Finally,  respondent  denied  ever  physically  disciplining  or  punishing  any 
student,  and  stated  that  he  used  progressive  discipline  to  deal  with  challenging  student 
behaviors. 

13. 

On  August  28,  2013,  Alfayate  again  interviewed  respondent.  Respondent 

provided  a  written  response  on  September  6,  2013.  (Exh.  11.)  Respondent  stated  that  toys 
were  not  allowed  in  his  classroom,  and  that  he  followed  District  protocol  in  enforcing  this 
tule.  He  stated  that  he  never  touched  or  searched  ME.’  pockets  for  candy  or  toys, 
and  that  he  never  “pat  or  searched  student’s  pockets  for  anything.”  He  denied  touching 

.’$  penis,  and  stated  that  he  had  never  touched  any  student  inappropriately. 

  

°  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  indicated  that  several  students  in  respondent’s  second 

grade  class  stated  that  respondent  did  not  search  M 

.,  Exh.  UU;  KIJE.,  Exh.  VV;  andR 

not  put  his  hand  into  any  student’s  pocket  (A 
C.,  Exh.  NN;  and  Hijp.,  Exh.  OO). 

   

S.’s  pockets  ARN.  Exh.  TT; 

R.,  Exh.  WW),  or  that  respondent  did 
R.Ph.  Ch:  iy.  Exh.  MM;  im 

  
  

  

 

    
  

  

  

    

Respondent  stated  that  he  never  massaged  any  student  in  the  classroom,  nor  “patted  or  poked 
any  student  on  any  part  of  the  body.”  However,  on  rare  occasions,  he  admitted  he  would 
“tap”  students  on  the  shoulders  with  two  fingers  to  reinforce  good  behavior. 

14. 

On  September  16,  2013,  Alfayate  interviewed  va.  who  provided  a 

written  statement.  (Exh.  6.)  MiSs.  stated  that  respondent  “use  to  put  his  hands  in  my 
pocket  and  check  for  candy.  I  wasn’t  ok  for  Mr.  Corjneho  [sic]  touched  my  private  part. 
It 
hapend  [sic]  more  than  once.  It  was  only  me  and  him.  It  was  in  the  classroom.”  (Exh.  6.) 

vias.  Allegation  (Charge  No.  1) 

15. 

Mia.  testified  that  whenever  he  asked  to  go  to  the  bathroom,  if 

.'S  pockets  to  feel  around  for  the  items.  He  testified  that  respondent  put  his  finger 

respondent  thought  he  had  candy  in  his  pockets,  respondent  would  place  his  hand  inside  of 
M 
on  his  penis  while  inside  of  his  pockets  each  time  respondent  searched  his  pockets.  y 
S.  also  testified  that  every  time  he  asked  to  go  to  the  bathroom,  respondent  required  him  to 
come  to  the  “kidney”  or  “half  circle”  table  in  the  front  corner  of  the  classroom,  which 
respondent  sometimes  used  as  his  desk.  He  claimed  that  he  went  to  the  bathroom  once  or 
twice  every  day  and  that  respondent  searched  his  pockets  and  touched  his  penis  every 
time 
he  went  to  the  bathroom,  which  vi.  estimated  occurred  over  200  times.  vis 
felt  that  respondent  treated  him  differently  by  searching 
upset  when  respondent  took  his  candy  and  toys.  M 
grandmother  about  the  alleged  incidents  until  almost  one  and  a  half  years  after  the  incidents 
allegedly  occurred. 

his  pockets  and  he  was  angry  and 
S.  did  not  tell  his  parents  or  his 

16. 

|  Respondent  testified  that  he  never  placed  his  hand  inside  of MEE.’ 

pocket  to  search  for  candy  or  toys  and  that  he  never  touched  the  student’s  genitals. 
Respondent  had  a  classroom  rule  or  policy  that  prohibited  students  from  bringing  candy,  toys 
and  gum  into  his  class.  He  testified  that  if  he  saw  a  student  with  candy  or  toys,  he  would  ask 
the  child  to  put  the  toy  away  and  to  throw  the  candy  away.  Sometimes  he  would  take  the  toy 
and  keep  it  until  the  end  of  the  school  for  the  parent  to  retrieve.  If  he  believed  the  student 
had  a  toy  or  candy  in  his  pocket,  respondent  stated  that  he  would  point  to  the  pocket  and  ask 
the  student  to  remove  the  item  from  his  or  her  pocket. 

17. 

Respondent  testified  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  2011-2012  school  year, 

MiSs.  brought  candy,  gum  and  toys  to  his  classroom  at  least  once  or  twice  per  week, 
and  respondent  verbally  admonished  him  for  this  conduct.  Respondent  initially  testified, 
consistent  with  his  written  statements  to  Alfayate,  that  he  never  searched  MiSs.  in  any 
manner.  Respondent  stated  that  he  spoke  to  Mi.’ s  grandmother  at  the  beginning  of 
the  school  year  about  the  student’s  conduct  and  told  her  that Mes.  was  easily  distracted 
and  was  prohibited  from  bringing  these  items  to  class.  Thereafter,  the  frequency  that 

.  violated  respondent’s  classroom  policy  decreased.  Respondent  also  testified  that 

M 

S.  got  upset  whenever  he  took  his  candy  and  toys. 

18. 

Respondent  used  a  “buddy  system”  for  student  bathroom  request  which 
required  a  second  student  to  accompany  the  requesting  student  to  the  bathroom.  Both 

6

  

prior  to  leaving  the  classroom  so  that  they 

students  typically  came  up  to  respondent’s  desk 
S.  used  the  “buddy  system”  whenever 
could  go  together.  Respondent  testified  that  M 
he  went  to  the  bathroom,  except  on  a  few  occasions  when  he  ran  off  before  a  “buddy”  could 
be  selected.  Consequently,  whenever  M 
S.  went  to  the  bathroom,  he  would  be 
accompanied  by  a  second  student  except  on  rare  occasions.  At  hearing,  Ami.  S 
and  KA...  students  in  respondent’s  2011-2012  second  grade  class,  confirmed  that 
respondent  used  a  “buddy  system”  for  his  students  to  go  to  the  bathroom.  Respondent’s 
teacher  assistant,  Anel  Peralta,  also  testified  that  respondent  used  a  “buddy  system”  for 
students  to  use  the  bathroom. 

19. 

—_  Respondent  initially  denied  that  he  searched  Mia.  or  any  student,  in 

any  manner  in  his  written  statements  and  at  hearing.  However,  the  evidence  established  that 
respondent  checked MES.’ s  pockets  for  candy  and  toys  by  tapping  or  touching  the 
outside  of  the  students’  pockets  to  feel  for  these  items.  Several  students  stated  that  they  saw 
respondent  check  MIMMMES.’s  pockets  for  candy  and  toys  in  this  manner  although  it  was  not 
established  how  often  such  searches  occurred.  Respondent  reluctantly  admitted  that  he 
“checked”  to  see  if  students  had  candy  and  toys  and  that  he  may  have  “accidentally”  touched 
a  students’  pockets  one  or  two  times  when  he 
pointed  to  their  pockets  if  he  saw  a  bulge  in  the 
pocket.  But  he  did  not  admit  he  checked  M 
S.’s  pockets  in  this  manner.  Respondent 
also  admitted  his  written  responses  to  Alfayate  indicating  that  he  had  not  searched  or 
checked  student’s  pockets  in  any  manner  were  inaccurate.  He  suggested  that 
miscommunication  between  him  and  his  attorney  in  his  written  response  caused  the 
inaccuracy.  Nonetheless,  respondent’s  denial  that  he  checked  M 
S.’s  pockets  in  any 
manner  or  that  he  only  touched  students’  pockets  “accidentally”  when  checking  for  candy 
and  toys  is  not  credible.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent  did  in 
fact  check  or  search  students’  pockets,  including Mis..  for  candy  and  toys  by  tapping 
and  touching  the  outside  of  the  pockets  if  he  believed  these  items  were  present.  However, 
notwithstanding  respondent’s  lack  of  veracity 
on  this  point,  there  was  insufficient  evidence 
to  conclude  that  he  put  his  hand  inside  of  M 
genitals  at  any  time. 

.S  pockets  and  touched  the  student’s 

20.  MS.  made  inconsistent  statements  regarding  the  frequency  that 
respondent  committed  the  alleged  acts,  as  well  as  the  circumstances  surrounding  how  the 
incidents  occurred.  He  testified  that  respondent  touched  his  penis  or  private  parts  over  200 
times,  but  in  his  written  statement  to  Alfayate  on  September  6,  2013,  he  only  stated 
respondent  committed  this  act  “more  than  once.”  On  February  13,  2013,  Mis.  told 
LAPD  officers  that  respondent  touched  him  “numerous  times,”  also  suggesting  fewer  than 
200  occurrences.  Mi 
S.’s  private  parts  on  only  two  occasions,  again  conflicting  with  M 
respondent  touched  him  over  200  times.  MIIS.’s  September  16,  2013,  written 
statement  also  indicated  that  only 
respondent  put  his  hand  into  M 
denied  that  respondent  used  a  “buddy  system”  and  insisted  that  he  always  went  to  the 
bathroom  by  himself.  However,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  used  the  “buddy 
system,”  which  required  another  student  to  accompany  MIMS.  to  the  bathroom,  which

he  and  respondent  were  present  at  respondent’s  desk  when 
.’§  pocket  and  touched  his  penis.  At  hearing,  he 

.’s  parents  also  told  Alfayate  that  respondent  touched  M 

S.’s  testimony  that 

  

contradicts  Vi: .’s  assertion  that  he  and  respondent  were  alone  when  he  approached 
his  desk  to  go  to  the  bathroom.  MMS.  frequently  violated  respondent’s  classroom 
policy  prohibiting  toys  and  candy  and  it  angered  him  that  respondent  checked  him  for  these 
items  and  sometimes  took  the  items  away.  It  is  not  inconsequential  that  by  MES.’ 
own  admission,  the  alleged  incidents  of  inappropriate  touching  by  respondent  always 
occurred  when  respondent  was  checking  the  student’s  pockets  for  candy  and  toys.  M 
S.’s  statements  and  testimony  regarding  his  allegations  against  respondent  may  have  been 
colored  or  influenced  by  his  resentment  of  respondent’s  classroom  policy.  The 
inconsistencies  in  his  statements,  and  the  presence  of  an  ulterior  motive,  raise  serious  doubts 
about  the  credibility  of  his  allegations. 

21. 

S.’s  “private  parts.”°  However,  although ARN. 

P.  and  SMP.  to  support  their  assertion  that  respondent 

The  District  also  relies  on ARN.  and  Ks  testimony,  and  written 
    

statements  by 
inappropriately  touched  M 
testified  that  she  saw  respondent  put  his  hand  inside  of  Mia.’  pocket,  Alfayate’s  April 
2013  interview  notes  indicate  that ARN  .  Stated  that  she  never  saw  respondent  put  his 
hand  into  Mi 
.’s  pockets  or  do  anything  inappropriate.  KA.  testified  that  he 
saw  respondent  put  his  hand  into  M 
written  statement  he  merely  states  “I  think  he  also  put  his  hand  in  Mand  NS 
pockets,  referring  to ae:  and  Ar  .,  indicating 
put  his  hands  into  M 
en  testimony  also  contradicted 
his  statements  to  Alfayate  at  his  April  2013  interview,  at  which  time  he  stated  that  he  did  not 
see  respondent  put  his  hands  on  M 
   
hearing  by  first  testifying  that  respondent  only  placed  his  hand  “near” 
S.  and  A 
T.’s  pocket  to  search  for  candy,  but  then  inconsistently  testifying  that  respondent  put  his 
   
hand  into  M 
IN. 
and 
statements  made  closer  in  time  to  the  events  in  question.  Their  inconsistent  statements 
likewise  cast  doubt  on  their  credibility. 

.'§  testimony  were  inconsistent  with  their  other  statements,  including  some 

S.’s  pocket  “really  fast”  and  removed  it.  Consequently,  both  A 

.  §  pocket  one  or  two  times,  but  in  his  April  2013 

S.  KQBBBA.  even  contradicted  himself  at 

he  was  not  sure  that  respondent 

S.’s  pockets.  (Exh.  4.) 

i 

22. 

Conversely,  several  students  provided  written  statements  and  testimony  that 

respondent  did  not  place  his  hands  inside  of  Mis.  pockets,  stating  instead  that  he 
merely  touched  or  tapped  the  outside  of  M§S.’s  pockets  to  feel  for  candy  and  toys. 
SE.  testified  that  respondent  checked  MIMS..’s  pockets  for  candy  by  making  him 
“stand  like  a  cross,”  and  touching  or  tapping 
respondent  never  put  his  hands  inside  of  M 
candy  in  his  pockets,  respondent  asked  him  to  take  the  candy  out. 
written  statement  that  he  never  saw  respondent  put  his  hand  into - 
consistently  testified  that  he  never  saw  respondent  touch  Matthew  S.,  K 
other  student  below  the  waist. 
or  anywhere  else  on  him  below  the  waist.  Although  K 

the  outside  of  the  pocket.  He  stated  that 

        

’s  pockets,  and  that  if  MIB.  had 

T.  testified  that  respondent  never  touched  his  pockets 

.  provided  a 
S.’s  pocket,  and  he 
A.  or  any 

T.’s  recollection  of 

G.  and 

  

:  A 6h  and  SP.  did  not  testify  at  hearing.  Their  written  statements  were 
admitted  as  administrative  hearsay,  and  can  only  supplement  and  explain  other  admissible 
evidence,  but  are  not  sufficient  standing  alone  to  support  a  factual  finding.  (Govt.  Code  § 
11513,  subd.  (d).)

  

  

    

  
  

  

  

events  was  spotty,  both  students’  testimony  was  generally  consistent  with  their  prior 
interview  statements  to  Alfayate.  Additionally, 
L.  and  Mr.  respectively,  testified  that  their  sons  never  complained  about  respondent 
and  thought  that  respondent  was  a  very  good  teacher.  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  for  many 
students  indicated  that  these  students  had  not  seen  respondent  put  his  hand  inside  of  MI 
S.  or  any  other  student’s  pockets. 

.  and  ARs  mothers, 

Zs 

It  is  improbable  that  respondent  put  his  hand  into  MES.’  s  pockets  with 
the  intent  to  touch  his  private  parts  in  a  sexual  manner  as  alleged  when  all  of  the  incidents 
purportedly  occurred  in  plain  view  of  the  other  students  in  the  classroom.  Additionally,  other 
District  employees  frequently  visited  respondent’s  class  unannounced  or  were  present  in  the 
classroom  during  a  significant  percentage  of  the  school  day.  Christina  Vega  (Vega)  taught  a 
third  grade  class  at  10th  Street  during  2011-2012  school  year  and  her  classroom  was  next 
door  to  respondent’s  classroom.  The  door  adjoining  the  two  classrooms  was  always  open 
and  unlocked.  Vega  went  into  respondent’s  classroom  unannounced  several  times  per  day 
and  could  observe  respondent  in  his  classroom  through  the  door  and  a  common  window 
between  the  classrooms.  She  testified  that  she  never  saw  respondent  put  his  hands  into  any 
student’s  pocket  or  touch  any  student  inappropriately.  Anel  Peralta  (Peralta)  was 
respondent’s  teacher  assistant  during  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Peralta  never  observed 
respondent  put  his  hands  into  any  student’s  pocket  or  touch  any  student  inappropriately, 
although  she  spent  significant  portions  of  the  school  day  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Vega 
and  Peralta  were  not  in  respondent’s  classroom  every  minute  of  the  school  day,  but  both  had 
access  to  his  classroom  all  day  and  would  enter  unannounced  several  times  during  the  school 
day,  and  neither  ever  saw  respondent  touch  a  student  inappropriately  or  place  his  hands 
inside  of  a  students’  pockets. 

24, 

Caroline  Kwong-Der  (Kwong-Der)  has  taught  first  through  third  grade  classes 

at  10th  Street  for  approximately  18  years.  During  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Kwong-Der 
taught  third  grade  at  10th  Street,  and  her  class  included  many  students  who  were  in 
respondent’s  second  grade  class  for  the  2011-2012  school  year,  including  M 
one-half  of  the  school  year  and  ih.  for  the  entire  school  year.  Neither 
nor  Ki.  or  any  other  student  from  respondent’s  2011-2012  second  grade  class, 
complained  to  Kwong-Der  about  respondent.  Although  Kwong-Der  did  not  observe 
respondent  interacting  with  his  students  in  the  classroom,  she  stated  that  students  described 
respondent  as  a  great  teacher  and  always  made  positive  comments  about  respondent. 
Kwong-Der  described  respondent  as  a  teacher  with  a  reputation  for  professionalism,  and 
stated  that  he  was  always  respectful  towards  students  and  adults  at  10th  Street. 

     .  for 

S. 

25.  _  Finally,  Alfayate  testified  that  it  was  inappropriate  for  respondent  or  any 
teacher  to  physically  touch  a  student  to  perform  searches  of  the  student’s  clothing.  However, 
he  stated  that  it  would  not  be  inappropriate  for  the  teacher  to  ask  the  student  if  there  was 
anything  in  their  pockets,  point  to  the  pocket,  and  ask  the  student  to  remove  items  such  as 
candy  and  toys.  Here,  respondent  physically  touched  or  tapped  the  outside  of  Mia 
pockets  to  check  for  candy  and  toys.  The  District’s  CCS  policy  prohibits  touching  or 
physical  contact  with  a  student  that  is  not  age-appropriate  or  within  the  scope of  the  teacher’s 
responsibilities  or  duties.  Respondent  reasonably  believed  that  candy  and  toys  were  a 

9

        

  

distraction  to  his  second  grade  students  and  he  attempted  to  prevent  students  from  bringing 
these  items  to  class.  Consistent  with  the  District’s  CCS,  tapping  or  touching  the  outside  of 
second  grade  students’  pockets  and  asking  them  to  remove  the  items  from  their  pockets 
appears  to  be  an  age-appropriate  manner  to  check  for  such  items.  It  was  within  respondent’s 
responsibilities  to  effectuate  a  reasonable  classroom  policy  prohibiting  candy  and  toys. 
Although  such  a  practice  is  ill-advised,  given  the  risks  that  such  physical  contact  with  a 
student  could  be  misconstrued,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  harbored  no 
inappropriate  or  sexual  intent  in  touching  the  student.  Instead  the  evidence  showed  that 
respondent’s  purpose  in  tapping  and  touching  outside  the  student’s  pockets  was  solely  to 
enforce  his  classroom  policy  prohibiting  candy  and  toys  in  the  classroom  for  second  grade 
students.  It  is  also  significant  to  note  that  the  District  did  not  allege  in  the  Statement  of 
Charges  or  Accusation  that  respondent  was  subject  to  dismissal  for  enforcing  a  classroom 
policy  by  tapping  or  touching  the  outside  of  the  students’ 
pockets  for  candy  or  toys.  The 
District  alleged  respondent  placed  his  hands  inside  of  M 
inappropriately  touched  his  private  parts,  which  was  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

. § pocket  and 

26. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  put  his  hands  inside  of  Mis  pockets  and  touched  his  “private  parts.” 
Respondent  prohibited  students  from  bringing  candy  and  toys  to  his  classroom  and  checked 
students’  pockets,  including  Me  s..  by  tapping  or  touching  the  outside  of  their  pockets 
to  check  for  these  items.  As  stated  above,  respondent’s  conduct  was  ill-advised  and  not  a 
prudent  practice  by  which  to  effectuate  his  classroom  policy.  However,  there  was 
insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  respondent  had  a  sexual  or  inappropriate  intent  when 
he  checked  Mi.  for  candy  and  toys. 

KGB.  Allegation  (Charge  No.  2) 

27. 

the  2011-2012 
The  District  also  asserts  that  on  multiple  occasions  during 
school  year,  respondent  put  his  hand  inside  of  second  grade  student  Ks  pants 
pockets  and  touched  his  genitals.  Kn.  testified  that  respondent  placed  his  hands 
inside  of  his 
pants  pockets  and  touched  his  penis  seven  or  eight  times  while  respondent 
checked  a.  school  work  at  respondent’s  desk.  According  to  _  Oe 
respondent  was  seated  at  his  desk  when  he  committed  these  acts  and  respondent  never  said 
anything  or  told  him  why  he  was  placing  his  hand  into Kis  pockets.  He  stated  that 
the  other  students  in  the  class  were  doing  their  work  and  not  paying  attention  to  him  and 
respondent,  even  though  the  incidents  allegedly  occurred  in  the  front  of  the  classroom. 

28. 

|  Respondent  denied  touching  Ks  penis,  stating  that  he  “never  touched 
any  part  of  him.”  (Exh.  11.)  He  testified  that  he  never  put  his  hand  into  KMJA..’s  pants 
or  touched  his  genitals  while  checking  i 
lee  school  work  at  his  desk.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  checked  students’  work  at  the  overhead  projector  cart,  which  he  frequently 
used  as  his  desk,  and  the  cart  was  in  the  front  of  the  class  in  plain  view  of  the  rest  of  the 
students.  Respondent  stated  that  the  overhead  projector  cart  was  of  a  height  that  required 
him  to  stand  when  reviewing  a  student’s  work.  Respondent  maintained  that  he  did  not  check 
student’s  school  work  at  the  “kidney”  or  “half  table”  because  he  always  used  the  overhead 
projector  when  reviewing  student’s  work.  This  contradicts Ki.’  claim  that 

10

respondent  sat  at  the  “kidney”  or  “half  table”  to  check  his  school  work,  which  the  District 
asserts,  conceivably  concealed  his  conduct  for  the  other  students  who  were  present  in  the 
class. 

29. 

As  shown  in  Factual  Findings  11  and  20  above,  Ka.  made  inconsistent 
and  contradictory  statements  to  Alfayate  and  during  his  testimony  at  hearing.  Significantly, 
no  other  student  claimed  that  they  saw  respondent  place  his  hand  into  xs  pockets 
or  searched Ki.’ s  pockets  in  any  manner.  K§§MMA.  failed  to  tell  Alfayate  that 
respondent  touched  his  genitals  in  his  April  18,  2013,  interview  and  written  statement.  To 
the  contrary,  he  told  Alfayate  that  respondent  had  not  touched  him  in  appropriately  in  any 
manner.  After  the  April  2013  interview, Km.  also  did  not  tell  his  parents  that 
respondent  had  inappropriately  touched  his  genitals,  even  though  his  parents  were  aware  he 
had  been  questioned  regarding  respondent  in  April  2013.  He  asserted  these  allegations  in  the 
August  2013  interview,  over  one  year  after  the  incidents  allegedly  occurred,  only  after 
Alfayate  specifically 
(Exh.  27.) 
penis  because  he  was  nervous  and  feared  something 
to  say  a  “bad  word”  in  front  of  the  principal. Kn;  omissions  and  inconsistent 
Statements  raise  doubts  about  the  truthfulness  of  his  allegations  and  testimony. 

asked  him  whether  respondent  touched  his  “private  parts”  or  “penis.” 
.  Stated  that  he  did  not  initially  tell  Alfayate  respondent  touched  his 

bad  would  happen,  and  he  did  not  want 

.  admitted  having  these  items  in  class,  and  most  students  who 

30.  i  ier  credibility  is  further  undermined  by  his  denial  that  he  was  aware 
of  respondent’s  rule  prohibiting  candy  and  toys  in  the  classroom.  It  was  common  knowledge 
amongst  the  students  in  respondent’s  second  grade  class  that  respondent  did  not  allow  candy 
and  toys  in  the  classroom,  and  that  he  checked  students  for  these  items.  KA.  was  also 
not  credible  in  testifying  that  Mis.  never  had  candy  or  toys  in  his  pockets  in  class, 
even  though  M 
testified  were  aware  of  this  fact.  Finally,  KERR.  and  Ma.  were  good  friends  in 
   
.  claimed  that  he  saw  respondent  put 
respondent’s  second  grade  class.  Although  K 
his  hand  into  M 
done  the  same  thing  to  him,  or  that  respondent  touched  his  penis.  MIRE.  also  never  told 
KBB.  that  respondent  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket  and  touched  MIS.’s  penis. 
This  seems  peculiar  given  the  relationship  the  two  students  had.  Finally, Kia. 
testified  that  he  did  not  like  respondent’s  class  and  thought  that  respondent  was  a  mean 
teacher  that  yelled  at  the  students  all  of  the  time.  However,  no  other  student,  including 
Mis..  claimed  that  respondent  yelled  at  them  or  other  students. 

S.’s  pocket,  <a  never  told  MRS.  that  respondent  had 

31.  —  It  is  implausible  that  respondent  placed  his  hands  inside  of  i 

Nee 

pockets  and  touched  his  penis  when  this  conduct  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  plain  view  of 
other  students  in  the  classroom.  Other  than Kis  inconsistent  statements  and 
testimony,  the  District  presented  no  other  credible  evidence  to  support  this  allegation. 
Consequently,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  placed  his  hands  inside  of 
As  pants  pockets  and  touched  his  genitals,  or  that  respondent  touched 
    
in  any  manner. 

11

  

  

M@BBBBS.  Allegations  (Charges  3,  5  and  6) 

32. 

The  District  alleged  that  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  on  multiple 

occasions  respondent  placed  his  hands  under  Mis.’  armpits,  lifted  him  off  of  the 
ground  and  placed  him  on a  chair  in  front  of  the  computer,  and  on  multiple  other  occasions 
lifted  him  in  the  same  manner  and  placed  him  ina  corner  to  sit  down.  The  District  also 
alleged  that  respondent  “placed  his  hands  on  Mis.’  shoulders”  on  multiple  occasions 
during  the  same  period. 

33. 

Respondent  denied  using  physical  discipline  or  corporal  punishment  on  any 

student.  He  testified  that  he  used  progressive  discipline  to  address  student  behavior  problems 
and  that  he  “benched”  or  placed  students  on  timeout  during  recess  if  they  misbehaved. 
Respondent’s  students  had  a  scheduled  time  to  work  at  the  computer  and  they  generally 
complied  with  the  schedule.  He  denied  ever  dragging,  pushing  or  carrying 
a  student  to  or 
from  the  computer  area.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  may  have  tapped  vs  on  the 
shoulder  to  reinforce  good  behavior,  but  that  he  never  placed  both  of  his  hands  on  M 
S.’s  shoulders.  Respondent  tapped  students  on  their  shoulders  to  praise  them  or  calm  them 
down  if  they  were  upset,  angry  or  crying. 

   

The  District  relies  primarily  on ARN  testimony  to  support  these 

N.  testified  that  respondent  mistreated  students  and  that  he  put  students 

34. 
allegations. 
in  the  corner  in  the  classroom,  including  MIB.  She  testified  that  respondent  picked 
MUS.  up  and  put  him  in  the  corner.  However,  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  indicate  that 
Amin .  told  him,  referring  to  i ..  that  respondent  would  “put  him  in  the  corner 
and  sit  him  down.”  ARN.  did  not  state  that  respondent  picked  MIS.  up  in  any 
manner.  Significantly,  and  most  importantly,  MMS.  and  his  parents  never  claimed  that 
respondent  lifted  or  picked  M 
respondent  placed  his  hands  on  M 
respondent  picked  him  up  or  touched  his  shoulders  in  any  manner,  and  the  District  did  not 
question  him  regarding  these  allegations.  Although  Alfayate  interviewed  several  students 
regarding  respondent’s  conduct  towards  MIEEEEES.,  no  student  other  than  AN. 
asserted  that  respondent  put  his  hands  on  MUB.,  or  any  other  student  in  this  manner. 
One  student,  N 
V.,  told  Alfayate  that  respondent  tapped  students  on  their  shoulders 
when  they  did  a  good  job  or  passed a test,  corroborating  respondent’s  statement  that  he 
praised  students  in  this  manner. 

also  did  not  complain  that 
.  did  not  testify  that 

S.in  any  manner.  They 
.’s  shoulders.  M 

  

  

35. 

Vega,  who  frequently  observed  respondent’s  classroom  from  next  door  and 

made  frequent  unannounced  visits  to  his  class,  never  saw  respondent  pick  a  student  up  by  the 
armpits,  massage  a  student’s  shoulders,  or  touch  a  student  inappropriately  in  any  way.  Vega 
stated  that  it  was  respondent’s  practice  to  send  students  to  her  classroom  for  “timeout”  as 
discipline  for  students  who  misbehaved  in  class.  Peralta,  respondent’s  teacher  assistant, 
never  received  any  complaints  from  any  student  about  respondent.  She  described  respondent 
as  very  professional  and  stated  that  he  did  not  yell  at  the  students,  but  instead  would  “bench” 
the  students  if  they  misbehaved.  Peralta  never  witnessed  respondent  pick  any  student  up  by 
his  armpits  or  massage  any  students’  shoulders. 

I

    

36. 

_There_is  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the  District’s  allegations  that 

respondent  lifted va.  up  by  his  armpits  and  moved  him  in  any  manner.  Although 
respondent  tapped  MIS.’s  shoulders  at  times  to  calm  him  down  or  praise  him,  tapping 
the  student  on  the  shoulders  to  praise  him  is  not  inappropriate  conduct. 

Ki.  Allegation  (Charge  4) 

37. 

The  District  also  alleged  that  on  multiple  occasions  during  the  2011-2012 

.  off  of  the  ground  by  his  armpits  and  placed  him  in  a 

school  year,  respondent  lifted 
chair  in  front  of  a  computer.  Respondent  denied  lifting  or  movin  KEG.  in  any  manner  in 
his  classroom.  In  a  written  statement  dated  October  9,  2014, Ki.  corroborates 
respondent’s  testimony  by  stating  that  respondent  never  picked  him  or  any  other  student  up 
by  their  armpits.  Consistent  with  his  written  statement,  KIBIG.  testified  that  respondent 
never  picked  him  up  in  any  manner,  or  physically  touched  him  to  move  him  in  the  classroom. 
Consequently,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  lifted  Kc.  up  by  the  armpits 
and  placed  him  in  a  chair  in  front  of  a  computed. 

Jc.  Allegation  (Charge  7) 

38. 

The  District  alleged  that  during  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent  on 

.  §  shoulders.  Alfayate  testified  that  JIIBC.’s  parents 

multiple  occasions  massaged  J 
made  the  complaint  that  respondent  inappropriately  massaged  J  i.’  shoulders.  Alfayate, 
however,  had  a  vague  recollection  of  this  allegation.  He  interviewed  AT.  and  asked 
him  whether  respondent  “put  his  hands  on  any 
and  Alfayate’s  interview  note  indicates 
hands  on  a  student’s  shoulders  when  the  student  got  angry,  and  that  respondent  had  placed 
his  hands  on 
he  told  Alfayate  respondent  touched  or  massaged  his  shoulders.  He  did  not  clearly 
remember  his  interview  with  Alfayate  and  did  not  clearly 
respondent  “massaged”  M 
respondent  massaged  his  shoulders.  Alfayate’s  interview  notes  from  interviews  with  several 
other  students  indicated  that  most  of  the  students  denied  seeing  respondent  massage  a 
student’s  shoulders. 

students’  shoulders,  like  to  give  a  massage,” 
I’.  stated  “yes,”  respondent  would  put  his 

T.  got  mad.  At  hearing Amr.  denied  that 

recall  whether  he  told  Alfayate  that 

T’.’s  shoulders  when 

.  denied  ever  stating 

S.’s  shoulders.  But 

  

  

   

  

39. 

The  District_offered  no  other  evidence  in  support  of  its  allegation  that 

respondent  massaged 
c.’s  shoulders.  There  is  no  written  statement  from  JMMC.,  and 
neither  he  nor  his  parents  testified  at  hearing.  Consequently,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to 
support  this  allegation. 

Other  Factors 

40. 

Respondent  offered  several  character  letters  of  reference  submitted  by  both 

past  and  current  colleagues  who  professed  knowledge  of  his  excellent  character  and 
professionalism.  He  was  described  as  a  superb  teacher  and  instructor  that  genuinely  cared 
about  his  students.  Several  references  spoke  of  respondent’s  ability  to  create  a  positive  and 

13

  

  

     

  

safe  classroom  environment  that  fostered  students’  ability  to  learn,  and  resulted  in 
respondent’s  students  achieving  academic  success. 

41. 

Respondent  has  no  prior  history  of  disciplinary  action  taken  by  the  District. 
By  all  accounts,  prior  to  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  Accusation  in  this  case,  respondent 
had  met  all  of  the  performance  standards  required  by  the  District  and  had  been  commended 
for  his  proficiency  as  a  teacher  in  the  District. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

iL. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof  in 
a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.)  Proof  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  requires  a  showing  that  it  is  more  likely  than  not  to  be  true. 
In  other  words,  the  evidence  is  more  convincing  than  that  which  is  offered  in  opposition. 
(People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

2: 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 
hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.)  When  a  school  board  recommends 
dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against 
the  dismissal;  the  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing 
probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).)’  The 
Commission’s  decision  is  deemed  to  be  the  final  decision  of  the  district’s  governing  board. 
(California  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  331.)  A 
Commission  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  the  issues  before  it,  including  whether 
dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  (/d.,  at  p.  343.) 

Grounds  For  Dismissal 

3a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  4  through  39. 

3b. 

“Immoral  conduct,”  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939, 

has  been  defined  to  mean  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  is  sometimes  used  as 
synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of Education  of  the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 
Immoral  conduct  can  be  construed  according  to  common  usage.  “The  term  ‘immoral’  has 

”  Effective  January  1,  2015,  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1-3),  was  changed  to 

section  44944,  subdivision  (d). 

14

been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and 
contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes 
conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of Riverside  v. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

3c. 

The  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  committed  immoral  conduct  by 
placing  his  hands  in  MIMS.  and Ki.’  pants  pockets  and  touching  their  private 
parts  or  genitals,  as  alleged  in  Charges  1  and  2,  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  4  through  31, 
’s  pockets  for  toys  and 
and  Legal  Conclusions  |  through  3.  Respondent  checked  ME 
candy  to  enforce  his  classroom  policy  which  prohibited  students  from  bringing  these  items 
into  his  classroom.  He  did  this  if  he  believed  MIMS.  possessed  such  items  by  pointing 
to  the  pocket  and  asking  via.  to  remove  the  item,  and/or  touching  and  tapping  the 
S.’s  pockets  to  feel  for  the  items.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
outside  of  via 
respondent  touched  or  searched  KA .’s  pockets  in  any  manner  as  alleged  in  the 
Statement  of  Charges  and  Accusation. 

3d. 

|The  Commission  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject 

another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  & 
Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact,  here  the  Commission,  may  also  “reject  part  of 
the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted 
portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus 
weaving  a  Cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v. 
Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  And,  the  testimony of  “one  credible  witness 
may  constitute  substantial  evidence,”  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of 
Medical  Quality  Assurance,  supra,  189  Cal.App.3d  at  1052.) 

3e. 

Respondent  initially  denied  that  he  searched Mas.  or  any  other  student 

in  any  manner.  This  assertion  was  false  and  not  credible.  However,  respondent  credibly 
testified,  and  the  totality 

of  the  evidence  established,  that  he  did  not  put  his  hands  inside  of 
S.’s  pockets  and  touch  the  students’  private  parts  or  genitals.  Even 

S.or  Kk 

though  respondent  was  less  than  truthful  regarding  his  conduct  in  checking  MAS..’s 
pockets  for  candy  and  toys,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  respondent 
placed  his  hands  into  M 
or  genitals.  MURS.  and  K§As  statements  and  testimony  were  found  to  be 
inconsistent  and  lacking  in  credibility.  Amn .  Ss  testimony  was  also  found  to  be 
inconsistent  and  unpersuasive. 

.  or  KA’  pockets  and  touched  their  “private  parts” 

3f.  |  Conversely,  respondent  presented  credible  evidence  that  raised  significant 

doubt  as  to  whether  he  committed  the  conduct  alleged  by  Mis.  and  x ON  Both 
students  alleged  that  respondent  committed  these  acts  in  plain  view  in  the  classroom  while 
other  students  were  present.  However,  several  students  offered  credible  testimony  that  they 
never  saw  respondent  place  his  hands  into  MIJS.’s  pockets  or  touch  him  inappropriately 
in  any  manner.  Moreover,  Christina  Vega  and  Anel  Peralta,  District  employees  who  both 

15

  

had  substantial  access  to  respondent’s  second  grade  classroom,  both  testified  on  respondent’s 
behalf  stating  that  they  had  not  witnessed  the  alleged  activity  and  that  they  did  not  believe 
respondent  committed  such  conduct.  Other  than  Ks  own  Statements  and 
testimony,  no  other  student  or  witness  corroborated  his  _ 
hand  inside  of  K§A.’s  pants  pockets.  Both 
dislike  for  respondent’s  class,  and  Mis.  specifically  stated  that  he  was  angered  by 
respondent’s  classroom  policy  prohibiting  toys  and  candy.  Finally,  both MES.  and 
.  ON  delayed  reporting  their  allegations  of  respondent’s  misconduct  until  almost  one 
and  half  years  after  the  incidents  allegedly  occurred.  This  lapse  in  time,  and  their 
inconsistent  versions  of  the  facts  supporting  their  allegations  raise  serious  questions  about  the 
veracity  of  the  allegations. 

that  respondent  placed  his 
.and  K§JA.  expressed  their 

3g. 

Finally,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  had  a  classroom  policy  that 

prohibited  second  students  from  bringing  toys  and  candy  into  the  classroom  because  he 
reasonably  believed  these  items  distracted  students  of  this  age.  Mia.  frequently 
violated  this  classroom  policy  and  respondent  ill-advisedly  checked  the  outside  of  his 
pockets  for  these  items.  Although  respondent’s  conduct  was  ill-advised  and  risked  being 
misinterpreted  by  students  and  parents,  respondent’s  touching  of  second  grade  students  in 
this  manner  was  age-appropriate  and  did  not  violate  the  District’s  CCS  policy.  The  District 
did  not  establish  by 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  put  his  hands  inside  of 
Mis.  or  a.  pockets  and  touched  their  genitals  or  that  respondent  harbored 
any  sexual  or  inappropriate  intent  in  enforcing 
policy.  Respondent’s  tapping  or  touching  M 
did  not  constitute  immoral  conduct.  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified 
School  District  v.  Weiland,  supra,  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  at  p.  811;  (Palo  Verde  Unified 
School  District  of Riverside  v.  Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  at  p.  972.) 

and  implementing  his  classroom  rule  or 

S.’s  pockets  to  check  for  candy  and  toys 

a 

3h. 

—_  The  District  also  did  not  establish  that  respondent  committed  immoral  conduct 

by  lifting  Mia.  and  Kc.  off_of  the  ground  by  their  armpits  and  placing  them  in a 
.  §  case,  lifting  him  in  the  same  manner  and 
chair  in  front  of  a  computer,  and  in  M 
placing  him  in  a  corner  to  sit  down,  as  alleged  in  Charges  3  through  5,  by  reason  of  Factual 
Findings  4  through  8,  32  through  37,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1  through  3. 

Bi. 

Finally,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  committed  immoral  by 

placing  his  hands  on  Matthew  S.’s  shoulders,  or  by  massaging . 
in  Charges  6  and  7,  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  4  through  8,  32  through  39,  and  Legal 
Conclusions  |  through  3. 

C.’s  shoulders  as  alleged 

Ds 

Although  respondent  tapped  students  on  the  shoulders,  including  Mias.. 

to  calm  the  student  if  the  student  was  angry  or  upset,  or  to  praise  a  student  for  performing 
good  school  work,  such  physical  contact  is  not  considered  immoral  conduct.  There  was 
insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  respondent  touched  or  massaged  JIC.’s  shoulders  in 
any  manner  as  alleged  in  Charge  7. 

16

  

4a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service 
pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  4  through  41, 
and  Legal  Conclusions  1|  through  4. 

4b.  —  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  provides  that  the  District  may  suspend  or 
dismiss  a  permanent  employee  for  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  “Evident  unfitness  for 
service,”  within  the  meaning of section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or 
suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445  (Woodland).)  Evident  unfitness  for  services  requires  that 
unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Id.  at  1444.) 

4c. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  is  not  synonymous  with  “unprofessional 

conduct,”  and  the  term  means  clearly  not  fit  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies;  it  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not 
remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  expectations  of  the 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “Evident  unfitness”  includes  in  its  definition 
“unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  To 
terminate  the  teacher  on  grounds  of  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  it  must  also  be  established  that  the  conduct  renders  the  teacher  unfit  to 
teach.  (Morrison  vy.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230.)  Thus  a 
determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on  criteria  set  forth  in 
Morrison.  In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist  to  dismiss  a  certificated  employee  on 
the  basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be  examined,  only  the 
pertinent  ones.  (Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384.) 

4d. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  The  evidence 
did  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  or  committed  the  inappropriate  conduct  alleged 
in  Charges  1  through  7.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  enforced  a  reasonable 
classroom  policy  prohibiting  second  grade  students  from  bringing  candy  and  toys  into  class 
by  checking  their  pockets  for  these  items  in  an  age-appropriate  manner.  It  was  further 
established  that  respondent  did  not  use  corporal  punishment  by  lifting  students  from  the 
ground  by  their  armpits  and  moving  them  to  areas  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  did  tap 
students’  shoulders  to  calm  them  down  and  praise  them,  but  it  was  not  established  that  he 

*  In  Morrison,  the  Supreme  Court  of  California  held  that  the  determination  of  whether 
a  person  is  fit  to  teach  must  be  based  on  an  objective  and  analytical  approach,  consisting  of  a 
review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an  assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  factors  including: 
(1)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  presence  of  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances;  (3)  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (5)  the  disruption  of  the  education 
process;  (6)  the  motive  underlying  the  conduct;  and  (7)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time 
of  the  conduct. 

17

massaged  any  student’s  shoulders  in  any  manner.  To  the  contrary,  the  evidence  established 
that  respondent  was  a  professional  and  competent  teacher  that  cared  for  his  students  and  was 
conscientious  in  performing  his  duties.  Consequently,  it  was  not  established  that 
respondent’s  conduct  rendered  him  evident  unfit  to  teach. 

3. 

Since  the  Commission  determined  that  respondent  did  not  commit  the 

misconduct  alleged  in  Charges  1  through  7,  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  214,  need  not  be  considered. 

6a. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal 
to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  by  reason  of 

.  Factual  Findings  4  through  41,  and  Legal  Conclusions  1  through  5. 

6b. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations  under 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  requires  that  the  violation  be  either  “persistent”  or 
“motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Bd.  of  Oakdale  Union 
School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents 
involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered  persistent. 
(Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.)  Cause 
for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180- 
1181.) 

6c. 

The  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent’s  conduct  was a  persistent 

violation  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations.  Because  the  Commission  determined 
that  the  District  did  not  establish  that  Charges  1  through  7  occurred  as  alleged,  there  is  no 
basis  upon  which  to  conclude  that  respondent  violated  or  refused  to  obey  any  law  or 
regulations.  Although  respondent  implemented  and  enforced  a  classroom  rule  or  policy 
prohibiting  second  grade  students  from  bringing  toys  and  candy  to  class,  the  District  did  not 
establish  that  respondent’s  classroom  rule  violated  any  school  laws  or  regulations.  The 
Commission  concluded  respondent  implemented  this  classroom  rule  in  an  age-appropriate 
manner  and  that  he  did  not  touch  any  student  in  a  sexual  or  inappropriate  manner.  The 
District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  also  did  not  allege  that  respondent’s 
classroom  rule  or  policy  of  prohibiting  candy  and  toys  in  class  was a  violation  of,  or  a  refusal 
to  obey,  a  District  rule  or  regulation.  Accordingly,  the  District  failed  to  show  that  respondent 
persistently  violated  school  laws  and  regulations. 

The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  Wilfredo  Cornejo  (EN  597426)  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44932  and  44939  is  not  upheld.  Accordingly,  the  Statement  of  Charges  and 
Accusation  are  dismissed.  Respondent  shall  be  reinstated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the 
District. 

ORDER 

18

DATED:  August  7,  2015 

ZA 

  

MICHAEL  pe  ARLELT 
}  Law  Judge, 
Administra 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

DATED:  8/0]  |  5 

Donn  Melua 

BONNIE  MACDONALD 
Commission  Member 

DATED: 

3/: a!  /  Ss 

LUCIAN@-ORTIZ 
Commission  Member 

+ 

” 

v 

~ 

19

