BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2014110111 

DANNY  WASHINGTON, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 

at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  February  23,  24,  25,  26,  2015,  March  9,  10,  11,  12  and  13, 
2015  and  May  12  and  13,  2015.  The  Commission  consists  of  the  following  members: 
Debbie  Frame,  Teacher;  Kelly  J.  Glusovich,  Teacher;  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative 
Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who  presided. 

The  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  (LACOE)  was  represented  by  Assistant 

General  Counsel  Jennifer  A.  Williams.  Respondent  Danny  Washington  (Respondent)  was 
present  and  was  represented  by  Rosty  Gore,  Esq.,  of  Trygstadt,  Schwab  &  Trygstadt,  Attorneys 
at  Law. 

Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  Oral  and 

documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive 
session.  After  due  consideration  of  the  record,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual 
findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

L 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Arturo  Delgado, 

Ed.D,  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent  for  LACOE. 

2. 

On  May  8,  2014,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the  LACOE’s  intention 
to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  submitted  a  timely  demand 
for  a  hearing. 

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  and  the  Accusation,  both  dated  September  26,  2014 

recommend  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  LACOE  for  the  following  legal  causes  under

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1)  unprofessional  conduct;  (2)  immoral 
conduct;  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service;  and  (4)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 
the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
employing  Respondent. 

4. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

5. 

LACOE  contends  that  Respondent  came  to  class  late  and  left  early  thereby 

routinely  depriving  students  of  the  certificated  instruction  time  indicated  in  their 
Individualized  Education  Programs  (IEPs).  LACOE  also  contends  that  Respondent  was 
insubordinate  when  he  ignored  administrators’  instructions  not  to  leave  his  classroom  and  to 
submit  documents  including  performance  plan  summaries,  lessons  plans  and  IEP  documents 
as  directed  by  his  supervisors. 

6. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  has  been  unfairly  targeted  for  conduct  which  is 

consistent  with  LACOB’s  practices  as  retaliation  for  his  complaints  about  poor  facilities  and 
lack  of  resources.  Respondent  also  contends  that  he  is  a  caring,  dedicated  and  experienced 
teacher  who  motivates  students  and  staff. 

Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  is  a  59-year-old  special  education  teacher  with  more  than  25 

years  of  experience.  He  holds  a  physical  education  credential  and  special  education  severely 
handicapped  and  learning  handicapped  credentials.  Respondent  also  has  a  Cross-cultural 
language  and  development  (CLAD)  certificate,  an  industrial  safety  certificate,  SDAI 
certification  and  highly  qualified  teacher  certification.  Respondent  graduated  from  Dallas- 
Fort  Worth  High  School  in  1975.  He  was  recruited  by  Oklahoma  State  University  and  given 
a  full  scholarship.  Respondent  played  football-in  college  and  was  an  All-American.  Unlike 
the  majority  of  his  classmates,  Respondent  graduated  in  four  years.  He  received  a  Bachelor 
of  Science  Degree  in  Industrial  Science  and  Safety. 
Next,  Respondent  attended  Central 
Oklahoma  University  where  he  graduated  with  a  Masters’  Degree  in  Education  with  an 
emphasis  in  Special  Education  and  Industrial  Safety. 

8. 

Respondent  began  his  teaching  career  in  Lawton,  Oklahoma  where  he  taught 
classroom  and  behind  the  wheel  Drivers’  Education.  Respondent  was  also  the  high  school 
football  and  track  coach.  Respondent  was  very  successful  in  Lawton.  His  team  won 
multiple  championships,  he  was  named  coach  of  the  year,  and  many  of  his  students  received 
college  scholarships. 

9. 

In  1993,  Respondent  was  newly  married  and  decided  to  move  to  California 
where  his  brother  already  resided.  Initially,  Respondent  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher  for 
LACOE.  Respondent  worked  at  various  juvenile  detention  camps  and  juvenile  hall.  His 
assignments  included  stints  at  Los  Padrinos  Juvenile  Hall,  Camp  Rocky  in  San  Dimas,  Alta

Pasa  detention  center  and  the  North  Lake  program. 
Camp  Rocky  and  Alta  Pasa  staff.  Respondent  was  one  of  the  first  staff  members  at  Alta 
Pasa,  a  program  which  serviced  12-18  students  transitioning  from  juvenile  detention  camp 
back  to  a  regular  school.  From  there  he  was  assigned  to  what  was  then  called  the  “Caldweil 
PAU"  in  Compton.  The  Caldwell  PAU  name  was  later  changed  to  the  “Avalon  PAU”  at 
some  time  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

Respondent  was  an  integral  part  of  the 

10. 

In  1996,  Respondent  was  recruited  to  teach  a  LACOE  class  at  Centennial  High 

School  in  Compton  by  one  of  his  former  colleagues  from  Camp  Rocky.  He  began  a  teacher 
internship  with  LACOE  taking  classes  at  California  State  University,  Long  Beach  and 
obtained  a  California  teaching  credential.  Respondent  was  happy  at  Centennial  High  School 
where  he  taught  students  in  ninth  through  twelfth  grade  who  were  eligible  for  special 
education  under  the  category  of  emotionally  disturbed  (ED)  and  coached  athletic  teams. 

11. 

Respondent  was  well  liked  by  his  colleagues  and  became  involved  with  the 

Shared  Decision  Making  Committee  (SDMC)  as  a  member  and  chairperson.  The  SDMC  is  a 
comprised  of  site  representatives  and  stakeholders  throughout  the  PAU.  The  SDMC 
conducted  meetings  to  determine  spending  priorities  for  various  “budgets”  including  lottery 
monies  and  other  special  funds.  Typically,  the  SDMC  met  during  the  school  day  at  various 
locations  within  the  PAU  and  conducted  its  business.  The  SDMC  submitted  its  proposal  for 
the  expenditure  of  funds  to  the  LACOE  special  education  director.  In  his  role  with  the 
SDMC,  Respondent  often  was  at  odds  with  the  LACOE  administration  and  challenged  the 
administrators  on  budgetary  issues.  He  was  respectful,  but  insistent  when  seeking 
information.  This  role  also  caused  him  to  be  away  from  his  class  for  meetings  and  SDMC 
related  matters.  At  some  point  in  the  last  few  years,  the  SDMC  meetings  were  changed  to 
after  school  hours.  Respondent’s  involvement  with  the  SDMC  lasted  for  the  duration  of  his 
employment  at  LACOE.  Respondent  was  also  active  in  efforts  to  obtain  better  and  safer 
facilities  for  his  students  and  books  for  all  students. 

12. 

Respondent’s  friend,  colleague  and  union  representative,  Marilyn  Gilbert- 

Banks,  Ph.d.  was  also  a  member  of  the  SDMC..  Dr.  Banks  grew  up  in  the  Compton  area  and 
returned  to  teach  in  Compton  with  LACOE.  Dr.  Banks  has  deep  roots  in  the  community  and 
cares  deeply  about  the  success  of  the  students  in  Compton.  Dr.  Banks  challenged  LACOE 

'PAU  stands  for  Principal’s  Administrative  Unit.  LACOE  teachers  teach  the  special 
education  classes  for  many  school  districts  within  Los  Angeles  County  that  do  not  have  their 
own  special  education  departments.  As  such,  LACOE  teachers  are  placed  on  the  campuses 
of  school  districts,  in  this  case  Compton  School  District.  There  may  only  be  one  or  there 
may  be  several  LACOE  teachers  on  a  particular  campus.  The  LACOE  teachers  are  not  part 
of  the  host  school  district’s  staff  and  are  instructed  not  to  use  the  copiers,  office  equipment  or 
resources  of  the  host  school  district.  For  larger  copy  needs  and  resources,  the  LACOE 
teachers  are  instructed  to  obtain  materials  from  their  PAU  office.  The  LACOE  teachers  are 
grouped  into  PAUs,  each  with  its  own  principal  and  assistant  principals  that  are  housed  at  the 
local  PAU  office.  Each  PAU  principal  reports  to  Kim  Hopko,  the  special  education  director 
for  LACOE.

administration  about  graduation  protocols,  lack  of  books,  comparable  resources  amongst  the 
various  PAU  units  and  institutional  racism.  Dr.  Banks  testified  that  she  found  the  LACOE 
special  education  director  Kim  Hopko  and  the  Avalon  PAU  principal  Paulette  Koss  to  be 
racists.  She  based  this  opinion  on  their  reactions  to  requests  for  resources  for  students  in  the 
Avalon  PAU,  who  were  poor  or  of  modest  means  and  overwhelmingly  African-American  or 
Latino.  Dr.  Banks  is  openly  contemptuous  of  most  of  the  LACOE  administration  (except 
Ms.  Pamela  Branch)  and  had  been  disciplined  or  threatened  with  discipline  for 
insubordination.  At  hearing,  Dr.  Banks  opined  that  Respondent  was  targeted  for  dismissal 
because  of  his  efforts  on  behalf  of  the  students,  the  SDMC,  and  his  challenges  to  LACOE 
administration  over  books,  facilities  and  equity  in  funding  of  student  field  trips  and  activities 
in  the  Avalon  and  Caldwell  PAUs  compared  to  other  PAUs  in  LACOE.  According  to  Dr. 
Banks  and  all  witnesses  for  both  parties,  Respondent  was  well  liked  by  students  and  staff. 
Dr.  Banks  asserts  that  LACOE  retaliated  against  Respondent  as  she  asserts  it  did  against  her 
when  she  was  moved  to  less  than  adequate  classroom  space  that  was  not  accessible  by 
wheelchair  or  mobility  impaired  students.  Respondent  never  asserted  and  the  evidence  did 
not  establish  that  Respondent  was  the  victim  of  racism.  However,  the  evidence  did  establish 
that  his  work  habits,  his  close  association  with  Dr.  Banks,  his  complaints  about  facilities  and 
anonymous  complaints  about  him,  subjected  him  to  intense  scrutiny. 

13. 

In  2009,  LACOE  began  experiencing  a  “take  back”  of  special  education 

services  in  which  many  of  the  schoo!  districts  to  which  it  had  historically  provided  special 
education  service  decided  to  establish  and  utilize  their  own  special  education  departments 
rather  than  using  LACOE  services.  This  resulted  in  a  reduction  in  force  or  “lay  off”  of  many 
LACOE  teachers  and  massive  reassignments  of  the  remaining  senior  teachers.  Respondent 
and  his  colleagues  were  effected  by  the  changing  landscape  of  LACOE’s  relationships  with 
school  districts.  An  additional  factor  at  work  for  LACOE  staff  was  the  contraction  of  the 
number  of  PAUs  from  8  in  2009  to  3  in  2015.  Just  as  the  teachers  were  reshuffled,  so  were 
the  administrators,  many  of  which  were  searching  for  new  jobs  as  it  became  evident  that 
there  were  not  enough  positions  for  the  number  of  administrators  on  staff. 

14. 

In  the  midst  of  these  events  in  late  2008  or  early  2009,  LACOE  embarked 

upon  a  new  pacing  plan  called  “Bridgeworks.”  The  LACOE  teachers  received  a  variety  of 
trainings  and  in-services  over  the  following  years  as  Bridgeworks  was  fully  implemented. 
The  Bridgeworks  pacing  plan  was  contained  in  a  series  of  binders  that  the  teachers  were 
given.  LACOE  expected  the  teachers  to  use  the  Bridgeworks  program  in  conjunction  with 
its  adopted  text  and  curriculum  and  state  standards. 
designed  to  use  with  specific  texts  which  were  not  always  available  to  Respondent  or  other 
teachers  in  the  Avalon  PAU  and  they  were  expected  to  improvise. 

The  Bridgeworks  program  was 

15. 

In  2009,  Respondent  was  transferred  mid-year  to  Caldwell  Elementary  School 

to  cover  a  class  where  the  teacher  left  or  resigned.  The  class  was  comprised  of  5  to  7  year 
olds  of  mixed  disabilities. 
Washington  was  the  Assistant  Principal.  Ms.  Washington  was  Respondent’s  immediate 
supervisor.

At  this  time,  Marjorie  Rudy  was  the  PAU  principal  and  LaShun 

16. 

In  2010,  Respondent  was  transferred  to  Davis  Middle  school  where  he 

remained  until  the  end  of  the  2011-2012  school  year.  At  Davis,  Respondent  taught  a  middle 
school  ED  class  comprised  of  sixth  to  eighth  graders.  Because  of  poor  classroom  conditions 
including  rodents  and  insect  infestations,  and  poor  repair,  Respondent’s  class  was  moved  to 
several  different  classrooms  after  he  complained  about  the  conditions.  Ms.  Washington 
remained  Respondent’s  immediate  supervisor  at  Davis  Middle  school.  Respondent,  like  all 
teachers,  was  on  a  performance  plan,  and  was  evaluated  annually  on  his  progress.  At  some 
point,  under  Ms.  Washington’s  tenure,  Respondent  was  placed  on  an  augmented  performance 
plan  to  improve  the  rigor  of  his  instruction  and  to  align  his  instruction  with  Bridgeworks, 
LACOE’s  adopted  pacing  plan.  Because  Respondent  was  on  an  augmented  performance,  he 
became  the  subject  of  an  extraordinary  number  of  administrative  observations  starting  in 
2010.  Ms.  Washington  testified  that  Respondent  was  not  in  his  classroom  on  many  of  the 
occasions  that  she  attempted  to  visit  him  or  observe  his  class.  Ms.  Washington  testified  that 
on  one  occasion,  she  visited  Respondent’s  classroom  while  on  her  way  to  deliver  layoff 
notices  to  other  teachers,  did  not  find  him  in  the  classroom,  and  she  therefore  stayed  with  his 
students  until  dismissal  instead  of  delivering  the  layoff  notices  which  were  of  immediate 
importance. 

17. 

Respondent’s  paraeducators  Tara  Cannon  and  Laniece  Rollins  testified  about 

Respondent’s  ability  to  manage  the  classroom  behaviors  and  bring  calmness  and 
respectfulness  to  the  classroom.  Respondent  developed  a  rapport  with  the  students,  parents 
and  paraeducators.  Both  paraeducators  testified  that  Respondent  rarely  left  campus  for  lunch 
or  took  a  lunch  break  instead  remaining  in  the  classroom  working  with  students  or 
paraeducators.  He  did  have  lunch  in  the  classroom  with  the  paraeducators  when  the  students 
were  away  at  lunch  on  occasion. 
mainstreaming  of  students  into  other  classes,  in-service  or  staff  trainings,  doctor 
appointments  and  physical  therapy  appointments  related  to  a  workers’  compensation  injury 
he  received  when  a  student  hit  him. 

Respondent  left  the  classroom  for  IEP  meetings, 

18.  | Respondent’s  contracted  start  time  was  at  7:45  a.m.,  15  minutes  before  the 

start  of  the  school  day,  and  his  end  time  was  3:00  p.m.,  15  minutes  after  the  school  day  ended 
or  until  the  students  had  all  boarded  the  school  bus.  As  a  practical  matter,  all  but  one  of  the 
students  that  attended  Respondent’s  class  arrived  by  school  bus  in  the  morning.  One  of 
Respondent’s  paraeducators  rode  on  the  bus  with  the  students.  The  bus  was  rarely  on  time 
and  was  as  much  as  45  minutes  late  on  a  regular  basis.  Respondent  was  expected  by  LACOE 
to  unlock  the  school  gate  for  the  bus  to  enter  and  students  to  disembark.  As  a  practical 
matter,  the  bus  rarely  arrived  by  8:00  a.m.  Therefore,  when  Respondent  arrived  late  for  work 
it  was  not  noticed  unless  he  failed  to  arrive  in  time  to  open  the  gate  for  his  students  and  his 
colleagues  opened  the  gate  when  they  did  so  for  their  own  students.  Upon  disembarking 
from  the  bus,  the  students  went  to  the  cafeteria  for  breakfast  where  the  paraeducators  that 
were  on  the  bus  and  those  arriving  for  work  met  them  and  supervised  them.  Sometimes, 
Respondent  met  the  students  at  the  gate  or  in  the  cafeteria.  On  many  occasions,  the 
paraeducators  walked  the  students  to  the  classroom  to  meet  Respondent.  On  those  occasions, 
other  LACOE  teachers  “kept  an  eye  on”  Respondent’s  students  until  he  arrived  or  they  were 
in  their  classroom.  For  a  period  of  time,  Respondent  left  several  days  each  week  for  several

hours  to  attend  physical  therapy  appointments.  Respondent  provided a  list  of  appointments 
to  the  PAU  office.  LACOE  did  not  provide  a  substitute  teacher  for  those  appointments,  IEP 
meetings,  nor  for  most  trainings  and  administrators  did  not  provide  coverage  or  supervision 
of  Respondent’s  classroom.  Respondent  also  called  the  PAU  office  and  spoke  to  a  secretary 
to  advise  the  PAU  of  his  absences  from  the  classroom  for  medical  appointments.  He 
generally  advised  the  PAU  several  days  before  the  appointments  and  then  called  on  the  day 
of  the  appointment  to  advise  the  PAU  office  when  he  was  leaving  for  the  appointments. 

19. 

For  the  2012-2013  school  year,  the  middle  school  ED  class  was  moved  from 

Davis  Middle  School  to  Vanguard  Middle  School  and  Respondent  continued  teaching  the 
class.  Respondent’s  morning  and  afternoon  practices  remained  the  same.  It  was  at  this  time 
that  Paulette  Koss  became  the  PAU  principal  and  Vernita  Adkins-Barlow  became  the 
Assistant  Principal  and  Respondent’s  immediate  supervisor.  Joe  Mahabir  was  also  an 
Assistant  Principal  in  the  Avalon  PAU.  Respondent  was  acquainted  with  Mahabir  and  had  a 
preference  for  working  with  Mr.  Mahabir  rather  than  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  Respondent  and 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  had  worked  together  as  colleagues  at  a  prior  school  in  the  past  and  were 
not  fond  of  each  other.  Respondent  requested  that  Principal  Koss  change  his  supervising 
administrator,  but  she  refused  to  do  so.  Because  Respondent  was  on  an  augmented 
performance  plan  which  was  supposed  to  help  him  increase  the  rigor  of  his  lessons  and  align 
his  instruction  with  the  Bridgeworks  pacing  program,  he  became  the  subject  of  an 
extraordinary  number  of  administrative  observations  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  starting  in  2010. 

20. 

Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  continued  the  augmented  performance  plan  that  was 

previously  in  place  and  made  frequent  “pop-in  visits”  to  Respondent’s  classroom  and  well- 
documented  formal  observations.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  visits  increased  from  multiple 
weekly  visits  to  multiple  daily  visits  over  time  and  were  always  unannounced.  She  left  notes 
on  Respondent’s  desk  after  her  visits.  During  the  visits  she  came  into  the  classroom, 
generally  without  speaking,  looked  around,  sat  in  the  back  or  walked  around  the  classroom 
looking  at  the  student’s  work  and  materials.  Respondent’s  students  did  not  always  respond 
well  to  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  presence  in  the  classroom.  On  several  occasions  the  students 
made  derogatory  remarks  about  her  when  she  left  the  class  or  wrote  derogatory  comments 
about  her  during  free  writing  journal  time.  On  those  occasions,  Respondent  addressed  the 
students’  conduct  directly  and  called  their  parents.  The  students  were  particularly  disturbed 
by  the  fact  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  did  not  greet  anyone  when  she  entered  the  class. 
Because  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was  in  the  classroom  so  often,  the  students  sensed  that 
Respondent  was  under  scrutiny  and  they  were  protective  of  him.  When  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
attempted  to  conduct  a  demonstration  lesson  in  the  classroom,  the  students  disregarded  her 
and  failed  to  show  her  the  respect  that  they  showed  to  Respondent. 

21.  —  For  the  2013-2014  school  year,  Respondent  was  transferred  to  Compton  Adult 
School  to  teach  an  adult  transition  class  for  18-22  year  olds  with  severe  disabilities.  Despite 
Respondent’s  request  that  Ms.  Atkins-Barlow  be  replaced  as  his  immediate  supervisor,  he 
remained  under  her  supervision  until  she  left  employment  with  LACOE  in  February  of  2014. 
Mr.  Mahabir  supervised  the  only  other  LACOE  teacher  placed  at  Compton  Adult  School. 
According  to  the  credited  testimony  of  paraeducator  Chris  Donaghby,  an  experienced

  

LACOE  paraeducator,  the  students  in  this  classroom  were  incontinent  requiring  diaper 
changes  and  for  the  most  part  were  nonverbal  and  of  low  cognitive  ability.  Respondent  rose 
to  the  task  of  caring  for  and  educating  the  students  and  provided  them  with  individualized 
instruction.  The  students  looked  forward  to  seeing  Respondent  and  he  worked  very  hard  to 
design  lessons  that  would  engage  them.  Neil  Donat  was  the  Avalon  PAU  principal  from 
December  of  2013  to  June  of  2013. 

Specific  Allegations  in  the  Accusation 

22. 

 InCharge  1  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  May  9,  2012,  at  Vanguard  Middle  School,  Respondent  was 
approached  by  LaShun  Washington,  Assistant  Principal,  and 
Respondent's  immediate  administrators  to  discuss  and  conduct  the  final 
evaluation  summary  of  his  performance  plan.  At  that  time,  Respondent 
requested  a  copy  of  the  evaluation  for  review  and  indicated  to  the 
administrator  that  he  would  contact  her  to  discuss  it  further.  By  May 
15,  2012,  Respondent  had  not  contacted  the  administrators. 
Respondent  was  directed  to  meet  the  expectations  outlined  in  the 
performance  plan.  These  directives  were  provided  to  Respondent  in  a 
Final  Evaluation  Summary  dated  May  15,  2012  by  Assistant  Principal, 
LaShun  Washington. 

23. 

Complaint  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  On  May  9, 

2012,  Vanguard  Middle  School  Assistant  Principal  LaShun  Washington  (Ms.  Washington) 
asked  Respondent  to  meet  with  her  regarding  her  evaluation  summary  of  Respondent’s 
performance  plan.  Complainant  also  established  that  Respondent  delayed  meeting  with 
Assistant  Principal  Washington  because  he  wanted  to  discuss  the  evaluation  summary  with 
his  union  representative. 
representative  present  at  the  meeting,  but  provided  Respondent  with  a  draft  copy  of  the 
evaluation  summary  so  that  Respondent  could  consult  with  his  union  representative  prior  to 
meeting  with  Ms.  Washington.  By  May  15,  2012,  Respondent  had  not  scheduled  a  meeting 
with  Ms.  Washington.  Therefore,  Ms.  Washington  finalized  her  draft  without  Respondent’s 
input  and  issued  a  May  15,  2012  written  evaluation  summary  to  Respondent.  In  the  written 
evaluation  summary,  Ms.  Washington  directed  Respondent  to  meet  the  expectations  outlined 
in  the  performance  plan. 

Ms.  Washington  was  not  amenable  to  having  a  union 

24. 

In  Charge  2  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  September  13,  2012,  Respondent  was  present  at  school  but  did  not 
attend  the  PAU  staff  meeting  at  3:00  p.m.  at  the  PAU  office. 
According  to  Respondent's  principal,  Paulette  Koss,  Respondent  was 
given a  list  of  monthly  staff  meeting  dates  at  Orientation  on  August  23, 
2012,  and  told  that  the  meetings  were  mandatory.  Respondent  was 
reminded  of  the  meeting  on  September  6,  2012,  and  informed  that  the

meeting  was  mandatory.  Additionally,  Respondent  was  advised  that 
his  contract  states  "within  48  hours  prior  notification,  except  for  urgent 
circumstances,  the  immediate  administrator  may  reasonably  require  the 
unit  member  to  attend  faculty  meetings  and  to  perform  other  on-site 
professional  duties."  Respondent  was  subsequently  reminded  in  a 
memo  dated  September  13,  2012,  "Attendance  at  PAU  Staff  meetings" 
of  future  meetings. 

25. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

received a list  of  monthly  staff  meeting  dates  at  the  mandatory  orientation  on  August  23, 
2012.  At  the  orientation,  all  staff  were  advised  that  the  monthly  staff  meetings  were 
mandatory.  On  September  13,  2012,  Respondent  was  present  at  school,  but  did  not  attend 
the  monthly  Principal’s  Administrative  Unit  (PAU)  meeting  at  3:00  p.m.  at  the  PAU  office 
despite  having  received  a  reminder  of  the  meeting  on  September  6,  2012.  Respondent  did 
not  believe  that  his  union  had  approved  attendance  at  staff  meetings  after  school  hours,  so  he 
did  not  attend. 

26. 

In  Charge  3  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  October  11,  2012,  a  conference  was  held  in  the  office  of  Vernita 
Adkins-Barlow,  Respondent's  supervisor,  at  Avalon  PAU.  Present  at 
the  meeting  were  Respondent  and  Marilyn  Banks,  LACEA 
representative. 

At  the  conference,  Ms,  Adkins-Barlow  expressed  concern  after  having 
been  at  Respondent's  school  site,  Vanguard  Middle  School,  on 
Tuesday,  October  9,  2012,  from  1:00  until  2:45  p.m.  and  not  having 
seen  Respondent  on  campus.  Respondent's  students  had  been  left  in  the 
supervision  of  his  paraeducators.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  asked  the 
paraeducators  to  let  Respondent  know  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was 
looking  for  him  and  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  would  like  to  see  him 
before  leaving  the  school.  An  Individualized  Education  Plan  (“IEP") 
team  was  meeting  and,  as  a  participant,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  would  be 
available  to  meet  with  him  upon  the  completion  of  the  student's  IEP. 

Ms.  Adkins  Barlow  also  mentioned  that  on  Monday,  October  8,  2012, 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  had  looked  for  Respondent,  at  the  beginning  of 
school,  and  he  was  not  present  when  his  students  arrived  at  school  and 
exited  the  bus.  Respondent's  paraeducators  supervised  his  students 
exiting  the  bus  and  eating  breakfast. 

Respondent  explained  that  on  October  8,  2012,  he  was  searching  for 
student  books  at  the  PAU  site;  this  was  verified.  Respondent  explained 
that  on  Tuesday,  October  9,  2012,  he  had  left  the  classroom,  gone  to  the 
restroom  and  was  sitting  in  his  car  in  the  Vanguard  parking  lot.  When

the  students  were  ready  to  get  on  the  bus,  Respondent  said  that  he  was 
present  to  load  them  on  the  bus.  Respondent  said  that  the 
paraeducators  did  not  inform  him  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was  on  the 
school  campus  looking  for  him. 

Respondent's  behavior  led  to  a  conference  summary  issued  to  him  by 
Vernita  Adkins-Barlow  dated  October  11,  2012. 

27. 

Complainant  established  the  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  3  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

28. 

In  Charge  4  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  October  19,  2012,  Respondent  received  an  email  by  Vernita 
Adkins-Barlow,  Assistant  Principal,  Respondent's  immediate 
administrator.  She  had  not  received  Respondent's  performance  plan 
which  was  due  at  the  end  of  September  (2012).  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
had  to  reschedule  the  meeting  to  discuss  the  plan  for  Tuesday,  October 
30,  2012. 

29. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins- 

Barlow  sent  such  an  email  to  Respondent  and  that  the  October  30,  2012  meeting  was 
rescheduled.  However  it  was  not  established  that  the  meeting  was  rescheduled  because 
Respondent  did  not  provide  his  performance  plan  to  Assistant  Principal  Adkins-Barlow.  It 
was  established  that  Ms.  Atkins-Barlow  extended  the  due  date  for  submission  until  the  end  of 
September  2012  and  Respondent  provided  the  documents  by  the  end  of  September  2012 
which  was  the  extended  deadline.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  received 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  email.  In  October  of  2012,  Respondent  had  difficulty  accessing  his 
email  account.  The  access  code  that  Respondent  had  been  given  was  not  correct  and  his 
requests  for  assistance  from  administration  and  technical  support  did  not  result  in  his  having 
access  to  the  email  system.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  provided  Respondent  an  access  code  but  the 
code  was  for  the  photocopy  machine  not  for  the  email.  Respondent’s  prior  administrator, 
Ms.  Washington,  corroborated  Respondent’s  testimony  that  the  email  system  was  unreliable. 
In  fact,  she  had  experienced  so  many  problems  with  the  LACOE  email  system  that  she  had 
resorted  to  forwarding  all  LACOE  email  to  her  personal  email  account  in  order  to  preserve 
her  email  communications  and  records.  Once  Respondent  finally  obtained  access  to  his 
email  account,  he  delegated  the  task  of  opening,  printing  and  responding  to  email  to  one  of 
his  classroom  paraeducators.  Respondent  preferred  to  use  the  computer  and  email  system  as 
little  as  possible. 

30. 

In  Charge  5  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  November  2,  2012,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  sent  an  email  regarding  the 
focus  of  classroom  observations  for  the  month  of  November  2012.  In 
her  email,  she  asked  for  Respondent  (and  other  teachers)  to  submit  a 

 

lesson  plan  document  to  her  by  Friday,  November  16,  2012  for  her 
review.  A  reminder  email  was  mailed  to  all  staff  regarding  the  lesson 
plan  due  date  on  November  15,  2012.  By  November  28,  2012, 
Respondent  had  failed  to  submit  lesson  plans.  By  December  4,  2012, 
Respondent  received  another  email  as  he  still  had  not  submitted  the 
November  lesson  plans. 

31. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins- 

Barlow  sent  the  emails  alleged  in  Charge  5.  However,  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  29,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  received  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  email 
messages. 
the  requested  lesson  plans  in  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  mailbox  at  the  PAU  office. 

By  the  end  of  November  2012,  Respondent  placed  or  had  his  paraeducator  place 

32. 

In  Charge  6  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  December  4,  2012,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  sent  an  email  to 
Respondent  and  his  colleagues  regarding  written  lesson  plan  reviews. 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  scheduled  meetings  with  all  teachers,  including 
Respondent. 
December  13,  2012.  She  also  informed  Respondent  she  had  not 
received  his  lesson  plans  in  a  separate  email  also  dated  December  4, 
2012. 

Respondent's  meeting  was  scheduled  for  Thursday, 

33. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  6  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  It  was  also  established  that  Respondent  read 
the  email  concerning  the  scheduled  meetings  and  was  annoyed  and  perplexed  by  the  fact  that 
all  of  the  teacher  meetings  were  scheduled  during  the  school  day  except  his  meeting  which 
was  scheduled  after  the  conclusion  of  the  school  day.  Respondent  was  not  comfortable  with 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  and  did  not  want  to  meet  with  her  after  school.  Although  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  sent  Respondent  an  email  notifying  Respondent  that  she  had  not  received  his  lesson 
plans,  he  assumed  she  had  received  what  had  been  placed  in  her  mail  box. 

34. 

In  Charge  7  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  December  5,  2012,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  emailed  Respondent 
regarding  the  placement  of  a  sample  lesson  plan  in  his  mailbox  to  assist 
with  the  planning  of  his  lessons. 

35. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins- 

Barlow  emailed  Respondent  a  portion  of  a  lesson  plan  to  illustrate  her  preferred  format. 

36. 

In  Charge  8  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  December  9,  2012,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow,  provided  Respondent  a 
memo  regarding  his  classroom  instruction,  the  Jack  of  rigor  and 

10

relevance  to  his  academic  instruction.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  offered  her 
assistance  in  addressing  these  concerns  while  preparing  Respondent's 
lesson  plans.  Respondent  was  directed  to  complete  a  lesson  plan  and 
submit  it  to  her  for  review  and  conference  by  December  13,  2012  at  4 
p.m.  pursuant  to  her  email  dated  December  4,  2012. 

37. 

|  Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  Charge  8  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  except  that  it  was  not  established  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
offered  Respondent  “assistance  in  addressing  these  concerns.”  Instead,  it  was  established 
that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  referred  Respondent  to  some  appropriate  resources  that  he  could 
consult  to  prepare  lesson  plans  and  offered  him  suggestions  about  items  to  include  in  the 
lesson  plans. 

38. 

In  Charge  9  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  December  20,  2012,  Respondent  was  informed  that  Respondent's 
lesson  plans  needed  to  follow  the  LACOE  Pacing  Plans.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  hand  carried  information  to  Respondent  regarding  sample 
lesson  plans  and  how  she  wanted  him  to  use  the  Pacing  Plans  to 
develop  his  lesson  plans.  She  asked  that  they  be  returned  on  January  7, 
2013. 
She  received  them  on  January  11,  2013,  and  referenced  them  in 
an  email  dated  January  18,  2013.  The  lesson  plans  Respondent 
provided  did  not  follow  the  provided  template  by  omitting: 

*Name  of  text. 
*Pacing  plan  pages  being  addressed. 
*What  paraeducators  were  to  work  on  with  which  students  during  small 
groups  and 
*What  they  were  to  do. 
*What  instructional  strategies  were  being  utilized. 
*How  the  student  JEP's  goals/objectives  were  being  addressed  during 
small  group  activity. 

The  lesson  plans  were  returned  to  Respondent,  and  he  was  notified  that 
his  formal  observation  was  scheduled  for  Wednesday,  January  23, 
2013.  Respondent's  failure  to  submit  his  lesson  plans  within  the 
deadline  issued  to  him  by  his  immediate  administrator  was  an  act  of 
insubordination. 

39. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  charge  9,  except 

that  a  template  was  provided,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  However,  Respondent  did 
not  establish  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  the  factual  allegations  constituted  an  act  of 
insubordination.  The  Commission  found  that  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established 
that  Respondent  attempted  to  comply  with  each  and  every  request  for  lesson  plans  and 
revisions  made  to  him  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow,  but  became  demoralized  by  her  continued 

i

  

demands.  There  was  no  evidence  that  Respondent  was  in  any  way  defiant  of  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow’s  authority  or  requests  for  lesson  plans. 

40. 

In  Charge  10  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  January  15,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  emailed  Respondent 
regarding  her  concerns  over  his  lack  of  diligence  shown  by  him  in  not 
providing  requested  documents  in  a  timely  manner.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
was  informed  by  the  attendance  clerk  that  Respondent  had  been 
consistently  late  in  presenting  his  class  attendance  registers  to  her.  The 
attendance  clerk  received  the  documents  on  January  15,  2013,  when 
they  were  due  to  her  by  Friday,  January  11,  2013. 

Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  also  had  concerns  regarding  her  request  for  a  copy 
of  IEPs  for  review  that  were  not  given  to  her  based  upon  her 
conversation  with  Respondent  on  January  8,  2013  (and  via  email  on 
January  7,  2013).  When  she  inquired,  on  January  8,  2013,  of  needing  to 
see  Respondent's  lesson  plans,  they  were  not  ready,  so  she  was  unable 
to  review  them. 

41. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  that  Ms.  Adkins- 

Barlow  requested  lesson  plans,  but  failed  to  establish  the  remaining  factual  allegations  of 
Charge  10  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

42. 

In  Charge  11  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  January  18,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  sent  Respondent  an  email 
(and  memo)  regarding  corrections  to  an  IEP  he  participated  in. 
Respondent  was  directed  to  have  the  corrections  made  before  the  IEP 
scheduled  for  January  22,  2013. 

43. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  of 

Charge  11  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

44. 

In  Charge  12  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  January  23,  2013,  Respondent  received  an  email  from  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
wherein  he  was  informed  by  her  that  he  was  provided  a  sample  lesson  plan 
using  the  Bridgeworks  pacing  plan  as  a  template  for  future  lessons. 
Respondent  was  reminded  to  provide  the  names  of  texts  that  he  still  needed  for 
student  use. 

45. 

|The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  of 

Charge  12  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  Commission  also  determined  that 
Respondent  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  told  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 

12

which  texts  he  needed.  When  Ms.  Atkins-Barlow  provided  Respondent  with  some  text 
books,  they  were  not  the  correct  books  nor  the  ones  requested  by  Respondent.  Respondent 
searched  in  libraries  and  at  the  PAU  office  for  appropriate  textbooks  as  required  by  the 
Bridgeworks  program  so  that  he  could  prepare  lesson  plans  as  directed  by  Ms.  Atkins- 
Barlow. 

46. 

In  Charge  13  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  January  22,  2013,  an  interim  conference  was  held  to  discuss 
Respondent's  performance  to  date  for  the  2012-2013  school  year. 
Concerns  regarding  his  teaching  practices,  instructional  strategies,  and 
student  engagement  were  discussed  with  Respondent.  Other  issues  of 
concern  included  the  lack  of  diligence  exhibited  in  submitting 
requested  paperwork  in  a  timely  manner  as  referenced  in  emails  and 
notes  dated: 

10/19/2012 
11/02/2012 
11/15/2012 
11/28/2012 
12/04/2012 
12/05/2012 
12/09/2012 
12/20/2012 
01/07/2013 
01/15/2013 
01/18/2013 

47.  |  The  Commission  found  that  the  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  demonstrated a  lack  of  diligence  in 
submitting  the  requested  paperwork.  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  Ms.  Atkins-Barlow  had  concerns  about  Respondent’s  performance  during  the 
2012-2013  school  year  including  his  teaching  practices,  instructional  strategies  and  student 
engagement  and  that  a  conference  was  held  on  January  22,  2013,  wherein  she  made 
Respondent  aware  of  these  concerns.  Ms.  Atkins-Barlow  also  documented  her  concerns  in 
emails  and  memorandum. 

48. 

In  Charge  14  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

Respondent's  January  2013  lesson  plans  were  submitted  at  the  end  of 
January  2013,  failing  to  abide  by  administrative  directives. 

49. 

Based  upon  Respondent’s  credited  testimony  and  exhibit  2,  page  109,  the 

Commission  found  that  Respondent  submitted  his  lesson  plans  on  January  11,  2013. 

13

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  Charge  14  by  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence. 

50. 

In  Charge  15  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  February  22,  2013,  Respondent  was  issued  an  unsatisfactory  performance 
evaluation  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  Respondent  received  unsatisfactory 
remarks  in  all  six  of  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession. 
Respondent's  performance  plan  goals  were  modified,  and  Respondent  was 
provided  with  opportunities  for  professional  growth,  via  formal  observations 
which  were  scheduled  and  provided  to  Respondent.  By  February  28,  2013, 
Respondent  had  refused  to  sign  a  copy  of  his  performance  plan  and  evaluation. 
Article  VII,  Section  H  of  the  Los  Angeles  County  Education  Association 
("LACEA")  states  that  "whether  or  not  the  unit  member  agrees  with  the 
evaluation,  the  unit  member  shall  acknowledge  receipt  of  the  evaluation  by 
signing  the  evaluation  form."  Respondent  refused  to  abide  by  the  LACEA 
agreement  and  would  not  sign  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  evaluation. 

51. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Atkins- 

Barlow  issued  an  unsatisfactory  performance  evaluation  as  alleged  in  Charge  15  and 
recommended  that  LACOE  not  retain  Respondent.  It  was  also  established  that  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  had  advised  Respondent  before  the  meeting  that  this  was  to  be  an  informal  meeting 
and  there  was  no  need  for  union  representation.  Respondent  felt  ambushed  by  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  in  this  situation.  It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  refused  to  sign  the  evaluation.  Respondent  did  not  know,  and  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  did  not  tell  him,  that  failure  to  sign  acknowledgement  of  receipt  of  the  evaluation 
was  a  violation  of  the  LACEA  contract.  Respondent  did  not  have  union  representation  at  the 
meeting  and  did  not  receive  a  copy  of  the  evaluation  until  early  March  of  2013.  The 
remaining  allegations  were  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

52. 

In  Charge  16  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

Respondent's  February  2013  lesson  plans  were  submitted  at  the  end  of 
February  2013  failing  to  abide  by  administrative  directives. 

53. 

|  The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  factual 

allegations  of  Charge  16  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

54. 

In  Charge  17  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  March  4,  2013,  Respondent  was  observed  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow. 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  observed  significant  areas  of  concern  regarding  his 
instructional  delivery,  use  of  instructional  strategies,  his  classroom 
environment,  and  lesson  planning. 

14

55. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  observed  Respondent  on  March  4,  2013  and  that  she  believed  there  were  significant 
areas  of  concern  regarding  his  instructional  delivery,  use  of  instructional  strategies,  his 
classroom  environment  and  lesson  planning. 

56. 

In  Charge  18  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  March  13,  2013,  Respondent  was  formally  observed  by  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  provided  him  with  a  summary  of  her  observations 
including  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  his  lesson.  On  March  21,  2013, 
Respondent  was  formally  observed  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  provided  him  with  a  summary  of  her  observations  including  strengths 
and  weaknesses  of  his  lesson. 

57. 

The  Commission  found  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Complaint 

established  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  18  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

58. 

In  Charge  19  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  March  25,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  emailed  Respondent  regarding  a 
meeting  invitation  with  him  to  discuss  expectations  for  the  instructional 
On  March  28,  2013,  Respondent 
program  in  his  class  for  April  2013. 
received  a  3rd  Quarter  Progress  Report  from  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  regarding 
concerns  over  student  records. 

59.  |  Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  19  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

60. 

In  Charge  20  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  March  28,  2013,  during  a  Thursday  morning  visit  to  Respondent's  class, 
his  immediate  supervisor,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow,  Assistant  Principal,  asked  that 
he  prepare a  set  of  student  texts  to  provide  for  person/s  that  would  be 
demonstrating  lessons  in  his  class  after  the  spring  break.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
would  not  be  on  site  before  break  and  the  school  would  be  closed  for  the  break 
so  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  needed  the  texts  that  day.  When  she  returned  to 
Respondent's  class  that  afternoon,  the  texts  had  not  been  prepared.  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  let  him  know  that  she  would  return  to  get  the  texts  after 
visiting  two  (2)  other  classes  on  the  campus.  When  she  returned,  the  following 
incident  occurred  in  the  presence  of  two  (2)  paraeducators  and  three  (3) 
students:  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  began  to  collect  student  texts  that  were  sitting 
on  desks.  Respondent  abruptly  said,  "You  can't  take  my  texts."  Again,  she 
explained  that  they  were  needed  for  persons  to  prepare  subject  lessons  for 
demonstration  after  spring  break.  Respondent  said,  "You  can't  take  my  texts." 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  said,  “As  an  administrator,  I  can  take  the  texts,"  again 

15

explaining  the  purpose  for  them.  Respondent's  tone  was  irritated  as  he  said, 
"Don't  take  the  texts."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  said,  "I  am  going  to  take  the  texts" 
and  continued  to  pick  up  a  set.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  also  said  that  Respondent 
could  "write  me  up.”  Respondent  defiantly  said,  "You  can  write  yourself  up.” 
Respondent  became  increasingly  agitated  and  said  that  he  did  not  want  to  force 
her  to  put  them  down.  Respondent  stood  up,  approached  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
as  her  back  was  turned,  and  reached  over  her  shoulder  to  take  the  books  from 
her  arms.  Respondent  was  only  able  to  get  some  papers  which  Respondent 
threw  down,  as  Ms.  Adidas-Barlow  held  them  close  to  her  chest.  She  kept  her 
back  to  Respondent  as  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  continued  to  move  away  from  him, 
as  he  continued  to  approach  her.  Respondent  continued  stating,  "You  can 
come  back  tomorrow,  Monday  or  next  week"  to  get  the  texts.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  said  that  the  spring  break  would  begin  the  following  week  and  the 
office  would  be  closed  and  there  were  other  things  that  she  needed  to  do  that 
week  in  the  office,  including  supervising  the  Longfellow  move.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  said  that  there  was  nothing  Respondent  would  be  doing  for  the 
remainder  of  the  day  to  need  the  texts  (it  was  about  1:50  p.m.).  Respondent 
said  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  did  not  know  that.  As  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
approached  the  back  door,  passing  Respondent's  desk,  Respondent 
aggressively  said,  "Don't  take  any  books  from  my  desk."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
had  no  intention  of  taking  any  teacher  guides  and/or  anything  else  from  his 
desk,  since  her  original  request  had  only  been  for  student  texts.  By  that  time, 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  had  obtained  enough  of  the  subject  texts  and  as 
Respondent  was  at  the  front  door  to  the  room,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  exited  from 
the  back  door  in  order  to  avoid  another  physical  confrontation. 

During  the  entire  interaction,  others  were  watching  Respondent's 
insubordination  to  her  authority.  Students  who  are  within  the  LACOE  ED 
program,  who  have  -  difficulty  respecting  authority,  observed  Respondent's 
actions  of  insubordination  to  the  authority  of  his  site  supervising  administrator. 
Student  CC  had  to  move  his  wheelchair  to  avoid  being  in  the  middle  of 
Respondent's  attempt  to  remove  the  books.  Student  TM  giggled  as  she 
observed  what  Respondent  was  doing,  just  as  she  had  done  that  morning  when 
Respondent  commented  on  how  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  would  not  sign  student 
progress  reports  written  in  pencil.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  could  also  observe  one 
(1)  paraeducator's  face  as  she  watched  the  interaction  in  shock.  Respondent's 
conduct  led  to  a  letter  of  reprimand  dated  March  28,  2013  issued  to 
Respondent  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow. 

61. 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  Charge  20  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  The  Commission  found  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  came  into 
Respondent’s  classroom  and  began  gathering  books  without  speaking  to  him  or  requesting 
his  permission.  Respondent  had  spent  a  considerable  amount  of  time  obtaining  the  books  he 
needed  for  his  classroom  from  various  school  sites,  the  library,  the  internet  and  other  PAUs, 
and  was  concerned  that  the  books  would  not  be  returned  and  not  be  available  for  the 

16

While  Respondent  is  a  big  man  approximately  6  foot,  5  inches  tall,  his  demeanor 
students. 
is  respectful  and  polite.  The  Commission  found  it  incredible  that  Respondent  would  engage 
in  any  physical  altercation  or  verbal  altercation  with  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  in  front  of  his  ED 
students  or  paraeducators. 
Respondent's  requests  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  not  remove  text 
books  from  his  classroom  during  a  class  session  and  under  these  circumstances  were 
reasonable.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  testimony  about  Respondent’s  behavior  and  demeanor 
was  not  corroborated  by  any  other  evidence  and  was  contrary  to  the  testimony  of  all  other 
witnesses  about  Respondent’s  demeanor  and  the  Commission’s  observations  of 
Respondent’s  demeanor. 
allegation  that  student  TM  giggled  during  interactions  between  Respondent  and  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  or  that  paraeducators  were  shocked  by  Respondent's  behavior.  On  the  contrary, 
several  paraeducators  were  concerned  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlows  behavior  and  what  they 
perceived  to  be  harassment  of  Respondent. 
It-was  established  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
issued  a  letter  of  reprimand  to  Respondent  based  upon  her  perception  of  the  incident. 

Furthermore,  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the  factual 

62. 

In  Charge  21  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

Respondent's  March  2013  lesson  plans  were  submitted  at  the  end  March  2013, 
failing  to  abide  by  administrative  directives.  Comments  provided  on  the  plans 
by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  indicated  these  plans  only  addressed  one  specific  area. 
Questions  written  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  indicated,  "what  para  is  working 
with  which  students  in  small  groups  and  what  are  groups  doing ?....How  are 
specific  IEP  needs of students  in  Language  Arts  going  to  be  addressed  in  small 
group  activities  ?...Are  these  questions  from  text,  pacing  plans  or  teacher 
developed?  Are  there  other  activities  using  graphic  organizers  that  may  be 
used  by  students  in  small  groups?....Text?  Pacing  Plan  information?”  On 
April  10,  2013,  Respondent  was  provided  with  an  Interim  Conference 
Evaluation  #2  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  The  summary  of  his  progress  provided 
areas  of  growth  as  well  as  areas  of  concern  which  had  been  brought  to  his 
attention  as  part  of  the  evaluation  process.  Respondent  was  informed  his 
performance  continued  to  be  unsatisfactory,  and  his  goals  reflected  an 
improvement  plan  which  contained  revised  goals,  and  observation  dates  in  his 
classroom.  Respondent  declined  to  sign  the  April  10,  2013  Interim  Conference 
Evaluation  #2.  Article  VIII,  Section  H  of  the  Los  Angeles  County  Education 
Association  ("LACEA")  states  that  "whether  or  not  the  unit  member  agrees, 
with  the  evaluation,  the  unit  member  shall  acknowledge  receipt  of  the 
evaluation  by  signing  the  evaluation  form."  Respondent  refused  to  abide  by  the 
LACEA  agreement  and  would  not  sign  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the 
evaluation. 

63. 

With  respect  to  Charge  21  of  the  Accusation,  the  Commission  found  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  timely  submitted  his  March  2013  lesson 
plans  and  that  he  did  not  violate  an  administrative  directive  in  that  regard.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  made  the  alleged  comments  about  Respondent’s  lesson  plans  and  provided 
Respondent  with  an  Interim  Conference  Evaluation  #2  Summary  on  or  about  April  10,  2013 

17

as  described  in  Charge  21.  Respondent  refused  to  sign  the  acknowledgement  and  receipt  of 
the  document.  Respondent  was  not  aware,  and  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  did  not  inform  him,  that 
the  LACEA  agreement  provided  that  teachers  were  to  sign  as  acknowledgement  and  receipt 
of  such  documents  whether  or  not  the  teacher  agreed  with  the  contents  of  the  document. 

64. 

In  Charge  22  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  April  11,  2013,  Respondent  was  observed  arriving  to  training  at  the  Avalon 
PAU  staff  meeting  room  at  8:45  a.m.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was  informed  that 
Respondent  left  the  training  at  approximately  10:15  a.m.  informing  the  trainer 
that  he  "had  an  appointment."  Paulette  Koss,  Avalon  Principal,  inquired  at  the 
PAU  staff  meeting  of  Respondent  and  others  who  had  attended  the  ELD 
workshop,  how  they  had  liked  it.  Respondent  said  that  he  did  not  stay  at  the 
training  because  of  a  doctor's  appointment.  She  asked  whether  he  had  called 
the  office  and  turned  in  an  absence  claim,  Respondent  said  that  he  had  called 
the  office  and  would  turn  in  an  absence  claim.  Upon  returning  to  the  office, 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow,  inquired  of  the  attendance  clerk  if  he  had  called 
informing  her  of  his  absence.  She  said  that  she  had  received  a  phone  message 
saying  that  he  was  going  back  to  class.  Throughout  the  day,  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  had  been  at  Vanguard  Middle  School  and  when  she  asked  if 
Respondent  had  been  there,  the  substitute  teacher  assigned  to  his  class  said 
that  he  had  only  been  there  that  morning.  The  ELD  strategies  workshop  was 
scheduled  specifically  in  response  to  a  recommendation  made  by  Respondent's 
LACEA  representative  at  a  formal  observation  conference  meeting. 
Respondent's  attendance  was  necessary  to  continue  to  address  concerns 
specified  in  his  performance  plan.  Respondent  was  directed  to  submit  an 
absence  claim  indicating  his  absence  on  Thursday,  April  11,  2013,  from  10:15 
a.m.  until  the  end  of  his  school  day  at  3:00  p.m.,  as  anything  but  "school 
business."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  provided  Respondent  with  a  memo  on  this 
directive  on  April  12,  2013,  regarding,  "Avalon  PAU  ELD  Strategies 
Workshop."  Respondent  submitted  the  absence  claim  form  only  after  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  issued  this  directive. 

65. 

As  to  Charge  22,  the  Commission  found  that  the  Complainant  failed  to  prove 

by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  either  left  a  message  or  told  the  PAU 
office  staff  that  he  would  return  to  class  after  his  appointment.  Complainant  also  failed  to 
establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  English  Language  Development,  also 
known  as  ELD,  workshop  was  scheduled  in  response  to  Respondent’s  LACEA 
representative’s  recommendation  or  that  Respondent’s  attendance  was  necessary  to  continue 
to  address  concerns  specified  in  his  performance  plan.  Complainant  established  the 
remainder  of  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  Charge  22  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence. 

66. 

In  Charge  23  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

18

In  April  2013,  Respondent  was  provided  with  an  Interim  Conference 
Evaluation  #3  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  The  summary  of  Respondent's  progress 
provided  areas  of  growth  as  well  as  areas  of  concern,  which  had  been  brought 
to  his  attention  as  part  of  the  evaluation  process.  Respondent  was  informed  his 
performance  continued  to  be  unsatisfactory,  and  his  goals  reflected  an 
improvement  plan  which  contained,  revised  goals,  and  observation  dates  in 
your  classroom. 

67. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  23  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

68. 

In  Charge  24  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

Respondent's  April  2013  lesson  plans  were  submitted  on  April  26,  2013.  Also 
on  this  date,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  emailed  Respondent  regarding  the  scheduling 
of  his  May  2013  formal  observations. 

69. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  Charge  24  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

70. 

In  Charge  25  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  May  3,  2013,  Respondent  was  informed  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  that  a 
meeting  was  scheduled  for  Friday,  May  10,  2013,  at  11:30  a.m.  at  Vanguard 
Middle  School  to  discuss  his  progress  as  an  Interim  Conference  Evaluation, 
and  expectations  of  his  "Augmented  Performance  Plan”  for  the  month  of  May 
2013. 

71. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  Charge  25  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

72. 

In  Charge  26  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  June  7,  2013,  Respondent  was  informed  that  attempts  had  been  made  to 
schedule  a  "Summary  Augmented  Performance  Pian  Meeting.”  Specificaily,  at 
his  May  10,  2013  "Performance  Plan  Progress"  meeting,  his  LACEA 
representative  scheduled  a  tentative  date  for  Monday,  June  3,  2013  at  11:30 
a.m.  However,  this  conflicted  with  an  important  IEP  meeting  scheduled  for 
one  of  Respondent's  students,  per  the  student's  mother's  request.  Per 
Respondent's  LACEA  representative,  a  second  date  was  proposed  to  schedule 
a  meeting  for  Wednesday,  June  5,  2013  at  2:30  p.m.  Respondent  informed  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  have  a  meeting  on  that  date 
due  to  an  appointment  scheduled  after  the  school  day.  Respondent's 
augmented  performance  plan  observation  completion  summary  was  provided 
to  him  via  certified  mail  as  the  result  of  his  inability  to  meet.  Goals  and 

19

objectives  that  were  not  met  prior  to  the  completion  of  the  2012-2013  school 
year  were  carried  over  to  the  2013-2014  school  year. 

73. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  contained  in  Charge  26  of  the 

Accusation. 

74. 

In  Charge  27  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  October  29,  2013,  Respondent  was  formally  observed  by  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  provided  him  with  a  summary  of  her  observations 
including  weaknesses  of  his  lesson.  On  November  7,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  followed-up  on  an  email  Respondent  deleted  and  did  not  read 
regarding,  "DW  Current  Progress  Report."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was  aware  of 
the  deleted  email  as  she  had  set  a  "read  receipt"  message  on  the  email.  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  forwarded  Respondent  the  deleted  email  message,  with  a 
message  regarding  "FC"  which  stated,  "Jf you  are  checking  your  emails  this 
morning,  I  need  the  completed  paperwork  for  Student  FC.  I  would  like  to 
complete  SEIS  by  the  end  of  the  week  and  you  will  not  be  here  tomorrow."  By 
November  13,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  informed  Respondent  she  had  not 
received  his  students'  progress  reports  and  Student  FC's  ELD  DEP  Paperwork. 
Respondent  was  directed  to  complete  his  students'  Progress  Reports  and 
Student  FC's  IEP  paperwork  by  November  20,  2013  for  review.  Respondent 
finally  complied  with  producing  FC’  s  paperwork  nearly  two  weeks  after  it 
was  requested. 

75. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
sent  the  email  messages  alleged  in  Charge  27  of  the  Accusation  and  that  the  documents  were 
submitted  later  than  requested.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  received, 
read,  or  deleted  the  emails.  The  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  27  are  alleged  to  have 
occurred  during  the  time  period  in  which  Respondent’s  email  was  not  functioning  correctly 
and  he  had  limited  or  no  access.  Additionally,  when  Respondent  did  obtain  email  access,  his 
paraeducators  managed  his  email. 

76. 

In  Charge  28  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  November  13,  2013,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  emailed  Respondent  (and  other 
staff)  regarding  a  request  for  adult  transition  information  on  the  students  who 
had  been  "conserved"  in  his  classroom.  The  request  required  a  response  to  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  no  later  than  November  22,  2013.  By  November  25,  2013, 
Respondent  had  not  provided  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  with  the  requested 
information  and  he  was  directed  to  submit  the  information  no  later  than 
December  4,  2013.  Respondent's  failure  to  persistently  not  comply  with 
directives  issued  to  him  by  his  immediate  administrator  was  an  act  of 
insubordination. 

20

77. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 

sent  the  email  messages  alleged  in  Charge  28  of  the  Accusation.  However,  it  was  not 
established  that  Respondent  received  or  read  the  emails.  The  factual  allegations  set  forth  in 
Charge  28  are  alleged  to  have  occurred  during  the  time  period  in  which  Respondent’s  email 
was  not  functioning  correctly  and  he  had  limited  or  no  access.  To  the  extent  that  Respondent 
may  have  failed  to  comply  with  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  request  because  he  did  not  receive  it, 
such  non-compliance  was  unintentional  and  did  not  constitute  a  persistent  failure  to  comply 
with  administrative  directives  or  insubordination. 

78. 

In  Charge  29  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  December  12,  2013,  Respondent  did  not  attend  the  pre-scheduled  monthly 
staff  and  professional  development  meetings  indicating  that  LACEA  has  not 
approved  meetings  after  work  hours.  Respondent  failed  to  attend: 

PLC:  November  21,  2013  at  3:00  p.m. 
Staff  Meeting:  December  12,  2013  at  3:00  p.m. 

Respondent  received  a letter,  of  warning  regarding  this  behavior  dated 
December  12,  2013  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow. 

79. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  the  factual 

allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  29  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
testified  that  he  attended  the  meetings,  but  may  not  have  signed  in  if  he  was  late  or  did  not 
see  a  sign  in  sheet. 

Respondent  credibly 

80.  —  In  Charge  30  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  January  15,  2014,  Respondent  deleted  without  reading  an  email  sent  to  him 
by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  regarding  "SEIS  IEP  Compliance."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
was  aware  Respondent  had  erased  her  message  because  she  had  set  a  "read 
receipt"  on  the  email  prior  to  sending.  Respondent's  deletion  of  an  email  from 
his  immediate  administrator  without  reading  it  was  an  act  of  insubordination. 

81.  |  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  email 
referenced  in  Charge  30  was  sent  to  Respondent  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  However,  it  was 
not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  received  the  email  or  that  he  was 
responsible  for  the  email  being  deleted.  Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  deletion  of  the  email  was  an  act  of  insubordination. 

82. 

In  Charge  31  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  February  5,  2014,  Respondent  deleted  an  email  sent  to  him  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow 
regarding  a  student,  "FC."  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  was  aware  the  email  was  deleted  as 
she  had  set  a  "read  receipt"  on  the  email  prior  to  sending.  Respondent's  deletion  of  an 

21

email  from  his  immediate  administrator  without  reading  it  was  an  act  of 
insubordination. 

83. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  email 
referenced  in  Charge  31  was  sent  to  Respondent  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  However,  it  was 
not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  received  the  email  or  that  he  was 
responsible  for  the  email  being  deleted.  Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  deletion  of  the  email  was  an  act  of  insubordination. 

84. 

In  Charge  32  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  February  11,  2014,  Respondent  deleted  an  email  sent  to  him  by  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  regarding  "Adult  Transition  Info  Request."  Again,  Ms. 
Adkins-Barlow  had  set  a  "read  receipt"  in  order  to  determine  if  Respondent 
was  opening  her  emails.  Respondent's  failure  to  read  and  instead  to  delete  the 
email  from  his  immediate  administrator  without  reading  it  is  an  act  of 
insubordination. 

85. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  email 
referenced  in  Charge  32  was  sent  to  Respondent  by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  However,  it  was 
not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  he  received  the  email  or  that  he  was 
responsible  for  the  email  being  deleted.  Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  deletion  of  the  email  was  an  act  of  insubordination 

86. 

In  Charge  33  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  February  12,  2014,  Respondent  was  provided  a  memo  by  Acting  Principal 
Ms.  Adkins-Barlow.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  requested  to  meet  with  Respondent 
to  discuss  his  PPAS  interim  review.  Respondent  was  provided  with  several 
choices,  and  was  informed  the  interim  conference  would  take  approximately 
30  minutes.  On  this  day,  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  stopped  by  Compton  Adult 
School  at  approximately  9:00  a.m.  to  present  Respondent  with  the  memo. 
Respondent  was  not  present,  and  had  not  arrived.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  left  the 
memo  on  Respondent's  desk.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  asked  class  staff  to  have 
Respondent  call  the  office  upon  arrival.  Upon  inquiry  of  the  attendance  clerk 
by  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow,  Respondent  had  not  called  by  2:30  p.m.  Ms.  Adkins- 
Barlow  noticed  that  Progress  reports  envelope  had  not  been  opened  for 
corrections  and  distribution  to  students’  families,  from  the  previous  week's 
review.  In  addition,  according  to  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow's  visitation  records, 
Respondent  informed  her  on  February  21,  2014,  that  he  would  not  be  able  to 
meet  with  Ms,  Adkins-Barlow  regarding  his  Interim  PPAS  due  to  family 
problems.  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow  subsequently  mailed  him  his  unsatisfactory 
evaluation  stating  that  his  performance  plan  remains  in  effect. 

22

  

87. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  alleged  in  Charge  33  of 
the  Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  However,  it  was  not  established 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  was  not  on  the  campus  at  9:00 
a.m.  or  that  he  received  Ms.  Adkins-Barlow’s  message  and  understood  the  message  to 
mean  that  he  was  to  contact  her. 

88. 

In  Charge  34  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  March  14,  2014,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  and 
Unprofessional  Conduct  was  issued  to  Respondent  by  Cuauhtemoc  Avila, 
Ed.D.,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Educational  Programs  dated  March  14,  2014. 

89. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  of  Charge  34  of  the  Accusation 

by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

90. 

In  Charge  35  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  Wednesday,  March  19,  2014,  Respondent  left  school  around  10:30  a.m. 
and  never  returned  to  his  classroom  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  On  Friday  morning, 
March  21,  2014,  Principal  Mr.  Donat  met  with  Respondent  at  Compton  Adult 
School  in  his  classroom  regarding  this  matter  and  he  stated  that  he  did  leave 
school  at  10:30  a.m.  and  went  to  drop  off  some  papers  at  two  different  sites 
within  the  PAU,  and  he  stated  he  returned  about  noon  on  the  same  day.  His 
special  education  classroom  students  had  been  left  in  the  supervision  of  his 
paraeducators  for  2.5  hours  and  did  not  receive  services  by  a  teacher.  This 
conduct  led  to  a  letter  of  reprimand  dated  March  26,  2014,  by  Principal  Neil 
Donat. 

91. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

left  the  school  between  10:30  and  11:00  a.m.  to  deliver  papers  to  different  sites  within  the 
PAU  and  returned  between  noon  and  1:00  p.m.  The  students  were  left  in  the  care  of  the 
paraeducators  during  that  time.  Mr.  Donat  issued  Respondent  a  reprimand  dated  March  26, 
2014  as  a  result. 

92. 

In  Charge  36  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  Thursday,  March  20,  2014,  Respondent  arrived  twenty  minutes  late  to  the 
Avalon  PAU  staff  meeting,  and  mentioned  to  the  Regional  Director,  Pamela 
Branch,  who  was  in  attendance  that  he  always  comes  late.  The  meeting  started 
on  time  at  3:00  p.m.  When  Respondent  arrived,  Respondent  crossed  in,  front 
while  Mr.  Donat  was  addressing  staff.  Respondent  sat  with  another  teacher, 
and  engaged  in  side-bar  conversation  that  was  disruptive  to  the  meeting.  This 
behavior  led  to  a  letter  of  reprimand  dated  April  14,  2014  issued  to 
Respondent  by  Neil  Donat,  Principal. 

23

93. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
was  twenty  minutes  or  less  late  to  the  Avalon  PAU  staff  meeting  which  had  a  scheduled  start 
time  of  3:00  p.m.  Respondent  walked  behind  Mr.  Donat.  However,  a  colleague  that  arrived 
at  the  same  time  and  Dr.  Banks,  did  cross  in  front  of  Mr.  Donat  and  were  distractions  to  Mr. 
Donat.  Respondent  did  not  engage  in  a  side-bar  conversation  with  another  teacher  or  disrupt 
the  meeting.  Instead,  he  did  ask  the  person  seated  next  to  him  where  the  speaker  was  in  the 
agenda.  Mr.  Donat  issued  Respondent a  letter  of  reprimand  dated  April  14,  2014  based  upon 
the  tardiness  and  the  alleged  disruption. 

94. 

In  Charge  37  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  Wednesday,  April  2,  2014,  at  9:10  a.m.,  Mr.  Donat  stopped  by  to  visit 
Respondent's  classroom  and  did  not  see  him  in  the  room.  Mr.  Donat  asked  his 
classroom  paraeducator  where  Respondent  was  and  the  response  from  him  was 
that  he  had  left  to  go  to  the  PAU  office.  Mr.  Donat  drove  back  to  the  PAU  and 
Respondent  was  not  in  the  office. 

Mr.  Donat  drove  back  to  Respondent's  school  at  9:35  a.m.  and  Respondent 
was  not  in  his  room.  Mr.  Donat  called  the  PAU  office  and  Respondent  had  not 
arrived,  meaning  Respondent  was  not  at  either  the  PAU  office  or  his  site.  Mr. 
Donat  also  noticed  Respondent's  car  was  not  in  the  school  parking  lot. 
Donat  waited  at  Respondent's  school  until  10:00  a.m.  and  received  a  call  from 
the  office  telling  him  that  Respondent  arrived  at  the  PAU.  Mr.  Donat  drove 
back  to  the  school  and  Respondent's  excuse  was  he  needed  to  use a  printer  in 
the  PAU  office  because  he  did  not  have a  printer  in  his  room  and  his 
explanation  in  the  lapse  of  time  from  when  he  left  his  site  and  arrived  at  the 
PAU  was  that  he  was  in  the  restroom  at  his  school.  His  special  education 
students  did  not  receive  services  for  more  than  2.5  hours.  This  behavior  led  to 
a  letter  of  reprimand  dated  April  14,  2014  issued  to  Respondent  by  Neil  Donat, 
Principal. 

Mr. 

95. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  on  April  2, 

2014,  at  9:10  a.m.,  Mr.  Donat  stopped  by  to  visit  Respondent's  classroom  and  did  not  see  him 
in  the  room.  Mr.  Donat  interrogated  each  of  the  paraeducators  separately  about  Respondent’s 
whereabouts,  and  learned  that  Respondent  had  gone  to  the  PAU  office.  The  paraeducators 
were  upset  and  intimidated  by  Mr.  Donat’s  interrogation  and  agitated  behavior.  Mr.  Donat 
drove  back  to  the  PAU  office  and  did  not  see  Respondent  in  the  office.  It  was  also 
established  that  Mr.  Donat  drove  back  to  Compton  adult  school  at  9:35  a.m.  and  did  not  see 
the  car  that  he  believed  Respondent  would  be  driving  in  the  parking  lot.  At  that  time, 
Respondent  owned  three  automobiles.  Mr.  Donat  was  looking  for  a  white  jaguar  which  he 
believed  that  Respondent  would  be  driving  that  day.  Instead,  Respondent  was  driving  his 
usual  automobile,  which  was a  silver  Mercedes-Benz.  It  was  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  car  was  not  in  the  parking  lot  at  9:10  a.m. 
Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  went  to  the  restroom  at  the  school  before  driving  to  the 
PAU  office  to  print  materials  for  his  class.  At  10:00  a.m.,  the  PAU  office  staff  called  Mr. 

24

Donat  to  advise  him  that  Respondent  was  in  the  PAU  office.  Mr.  Donat  was  focused  on 
catching  Respondent  in  a  lie  and  for  that  reason  did  not  call  Respondent’s  cellphone  to 
ascertain  his  location  and  instead  drove  back  and  forth  between  the  two  locations. 

96. 

In  Charge  38  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  April  10,  2014,  Mr.  Donat  arrived  at  Respondent's  assigned  school, 
Compton  Adult  School  at  7:45  a.m.  Between  7:50  a.m.  and  8:00  a.m.  the 
student  bus  arrived  and  the  students  entered  Respondent's  assigned  classroom 
where  Respondent  was  not  present  and  there  was  no  Certificated  Staff 
Member  present.  Mr.  Donat  stayed  with  the  students  until  8:20  a.m.  when  Mr. 
Donat  observed  Respondent  driving  into  the  school  parking  lot.  Respondent 
stayed  in  his  car  for  five  minutes  until  8:25  a.m.  and  he  arrived  in  his 
classroom  at  8:30  a.m.  Respondent  made  the  dishonest  comment  that  he  just 
came  back  from  the  restroom  with  one  of  the  students.  This  behavior  led  to  a 
letter  of  reprimand  dated  Apri]  14,  2014  issued  to  Respondent  by  Neil  Donat, 
Principal,  as  his  special  education  students  did  not  receive  services  for  at  least 
45  minutes. 

97. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
was  late  on  April  10,  2014,  arriving  on  campus  sometime  between  8:25.m.  and  8:30  a.m.  and 
arriving  at  his  classroom  between  8:25  a.m.  and  8:30  a.m.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that 
he  toid  Mr.  Donat  that  he  had  stopped  at  the  restroom,  but  never  said  that  he  had  taken  a 
student  to  the  restroom.  Complainant  also  established  that  the  students  were  in  the  care  of 
the  paraeducators.  Respondent  called  the  PAU  office  and  advised  the  secretary  that  he 
would  be  late. 
made  any  dishonest  comments  although  he  did  tell  Mr.  Donat  that  he  had  just  come  from  the 
restroom, 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

98. 

[In  Charge  39  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  Wednesday,  April  30,  2014,  at  10:15  a.m.  Mr.  Donat  stopped  by  to  visit 
Respondent's  classroom  and  did  not  see  him  in  the  room.  Mr.  Donat  asked  his 
classroom  paraeducators  and  the  response  was  Respondent  had  left  for  a 
doctor's  appointment  for  his  arm. 

The  classroom  did  not  have  a  certificated  staff  member  in  the  room,  Mr.  Donat 
went  next  door  and  asked  the  other  Special  Education  Teacher  if  Respondent 
had  asked  her  to  cover  his  room  and  her  response  was  that  Respondent  had  not 
asked  her  to  cover  his  room. 

When  Mr.  Donat  returned  to  the  PAU  office  at  about  noon,  the  Assistant 
Principal,  Joe  Mahabir,  told  Mr.  Donat  that  Respondent  had  called  at  about 
11:45  a.m.,  saying  he  was  at  the  doctor's  office.  The  Assistant  Principal  also 
stated  that  he  had  directed  Respondent  to  bring  in  a  doctor's  note  before  he 

25

returned  to  his  classroom.  At  about  12:55  p.m.  Mr.  Donat  drove  back  to  his 
school,  and  noticed  Respondent's  car  was  in  the  parking  lot.  He  did  not  show 
up  at  the  PAU  office  until  4:00  p.m.  His  students  did  not  receive  services  for  at 
Jeast  2  hours  and  45  minutes.  This  behavior  led  to  a  letter  of  reprimand  issued 
on  May  7,  2014  by  Neil  Donat,  Principal. 

99. 

Complainant  established  the  factual  allegations  in  Charge  39  of  the  Accusation 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  except  that  it  was  not  established  that  Mr.  Mahabir  asked 
Respondent  to  bring  a  doctor’s  note  to  the  office  before  returning  to  class.  Respondent 
credibly  testified  at  hearing  that  he  went  straight  to  class  after  the  medical  appointment,  then 
delivered  the  doctor’s  note  to  the  office  at  4:00  p.m.  after  completing  his  work  day. 
Respondent  also  credibly  testified  that  he  was  not  instructed  to  deliver  the  doctor’s  note 
before  going  back  to  work.  His  testimony  was  not  contradicted  in  this  regard. 

100. 

In  Charge  40  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges: 

On  Monday,  May  5,  2014,  Mr.  Donat  arrived  to  Respondent's  classroom. 
Respondent  asked  why  he  was  not  registered  to  attend  an  English  Learner 
Training  that  other  teachers  were  attending.  Mr.  Donat  informed  him  the  error 
was  clerical,  and  advised  him  that  the  same  training  would  take  place  on 
Tuesday,  May  6,  2014.  Mr.  Donat  permitted  him  to  attend  the  May  6,  2014 
training.  Respondent  attended  the  English  Learner  Training  at  the  Head  Start 
Building,  10100  Pioneer  Blvd.,  Santa  Fe  Springs,  CA  90607. 

Mr.  Donat  was  informed  by  the  administrator  overseeing  the  training  on  May 
6,  2014  that  Respondent  left  the  training  stating  he  was  going  to  a  doctor's 
appointment.  Respondent  did  not  sign  in  for  the  afternoon  portion  of  the 
training.  Mr.  Donat  contacted  the  Worker's  Compensation  Department. 
Respondent  did  not  have  a  Worker's  Compensation  related  doctor's 
appointment,  nor  did  Respondent  return  to  the  site.  However,  a  Worker's 
Compensation  appointment  was  scheduled  in  advance  on  April  7,  2014  for 
May  5,  2014,  and  Respondent  was  a  "NO  SHOW"  to  this  appointment 
according  to  the  Worker's  Compensation  Department.  This  behavior  led  to  a 
letter  of  reprimand  issued  on  May  7,  2014  by  Neil  Donat,  Principal. 

101. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

had  been  told  that  he  would  be  scheduled  to  attend  an  ELD  training  on  May  5,  2014,  but 
found  out  at  the  Jast  minute  that  due  to  an  administrative  error  he  was  not  registered.  He 
contacted  a  colleague  that  was  in  attendance  at  the  training  to  inquire  if  the  training  was  full. 
Respondent  learned  from  his  colleague  that  there  was  space  available  and  the  trainer  would 
allow  him  to  attend.  When  Mr.  Donat  came  to  Respondent’s  class,  Respondent  asked  him  if 
he  could  attend  the  training.  Mr.  Donat  promised  to  check  to  see  if  Respondent  could  attend. 
Late  in  the  day,  Mr.  Donat  advised  him  that  he  could  not  attend  on  May  5,  2014,  but  that 
Respondent  would  be  scheduled  for  the  following  day  and  would  attend  in  the  space  that  had 
been  reserved  for  Mr.  Donat.  At  that  time,  Respondent  advised  Mr.  Donat  that  he  had  an 

26 

   

appointment  in  the  afternoon  and  would  not  be  able  to  attend  for  the  entire  day.  Mr.  Donat 
then  told  Respondent  that  he  could  “just  leave”  if  he  had  to  in  the  afternoon.  Respondent 
was  suspicious  of  Mr.  Donat’s  instruction.  When  he  attended  the  training  the  following  day, 
he  spoke  to  the  trainer  during  the  break  and  advised  her  that  he  would  need  to  leave  in  the 
afternoon.  The  trainer  advised  Respondent  that  he  could  receive  credit  for  the  training  if  he 
took  the  second  half  of  the  training  when  it  was  next  offered.  Mr.  Donat  checked  with  the 
trainer  to  see  if  Respondent  had  attended  the  training.  Mr.  Donat  verified  that  Respondent 
had  not  attended  the  afternoon  portion  of  the  training  and  had  informed  the  trainer  he  had  an 
appointment.  Mr.  Donat  assumed  that  the  appointment  involved  Respondent’s  ongoing 
worker’s  compensation  matter,  but  it  did  not.  Claimant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  was  dishonest  about  having  to  attend  a  medical  appointment 
in  the  afternoon. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant  section 

44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivisions  (d)(1)-(3),  when  a  school  board 

recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise, 
when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension. 
The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an 
alternative  sanction. 

3. 

LACOE  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee. 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039.)  The  “preponderance  of  the  evidence”  standard  requires  the 
trier  of  fact  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (Jn 
re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63  Cal.App.4th  700,709.) 

The  standard  of  proof  is 

4, 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  set  forth  specifically  which 
(1) 

of  LACOE’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  four  alleged  grounds  for  dismissal: 
unprofessional  conduct,  (2)  immoral  conduct,  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  (4) 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district. 

5. 

Section  44932,  as  amended,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  |  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
following  causes: 

(1) 

—_‘ Immora!  conduct,  including  but  not  limited  to,  egregious 

27 

 

misconduct... 

(2) 

Unprofessional  conduct. 

Dishonesty 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

lS 

(4) 

(5) 

(7) 

.[f].. 

_  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  of 
or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing 
him  or  her. 

6. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision(a)(2), 
as  amended,  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a 
profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good 
standing.  (Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553;  Perez  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174.) 

8. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6),  as  amended,  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness 
be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(/d.  at  p.  1444.) 

9. 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  as  amended,  the  violation  of 

school  rules  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous 
insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman 
(1972)  28  Cal.App.  3d  77,  84.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of 
school  rules.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

28

Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

10. 

With  respect  to  determination  of  witness  credibility: 

On  the  cold  record  a 

witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached,  uncontradicted  --  but  on a  face  to  face 
evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his  credibility  factor  nil.  Another  witness  may 
fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict  himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written 
transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who  sees,  hears  and  observes  him  may  be 
convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.  (Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17 
Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and 
reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke 
Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony 
of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of 
testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth 
out  of  selected  material.”  (7d.  at  pp.  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161 
Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an 
expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875, 
890.) 

11. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral.  It  was  not  established  that 
Respondent’s  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency, 
depravity,  dissoluteness;  nor  that  he  displayed  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct 
showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  or  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  The  Commission 
determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7-101  and 
Legal  Conclusions  3,  5,  6  and  10. 

12. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of 

the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional.  Respondent’s  delegation  of  his 
email  to  paraeducators  and  his  failure  to  be  in  his  class  providing  instruction  throughout  the 
class  day  were  unprofessional.  The  conduct  over  a  substantial  period  of  time  constituted 
conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing  pursuant  to  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(2).  While  Respondent’s  classroom  instruction  may  not  have  reflected 
best  practices,  it  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of  constituting  unprofessional  conduct.  (Factual 
Findings  25,  29,  63,  65,  75,  87,  91,  93,  95  and  97  and  Legal  Conclusions  3,  5,  7  and  10  .) 

13. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  has  a 
defect  in  his  temperament  or  a  fixed  character  trait  that  makes  him  unfit  to  teach.  The 
Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  for  the  reasons  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  7-101  and  Legal  Conclusions  3,  5,  8  and  10. 

29

14. 

The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent 
for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  of  the  state  or  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by 
the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in 
Factual  Findings  7-101  and  Legal  Conclusions  3,  5,  9  and  10. 

15. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are 

established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident  unfitness 
renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal. 
3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d 
208;  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.  4th  at  pp.  1444-1445.)  Under  the  facts  of  the  Morrison 
case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may 
consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the 
existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
(6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 
discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher. 

16. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the  Commission  has  broad 

discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine 
whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as 
measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana,  supra,  45 
Cal.  3d.  at  220.)  The  Morrison  factors  are  analyzed  with  Respondent  to  Respondent’s 
conduct  as  follows: 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  The  conduct  adversely  affected  teachers  to  a  mild 
degree  when  they  were  called  upon  to  “keep  an  eye”  on  Respondent’s  students  when  he  was 
not  where  he  should  be.  The  conduct  also  placed  an  undue  burden  on  the  paraeducators  to 
assume  total  responsibility  for  the  class  during  his  absences.  The  students  were  adversely 
affected  by  Respondent’s  conduct  when  he  was  not  in  the  classroom  because  they  did  not 
receive  the  services  of  a  credentialed  teacher  to  which  they  were  entitled. 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The  conduct  was 
proximate  in  time. 

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher.  Respondent  held  a 
special  education  credential  which  was  the  appropriate  credential. 

(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct.  There  were  no  extenuating  or  aggravating 
circumstances. 

30

  

(e€)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct.  Respondent’s  motives  were  neither  praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy. 

(f)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  The 
Commission  found  that  the  conduct  is  unlikely  to  recur  and  specifically  found  that 
Respondent  responds  to  specific  unequivocal  direction  to  change  his  conduct. 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling 
effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on  constitutional  rights 
was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination  of  Respondent  from  LACOE. 

17. 

Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  discipline  is  warranted.  (Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at 
pp.  220-222.)  A  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may  require  a 
sensitive  evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it  warrants 
the  grave  sanction  of  dismissal.  (Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  Cal.  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327, 
343-344.) 

18. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  instances  of  unprofessional  conduct, 

although  constituting  cause  for  dismissal  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2),  were 
insufficient,  separately  and  in  the  aggregate,  to  warrant  dismissal  or  to  demonstrate  that 
respondent  is  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher.  The  Commission  members  agree  unanimously.  The 
Commission  does  not  believe  that  dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect  students,  school 
employees,  or  others  or  to  further  deter  Respondent  from  engaging  in  similar  conduct  in  the 
future.  The  Commission  found  that  Respondent’s  practice  of  leaving  his  students  with 
paraeducatiors  while  he  handled  matters  at  the  PAU  office  or  other  school  related  business 
without  a  substitute  teacher  or  other  certificated  staff  present  to  be  disturbing  whether  or  not 
it  complied  with  common  practice  at  LACOE  and  regardless  of  what  other  responsibilities 
Respondent  may  have  had  for  LACOE.  Had  the  Commission  the  discretion  to  impose  a 
suspension  upon  Respondent  for  this  conduct,  it  would  have  chosen  to  do  so.  However, 
imposition  of  a  suspension  is  not  an  option  available  to  the  Commission  here.  Accordingly, 
all  evidence  having  been  considered,  the  Commission  found  that  Respondent  is  fit  to  teach 
and  is  a  capable  teacher  serving  a  difficult  population  of  students  and  should  not  be 
dismissed. 

if 

if 

if 

it 

if 

31

ORDER 

     

cerfaficated  employee  of  the  Leg  An  eles 

\ 

i 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Danny  Washington  nel 

not  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanept 
County  Office  of  Education. 

Dated:  July 

/ 

,  2015 

Dated:  July 

,  2015 

7 

Dated:  July 

,  2015 

Debbie  Frame 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Kelly  J.  Glusovich 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

32

*  @7/22/2015 

18:38 

818--558-3939 

FEDEX  OFFICE 

8236 

PAGE 

83 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Danny  Washington  shall 
not  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles 
County  Office  of  Education. 

Dated:  July 

,  2015 

Dated:  July,  2015 

Dated:  July_2  ©,  2015 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Debbie  Frame 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

ich 

Kell 
M 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

32 

 

  
  

suspension  upon  Respondent  for  this  conduct,  it  would  have  chosen  to  do  so.  However, 
imposition  of  a  suspension  is  not  an  option  available  to  the  Commission  here.  Accordingly, 
all  evidence  having  been  considered,  the  Commission  found  that  Respondent  is  fit  to  teach 
and  is  a  capable  teacher  serving  a  difficult  population  of  students  and  should  not  be 
dismissed. 

Hf 

if 

if 

if 

i 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Danny  Washington  shall 

not  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles 
County  Office  of  Education. 

Dated:  July 

,  2015 

Dated:  July 

| 

»  2015 

° 

. 

Dated:  July 

,  2015 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

orn 

Debbie  Frame 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

nN 

Kelly  J.  Glusovich 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

34 

   

  

