BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2014030541 

DANA  KOON 

Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

  

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  April  24,  25,  28,  and  29,  2014.  The 
Commission  consists  of  the  following  members:  Luciano  Ortiz,  Teachert;  Maria 
Granado,  Assistant  Principal;  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Michelle 

Meek,  Esq.,  of  Liebert  Cassidy  Whitmore,  Attorneys  at  Law.  Respondent  Dana  Koon 
(Respondent)  was  present  and  was  represented  by  Rosemary  O.  Ward,  Esq.,  of  Law 
Offices  of  Rosemary  Ward  and  Richard  J.  Schwab,  Esq.,  of  Trygstadt,  Schwab  & 
Trygstadt,  Attorneys  at  Law. 

Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  Oral  and 

documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in 
executive  session.  After  due  consideration  of  the  record,  the  Commission  makes  the 
following  factual  findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by 

Justo  H.  Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the 
District. 

2. 

On  February  18,  2014,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the 

District’s  intention  to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent 
submitted  a  timely  demand  for  a  hearing. 

   
  

3. 

The  First  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  is  dated  April 

11,  2014,  and  recommended  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  the  District  for  the 
following  legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1) 
‘unprofessional  conduct;  (2)  immoral  conduct;  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service;  and  (4) 
persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  Respondent. 

4, 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties 

and  jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

5. 

District  contends  that  Respondent  is  subject  to  dismissal  based  upon 
allegations  that  he  hit,  kicked,  and  pulled  the  hair  of  Student  HJM.,  grabbed  and 
dragged  Student  JAEL.,  called  students  “stupid”  and  “dumb”  and  told  them  to  “shut 
up”  during  the  period  of  February  18,  2010  through  October  of  2012. 

6. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  never  called  students  “stupid”  or  “dumb” 

and  did  not  tell  them  to  “shut  up.”  Instead,  he  asserts  that  the  word  “stupid”  was 
discussed  in  class  relative  to  its  inclusion  in  a  story  in  the  language  arts  materials  in  the 
District’s  required  curriculum.  Respondent  acknowledged  that  he  removed  a  student 
from  a  music  practice  for  his  own  safety,  and  that  of  the  students  around  him,  and  that 
the  student  “went  limp”  purposely  during  the  process.  Respondent  denied  ever  hitting 
any  student,  pulling  the  hair  of  any  student,  kicking  any  student,  calling  any  students 
“stupid”  or  “dumb,”  or  telling  them  to  “shut  up”  or  write  “stupid”  on  a  piece  of  paper 
and  hold  it  over  their  heads. 

Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  is  Navy  veteran  and  served  in  Vietnam.  After  completing 

his  military  service,  Claimant  worked  as  a  patient’s  representative  with  Orthopedic 
Hospital  of  Los  Angeles  and  Children’s  Hospital  for  a  combined  total  of  15  years  before 
joining  the  District  as  a  teacher.  Respondent  first  began  teaching  approximately  20 
years  ago  on  an  emergency  credential.  Respondent  has  a  multiple  subject  teaching 
credential,  a  Cross-Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  Credential  (CLAD), 
and  a  level  B  certification  in  Spanish  from  the  District.  Respondent  had  a  brief  break 
from  District  service  while  he  worked  as  a  computer  graphics  artist  for  one  year. 
Respondent  taught  at  Raymond  Avenue  Elementary  School,  Middleton  Elementary 
School,  Mariposa  Avenue  Elementary  School,  Santa  Monica  Elementary  School,  Santa 
Monica  Charter  Elementary  School  and  for  his  last  five  years  at  Glen  Feliz  Elementary 
School  (GlenFeliz).  Respondent  was  a  second  grade  teacher  at  GlenFeliz  teaching  a 
general  education  class  during  all  relevant  time  periods.

2009-2010  School  Year’ 

8. 

ER  M.,  a  second  grade  student  in  Respondent’s  2009-2010  class,  was  a 
challenging  child  with  severe  behavior  problems  which  included  hitting  others,  kicking 
others,  pulling  the  hair  of  other  children,  urinating  on  others,  and  generally  being 
disruptive. 
discussions  about  HiJM.’s  challenging  behaviors  and  strategies  to  deal  with  his 
behaviors. 

Principal  Karen  Sulahian  (Ms.  Sulahian)  and  Respondent  had  frequent 

9. 

MEA.  was  also  a  student  in  Respondent’s  2009-2010  second  grade 

class.  He  testified  that  he  had  been  bullied  by 
interceded  to  protect  him  from  Ef§jM.’s  repeated  assaults.  M 
testified  that  he  never  saw  Respondent  hit,  kick,  or  pull  E 
heard  Respondent  call  anyone  “stupid”  or  “dumb.” 
testified  that  she  was  satisfied  with  Respondent’s  attempts  to  handle  the  situations  and 
Matthew’s  tremendous  academic  growth  in  Respondent’s  class.  LiR.  occasionally 
volunteered  in  Respondent’s  classroom  and  during  those  times  never  saw  Respondent 
behave  inappropriately. 

.  and  that  Respondent  had 
   
R.  credibly 
*s  hair.  He  also  never 

R.’s  mother,  LR... 

10. 

Conversely, DER.  also  a  second  grade  student  in  Respondent’s  2009- 

2010  class,  testified  that  Respondent  “hit”  EM.  twice  during  the  time  period  of 
R.  was  credible 
February  18,  2010  to  the  end  of  the  school  year  in  June  of  2010. 
in  his  testimony,  both  in  terms  of  his  demeanor,  which  was  open  and  straightforward, 
and  in  terms  of  the  consistency  of  his  statements.  DER.  did  not  describe  the 
Initially,  DER.  also  testified  that 
circumstances  or  details  of  the  incident(s). 
Respondent  kicked  HEM.  and  pulled  EJM.’s  hair.  However,  cross-examination  of 
R.  revealed  that  he  had  not  actually  seen  Respondent  kick  EME.  or  pull  Ei 
D 
M.’s  hair.  Instead,  he  “knew”  these  things  happened  because  he  had  heard  that  they  had 
occurred  from  his  classmates.  When  asked  about  details,  DIEEER.  readily 
acknowledged  that  his  knowledge  of  the  hair  pulling  and  kicking  was  hearsay.  It  was 
R.  had  no  bias  or  personal  agenda  in  giving  testimony.  He  had  never 
clear  that 
volunteered  information  about  Respondent  and  only  reluctantly  responded  to  the 
R.  credibly  testified  that  he  and  his  friends  generally 
questions  posed  by  counsel. 
tried  not  to  get  on  Respondent’s  “bad  side”  and  were  not  usually  in  any  trouble  in  class. 

    

filing  of  the  Notice  of  Dismiss  by  operation  of  Education  Code  section  44944. 
Accordingly,  Complainant’s  case  was  limited  to  the  time  period  commencing 
February  18,  2010. 

classroom  because  he  hit  other  students,  kicked  them,  and  pulled  their  hair. DEER.’s 
testimony  persuasively  established  that  there  was  some  type  of  physical  contact  between 

R.  also  testified  that  E[M.  was  a  source  of  distraction  and  disturbance  in  the 

'  Complainant  was  limited  to  allegations  of  conduct  within  four  years  of  the 

.  and  Respondent,  but  did  not  establish  the  character  or  context  of  the  contact. 

    
       

 

  

  

11. 

During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  GlenFeliz  teachers  used 

The  goal  of  “reflection”  was  for  a 
behavior/discipline  strategy  known  as  “reflection.” 
misbehaving  student  to  have  time  and  tools  to  reflect  upon  his  behavior.  The  exercise 
required  an  offender  to  write  or  draw a  picture  of  his  inappropriate  behavior  and  then 
summarize  how  he  could  make  a  better  choice  the  next  time.  According  to  HR.  in 
the  context  of  this  learning  strategy,  Respondent  told  DER.  and  one  of  his  classmates 
papers  and  hold  it  over  their  heads.  DER. 
that  they  should  write  a  big  “S”  on  their 
R.,  like  many  second  graders,  considered 
understood  the  “S”  to  mean  “stupid.”  D 
  
“stupid”  to  be  a  very  bad  word.  Although  DIR.  recalled  Respondent  instructing  the 
two  students  to  write  an  “S”  on  their  papers  and  hold  it  over  their  heads,  they  did  not  do 
so,  and  were  not  disciplined  for  refusing  to  do  so.  There  was  no  evidence  that 
Respondent  specifically  called  a  student  or  students  “stupid”  or  “dumb.” 

12. 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  once  spontaneously  called  an  inanimate 

object  “stupid”  in  his  classroom  in  frustration.  He  also  admitted  that  the  word  “stupid” 
was  discussed  at  length  in  his  classroom  because  it  was  contained  within  the  story 
“Matthew  and  Tilly”  in  the  District  mandated  Open  Court  curriculum  that  was  used  in 
second  grade  during  the  2009-2010  school  year.  Respondent  spent  considerable  time 
discussing  the  meaning  of  the  word  “stupid”  with  his  class.  He  also  discussed  with  them 
that  in  some  cultures  the  word  is  especially  derogatory  and  demeaning.  Respondent 
speaks  Spanish  and  explained  to  his  students  that  the  word  “stupid”  when  translated  into 
Spanish  is  very  demeaning  and  should  not  be  used  to  describe  a  person.  He  also 
discussed  the  differences  between  the  concepts  of  “stupid”  and  “not  stupid.” 

13. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  dislike  HM.  Instead,  he  asserted 
.  encouraging  him  to  focus  and  complete 

that  he  spent  extra  individual  time  with 
story  boards  in  an  effort  to  develop 
used  plastic  boxes  with  themed  toys  to  encourage 
He  assisted  Hi  M.  by  taking  dictation  of  narratives  EM.  gave  for  pictures  he  drew 
based  upon  the  toys  and  prompts  contained  in  the  plastic  boxes. 

skills.  To  do  this,  Respondent 
M.  to  develop  language  skills. 

.s  language 

14. 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  EM  M.  hid  in  a  classroom  closet  once. 

He  was  found  there  ransacking 
Respondent  denied  placing 
that  Respondent  ever  placed  or  caused  ERIM  to  be  in a  closet  or  cabinet. 

the  lunches  and  backpacks  of  other  students. 

M.  in  a  closet  or  cabinet.  Complainant  did  not  establish 

15. 

Respondent  denied  ever  hitting  EM.  or  any  other  child.  It  is  difficult 
to  reconcile  Respondent’s  outright  denial  with  DJR.’s  credible  testimony.  However, 
the  lack  of  detail  in  DEFs  testimony,  and  the  lack  of  corroboration,  leaves  open  the 
possibility  of  different  perceptions  of  the  same  events.  The  Commission  determined  that 
it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  some  type 
of  physical  contact  with  HM.  which 
conduct  was  distressing  to  Di 

R.  interpreted  to  be  a  “hit”  and  that  the 

R. 

f/ 

 

  

  

2010-2011  School  Year 

16. 

During  the  2010-2011  school  year, 
Respondent’s  second  grade  class  at  GlenFeliz.  J 
had  severe  behavior  issues  including  hitting  others,  kicking  others,  being  disruptive, 
running  away  from  class,  and  not  being  where  he  was  supposed  to  be. 

was  a  challenging  student  who 

.  was  a  Student  in 

17. 

Onsome  days  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  Respondent  had  a 

teacher’s  assistant,  Marianne  Sahagun  (Sahagun),  who  accompanied  his  class  and  whose 
primary  responsibility  was  to  assist  with  Student  JHE  L.  for  thirty  minutes  per  day. 
Sahagun  had  been  trained  in  methods  to  restrain  JMB  L.  when  necessary.  In  brief, 
restraining  ys L.  was  sometimes  needed  when  he  attempted  to  run  away  from  class 
or  was  in  danger  of  hurting  himself  or  someone  else.  At  hearing,  Sahagun  demonstrated 
that  the  appropriate  restraint  was  from  behind  with  her  arms  around  his  waist  and  her 
head  held  to  the  side  to  avoid  being  head  butted  or  kicked.  Sahagun  never  saw 
Respondent  hit  or  kick  any  child  and  never  saw  him  do  or  say  anything  she  would 
consider  inappropriate.  She  praised  Respondent’s  work  on  the  GlenFeliz  Parent  Teacher 
Association  (PTA).  Sahagun  was  president  of  the  PTA  and  Respondent  served  as  the 
teacher  representative  to  the  PTA  for  several  years. 

18. 

|  When  Respondent  led  his  class  into  the  auditorium  on  December  8,  2010 

L.  placed  his  hands  over  his  ears  and  expressed  his 
for  a  music  rehearsal,  J 
reluctance  about  going  into  the  auditorium.  On  this  day,  Sahagun  was  not  with 
Respondent’s  class.  Respondent,  Ms.  Sahagun,  Ms.  Sulahian  and  other  staff  members 
were  also  aware  that  Joshua  L.  had  an  aversion  to  the  auditorium.  Nancy  Kim,  one  of 
mm  L.’s  prior  teachers,  testified  that  she  often  had  to  take  J  a.  by  the  hand  in 
order  to  get  him  into  the  auditorium.  Once  inside  the  auditorium,  Respondent’s  class 
lined  up  on  risers  in  front  of  the  school  stage.  Four  other  classes  of  second  graders  were 
also  present  in  the  stage  area. 

19. 

The  rehearsal  was  called  on  short  notice.  At  the  time,  music  teacher 

Melineh  Khachikian  (Ms.  Khachikian)  taught  music  at  four  elementary  schools 
including  GlenFeliz.  She  was  at  GlenFeliz  three  days  a  week  and  taught  various  grades. 
The  Christmas/holiday  programs  were  her  biggest  projects.  After  Ms.  Khachikian  gave 
L.  began  making  noises,  swaying  his  body, 
some  initial  instruction  to  the  group,  J 
sitting  down  on  the  risers,  and  bumping  into  other  students.  Ms.  Khachikian  warned 

_ 

L.  to  stand  up.  He  refused  to  do  so.  After  she  counted  to  five,  he  stood  up,  but 

began  making  different  noises.  Ms.  Khachikian  told  HEBBAL...  to  be  quiet  and 
threatened  to  “bench”  him  during  lunch  if  he  continued.  At  that  time,  Respondent  told 
Ms.  Khachikian  that  “benching  doesn’t  work  anymore”  because  that  was  no  longer  a 
strategy  used  by  the  school  to  deal  with  JENEEEL.’s  behaviors.  JIL.  continued  to 
be  disruptive,  but  Ms.  Khachikian  attempted  to  ignore  him,  turned  on  the  IPOD  which 
had  been  set  up  on  top  of  the  piano  in  front  of  the  stage,  and  began  the  lesson.  When  she 
turned  back  to  the  risers  and  stage  area  where  the  students  were  standing,  she  saw 
Respondent  holding 

mm  L.  by  the  wrists  and  dragging  him  on  the  floor. 

  

 

20. 

When  ai.  refused  to  follow  Ms.  Khachikian’s  directions, 

Respondent  became  concerned  that  his  behaviors  would  escalate.  Respondent  asked 

L.  to  come  down  from  the  risers,  grabbed  his  hands  and  wrists  and  helped  him  to 
descend  the  risers.  J  i.  purposely  went  limp  as  he  came  down  from  the  riser  area, 
requiring  Respondent  to  hold  on  to  him  to  keep  him  from  falling.  Respondent  drug  him 
for  a  brief  period  and  then  told  him  to  get  up  and  sit  in  a  chair  in  the  audience,  which  he 
did.  The  auditorium  had  two  doors,  one  leading  to  the  street  and  another  to  the  school 
aL.  would  run  from  the  auditorium  and  exit 
yard.  Respondent  had  concerns  that 
either  of  the  two  doors.  Respondent’s  concern  was  based  upon  past  experience  with 
JEAL..s  attempts  to  run  away.  Respondent  was  concerned  that  if  J MEL...  was  able 
to  get  out  of  the  auditorium,  he  would  lose  sight  of  him  and  he  might  become  lost  or 
injured.  Afterwards,  Respondent  discussed  the  incident  with  Ms.  Sulahian  and  J 
L.’s  mother. 

21. 

Ms.  Khachikian  considered  Respondent  to  be  a  good  teacher  and  his  class 

was  always  well  behaved.  She  was  concerned  about  the  interaction  between 
Respondent  and  a.  Ms.  Khachikian  was  very  conscientious  and  aware  of  her 
duties  to  report  anything  that  might  be  suspected  child  abuse.  She  believed  that  what 
she  observed  in  the  interaction  between  Respondent  and 
report  as  a  mandatory  reporter  of  suspected  child  abuse.  Therefore,  on  December  15, 
2010,  she  contacted  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  and  filed  a  Suspected  Child 
Abuse  Report  (SCAR).  She  did  not  contact  Ms.  Sulahian  or  anyone  with  the  District 
about  her  observations  and  wished  to  remain  anonymous. 

i.  triggered  her  duty  to 

22. 

After  the  filing  of  the  SCAR,  Ms.  Khachikian  and  JEL.  were  both 
interviewed  by  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  Officer  Ada  Chica  Estrella  (formerly 
Vazquez).  Respondent  was  not  interviewed.  According  to  Officer  Estrella’s  testimony 
at  hearing  and  as  memorialized  in  her  report,  7  L.  admitted  that  he  had 
intentionally  gone  limp  when  Respondent  attempted  to  remove  him  from  the  risers,  was 
not  hurt,  and  was  not  afraid  of  Respondent.  Additionally,  J§fL.’s  mother  reported  to 
Officer  Estrella  that  Respondent  had  advised  her  of  the  incident.  J[JL.’s  mother 
thought  Respondent  had  effectuated  some  positive  changes  in  JML.’s  behavior  and 
Officer  Estrella  concluded  that  there 
asked  that JM 
was  no  evidence  of  child  abuse  and  closed  the  case. 

remain  in  Respondent’s  class. 

23. 

Respondent  was  evaluated  by  Ms.  Sulahian  on  June  9,  2011. 
Respondent  received  a  rating  of  “meets  standards”  in  all  areas.  Ms.  Sulahian  also  made 
notation  of  his  perfect  attendance  and  volunteering  as  grade  level  chairperson.  Although 
Ms.  Sulahian  never  gave  Respondent  a  negative  Stull  evaluation,  she  did  express  some 
concerns  to  him  on  occasion  and  he  was  always  receptive  to  her  direction.  She 
expressed  concerns  to  him  about  the  lesson  focused  on  the  word  “stupid”  and  counseled 
him  informally  about  the  use  of  the  word  “stupid”  because  she  believed  the  second 
graders  were  overly  excited  about  the  word.  Respondent  felt  it  necessary  to  teach  the 
students  about  the  words  “stupid”  and  “dumb”  because  the  word  “stupid”  was  used  in 

  

 

the  lesson  and  the  students  had  questions  and  concerns.  She  also  reminded  him  that  he 
had  a  naturally  loud  voice  and  that  he  needed  to  be  mindful  of  the  volume  and  tone  he 
used  with  students.  Ms.  Sulahian  and  Respondent  had  frequent  conversations  about 
strategies  to  manage  the  problem  behaviors  of  Ho.  and  JEL.  Ms.  Sulahian 
always  found  Respondent  to be  engaged  and  receptive  to  her  direction.  Ms.  Sulahian  had 
no  serious  concerns  about  Respondent  and  considered  him  to  be  a  good  teacher  until  the 
allegations  which  form  the  basis  for  the  Amended  Accusation  came  to  her  attention. 

24. 

In  paragraph  1  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

Respondent  “pulled  student  HE M's  hair  on  one  or  more  occasions.”  The  Commission 
found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  pulled 
former  student’s  D 

M.’s  hair.  It  was  established  only  that  one  of  Respondent’s 
.,  believed  that  Respondent  pulled  EREEM.’s  hair. 

   

25. 

In  paragraph  2  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

M.  in  the  classroom  closet  and/or 

Respondent  “placed  and/or  locked  student  Ef 
wall  cabinet  on  one  or  more  occasions.”  The  Commission  found  that  Em  M.  was  in a 
cabinet  or  closet  on  at  least  one  occasion,  but  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 
preponderance  that  Respondent  had  caused  Em  M.  to  be  in  the  cabinet  or  closet. 
Respondent  credibly  testified  that  on  one  occasion  ERR M.  was  found  in  a  cabinet  or 
closet  where  other  students’  backpacks  were  kept.  At  the  time,  EM.  was 
ransacking  other  students’  backpacks  and  was  eating  snacks  and  lunches  from  the 
backpacks. 

26. 

In  paragraph  3  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

Respondent  “kicked  student Fm  M,  on  one  or  more  occasions.”  Complaint  failed  to 
establish  these  allegations  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  It  was  established  only 
that  Student  D 
friends  had  discussed  the  topic. 

R.  believed  that  Respondent  had  kicked  EMRE  M.  and  he  and  his 

7 

27. 

‘In  paragraph  4  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 
M.,  on  one  or  more  occasions.”  It  was  established  by  a 
Respondent  “hit  student  Ef 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  some  type  of  physical  contact 
with  HEM.  on  two  occasions  and  that  DR.  believed  the  physical  contact  was  a 
“hit.” 

28. 

In  paragraph  5  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

Respondent  “screamed  at  student 
Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  Respondent  screamed  at  F 

M.,  on  one  or  more  occasions.”  The 

29. 

In  paragraph  6  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

Respondent  “physically  and/or  verbally  abused  student  H..  on  one  or  more 
occasions.”  The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a

  
  

  

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Complainant  physically  or  verbally  abused  student 

M. 

30. 

In  paragraph  7  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

M.,  on  one  or  more 
Respondent  “mistreated  or  physically  abused  student 
occasions.”  The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Complainant  mistreated  or  physically  abused 
student  HM. 

31. 

In  paragraph  8  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

Respondent  “told  students  in  his  classroom  to  ‘shut  up’  and  called  students  in  his 
classroom  ‘stupid’.’’  The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Complainant  told  students  in  his  classroom  to 
“shut  up”  and/or  called  students  in  his  classroom  “stupid.” 

32. 

In  paragraph  9  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 
L. 

. 
“During  the  2010-2011  school  year,  [Respondent]  Koon  grabbed  Student 
by  the  hand  and/or  wrist,  and  dragged  him  across  the  school  auditorium.”  The 
Commission  determined  that  the 
Respondent  did  grab  Student 
period  of  time.  The  Commission  found  that  Respondent’s  concerns  were  reasonable, 
but  he  should  have  found  a  less  forceful  method  of  dealing  with  J§L.’s  behavior. 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that 

L.  by  the  wrists  and  did  drag  him  for  a  short 

33. 

In  paragraph  10  of  the  Amended  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that 

“During  the  2012-2013  school  year,  [Respondent]  Koon  told  students  in  his 
classroom  to  ‘shut  up’  and  called  students  in  his  classroom  ‘stupid.’  The  Commission 
found  that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  these  allegations  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence. 

34. 

Respondent’s  conduct  had  an  adverse  effect  on  Student DER.  who 

was  somewhat  fearful  of  Respondent  after  witnessing  his  behavior  with  FM. 
Respondent’s  conduct  also  had  an  adverse  effect  on  music  teacher  Ms.  Khachikian 
who  witnessed  his  attempts  to  manage  student  iL.  which  resulted  in 
being  dragged  across  the  floor  during  music  rehearsal.  Respondent’s  conduct  was 
remote  in  time  occurring  three  to  four  years  ago.  The  extenuating  circumstances  were 
that  Respondent  attempted  to  manage  severe  behaviors  exhibited  by  ERM.  and 
J 
conduct  was  neither  praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy.  There  were  no  constitutional 
implications  with  regard  to  Respondent’s  conduct. 

.,  but  was  not  provided  adequate  assistance  or  training.  Respondent’s 

aL. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant 

section  44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.)

  

  

    

2. 

Pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivisions  (c)(1)-(3),  when  a  school  board 

recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  it. 
Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or 
against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by 
imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction. 

3. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking 
to  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  standard  of 
proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  The  “preponderance  of  the  evidence” 
standard  requires  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  is  more 
probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (In  re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63  Cal.App.4th  700.) 

4. 

The  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  set  forth 

specifically  which  of  the  District’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  four 
alleged  grounds  for  dismissal: 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  (4)  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district. 

(1)  unprofessional  conduct,  (2)  immoral  conduct,  (3) 

5. 

Section  44932  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of 

(a) 
the  following  causes: 

=  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

(1) 
AT. 
(5) 
.[M... 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(7)  _  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 

of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

6. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

    

subdivision(a)(1),  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932, 

7. 

ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member 
of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41. 
Cal.2d  546,  553;  see  Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1983) 
149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174.) 

8. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason 
of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.) 
Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in 
temperament  which  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon 
receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.”  (Id.  at  p.  1444.) 

9, 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  of  school  rules 

must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.” 
(Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App. 
3d  317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.) 

10. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral.  It  was  not 
established  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  indicative  of 
corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  nor  that  he  displayed  willful,  flagrant, 
or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community  or  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss 
Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  for 
the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  8-34  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-6. 

11. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct.  It 
was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  engaged  in 
conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  teaching  profession.  Here,  Respondent 
made  some  sort  of  physical  contact  with 
that  he  saw  this  physical  contact  and  believed  that  Respondent  hit  HEM.  twice. 
Respondent  also  told DER.  that  he  should  write  a  big  “S”  on  his  paper  and  hold  it 
over  his  head.  These  facts  were  established  by  Df R.’s  credible  testimony. 

R.  gave  credible  testimony 

M. 

12. 

With  respect  to  determination  of  witness  credibility:  On  the  cold 

record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached,  uncontradicted  --  but  on 
a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his  credibility  factor  nil. 
Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict  himself,  and 

10

  

on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who  sees, 
hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability. 
(Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17  Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)  The  trier  of  fact  may 
“accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the 
latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d 
51,67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of 
selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161 
Cal.App.2d  762,  767.) 

13.  Additionally, 

it was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that 

Respondent  grabbed  a  by  the  wrists,  and  when  JIL.  went  purposely 
limp,  Respondent  was  left  holding  him  by  the  wrists  and  dragging  him  across  the 
floor.  Respondent’s  conduct  taken  in  the  aggregate  shows  the  use  of  more  force  than 
necessary  and  an  inappropriate  comment  to  D 
that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct,  as  defined  in  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  8-12,15-23,  27,  32-34 
and  Legal  Conclusions  1-5,  7  and  10.  However,  after  application  of  the  Morrison 
factors,  the  Commission  determined  that  cause  to  dismiss  Respondent  for 
unprofessional  conduct  does  not  exist  as  Respondent  is  not  unfit  to  teach. 

R.  The  Commission  determined 

14. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  It  was  not  established 
that  Respondent  has  a  defect  in  his  temperament  or  a  fixed  character  trait  that  makes 
him  unfit  to  teach.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss 
Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  8-34  and  Legal  Conclusions  1-5,  8 
and  10. 

15. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  that 

Respondent  violated  school  rules,  the  District  code  of  conduct,  the  Code  of  Ethics,  the 
Corporal  Punishment  policy,  or  any  other  directive,  policy,  law,  or  rule  set  by  the 
District  or  the  State  board  of  Education  on  a  persistent  basis.  The  Commission 
determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the 
school  district  employing  him  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7),  for  the 
reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  8-34  and  Legal  Conclusions1-5  and  9. 

16. 

|  Even  where  unprofessional conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are 

established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident 
unfitness  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.  3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d  208;  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.  4th  at  pp. 

11 

  

 

Under  the  facts  of  the  Morrison  case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s 
1444-1445.) 
conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may  consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1) 
the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the 
degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 
the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 
ageravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 
likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 
discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights 
of  the  teacher. 

17. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to 
determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the 
conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach. 
(Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.  Ed.  At  220.)  Applying  the  facts  of  this  case  to  the  Morrison 
factors  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  Respondent  is  not  unfit  to  teach. 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or 
fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  conduct  had  an 
adverse  effect  on  Student  D 
witnessing  his  behavior  with 
concerning  to  Ms.  Khachikian,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  she  was  adversely 
affected.  There  was  no  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  had  an  adverse  effect  on 
anyone  else. 

R.  who  was  somewhat  fearful  of  Respondent  after 

M.  Respondent’s  conduct  with 

L.  was 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 
Respondent’s  conduct  was  remote  in  time  occurring  three  to  four  years  ago. 

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher. 
Respondent  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential,  which  entitles  him  to  teach 
classes  typically  found  at  the  elementary  school  level. 

(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct.  The  extenuating  circumstances  were  that 
Respondent  attempted  to  manage  severe  behaviors  exhibited  by  ERM.  and  Jai 
L.,  but  was  not  provided  adequate  assistance  or  training.  The  aggravating 
circumstances  are  that  the  involved  students  were  relatively  young  second  graders. 

(e)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  neither  praiseworthy  nor 
blameworthy. 

(f)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  There 
was  no  evidence  that  the  conduct  was  likely  or  unlikely  to  occur  again. 

12 

  

 

Jun 

03 

2014 

5:08PM 

HP 

Fax 

page 

(g)  Morri: 
chilling  e: 
constituti 
of  Respon 

wt  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact 
fect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  ¢ 
al  rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  f 
ent  from  employment  with  the  District. 

or  have  a 
ffect  on 
or  termination 

16. 
warrant  di 

missal  from  District  employment. 

Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  show  such  unfitness  to  feach  as  to 

ORDER 

Thq  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Dana 
be  dismissFd  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Uhified  School  District. 

2  Koon  shall  not 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Profession 

al  Competence 

Luciano  Ortiz 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DISSENT 

Commission  Member  Maria  Granado  concurs  in  the  factual findings  recorded 
fondent  not  be 

respectfully  dissents  from  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  Resp 
bached  in  this  matter. 

herein,  but 
dismissed  y 

June  3 

, 

014 

\ 

f 

Maria  Granado 
Member 
Commission  on  Professiona 

il  Competence 

June 

>p014 

June___,2)14 

  

  

13 

   

  

      

Jun  10  14  03:54p 

Luciano  Ortiz 

(805)  983-2708 

p.1 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 
chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on 
constitutional  rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination 
of  Respondent  from  employment  with  the  District. 

16. 

Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  show  such  unfitness  to  teach  as  to 

warrant  dismissal  from  District  employment. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Dana  Koon  shall  not 

be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

June___,  2014 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

      

ciano  Ortiz 

Member 
Commission  on  Professighal  Competence 

DISSENT 

Commission  Member  Maria  Granado  concurs  in  the  factual  findings  recorded 
herein,  but  respectfully  dissents  from  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  Respondent  not  be 
dismissed  reached  in  this  matter. 

Commission  on  Professional]  Competence    

Maria  Granado 
Member 

June  1.  2014 

      

,  2014 

June 

 

  

  

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 
chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on 
constitutional  rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination 
of  Respondent  from  employment  with  the  District. 

16. 

 Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  show  such  unfitness  to  teach  as  to 

warrant  dismissal  from  District  employment. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges‘are  dismissed.  Dana  Koon  shall 

not 

be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  gerfificated  employee  of  the 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

kos 
(  C 

. 

ORDER 

    

June_!@ ,  2014 

June  __,  2014 

f/ 

> 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Luciano  Ortiz 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

June 

,  2014 

DISSENT 

Commission  Member  Maria  Granado  concurs  in  the  factual  findings  recorded 
herein,  but  respectfully  dissents  from  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  Respondent  not  be 
dismissed  reached  in  this  matter. 

  
Commission  on  Professional  Competence    

Maria  Granado 
Member 

