BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE  
SWEETWATER UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
CHULA VISTA, CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
ERENDIRA RANGEL-PALACIOS, 
 
                                       Respondent. 
 
 
 

 
 
    OAH No. 2014011073 
   
     

 

DECISION 

The Commission Members deliberated on this matter.  Deliberations ended and 

 
This  matter  was  heard  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in 
 
San Diego, California on September 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30, and October 6, 7, 8, and 9, 
2014.    The  Commission  consisted  of  the  following  members:    Administrative  Law 
Judge Roy W. Hewitt; Ms. Tara Howell; and Ms. Pia VanMeter. 
 
 
the matter was deemed submitted on October 22, 2014.  
 
 
The Commission members unanimously agreed to affirm respondent‟s dismissal 
from the Sweetwater Union High School District.  The Commission‟s factual findings 
and legal conclusions are set forth below. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
The Dismissal Accusation was filed by Sandra C. Huezo, while acting in 
 
her official capacity as the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, Sweetwater 
Union High School District. 
 
 
Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the district and, at all 
relevant times, was teaching Biology, Earth Science and/or Physics at Bonita Vista High 
School. 
 

2. 

 

1 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

On October 31, 2012, the Governing Board of the district approved 

Respondent timely appealed the dismissal action by filing a Notice of 

On July 25, 2014, an Amended Accusation was filed with the Office of 

 
service of a Notice of Intent to Dismiss and a Statement of Charges against respondent, 
notifying respondent of her proposed dismissal as a certificated employee of the district.  
 
 
The Intent to Dismiss, Statement of Charges, copies of the relevant 
California Education Code sections, and Request for Hearing form were served on 
respondent. 
 
 
Defense/Request for Hearing. 
 
 
Administrative Hearing and was served on respondent.  By virtue of respondent‟s 
previously filed Notice of Defense/Request for Hearing, the matter was set for hearing.  
The instant hearing ensued. 
 
Incorporation by Reference of the Amended Accusation 
 
 
factual allegations contained in the Amended Accusation were true.1  The Amended 
Accusation consisted of 26 pages, detailing factual allegations against respondent.  
Rather than rewrite the Amended Accusation, Exhibit 160, it is hereby incorporated by 
reference in this decision, as if fully set forth herein, as allowed by Government Code 
section 11425.50, subdivision (b).2   
 
Summary of the Evidence/Facts Leading to the Decision to Uphold Respondent’s 
Dismissal 
 
 
following factual findings will summarize the evidence/facts relied upon by the 
Commission as the bases for denying respondent‟s appeal and affirming the decision to 
dismiss her from her teaching position with the district. 
 

Pursuant to Government Code section 11425.50, subdivision (d),3 the 

By unanimous vote, the Commission Members found that all of the 

8. 

7. 

                                                           

1 

2 

3 

In fact, the overwhelming evidence presented in this case left no doubt 

in the minds of the Commission Members that the allegations were true. 
  

Government Code section 11425.50, subdivision (b) provides, in part:  

“The statement of the factual basis for the decision may be in the language of, or by 
reference to, the pleadings.” 
  

Government Code section 11425.50, subdivision (d) provides:  

“Nothing in this section limits the information that may be contained in the decision, 
including a summary of evidence relied on.” 

 

2 

9. 

Respondent joined the staff of Bonita Vista as a science teacher in 

The 2011-2012 School Year 
 
 
October 2011.  During respondent‟s first year at Bonita Vista, the Principal, Bettina 
Batista, developed concerns about respondent‟s performance due to numerous parent 
and student complaints involving lack of proper/rigorous instruction; lack of classroom 
management; lack of a safe learning environment; lack of efficient, effective and timely 
communication with parents; and not keeping accurate records regarding student grades.  
Following several meetings with respondent, Ms. Batista also became concerned about 
respondent‟s failure to accept recommendations regarding improvement in the 
classroom, to meet with parents as directed, to collaborate with other staff members 
regarding improving lessons, or to provide lesson plans as requested. 
 
 
10.  Despite the joint formulation of an assistance plan in December 2011, 
which was revised in February 2012, respondent did not correct her performance, and 
multiple issues continued to arise, resulting in several letters of reprimand, so many in 
fact that Ronne Pietila, an Assistant Principal at Bonita Vista, ultimately recommended 
that respondent be suspended for five days.   
 
The 2012-2013 School Year 
 
 
11.  During the 2012-2013 school year, respondent continued engaging in a 
pattern of highly unprofessional conduct, such as yelling at students, using profanity in 
front of students, behaving discourteously towards others, refusing to meet with or 
respond to parents, leaving campus during duty hours without permission, and 
disclosing sensitive student academic progress information to other students. 
 
 
directives.  Respondent exhibited a pattern of highly unusual, irrational, and erratic 
behavior, which negatively impacted her relationships with her colleagues, parents and 
students, and demonstrated her evident unfitness for service.   
 
 
teacher, despite having an assistance plan.  In fact, on January 18, 2013, respondent was 
issued a second assistance plan.  Nevertheless, respondent consistently failed to establish 
and/or implement current daily learning targets (DLTs), provide adequate and/or 
academically challenging lessons of the rigor expected of a high school science course, 
actively engage her students, check for student understanding throughout instruction, 
and/or make effective use of her instructional time. 
 
 
respondent received a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory 
Performance.  In the Notice, respondent was directed to refrain from engaging in 
discourteous, confrontational, and/or antagonizing behavior towards others; meet and 

14.  On February 22, 2013, pursuant to Education Code section 44938, 

Respondent either refused or was unable to comply with her supervisors‟ 

Respondent continued demonstrating unsatisfactory performance as a 

13. 

12. 

 

3 

15. 

Respondent‟s misconduct continued through the 2013-2014 school year.  

comply with any and all directives given by her supervisors; maintain positive and 
supportive relationships with students, parents, and colleagues; meet with parents and 
comply with their requests to meet in a timely manner; refrain from leaving campus 
during duty without prior authorization; establish and implement current DLTs to ensure 
student focus; design engaging, standards-based lesson plans; refrain from wasting 
instructional time; and provide continuous instruction throughout the entire class period.  
Respondent ignored the directives. 
 
The 2013-2014 School Year 
 
 
Respondent continued to engage in unprofessional conduct and highly unusual, 
irrational, and erratic behavior.  Respondent continued to demonstrate a consistent 
pattern of disobeying her supervisors‟ directives and undermining their authority.  
Additionally, Respondent continued to leave campus during duty hours without 
permission; refused to meet with her supervisors; treated students, parents, and 
colleagues in a discourteous manner; and failed to meet with and respond to parents.  
Respondent continued to fail to develop and implement current DLTs, plan and provide 
academically challenging lessons of the rigor expected of a high school science course, 
make effective use of her instructional time, actively engage her students, and check for 
student understanding throughout instruction. 
 
From 2011-2014 
 
 
insubordination and unprofessional conduct (November 2, 2012; November 13, 2012; 
November 26, 2012; January 23, 2013; February 28, 2013; March 4, 2013; April 25, 
2013; May 6, 2013 (two letters); August 27, 2014 (two letters); and, September 3, 
2013).  In addition, she received two summaries of conference (November 19, 2012; 
and March 15, 2013) and nine letters containing warnings and directives (January 23, 
2013; February 20, 2013 (two letters); April 25, 2013; May 6, 2013 (three letters); May 
7, 2013; and August 27, 2013).  The letters of reprimand, warnings, directives, and 
summary conference documents all arose from parent and student complaints about her 
behavior.   
 
 
insubordinate conduct included, but were not limited to the following: 
 
 
 
 
a dead rat near her parked car;  
 
 

Insisting that she was threatened by someone, probably students, who left 

Accusing her students of “bullying,” “threatening,” and “harassing” her; 

16.  Overall, Respondent received twelve letters of reprimand for 

Respondent‟s erratic behavior, paranoia, disorganization and 

Insisting that someone was following her; 

17. 

b. 

a. 

c. 

 

4 

i. 

f. 

e. 

h. 

d. 

g. 

Respondent‟s lessons and assignments were confusing, and her classroom 

Inappropriate classroom management (sending e-mails during 

Students were not given any direction and repeatedly submitted 

Students were perpetually confused and frustrated by respondent‟s 

Accusing district administrators, staff members, parents, and students of 

Claiming that administrators installed a listening device in her classroom 

 
conspiring against her;   
 
 
and that they were conspiring against her; 
 
 
instructional time, inviting an unapproved guest speaker to lecture her class, telling the 
class that the administration was out to get her, accusing her class of acting dumb and 
confused when administrators observed the class, and telling the students that the KKK 
and Neo Nazi groups were constantly threatening her); 
 
 
was messy and disorganized;  
 
 
assignments that were never returned;  
 
 
inconsistent grading (At one point a student‟s grade was changed from an A to an F 
within four hours after the student‟s parents had confronted respondent about her 
grading system, or lack thereof.); 
 
 
grades given to students; 
 
 
administrators tried to get her to meet with parents and address their concerns  (It took 
one parent over four months of continuous emails to respondent and administrators 
before the parent‟s concerns were finally discussed.); 
 
At one point, the district assigned a science resource teacher to assist 
 
respondent in developing her curriculum; at another point the district assigned a co-
teacher to help teach respondent‟s class; however, respondent‟s classroom conduct and 
teaching methods continued to deteriorate;  
 
 
regarding her lack of instruction in the classroom and mismanagement of students, 
failing to leave lesson plans for substitute teachers when absent for duty, failing to plan 
and provide lesson plans of the rigor expected of a high school science course, failing to 
review or discuss given assignments with students, failing to explain her grading 
method, and failing to provide documentary support for any of the students‟ grades; 
 

Respondent repeatedly received unsatisfactory performance evaluations 

Respondent‟s inability to provide adequate support/explanations for 

Respondent‟s constant failures to respond when parents and 

m. 

k. 

l. 

j. 

 

5 

n. 

18. 

19. 

Respondent testified that she has been teaching for 26 years and is an 

On February 26, 2013, respondent required students to purchase clay for 

Respondent‟s intransigent defiance and poor attitude, as demonstrated by 

 
an educational activity and was directed by her supervisor not to do so because it 
violated the Education Code and the school‟s policies and procedures.  Nevertheless, on 
April 26, 2013, respondent again required students to purchase clay to participate in a 
classroom activity. 
 
 
the numerous disciplinary warnings, reprimands, and directives, were well known 
around the high school campus, the district as a whole, and the community in general.  
Ultimately, the district was compelled to recommend that respondent be dismissed. 
 
Respondent’s Evidence 
 
 
excellent teacher.  She steadfastly denied all of the allegations against her and testified 
that district personnel (teachers, administrators, and classroom assistants) conspired with 
students and parents to fabricate complaints.  This vast conspiracy, designed to get 
respondent fired, worked as follows:  whenever respondent sought to discipline students 
by writing referrals and sending the students to the office, administrators would contact 
the students‟ parents, and, the administrators, students, and the students‟ parents would 
concoct/fabricate stories designed to reflect poorly on respondent.  For example, 
respondent sends student A to the office for misbehavior or failure to do his/her work; 
student A reports to the office and one of the assistant principals (AP) contacts student 
A‟s parents; the AP tells the parents to make up a story about respondent and file a 
complaint; from that point on, respondent becomes the victim, and adverse actions are 
taken against her.  Additionally, the students conspired to act as if they did not 
understand what was going on in class whenever an administrator conducted a 
classroom observation.  Respondent referred to this scheme as “the victim game.” (Exh. 
K-1) 
 
The Request for Admissions 
 
 
Request for Admissions.  
 
 
 
 
Sanctions with the San Diego County Superior Court.  The motion was heard on 
September 19, 2014.  An order granting the district‟s motion issued that same day.  The 
order stated, in part:  “the truth of any matters specified in the District‟s Amended 
Requests for Admissions . . . are deemed admitted. . . .”  (Exh. 160) 
 

20.  On March 21, 2014, respondent was served with the district‟s Amended 

Respondent failed to respond to the Amended Request for Admissions. 

The district filed a motion for Deemed Admissions and Request for 

21. 

22. 

 

6 

23. 

24. 

Respondent completely lacked credibility.  First and foremost, respondent 

Pursuant to the September 19, 2014, superior court order, respondent is 
 
deemed to have made the following admissions:  she has yelled at students in her class; 
she used profanity in front of students in her class; she refused to meet with parents or to 
respond to parents of students in her class; she left campus during the duty day without 
permission; she disclosed sensitive and personal information about students and their 
academic progress; she failed to meet with her supervisors when directed; and she failed 
to establish and/or implement Daily Learning Targets, even after being instructed to do 
so by her supervisors. 
 
Credibility Determinations 
 
 
made direct misrepresentations to the Commission during the hearing.  Those 
misrepresentations are summarized as follows:  on the first day of the hearing 
respondent told the Commission that she had never seen a copy of the Amended 
Accusation prior to the first day of hearing; the proof of service for the Amended 
Accusation indicated service on July 25, 2014.  During the second day of hearing 
respondent told the Commission that she had just received the Amended Accusation via 
mail; respondent claimed to still have the envelope that contained the Amended 
Accusation so, she was directed to bring it to the hearing; the next day, respondent was 
asked about the envelope; respondent said she had it with her so she was asked to 
produce it; respondent looked at her purse and then said, “Oh, I think I left it in my car”; 
respondent indicated she parked about two blocks from the hearing site so the 
Administrative Law Judge told respondent that the hearing would be recessed so that 
she could go to her car and get the envelope; respondent briefly looked at her purse 
again and then admitted to the Commission that she had not been honest with the 
Commission and that she did not have the envelope with her that day; respondent was 
told to produce the envelope the next day; the next day respondent produced an 
envelope that she claimed contained the Amended Accusation; however, in reality, the 
envelope had contained the district‟s trial brief, not the Amended Accusation.  
 
 
the testimony of the credible witnesses who testified against her during the hearing. 
 
 
bizarre and caused the Commission members great concern about her mental 
state/status.  Moreover, respondent made some disturbing statements during this 
hearing.  For example respondent claimed that some of the parents who testified against 
her were not “actual parents”; rather, they were “made-up parents” whom she had never 
seen or communicated with before. 
    
The witnesses who testified against respondent were entirely credible.  
 
None of the witnesses had anything to gain by testifying against respondent, and their 
testimony was consistent with the independent documentation and the accounts of 

Secondly, respondent‟s testimony was belied by the documentary evidence and 

Finally, respondent‟s demeanor and body language during the hearing was 

25. 

 

7 

others.  Their demeanor indicated that they were respectful of the process, thoughtful 
about their answers, fair in their assessments of what had occurred, and that they 
understood and appreciated the magnitude and importance of their testimony. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), sets forth cause(s) for 

 
 
dismissal.  The causes that are applicable here are immoral or unprofessional conduct, 
specifically in regards to respondent‟s discourteous treatment of staff members, 
students, and parents and her insubordination; dishonesty; unsatisfactory performance, 
also in regards to interaction with staff members, students, and parents, as well as her 
conduct in the classroom; evident unfitness for service; and, persistent violation of or 
refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 
board of the school district, to wit: the secondary classroom teacher job description; 
Board Policy (BP) 4119.21 -“Professional Standards”; BP 4119.24 - “Code of Ethics”; 
Administrative Regulation (AR) 5020 - “Parent Rights and Responsibilities”; and, 
Education Code section 49011. 
 
Unprofessional Conduct 
  
 
 
 
unique position of public school teachers, who have “responsibilities and limitations on 
freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.”  (San Diego Unified 
Sch. Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 
1466, citing Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)  The 
California Supreme Court‟s decision in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214, provided the following factors in considering unprofessional conduct: 
 

The definition of unprofessional conduct is considered in conjunction with the 

Cause for dismissal exists based on respondent‟s unprofessional conduct. 

2. 

 

1) 

2) 

3) 

4) 

5) 

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 
fellow teachers and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 
  
The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 
  
The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved; 
  
The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 
conduct; 
  
The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct; 

 

8 

6) 

7) 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; and, 
  
The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 
chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or 
other teachers. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 
214, 229; Fontana Unified Sch. Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 
219-220.) 
 

 
The Morrison factors may be considered in the aggregate:  “[A]lthough no 
individual finding was sufficient in itself to authorize [the teacher‟s] dismissal, the 
cumulative effect of the findings showed a pattern and course of misconduct justifying 
the additional finding that [the teacher‟s] continued employment „posed substantial 
danger to faculty, administrators, students, and parents of the district.‟ ”  (Woodland 
Joint Unified Sch. Dist. v. Commission of Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1440 - 1441.)  A district need not prove all of the Morrison factors, 
but only those that are “pertinent” to be examined in the case of an individual teacher‟s 
conduct.  (West Valley-Mission Comm. College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 
Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 
 
 
Here, Respondent exhibited an ongoing pattern of behavior that was both likely 
to, and did, significantly impact the students enrolled in her class, their parents, and the 
Bonita Vista staff and administration.  Respondent‟s lessons, and classroom, were 
extremely disorganized; students were not given any direction; students repeatedly 
submitted assignments that were never returned; and, students were perpetually 
confused and frustrated by respondent‟s inconsistent grading.  Parents were frustrated in 
their attempts to contact and/or meet with respondent.  Moreover, respondent‟s grading 
was erratic, and respondent was unable to produce any support for the grades she 
distributed.   
 
 
the administration to remediate her actions.  Bonita Vista and district administrators 
engaged in countless efforts to improve respondent‟s conduct, to no avail.  The district 
assigned a science resource teacher to assist respondent in developing her curriculum; 
however, respondent‟s classroom conduct and teaching methods only continued to 
deteriorate.  No extenuating or aggravating circumstances existed here.  Since 
respondent joined Bonita Vista, the district received repeated complaints from parents, 
students and staff about her behavior, poor performance in the classroom, and refusal to 
communicate. This was not a single or limited circumstance but an ongoing problem.  
Respondent‟s misconduct continued from 2011 until she was placed on paid 
administrative leave in 2014. 
   
 
with the amount of attempted remediation and directives extended by the district, there 

Respondent‟s unprofessional conduct was ongoing despite repeated efforts by 

There is nothing praiseworthy about respondent‟s conduct.  On the contrary, 

 

9 

Respondent‟s conduct, as her history reflects, is likely to recur.  Respondent 

is no other conclusion but that respondent simply refuses to correct her behavior and is, 
in fact, solely responsible for her continued misconduct.   
 
 
demonstrated complete disregard for her supervisors‟ requests and directives.  There is 
absolutely no evidence that respondent‟s conduct will ever improve.  In fact, 
respondent‟s conduct progressively worsened.  Respondent was, and currently is, either 
unaware or unconcerned about her conduct.  She blindly denies all of the allegations 
against her.  As such, there is no evidence that she will – or is even able to – improve.   
 
Respondent‟s dismissal would have no adverse impact or chilling effect on 
 
respondent‟s constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of any other teachers.   
 
The Morrison factors, taken together, firmly support respondent‟s dismissal. 
 
Dishonesty  
 
Cause for dismissal exists pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 
 
subdivision (a)(3), based on respondent‟s dishonesty and complete disregard of her 
supervisors‟ directives, the unusual nature of her behavior, and its effect on Bonita Vista 
students, parents, and staff.   
 
 
integrity.”  (Brewer v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1979) 93 Cal.App.3d 358, 364.)   
 
 
 

“Public service provides no hiding place for the dishonest and those lacking 

A teacher is regarded as a role model for students: 

3. 

As between a teacher and his student, “(a)n important part 
of the education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for 
authority and obedience to necessary discipline.  Lessons 
are learned from example as well as from precept.” 
(Johnson v. Taft School Dist., 19 Cal.App.2d 405, 408.) 
And as our Supreme Court said in Board of Education v. 
Swan, 41 Cal.2d 546, at 552,  “A teacher . . . in the public 
school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the 
light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to 
be followed by the [students] coming under his care and 
protection.”  (Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 
Cal.App.3d 820, 824-825; see also San Diego Unified 
School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-1464.)    

   
 
each incident of concern was brought to light, respondent routinely put forth only a 

Respondent showed no concern or remorse for her misconduct.  Rather, when 

 

10 

4. 

Cause for dismissal exists because respondent‟s actions, as alleged in the 

“Unsatisfactory performance” was added to Education Code section 44932, 

vague denial (in blatant contradiction of the evidence) and did not provide any valid 
explanation or support for her position or take any responsibility.  Indeed, when 
challenged with concerns from the district, respondent repeatedly gave entirely different 
(and baseless) versions of events; versions that were repeatedly disproven by the facts.  
Respondent‟s actions and subsequent dishonesty to district administrators are the 
opposite of what is expected from a role model for students and constitute cause for 
dismissal. 
 
Unsatisfactory Performance 
 
 
Amended Accusation, constituted unsatisfactory performance.   
 
 
subdivision (a)(4), in place of “incompetency” as a ground for dismissal.  (See Assem. 
Bill No. 729 (1995); Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4).)  The purpose of the 1995 
amendment to Education Code section 44932, according to its author, was to enable 
school district governing boards to dismiss teachers based on a determination of 
unsatisfactory performance.  (Assem. Com. on Education, Rep. on Assem. Bill No. 729 
(1995-1996 Reg. Sess.) April 26, 1995, p.1.)  In determining whether an employee‟s 
performance was unsatisfactory, the Legislature noted that the district may look to the 
governing board‟s adopted standards. (Assem. Com. on Education, Rep. on Assem. Bill 
No. 729 (1995-1996 Reg. Sess.) April 26, 1995, p. 1.) 
 
 
December 14, 2011, the district developed an assistance plan with respondent to help 
her establish DLTs and apply appropriate classroom management strategies.  The 
assistance plan was revised in February of 2012.  Due to respondent‟s failure to comply 
with the first assistance plan, a second assistance plan was developed for respondent on 
January 18, 2013.  Respondent continually refused to comply with any of the provided 
assistance plans or any of the other directives from her supervisors.  In addition, 
respondent was given a Notice on February 22, 2013, regarding her difficulty 
maintaining positive and supportive relationships with her colleagues and parents, and 
providing adequate instruction to her students.  Moreover, respondent continued to 
engage in behavior and conduct reflecting a general lack of motivation to improve as a 
teacher.  Indeed, respondent has repeatedly received unsatisfactory performance 
evaluations regarding her lack of instruction in the classroom and mismanagement of 
students.  Likewise, the district has received repeated complaints, and both parents and 
students testified about respondent‟s lack of proper instruction; lack of classroom 
management; lack of efficient, effective and timely communication with parents; and 
failures to keep accurate records regarding student grades.   
 
 
Respondent has demonstrated a complete lack of interest in improving her 
performance.  For example, district administrators testified that their investigation(s) of 

Respondent‟s conduct rose to the level of unsatisfactory performance.  On 

 

11 

5. 

Cause exists for respondent‟s dismissal based on her evident unfitness for 

Respondent‟s actions and complete failure or refusal to remediate render her 

parent and student complaints revealed the following unsatisfactory performance by 
respondent: failing to implement adequate lesson plans or DLTs on a regular basis; 
failing to leave lesson plans for substitute teachers when absent from duty; failing to 
plan and provide lesson plans of the rigor expected of a high school science course; 
failing to review or discuss given assignments with students; and, failing to explain her 
grading method, if any, or provide support for students‟ grades. 
 
 
performance unsatisfactory. 
 
Evident Unfitness for Service 
 
 
service. 
 
 
In Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1444, the Court of Appeal defined 
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), “evident unfitness for service,” as:  
“[C]learly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.  Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident 
unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely 
on receipt of notice that one‟s conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing 
school district.”  (Id. at 1444 [quoting Fresno City High Sch. Dist. v. De Caristo (1939) 
33 Cal.App.2d 666; Palo Verde Sch. Dist. v. Hensey, (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967].)  The 
criteria set forth in Morrison must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, 
whether respondent‟s conduct indicates unfitness for service.  (Woodland, supra, 2 
Cal.App.4th at 1445; Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696)  “If the 
Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the „unfitness‟ is 
„evident‟; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” 
(Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1445.)  As previously concluded, respondent‟s 
conduct clearly meets the criteria set forth in Morrison. 
 
 
which, as a professional educator with nearly three decades of experience she was 
expected to know was indicative of unfitness to teach.  Moreover, respondent engaged 
in continued erratic behavior, including: accusing students of threatening her; alleging 
that a student, or students, placed a dead rat behind her car; persistently claiming that 
“someone” was following her; accusing the district of planting a listening device in her 
classroom; accusing her students of “bullying,” “threatening,” and “harassing” her; and, 
accusing district staff members, parents, and students of conspiring against her.   
 
 
respondent is unfit to teach. 
 
Persistent Violations of and Refusal to Obey School Laws and Regulations 

As parents, students, and district staff testified, respondent engaged in behavior 

Due to the severe and continuous nature of her misconduct, it is evident that 

 

12 

Cause exists for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

Education Code section 44932 subdivision (a)(7), provides that a teacher may be 

6. 
 
subdivision (a)(7). 
 
 
dismissed for: 
 

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the State or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the State Board of 
Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him. 

A school district has a right to adopt rules governing the conduct of its 

Respondent‟s conduct violated Education Code section 49011, which prohibits 

 
 
employees and to require the employees to observe the rules.  (Oakdale Union Sch. Dist. 
v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 84.) 
 
Respondent Refused to Comply with the Education Code 
 
 
the imposition of pupil fees for participation in educational activities.  Respondent 
required students to purchase clay for a classroom project, in direct violation of the 
Education Code.  Specifically, on February 26, 2013, Respondent required students to 
purchase clay for an educational activity and was directed by a supervisor not to do so.  
Nevertheless, on April 26, 2013, respondent again required students to purchase clay to 
participate in a classroom activity in violation of the Education Code, as well as her 
supervisor‟s directive. 
 
Respondent Refused to Comply with the District Board‟s Policies 
 
 
provides that the Board “expects district employees to maintain the highest ethical 
standards, follow district policies and regulations, and abide by state and federal laws,” 
and that employee‟s conduct should “enhance the integrity of the district and advance 
the goals of the educational program.”  Respondent‟s actions entirely contravened this 
policy.  Moreover, respondent repeatedly failed to effectively perform her job as a 
classroom teacher which harmed the district‟s integrity and directly conflicted with the 
goals of the district‟s educational program. 
 
 
Respondent‟s conduct violated BP 4119.24- “Code of Ethics of the Education 
Profession,” which provides that “[t]he educator accepts the responsibility to adhere to 
the highest ethical standards” and that “[t]he desire for the respect and confidence of 
one‟s colleagues, of students, of parents, and of the members of the community provides 
the incentive to attain and maintain the highest possible degree of ethical conduct.”  
Respondent‟s inappropriate and discourteous interactions with district staff, students, 

Respondent‟s conduct violated BP 4119.21 - “Professional Standards,” which 

 

13 

Respondent‟s conduct violated BP 4119.23(a) - “Unauthorized Release of 

Respondent‟s conduct violated BP 4119.24 - “Code of Ethics,” which provides 

Respondent‟s conduct violated AR 5020 - “Parent Rights and Responsibilities,” 

and parents, as well as her blanket denial of any responsibility for her conduct violated 
this policy. 
 
 
that employees have a responsibility for creating a positive work environment; 
employees are expected to act responsibly and conscientiously with honesty and 
integrity; and that employee actions must reflect good judgment, due care, competence, 
and diligence.  Once again, respondent‟s inappropriate and discourteous interactions 
with district staff, students, and parents violated this policy. 
 
 
which provides that the rights of parents and guardians of district students include the 
right to be informed of their child‟s progress in school, to have a school environment for 
their child that is supportive of learning, and to meet with their child‟s teacher within a 
reasonable time after a request.  Respondent‟s persistent refusal to meet with parents 
and/or appropriately address their complaints directly violated this policy‟s 
requirements. 
 
 
Confidential/Privileged Information,” which prohibits the disclosure of confidential 
information acquired in the course of performing duties.  Respondent‟s display of a 
student‟s grade information in front of his classmates violated this policy. 
 
 
secondary teacher, which requires secondary teachers to cooperate with other staff 
members and the administration for the general welfare of the school; maintain a 
professional relationship with students, staff members, and parents; communicate with 
parents to further pupil progress; attend school appointments in a punctual manner; and 
provide instruction and a classroom environment necessary to ensure that students meet 
their academic goals.  Respondent‟s conduct contravened those requirements. 
 
Respondent Persistently Violated District Directives 
 
 
directives from her supervisors and/or the district. 
 
Respondent’s Overall Misconduct 
 
 
dismissed for any one of the acts in isolation.  As the Woodland court held in a 
permanent certificated employee dismissal case:  “When a camel‟s back is broken, we 
need not weigh each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed.”  
(Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.)   
 

Respondent‟s conduct and/or behavior violated the district‟s job description for a 

Throughout her tenure, respondent repeatedly failed or refused to abide by 

It is not the district‟s burden to establish that respondent could have been 

7. 

 

14 

Respondent‟s unsubstantiated denials are no match for the multiple written 

The totality of the evidence in this case overwhelmingly supports the district‟s 

 
decision to dismiss respondent from permanent certificated employment as a classroom 
teacher. 
 
complaints from parents, multiple complaints from students, multiple accounts from 
administrators, and the stark inconsistencies in her own statements that support the 
district‟s action in this case.  There can be no doubt here that the numerous instances of 
misconduct described in this decision constitute “good cause” for dismissal.  Nor can 
there be any doubt that dismissal is reasonable in light of the number and frequency of 
events and the seriousness of the situation.  Respondent‟s behavior has been 
unprofessional, dishonest, unsatisfactory, and in violation of school rules and district 
policies.  Instead of correcting her behavior, respondent steadfastly ignored her principal 
and assistant principals and continued to mistreat students, parents, and staff members 
around her.  The district has overwhelmingly proven that dismissal is appropriate. 
 
 

ORDER 

Respondent's dismissal from employment with the Sweetwater Union High 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
School District is affirmed.   
 
 
Dated: November 24, 2014.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated: November 20, 2014.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated: November 21, 2014.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

_________/s/___________________ 
Roy W. Hewitt 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

________/s/____________________ 
Ms. Tara Howell 
Commission Member 

________/s/____________________ 
Ms. Pia VanMeter 
Commission Member  

 

15 

