BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

SHAQUANA  (NICHOLE)  WALKER 
SLACK,  (EN  788406), 
a  permanent  certificated  employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2014011065 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on  May 
26-May  29,  and  June  1,  2015,  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The  Commission  members  were 
Laurie  R.  Pearlman,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  Gordon  Brown,  and  Robert  K.  Lewis.  ALJ  Pearlman 
presided. 

Lynn  I.  Ibara,  Associate  General  Counsel,  represented  complainant  Justo  H.  Avila, 

Interim  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
(District). 

No  appearance  was  made  by,  or  on  behalf  of,  respondent  Shaquana  (Nichole)  Walker 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record  was 

left  open  until  June  22,  2015,  to  aliow  the  District  to  file  written  closing  argument  and  a 
request  for  a  protective  order  sealing  confidential  records.  Both  were  timely  submitted  on 
June  22,  2015.  The  District’s  closing  argument  was  marked  as  Exhibit  97  for  identification. 
Its  request  for  a  protective  order  was  marked  as  Exhibit  98  for  identification.  Neither  exhibit 
was  admitted  into  evidence.  A  protective  order  sealing  confidential  records  was  issued.  The 
record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  June  22,  2015. 

Slack. 

if 

Mt 

Mi 

If    

Jurisdiction  and  Parties 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

2. 

At  all  times  relevant,  Respondent  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of 

the  District. 

3, 

On  November  26,  2013,  Vivian  K.  Ekchian,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 
District’s  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  filed  with  the  Board  a  Statement  of  Charges 
against  respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for  respondent’s  immediate  suspension 
without  pay  and  termination  of  her  employment  with  the  District. 

4. 

On  or  about  January  31,  2014,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation  and  Statement 
of  Charges  with  OAH  and  served  the  same  on  respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice 
of  Defense,  which  contained  a  request  for  a  hearing. 

5. 
on  respondent. 

On  February  27,  2014,  the  District  filed  an  Amended  Accusation  and  served  it 

6. 

On  March  28,  2014,  a  hearing  commenced  in  this  matter.  ALJ  Eric  Sawyer 
presided.  Ibara  represented  complainant.  Respondent  was  present  and  represented  herself. 
Because  the  parties  and  the  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  were  unable  to 
designate.a  third  Commission  member,  the  matter  was  continued. 

7. 

Respondent  was  timely  provided  with  notice  of  all  hearing  dates  before  the 

Commission. 

8. 

Respondent  holds  a  multi-subject  credential.  Her  most  recent  assignment  was 

as  an  intervention  teacher  at  Cimarron  Elementary  School  (Cimarron).  Prior  to  August,  2012, 
she  was  a  fourth  grade-teacher  at  Palisades  Elementary  Charter  School  (Palisades). 

Complainant's  Charges  Against  Respondent 

9. 

In  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent,  in 

53  separate  charging  allegations,  complainant  alleges  the  following  causes  to  dismiss 
respondent  from  her  employment  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District: 

a. 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1);' 

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified. 

2    

Immoral  conduct,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939, 

Unsatisfactory  performance,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4); 

Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5); 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

State  Board 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the 
of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,  under  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and 

f. 

Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 

cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district, 
under  section  44939. 

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

10. 

From  November  8,  2010,  through  December  20,  2013,  respondent  received  23 
conference  memoranda  from  either  Joan  Ingle  or  Cynthia  William,  the  principals  at  Palisades 
and  Cimarron,  respectively.  The  memoranda  addressed  deficiencies  in  performance  and 
classroom  management.  In  the  memoranda,  both  principals  offered  respondent  professional 
support,  materials,  and  training  for  her  assignments.  The  memoranda  also  contained 
directives  and  warnings  that  disciplinary  action  might  follow. 

11. 

From  December  2,  2011,  through  January  15,  2014,  respondent  received  four 
Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  Notices  of  Suspension  for  matters  relating  to  classroom 
and  behavior  management.  On  April  29,  2013,  respondent  received  a  Below  Standard 
Evaluation.  The  suspension  notice  and  evaluation  noted  deficiencies  in  effective  classroom 
and  behavior  management.  It  also  noted  deficiencies  in  support  for  student  learning, 
planning  and  designing  instruction,  and  classroom  performance. 

Bases for  Dismissal from  Employment 

12. 

On  December,  2010,  respondent  failed  to  provide  the  parents  of  her  fourth- 

grade  students  with  timely  notices  of  students’  unsatisfactory  progress;  failed  to  timely  turn 
in  report  cards;  and  turned  in  seven  report  cards  that  needed  corrections. 

13. 

From  January  2011  through  February  2011,  respondent  misused  instructional, 

collaboration,  or  planning  time  on  personal  correspondence  and  texting. 

14. 

From  January  2011  through  March  2011,  Respondent  ignored  directives  to 

meet  with  Principal  Ingle  to  collaborate  on  each  new  level  of  the  Intervention  Program, 
which  was  a  new  assignment  for  Respondent. 

*  In  its  written  closing  argument.  the  District  withdrew  its  cause  of  immoral  conduct.

15. 

On  February  1,  2011,  Respondent  was  disrespectful  towards  Principal  Ingle, 

interrupting  her  several  times  and  raising  her  voice.  This  caused  Principal  Ingle  to  direct 
Respondent  to  stop  or  she  would  end  the  conference. 

16. 

On  March  1,  2011,  Respondent  was  disrespectful  to  Principal  Ingle  by 

interrupting  her  while  she  was  speaking  to  the  faculty. 

17. 

On  May  9,  2011,  Respondent  ignored  a  sign  on  the  library  door  which  stated, 
“Do  not  enter,  testing  in  progress.”  Respondent  unlocked  the  door  and  entered  at  about  8:35 
a.m.,  during  the  administration  of  the  California  Standards  Testing.  On  May  9,  2011, 
respondent  twice  left  California  Standards  Testing  materials  unsecured  in  room  28  at 
Palisades.  Respondent’s  actions  jeopardized  the  validity  of  the  testing. 

18a. 

On  September  7,  2011,  respondent  parked  her  car  so  as  to  occupy  two  spaces 

in  the  Palisades  parking  lot,  then  willfully  ignored  an  “all-school”  page  that  she  call  the 
office  immediately,  causing  Principal  Ingle  to  have  to  search  for  Respondent. 

18b. 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  Principal  Ingle’s  directive  to  move  her 

car  for  up  to  six  minutes.  During  that  time,  respondent  seated  her  students  and  began  to  hand 
out  journals,  even  after  Principal  Ingle  said  that  she  would  look  after  the  students  while 
Respondent  freed  up  the  second  parking  space  to  enable  another  staff  member  to  park  and 
report  to  work. 

19. 

From  September  8,  2011  through  September  16,  2011,  respondent  failed  to 
comply  with  District  policies  and  failed  to  use  age-appropriate  instructional  strategies.  In 
particular,  respondent  had  no  lesson  plans  evident  in  the  classroom;  dismissed  students  late 
on  the  first  eight  days  of  school;  did  not  leave  one  door  unlocked  for  emergency  access,  and 
allowed  students  to  leave  backpacks  in  the  aisles,  creating  safety  hazards;  failed  to 
implement  the  California  Treasures,  Tribes,  or  Smart  Start  curriculum  and  instead,  had 
posted  the  Character  Education  Series,  which  was  not  used  at  Palisades;  failed  to  arrange 
appropriate  seating  in  that  two  students  sat  with  their  backs  to  the  Smart  Board;  directed 
second-grade  students  repeatedly  during  the  first  week  of  school  to  “respond  to  the  prompt,” 
not  realizing  or  acknowledging  that  they  did  not  know  what  it  meant;  and  informed  students 
of  the  “moral  of  the  fable”  without  making  any  connection  to  prior  learning  or  explaining 
what  the  phrase  meant. 

20. 

From  October  1,  2011  through  October  29,  2011,  respondent  failed  to  comply 

with  District  policy  and  procedure  regarding  field  trips,  and  failed  to  exhibit  competence  in 
planning  and  executing  a  field  trip  to  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art  (LACMA)  for 
second-graders.  In  particular,  Respondent  failed  to  insure  that  forms  were  completely  filled 
out  and  handed  in  two  days  before  the  October  27  field  trip;  failed  to  familiarize  herself  with 
field  trip  rules  or  with  the  field  trip  schedule  which  would  enable  her  to  inform  parents, 
including  trip  volunteers,  of  the  field  trip  schedule;  failed  to  plan  for  snacks  or  lunch  for 
students  on  free  or  reduced  lunch  programs;  and  failed  to  plan  for  snack  time  during  the  field 

trip.    

21. 

On  October  27,  2011,  respondent  failed  to  provide  supervision  to  her  second- 

grade  students  and  was  derelict  in  her  duties  during  the  LACMA  field  trip.  In  particular, 
respondent  left  the  management  of  student  behavior  to  volunteer  parents;  failed  to  make 
herself  known  to  the  museum  docent  as  the  teacher  in  charge  of  the  field  trip;  failed  to  insure 
that  the  students  were  following  museum  rules;  took  student  W.M.  to  an  establishment 
serving  alcohol  to  buy  him  lunch  during  the  lunch  break,  while  abandoning  the  rest  of  the 
class  and  parent  volunteers  for  about  40  minutes;  was  not  available  to  prevent  or  stop  a  fight 
between  students,  thus  requiring  parents  to  intervene;  failed  to  report  the  fight  to  the  school 
principal  and  ignored  the  principal’s  request  for  a  meeting  about  the  field  trip;  reported  to  a 
parent  that  she  would  address  behavioral  issues  once  back  at  school,  but  failed  to  do  so;  and 
failed  to  implement  the  school’s  Tribes  agreement  to  manage  student  behavior  during  and 
after  the  field  trip. 

22. 

From  October  4,  2011  through  November  17,  2011,  respondent  failed  to 

comply  with  federal  and  state  laws  and  with  District  policy.  In  particular,  respondent  failed 
to  follow  the  Individualized  Education  Program  (IEP)  accommodations  for  student  E.G., 
even  though  she  had  reviewed  them  on  October  4;  failed  to  adapt  instructions  and  homework 
for  special  education  students,  including  E.G.;  failed  to  prepare  and  provide  a  tangible 
structure  for  instructional  needs  of  special  education  students;  and  failed  to  provide  the  rating 
scales  that  had  been  requested  to  enable  a  particular  student’s  IEP  team  to  formulate  the 
student’s  current  levels  of  performance  and  assessment  reports. 

23. 

On  October  17,  2011,  respondent  failed  to  follow  an  October  14,  2011 

directive  when  she  did  not  allow  second-grade  student  J.P.  to  use  the  restroom. 

24. 

On  December  15,  2011,  respondent  was  derelict  in  her  duties,  failed  to  comply 

with  District  policies,  and  failed  to  comply  with  directives.  In  particular,  respondent  used  at 
least  an  hour  of  instructional  time  to  write  a  response  to  a  conference  memo  and  personal 
notes  to  teachers;  did  not  return  to  the  classroom  after  recess;  left  the  school  without 
authorization  65  minutes  before  the  end  of  the  work  day;  failed  to  turn  in  her  computer  and 
keys;  and  failed  to  follow  the  procedure  for  requesting  “personal  necessity  days”  absences. 

25. 

On  January  27,  2012,  and  for  approximately  five  days  thereafter,  respondent 

failed  to  comply  with  District  policy  in  that  she  did  not  inform  Principal  Ingle  that  she  would 
be  absent  and  did  not  notify  the  Substitute  Unit  of  her  absences. 

26. 

From  January  23,  2012  through  February  17,  2012,  respondent  failed  to 

demonstrate  competency  as  a  teacher.  In  particular,  she  failed  to  coordinate  efforts  with  other 
teachers,  thereby  failing  to  co-teach;  refused  to  plan  or  implement  specific  instructional 
strategies  with  students  and  instead,  sat  at  her  computer  during  the  instructional  period; 
refused  to  solicit  responses  or  engage  in  interactions  with  students  in  various  classes  on  at 
least  nine  separate  occasions;  and  gave  students  homework  independent  of  the  co-teacher, 
despite  having  been  directed  not  to  do  so. 

27, 

From  February  22,  2012  through  February  27,  2012,  respondent  failed  to 

implement  co-teacher  procedures  for  administering  spelling  and  other  tests. 

5 

 

  

28. 

On  March  9,  2012,  and  March  15,  2012,  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with 
District  policy  against  providing  candy  and  other  food  to  students,  even  after  she  had  been 
reminded  not  to  do  so. 

29. 

From  March  9,  2012  through  March  28,  2012,  respondent  refused  to  undertake 

her  co-teaching  responsibilities;  observed  students,  but  did  not  assist  them;  worked  at  her 
computer  during  instructional  time;  and  did  not  model  lesson  components  or  set  clear  and 
rigorous  expectations  for  students. 

30. 

On  March  12,  2012,  respondent  called  Palisades  to  say  she  would  be  arriving 
at  10  a.m.,  due  to  a  family  meeting.  However,  she  did  not  arrive  until  11:05  a.m.,  and  failed 
to  update  the  school  as  to  her  arrival  time. 

31. 

On  March  15,  2012,  respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  competency  as  a  teacher 

when  she  administered  a  Foss  science  assessment  that  contained  items  that  the  students  had 
not  been  taught;  failed  to  provide  adequate  repetition,  so  that  the  students  were  unable  to 
comprehend  the  material;  and  failed  to  adequately  engage  students. 

32. 

On  March  16,  2012,  respondent  exhibited  unprofessional  conduct  and 

unfitness  as  a  teacher.  Respondent  called  a  parent  at  6:45  a.m.,  asking  to  ride  with  that  parent 
for  a  field  trip  scheduled  that  day  instead  of  going  with  her  pre-arranged  ride  assignment;  put 
on  headphones  and  listened  to  music  while  the  parent  was  left  to  drive  and  manage  five 
students;  failed  to  interact  with  or  provide  supervision  of  students;  remained  passive, 
unengaged  and  silent  for  the  entire  trip;  did  not  assist  in  keeping  students  together  or 
monitoring  their  safety;  remained  unengaged  upon  returning  to  the  school;  and  had  to  be 
asked  by  other  teachers  to  assist  with  student  supervision. 

33. 

From  May  3,  2012  through  May  9,  2012,  respondent  was  unprofessional, 

discourteous,  and  defiant  in  her  interactions  with  Palisades  colleagues.  In  particular, 
respondent  failed  to  follow  testing  support  directions,  jeopardizing  mandatory  state  testing 
procedures;  failed  to  allow  second-graders  to  use  the  restroom,  despite  being  issued  prior 
directives  to  do  so;  failed  to  respond  to  questions  with  simple  answers;  failed  to  send  home 
CST  testing  letters  on  time;  failed  to  respectfully  and  professionally  collaborate  with  a  co- 
teacher;  and  was  confrontational  with  Principal  Ingle. 

34. 

On  May  7,  2012,  respondent  again  failed  to  comply  with  District  policy  when 

she  gave  students  food  without  regard  for  potential  allergies,  despite  having  been  directed 
not  to  do  so. 

35. 

On  May  9,  2012,  and  May  14,  2012,  respondent  abandoned  students  in 

classrooms,  leaving  them  without  appropriate  supervision  by  certificated  personnel. 

36. 

From  January  14,  2013  through  June  1,  2013,  respondent  failed  at  least  ten 

times  to  report  to  the  principal  at  8:05  a.m.  to  see  if  any  classes  needed  a  teacher.    

  

37. 

On  January  14,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  District  policies  that 

teachers  have  their  lesson  plans  available  in  the  classroom,  and  that  detailed  lessons  plans  be 
provided  to  the  administrator  prior  to  the  formal  observation  for  Stull  evaluations, 

38. 

On  January  14,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  maintain  behavioral  standards  by 

not  following  through  with  consequences  or  reinforcement  when  she  had  to  re-direct  three  of 
the  five  students  in  one  group  several  times  during  a  30-minute  lesson. 

39. 

On  February  21,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  District  policy  in  that 

her  lesson  plans  were  not  visible  or  made  available  to  the  site  administrator  during  an 
observation.  In  addition,  the  classroom  did  not  reflect  current  lessons  and  accomplishments 
of  students  because  no  student  work  was  displayed. 

40. 

On  February  21,  2013,  respondent  did  not  demonstrate  evidence  of  plans  to 
foster  student  learning  and  achievement  of  state  standards  because  she  failed  to  write  the 
objective  of  the  lesson  on  comparing  and  contrasting,  and  instead,  wrote  only  “Compare  and 
Contrast.” 

41. 

Also  on  February  21,  2013,  respondent  did  not  establish  rigorous  learning 

goals  for  her  students  because,  despite  writing  “California  State  Standards”  and  "’Strategies’ 
on  the  board,  she  failed  to  identify  any  standards  or  strategies. 

> 

42. 

On  February  21,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  model  correct  spelling, 
capitalization,  and  phonics.  In  particular,  respondent  spelled  kindergarten  as  “KinderGarden” 
on  a  sentence  strip  at  the  top  of  two  closet  doors;  and  used  vertical  rather  than  slanted  lines 
on a  chart  regarding  phoneme  segmentation,  so  that  the  written  lines  could  be  mistaken  for  a 
lower  case  “L”. 

43. 

On  February  21,  2013,  respondent’s  classroom  failed  to  conform  to  safety 

standards  in  that  a  roll  of  butcher  paper  and  a  wall  clock  were  stacked  on  top  of  a  closet,  and 
a  plastic  container  and  wire  basket  were  precariously  placed  on  top  of  a  moveable  cabinet. 

44a. 

On  February  28,  2013,  respondent  did  not  use  instructional  strategies  and 

resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs,  thereby  failing  to  engage  students.  In 
particular,  while  reading  Big  Machines,  a  story  in  which  one  line  repeats  every  one  or  two 
pages,  respondent  failed  to  directly  answer  students’  questions,  including,  “What  the  heck  is 
a  block?”  and  “Why  do  you  keep  saying  that:  at  the  end  of  the  block?” 

44b. 

Respondent  failed  to  take  the  opportunity  presented  from  the  questions 

students  posed  to  engage  them  in  an  interactive  exercise,  such  as  reciting  a  repeating  line. 

44c. 

Respondent  first  responded  to  the  question,  “What  is  a  block?”  by  saying,  “Sit 

quietly.”  She  answered  only  after  a  second  student  asked  the  question  again  two  minutes 
later.  When  one  student  complained  that  it  was  a  long  book,  Respondent’s  response  was, 

“Only  two  more  pages,”  to  which  the  students  responded,  “Good!”    

45a, 

On  February  28,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively, 

failed  to  establish  and  maintain  behavioral  standards,  and  failed  to  effectively  supervise 
students  or  to  intervene  when  students  were  disruptive  or  created  safety  issues. 

45b. 

In  particular,  respondent  took  two  minutes  to  dismiss  students  one-by-one 

from  their  chairs  to  the  carpet,  and  did  not  notice  five  students  talking  to  each  other,  or  five 
other  students  playing  with  their  name  tags  while  waiting  to  be  called. 

45c. 

Respondent  failed  to  intervene  during  the  story  reading  when  one  student  said 
loudly  to  another  student,  “Will  you  quit?”  and  then  complained  to  Respondent,  “She  won’t 
stop  talking  to  me!”  _ 

45d. 

Respondent  failed  to  intervene  when  student  D.T.  kicked  student  C.R.  at  least 

twice  under  the  table. 

45e. 
writing  assignment. 

Respondent  failed  to  redirect  student  A.W.,  who  made  paper  airplanes  during  a 

45f. 

Respondent  failed  to  engage  nine  students  who  did  not  participate  when  she 

instructed  24  students  to  show  five  fingers,  four  fingers,  and  three  fingers. 

45g. 

Respondent  failed  to  respond  when  student  A.L.  pushed  back  her  chair  and  fell 

onto  the  floor. 

45h. 

Respondent  failed  to  engage  student  J.R.,  who  was  constantly  off-task  in  the 
back  row  on  the  carpet  when  he  distracted  a  student  next  to  him,  and  wrapped  string  around 
his  pencil  box. 

451. 

Respondent  failed  to  redirect  two  students  who  repeatedly  tossed  a  wad  of 
paper  into  the  air  and  to  each  other.  Respondent  failed  to  interact  with  or  engage  students 
who  sucked  their  thumbs,  or  who  had  other  objects  in  their  mouths. 

46. 

On  March  6,  2013,  respondent  left  campus  at  1:35  p.m.  without  authorization, 

even  though  her  work  day  did  not  end  until  2:20  p.m. 

47. 

On  March  12,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  District  policy  in  that 
her  lesson  plans  were  not  visible  or  made  available  to  the  site  administrator  upon  request. 

48. 

On  March  12,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  use  state  subject  matter  content 

standards  to  establish  rigorous  goals  for  students.  In  particular,  the  state  standard  written  on 
the  board  for  first-graders  (blend  two  to  four  phonemes  into  recognizable  words)  did  not 
reflect  the  activity  she  had  the  first-graders  engage  in;  and  the  state  standard  on  the  board  for 
second-graders  did  not  reflect  the  agenda  she  had  on  the  board  and  did  not  reflect  the  activity 

she  had  the  second-graders  engage  in.    

49a, 

On  March  12,  2013,  Respondent  also  failed  to  use  subject  matter-appropriate 

instructional  strategies,  materials,  resources  and  technologies  to  support  standards-based 
objectives,  and  failed  to  provide  all  students  with  equal  access  to  the  respective  curriculum. 

49b. 

In  particular,  when  working  with  the  two  students  in  her  first-grade  group, 

respondent  worked  with  each  student  individually,  but  did  not  have  a  task  or  assignment  for 
the  other  student  awaiting  individual  instruction. 

49c. 

Respondent  had  one  first-grader  read  a  passage  three  times  over  five  minutes, 

but  allowed  the  other  only  one  reading  over  three  minutes. 

49d. 

When  working  with  four  students  in  the  second-grade  group,  respondent  read 
about  how  animals  move  about  and  move  their  bodies,  a  book  that  had  no  connection  to  the 
theme  “Growing/Changing,”  which  she  had  written  on  a  chart. 

49e. 

Upon  asking  students  for  examples  of  things  that  grow  and  change,  the 

students’  replies  included  a  flower,  a  person,  and  apples,  none  of  which  came  from  the  book 
about  moving. 

49f. 

As  respondent  solicited  the  responses  from  three  of  the  four  second-graders, 

respondent  used  ten  minutes  of  instructional  time  to  draw  three  pictures  of  their  answers  on  a 
chart. 

49g. 

Respondent  failed  to  engage  or  attempt  to  elicit  a  response  from  the  one 

second-grader  who  did  not  offer  an  example. 

50. 

On  March  12,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  professional  competency 
when  she  told  the  group  of  second-graders  that  they  were  going  to  “choral  read  a  story”  from 
a  “simplified  picture  book.”  In  fact,  she  read  to  the  students  a  non-fiction  resource  book 
entitled  “Moving”,  which  had  photographs  of  various  animals  and  included  the  words  joints, 
spine,  bones,  bending,  and  muscles. 

$1. 

On  March  7,  2013,  respondent  entered  her  daughter’s  kindergarten  classroom 

at  Cimarron  and  began  yelling  loudly  at  teacher  Martha  Sanchez,  “I  don't  appreciate  you 
isolating  my  child,  treating  her  like  a  guinea  pig!”  Respondent’s  conduct  was  observed  by 
her  daughter.  Her  comments  were  heard  by  a  neighboring  teacher  and  other  parents.  By  her 
actions,  respondent  intimidated  Sanchez. 

52. 

On  April  4,  2013,  respondent  moved  her  daughter  from  Sanchez’s  classroom 

to  another  class  without  authorization.  When  respondent’s  daughter  was  returned  to 
Sanchez’s  classroom,  respondent  left  her  work  station  to  again  take  her  child  to  the  other 
class,  engaging  in  an  argument  with  the  principal. 

53. 

On  April  4,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  provide  supervision  or  instruction  to  her 

own  class  for  at  least  30  minutes  and  failed  to  comply  with  the  principal’s  directive  to  return    

to  work.  She  disrupted  at  least  two  other  classes  at  the  school  while  she  was  engaged  in 
moving  her  daughter  twice  from  her  assigned  classroom  and  arguing  with  the  principal. 

54. 

On  April  5,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  District  policies  in  that  her 

lesson  plans  were  not  visible  or  made  available  to  the  site  administrator  upon  request,  no 
student  work  was  displayed  anywhere  in  the  classroom,  and  no  state  standards  or  strategies 
were  describe  on  the  board. 

55. 

On  April  5,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively,  failed 
to  provide  effective  supervision,  failed  to  respond  to  respond  to  students’  needs,  and  failed  to 
demonstrate  professional  competency.  In  particular,  respondent  allowed  seven  students  to  sit 
idly  for  about  five  minutes  after  they  finished  a  worksheet,  even  after  two  students  said  aloud 
that  they  were  done;  in  response  to  a  student's  question,  what  does  infer  mean,  respondent 
replies  that  it  “means  something  is  between  the  lines  and  it  causes  you  to  draw  conclusions,” 
but  when  the  student  asked  what  conclusions  means,  respondent  said  she  was  not  going  to 
address  that  now,  and  never  did  answer  the  question;  nine  minutes  into  one  assignment, 
respondent  first  noticed  that  one  student  was  doing  the  wrong  page;  and  respondent  failed  to 
address  or  acknowledge  two  students  talking  among  themselves  in  front  of  her  about  her 
cursive  handwriting  on  their  papers  and  the  difficulty  they  had  in  reading  cursive  writing. 

56. 

From  April  27;  2013  through  May  1,  2013,  respondent  approached  Sanchez  at 

least  four  times  to  pick  up  her  daughter,  despite  having  been  directed  not  to  do  so. 

57. 

On  June  7,  2013,  respondent  entered  Sanchez’s  classroom  despite  having  been 

directed  not  to  do  so. 

58. 

On  June  7,  2013,  respondent  accessed  Dynamic  Indicators  of  Basic  Early 

Literacy  Skills  (DIBELS)  assessment  results  for  students  who  were  not  assigned  to  her,  and 
used  the  confidential  information  to  correspond  with  others. 

59. 

Respondent  failed  to  attend  Cimarron’s  mandatory  professional  development 
meetings  on  August  20,  2013,  October  1,  2013,  October  15,  2013,  and  November  19,  2013. 

60. 

After  being  directed  to  submit  weekly  lesson  plans  to  her  site  administrator  at 

the  beginning  of  every  week  beginning  November  4,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  do  so  on 
November  4,  2013,  November  12,  2013,  November  18,  2013,  December  2,  2013,  December 
9,  2013,  and  December  16,  2013. 

61. 

On  December  11,  2013,  respondent  abandoned  her  assigned  teaching  post 
from  8:05  a.m.  through  9:00  a.m.,  and  failed  to  respond  to  a  school-wide  announcement, 
made  over  the  public-address  system,  that  she  account  for  her  presence  during  that  time. 

62. 

On  December  17,  2013,  respondent  failed  to  meet  with  her  peer-assistance  and 

review  coach  at  the  scheduled  time  of  8:30  a.m.  Instead,  respondent  was  seen  sitting  in  her 

car,  which  was  parked  on  the  street.    

  

63. 

On  December  19,  2013,  Respondent  failed  to  attend  a  conference  with 

Cimarron’s  principal  Dana  Rivers,  despite  having  been  directed  to  do  so. 

64. 

The  evidence  presented  supported  each  of  the  charges  contained  in  the 

Amended  Accusation.  Respondent  was  not  present  or  represented  at  the  hearing.  She  called 
no  witnesses  to  testify  and  proffered  no  documentary  evidence  on  her  behalf,  thus  leaving  the 
District's  evidence  uncontroverted.  Three  principals,  one  former  principal,  two  parents,  a 
Local  District  superintendent,  a  teacher,  and  a  representative  from  the  District's  Human 
Resources  Division  testified  credibly  on  behalf  of  the  District.  Principals  Ingle  and  Williams 
made  efforts  to  provide  respondent  with  professional  support,  materials,  and  training  for  her 
assignments.  Parents  Lisa  P.  and  Shara  M.  were  frustrated  and  puzzled  by  respondent's  lack 
of  engagement  with  her  students  and  their  parents. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

Jurisdiction 

44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  8.) 

Burden  of Proof 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  or 
section  44939  are  established.  In  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the 
District  alleged  six  of  those  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  unsatisfactory 
performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations, 
and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  (Factual 
Finding  9.) 

4. 

The  District’s  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  charged 

respondent  with  various  acts  to  support  the  six  statutory  grounds  for  dismissal.  The  District 
later  withdrew  the  immoral  conduct  charge.  The  Commission  examined  each  charged  act  to 
determine  whether  it  was  proven.  For  each  charged  act  that  was  proven,  the  Commission 
considered  whether  the  charged  acts  violated  one  or  more  of  the  alleged  statutory  bases  for 

dismissal.    

  

5. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence  that  the  acts  in  each  of  the  charges  occurred  as  alleged.  (Factual  Findings  10- 
64.) 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(1),  based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  64  and 
Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

7. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(4),  based  on  unsatisfactory  performance,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  64 
and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

8. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(5),  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  64 
and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

9. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(7),  based  on  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  64  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

10. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44939,  based  on  willful 

refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  10  through  64  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Evident  Unfitness for  Service 

11. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 
The  established  misconduct  demonstrates  specific  instances  when  Respondent  acted 
unprofessionally,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10-64. 

12. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  is 

evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  10-64. 

13. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee 
for  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not 
adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 
inadequacies.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a 
fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.) 

12 

 

  

Analysis  of the  Morrison  Factors 

14. 

_  Dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct  and  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  is 
assessed  utilizing  criteria  enunciated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  (Morrison):  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the 
party  involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the 
likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary 
action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  These  criteria  are  commonly  referred  to  as  “the  Morrison 
factors.”?  The  Morrison  court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  (/d.  at  p.  235.) 

15. 

It  is  settled  that  not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison 

test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th 
369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact 
established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4"  at  p.  1457.) 

16. 

Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  respondent’s  acts,  as  established  by  the 

evidence,  constituted  unprofessional  conduct  and  the  evidence  established  evident  unfitness 
for  service  or  grounds  for  dismissal.  (See,  e.g.,  Bd.  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553 
(unprofessional  conduct);  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  1429 
(evident  unfitness).) 

17. 

In  this  case,  we  find  as  follows: 

(A)  —  The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow  teachers: 

respondent’s  misconduct  adversely  impacted  students,  parents,  school  and  District 
administrators,  and  a  fellow  teacher. 

(B) 

The  degree  of  such  adversity:  respondent’s  conduct  had a  significant  adverse 

impact  on  students,  parents,  school  and  District  administrators,  and  a  fellow  teacher. 

>  The  Morrison  analysis  only  applies  to  causes  for  dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct 

and  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  It  does  not  apply  to  causes  for  dismissal  for 
unsatisfactory  performance  or  for  persistent  violation  of  laws  and  regulations  (Morrison, 
supra,  |  Cal.3d  at  pp.  227-230);  it  is  presumed  that  such  conduct  is  related  to  fitness  to  teach. 

13 

   

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct:  respondent’s  conduct  was 

proximate  in  time,  beginning  in  late  2010,  and  continuing  until  early  2014,  when  she  was 
removed  from  Cimarron. 

(D)  _  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved:  because  respondent 

holds  a  multi-subject  credential,  her  conduct  had  particular  impact  on  younger  students  who 
are  just  beginning  their  education. 

(E)  _  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding 

the  conduct:  neither  aggravating  nor  extenuating  circumstances  were  proven. 

(F) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 

conduct:  respondent’s  motives  for  her  conduct  are  unknown. 

(G)  _  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct:  it  is  highly  likely  that 

Respondent  will  engage  in  the  same  activity  if  put  back  in  the  classroom.  When  she  was 
moved  from  Palisades  to  Cimarron,  her  troubling  conduct  continued  in  the  new  setting. 
Moreover,  respondent’s  failure  to  appear  and  defend  might  be  indicative  of  recalcitrance. 

(H) 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the 

constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers:  no  evidence  was  presented  to 
establish  that  any  disciplinary  action  against  respondent  would  have  an  adverse  impact  or 
chilling  effect  upon  her  constitutional  rights  or  upon  the  rights  of  other  teachers. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance,  Persistent  Violation  of Laws,  and  Willful  Refusal  to  Perform 

18a. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  engaged 
in  unsatisfactory  performance  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  64. 

18b. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume  the 
Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  (/n  re  Maes  (2010)  185 
Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from 
unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory 
performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

18c. 

While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a  teacher’s 

conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing 
school  district.  Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance, 
and  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establish  guidelines  for  how  school  districts 

should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for    

discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to  her 
employing  school  district. 

18d. 

However,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to 

teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not 
dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and 
perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v. 
Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation  is  that  an  employing 
school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a 
certificated  employee  has  performed  unsatisfactorily. 

19. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  Board  of  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7). 

20.  -  Cases  interpreting  section  44932,  subdivision  (a){7),  require  a  “showing  of 

intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

21. 

Respondent’s  acts  constituted  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public 
schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  her,  or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
set  out  in  Factual  Findings  10-64. 

22. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  willfully 

refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  rules 
and  regulations  of  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44939,  as  set  out  in  Factual 
Findings  10-64. 

Disposition 

23. 

Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  discipline  is  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist. 
v.  Burman  (Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220-222.)  “The  Commission  has  broad 
discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach  ...  ,  and  whether  dismissal  or 
suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  [Citing  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  pp.  220-222.] 
‘[A]  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may  require  a  sensitive 
evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it  warrants  the  grave 
sanction  of  dismissal.’  [Citation].”  (Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of Cal.  (1999)  20  Cal.4th 
327,  343-344.) 

15

24. 

The  Commission  unanimously  agreed  th 
students,  school  employees.  or  others  or  to  further  dete 
conduct  in  the  future. 

at  dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect 
r  respondent  from  engaging  in  similar 

Shaquana  (Nichole)  Walker  Slack  is  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

ORDER 

DATED:  September  30,  2015 

DocuSigned  by: 

LAURIE  R.  PEARLMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED: 

DATED: 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

(snd (oe 
GORDON  BROWN 
Commission  Member 

Reber  K.  Rana 
ae  eee 

nennaianatdter 
ROBERT  K.  LEWIS 
Commission  Member 

16

