   

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

CLAUDIA  CONROY  (EN  598852), 
a  permanent  certificated  employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2014030272 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on 

April  30,  May  1,  5  through  9,  and  21,  and  June  2,  2014,  and  February  5,  2015,  in  Los 
Angeles,  California.  Howard  W.  Cohen,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  Marlon  Mendez,  and  Haywood  Finder 
constituted  the  Commission.  ALJ  Cohen  presided. 

Ellen  C.  Wa,  of  Dannis  Woliver  Kelley,  represented  complainant  Justo  H.  Avila, 

Interim  Chief  Human  Resource  Officer  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
(District). 

Rosty  G.  Gore,  of  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondent  Claudia 

Conroy. 

‘ 

Prior  to  the  presentation  of  evidence,  the  parties  brought  several  pre-trial  motions. 

The  ALJ  considered  and  ruled  on  those  motions  as  well  as  on  motions  made  during  the 
course  of  the  hearing,  as  reflected  on  the  record.  The  District’s  Hearing  Brief  was  marked  as 
Exhibit  50,  and  its  closing  brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  51.  Respondent’s  closing  brief  was 
marked  as  Exhibit  GG.  The  ALJ  ordered  that  any  testimonial  reference  to  the  name  of  a 
minor  student  be  replaced  in  the  hearing  transcript  by  the  student’s  first  name  or  first  name 
and  last  initial.  Counsel  for  the  parties  represented  that  they  had  redacted  students’  names  in 
all  exhibits  so  that  students  are  identified  only  by  first  name  and  last  initial. 

The  Commission  considered  the  entire  record  in  executive  session.   

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  February  5,  2015. 

     

  

Jurisdiction  and  Parties 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  February  19,  2014,  complainant  filed  and  served  on  respondent  a  Notice  of 

Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension,  with  a  Statement  of 
Charges.  On  March  5,  2014,  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

2. 

Acting  in  his  official  capacity,  on  March  12,  2014,  complainant  filed,  and  on 

March  14,  2014,  complainant  served  on  respondent,  an  Accusation  and  Statement  to 
Respondent.  Respondent  timely  served  a  Notice  of  Defense,  which  respondent  amended  on 
April  10,  2014. 

3. 

Respondent,  53,  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  on 

unpaid  leave  status.  She  taught  elementary  school  in  the  District  from  1988  to  2004,  and  then 
taught  at  Grover  High  School  in  the  2004/2005  school  year.  She  has  taught  English,  English 
as  a  Second  Language,  and  World  History  at  John  F.  Kennedy  High  School  (Kennedy  HS) 
since  2005.  Respondent  holds  a  clear  multi-subject  credential,  single  subject  credentials  in 
English  and  Social  Studies,  and  a  Bilingual  Certificate  of  Competency-Spanish. 

Complainant’s  Charges  Against  Respondent 

4. 

In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent,  in  27  separate 

charging  allegations,  complainant  alleges  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  her 
employment  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  for,  variously: 

a. 
subdivision  (a)(1);' 

Unprofessional  conduct,  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Unsatisfactory  performance,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4); 

Immoral  conduct,  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939; 

Evident  unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5); 

f. 
Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 
Cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing 
school  district,  under  section  44939, 

e. 
Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7);  and 

  
  
2   

"All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified. 

  

 

  

Notices  and  Warnings  Issued  to  Respondent 

5. 

In  spring  and  fall  2010,  respondent  received  three  conference  memoranda 

from,  variously,  Christine  Clark,  then  the  principal,  and  Jose  R.  Castelo,  then  the  assistant 
principal,  regarding  classroom  management,  student  discipline,  instruction,  and  respondent’s 
attendance  at  and  recording  of  conferences  with  administration.  In  the  memoranda  were 
certain  assistance  and  guidance  provided  to  respondent,  directives  issued  to  her,  and  a 
warning  that  disciplinary  action  might  follow. 

6. 

On  January  10,  2011,  respondent  received  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and 

a  Notice  of  Suspension  (7  Days)  for  13  matters  relating  to  classroom  management  and 
conduct  toward  students.  On  April  11,  2011,  respondent  received  a  Below  Standard 
Evaluation.  The  suspension  notice  and  evaluation  noted  deficiencies  in  various  areas  related 
to  respondent’s  conduct  toward  students  and  parents  and  her  sending  students  out  of  class 
unsupervised;  it  also  noted  deficiencies  in  two  items  related  to  classroom  instruction. 

7. 

During  the  2011/2012  and  the  2012/2013  school  years,  respondent  received 
eight  conference  memoranda  from,  variously,  Suzanne  Blake,  then  the  principal,  and  Yela 
Dirlam,  then  the  assistant  principal,  after  classroom  observations  and  subsequent  conferences 
with  administration,  all  regarding  classroom  instruction.  In  the  memoranda  were  certain 
assistance  and  guidance  provided  to  respondent,  directives  issued  to  her,  and  a  warning  that 
disciplinary  action  might  follow.  Respondent  provided  administration  with  written  responses 
to  most  of  the  conference  memoranda. 

8. 

On  April  20,  2012,  respondent  received  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which 
noted  deficiencies  in  10  areas  related  to  classroom  instruction.  On  April  18,  2013,  respondent 
received  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  (11  Days).  On  April  30, 
2013,  respondent  received  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation.  The  suspension  notice  and  the 
evaluation  contained  numerous  “charges,”  all  pertaining  to  classroom  instruction. 

9. 

The  District  provided  respondent  with  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the 
Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  program,  which  provides  to  teachers  who  have  either 
volunteered  to  participate  or  received  a  below  standard  evaluation  with  one-on-one  support 
from  a  consulting  teacher,  for  the  2011/2012  and  the  2012/2013  school  years.  The  District 
also  afforded  respondent  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  various  professional  development 
training  programs  and  activities.  Respondent  availed  herself  of  those  opportunities. 
Complainant’s  Charging  Allegations  1  T. hrough  4 

  

10. 

These  charges  pertain  to  events  that  are  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  spring 

11. 

2010,  during  the  2009/2010  school  year. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charges  1,  2,  and  4  that,  on  March  4,  March  5,  and 

March  18,  2010,  respectively,  respondent  “failed  to  prepare  and/or  provide  lesson  plans  for 
substitute  teachers.” 

  
  

 

  

12. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  1,  but  it  Supported  Charges  2  and  4. 
Respondent’s  colleagues,  Ms.  Kaskela  and  Ms.  Johnson,  testified  credibly  that  on  a  few 
occasions  when  respondent  was  absent  they  were  unable  to  find  lesson  plans  in  respondent’s 
Classroom,  so  they  prepared  lesson  plans  for  respondent’s  substitutes.  Respondent  testified 
that  it  was  her  practice  to  leave  lesson  plans  in  the  classroom  and  also  to  post  lesson  plans  on 
SubFinder.  There  was  uncontroverted  corroborative  written  evidence  that  on  March  4,  2010, 
respondent  did  leave  a  lesson  plan  for  her  substitute:  there  was  no  documentary  evidence 
supporting  respondent’s  testimony  as  to  the  other  two  dates.  On  those  occasions  when 
respondent  did  not  leave  lesson  plans,  or  when  she  left  plans  that  Kaskela  and  Johnson  were 
unable  to  locate,  the  task  of  creating  a  plan  for  the  substitute  was  simple.  Respondent  was 
using  the  California  State  University  Expository  Readers  and  Writers  Handbook;  the 
handbook’s  teacher’s  manual  has  daily  lesson  plans.  Kaskela  and  Johnson  found  the  spot  in 
the  handbook  where  respondent  left  off  and  told  the  substitute  to  use  the  next  lesson  plan. 

13. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  3  that,  on  March  16,  2010,  respondent  “sent  a 
student  to  the  Dean's  office  for  defiance  but  failed  to  issue  or  send a  referral.  The  student  was 
instructed  to  return  to  the  classroom  to  obtain  a  referral  at  which  time  [respondent]  demanded 
that  the  student  leave  the  classroom.” 

14, 

The  evidence  supported  Charge  3,  in  part.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that 

respondent  sent  student  BH  to  the  dean’s  office  without a  referral.  Among  other  things, 
respondent  testified  that  she  always  used  written  referrals  when  Sending  students  to  the 
dean’s  office.  The  District  witnesses  admitted  that,  because  teachers  did  not  retain  a  copy  of 
referrals  they  issued,  there  was  no  way  of  determining  whether  students  appearing  at  the 
dean’s  office  had  not  been  issued  referrals  or  had  simply  discarded  them  and  falsely  claimed 
that  no  referral  was  issued. 

| 

Complainant's  Charging  Allegations  5  T. hrough  19 

15. 

These  charges  pertain  to  events  that  are  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  fall  2010, 

during  the  2010/2011  school  year. 

16. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charges  5,  6,  and  7  that,  on  September  15,  2010, 

im 

respondent  “kicked  student 
M.  out  of  class  and  yelled  at  her,  ‘Go  find  a  new  teacher’ 
and  ‘Grab a  chair  and  sit  outside’  after  the  student  returned  from  the  office  because  she  did 
not  have  a  referral,”  and  “sent  student,  1M.  to  sit  outside  of  her  classroom 
unsupervised  during  period.  [Respondent]  had  previously  been  directed  not  to  utilize  this 
form  of  classroom  management  or  discipline  during  conferences  on,  among  other  dates, 
October  3,  2006  and  March  24,  2010.”  The  evidence  supported  Charges  5,  6,  and  7,  and 
respondent’s  denial  of  the  charges  is  not  corroborated  or  credible.  In  memoranda  respondent 
wrote  to  administration,  in  reply  to  a  conference  memo  she  received  critical  of  her  handling 
of  student  JJ  M.,  respondent  did  not  dispute  the  charge  or  address  the  issue. 

  

17. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  8  that,  on  September  16,  2010,  respondent 
“harassed,  bullied,  mocked,  mimicked  and/or  made  fun  of  the  accent  of  student, Km  S. 
when  the  student  volunteered  to  read  an  essay  in  class.”  The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge 

  
  

4 

 

  

8.  Student  KMS.  offered  self-contradictory  testimony  and  was  not  credible.  Respondent 
testified  that  she  was  making  appropriate  inquiries  into  whether  student  KEM  S.  was  making 
fun  of  Italian-Americans;  complainant  did  not  establish  otherwise. 

18. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  9  that,  on  September  16,  2010,  respondent  “in 
the  presence  of  other  studenis,  . 
.  got  very  close  to  student 
R.’s  face  and  told  her 
that  she  should  not  be  laughing  as  her  essay  was  not  good.  [Respondent’s]  conduct  caused 
MEER,  embarrassment  and/or  humiliation.”  The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  9;  it 
did  not  establish  that  respondent  did  anything  inappropriate  or  that  she  humiliated  student 
MER. 

. 

19. 

|  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  10  that,  on  September  17,  2010,  respondent 

R.  to  leave  the  classroom  and  sit  outside  in  the  hallway  during  the  entire 

“directed  M 
class.  When  the  student  asked  to  return  to  class  so  that  she  could  learn,  [respondent] 
informed  her  that  she  could  not.”  The  evidence  supported  Charge  10.  There  were  detailed 
Student  statements  regarding  the  incident,  and  respondent  provided  no  written  response 
addressing  the  charge  after  receipt  of  a  memorandum  about  it  from  administration. 

20. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  11  that,  on  September  17,  2010,  respondent 
“rudely  yelled  ..  .  to  student  KJS.:  ‘Be  quiet’  and  ‘Get  out  of  my  class.’”  The  evidence 
did  not  support  Charge  11.  Respondent  testified  credibly  that  student Kis.  was  rude  that 
day  and  that  respondent  offered  to  talk  to  KS.  before  or  after  school.  KEBS.’s  written 
Statement  and  testimony  were  inconsistent  and  were  not  found  to  be  credible. 

21. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  12  that,  on  September  29,  2010,  respondent 

“rudely  entered  the  room  during  a  previously  scheduled  parent  conference  with  the  parents  of 
student  MER.  and  Jose  Castelo,  Assistant  Principal.  [Respondent]  then  demanded  to 
tape  record  the  conference.  However,  when  she  was  told  that  she  could  not  do  SO, 
[Respondent]  rudely  and  abruptly  walked  out  of  the  meeting.  [Respondent]  was  previously 
advised  that  she  could  not  tape  record  the  meeting.”  The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  12. 
Respondent  appeared  at  the  meeting  and  was  surprised  to  find  Castelo  there.  She  reasonably 
believed  his  presence  signified  that  the  meeting  could  lead  to  discipline.  She  believed  that 
she  could,  therefore,  have  a  union  representative  present  or  could  record  the  meeting.  The 
evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  acted  rudely. 

22. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  13  that,  on  October  1,  2010,  respondent 

“refused  to  attend  a  scheduled  conference  with  Assistant  Principal  Jose  Castelo  because  she 
was  not  permitted  to  record  the  meeting.”  Uncontroverted  evidence  supported  Charge  13. 

  

23. 

Charges  14  through  17  are  related  and  are  here  addressed  together. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  14  that,  on  October  4,  2010,  respondent  stated  to  student 
Mi.  in  the  presence  of  other  students,  “*You  shouldn’t  even  be  in  this  school’  and  ‘I 
will  be  glad  if  and  when  you  get  kicked  out.’”  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  15  that,  on 
October  15,  2010,  respondent  stated  to  student  MEER.  in  the  presence  of  other  students, 
“*You’re  lucky  that  I  and  the  rest  of  the  school  allows  you  to  be  here,’  ‘If  you  keep  defying 
me,  I°ll  send  you  back  to  wherever  you  came  from,’  and  ‘I’m  not  going  to  listen  to  you[,] 

  
  

   

5 

  

like  you  weren’t  there.’”  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  16  that,  on  October  28,  2010, 
respondent  “kicked  student  JH.  out  of  the  classroom  without  supervision  for 
approximately  10  minutes.”  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  17  that,  on  November  4,  2010, 
respondent  stated  to  student  M 

R.,  in  the  presence  of  other  students,  that: 

A.  “I  can  comment  about  your  mother,  but  I’m  going  to  refrain. . 

. 

again  I'm  from  Inglewood.  We  know  how  to  get  down. 

B.  “I’m  so  concerned  about  you  that  I’m  talking  to  Ms.  Clark  to  get  you 

sent  out  of  here. 

C.  “That's  funny  [MJ§JR.,]  because  Ms.  Clark  knows  that  I  have 

friends  in  the  District  and  she  wouldn't  cross  me  like  that. 

D.  “Really?!  Can  you  get  me  the  names  of  those  people  so  I  can  talk  to 
Ms.  Clark  about  them?  Or  you  can’t  because  you’re  lying.  You’re  just  like  Ms. 
S[.]  (student),  a  liar...  .” 

24. 

The  evidence  supported  Charges  14,  15,  16,  and  17.  Testimony  and 

corroborative  documentary  evidence  establish  that  respondent  questioned  student  M 
R.’s  right  to  attend  the  school,  that  respondent  sent  student  JBBH.  out  of  the  classroom 
unsupervised,  and  that  respondent  made  some  of  the  statements  alleged  in  Charge  17, 
Respondent’s  written  response  to  memoranda  from  administration  addressing  the  charges 
does  not  refute  them. 

25. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  18  that,  on  November  9,  2010,  respondent 

“refused  to  attend  a  scheduled  conference  with  Assistant  Principal  Jose  Castelo  because  she 
was  not  permitted  to  record  the  meeting.”  The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  18. 
Respondent  was  not  directed  to  attend  a  meeting  with  Castelo  on  November  9,  2010;  she  was 
unable  to  arrange  for  her  union  representative  to  appear,  and  did  not  wish  to  attend  without 
the  representative  or  the  ability  to  tape  record  the  meeting,  which  Castelo  would  not  allow. 
The  meeting  was  rescheduled  for  three  days  later,  November  12,  2010,  and  respondent 
attended,  accompanied  by  her  union  representative. 

26. 

27. 

All  subsequent  charges  are  based  on  allegations  of  unsatisfactory  classroom 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  19  that,  on  November  10,  2010,  “Lilia  Postell, 
Assistant  Principal,  observed  [respondent]  photographing  students  during  lunch  without  their 
or  their  parent’s  consent  and  without  approval  from  the  administration.”  The  evidence  did 
not  support  Charge  19.  The  charge,  which  was  denied  by  respondent,  was  not  supported  by 
competent  evidence, 

  
  
  

instruction;  there  are  no  subsequent  charges  pertaining  to  respondent’s  behavior  toward 
students  and  parents,  which  respondent  appears  to  have  corrected. 

if 

 

  

Complainant's  Charging  Allegations  20  Through  23 

These  charges  pertain  to  events  that  are  alleged  to  have  occurred  during  the 

2011/2012  school  year. 

28. 

29. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  20  that,  on  December  12,  2011,  respondent 

failed  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

(1) 

Respondent  distributed  a  graphic  organizer  for  the  pre-writing 
activity.  All  of  the  prompts  were  “what”  questions.  There  was  no  evidence  of 
analysis,  evaluation  or  application  in  what  the  students  were  being  asked  to 
perform. 

B. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

procedures: 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  classroom  routines  or 

There  was  no  opening  activity  or warm-up. 

There  was  an  agenda,  yet  it  only  reflected  one  item, 

(two  pieces  of  paper)  took  five  minutes.  The  writing  activity  began  18  minutes 
into  class. 

Distribution  of  the  writing  prompt  &  graphic  organizer 

questions. 

There  was  no  established  process  for  answering  student 

seated  at  her  computer. 

Respondent  took  attendance  15  minutes  into  class  while 

Instructions  were  unclear.  Many  students  asked,  “What 

are  we  supposed  to  do?”  Respondent  failed  to  respond  or  clarify  the 
instruction,  thus  prompting  some  students  to  ask  each  other  for clarification. 

(g) 

Respondent  asked  the  class,  “Is  it  clear?”  However,  she 
used  a  very  low  or  soft  voice  such  that  most  of  the  students  failed  to  hear  the 
question. 

(h) 

There  were  no  clear  transitions. 

(1) 

(a) 

(bo) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

  

(i) 

There  was  no  clear  product  or  assignment, 

 
  

  

    

Students  were  given  thirty  minutes  to  complete  the 

G) 

graphic  organizer,  yet  they  were  not  collected  and  respondent  made  no  marks 
or  notations  to  verify  that  the  students  had  completed  the  assignment. 

(2) 
bulletin  boards. 

No  graded  student  work  was  posted  on  any  of  the 

(3) 

.  Respondent  circulated  throughout  the  class,  but 

repeatedly  talked  to  the  same  students  and  did  not  notice  that  7-10 
students  did  no  work  and  did  not  complete  any  portion  of  the  graphic 
organizer. 

30. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  20.  Blake  chose  to  observe  respondent’s 

class  on  December  12,  2011,  during  the  last  period  of  the  last  day  of  the  first  semester,  the 
day  before  final  exams.  Graded  student  work,  which  had  been  posted  on  the  bulletin  board, 
was  returned  to  the  students  and  books  were  collected.  The  period  was  dedicated  to  review 
for  the  final  exams,  with  a  focus  on  writing.  The  student  assignment  was  to  begin  work  on  a 
graphic  organizer,  which,  respondent  had  previously  explained  to  them,  the  students  were  to 
take  home  with  them  and  bring  back  the  next  day  with  their  final  essay  attached.  They  would 
get  credit  for  the  graphic  organizer  and  essay  when  they  turned  in  their  essay  the  next  day, 
the  day  of  the  final.  The  purpose  of  organizer  was  to  help  the  students  glean  examples  for 
their  essay,  and  respondent  used  appropriate  instructional  techniques  in  conducting  the 
directed  lesson,  including  a  warmup  of  WOW  words  transitioning  to  students working 
independently  in  pods,  as  well  as  positive  behavior  supports,  lesson  sequencing,  and 
circulating  through  the  classroom. 

31.  |  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  21  that,  on  January  24,  2012,  respondent  failed 

to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

(1) 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  engaging  students  in  problem 

solving,  critical  thinking,  and  other  activities  that  make  the  subject  matter 
meaningful,  the  book,  Into  the  Wild.  Students  were  not  asked  to  analyze, 
evaluate,  synthesize,  or  predict  from  the  book.  Rather,  during  the  “popcorn” 
reading,  [respondent]  focused  on  correcting  mispronounced  words  and 
providing  students  the  origin  of  certain  words. 

(2) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  developing  and  sequencing 

instructional  activities  and  materials  for  student  learning: 

student  understanding  of  the  material.   

Respondent  did  not  ask  probing  questions  to  verify  and  validate 

Students  read  aloud  in  “popcorn”  fashion,  yet  they  did  not  take 

notes  or  discuss  the  text. 

b) 

a) 

    

  

      

The  purpose  of  the  WOW  words  was  unclear  and  did  not  relate 

c) 

to  the  posted  standard,  or  the  book. 

(3) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  designing  short-term  and 
long-term  plans  to  foster  student  learning,  as  [respondent]’s  lecture  lacked 
focus  towards  a  specific  objective.  At  one  point  respondent  stated,  “Stay 
focused,”  yet  she  went  from  one  unrelated  topic  to  another  and  26  out  of  39 
students  did  not  participate  in  the  activity. 

(4) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  using  California  subject 

matter  standards  to  establish  learning  goals,  and  even  though  a  standard  was 
posted  for  writing  reflective  compositions,  [respondent]  made  no  connection 
between  the  standard  and  the  lesson. 

[Respondent]  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively: 

[Respondent]  took  the  first  10  minutes  of  class  to  take 

attendance. 

The  distribution  (12:05  p.m.-12:12  p.m.)  and  collection  (12:22 

p.m.-12:27  p.m.)  of  the  book,  Into  the  Wild,  resulted  in  a  loss  of  12  minutes  of 
instructional  time. 

The  collection  of  homework  took  five  minutes. 

The  lecture  activity  (12:23  p.m.-12:36  p.m.)  on  the  paragraph 

worksheet,  resulted  in  a  loss  of  13  minutes  of  instructional  time. 

e) 

Transitions  between  activities  took  a  total  of  13  minutes,  and 
[respondent]’s  lack  of  urgency  resulted  in  students  Sitting  at  their  desks  with 
nothing  to  do,  waiting  for  the  next  activity. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  planning  and  implementing 

classroom  routines  and  procedures  that  support  student  learning: 

No  opening  activity  or  warm-up  was  posted. 

There  was  an  agenda  and  it  had  only  one  item  -  WOW  words. 

There  was  no  established  process  for  answering  student 

questions,  as  students  blurted  out  questions  and  comments. 

(5) 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

B. 

(1) 

a) 

b) 

c) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  establishing  and 
    

communicating  learning  goals  for  students,  as  there  was  no  connection 

(2) 

    

   

  

  

between  what  [respondent]  asked  students  to  do  in  class  and  any  final  product 
or  objective. 

C. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  there  was  little  or  no 
evidence  of  creating  a  physical  environment  that  engages  all  students,  as  there 
was  no  graded  student  work  posted  on  any  of  the  bulletin  boards. 

32. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  21.  Respondent’s  testimony  convincingly 

rebutted  the  charges  and  evidence  introduced  on  behalf  of  complainant.  The  classroom 
observation  was  conducted  on  respondent’s  first  day  back  at  work  after  suffering  a  foot 
injury.  She  was  on  crutches,  which  hampered  her  ability  to  post  student  work  on  the  bulletin 
boards.  She  made  repeated  requests  to  administration  for  assistance  with  that  task,  but 
received  no  response.  Instead,  she  was  charged  with  failure  to  post  opening  activities, 
warmups,  and  student  work.  Blake  was  only  present  for  38  minutes  and  was  not  present  to 
see  all  the  components  of  respondent’s  structured  lesson.  Moreover,  Blake  conceded  that  her 
timekeeping  of  activities  in  respondent’s  classroom  that  day,  used  to  support  the  charges  of 
instructional  inefficiency,  was  inaccurate.  Respondent  used a  variety  of  appropriate 
instructional  techniques  and  teaching Strategies. 

33. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  22  that,  on  February  22,  2012,  respondent 

failed  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

(1) 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

[Respondent]  failed  to  use  instructional  time effectively: 

(a) 

At  9:35  a.m.,  [respondent]  said,  “I  have  to  find  the  right  track,” 
and  then  spent  three  minutes  searching  for  the  ‘Alaska’  chapter  on  the  audio 
CD.  Students  watched  [respondent]  at  the  computer  while  she  searched  for  and 
found  the  correct  track. 

(b) 

At.  9:55  a.m.  [Respondent]  said  “Take  five  minutes  to  write  out 
the  questions  on  page  55,”  yet  she  did  not  give  a  ‘two-minute  warning’  until  8 
minutes  had  elapsed.  The  activity  lasted  10  minutes  rather  than  five,  resulting 
in  a  loss  of  five  instructional  minutes. 

(c) 

P' 

(d) 

group 
group 

to  start. 

group  did  not  begin  until  five  minutes  later. 

Transitioning  the  class  from  writing  the  questions  to  the  group 
presentations  took  six  minutes,  during  which  time  the  students  were  Sitting  at 
their  desks  with  nothing 
to  do  except  wait  for  the  first 
is 

The  first  group  presented  for  less  than  one  minute  and  the  next 

  
  
10   

Transitions  between  activities  took  a  total  of  15  minutes  and 
[respondent]’s  lack  of  urgency  resulted  in  students  sitting  at  their  desks  with 
nothing  to  do,  waiting  for  the  next  activity. 

{c) 

 

  

(2) 

Respondent  failed  to  engage  students  in  problem  solving, 

critical  thinking,  and  other  activities  that  make  subject  matter meaningful: 

(a)  _  Students  were  not  asked  to  analyze,  evaluate,  synthesize,  or 

predict  from  the  book. 

(b) 

The  group  presentations  lacked  rigor  as  both  groups  read  from 

their  papers  and  neither  group  spoke  for  more  than  90  seconds. 

(3) 

[Respondent]  failed  to  develop  and  sequence  instructional 

activities  and  materials  for  student  learning  or  use  a  variety  of  instructional 
strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs: 

(a) 

The  passage  from  the  book  on  audio  CD  included  references  to 
Jack  London  and  Ernest  Hemingway,  yet  there  was  no  explanation  about  those 
writers,  their  significance,  or  the  reasons  they  were  referenced  in  the  reading 
materials. 

(b) 

Chapter  9  of  Into  the  Wild  included  several  vocabulary  words, 

yet  there  was  no  reference  to  or  explanation  of  the  words. 

(c) 
validate  student  understanding  of  the  material. 

[Respondent]  did  not  ask  probing  questions  to  verify  and 

(d) 

Many  students  did  not  participate  either  by  reading  or  answering 
questions  and  they  were  permitted  to  sit  and  not  produce  any  work  during  the 
period. 

(4) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  designing  short-term  and 

long-term  plans  to  foster  student  learning: 

(a) 

The  posted  agenda  listed  “Literary  Circles,”  however  there  was 
no  such  activity.  Two  groups  made  very  brief  presentations  to  the  rest  of  the 
class. 

(o) 

There  was  no  specific  objective  or  clear  focus  to  [respondent]’s 

35. 

34, 

A3.d. 

perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  22,  with  the  exception  of  paragraph 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  23  that,  on  March  9,  2012,  respondent  failed  to 

lecture  and  she  often  went  on  tangents  into  one-on-one  conversations with 
students.  Many  students  stopped  working  whenever  [respondent]  spoke. 

  
  
11  

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

A. 

  

(1) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  engaging  students  in  problem 

solving,  critical  thinking,  and  other  activities  that  make  subject  material 
meaningful: 

(a) 

[Respondent]  did  not  structure  activities  or  ask  students  to 

analyze,  evaluate,  synthesize,  or  predict  in  preparation  for  writing  the essay. 

(b) 

[Respondent]  had  students  seated  in  rows  facing  towards  the 
front  of  the  classroom  and  did  not  provide  students  an  opportunity  to  work 
collaboratively  in  pairs  or  small  groups  for  the  purpose  of  interacting  with  and 
learning  from  their  peers. 

(2) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  developing  and  sequencing 

instructional  activities  and  materials  for  student  learning.  [Respondent]  did  not 
provide  students  any  pre-writing  exercises  such  as  quick-write,  note  review  or 
outlining,  nor  did  she  structure  any  collaborative  activities  such  as 
Think/Pair/Share,  literary  circles  or  small  group-discussion  groups. 

(3) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  designing  short-term  and 
long-term  plans  to  foster  student  Jearning,  as  [respondent]'s  talk  about  the 
potential  essay  topics  lacked  focus,  and  she  frequently  mentioned  subjects 
unrelated  to  Expository  Composition  or  participated  in  ‘one-on-one’  side 
conversations  with  students.  [Respondent]  did  not  instruct  students  to  take  any 
notes  during  this  activity  and  as  a  result  of  not  participating  in  the  lesson, 
many  students  engaged  in  off-topic  behaviors  as  soon  as  [respondent]  began 
speaking. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

[Respondent]  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively: 

B. 

(1) 

(a) 

From  11:23  a.m.-11:29  a.m.,  (6  minutes  from  the  11:23  a.m. 

tardy  bell),  [respondent]  did  not  provide  students  with  an  opening  or 
instructional  activity,  and  as  a  result,  students  were  engaged  in  off-task 
behaviors  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  having  off-topic,  personal  conversations. 

(b) 

From  11:30  a.m.-11:50  a.m.  (20  minutes),  [respondent]  told 

students  about  the  writing  prompt  and  possible  topics  for  the  essay,  however 
her  attempt  to  foster  a  discussion  was  ineffective  as  she  consistently  utilized 
the  “teacher-to-student-to-teacher”  delivery  model.  [Respondent]  did  not 
involve  all  of  the  students  in  her  talk  about  potential  essay  topics  and  she 
allowed  students  to  disengage  from  the  subject  material  and  not participate. 

  

(c) 

From  11:40  a.m.-11:48  a.m.  (8  minutes),  a  student  had  his  head 

down  on  the  desk  and  [respondent]  did  not  redirect  him  to  participate  in  the 
activity. 

12    
  

    

   

From  11:52  a.m.  -  11:57  a.m.  (5  minutes),  [respondent]’s 

  

(d) 

attempt  to  efficiently  transition  from  her  talk  about  the  essay  topics  to  the 
WOW  words  was  ineffective  as  students  lost  5  minutes  of  instructional  time 
before  beginning  the  quiz. 

(2) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  establishing  a  climate  that 

promotes  fairness  and  respect,  as  [respondent]  did  not  structure  her 
introduction  of  the  writing  prompt  to  raise  the  discussion  to  the  level  of  a 
meaningful  and  thoughtful  examination  of  prejudice  and  stereotypes. 
[Respondent]’s  talk  to  students  elicited  comments  from  students  that  were 
offensive  and  the  unstructured  conversation  devolved  into  and  reinforced 
negative  stereotypes,  such  as  (1)  Mexicans  and  Latinos  eating  beans  and  (2) 
African-Americans  eating  collard  greens. 

(3) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  planning  and  implementing 

classroom  routines  and  procedures  that  support  student  learning,  as 
[respondent]’s  attempts  to  include  all  students  in  the  discussion  by  drawing 
names  from  a  cup  was  time  consuming  and  distracting  to  students.  While 
drawing  a  name  from  the  cup  [respondent]  stated  with  a  sarcastic  tone,  “I  am 
drawing  a  name  from  the  cup  so  that  everyone  has  a  turn  which  is  what  I  was 
told  to  do.” 

(4) 

There  was  little  to  no  evidence  of  establishing  and maintaining 
standards  for  student  behavior,  as  [respondent]  did  not  wait  for  the  class  to  be 
quiet  before  she  began  speaking  and  she  consistently  attempted  to  speak  over 
students  and  their  off-topic,  personal  conversations.  As  a  result  of  the  high 
noise  level  from  the  off-topic  conversations,  many  students  could  not  hear 
[respondent]. 

Cc. 

In  the  area  of  support  for  student  learning,  [respondent]  failed  to 

use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond  to  students’ 
diverse  needs: 

(4)  —  [Respondent]  did  not  provide  students  with  any  differentiated 

instruction  and/or  activities,  or  address  the  unique  needs  of  English  learner  or 
Special  Education  students,  contrary  to  prior  directives.  The  lecture  continued 
to  be  [respondent}’s  primary  mode  of  instructional  delivery  rather  than 
utilizing  a  variety  of  teaching  strategies  designed  to  make  subject  matter 
meaningful. 

(2) 

_  [Respondent]  did  not  provide  students  any  opportunities  for 

critical  thinking,  collaborative  or  group  learning  or  reflecting  upon  their  own 
work  or  that  of  their  peers. 

36. 
(B)(1)(c). 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  23,  with  the  exception  of  paragraph 

13   

  

  

Complainant’s  Charging  Allegations  24  Through  27 

These  charges  pertain  to  events  that  are  all  alleged  to  have  occurred  during  the 

2012/2013  school  year. 

37. 

38. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  24  that,  on  September  6,  2012,  respondent 

failed  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  there  was  no 

evidence  of  designing  short-term  and  long-term  plans  to  foster  student  learning 
and  achievement.  [Respondent]  failed  to  ensure  that  each  instructional  activity 
was  related  to  rigorous  learning  goals  as  evidenced  by  the  following: 

(1) 

The  Learning  Objective  stated,  “Students  will  evaluate  two 

speeches  by  reading  Check  Questions  to  prepare  for  the  final  essay.”  It  was 
unclear  how  reading  the  Check  Questions  helped  students  evaluate  the  two 
speeches  and  how  copying  the  definitions  and  questions  from  a  book  were 
connected  to  the  standard  [respondent]  posted. 

(2). 

The  warm-up  activity  consisted  of  defining  the  Wow  word 

dermatitis.  [Respondent]  did  not  establish  or  make  clear  to  students  the 
relationship  of  defining  the  terms  to  the  learning  objective,  standards,  or  the 
lesson. 

(3) 

|  The  warm-up  activity  was  from  approximately  8:20  a.m.  to  8:36 

a.m.  and  lasted  approximately  16  minutes.  [Respondent]  did  not  review  the 
activity,  make  reference  to  it,  or  collect  it. 

(4)  |  Aconnection  between  reading,  the  copying  and  answering  of 

the  questions  at  the  end  of  the  reading  and  the  learning  objectives  was  not 
communicated  to  students. 

(5) 

|  There  were  many  poster-sized  Post-its  all  over  the  room. 

Students  in  the  back  of  the  classroom  could  not  read  them.  The  connection 
between  those  Post-its  and  the  lesson  objectives  was  unclear. 

B. 

[Respondent]  also  failed  to  plan  instruction  to  ensure  that  all 
groups  of  students  had  equal  access  to  the  curriculum.  She  did  not  frontload 
and/or  introduce  the  academic  vocabulary  as  students  struggled  with  the  choral 
reading  activity. 

c. 

[Respondent]  also  did  not  use  state  subject  matter  content 

standards  to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals  for  students.  She  assigned  low 

level  activities  such  as  copying  definitions  and  copying  questions  from  a  book.  

   

  

D. 

There  was  no  evidence  of  effective  strategies  to  address  the 

different  needs  of  different  students. 

E. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance,  [respondent] 
demonstrated  a  lack  of  (1)  using  instructional  time  effectively;  (2)  establishing 
a  climate  that  promotes  fairness  and  respect;  (3)  planning  and  implementing 
classroom  routines  and  procedures  that  support  student  learning;  (4) 
establishing  and  maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior;  and  (5)  designing 
lessons  to  engage  students  in  active,  intellectual,  and  rigorous  activity  as  made 
evident  by  the  following: 

(1) 

At  approximately  8:38  a.m.,  students  read  aloud  one  at  a  time. 
Within  two  minutes,  a  majority  of  the  class  was  disengaged  and  [respondent] 
failed  to  notice  or  address  this  behavior. 

(2) 

At  approximately  8:40  a.m.,  a  student  in  the  front  row  was 

making  faces  at  a  student  in  the  back.  The  student  in  the  back  was  not 
following  the  reading  and  was  twirling  his  pen. 

(3) 

At  approximately  8:46  a.m.,  several  students  were  yawning 

frequently,  two  students  had  their  heads  down,  and  three  students  were 
slouching  in  their  chairs  and  doodling  on  a  sheet  of  paper. 

(4) 

At  approximately  8:54  a.m.,  a  young  lady  in  purple  put  her  head 

down  and  two  young  men  in  the  front  row  were  making  funny  faces  at  each 
other  and  began  to  intentionally  rub  their  tennis  shoes  on  the  floor  causing  a 
screeching  sound.  [Respondent]  was  unaware  of  this  conduct  and  failed  to 
address  it. 

(5) 

At  approximately  9:02  a.m.,  the  reading,  which  lasted  24 

minutes,  was  completed  but  there  was  no  discussion  of  the  reading.  Instead 
[respondent]  had  students  copy  the  questions  at  the  end  of  the  reading  and 
answer  the  questions  individually. 

(6)  |  From  approximately  8:25  a.m.  to  9:10  a.m.  (45  minutes),  there 

was  no  student-  to-student  interaction.  Students  worked  individually  on  the 
warm-up  activity  defining  words,  they  read  one  at  a  time  during  the  choral 
reading,  and  then  they  copied  and  answered  questions  from  the  book. 

(7)  —  At  approximately  9:11  a.m.,  [respondent]  told  students,  “Feel 
free  to  work  with  a  partner,”  but  did  not  provide  any  norms  on  what  working 
with  a  partner  should  look  like  or  what  the  expectation  of  submitting  work 
was.  The  entire  class  ignored  the  statement,  immediately  stopped  working  and 

began  to  socialize.   
  

  

  

(8)  |  At  approximately  9:14  am.,  a  student  made  a  comment  to 
another  student,  “This  is  boring.”  Students  appeared  to  be  restless  and  anxious 
to  leave  the  class  as  they  stopped  working  and  did  not  seem  concerned  to 
complete  the  assignment. 

(9) 

At  approximately  9:15  a.m.,  [respondent]  stated  to  the  class,  “A 
few  of  you  are  finished.  The  rest  of  you  finish  for  homework.”  Students  began 
to  pack  up  their  belongings  and  left  when  the  bell  rang  without  [respondent] 
dismissing  them. 

(10) 

[Respondent]  did  not  review  or  collect  any  assignments  from 
students  and  did  not  evaluate  to  see  if  the  learning  objectives  for  the  day  had 
been  met.  There  was  no  closure  to  the  lesson. 

(11) 

[Respondent]  did  not  establish  and  maintain  standards  for 
student  behavior  nor  did  she  create  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and 
respect.  There  was  no  evidence  of  her  creating  a  positive  rapport  with  students. 

(a) 

On  September  12,  2012,  the  mother  of  DER.  reported  to 
administrators  that  [respondent]  had  previously  informed  her  that  her  son  had 
an  “attitude.”  a  R.  reported  to  his  mother  that  [respondent]  would  never 
say  hello  and  would  simply  make  notes  in  a  book. 

(b) 

A.  had  been  told  to  check  in  with  [respondent]  during 

On  September  13,  2012,  the  mother  of  CR  A.  reported  to 
administrators  that  she  was  concerned  because  of  the  way  [respondent]  treated 
her  son. Ci 
Homeroom  and  then  to  report  back  to  the  counselor’s  office  (Mrs.  Dreyer). 
According  to  CBA...  [respondent]  stated  to  him,  “No,  (you  cannot  go 
back  to  the  office),  I  am  not  breaking  any  rules  for  you  or  for  Mrs. Dreyer.” 
ml  A.  reported  that  [respondent]  was  constantly  rude  and  talked  down  to 

him. 

F. 

(1) 

(a) 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning: 

respond  to  student's  diverse  needs. 

[Respondent]  failed  to  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  to 

[Respondent]  did  not  deliver  a  teacher  directed  lesson.  The 

interaction  between  the  teacher  and  the  students  was  very  limited  and 
consisted  primarily  of  [respondent]  going  around  with  a  clipboard  checking  for 
something  or  calling  on  students  asking  them  to  answer  a  question  or  read. 

(b) 

[Respondent]  did  not  frontload,  promote,  or  model  the  use  of 

academic  vocabulary  relevant  to  the  reading  assignment. 

16 

  

 

  

  

  

     
   

(c) 

[Respondent]  failed  to  guide  students  to  be  self-directed  and 
assess  their  own  learning.  At  approximately  8:41  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked 
student  Michelle,  out  loud  in  the  presence  of  the  class,  “Do  you  know  how  to 
pronounce  it?”  (Referring  to  a  word  in  the  reading  material).  [Respondent]  did 
not  allow  sufficient  pause  time  for  the  student  to  answer.  Rather,  [respondent] 
answered  the  question  for  the  student  and  engaged  in  similar  conduct  with 
other  students. 

  

(a) 

[Respondent]  did  not  integrate  students’  prior  knowledge,  life 

experiences,  and  interests  into  the  instructional  program.  She  did  not  tie  in 
students’  experience  about  evaluating  the  credibility  of  an  author  and  person 
and  make  the  connection  to  the  lesson,  learning  objective  or  standard. 

39. 

|  The  evidence  supported  Charge  24,  paragraphs  A.2  through  4,  C,  E.1  through 

4  and  6  through  10,  and  F;  the  evidence  did  not  support  the  other  parts  of  the  charge.  The 
proven  portions  of  the  charge  are  partly  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  September  6,  2012,  the  day 
Dirlam  chose  to  observe  respondent’s  class,  was  the  day  respondent  returned  from 
bereavement  leave  after  her  father’s  death. 

40.  |  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  25  that,  on  February  22,  2012,  respondent 

failed  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

(1) 

There  was  minimal  evidence  of  designing  short-term  and  long- 
term  plans  to  foster  student  learning  and  achievement  of  the  State  Standards. 

(a) 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  [respondent]  had  various  State 

Standards  (Reading  Comprehension  2.1  and  2.2)  and  learning  objectives 
posted  on  the  board,  she  failed  to  review,  or  make  reference  to  any  of  the 
posted  materials  during  a  period  of  45  minutes. 

(b)  —  [Respondent]  failed  to  effectively  communicate  to  students  the 

purpose  of  the  lesson.  She  did  not  review  what  the  students  were  learning,  how 
the  activities  she  had  planned  would  help  the  students  accomplish  the  Learning 
Objective  and  meet  the  State  Standards,  and  why  it  is  important  or  relevant  to 
the  students. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  plan  rigorous  learning  activities  that  would 

help  students  meet  the  Learning  Objective  and  State  Standards,  nor  did  she 
make  a  connection  between  the  assignments  she  asked  students  to  complete 
and  the  Learning  Objectives.  The  agenda  stated,  “Warm-up  Academic 
Vocabulary.  Define  and  Delineate.  5  min.  Class  work:  Text  based  grammar 
exer.  3-15  min.  Activity  9  pg.  42  Structure  and  Text,  Questions  15  min. 
Descriptive  Outlining.  Evaluate  5-min.”  [Respondent]  did  not  review  or 

    

17

    

    

    
    

   
     
   

    

     

      
    

    

    

   

        
  
  

     

address  the  warm-up,  nor  did  she  make  a  connection  between  the  assignments 
and  the  Learning  Objectives  or  Standards. 

(3) 
needs  of  students. 

There  was  no  evidence  of  strategies  to  address  the  individual 

B. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

[Respondent]  did  not  create  an  effective  learning  environment  that 

engaged  students  in  active  intellectual  learning.  Many  students  were  not 
paying  attention  to  [respondent]  and  were  off-task  during  the  majority  of  the 
time  that  the  administrator  observed  the  class. 

(a)  | From  approximately  1:06  p.m.  to  1:20  p.m.,  a  student  sat 

reading  a  novel  instead  of  doing  the  warm-up  and  class  work, 

(b) 

At  approximately  1:25  p.m.,  a  student  was  organizing  his 

backpack  instead  of  copying  sentences  from  the  worksheet  displayed  on  the 
overhead  projector.  [Respondent]  did  not  redirect  or  address  the  student. 

(c) 

At  approximately  1:27  p.m.,  three  students  were  yawning 

frequently,  four  students  had  their  heads  down,  five  students  were  playing  with 
their  pens  or  doodling  on  their  papers.  [Respondent]  failed  to  intervene  or 
address  the  students’  behavior, 

(d) 

At  approximately  1:40  p.m.,  a  majority  of  the  class  was 

socializing.  [Respondent]  made  a  comment  to  the  class,  “I  hear  a  lot  of  chatter. 
I  hope  we  are  doing  what  we  are  supposed  to  be  doing.”  The  class  continued  to 
socialize  until  the  bell  rang  at  1:50  p.m.  (10  minutes).  [Respondent]  did  not 
redirect  or  address  the  students/class. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  utilize  instructional  time  effectively. 

(a)  |  From  approximately  1:12  p.m.  to  1:24  p.m,  (12  minutes), 
[respondent]  asked  students  to  copy  the  sentences  from  a  grammar  worksheet 
displayed  on  the  overhead  projector.  The  students  did  not  need  to  copy  the 
worksheet  since  [respondent]  subsequently  asked  individual  students  to  share 
their  answers  aloud.  [Respondent]  did  not  give  credit  or  collect  the 
assignment,  thus  resulting  in  a  loss  of  12  instructional  minutes. 

    

the  room  with  her  clipboard,  but  did  not  seem  to  be  keeping  record  of 
students’  work  as  she  walked  by  them.  [Respondent]  did  not  assess  student 
work  or  offer  constructive  feedback.

(b)  —  [Respondent]  spent  an  excessive  amount  of  time  walking  around 

  

    

C. 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning: 

(1) 

[Respondent]  did  not  effectively  monitor  for  student  learning  or 

check  for  student  understanding.  Although  she  circulated  around  the  room  to 
check  if  students  had  copied  the  sentences  displayed  on  the  overhead 
projector,  [respondent]  did  not  ask  students  to  explain,  summarize  or 
demonstrate  that  they  understood  the  content. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and 
resources  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs.  She  did  not  plan  activities  that 
would  have  allowed  for  collaborative  learning.  The  teacher-to-student 
interaction  was  limited  and  there  was  no  evidence  of  student-to-student 
interaction.  [Respondent]  also  failed  to  use  or  promote  the  use  of  academic 
vocabulary  with  the  exception  of  the  warm-up  which  she  did  not  review  or 
address. 

D. 

[Respondent]  also  failed  to  guide  students  to  be  self-directed 
learners  and  assess  their  own  learning.  She  did  not  provide  scaffolds  to  help 
students  answer  the  questions  on  their  own  for  the  class  work  that  she 
assigned.  Instead  [respondent]  gave  students  a  graph  of  where  they  could  find 
the  answers  and  advised  the  class,  “Write  this  table  to  help  make  this a  little 
simple.” 

41. 

|  The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  25,  with  the  exception  of  paragraph  A.2, 

a  charge  partly  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  the  class  period  was  shortened  that  day. 

42. 

Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  26  that,  on  January  22,  2013,  respondent  failed 

to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

(ql) 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

[Respondent]  did  not  demonstrate  evidence  of  short-term  plans 

to  foster  the  activities  she  planned  for  the  day. 

(a) 

The  Standards  posted  were  not  connected  to  the  learning 

objective  or  the  activities  she  planned  for  the  day. 

(b) 

The  learning  objective  posted  stated,  “You  (students)  will 

complete  Literary  Analysis  Form  of  Questioning  for  Final  Essay.” 

(c) 

The  Agenda  items  were;  “Warm-Up  Clear  desks  ready  for 
vocabulary  quiz-3  min.  Class  work  3  pg.  30  miii.  To  Kill  A  Mockingbird. 
Reflection  5  Min.  Homework:  Bring  PML  Review  Expository  Vocab.” 

(2) 

    

 [Respondent]’s  explanation  of  the  instructional  purpose  was 
unclear  to  students.  At  approximately  8:44a.m.,  19  minutes  into  the  period, 

19

  

[respondent]  read  the  standards  in  a  very  soft  inaudible  voice  and  while  facing 
the  board.  It  appeared  as  if  she  read  the  standards  to  herself  rather  than  the 
class.  [Respondent]  did  not  review  the  standards  or  learning  objective  with  — 
students  nor  did  she  demonstrate  their  connection  to  the  day's  learning. 

(a) 

At  approximately  8:41  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  students  to  take 
out  the  book,  To  Kill  a  Mockingbird,  and  their  Class  Structure  Thinking  Maps. 

(b) 

[Respondent]  asked  the  class,  “Who  can  give  me  an  example  of 

socialization?”  There  was  no  response. 

) 

[Respondent]  went  to  a  cup  with  sticks  that  contained  students’ 

names  and  pulled  out  the  name  REO.  He  had  no  response. 

(d) 

[Respondent]  then  asked,  “What's  the  definition?  Do  you 
remember  the  example  I  gave  you  on  Friday?”  There  was  no  response. 

7 

(3) 

The  student  group  activity  [respondent]  assigned  did  not  support 

the  instructional  outcomes,  nor  did  she  clearly  explain  the  purpose  of  the 
group  work.  As  a  result,  students  became  confused. 

(a) 

At  approximately  8:51  a.m.,  [respondent]  told  students,  “You 
will  work  in  groups.  I  need  one  of  each  in  each  group,  director  is  in  charge, 
summarizer  takes  notes,  word  watcher  looks  for  new  vocabulary,  and  the 
illustrator  draws.” 

(b) 

At  approximately  8:52  a.m.,  [respondent]  said,  “If  anyone  has 

any  questions,  now  is  the  time  to  ask.”  A  student  asked,  “Ms.,  what  are  we 
doing?”  Rather  than  clarify  the  task  for  him,  [respondent]  responded,  “I  will 
give  you  one  minute  to  decide  your  roles.” 

| 

(c) 

At  approximately  8:59  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  students  to 

move  their  desks,  but  they  ignored  her  and  instead  socialized.  One  group  of 
three  girls  moved  their  desks  about  30  seconds  later. 

B. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

(1) 

—  [Respondent]  did  not  implement  classroom  procedures  and 

routines  that  support  student  learning. 

(a) 

From  approximately  8:28  a.m.  to  8:40  a.m.,  students  took  a  quiz 

which  consisted  of  defining  seven  words  that  were  written  on  the  board. 

(b) 

At  approximately  8:33  a.m.,  four  students  were  sharing  answers 
during  the  quiz  while  [respondent]  wrote  something  on  the  board  and  walked 
back  and  forth  from  her  desk  to  the  board.  She  was  either  unaware  or  chose  to 
ignore  the  students  who  were  sharing  answers. 

20 

 

  

(c) 

At  approximately  9:12  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  students  to  do  a 
reflection  on  two  prompts:  (I)  “What  did  you  learn  today?”  (2)  “How did  you 
learn  it?”  [Respondent]  told  students  that  they  would  be  doing  the  reflection  of 
these  two  prompts  every  day  and  would  receive  5  points  for  every  day.  A 
majority  of  the  students  did  not  do  the  reflection.  Instead  they  laughed  and 
socialized.  They  appeared  to  not  take  the  assignment  seriously.  [Respondent] 
did  not  review  or  discuss  the  reflection  with  students.  She  collected  them  when 
the  bell  rang. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  create  an  effective  learning  environment 

that  engaged  students  in  active  intellectual  activity. 

(a) 

At  approximately  9:00  a.m.,  two  students  in  the  back  of  the 

room  did  not  appear  to  be  working  in  a  group,  but  instead  sat  independently 
reading  To  Kill  a  Mockingbird.  [Respondent]  redirected  them  at 
approximately  9:05  a.m. 

(bo) 

At  approximately  9:01  a.m.,  four  female  students  were  engaged 

in  a  social  conversation,  giggling,  instead  of  doing  the  assignment  of 
completing  the  Literary  Analysis  Form.  [Respondent]  approached  the  group  of 
girls  at  approximately  9:08  a.m.,  and  told  them  she  would  give  them a  zero  for 
the  day.  A  student  replied,  “No,  Ms.  we  were  talking  about  what  to  do.” 
[Respondent]  walked  away  and  they  continued  to  socialize.  She  did  not 
address  the  behavior  any  further. 

(3)  |  [Respondent]  did  not  maintain  or  establish  standards  for  student 

behavior  or  redirect  them  when  several  exhibited  disrespect  for  one  another. 
At  approximately  9:04  a.m.,  a  student  (#1)  yelled  out,  “RA  what  am  I 
supposed  to  draw?”  RZ  replied  to  the  student  sarcastically, “Draw  a  kid 
holding  a  pumpkin.”  Several  students  laughed.  A  third  student  then  stated, 
“He's  lying  to  you  fool.  I'm  going  to  draw  the  cover  of  the  book.”  Several 
students  laughed.  At  approximately  9:13  a.m.,  a  majority  of  the  class  was 
socializing  rather  than  working  on  the  assignment. 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning: 

C. 

(I) 

Rather  than  monitor  for  student  learning,  [respondent]  walked 

around  the  room  and  simply  checked  to  see  if  students  were  on  task. 

(a) 

At  approximately  8:52  a.m.,  [respondent]  stated  to  the  class,  “If 

anyone  has  any  questions,  now  is  the  time  to  ask.”  [Respondent]  did  not  ask 
students  questions  that  allowed  them  to  demonstrate  they  understood  the  task 
at  hand,  what  the  purpose  of  the  assignment  was,  or  any  key  concepts. 

21 

 

     

  

(b) 

At  approximately  9:02  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  a  student,  “Mr. 
Dominguez,  what  are  we  working  on?”  He  did  not  respond.  [Respondent]  then 
walked  to  her  desk. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  integrate  students’  prior  knowledge,  life 

experiences,  and  interests  into  the  instructional  program.  At  approximately 
8:45  a.m.,  [respondent]  briefly  mentioned  that  there  was  a  theme  of  race  and 
socialization  in  the  book,  To  Kill  a  Mockingbird,  and  she  mentioned  Martin 
Luther  King  day  and  the  Civil  Rights  movement,  but  did  she  did  not  encourage 
students  to  participate  in  a  discussion  or  share  their  experience  with  race  or  the 
theme  of  socialization. 

(3) 

[Respondent]  did  not  use  or  promote  the  use  of  academic 

vocabulary  with  the  exception  of  the  quiz  which  she  did  not  review.  It 
appeared  that  many  students  were  not  able  to  define  the  words  as  there  were 
many  blanks  where  there  should  have  been  definitions. 

43. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  26,  with  the  exception  of  paragraph 

A.2.d. 

44.  |  Complainant  alleges  in  Charge  27  that,  on  February  19,  2013,  respondent 

failed  to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  as  classroom  observation  revealed: 

A. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction: 

(1) 

[Respondent]  failed  to  demonstrate  evidence  of  short-term  and 

long-term  plans  to  foster  student  learning  and  achievement  in  the  State 
Standards. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  use  state  subject  matter  content  Standards 

to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals  for  students. 

(a) 

The  learning  goal  [respondent]  established  for  students 

consisted  of  completing  a  chart  and  creating  a  timeline  of  three  events  that 
occurred  in  a  chapter  in  To  Kill  a  Mockingbird.  Although  the  students  had 
been  reading  the  book  for  over  a  month,  [respondent]  did  not  make  a 
connection  to  the  State  Standard  that  was  posted. 

(b) 

The  objective  [respondent]  posted  stated,  “You  (students)  will 
complete  chart  (sic)  for  culminating  assignment  and  timeline  for  your  chapter 
In  TKM  (To  Kill  a  Mockingbird).” 

responses.   

assignment  wrote  three  simple  sentences  describing  three  moments  in  one 
chapter.  [Respondent]  collected  the  assignment  and  did  not  review  their 

A  majority  of  students  who  completed  the  low  rigor  timeline 

(c) 

  

(d) 

[Respondent]  failed  to  provide  opportunities  for  more  students 

to  become  involved  in  answering  questions  or  participating  in  a  discussion. 

(3) 

[Respondent]  did  not  clearly  communicate  to  students  what  the 

learning  expectation  was  for  the  day.  At  approximately  10:32  a.m., 
[respondent]  read  the  Standards  and  the  Objective  she  posted  on  the  board  to 
the  class.  She  did  not  ask  students  to  demonstrate  that  they  understood  the 
learning  expectation  for  the  day.  She  also  failed  to  monitor  student  learning 
when  she  did  not  ask  students  questions  that  would  demonstrate  if  they 
understood  the  assignment,  key  terms  or  key  concepts. 

B. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  performance: 

(1) 

[Respondent]  failed  to  create  an  effective  learning  environment 

that  engaged  students  in  active  intellectual  activity, 

(a) 

At  approximately  10:39  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  the  class, 
“How  do  the  characters  in  these  chapters  model  socialization?”  Only  one 
student,  REE,  answered.  The  rest  of  the  class  sat  quietly  and  did  not  offer  any 
responses,  [respondent]  addressed  only  the  one  student. 

(b) 

At  approximately  10:40  a.m.,  two  students  were  slouching  and 
one  had  her  hand  on  her  cheek  and  elbow  on  the  desk.  Several  students  had  a 
glazed  look  in  their  eyes  and  appeared  to  be  bored. 

(c) 

At  approximately  10:50  a.m.,  one  student  stated,  “I  don't  get  it.” 

(d) 

At  approximately  11:05  a.m.,  several  students  were  observed 
not  working  and  instead  were  socializing.  Five  out  of  the  31  students  in  the 
class  were  working  on  their  timelines  but  the  remaining  26  students  had  blank 
papers  and  were  not  working. 

(2) 

[Respondent]  did  not  create  a  climate  that  promoted  fairness  and 

respect.  At  10:45  a.m.,  she  used  a  strategy  of  pulling  small  sticks  with  names 
on  them  from  a  cup  to  select  students  to  answer  questions.  In  one  instance, 
[respondent]  pulled  out  a  stick,  looked  at  the  name  and  stated,  “No,  that’s  one 
of  my  usual  suspects.”  She  then  pulled  out  another  stick  and  called  on  that 
particular  student, 

(3) 

[Respondent]  did  not  establish  classroom  procedures  and 

routines  that  support  student  learning. 

(a) 

At  approximately  10:46  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  students  to 

find  three  examples  of  socialization  in  chapters  1-3. 

23 

 

  

(b) 

[Respondent]  set  a  timer  for  five  minutes.  When  it  went  off,  she 

asked  if  the  students  required  more  time.  She  then  reset  the  timer  multiple 
times. 

(c) 

It  was  unclear  what  the  purpose  of  the  timer  was  since  she 

repeatedly  reset  it  without  expecting  students  to  have  completed  the 
assignment. 

(d) 

At  approximately  10:50  a.m.,  [respondent]  allowed  student 

who  had a  history  of  truancy  or  absenteeism,  to  go  to  the  restroom. 

The  student  was  gone  for  over  ten  minutes.  [Respondent]  failed  to  address  the 
issue  of  the  student  being  gone  for  so  long. 

C. 

In  the  area  of  support  of  student  learning: 

(2) 

(a) 

(J) 

[Respondent]  did  not  monitor  for  student  learning,  instead  she 
walked  around  the  room  and  simply  checked  to  see  if  students  were  on  task. 
She  did  not  ask  students  questions  that  allowed  them  to  demonstrate  that  they 
understood  the  assignment,  the  key  concepts  or  key  terms.  It  was  evident  by  a 
lack  of  responses  and  participation  that  students  did  not  understand  the 
assignment.  [Respondent]  did  not  reteach  or  clarify. 

[Respondent]  did  not  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and 

resources  to  respond  to  student's  diverse  needs. 

[Respondent]  did  not  pre-view  academic  vocabulary.  She  asked 

students  to  provide  examples  of  socialization  in  the  chapters  of  To  Kill  a 
Mockingbird,  but  failed  to  implement  teaching  strategies  to  ensure  that 
students  would  be  able  to  define  or  explain  what  socialization  is. 

(b) 

[Respondent]  did  not  allow  sufficient  pause  time  for  students  to 

generate  their  responses  when  she  asked  them  questions.  At  approximately 
10:42  a.m.,  [respondent]  asked  the  class  if  anyone  had  any  examples  of 
socialization.  Instead  of  pausing  to  give  students  an  opportunity  to  think, 
[respondent]  immediately  provided  an  example  from  chapter  3. 

45. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Charge  27. 

46. 

 Blake’s  and  Dirlam’s  pattern  of  choosing  classroom  observation  days  that 
administration  could  anticipate  would  prove  difficult  for  respondent—after  her  return,  on 
crutches,  from  injury,  and  on  her  first  day  in  class  after  bereavement  leave—and  evaluating 
respondent’s  performance  by  standards  that  are  not  fully  applicable  to  the  day’s  lesson—such 
as  the  last  period  before  final  exams,  or  on  shortened  class  days—raises  serious  questions 
about  the  credibility  of  evidence  introduced  to  support  the  charges  against  respondent. 

24 

  

 

  

   

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction 

Burden  of Proof 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under  section 

44944,  (Factual  Findings  1  through  3.) 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  since  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  or 
44939  are  established.  In  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  alleged  five 
of  those  causes:  unprofessional  conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations,  and  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  (Factual  Finding  4.) 

4. 

The  District’s  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  charged  respondent  with 

various  acts  to  support  the  five  statutory  grounds  for  dismissal.  (Factual  Finding  5.)  The 
Commission  examined  each  charged  act  to  determine  whether  it  was  proven;  for  each 
charged  act  proven,  the  Commission  considered  whether  the  charged  acts  violated  one  or 
more  of  the  statutory  bases  for  dismissal,  as  alleged. 

5. 

The  Commission  determined  that  the  District  established  that  the  acts alleged 

in  the  following  charges  occurred:  2;  4;  5;  6;  7;  10;  13;  14;  15;  16;  17;  22(A)(3)(d); 
23(B)(1)(c);  24(A)(2)  through  (4),  C,  E(1)  through  (4),  (6)  through  (10),  and  F;  25(A)(2);  and 
26(A)(2)(d).  The  District  did  not  establish  that  the  other  charged  acts  occurred  as alleged. 
(Factual  Findings  10-45.) 

6. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1),  based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10 
through  45  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

7. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  exists  under  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(4),  based  on  unsatisfactory  performance,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  11  through  17, 
10  through  45  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

through  45  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5.   

subdivision  (a)(5),  based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

8. 

  

  

   

  

9. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44939,  based 
on  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  set  forth  in 
Factual  Findings  10  through  45  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

10. 

Cause  for  dismissal  of  respondent  does  not  exist  under  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(7),  based  on  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the 
state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,  as 
set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  10  through  45  and  Legal  Conclusions  3  through  5. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

11. 

Asa  threshold  matter,  courts  require  an  evaluation  of  whether  a  teacher’s 
alleged  misconduct  demonstrates  the  teacher’s  unfitness  for  service,  using  the  following 
criteria,  which  the  Supreme  Court  enunciated  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  (Morrison):  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  adversity  anticipated;  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved;  extenuating 
or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the 
questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact 
or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 
These  criteria  are  commonly  referred  to  as  “the  Morrison  factors.”  The  Morrison  court  held 
that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a  showing  that 
his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students,  school 
employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  (Id.,  at  p.  235.) 

12. 

The  Morrison  factors  analysis  applies  to  causes  for  dismissal  for 

unprofessional  conduct.  “Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1),  is  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  that  is  unbecoming 
a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Bd.  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 
The  conduct  in  question,  to  amount  to  unprofessional  conduct,  must  demonstrate  unfitness  to 
teach.  (Perez  v.  Com.  on  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.)  The 
Morrison  analysis  also  applies  to  causes  for  dismissal  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  under 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5).  Evident  unfitness  for  service  is  established  by  conduct 
demonstrating  that  the  teacher  is  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Com.  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  There 
is  no  reason  to  apply  the  Morrison  factors  to  analyze  causes  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory 
performance  or  for  persistent  violation  of  laws  and  regulations  (Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at 
pp.  227-230);  it  is  presumed  that  such  conduct  is  related  to  fitness  to  teach. 

*  None  of  respondent's  acts  constituted  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public 
26   

  

   

  

13. 

|  Some  of  respondent’s  acts  constituted  unprofessional  conduct.  (Factual 

Findings  11-14,  16,  19,  23,  &  24.)  Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  the  evidence  did  not 
establish,  however,  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  The  incidents  adversely  affected 
students,  but  are  remote  in  time  and  are  not  likely  to  recur.  Respondent  was  able  to  and  did 
correct  her  behavior  toward  students  and  parents,  and  was  not  again  cited  for  her  behavior 
after  November  2010.  (See,  e.g.,  Bd.  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553 
(unprofessional  conduct);  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Com.  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429  (evident  unfitness).) 

14. 

Some  of  respondent's  acts,  alleged  in  Charges  2,  4,  24(C)  to  (F),  25(A)(2),  and 

26(A)(2)(d)  (Factual  Findings  11,  12,  37-43),  constituted  unsatisfactory  performance.  The 
Commission  determined  that  those  instances  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  although 
constituting  cause  for  dismissal  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  were  insufficient, 
separately  and  in  the  aggregate,  to  warrant  dismissal  or  to  demonstrate  that  respondent  is 
unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher.  Other  charged  acts,  though  proven  (see  Legal  Conclusion  5),  were 
insufficiently  significant  to  constitute  unsatisfactory  performance.  Moreover,  the  reliability 
of  the  District’s  evidence  pertaining  to  its  unsatisfactory  performance  charges  was 
compromised  by a  lack  of  credibility  resulting  from  the  nature  and  timing  of  classroom 
observations,  as  set  forth  at  Factual  Finding  46. 

15. 

Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  discipline  is  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist. 
v.  Burman  (Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220-222.)  “The  Commission  has  broad 
discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach  ..  . 
,  and  whether  dismissal  or 
Suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  [Citing  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  pp.  220-222.] 
‘[A]  disciplinary  discharge  often  involves  complex  facts  and  may  require  a  sensitive 
evaluation  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it  warrants  the  grave 
sanction  of  dismissal.’  [Citation].”  (Cal.  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  Cal.  (1999)  20  Cal.4th 
327,  343-344.)  Complainant  did  not  establish  that  dismissal  is  necessary  to  protect  students, 
school  employees,  or  others  or  to  deter  respondent  from  engaging  in  similar  conduct  in  the 
future.  The  Commission  members  agree  unanimously. 

/ 

i 

  

schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  her,  or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 
based  on  Factual  Findings  10  through  46.  (See,  e.g.,  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Com.  on  Prof.  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429  (evident  unfitness);  Governing  Bd.  of 
Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77  (violation  of  school  laws).) 

*  With  respect  to  Charges  13  and  18  (see  Factual  Findings  22  and  25),  respondent  did 

not  engage  in  unprofessional  conduct.  It  is  not  unprofessional  conduct  for  respondent  to 
insist  on  either  having  a  union  representative  present  at,  or  being  allowed  to  record,  a 
meeting  that  could  have  disciplinary  repercussions. 

27   

  

ORDER 

dismissed. 

DATED:  May  8,  2015 

Poupilile— 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Claudia  Conroy  are 

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    
       
       
    
    

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

MARLON  MENDEZ 
Commission  Member 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  

HAYWOOD  FINDER 
Commission  Member

    

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Claudia  Conroy  are 

dismissed. 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

f 

f 

i 

DATED:  May 8 ,  2015 

Ve 
tii mn  j  i> 

MARLON  MENDEZ 
‘ 
Commission  Member’ 

    

T  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

HAYWOOD  FINDER 
Commission  Member

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  

    

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Claudia  Conroy  are 

dismissed. 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  May  __,  2015 

  MARLON  MENDEZ 
Commission  Member 

    

  HAYSYOQOD FINDER 
Commission  Member

I  concur  with  the  Decision  and  Order  set  forth  above: 

DATED:  May  w  2015 

