    BEFORE  THE 

_  COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2014100676 

EDGAR  CORDOBA, 

Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  January  20,  21,  23,  2015  and  March  23 
2015.  The  Commission  consists  of  the  following  members:  Deanna  Clark,  Teacher; 
Elizabeth  Hayne,  Teacher;  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office 
of  Administrative  Hearings. 

> 

The  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Assistant 
General  Counsel  Susan  Hyman.  Respondent  Edgar  Cordoba  (Respondent)  was  present 
and  was  represented  by  Richard  J.  Schwab,  Esq.,  of  Trygstadt,  Schwab  &  Trygstadt, 
Attorneys  at  Law. 

Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  Oral  and 

documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in 
executive  session.  After  due  consideration  of  the  record,  the  Commission  makes  the 
following  factual  findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Justo  H. 

Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District. 

    

District’s  intention  to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent 
submitted  a  timely  demand  for  a  hearing. 

On  September  16,  2014,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the 

2. 

 

    

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  dated  June  13,  2014,  and  the  Accusation  dated 

October  29,  2014,  recommend  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  the  District  for  the 
following  legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1) 
unprofessional  conduct;  (2)  immoral  conduct;  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service;  and  (4) 
persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  Respondent. 

4. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties 

and  jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

5. 

District  contends  that  Respondent  is  subject  to  dismissal  based  upon 

allegations  that  he  struck  then  5-year-old  kindergarten  student  EM,  pushed  him,  threw 
his  eraser,  markers,  and  crayons,  threatened  to  tear  up  a  picture  of  EM  and  his  sibling 
District  also  contends  that  in  January  of  2012,  Respondent 
and  then  tore  up  the  picture. 
touched  the  chest  of  10-year-old,  fifth  grade  student,  JS,  as  she  walked  by  his  classroom. 

6. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  did  not  commit  the  acts  alleged  in  the 

Accusation  and  that  contact,  if  any,  with  student  JS  was  accidental,  if  she  bumped  into 
him. 

Background  Information 

7. 

Respondent  received  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Urban 

Planning  from  the  Metropolitan  University  in  Mexico  City,  Mexico  in  1983  and 
a  Master  of  Arts  in  Teaching  and  Research  from  the  National  University  of 
Mexico  in  Mexico  City,  Mexico.  Respondent  obtained  a  Master’s  Degree  in 
Education,  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential,  and  a  Bilingual  Cross 
Cultural  certification  (BCLAD)  from  National  University  in  Los  Angeles, 
California.  Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  for  15  years. 

8. 

Respondent  is  fluent  in  English,  Spanish  and  German.  He  was  a 
bilingual  first  and  second  grade  teacher  in  Compton  Unified  School  District  for 
five  years  where  he  taught  both  bilingual  and  immersion  classes.  Respondent 
has  been  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  the  District  since  2006.  Respondent 
taught  a  fifth  grade  class  at  Sylvan  Park  Elementary  School  from  July  to  October 
of  2006  until  he  was  displaced  due  to  low  enrollment.  Respondent  taught  third 
grade  and  fifth  grade  at  Plummer  Elementary  School  from  October  of  2006  to 
June  of  2011  until  his  position  was  eliminated  due  to  a  reduction  in  force. 
Respondent  was  immediately  rehired  by  the  District  to  teach  a  kindergarten  class 
at  Lassen  Elementary  School  from  September  of  2011  until  he  was  removed 
from  the  classroom  in  February  of  2013  as  a  result  of  the  allegations  in  the 
Accusation.  Respondent  also  taught  English  as  a  Second  Language  courses  at 
the  Van  Nuys  Community  Adult  School  within  the  District  from  2006-2009. 
Respondent’s  evaluations  have  been  positive  noting  that  he  met  standards.  He  is 

    

 

well  liked  and  respected  by  his  colleagues.  There  had  not  been  any  complaints 
about  Respondent  from  any  parent,  student  or  staff  member  other  than  those  set 
forth  in  the  Accusation. 
Letters  of  recommendation  from  Respondent’s  former 
colleagues  and  supervisors  were  also  admitted  into  evidence. 

9, 

In  January  of  2012,  then  10-year-old  fifth  grade  female  student,  JS,  toid 

her  teacher  Ms.  Catherine  Barkle,  that  Respondent  was  “creepy.”  Ms.  Barkle  asked 
some  clarifying  questions  and  attempted  to  get  JS  to  provide  an  explanation  about  why 
she  considered  Respondent  to  be  “creepy.”  JS  did  not  provide  Ms.  Barkle  with  any 
explanation  or  additional  information.  At  that  time,  Ms.  Barkle  did  not  believe  that  she 
had  any  information  that  triggered  her  duties  as  a  mandatory  reporter  of  suspected  child 
abuse  and  she  had  no  suspicions  of  any  possible  abuse.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Barkle  credibly 
testified  that  she  had  found  JS  to  use  the  term  “creepy”  to  refer  to  anyone  she  did  not 
like.  Accordingly,  Ms.  Barkle  considered  the  comments  to  be  reflective  of  JS’s  general 
attitude  about  Respondent  and  staff  members  in  general  and  not  indicative  of  any 
specific  incidents. 

10. 

On  February  24,  2012,  JS  again  stated  to  Ms.  Barkle  that  she  found 
Respondent  “creepy.”  On  this  occasion,  when  Ms.  Barkle  made  further  inquiry,  JS 
described  an  incident  wherein  she  alleged  that  Respondent  touched  her  chest  as  she 
walked  by  his  classroom  with  her  friend  Ci.  Ms.  Barkle  was  skeptical  of  JS’s 
claims  because  she  had  found  JS  to  not  be  trustworthy  in  the  past.  As  examples,  Ms. 
Barkle  noted  that  JS  was  often  not  where  she  was  supposed  to  be  during  lunch  and 
recess  and  was  sometimes  untruthful  in  her  explanations.’ 
asserted  that  Respondent  had  touched  JS’s  chest.  Ms.  Barkle  remained  skeptical 
because  she  was  aware  that  JS  and  Cj  were  best  friends  and  often  vouched  for 
each  other  and  sometimes  lied  for  each  other. 
Nevertheless,  the  information  that  the 
two  students  provided  triggered  Ms.  Barkle’s  duty  to  report  suspected  child  abuse.  Asa 
result,  she  immediately  reported  the  information  to  Principal  Dana  Carter,  prepared  a 
suspected  child  abuse  report,  and  contacted  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department,  as 
required, 

JS’s  friend  Cj  also 

11.  —- Principal  Dana  Carter  interviewed  eC  JS  and  Ms.  Barkle.  Principal 

Carter  also  had  each  of  them  prepare  a  written  statement.  JS  and  Ms.  Barkle  prepared 
their  statements  on  February  24,  2012. 
23,  2012.  The  students  and  Ms.  Barkle  were  also  interviewed  by  a  detective  from  the 

prepared  her  written  statement  on  April 

oe 

  

  

1 

Teacher  Mehrdad  Mazkoori  also  testified  that  JS  had  a  reputation  as 

being  untruthful.  Mr.  Mazkoori  had  no  personal  experience  with  JS  and  ascertained 
this  information  from  teacher  meetings  that  are  held  each  year  to  discuss  which 
students  should  be  paired  with  which  teachers  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

  

   

Los  Angeles  Police  Department.”  JS’s  claim  has  remained  consistent  with  minor 
inconsistencies  attributable  to  a  lapse  in  time. 

12. 

Athearing,  JS  was  dressed  in  a  modest  sweat  shirt  and  jeans  appropriate 

JS 

for  the  proceeding.  She  was  animated,  confident,  and  clear  in  her  testimony. 
testified  that  on  a  day  in  January  of  2012,  she  and  her  friend  Cif  also  a  fifth  grader, 
had  walked  from  one  side  of  the  campus  to  the  other  after  school  after  having 
JS  testified  that  as  she  and  eC 
accompanied  a  friend  to  a  side  gate  of  the  campus. 
passed  Respondent’s  classroom,  he  stuck  his  head  out,  looked  from  right  to  left,  stepped 
out,  raised  his  hand,  and  brushed  across  her  chest  with  his  hand  as  they  walked  past. 
She  felt  uncomfortable,  placed  her  hands  across  her  chest  and  quickly  walked  away.  JS 
was  familiar  with  Respondent  because  she  had  been  a  volunteer  helping  kindergarten 
students  in  Respondent’s  class  as  part  of  a  class  project  on  one  occasion.  JS’s  friend 
oe 
did  not  testify  at  the  hearing.  However,  the  written  statement  she  prepared  on 
April  23,  2012,  is  mostly  consistent  with  JS’s  account  of the  events  with  variations  in 
some  details.  Most  notably,  the  recollections  of  JS  and  Cf  differed  with  regard  to 
the  name  of  the  friend  that  they  walked  to  the  side  gate.  JS  testified  that  the  girls  walked 
JE 
to  the  gate.  CIs  statement  prepared  three  months  after  the  alleged 
incident,  indicates  that  the  girls  walked Hm  to  the  gate.  JS’s  version  of  the  events  was 
otherwise  uncorroborated. 

13. 

Respondent  credibly  denied  that  he  ever  intentionally  touched  JS. 

Respondent  had  no  recollection  of  ever  meeting  JS  or  seeing  her  prior  to  the  hearing. 
He  surmised  that  the  only  possible  time  that  he  may  have  had  accidental  contact  with  her 
was  on  a  Friday  in  January  of  2012  when  he  was  asked  by  a  colleague,  Mehrdad 
Mazkoori,  to  translate  for  a  parent.  Mr.  Mazkoori  also  testified  that  he  remembered  a 
Friday  in  January  of  2012  when  Respondent  translated  for  a  parent,  at  his  request. 
Generally,  the  parent  came  each  Friday  to  speak  with  Mr.  Mazkoori  about  her  student 
and  brought  a  sibling  to  translate.  On  this  day,  the  parent  came  alone.  Respondent 
translated  for  the  parent  and  Mr.  Mazkoori  whose  classroom  was  adjacent  to  that  of 
Respondent.  The  meeting  and  translation  occurred  in  the  outdoor  corridor  outside  of 
Mr.  Mazkoori’s  classroom  sometime  between  2:30  and  3:00  p.m.,  immediately  after 
school.  The  corridors  were  somewhat  crowded  during  that  period  with  students,  parents, 
and  teachers  in  the  corridors.  Respondent  completed  the  translation  and  returned  to  his 
classroom.  Mr.  Mazkoori  testified  at  the  hearing  and  corroborated  the  chain  of  events. 
Respondent  remembers  that  someone  bumped  into  him  from  the  side  and  back  as  he  was 
returning  to  his  classroom  and  it  jostled  him,  but  he  did  not  see  who  bumped  into  him. 
He  did  not  think  it  was  anything  out  of  the  ordinary  at  the  time.  Respondent  did  not  see 
JS  at  that  time.  Respondent  did  not  recognize  JS  when  she  testified  at  the  hearing  and 
did  not  remember  seeing  her  on  campus.  Respondent  first  learned  of  the  allegations 
when  interviewed  by  a  police  officer  from  the  Los  Angeles  Police  department. 

  

° 

The  Los  Angeles  City  Attorney  notified  Respondent  that  it  has  closed 

its  case  on  this  incident  without  charges  as  has  the  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing. 

   

 

F 

14. 

On  October  5,  2012,  student  HER  tod  his  teacher  and  school 
officials  including  Principal  Dana  Carter,  that  Respondent  had  slapped  and  pushed 
student  EM  while  EM  and  FIRE  were  in  Respondent’s  class. 
reported  that  it  had  been  EM’s  first  day  in  the  class  and  that  EM  had  cried  for  20 
minutes  afterward.  At  the  time,  EM  was  a  recent  immigrant  and  did  not  speak  English. 
EM  confirmed  that  “Mr.  Cordoba”  had  slapped  him  during  a  reading  lesson.  He  also 
disclosed  that  “Mr.  Cordoba”  had  thrown  EM’s  markers,  pencils  and  erasers  and  on 
another  occasion  “broke”  a  picture  of  him  with  his  brother  or  his  entire  family.  He  kept 
the  picture  in  his  school  box  or  back  pack.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  why  EM  had 
the  picture  out  at  the  time.  EM  also  testified  that  he  did  not  like  FJ  and  found 
him  to  be  a  “bad  boy.”  EM  thought  that  his  cousin  GI  may  have  seen  “Mr. 
Cordoba”  slap  him.  Complainant  did  not  introduce  any  evidence  that  GI saw 
Respondent  slap  EM. 

15. 

EM  gave  clear  and  concise  testimony  about  being  slapped  by  “Mr. 

Cordoba”  early  in  the  school  year.  However,  he  had  confusion  about  kindergarten  and 
first  grade  and  when  the  incident  occurred.  When  asked  if  “Mr.  Cordoba”  was  in  the 
hearing  room,  EM  was  unable  to  identify  the  Respondent.  Moreover,  testimony  from 
EM  and  first  grade  teacher  Margarita  Garcia,  established  that  EM  had  a  male  teacher  at 
the  beginning  of  first  grade.  EM  was  transferred  to  Ms.  Garcia’s  class  as  part  of 
rebalancing  of  classes  in  his  first  grade  year. 

16. 

Neither  iim  nor  GRE  testified  at  the  administrative  hearing. 

17, 

Respondent  credibly  denied  ever  slapping,  hitting,  or  pushing  EM. 

Respondent  also  denied  throwing  Respondent’s  erasers,  pencils  and  markers,  threatening 
to  or  tearing  a  picture  belonging  to  EM.  Respondent  testified  that  at  the  time  markers 
were  not  used  in  his  kindergarten  class.  Respondent  does  not  remember  EM  having  a 
photograph  or  that  any  photograph  was  damaged. 

18. 

In  Charge  1  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that  on  or  about 

February  6,  2012,  Respondent  “struck  a  5  year  old,  limited  English  proficient,  recent 
immigrant  student  [EM],  on  the  cheek  with  an  open  hand  during  his  first  week  in 
Cordoba’s  classroom  causing  [EM  ]  to  cry  for  several  minutes.”  The  Commission  found 
that  Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
struck  EM.  It  was  established  that  EM  was  a  limited  English  proficient  student  in 
February  of  2012. 
It  was  also  established  that  EM  had  been  a  student  in  Respondent’s 
kindergarten  class  and  that  at  some  point  either  in  kindergarten  or  first  grade,  EM  was 
struck  by  a  male  teacher.  EM  gave  conflicting  accounts  of  the  details  of  the  incident 
including  what  grade  he  was  in  at  the  time  and  was  unable  to  identify  Respondent  as  the 
teacher  who  struck  him  when  he  saw  him  in  the  hearing  room.  While  the  Commission 
believed  that  EM  truthfully  testified  about  what  happened  to  him,  there  was  sufficient 
confusion  about  time  frames  of  kindergarten  and  first  grade  and  identity  of  the  teacher 
who  siapped  EM  for  the  Commission  to  have  serious  doubts  about  whether  Respondent 

  
  

was  the  person  who  struck  EM.  Accordingly,  Complainant  did  not  meet  his  burden  to 
establish  the  facts  set  forth  in  Charge  1  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

19. 

In  Charge  2  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that  on  February  6, 

2012,  Respondent  “threw  [EM’s]  eraser,  markers  and  crayons.”  The  Commission 
found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Respondent  had  thrown  EM’s  eraser,  markers  or  crayons.  Respondent  credibly 
denied  that  he  engaged  in  such  conduct  at  any  time.  However,  the  Commission  did 
believe  that  a  teacher  threw  EM’s  eraser,  markers  and  crayons. 

20. 

In  Charge  3  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that  during  the 

month  of  February  2012,  Respondent  “pushed  [EM]  on  his  back.”  The  Commission 
found  no  evidence  to  support  Charge  3  and  Complainant  conceded  in  closing 
argument  that  no  evidence  had  been  introduced  to  support  Charge  3.  Respondent 
credibly  denied  that  he  engaged  in  such  conduct  at  any  time. 

21. 

In  Charge  4  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that  during  the 

month  of  February  2012,  Respondent  “threatened  to  tear  up  a  picture  of  [EM]  and  his 
brother  and  did  so.”  The  Commission  found  no  evidence  to  support  the  allegation 
that  Respondent  threatened  to  tear  up  a  picture  of  EM  and  his  brother.  However,  the 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  establish  that  EM  had a picture  of  either  himself 
and  his  brother  or  himself  with  his  family  in  his  possession  at  school  in  February  of 
2012.  The  evidence  also  established  that  he  kept  the  photograph  either  in  his 
backpack  or  in  his  school  box  for  comfort  purposes.  At  some  point,  for  a  reason  not 
established  by  the  evidence,  EM  had  the  photograph  out  of  either  his  backpack  or 
school  box  and  it  was  damaged,  most  likely  by  accident,  in  an  interaction  with 
Respondent. 

  

22. 

In  Charge  5  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleges  that  in  January  of 

2012,  Respondent  “put  his  hand  up  and  touched  a  10-year-old  fifth  grade  female 
student  [JS’s]  chest  as  she  walked  past  his  classroom.”  The  Commission  did  not  find 
JS’s  version  of  the  events  as  probable  as  Respondent’s  version.  To  the  extent  that 
there  may  have  been  any  physical  contact  between  Respondent  and  JS,  the 
Commission  found  that  such  contact  was  accidental.  The  Commission  did  not  find 
JS’s  version  of  the  events  as  credible  as  Respondent’s  denial  and  explanation  that  at 
most,  he  may  have  had  accidental  contact  with  JS,  if  she  was  the  person  who  bumped 
into  him  in  January  of  2012.  The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  failed  to 
establish  the  allegations  set  forth  in  Charge  5  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

    

Respondent  had  any  physical  contact  with  JS.  The  conduct  that  was  established 
consisted  of  the  accidental  damage  to  a  treasured  photograph.  The  conduct  had  an 
adverse  effect  on  Student  EM  who  believed  that  the  photograph  was  intentionally 
damaged  and  was  distraught  about  the  photograph.  The  conduct  was  remote  in  time 
occurring  more  than  three  years  ago.  There  were  no  aggravating  or  extenuating 

 

23.  —  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

 

circumstances.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  neither  praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  the  conduct  was  either  likely  or  unlikely  to  occur  again. 
There  were  no  constitutional  implications  with  regard  to  Respondent’s  conduct. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant 

section  44944.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  4.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivisions  (c)(1)-(3),  when  a  school  board 

recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  it. 
Likewise,  when  suspension  is  recommended,  the  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or 
against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by 
imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction. 

3. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking 
The  standard  of 

to  dismiss  Respondent  from  employment  as a  certificated  employee. 
proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039.)  The  “preponderance  of  the 
evidence”  standard  requires  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  is 
more  probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (/n  re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63  Cal.App.4th 
700,709.) 

4. 

The  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  does  not  set  forth 

specifically  which  of  the  District’s  factual  allegations  relate  to  each  of  the  four 
alleged  grounds  for  dismissal: 
evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  (4)  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district. 

(1)  unprofessional  conduct,  (2)  immoral  conduct,  (3) 

5. 

Section  44932  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

No  permanent  employee  shail  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of 

(a) 
the  following  causes: 

(1)  —  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

AG): 

(5) 
[Mp 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

(7)  _  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 

of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

  

  

  

6. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932, 

subdivision(a)(1),  may  be  defined  as  conduct  “Unprofessional  conduct,”  as 
used  in  section  44932,  subdivision(a)(1),  may  be  defined  as  conduct  which 
violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct  that  is 
unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553;  Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.  App.  3d  1167,  1174.) 

8. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service,”  within  the  meaning  of  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland 
Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that 
unfitness  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  which  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  presumably  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 
p.  1444.) 

(Id.  at 

10. 

9. 

With  respect  to  determination  of  witness  credibility:. 

Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  of  school 

rules  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous 
insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v. 
Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.  3d  77,  84.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on 
the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180- 
1181.) 

    

record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached,  uncontradicted  --  but  on 
a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his  credibility  factor  nil. 
Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict  himself,  and 
on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who  sees, 
hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability. 
(Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co,  (1971)  17  Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)  The  trier  of  fact  may 
“accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the 

 

On  the  cold 

  

  

latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d 
51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of 
selected  material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161 
Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness, 
even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971) 
3  Cal.3d  875,  890.) 

11. 

The  Commission  found  Respondent’s  testimony  more  credible  and  his 
version  of  events  more  probable  than  the  uncorroborated  testimony  offered  by  student 
JS.  While  the  Commission  found  EM  credible,  his  young  age  at  the  time  of  the 
incident,  confusion  about  time  and  grade,  and  inability  to  identify  Respondent,  caused 
the  Commission  to  doubt  whether  or  not  the  person  that  EM  referred  to  as  “Mr. 
Cordoba”  was  in  fact,  Respondent.  Moreover,  EM.’s  testimony  was  uncorroborated. 
Under  these  circumstances,  Respondent’s  outright  denial  of  ever  slapping  EM  or 
throwing  his  pencils,  erasers  and  markers  was  more  persuasive. 

12. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral.  It  was  not 
established  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  indicative  of 
corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  nor  that  he  displayed  willful,  flagrant, 
or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community  or  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss 
Respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (1),  for 
the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-23  and  Legal  Conclusions  2-6,  10  and  11. 

13. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional. 
However,  the  handling  of  EM’s  photograph,  while  not  unprofessional,  did  not  reflect 
best  practices  or  good  classroom  management  skills.  However,  the  conduct  did  not 
violate  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  nor  was  the  conduct  such  that  it  would 
constitute  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing  or 
unfitness  to  teach  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-23  and  Legal  Conclusions  2-5,  7,  10  and  11. 

14. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  It  was  not  established 
that  Respondent  has  a  defect  in  his  temperament  or  a  fixed  character  trait  that  makes 
him  unfit  to  teach.  The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss 
Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5),  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-23  and  Legal  Conclusions 
2-5,  9,  10  and  11. 

 

  

15. 

The  Commission  found  that  Complainant  did  not  establish  that 

Respondent  violated  school  rules,  the  District  Code  of  Conduct,  the  Code  of  Ethics, 
the  Corporal  Punishment  Policy,  or  any  other  directive,  policy,  law,  or  rule  set  by  the 
District  or  the  State  board  of  Education  on  a  persistent  basis.  The  Commission 
determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the 
school  district  employing  him  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)  (7),  for  the 
reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-23  and  Legal  Conclusions  2-5,  8,  10  and  11. 

16.  |  Even  where  unprofessional  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are 

established,  it  must  also  be  established  that  such  unprofessional  conduct,  or  evident 
unfitness  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.  3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d  208;  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.  4th  at  pp. 
1444-1445.) 
Under  the  facts  of  the  Morrison  case,  the  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s 
conduct  and  determined  that  a  school  board  may  consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1) 
the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the 
degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 
the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 
aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 
likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 
discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights 
of  the  teacher. 

  

17. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the  Commission  has 

broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to 
determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the 
conduct,  as  measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach. 
(Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.  3d.  at  220.)  Although  it  is  not  necessary  to  analyze  the 
Morrison  criteria  here,  an  application  of  the  Morrison  factors  to  the  facts  of  this  case 
also  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  Respondent  is  not  unfit  to  teach. 

(a)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or 
fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  involvement  in  the 
damage  to  EM’s  photograph,  had  an  adverse  effect  on  EM.  Although  the  damage  was 
most  likely  accidental,  EM  believed  that  it  was  intentional. 

    

(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher. 
Respondent  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential,  which  entitles  him  to  teach 
classes  typically  found  at  the  elementary  school  level. 

(b)  Morrison  Factor:  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 
Respondent’s  conduct  was  remote  in  time  occurring  more  than  three  years  ago. 

 

10 

  

      
(c)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher. 
Respondent  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential,  which  entitles  him  to  teach 
classes  typically  found  at  the  elementary  school  level. 

        
(d)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct.  There  were  no  extenuating  or  aggravating 
circumstances. 

      

  
   

(e)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  was  neither  praiseworthy  nor 
blameworthy. 

(f)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  There 
was  no  evidence  that  the  conduct  was  likely  or  unlikely  to  occur  again. 

(g)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 
chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  No  adverse  effect  on 
constitutional  rights  was  identified  as  being  implicated  in  this  action  for  termination 
of  Respondent  from  employment  with  the  District. 

18. 

|  Respondent’s  conduct  does  not  show  such  unfitness  to  teach  as  to 
warrant  dismissal  from  District  employment.  (Factual  Findings  1-23  and  Legal 
Conclusions  1-17.) 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  are  dismissed.  Pdgar  C Cordoba  shall 

not  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  e 
Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

   

April  ¢ 

,  2015 

April 2,  2015 
pril  &_ 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Chairperson 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

has 

    
> 
» 
a 
Deanna  Clark 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

eat  Ll  ak 

     
        
    
      
  

  
     

   

      

   

   

   

      

 

Glynda  B.  Gomez. 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Chairperson 

Comm 

ission  on  Professional  Competence 

April 

,  2015 

April,  2015 

Clark 
Member 

April 

»  2015 

 

Deanna 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

Elizabeth  Hayne 

Member 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

