BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OF  THE  RIVERBANK  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STANISLAUS  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2014010467 

In  the  Matter  of: 

JERRY  PIEF, 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

. 

(Commission)  of  the  Riverbank  Unified  School  District  on  September  22,  23,  and  24,  2014, 
in  Riverbank,  California.  The  Commission  included  Kathy  Cronin,  Lara  Robinson,  and 
Marcie  Larson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  presiding. 

Attorneys  Megan  E.  Macy  and  Gabriela  Flowers,  with  the  Lozano  Smith  law  firm, 

appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Riverbank  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle,  [V,  Attorney  at  Law,  appeared  on  behalf  of  Jerry  Pief  (respondent), 

who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing, 

Berta  DeFrench,  certified  Spanish  interpreter,  was  present  and  provided  Spanish 

interpreting  services. 

This  matter was  submitted  for  decision  when  the  Commission  concluded  its 

deliberations  on  November  17,  2014.1 

"  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  record  remained  open  for  written  closing 
arguments.  On  October  24,  2014,  OAH  received  respondent’s  closing  brief,  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  A.  On  October  27,  2014,  OAH  received  the  District’s  closing  brief, 
marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  33.  On  October  31,  2014,  OAH  received  respondent’s 
reply  brief,  marked  as  Exhibit  B,  and  the  District’s  reply  brief,  marked  as  Exhibit  34. 

J 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certified  employee  of  the  District.  He  was 

assigned  as  a  resource  specialist  program  (RSP)  teacher  at  Cardoza  Middle  School,  in 
Riverbank,  California. 

: 

2. 

On  December  10,  2013,  Daryl  Camp,  Ph.D.,  District  Superintendent  signed  a 
Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss;  Placement  on  Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension  Pending  Outcome 
of  Disciplinary  Proceedings;  and  Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of  Charges).  Thereafter, 
the  District’s  Governing  Board  approved  a  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  and 
directed  the  District  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  position  with  the  District  and  to  place 
him  on  unpaid  suspension  pending  the  outcome  of  the  disciplinary.  proceedings.  On 
December  13,  2013,  the  District  served  respondent  with  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

3. 

On  December  17,  2013,  respondent  demanded  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  to  dismiss  him  from  his  position  with  the  District. 

4, 

On  December  31,  2013,  Dr.  Camp  signed  and  thereafter  filed  and  served  on 

respondent,  the  Accusation  against  respondent,  based  upon  and  incorporating  the  Statement 
of  Charges.  Thereafter,  the  matter  was  set  for  hearing,  * 

Summary  of Allegations 

5. 

The  District  alleged  that  during  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent 

inappropriately  touched  two  female  students,  M.S  and  L.I.  Specifically,  the  District 
contended  that  from  August  7,  2013  until  August  30,  2013,  respondent  repeatedly  touched 
both  girls  on  their  shoulders  and  hands,  and  touched  M.S.  on  her breasts  and  stroked  her  hair. 

6. 

The  District  also  alleged  that  on  November  24,  2010,  respondent  was  issued  a 
45-day  notice  to  improve  his  unprofessional  conduct,  after  he  hit  a  student,  and  grabbed  the 
student’s  forearm  and  bent  it  back,  which  caused  the  student  to  fall  to  the  ground.  The 
District  alleged  that  respondent’s  behavior  constituted  corporal  punishment  in  violation  of 
the  District  policies  and  the  Education  Code. 

7. 

The  District  contends  that  respondent’s  actions  constituted  immoral  conduct, 

evident  unfitness  and  persistent  and  willful  violations  of  the  school  laws  or  regulations 
governing  his  employment.  The  District  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal  from  his  position  as  a 
permanent  and  certificated  employee  in  the  District. 

2  A  Notice  of  Defense  signed  by  respondent  was  not  entered  into  evidence.  However, 

there  was  no  dispute  at  hearing  that  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

2

Background 

8. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  as  teacher  for  the  District  for  approximately 

25  years.  He  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  specialist  and  Senate  Bill  395  certificate, 
and  a  resource  certificate.  Respondent  obtained  his  Master’s  degree  in  special  education  and 
fine  and  dramatic  arts.  Respondent  also  served  as  a  wrestling  coach  for  many  years. 
Respondent  has  no  history  of  engaging  in  inappropriate  sexual  conduct  with  students. 

9. 

Respondent  has  worked  at  Cardoza  the  entire  time  he  has  been  employed  with 

the  District.  Cardoza  is  a  middle  school  with  sixth,  seventh  and  eighth  grades.  In  August 
2013,  Kevin  Bizzini  was  the  principal  at  Cardoza.  Respondent  was  an  RSP  teacher.  The 
resource  program  at  Cardoza  consisted  of  a  “push  in/pull  out”  system.  Depending  on  a 
student’s  need,  special  education  resource  services  were  provided  in  a  general  education 
class.  Ifa  student  needed  more  time  and  attention  to  meet  the  goals  of  their  Individual 
Education  Plan  (IEP)  the  student  would  be  pulled  out  of  the  general  education  class  for  one 
class  period  per  day  to  work  with  the  RSP  teacher. 

10. 

During  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  to  work  with 

students  from  all  three  grade  levels.  He  worked  with  students  based  upon  their  IEP  goals  in 
all  areas  of  curricula  as  needed.  There  were  seven  academic  periods  per  day.  Respondent 
worked  in  the  Cardoza  resource  room  with  students  for  three  periods  per  day;  one  period  per 
grade  level.  The  remaining  periods  he  rotated  through  the  general  education  classrooms  to 
work  with  resource  students. 

Events  Between  August  7,  2013  and  August  29,  2013 

11. 

On  Wednesday,  August  7,  2013,  the  2013-2014  Cardoza  school  year  began, 

Respondent  was  assigned  four  sixth  grade  students  who  were  “pulled  out”  to  receive 
resource  services:  two  female  students,  M.S.  and  L.L.,  and  two  male  students,  A.R.  and  J.R. 
Amelia  Luna  was  the  general  education  teacher  for  M.S.,  L.L,  and  ALR.  J.R.  was  assigned  to 
a  different  general  education  teacher.  M.S.  and  L.I.  did  not  attend  respondent’s  class  until 
approximately  the  second  week  of  school. 

12. 

M.S.  and  L.I.  were  new  to  Cardoza.  Respondent  had  never  met  either  girl 

prior  to  the  start  of  the  school  year.  M.S.  was  born  in  Riverbank,  Her  parents  are  Spanish- 
speaking.  M.S’s  first  language  is  Spanish,  although  she  typically  spoke  English  at  school. 
LL.  also  spoke  Spanish  and  English.  M.S.  and  L.L  are  friends.  They  ate  lunch  together  and 
played  at  recess; 

13. 

Prior  to  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  an  instructional 
aide  to  work  in  his  classroom.  In  2013,  the  decision  was  made  by  Mr.  Bizzini  to  place  the 
resource  aide  in  the  general  education  classrooms.  However,  in  the  first  week  of  the  2013 
school  year,  there  were  times  Ms.  Hernandez,  the  instructional  aide,  worked  in  respondent’s 
classroom. 

 

14. 

|  Once  respondent  began  to  work  with  the  sixth  grade  resource  students,  they 
spent  the  majority  of  their  school  day  with  their  general  education  teacher.  Five  days  per 
week  the  students  met  with  respondent  in  the  resource  classroom  during  seventh  period..  The 
seventh  period  lasted  approximately  45  minutes.  On  Thursdays,  the  two  male  students 
attended  speech  services.  The  male  students  initially  met  with  respondent  and  then  went  to 
speech  services  if  the  speech  therapist  sent  for  them.  Between  August  7,  2013,  and  August 
29,  2013,  A.R.  only  attended  speech  services  one  time. 

15. 

The  resource  room  was  equipped  with  four  computers  which  were  placed 

close  together  on  long  tables  in  one  row.  Four  chairs  were  placed  in  front  of  the  computers. 
The  resource  room  also  had  a  whiteboard  at  the  front  of  the  room  and  four  large  work  tables. 
The  computers  chairs  were  approximately  one  foot  from  the  edge  of  the  work  tables. 

16. 

Initially,  respondent  had  the  students  work  on  mathematics,  The  students  used 

math  programs  on  the  computers  to  improve  their  math  fluency.  In  order  to  familiarize  the 
students  with  the  computers,  respondent  had  the  students  sit  in  front  of  a  computer  and  he 
showed  them  where  buttons  on  the  computer  were  located.  Once  the  computers  were 
warmed  up,  respondent  showed  the  students  where  the  mouse  and  cursor  were  located.  He 
used  the  mouse  to  move  the  cursor.and  showed  the  students  which  programs  to  use. 

17. 

Respondent  also  logged  on  to  the  computers  for  the  students.  Typically,  the 

students  sat  in  front  of  their  computer  and  respondent  moved  his  hand  onto  the  mouse  to 
open  the  appropriate  window.  He  then  reached  to  the  side  of  the  student  to  type  in  their 
name  and  password.  If  respondent  stood  near  the  student,  he  would  reach  over  the  top  of  the 
student  or  along  the  side  of  the  student  to  log  into  the  computer.  Respondent  did  not  ask  the 
students  to  stand  up  and  let  him  sit  down  to  log  into  the  computer  or  move  the  students  out  of 
the  way,  because  he  wanted  the  students  to  see  what  was  on  the  computer  screen  and  what 
information  he  typed  into  the  computer,  so  that  they  would  know  how  to  do  it  in  the  future. 

18. 

The  resource  classroom  computers  used  older  versions  of  the  mouse  that 

contained  a  rollerball  mechanism  to  move  the  cursor.  All  four  students  had  difficulty  using 
the  mouse.  At  times  respondent  had  to  wiggle  the  mouse  to  get  it  to  work.  He  would  guide 
the  mouse  and  move  the  students’  hands.  Respondent  did  not  ask  M.S.  or  L.I.  to  move  their 
hands  to  take  control  of  the  mouse.  As  a  result,  there  were  times  that  respondent  made 
contact  with  their  hands  when  he  moved  their  mouse.  There  were  also  times  that  respondent 
placed  his  hand  on  top  of  the  students’  hands  to  move  the  mouse. 

19. 

At  times,  respondent  sat  at  the  tables  behind  the  students  and  watched  the 

students’  computer  monitors  while  they  completed  their  math  fluency  exercises.  Respondent 
also  worked  with  the  students  at  the  tables  and  walked  around  the  room  to  check  their  work. 
He  did  not  typically  stand  immediately  behind  students  to  check  their  work.  He  often  stood 
to  the  side  of  the  students  and  bent  down  to  check  their  work.  He  also  did  not  typically  sit  in 
between  students  at  the  computers  or  tables. 

20. 

During  the  approximately  three  weeks  that  respondent  met  with  the  students, 
occasionally  M.S.  and  L.I.  would  be  off  task.  Typically  it  was  because  M.S.  and  LI.  talked

to  each  other  in  class.  In  most  cases,  respondent  would  first  verbally  redirect  M.S  and  L.I. 
He  asked  them  to  turn  back  to  the  computer  or  the  task.  If  they  ignored  respondent,  he 
tapped  on  their  shoulders  to  get  their  attention  and  again  asked  them  to  go  back  to  the  task. 
If  M.S.  and  L.I.  were  seated  at  a  table,  he  tapped  on  the  table  to  get  their  attention.  At  least 
one  time  respondent  pushed  L.I.’s  shoulder  with  his  hand  in  an  effort  to  direct  her  to  face  the 
computer  screen  and  work  on  the  assigned  program.  At  hearing,  respondent  described  it  as  a 
“gentle  push”  of  her  shoulder  to  redirect  her  attention.  He  had  not  given  her  verbal  direction 
before  he  pushed  her  shoulder  to  redirect  her  attention.  Respondent  used  the  same  physical 
redirection  and  tapping  techniques  with  A.R.  and  all  of  his  students  as  needed.  He  did  not 
use  this  technique  with  J.R.  because  he  complied  with  respondent’s  directions. 

21, 

Respondent  did  not  believe  that  any  of  his  actions  towards  M.S.  or  L.I.  were 
inappropriate.  Neither  M.S.  nor  L.L  ever  asked  respondent  not  to  touch  them.  Respondent 
denied  that  he  made  any  physical  contact  with  M.S.  during  the  times  that  he  reached  for  her 
keyboard.  Respondent  acknowledged  that  there  may  have  been  inadvertent  contact,  but  he 
did  not  recall  that  there  was  any.  On  one  occasion  respondent  walked  passed  MLS.  on  his 
way  to  the  computers  and  “flicked”  M.S.’s  hair  which  was  in  a  braid.  Respondent  testified 
that  he  did  so  because  he  was  “having  a  good  day”  and  because  her  braid  was  “well  done.” 
L.L.  saw  respondent  flick  M.S.’s  hair  and  said  “Ew.”  Respondent  put  up  his  hands  and  said 
“okay.”  In  hindsight,  respondent  realized  that  flicking  M.S.’s  braid  may  have  been 
unwelcome.  Respondent  denied  that  he  ever  touched  M.S.  or  L.L.  on  her  breasts, 

22. 
August  29,  2013. 

The  last  day  that  M.S.  and  L.I.  attended  respondent’s  class  was  Thursday, 

August  30,  2013  Report  Made  by  M.S.  and  L.I. 

23. 

On  Friday,  August  30,  2013,  at  approximately  11:00  a.m.,  M.S.  and  L.I.  went 

to  the  main  office  at  Cardoza.  They  spoke  with  Martha  Lopez,  Secretary  to  Mr.  Bizzini.  Mr. 
Bizzini  was  not  in  the  office  at  that  time.  The  girls  told  Ms.  Lopez  that  respondent  had 
touched  them.  M.S.  stated  that  respondent  put  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  then  moved  it  on 
to  her  breast.  L.L  told  Ms.  Lopez  that  respondent  put  his  hand  on  her  hand  and  shoulder. 

24, 

Shortly  after  the  girls  left  the  main  office,  Mr.  Bizzini  arrived  at  the  office. 

Ms.  Lopez  informed  Mr.  Bizzini  that  two  students  reported  that  respondent  had 
inappropriately  touched  them  and  that  he  should  follow-up  with  the  students  immediately. 

Interviews  Conducted  by  Keven  Bizzini 

25. 

Mr.  Bizzini  called  M.S.  and  L.L  to  the  office.  Initially,  he  met  with  the  girls 

together  and  asked  them  what  had  occurred.  He  then  met  with  the  girls  individually. 

  

 

INTERVIEW  OF  M.S. 

26. 

Mr.  Bizzini  met  with  M.S.  first.  During  the  course  of  the  meeting  he  prepared 

handwritten  notes  concerning  the  information  she  provided.  Afterward  he  typed  his  notes. 
MSS.  told  Mr.  Bizzini  that  respondent  placed  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  or  neck  area  first  and 
then  let  his  hand  fall  across  her  chest.  Mr.  Bizzini  asked  MLS.  to  demonstrate.  M.S.  then 
showed  Mr.  Bizzini  that  respondent  let  his  hand  brush  against  her  chest.  She  did  not 
demonstrate  any  type  of  grab  of  her  breast.  She  stated  that  respondent  would  touch  her 
almost  every  day  she  was  in  class,  but  that  it  was  worse  on  Thursdays  when  J.R.  and  A.R. 
were  pulled  out  of  the  class  for  speech  services.  When  the  boys  were  in  class,  respondent 
would  put  the  boys  to  work  so  that  they  would  be  distracted  and  then  respondent  would  touch 
her  and  L.I.  Respondent  touched  her  while  she  was  seated  at  the  computer  stations  and  at  the 
tables  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Respondent  would  sit  between  MLS.  and  L.I.  when  they 
were  seated  at  the  computer  stations  and  touch  them.  Mr.  Bizzini  also  noted  that  M.S. 
reported  that  respondent  “stroked”  her  hair. 

27, 

‘Mr.  Bizzini  directed  M.S.  to  write  a  statement  concerning  what  occurred  in  the 
classroom.  Shortly  after  M.S.  met  with  Mr.  Bizzini,  M.S.  wrote  that  respondent  told  her  and 
L.I.  to  sit  on  the  chairs  near  the  computer  so  that  he  could  touch  her  on  the  shoulder  and 
chest.  M.S.  also  wrote  that  the  touching  occurred  when  J.R,  and  A.R.  were  present,  but 
occurred  more  when  the  boys  were  not  present.  M.S.  did  not  mention  that  respondent 
touched  her  hair. 

INTERVIEW  OF  L,I. 

28. 

After  Mr.  Bizzini  completed  his  interview  with  M.S.,  he  met  with  LI.  She 
reported  that  respondent  squeezed  or  grabbed  her  shoulder  to  get  her  attention  back  to  the 
computer  she  was  working  on. 
unrelated  incident,  and  it  hurt  when  respondent  touched  her  shoulder. 

L.I.  explained  that  she  had  a  bruise  on  her  shoulder  from  an 

29.  ~  L.I.  also  stated  that  when  she  and  MLS.  worked  at  the  computers,  respondent 

touched  their  hands  as  they  tried  to  move  the  computer  mouse.  This  made  L.I. 
uncomfortable.  L.I.  also  reported  that  she  saw  respondent  let  his  hand  fall  across  M.S.’s 
chest  about  seven  times.  L.I.  denied  that  respondent  touched  her  chest.  Mr.  Bizzini  prepared 
handwritten  and  typed  notes  concerning  his  meeting  with  L.I. 

30. 

Mr.  Bizzini  directed  L.I.  to  write  a  statement  concerning  what  occurred  in  the 
classroom  with  respondent.  That  same  day  L.I.  wrote  that  respondent  touched  her  and  M.S. 
when  J.R.  and  A.R  were  not  in  the  classroom  and  that  she  and  M.S.  were  scared  to  be  alone 
with  respondent.  L.I.  wrote  that  respondent  touched  her  on  the  hand  and  the  shoulder.  L.1. 
did  not  write  that  she  had  observed  respondent  touch  M.S.  on  the  chest  or  breast. 

INTERVIEWS  OF  J.R.  AND  A.R. 

31. 

After  Mr.  Bizzini  completed  his  interview  of  M.S.  and  L.L,  he  interviewed 

J.R.  and  A.R.  Initially,  Mr.  Bizzini-met  with  both  boys  at  the  same  time  to  determine  if  they 

6°

had  any  information  about  the  allegations  made  by  the  girls.  J.R.  did  not  recall  seeing 
anything  or  knowing  about  anything  inappropriate  occurring  in  the  classroom.  J.R. 
explained  that  M.S.  and  L.I.  talked  a  lot  and  as  a  result  they  had  to  be  separated.  He  also 
stated  that  the  girls  were  “always  late”  and  that  respondent  made  them  write  sentences. 

32. 

JR.  also  reported  that  he  saw  respondent  pat  all  of  the  students  on  the  back  or 

shoulders  and  that  it  usually  occurred  when  he  was  praising  a  student  for  doing  a  good  job. 
He  never  saw  respondent  touch  the  girls  in  any  different  way  from  the  way  that  he  touched 
him  and  A.R.  Mr.  Bizzini  allowed  J.R.  to  return  to  his  class. 

33. 

Mr.  Bizzini  then  spoke  to  A.R.  alone.  A.R.  also  stated  that  the  M.S  and  LL. 
talked  a  lot.  The  previous  week,  while  they  were  in  Ms.  Luna’s  class,  M.S.  and  L.I.  asked 
him  not  to  leave  the  room  to  attend  speech  class.  M.S.  told  him  that  respondent  had  touched 
L.I.  “weird.”  The  girls  indicated  to  A.R.  that  they  were  scared  to  be  in  the  room  alone  with 
respondent.  A.R.  never  saw  respondent  touch  MLS.  or  L.I. 

Steps  Taken  by  Marcus  Wirowek  on  August  30,  2013 

34, 

After  Mr.  Bizzini  conducted  interviews,  he  telephoned  Marcus  Wirowek, 
Human  Resources  Director  for  the  District.  Mr.  Bizzini  informed  Mr.  Wirowek  that  two 
students  had  provided  written  statements  concerning  alleged  misconduct  by  respondent.  Mr. 
Bizzini  read  Mr.  Wirowek  the  statements  written  by  M.S.  and  L.I.  Due  to  the  serious  nature 
of  the  allegations,  Mr.  Wirowek  informed  Mr.  Bizzini  that  he  would  come  to  Cardoza  to 
meet  with  him  and  investigate  the  matter. 

35. 

Mr.  Wirowek  was  hired  by  the  District  in  September  2012.  Prior  to  working 

for  the  District,  Mr.  Wirowek  had  no  experience  working  for  a  school  district  or  with 
children.  Part  of  Mr.  Wirowek’s  duties  as  the  human  resources  director  for  the  District 
included  investigating  complaints  concerning  employee  misconduct. 

36. 

Shortly  after  speaking  to  Mr.  Bizzini,  Mr.  Wirowek  arrived  at  Cardoza.  He 

met  with  Mr.  Bizzini  and  they  spoke  about  the  interviews  Mr.  Bizzini  conducted.  Mr. 
Wirowek  reviewed  the  written  statements  prepared  by  M.S.  and  L.I.  Thereafter,  Mr. 
Wirowek  and  Mr.  Bizzini  decided  to  contact  the  parents  of  M.S.  and  L.L.  and  to  interview  the 
girls  again. 

, 

37. 

Mr.  Wirowek  conducted  interviews  with  M.S.  and  her  mother  and  L.I.  and  her 

father,  Mr.  Bizzini,  Ms.  Lopez,  and  Darlene  Ribeiro,  Secretary  to  Dr.  Camp,  attended  both 
interviews.  Ms.  Lopez  is  fluent  in  Spanish.  During  the  interviews,  she  interpreted  as  needed. 
Ms.  Ribeiro  took  notes  of  the  interviews.  She  wrote  down  the  questions  asked  by  Mr. 
Wirowek  and  the  responses  given  by  the  girls  and  their  parents. 

INTERVIEW  OF  L,I. 

38. 

At  approximately  1:30  p.m.,  Mr.  Wirowek  interviewed  L.I.  Mr.  Wirowek 

informed  L,I.  that  he  reviewed  the  statement  she  wrote  concerning  respondent.  Mr.  Wirowek 

7 

 

asked  L.L  if  respondent  had  touched  her  “from  the  waist  up?”  L.I.  replied  that  respondent 
had  touched  her  shoulder  and  hand.  Specifically,  that  respondent  touched  her  collarbone  and 
her  hand  when  she  had  it  on  the  computer  mouse.  When  he  touched  her  shoulder  he  turned 
her  around.  This  had  occurred  every  day  since  the  start  of  school. 

39. 

L,I.  stated  that  the  day  before  the  interview,  respondent  had  touched  M.S,  “the 

most”  when  J.R.  and  A.R.  went  to  speech  services.  She  further  stated  that  respondent 
touched  M.S.  on  the  chest  and  that  it  had  occurred  since  the  start  of  school,  but  that 
respondent  does  not  touch  M.S.  when  J.R,  and  ALR.  are  in  the  classroom,  which  contradicted 
MLS.’s  statement  that  respondent  touched  her  and  L.I.  when  the  boys  were  in  the  classroom. 

40. 

Mr.  Wirowek  asked  L.I.  if  she  knows  why  respondent  would  touch  her 

shoulder  to  turn  her  around.  She  responded  that  “he  puts  us  to  practice  some  math  problems; 
he  gives  a  difficult  math  problem  and  we  get  it  a  little  bit.”  LI.  did  not  tell  respondent  that 
she  did  not  like  to  be  touched. 

, 

41. 

L.1.’s  father,  who  is  Spanish-speaking,  informed  Mr.  Wirowek  that  L.L  told 

him  the  evening  before  the  interview  that  respondent  put  very  hard  pressure  on  her  shoulder. 
L.L  and  her  father  had  been  playing  and  she  bruised  her  shoulder.  As  a  result,  it  hurt  when 
respondent  touched  her  shoulder.  The  interview  concluded  at  1:50  p.m. 

INTERVIEW  OF  MLS. 

42. 

At  approximately  1:56  p.m.,  Mr.  Wirowek  met  with  M.S.’s  mother,  who  is 

Spanish-speaking.  Mr.  Wirowek  explained  that  he  received  a  written  statement  prepared  by 
MSS.  in  which  she  stated  that  she  had  been  inappropriately  touched  by  respondent.  He  read 
the  statement  to  M.S.’s  mother  and  Ms.  Lopez  translated.  Afterwards,  M.S.’s  mother  stated 
her  daughter  had  an  “attitude”  and  would  not  communicate  and  locked  herself  in  her  room. 
When  M.S.’s  mother  asked  her  how  school  was,  she  stated  it  was  “fine.”  Mr.  Wirowek 
asked  the  mother  how  long  this  had  occurred.  She  responded  “not  very  long,  just  in  the  last 
couple  of  days,”  but  then  stated  it  had  been  about  two  weeks.  Her  mother  also  stated  that 
M.S.  did  not  want  to  be  kissed. 

43. 

After  Mr.  Wirowek  spoke  to  M.S.’s  mother,  M.S.  was  interviewed.  Mr. 

Wirowek  told  M.S.  that  he  wanted  to  talk  to  her  about  the  statement  she  wrote.  He  read  the 
statement  out  loud.  He  then  asked  M.S.  what  teacher  she  was  talking  about  in  the  statement. 
She  stated  respondent.  The  questions  and  answers  as  transcribed  by  Ms.  Ribeiro  continued, 
in  relevant  part,  as  follows: 

Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 

how  does  he  touch  you  or  your  shoulders? 
he  rubs  my  shoulder 
does  he  say  anything  to  you? 
no  he  just  rubs  it 
at  the  computers? 
sometimes  at  the  table

[1]  .  [1] 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student? 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 

Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 

Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student? 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
[M]  ...[9] 

when  he  touches  you  at  the  computer 
yes 
numerous  times?  Is  he  coming  from  behind  you? 
yes 
you  said  when  you  sit  at  the  table  he  has  touched  you 
yes 
where  do  you  sit? 
anywhere  we  want 
when  did  he  touch  you  last? 
I  don’t  remember 
Did  he  touch  you  yesterday? 
no  we  had  a  sub 
did  he  touch  you  Tuesday? 
yes 
where  did  he  touch  you? 
Shoulder, 
did  he  touch  you  on  your  chest? 
yes. 
multiple  times  one  side  both  [sic]? 
both  sides 
when  he  touched  you  on  your  chest  were  you  in  front  of 
[sic]  computer? 
yes 
at  tables? 
yes 
last  week  did  he  touch  you? 
yes 
where?  Chest? 
yes. 
did  he  touch  your  shoulder  and  go  down  across  the 
chest? 
he  went  down 
did  he  pause? 
he  left  it  there  a  few  seconds 
anyone  else  in  [sic]  classroom? 
yes,  [L.L.] 
does  he  touch  her? 
yes 
on  shoulder? 
on  chest. 
Tuesday? 
yes 

  
 

Marcus  Wirowek: 

Student: 
Martha  Lopez: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 

Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 

Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
Marcus  Wirowek: 
Student: 
[M]  ...[T] 

Does  he  come  up  touch  you,  go  away 

except  for  [L.I.]  has  anyone  seen  it?  Has  he  touched  you 
multiple  [sic]? 
and  come  back  and  touch  you? 
no  he  doesn’t  do  that 
mom  asked  why  she  didn’t  tell  her 
said  sorry 
have  you  told  anyone  else  about  it? 
no 
has  anyone  come  in  when  it  is  happening  and  he’s 
walked  away?  Last  time  he  touched  you  was  Monday? 
Tuesday 
Substitute  was  in  on  Tuesday 
Mr.  Pief  was  there  then  Sub  came  in  and  Mr.  Pief  left 
last  week?  Did  he  touch  you? 
indicated  shoulder  chest 
shoulder  and  chest  at  least  one  time  everyday  [sic]  on  the 
shoulder  and  chest 
yes  sometimes  on  the  shoulder  and  the  chest 
how  many  times  on  the  chest? 
T  don’t  know. 
how  many  times?  5?  How  about  6? 
maybe  5 

: 

44, 

M.LS.’s  mother  asked  M.S.  if  she  could  explain  why  she  did  not  say  anything  to 

her  about  what  was  occurring.  M.S.  explained  that  she  did  not  tell  her  mother  because  she 
was  afraid  respondent  would  find  out  and  she  would  be  threatened.  M.S.’s  mother  asked  if 
there  was  any  help  for  her  daughter.  Mr.  Bizzini  informed  her  that  there  was  a  District 
psychologist.  The  interview  concluded  at  2:30  p.m. 

45. 

Based  upon  the  interviews,  Mr.  Wirowek  was  not  able  to  determine  the  time  or 

date  in  which  respondent  touched  the  girls.  M.S.  contradicted  L.I.’s  statement  that 
respondent  had  touched  her  the  day  before  he  interviewed  them.  Mr.  Wirowek  also  could 
not  determine  who  was  in  the  classroom  when  respondent  touched  the  girls.  Mr.  Wirowek 
was  aware  that  Mr.  Bizzini  spoke  to  J.R.  and  A.R.  and  made  the  decision  not  to  interview 
them  as  part  of  his  investigation. 

46. 

Mr.  Wirowek  determined  that  respondent  did  not  inappropriately  touch  L.I. 

It 

was  not  inappropriate  for  respondent  to  touch  L.I.’s  shoulder  or  hand.  At  hearing,  Mr. 
Wirowek  contended  that  because  L.I.  saw  respondent  touch  M.S.  on  the  chest,  it  caused  her 
to  be  afraid  that  she  may  be  touched  inappropriately  as  well,  therefore  respondent’s  conduct 
towards  L.I.  was  inappropriate. 

47. 

Mr.  Wirowek  and  Mr.  Bizzini  spoke  about  the  interviews.  Mr.  Wirowek  then 

spoke  to  Dr.  Camp.  Thereafter,  Mr.  Bizzini  called  Child  Protective  Services  (CPS), 
concerning  the  allegations  made  by  the  girls.  He  felt  that  as  a  mandated  reporter  he  was 

10

required  to  do  so.  CPS  instructed  Mr.  Bizzini  to  contact  law  enforcement.  At  approximately 
3:40  p.m.  Mr.  Bizzini-faxed  a  report  to  CPS  which  stated  that  M.S.  had  reported  that 
respondent  had  touched  her  several  times  on  the  chest. 

48. 

After  Mr.  Bizzini  spoke  to  CPS,  Mr.  Wirowek  called  the  non-emergency 

number  for  Stanislaus  County  Sheriff's  Department.  He  informed  the  Sheriff's  Department 
about  the  statements  made  by  M.S.  and  L.I.  Thereafter,  Deputy  Joe  Knittel  arrived  at 
Cardoza. 

49, 

After  Mr.  Wirowek  conducted  the  interviews  with  M.S.  and  L.I.  he  met  with 

respondent.  Mr.  Wirowek  told  respondent  about  the  allegations  made  by  the  girls.  He 
informed  respondent  that  he  would  discuss  the  issue  with  him  in  more  detail  the  following 
week.  The  decision  was  also  made  to  remove  the  girls  from  respondent’s  class  and  put  them 
into  a  physical  education  class  while  the  investigation  was  pending. 

September  4,  2013  Interviews  Conducted  by  Nelarie  Romo 

50. 

Nelarie  Romo  is  a  psychologist  for  the  District.  She  was  hired  by  the  District 

in  the  fall  of  2012.  Ms.  Romo  obtained a  certificate  in  applied  behavioral  analysis  and  an 
education  specialist  degree  from  Fresno  State  University.  Her  degree  is  specifically  for 
individuals  who  want  to  work  as  a  school  psychologist.  Ms.  Romo  is  a  Nationally  Certified 
school  psychologist.  She  also  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  teaching  credential. 

51. 

Ms.  Romo’s  duties  as  the  District’s  psychologist  included  conducting 

individual  and  group  therapy  for  students.  She  handled  crisis  situations  at  District  school 
sites  and  conducted  psychological  evaluations  on  students  who  threaten  to  harm  themselves 
or  others.  Ms.  Romo  conducted  psychoeducational  evaluations  and  also  attended  all  IEP 
meetings.  On  at  least  20  occasions,  Ms.  Romo ‘has  counseled  or  interviewed  possible  victims 
of  sexual  abuse.  Ms.  Romo  is  fluent  in  Spanish. 

52. 

At  approximately  8:10  a.m.  on  Tuesday,  September  3,  2013,  Ms.  Romo’s 

supervisor,  Karen  Young,  Director  of  Student  Services  for  the  District,  called  Ms.  Romo  and 
asked  to  meet  with  her  at  the  District  office.  Ms.  Romo  arrived  at  the  District  office  at 
approximately  9:00  a.m.  Ms.  Young  informed  Ms.  Romo  that  there  were  allegations  of 
“child  molestation”  by  respondent.  Ms.  Young  then  asked  Mr.  Wirowek  to  join  the  meeting. 
During  the  course  of  the  meeting,  Ms.  Romo  learned  that  M.S.  and  L.I.  were  the  students  that 
had  alleged  that  respondent  touched  them  inappropriately.  Ms.  Romo  had  never  met  M.S.  or 
LI.  Although,  she  was  aware  that  M.S.  and  L.L.  received  special  education  resource 
services.  At  some  point  Ms.  Romo  learned  that  A.R.  had  been  in  respondent’s  class  with 
MLS.  and  L.I.  Ms.  Romo  was  familiar  with  A.R.  Ms.  Romo  also  knew  respondent.  He  had 
been  on  Ms.  Romo’s  hiring  panel  and  they  became  work  friends.  Respondent  was  someone 
whom  she  respected. 

53. 

Ms.  Young  and  Mr.  Wirowek  instructed  Ms.  Romo  to  meet  with  M.S.,  L.1.  and 

AR.  individually  to  ensure  that  the  “fidelity”  of  their  version  of  events  was  accurate.  Ms. 
Romo  was  not  asked  to  conduct  an  investigation  or  render  any  conclusions  regarding  the 

11 

 

allegations  made  by  MLS.  or  L.I.  Rather,  her  role  was  to  counsel  the  girls,  to  see  how  they 
interpreted  the  events,  and  to  address  their  needs.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Romo  did  not  explain 
what  her  role  was  concerning  A.R. 

54. 

On  Wednesday,  September  4,  2013,  at  approximately  7:50  a.m.,  Ms.  Romo 

arrived  at  Cardoza  to  meet  with  the  students.  She  then  wrote  out  questions  to  ask  M.S.  and 
L.I.,  because  she  had  never  interviewed  a  child  that  alleged  a  co-worker  had  done  something 
inappropriate. 

55. 

At  approximately  9:00  a.m.,  Mr.  Bizzini  spoke  with  Ms.  Romo  and  asked  her 

about  her  plan  for  meeting  with  the  students.  She  informed  Mr.  Bizzini  that  per  the 
directions  provided  by  Ms.  Young  and  Mr.  Wirowek,  she  would  have  the  children  called  to 

’  the  office  together,  so  that  they  did  not  have  time  to  talk.  She  would  then  meet  with  the 

children  individually.  Mr.  Bizzini  then  informed  Ms.  Romo  about  the  series  of  events  and 
meetings  that  occurred  on  Friday,  August  30,  2013,  concerning  the  allegations  made  by  MLS. 
and  L.I.  He  also  stated  that  he  let  the  children’s  parents  know  that  they  would  see  a  school 
counselor  to  “help  them  cope”  and  that  the  parents  had  given  their  consent. 

56. 

At  approximately  9:15  a.m.  L.I  and  A.R.  were  called  to  the  office  to  see  Ms. 
Romo.  At  approximately  9:20  a.m.  M.S.  was  called  to  the  office.  Ms.  Romo  met  with  M.S, 
first.  An  intern  sat  with  L.L  and  A.R.  in  the  office  waiting  room  until  Ms.  Romo  met  with 
them. 

INTERVIEW  WITH  M.S. 

57. 

Ms.  Romo  introduced  herself  and  asked  M.S.  information  about  her 

background.  She  then  asked  MLS.  if  she  liked  her  teachers.  MLS.  stated  that  she  did  not  like 
respondent.  M.S.  told  Ms.  Romo  that  réspondent  had  touched  her  and  L.L.  and  that  they  had 
told  Mr.  Bizzini  about  it.  M.S.  explained  that  their  parents  were  called  and  they  met  with 
another  person.  After  the  meetings  she  was  moved  out  of  respondent’s  class  and  into  a 
physical  education  class. 

58. 

M.S.  stated  that  on  the  first  day  of  school,  respondent  touched  her  shoulder. 
M.S.  then  placed  her  hand  over  her  breast  and  stated  that  during  the  second  week  of  school 
respondent  had  touched  her  “right  here”  for  two  to  three  minutes.  Ms.  Romo  then  clarified 
this  statement.  Ms.  Romo  counted  seconds  out  loud  and  asked  MLS.  io  tell  her  when  to  stop 
to  demonstrate  how  long  respondent  held  his  hand  on  her  breast.  She  told  Ms.  Romo  to  stop 
at  three  seconds.  M.S.  demonstrated  that  respondent  placed  his  hand  like  a  “semi-folded  like 
cup”  over  her  breast,  which  was  inconsistent  with  how  M.S.  demonstrated  the  touching  to 
Mr.  Bizzini.  M.S.  also  stated  that  respondent  touched  her  breasts  when  she  and  L.I.  were 
alone  in  the  room  with  respondent  and  a  couple  of  times  when  the  boys  were  in  the  room,  but 
the  boys  did  not  see.  M.S.  did  not  know  the  exact  number  of  times  respondent  touched  her 
ot  the  days  in  which  it  occurred,  but  it  happened  more  than  one  time.  At  one  point,  M.S.  also 
told  A.R.  not  to  leave  her  and  LI.  with  respondent. 

12

59. 

M.S.  also  stated  that  respondent  touched  her  at  times  when  L.I.  was  seated  at 
the  classroom  tables  and  M.S.  was  at  a  computer.  Respondent  stood  behind  her  and  put  his 
hand  on  her  upper  chest  and  moved  his  hand  down  for  three  seconds  slowly  on  her  breasts. 
More  than  one  time  respondent  seated  himself  between  her  and  L.1.  He  placed  one  hand  on 
one  of  them  and  his  other  hand  on  another  person’s  breast.  When  M.S.  demonstrated  how 
respondent  touched  her,  she  consistently  grasped  her  right  breast.  But  when  asked,  she  stated 
that  he  touched  both  of  her  breasts. 

60. 

MSS.  did  not  tell  her  parents  that  respondent  had  touched  her,  but  she  told 

some  of  her  friends  that  respondent  had  touched  her  hand.  She  did  not  tell  them  that  he  had 
touched  her  breasts  because  she  did  not  want  the  boys  to  make  fun  of  her  for  being  touched 
on  the  breast  by  a  teacher. 

61. 

MS.  stated  that  she  and  L.I.  decided  that  if  respondent  touched  them  one  more 
time,  they  would  tell  Mr.  Bizzini.  M.S.  stated  that  respondent  did  not  touch  them  on  the  day 
that  they  spoke  to  Mr.  Bizzini,  but  he  had  touched  her  the  day  before.  This  assertion  was 
inconsistent  with  her  statement  to  Mr.  Wirowek,  that  respondent  had  not  touched  her  the  day 
before  they  spoke  to  Mr.  Bizzini.  M.S.  then  demonstrated  that  respondent  had  very  quickly 
touched  her  upper  chest  and  barely  her  upper  breast. 

62. 

M.S.  stated  that  no  one  had  ever  touched  her  breast  before  and  it  made  her  feel 

like  she  did  not  want  anyone  to  touch  her.  After  respondent  began  to  touch  her,  she  hugged 
her  mother  less  because  she  was  afraid  that  her  mother  would  touch  her  breasts.  She  stated 
that  since  she  was  moved  out  of  respondent’s  class  she  hugs  her  mother  again.  Ms.  Romo 
observed  that  when  M.S.  spoke  to  her,  she  often  looked  up  and  to  the  left  and  down  and  to 
the  right  when  she.tried  to  recall  information.  Ms.  Romo  described  M.S.’s  body  language  as 
“closed”  when  speaking  about  the  events  involving  respondent. 

63. 

M.S.  shared  with  Ms.  Romo  that  when  she  was  at  Riverbank  elementary 

school,  she  told  the  front  office  that  a  girl  in  her  class  had  touched  her  on  the  leg,  but  really 
the  girl  had  touched  her  in  the  crotch  area.  M.S.  stayed  in  the  same  class  with  the  student  for 
the  entire  school  year.  After  M.S.  shared  this  information,  Ms.  Romo  concluded  the 
counseling  session.  Ms.  Romo  informed  M.S.  that  she  was  at  Cardoza  on  Thursdays  and  she 
could  come  to  see  her  anytime.  She  also  stated  if  she  needed  to  speak  with  her  on  a  different 
day,  to  let  the  office  know. 

64. 

Ms.  Romo’s  interview  with  M.S.  lasted  approximately  40  minutes.  Ms.  Romo 

prepared  notes  concerning  her  observations  and  the  statement  made  by  M.S.  in  the  meeting. 

INTERVIEW  WITH  ALR. 

65. 

At  approximately  10:40  a.m.,  Ms.  Romo  met  with  A.R.  Ms.  Romo  knew  ALR. 

from  past  interactions.  Ms.  Romo  had  prepared  written  questions  to  ask  A.R.  that  were 
different  than  the  questions  she  wrote  for  M.S.  and  L.L. 

13 

 

66. 

- 

During  the  meeting,  A.R.  asked  Ms.  Romo  if  Mr.  Bizzini  had  told  her  that 

something  had  happened  in  respondent’s  class.  Ms.  Romo  asked  him  what  he  meant.  A.R. 
explained  that  M.S.  told  him  that  respondent  was  touching  L.L  “funny”,  and  that  L.I.  said 
“yes.  he  was  touching  me  funny.”  L.I.  sounded  scared  when  she  said  it.  This  conversation 
occurred  in  class.  M.S.  and  L.I.  told  him  that  respondent  touched  L.I.’s  shoulder  and  back. 
They  also  told  him  not  to  leave  class  because  they  were  scared.  A.R.  told  Ms.  Romo  that  he 
only  had  speech  one  day  since  the  school  year  had  begun. 

67. 

AR.  explained  that  he  and  respondent  joked  and  that  respondent  touched  him 

on  the  shoulder  at  times,  but  it  was  not  in  a  “funny”  way.  A.R.  had  never  seen  respondent 
touch  the  girls.  A.R  was  not  sure  if  L.L  was  telling  the  truth  or  joking  with  him  because  he 
and  the  girls  picked  on  each  other  at  times. 

68. 

The  interview  concluded  at  11:05  a.m.  Ms.  Romo  prepared  notes  concerning 

her  observations  and  the  statement  made  by  A.R  in  the  meeting. 

INTERVIEW  WITH  L.I. 

69. 

At  approximately  11:06  a.m.,  Ms.  Romo  met  with  L.I.  Ms,  Romo  introduced 

herself  and  asked  L.I.  about  her  background.  Ms.  Romo  then  asked  L.I.  how  she  liked  the 
sixth  grade.  She  stated  that  she  liked  Ms.  Luna’s  class  and  that  she  got  along  with  everyone. 
She  then  stated  that  she  was  no  longer  in  respondent’s  class  because  he  had  touched  her  and 
her  friend  M.S.  Ms.  Romo  asked  what  she  meant.  L.I.  explained  that  respondent  touched 
M.S.  seven  times  while  M.S.  was  seated  at  the  computer  and  that  he  placed  his  hand  on 
M.S.’s  shoulder  and  slowly  moved  it  down.  L.I.  demonstrated  and  Ms.  Romo  counted 
seconds  again.  She  noted  that  L.I.  moved  her  hand  down  for  approximately  three  seconds. 

70. 

.  LI.  described  respondent  as  a  “nice”  teacher  but  that  when  he  touched  them 

L.I.  stated  that  on  the  first  day  of  class  respondent  touched 

she  was  scared  to  be  in  class. 
M.S.’s  shoulder  and  that  it  had  grown  from  that  point.  Respondent  would  stand  behind  M.S. 
at  the  computer  and  with  his  left  hand  touch  M.S.’s  breast.  Afterward,  M.S.  told  her  that  she 
was  scared  and  that  she  wanted  to  cry  and  call  her  mother,  but  she  did  not  have  a  telephone. 
L.L  further  stated  that  recently  M.S.  had  told  her  that  she  was  scared  that  respondent  would 
kill  her. 

71, 

L,I.  initially  would  not  tell  Ms.  Romo  any  details  concerning  how  respondent 

touched  her  and  only  said  that  he  did  not  touch  her  breasts.  She  explained  that  respondent 
placed  his  hand  over  her  hand  one  time  while  she  was  using  the  mouse  by  the  computer.  L.I. 
added  that  respondent  sat  in  between  her  and  M.S.  and  had  his  hand  over  L.I.’s  hand  and 
moved  the  mouse.  She  did  not  like  when  he  touched  her  hand,  but  she  could  not  say  why. 
Respondent  also  touched  L.I.’s  shoulder  with  a  push  or  jab  and  told  her  “turn  around.”  LI. 
and  M.S.  watched  where  respondent  was  in  the  classroom  to  see  if  he  was  getting  close  to 
them  because  they  were  scared.  L.I.  was  scared  that  respondent  would  touch  her  in  a  “bad 
place.”  One  day  J.R.  and  A.R.  were  not  in  class  and  respondent  touched  her  hand  and 
touched  M.S.  L.L  did  not  explain  where  respondent  touched  M.S. 

14

72. 

Ms.  Romo  asked  L.I.  if  she  told  anyone  that  respondent  had  touched  her  and 

M.S.  She  stated  that  she  told  her  father.  He  told  her  to  tell  the  school.  Ms.  Romo’s 
interview  with  L.L  lasted  approximately  20  minutes.  Ms.  Romo  prepared  notes  concerning 
her  observations  and  the  statement  made  by  L.I.  in  the  meeting. 

73. 

After  Ms.  Romo  met  with  the  students,  her  intern  told  her  that  while  she  was 

in  the  waiting  room  with  L.I.  and  A.R.,  one  of  the  children  flicked  her  hair.  The  intern  asked 
L.1.  blamed  it  on  A.R.  when  in  fact  it  was  L.I.  who  had  flicked 
the  children  who  had  done  it. 
her  hair  and  then  lied  about  it.  Ms.  Romo  documented  her  conversation  with  the  intern  in  her 
handwritten  notes.  Ms.  Romo  also  wrote  in  her  notes  that  it  was  possible  M.S  could  have 
been  influenced  by  L.I,  At  hearing,  Ms.  Romo  opined  that  M.S.  may  have  been  cognitively 
too  low  to  mastermind a  lie  about  respondent’s  conduct,  but  that  M.S.  could  be  susceptible  to 
influence. 

74,  ~  After  Ms.  Romo  met  with  M.S.  and  L.I.  on  September  4,  2013,  she  had  no 
further  counseling  sessions  with  them  concerning  their  allegations.  At  times,  Ms.  Romo 
checked  with  Ms.  Luna  to  find  out  how  the  girls  were  doing  in  class. 
If  Ms.  Romo  saw  the 
girls  at  Cardoza  she  would  say  hello  and  asked  them  how  they  were  doing.  Ms.  Romo  felt 
that  after  the  girls  were  moved  from  respondent’s  class  into  physical  education,  they  adjusted 
well. 

Investigation  Conducted  by  the  Stanislaus  County  Sheriff's  Department 

75. 

At  approximately  5:00  p.m.  on  August  30,  2013,  Deputy  Knittel  met  with  Mr. 

Wirowek.  He  informed  Deputy  Knittel  that  two  students  had  told  the  principal  at  Cardoza 
that  their  teacher  had  touched  them  and  that  they  did  not  like  it.  He  further  stated  that  the 
girls  explained  that  their  teacher  would  touch  them  on  their  shoulder,  and  Mr.  Wirowek 
opined  that  it  may  have  been  to  get  their  attention.  Mr.  Wirowek  further  stated  that  one  of 
the  girls  stated  that  the  teacher  had  placed  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  then  grazed  his  hand 
down  across  her  breast.  Mr.  Wirowek  told  Deputy  Knittel  that  he  placed  his  hand  on  his  own 
chest  and  asked  the  girl  where  on  her  chest  she  was  touched.  She  inched  his  hand  towards 
his  breast.  Mr.  Wirowek  provided  Deputy  Knittel  contact  information  for  M.S.  and  L.J.  He 
also  provided  Deputy  Knittel  copies  of  the  statements  they  had  written. 

76. 

On  September  5,  2013,  Deputy  Knittel  requested  that  Jesse  Tovar,  a  detective 

with  the  Stanislaus  County  Sheriff's  Department,  investigate  the  allegations.  In  cases  that 
involved  alleged  sexual  assault  or  child  abuse,  the  Sheriff's  Department  made  arrangements 
to  have  the  children  interviewed  by  someone  who  was  trained  to  interview  minors.  Law 
enforcement  officers  are  trained  to  ask  leading  questions,  but  special  knowledge  is  required 
to  interview  victims  of  sexual  abuse  and  minors. 

TT, 

On  September  9,  2013,  Detective  Tovar  contacted  the  M.S.’s  mother  and 

arranged  for  M.S.  to  be  interviewed  on  September  16,  2013.  The  same  day,  Detective  Tovar 
contacted  L.I.’s  mother  and  left  a  message.  On  September  11,  2013,  he  spoke  to  L.L.’s 
mother  and  arranged  for  L.L  to  be  interviewed  on  September  19,  2013.  The  interviews  of 
MLS.  and  L.I.  were  conducted  by  Kelley  Dominguez  who  worked  for  the  Family  Justice 

15 

 

Center.  She  had  specialized  training  in  interviewing  children.  The  interviews  were  video 
recorded  and  Detective  Tovar  included  a  synopsis  of  the  interviews  in  his  investigation 
report. 

INTERVIEW  OF  M.S. 

78. 

At  approximately  11:00  a.m.  on  September  9,  2013,  Ms.  Dominguez  met  with 

M.S.  Ms.  Dominguez  introduced  herself  and  told  M.S.  the  importance  of  telling  the  truth. 
M.S.  indicated  that  she  understood  that  she  was  there  to  talk  about  what  happened  with  her 
teacher.  M.S.  then  explained  that  she  and  her  friend,  referring  to  L.L,  had  class  with 
respondent,  and  that  were  also  two  boys  in  the  class. 

79. 

M.S.  explained  that  first  time  she  was  in  class  with  respondent,  on  the  first  day 

of  school,  he  touched  her.  M.S.  then  pointed  to  her  shoulder  area.  M.S.  stated  that  she 
thought  it  was  normal  but  then  respondent  started  to  put  his  hand  where  he  was  not  supposed 
to.  M.S.  then  moved  her  hand  to  her  chest  area.  M.S.  stated  that  she  did  not  tell  anyone 
about  this.  This  statement  was  inconsistent  with  her  statement  to  Ms.  Romo  that  she  had  told 
her  friend  at  school  that  respondent  had  touched  her  hand.  Respondent  then  touched  them 
one  more  time  and  they  went  to  the  office  and  told  the  principal. 

80. 

M.S.  also  stated  that  when  respondent  first  touched  her  shoulder  she  did  not 

feel  uncomfortable.  She  told  L.I.  that  respondent  had  touched  her  and  L.L.  stated  respondent 
touched  her  too.  They  decided  that  they  did  not  feel  comfortable  with  the  touching,  but  they 
did  not  think  about  talking  to  anyone  about  it.  M.S.  placed  her  hand  on  her  right  breast  and 
explained  that  she  and  L.I.  decided  if  respondent  touched  them  one  more  time  they  would 
talk  to  someone  about  it.  Ms.  Dominguez  placed  her  hand  on  her  chest  and  asked  M.S,  if  she 
knew  how  long  ago  respondent  had  touched  her  there.  M.S.  did  not.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked 
M.S.  how  many  times  respondent  had  touched  her  in  the  chest  area.  M.S.  again  placed  her 
hand  on  her  chest  and  stated  that  he  “touched  us”  for  a  “few  minutes”  then  took  it  off  and 
that  respondent  had  only  touched  them  for  “like  a  week.” 

81. 

Ms.  Dominguez  asked  M.S.  what  occurred  when  respondent  touched  them. 

M.S:  explained  that  she,  L.I.  and  the  two  boys  were  at  the  computers,  Respondent  weuld  sit 
in  the  middle  and  “start  grabbing  our  shoulders  and  putting  his  hands  right  here.”  M.S, 
placed  her  hand  on  her  chest  area.  She  and  L.L  started  to  feel  uncomfortable.  M.S:  and  L.L. 
talked  in  Spanish  about  it  in  front  of  respondent,  but  they  were  afraid  to  talk  about  it  in 
English. 

82. 

Ms.  Dominguez  gave  MLS.  a  doll  and  asked  her  to  demonstrate  on  the  doll 

how  respondent  would  touch  her.  MLS.  stated  that  respondent  would  sit  in  the  middle 
between  her  and  L.I.  and  start  “grabbing  us.”  She  then  placed  her  hand  on  the  chest  area  of 
the  doll  to  show  where  respondent  touched.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  M.S.  how  long 
respondent  would  keep  his  hand  in  that  area.  M.S.  responded  “for  an  hour  or a  little  bit.” 
When  respondent  touched  them  he  did  not  say  anything.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  how  many 
times  respondent  had  touched  her  chest  area.  MLS.  replied  “five  or  four.”  M.S.  also 
explained  that  one  time  L.I.  was  turned  around  in  her  seat  looking  at  the  boys  in  the  class  and 

16

“goofing  around.”  Respondent  told  L.I.  to  turn  around.  He  then  placed  his  hand  on  L.I.’s 
chest.  This  occurred  while  the  boys  were  sitting  at  the  table  in  the  back  of  the  classroom  and 
MLS.  and  L.I.  were  sitting  at  the  front  table.  M.S.  never  saw  respondent  put  his  hands  on  the 
boys. 

83. 

M.S.  and  L.I.  decided  to  tell  someone  about  respondent  because  they  thought  it 

was  going  to  be  worse  and  they  were  scared.  M.S.  explained  that  they  did  not  say  anything 
to  their  families  about  it,  but  they  told  the  woman  in  the  District  office  and  a  school  friend, 
A.V.,  who  told  other  friends.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  M.S.  if  respondent  had  ever  told  her  not 
to  tell  anyone  about  the  touching.  MLS.  stated  that  he  did  not. 

INTERVIEW  OF  LI. 

84. 

On  September  19,  2013,  at  approximately  10:30  a.m.,  Ms.  Dominguez  met 

with  L.I.  Ms.  Dominguez  introduced  herself  and  asked  L.I.  if  she  knew  why  they  were 
meeting.  L.I.  stated  that  her  mother  had  brought  her  to  the  meeting  but  did  not  tell  her 
anything  about  the  meeting,  other  than  she  should  not  lie.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  L.I.  what 
she  thought  the  meeting  was  about,  and  L.I.  stated  that  she  believed  it  was  about  her  teacher, 
respondent.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  L.I.  to  tell  her  about  respondent.  L.I.  stated  and 
demonstrated  that  when  respondent  wanted  her  to  turn  around  and  pay  attention,  he  placed 
his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  it  hurt.  Ms.  Dominguez  asked  if  respondent  had  placed  his 
hand  anywhere  else. 
placed  her  hand  over  the  top  of  Ms.  Dominguez’s  hand.  The  only  thing  that  respondent  had 
ever  done  that  made  her  uncomfortable  was  to  touch  her  shoulder  and  hand. 

L.I.  stated  her  hand.  Then  she  used  Ms.  Dominguez’s  hand.  She 

85. 

Ms.  Dominguez  then  asked  L.I.  if  she  had  seen  respondent  do  anything  to 

other  children  that  made  her  feel  uncomfortable,  L.I.  stated  that  one  day  M.S.  was  laughing 
at  the  computer.  Respondent  approached  M.S.  and  told  her  what  to  do  and  what  not  to  do. 
LJ.  then  stated  and  demonstrated  that  respondent  put  his  hand  over  M.S.’s  shoulder  and 
breast  area.  She  stated  that  the  boys  were  in  speech  class  when  this  occurred.  L.I.  did  not 
know  how  long  respondents’  hand  was  on  M.S.’s  chest.  She  saw  respondent  put  his  hand  on 
M.S.’s  chest  seven  times.  Respondent  told  M.S.  how  to  do  math  when  this  occurred. 

86. 

LI.  told  Ms.  Dominguez  that  she  spoke  to  her  father  about  respondent,  and  he 
told  her  to  tell  the  office.  M.S.  did  not  want  to  tell  because  she  would  get  in  trouble  with  her 
mother. 

INTERVIEWS  CONDUCTED  BY  DETECTIVE  TOVAR 

87. 

Detective  Tovar  was  present  when  MLS.  and  L.I.  were  interviewed  by  Ms. 

Dominguez.  At  hearing,  Detective  Tovar  testified  that  during  the  interviews  of  M.S.  and  LI. 
they  were  asked  questions  such  as  whether  respondent  had  told  them  not  to  tell  anyone. 
Detective  Tovar  explained  that  it  is  important  to  determine  if  any  threats  were  made  to  the 
children.  In  this  case,  respondent  did  not  threaten  the  children.  M.S.  and  L.I.  were  also 
asked  if  respondent  made  any  comments  when  he  touched  them.  This  question  was 
important  because  it  may  show  what  respondent  was  thinking  at  the  time  and  whether  he 

17 

 

touched  the  girls  for  sexual  gratification.  There  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  made  any 
sexual  comments  to  MLS.  or  L.L 

88. 

Detective  Tovar  also  conducted  interviews  with  Ms.  Luna,  the  mother  of  MLS., 

students  J.R.,  A.R.,  and  A.V.,  a  female  student  at  Cardoza  who  was  friends  with  M.S.  and 
L.I.  Detective  Tovar  summarized  the  interviews  in  his  investigation  report  and  relevant 
portions  of  some  of  the  interviews  are  set  forth  below. 

INTERVIEW  WITH  J.R. 

89, 

On  September  18,  2013,  at  approximately  4:18  p.m.  Detective  Tovar 

interviewed  J.R.  Detective  Tovar  asked  J.R.  about  the  time  he  spent  in  respondent’s  class, 
J.R.  confirmed  that  there  were  four  people  in  respondent’s  seventh  period  class,  including 
M.S.  and  LL 

90. 

J.R.  stated  that  M.S.  and  L.I.  never  told  him  that  respondent  had  touched  them. 

There  were  times  when  the  students,  including  J.R.,  would  get  a  problem  correct  and 
respondent  would  tap  them  on  the  shoulder.  At  some  point  MLS.  and  L.I.  told  J.R.  that  they 
were  scared  that  something  was  going  to  happen  with  respondent.  J.R.  never  witnessed 
respondent  touch  MLS.  or  LI.  inappropriately. 

INTERVIEW  WITH  A.R 

91. 

On  September  19,  2013,  at  approximately  2:49  p.m.,  Detective  Tovar 

interviewed  A.R.  He  confirmed  that  he  was  in  respondent’s  math  class  with  M.S.  and  L.L. 
AR.  stated  that  M.S.  and  L.L.  would  “always  get  in  trouble”  because  they  talked a  lot. 
Detective  Tovar  asked  A.R.  if  respondent  ever  made  comments  to  him  about  homework  or  a 
project.  A.R.  stated  that  respondent  would  say  “good  job.”  Detective  Tovar  then  asked  if 
respondent  would  touch  him  on  any  place  on  his  body  when  he  said  “good  job.”  A.R.  stated 
that  respondent  would  give  him  a  tap  on  the  back.  Detective  Tovar  asked  A.R.  to 
demonstrate.  A.R.  then  placed  his  hand  on  his  shoulder  area. 
do  this  to  M.S.  or  LLL 

A.R.  did  not  see  respondent 

92, 

Atsome  point  MLS.  told  A.R.  “in  a  dramatic  way”  that  she  was  afraid  of 

respondent,  because  he  was  touching  L.I.  on  the  back  area.  Later  L.I.  told  A.R.  that  she  felt 
“creeped  out”  that  he  was  touching  them.  They  also  told  A.R.  that  respondent  rubbed  their 
arms.  A.R.  never  witnessed  respondent  touch  MLS.  or  L.I. 

93. 

A.R.  informed  Detective  Tovar  that  he  does  not  get  along  with  M.S  and  L.I 

and  that  sometimes  they  lied.  For  example,  they  would  tell  him  that  his  shoe  was  untied,  but 
it  was  not. 

18

INTERVIEW  WITH  A.V. 

94. 

On  October  2,  2013,  at  approximately  4:15  p.m.,  Detective  Tovar  interviewed 

A.V.  a  female  student  at  Cardoza.  A.V.  was  friends  with  M.S.  and  L.I.  She  told  Detective 
Tovar  that  approximately  three  weeks  before,  during  Iunch  time,  both  M.S.  and  L.1.  had  told 
her  that  respondent  touched  their  legs  and  chest  area.  When  MLS.  and  L.I.  told-her  about 
respondent,  there  were  others  girls  present. 

95. 

After  Detective  Tovar  completed  his  investigation  report,  he  sent  the  report  to 

the  District  Attorney  to  determine  if  criminal  charges  should  be  filed  against  respondent. 
Respondent  was  never  arrested  or  detained.  No  criminal  charges  were  filed  against 
respondent  and  the  time  has  since  lapsed  to  file  criminal  charges  against  him. 

Testimony  of M.S.  and  LL. 

TESTIMONY  OF  MLS. 

96. 

At  hearing,  M.S.  and  L.I.  testified  concerning  the  time  that  they  spent  in 
the 

respondent’s  classroom  and  the  manner  in  which  respondent  touched  them  during 
approximate  three  weeks  that  they  were  in  his  class. 

97. 

M.S.  learned  from  Ms.  Luna  that  she  would  attend  respondent’s  class.  She 

had  never  met  respondent,  but  was  nervous  to  be  in  his  class.  When  she  first  attended 
respondent’s  class  he  helped  her  with  math  and  she  liked  respondent.  She  was  able  to  play 
math  games  on  the  computer.  At  some  point,  respondent  would  no  longer  allow  the  students 
to  play  math  games  on  the  computer.  He  wanted  the  students  to  be  more  challenged.  MLS. 
testified  that  he  then  began  to  “scold”  and  touch  her  in  class.  For  example,  he  would  tell 
M.S.  and  L.I.  that  he  did  not  want  them  to  play  “jumping  chicks,”  a  math  game  that  M.S. 
enjoyed.  M.S.  felt  that  respondent  was  mean  because  he  did  not  allow  her  to  play  the  math 
game  that  she  wanted  to  play.  M.S.  also  felt  that  she  did  not  need  to  be  in  respondents  class. 

98. 

M.S.  could  not  recall  when  respondent  first  began  to  touch  her,  but  she 
believed  it  was  in  the  middle  of  the  school  year.  M.S.  described  that  when  respondent 
touched  her,  he  would  place  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  then  moved  it  to  her  breast.  She 
estimated  that  he  did  this  “three,  five  or  four  times.”  Sometimes  he  put  his  hand  on  her 
breast  and  took  it  off,  other  times  he  would  leave  his  hand  there  for  “a  little  while.” 
Respondent  touched  M.S.  when  she  was  seated  at  computer  or  at  a  table.  At  times,  J.R.  and 
A.R.  were  in  the  classroom  and  seated  at  the  computers  with  her  when  this  occurred.  There 
were  also  times  when  respondent  would  stand  behind  MLS.  at  the  computers  in  between  her 
and  L.I.  and  instruct  her  and  L.L 

@ 

99. 

MLS.  also  saw  respondent  put  his  hand  on  L.I.’s  shoulder  and  slide  it 

downwards  towards  her  breast.  MLS.  testified  that  respondent  touched  L.I.  just  like  he 
touched  her.  She  could  not  recall  how  many  times  she  saw  respondent  touch  L.I.,  but  she 
was  “100  percent  sure”  she  saw  respondent  touch  L.I.’s  breast. 

19 

 

100. 

After  respondent  began  to  touch  M.S,  she  stayed  in  her  bedroom  and  was 
angry.  She  did  not  want  her  father  to  touch  her  because  she  was  scared.  M.S.  made  no 
mention  of  feeling  this  way  towards  her  mother. 

TESTIMONY  OF  L.I. 

101. 

LAI.  testified  that  she  did  not  like  respondent  because  he  touched  her  and  MLS. 

Respondent  touched  L.I.  on  the  shoulder  and  hand  when  she  used  the  mouse.  Respondent 
told  her  and  M.S.  to  look  at  the  whiteboard.  She  then  demonstrated  that  respondent  touched 
the  front  of  her  shoulder  to  move  her  in  the  direction  of  the  whiteboard.  Respondent  touched 
her  like  this  just  “once  or  twice.”  It  made  her  feel  “weird”  because  he  was  her  teacher. 
_  Respondent  touched  her  shoulder  “more  than  twice”  and  that  also  made  her  feel  “weird” 
because  it  hurt. 

102. 

Respondent  also  touched  L.I.’s  hand  to  take  control  of  her  computer  mouse 

because  she  was  on  the  wrong  application  on  the  computer.  Respondent  put  L.I.  on  the  right 
application.  L.I.  understood  that  is  why  respondent  touched  her  hand.  Prior  to  taking  control 
of  L.1.’s  computer  mouse,  he  would  tell  her  that  she  was  not  on  the  correct  game. 

103. 

Respondent  never  touched  L.I.  anywhere  other  than  the  hand  and  shoulder. 

M.S.  was  in  the  classroom  when  respondent  touched  her,  but  J.R.  and  A.R.  were  not. 
Respondent  did  not  touch  L.I.  when  she  was  seated  at  the  classroom  tables. 

104. 

L.L  also  testified  that  respondent  touched  M.S.  “by  the  breast”  with  an  open 

palm.  His  hand  stayed  on  her  breast  for  two  or  three  seconds.  This  occurred  when 
respondent  stood  directly  behind  M.S.  while  she  was  seated  at  the  computer.  Respondent 
reached  over  M.S.’s  shoulder  to  touch  either  the  mouse  or  keyboard  when  his  hand  touched 
M.S.’s  breast.  Respondent  opened  math  games  on  the  computer  for  the  girls  to  play.  At 
times,  L.I.  played  different  games  than  she  was  allowed  to  play  and  respondent  told  her  to  go 
back  to  the  math  games.  L.I.  was  scared  that  respondent  would  touch  her  as  well. 

105. 

The  only  time  L.I.  saw  respondent  touch  M.S.’s  breast  was  while  M.S.  was 

seated  at  the  computer.  The  boys  were  not  in  the  classroom,  L.I.  never.saw  respondent 
touch  M.S.  while  she  was  seated  at  a  table.  L.I.  contended  that  if  M.S.  claimed  that 
respondent  touched  her  while  she  was  seated  at  a  table,  she  would  be  lying.  M.S.  would  also 
be  lying  if  she  claimed  that  respondent  touched  her  when  J.R.  and  A.R.  were  in  the 
classroom. 

Education  Assessments  of M.S.  and  LI 

106. 

During  the  2013-2014  school year,  M.S.  and  L.I.  had  psychoeducational 

assessments  conducted.  Theses  assessments  are  typically  conducted  every  three  years  to 
assess  whether  a  student  is  still  eligible  for  special  education  services.  Ms.  Romo  was 
involved  in  conducting  portions  of  the  assessments  for  M.S.  and  L.IL. 

20

M.S.  ASSESSMENT 

107. 

MLS.  tested  low  range  for  the  Differential  Ability  Scale  (DAS-ID),  particularly 
in  the  areas  of  verbal  similarities.  Ms.  Romo  opined  that  a  child  that  scored  in  the  low  range 
for  verbal  similarities  may  have  a  difficult  time  communicating  distinctions  about  units  of 
time.  For  example,  when  M.S.  mixed  up  minutes  with  seconds  when  describing  how  long 
respondent  touched  her  breast.  Ms.  Romo  also  opined  that  M.S.  may  confuse  the  words  for 
desk  and  table. 

108. 

M.S.  was  also  administered  the  Wide.  Range  Assessment  of  Memory  and 
Learning,  which  tested  verbal  and  visual  memory  as  well  as  attention  and  concentration. 
This  test  was  administered  only  in  English.  M.S.  scored  in  the  very  poor  range.  She  was 
also  given  the  Test  of  Auditory  Processing  Skills  in  English  and  Spanish.  M.S.  scored  below 
average  memory  in  English,  but  scored  average  in  Spanish.  Her  overall  score  for  the  nine 
core  subtests  which,  in  part,  tested  number,  word  and  sentence  memory,  was  below  average 
in  English,  but  average  in  Spanish.  M.S.  had  strengths  in  her  ability  to  recall  visual  and 
auditory  patterns,  sustained  attention  and  visual  memory. 

109. 

M.S.  was  also  administered  Woodcock-Johnson  Normative  Update  Tests  of 

Achievement.  She  displayed  strength  in  ability  to  recall  parts  of  stories  and  her  fluid 
reasoning  which  tested  her  ability  to  think  in  the  moment  and  form  connections,  was  average. 

110. 

Ms.  Luna  also  provided  information  for  MLS.’s  assessment.  Ms.  Luna  reported 

that  M.S.  had  substantial  difficulties  in  math.  For  example,  during  one  observation,  M.S. 
was  asked  to  solve  a  math  equation.  She  had  to  be  prompted  several  times  to  complete  it. 
M.S.  stated  that  she  did  not  want  to  complete  the  problem  because  it  was  too  hard.  Ms.  Luna 
then  walked  through  the  steps  of  the  problem  with  her,  but  when  she  walked  away,  MLS. 
stopped  working  on  the  problem  and  stated  that  she  still  did  not  know  how  to  complete  the 
problem.  M.S.  also  followed  the  lead  of  other  students  that  were  seated  next  to  her,  rather 
than  generate  her  own  responses.  She  often  looked  at  what  others  were  doing  and  appeared 
to  want  to  please  others. 

L.I.  ASSESSMENT 

111. 

L,I.  also  scored  in  the  very  poor  range  for  the  Wide  Range  Assessment  of 

Memory  and  Learning.  She  scored  in  the  poor  range  for  visual  and  verbal  memory  indexes 
and  very  poor  range  for  overall  memory  ability.  Her  scores  indicated  that  it  could  be 
difficult  for  her  to  sustain  attention.  She  was  also  “very  distractible.”  It  was  noted  in  the 
report  that  L.I.  had  a  history  of  being  tired  and  lethargic 

112. 

Ms.  Luna  also  reported  that  L.I.  had  severe  difficulties  in  math.  Ms.  Luna 

provided  the  following  information: 

She  lacks  confidence,  behaves  aggressively,  has  difficulty  being 
redirected  and  lack  [sic]  motivation.  [L.L.]  is  rarely  cooperative 

21 

 

with  others,  inconsistently  displays  situation  appropriate 
behavior,  and  inconsistently  gets  along  well  with  peers. 

[7]  ...[] 

[L.L]  typically  does  not  present  as  a  student  with  behavioral 
difficulties.  However,  she  sometimes  is  a  bully  and  uses  foul 
language.  She  is  sometimes  defiant  outside  of  the  classroom 
and  the  yard  duty  teacher  has  difficulties  with  [L.I.]  not 
following  directions.  At  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  [L.I.] 
was  able  to  unlock  her  locker  and  now  she  states  that  she  is 
unable  to.  Staff  feels  like  she  is  pretending  to  not  be  able  to 
unlock  her  locker  so  that  she  can  share  a  locker  with  a  friend. 

113. 

Ms.  Romo  opined  that  MLS.  and  L.L  have  specific  learning  disabilities.  There 

was  a  gap  between  how  the  girls  were  expected  to  perform  on  the  assessments  and  their 
actual  performance.  However,  the  specific  learning  disabilities  for  which  they  suffer  do  not 
affect  their  ability  to  know  right  from  wrong. 

45-Day  Notice  to  Improve  Conduct 

114. 

On  November  15,  2010,  respondent  was  in  class  with  several  students. 

Respondent  was  seated  at  a  table  instructing  students.  There  was a  student  sitting  next  to 
respondent  to  his  left.  Respondent  and  the  student  were  both  seated  in  chairs  that  had 
triangular  legs.  The  student  proceeded  to  use  the  table  to  rock  himself  back  in  his  chair.  The 
student’s  right  hand  was  on  respondent’s  left  shoulder  to  stop  him  from  falling  backwards. 
Respondent  asked  the  student  multiple  times  to  stop.  The  student  did  not  stop.  As  the 
student  rocked  his  chair  he  put  his  hand  on  respondent’s  shoulder  again.  Respondent  then 
performed  a  wrestling  maneuver  called  a  “reverse  wrist  lock,”  where  he  took  the  student’s 
hand  off  of  his  shoulder  and  turned  the  student’s  palm  up  so  he  could  not  grasp  respondent’s 
shoulder  again.  The  student  then  fell  backward  in  his  chair  to  the  floor. 

115. 

As  soon  as  the  class  period  was  over,  respondent  spoke  with  Alice  Solis, 
principal  of  Cardoza  from  approximately  2006  until  2012.  Respondent  explained  what 
occurred,  that  he  performed  a  reverse  wrist  lock,  and  that  the  student  fell  backward  out  of  his 
chair  and  hit  his  head.  He  stated  that  the  student’s  conduct  made  him  upset.  Respondent  told 
Ms.  Solis  that  he  acted  inappropriately  by  putting  the  student  on  the  ground.  Respondent 
knew  his  conduct  was  wrong. 

116. 

Ms.  Solis  interviewed  the  student  that  was  involved  in  the  incident.  The 

student  explained  that  he  fell  and  did  not  take  the  incident  seriously.  The  student  was  not 
injured.  There  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  hit  the  student. 

22

117. 

On  November  24,  2010,  respondent  was  issued  a  notice  to  improve  his 

unprofessional  behavior  (Notice).  The  Notice  was  issued  by  Ms.  Solis.  The  Notice  directed 
respondent  to: 

Exercise  self-control  and  restrain  [himself]  when  addressing  and 
disciplining  any  student  in  a  manner  that  is  contrary  to  the  safety 
and  welfare  of  students  and  contrary  to  the  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  [District]  in  regards  to  how  we  treat  students. 

After  respondent  was  issued  the  Notice,  he  did  not  violate  the  directive. 

118. 

At  hearing,  respondent  was  questioned  about  why  he  did  not  send  the  student 

to  the  office  when  the  student  refused  to  take  his  hand  off  respondent’s  shoulder. 
Respondent  explained  that  that  the  student  had  been  sent  to  his  class  because  he  had  gotten 
into  trouble  in  another  class.  If  respondent  had  sent  the  student  to  the  office  he  would  have 
been  suspended  for  the  day  and  he  was  at  risk  of  expulsion  from  Cardoza  if  he  received 
another  suspension.  Respondent  did  not  make  an  excuse  for  the  manner  in  which  he  handled 
the  situation,  which  he  acknowledged  was  wrong.  Rather,  he  provided  context  for  the 
situation  with  this  student. 

District  Policies 

119, 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent’s  conduct  constituted  persistent  violations 

of  several  Board  policies,  administrative  regulations  and  Education  Code  sections. 
Specifically,  the  District  contended  that  respondent  violated  prohibitions  against  sexual 
harassment  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  212.5  and  District  Administrative 
Regulation  (AR)  sections  4119.11,  4219.11,  4319.11,  and  5145.7,  which  set  forth  the 
District’s  regulations  prohibiting  sexual  harassment.  The  language  in  Education  Code 
sections  212.5,  essentially  mirrors  the  language  set  forth  in  the  District’s  regulation,  which 
provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

Prohibited  Sexual  harassment  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to, 
unwelcome  sexual  advances,  unwanted  request  for  sexual 
favors,  or  other  unwanted  verbal,  visual,  or  physical  conduct  of 
a  sexual  nature  made  against  another  person  of  the  same  or 
opposite  sex  in  the  work  or  education  setting  when... 

120. 

The  District  also  contended  that  respondent’s  conduct  violated  District  Board 

Policy  (BP)  sections  4119.21,  4219.21  and  4319.21,  which  set  forth  the  policy  on 
professional  standards  for  District  employees.  The  BP  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

The  Board  expects  all  employees  to  exercise  good  judgment  and 
maintain  professional  standards  and  boundaries  when 
interacting  with  students  both  on  and  off  school  property. 

23 

 

Inappropriate  employee  conduct  shall  include,  but  not  be  limited 
to,  engaging  in  harassing  or  discriminatory  behavior;  engaging 
in  inappropriate  socialization  or  fraternization  with  a  student; 
soliciting,  encouraging,  or  establishing  an  inappropriate  written, 
verbal,  or  physical  relationship  with  a  student;  engaging  in  child 
abuse. 

121. 

The  District  contended  that  respondent’s  conduct  violated  BP  section  5137 

which  sets  forth  the  policy  concerning  the  school  environment.  The  policy,  in  part,  requires 
employees  to  enforce  and  abide  by  the  Board’s  rules  and  regulations  prohibiting  harassment. 

122. 

The  District  contended  that  in  November  2010,  respondent  engaged  in 

corporal  punishment  of  a  student,  in  violation  of  BP  section  5144,  and  Education  code 
sections  49000  and  49001,  which  prohibits  the  use  of  corporal  punishment  as  a  disciplinary 
measure.  Education  Code  section  49001,  defines  corporal  punishment,  in  pertinent  part,  as: 

..  the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of, 
physical  pain  on  a  pupil.  An  amount  of  force  that  is  reasonable 
and  necessary  for  a  person  employed  by  or  engaged  in  a  public 
school  to  quell  a  disturbance  threatening  physical  injury  to 
persons  or  damage  to  property,  for  purposes  of  self-defense,  or 
to  obtain  possession  of  weapons  or  other  dangerous  objects 
within  the  control  of  the  pupil,  is  not  and  shall  not  be  construed 
to  be  corporal  punishment  within  the  meaning  and  intent  of  this 
section. 

Discussion 

123. 

Respondent  had  been  employed  with  the  District  for  25  years.  He  has  no 
history  of  sexual  misconduct  towards  students.  In  the  instant  case,  the  District  failed  to 
establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched  M.S.  or 
L.L,  that  he  touched  M.S.’s  breast,  or  that  he  stroked  her  hair.  The  District  also  failed  to 
establish  that  in  November  2010,  respondent’s  conduct  constituted  corporal  punishment,  or 
that  he  violated  the  45-day  Notice  to  correct  his  behavior. 

124,. 

M.S.  and  L.I.  made  numerous  statements  concerning  the  events  that  occurred 
in  respondent’s  classroom  between  August  7  and  August  29,  2013.  The  statements  and  their 
version  of  events  have  changed  and  evolved  significantly  since  August  30,  2013,  when  they 
first  reported  to  Mr.  Bizzini  that  respondent  touched  them.  Specifically,  their  statements 
concerning  when  respondent  touched  them,  how  he  touched  them,  how  often  he  touched 
them,  where  they  were  touched,  and  who  was  present  when  he  touched  them,  were 
inconsistent  and  often  in  contradiction  with  each  other.  The  significant  inconsistencies  and 
contradictions  in  their  versions  of  events  affect  their  credibility  to  the  extent  that  their 
statements  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched  them  are  unreliable. 

24

125. 

Both  girls  had  reasons  why  they  did  not  want  to  be  in  respondent’s  class.  M.S. 

and  L.I.  were  new  to  Cardoza.  Both  girls  were  assessed  and  determined  to  have  severe 
difficulties  learning  math.  M.S.  was  nervous  about  being  in  respondent’s  class  prior  to 
meeting  him.  Shortly  after  attending  respondent’s  class,  M.S.  decided  that  she  did  not  like 
respondent  because  he  would  not  allow  the  students  to  play  the  math  games  that  she 
preferred.  At  times  M.S.  and  L.L  had  to  be  redirected  by  respondent  because  they  talked  to 
each  other.  M.S.  felt  that  respondent  had  “scolded”  her  and  L.I.  When  M.S.  and  L.L.  arrived 
late  to  class,  respondent  made  them  write  sentences.  MLS.  also  believed  that  she  did  not  need 
to  be  in  respondent’s  class. 

126. 

Initially  when  respondent  touched  M.S.  on  the  shoulder,  she  was  not 

uncomfortable,  It  was  not  until  L.I.  informed  her  that  respondent  had  also  touched  her 
shoulder  that  they  decided  that  they  were  uncomfortable.  Within  a  three  week  period  of 
attending  respondent’s  class,  M.S.  and  L.I.  reported  that  respondent  had  inappropriately 
touched  them.  M.S.  reported  to  Mr.  Bizzini  that  respondent  touched  her  on  the  shoulder  or 
neck,  She  demonstrated  that  respondent  then  let  his  hand  fall  across  her  chest,  which  Mr. 
Bizzini  described  as  a  “graze.”  She  did  not  demonstrate  any  type  of  grab  of  her  breast.  L.L. 
told  Mr.  Bizzini  that  she  saw  respondent’s  hand  “fall  across”  M.S.’s  chest  about  seven  times. 

127. 

Mr.  Wirowek  was  the  second  person  to  interview  the  girls.  He  had  never 

worked  for  a  school  district  or  with  children.  Nor  did  he  have  any  specialized  training  to 
interview  children.  Mr.  Wirowek  asked  M.S.  a  series  of  suggestive  and  leading  questions. 
MLS.  adopted  many  of  his  suggestions.  For  example,  Mr.  Wirowek  asked  MLS.  several  times 
when  was  the  last  time  that  respondent  had  touched  her.  Initially,  she  stated  that  she  could 
not  remember.  When  he  continued  to  ask,  she  then  stated  multiple  times  that  respondent  had 
not  touched  her  the  day  before,  which  was  Thursday.  Mr.  Wirowek  then  suggested  that 
maybe  respondent  had  touched  her  on  the  Tuesday  of  that  week  and  she  agreed.  He  then 
suggested  to  M.S.  how  respondent  may  have  touched  her  on  the  chest.  For  example,  before 
MLS.  had  provided  any  explanation  as  to  how  respondent  touched  her  chest,  Mr.  Wirowek 
asked  her  if  respondent  would  touch  her  shoulder  and  “go  down  across  the  chest?”  M.S.  then 
stated  that  respondent  “went  down.”  He  then  asked  if  respondent  “paused”  referring  to  his 
hand.  She  replied  that  he  “left  it  there  for  a  few  seconds.”  When  Mr.  Wirowek  asked  M.S. 
how  many  times  respondent  had  touched  her  on  the  chest,  she  replied  that  she  did  not  know. 
Mr.  Wirowek  then  began  to  suggest  that  it  had  occurred  five  or  six  times.  M.S.  agreed  that  it 
was  “maybe”  five  times. 

128. 

When  M.S.  met  with  Ms.  Romo,  for  the  first  time  she  claimed  that  respondent 

placed  his  hand  on  her  breast  in  what  she  demonstrated  was  a  “semi-folded  like  cup”  of  his 
hand.  M.S.  again  stated  that  she  could  not  remember  how  many  times  respondent  touched 
her  breast,  but  that  it  was  more  than  one  time.  She  initially  claimed  that  respondent  touched 
her  breast  for  two  to  three  minutes.  Ms.  Romo  had  to  clarify  that  she  meant  two  to  three 
seconds.  When  M.S,  was  interviewed  by  Ms.  Dominguez,  she  stated  that  respondent  left  his 
hand  on  her  breast  for  “an  hour  or a  little  bit.”  She  claimed  this  occurred  “five  or  four” 
times. 

25 

 

129. 

M.S.  and  L,I.  did  not  attend  respondent’s  class  until  the  second  week  of 

school.  Yet  they  claimed  that  respondent  began  to  touch  them  on  the  first  day  of  school. 
M.S.  and  L.L.  told  some  people  that  respondent  touched  them  every  day.  M.S.  told  Ms. 
Dominguez  that  respondent  touched  her  for  “like  a  week.”  MLS.  claimed  that  respondent 
touched  her  when  the  boys  were  present,  but  L.I.  claimed  that  respondent  did  not  touch  them 
when  A.R.  and  J.R  were  in  the  classroom.  J.R.  and  A.R.  were  pulled  out  for  speech  services 
on  Thursdays,  and  A.R.  had  only  been  pulled  out  for  speech  services  one  time  in  the  three 
weeks  M.S.  and  L.L.  were  in  respondent’s  class, 

130. 

MLS.  repeatedly  stated  that  respondent  touched  her  on  the  breast  when  she  was 

seated  at  the  computer  and  tables.  She  also  contended  that  the  boys  were  present  when  this 
occurred,  One  incident  M.S.  described  was  that  all  of  the  students  were  seated  at  the 
computers.  Respondent  was  seated  in  between  her  and  L.I.  when  he  started  to  grab  their 
shoulders  and  put  his  hands  on  her  breast.  Based  on  the  tight  configuration  of  the  computer 
stations,  it  is  not  plausible  that  the  boys  would  not  see  this  occur.  M.S.’s  statements  that  the 
boys  were  present  when  respondent  touched  them  is  also  in  contradiction  to  L.I.’s  statements 
and  testimony  that  the  boys  were  not  present  when  respondent  touched  them.  L.I.  also  stated 
that  respondent  only  touched  them  when  they  were  seated  at  the  computers,  and  if  M.S.  said 
otherwise  she  would  be  lying.  L.I.  described  that  respondent  touched  M.S.’s  breast  when  he 
reached  over  M.S.  while  she  was  seated  at  the  computer  to  touch  either  the  mouse  or  the 
keyboard. 

131.  . M.S.  often  spoke  about  incidents  with  respondent  i  in  terms  of  “us”  referring  to 
both  her  and  L.I.  M.S.  also  consistently  reported  that  respondent  touched  L.I.  on  the  breast. 
MS.  testified  that  she is  “100  percent  sure”  that  she  saw  respondent  touch  L.L.  on  her  breast 
and  that  respondent  touched  L.I.  just  like  he  touched  her.  Yet,  L.1.  repeatedly  denied  that 
respondent  touched  her  on  the  chest  or  breast. 

132. 

M.S.’s  reasons  for  why  she  did  not  tell  anyone  that  respondent  had  touched 
her,  were  also  inconsistent.  M.S.  told  some  people  that  she  did  not  tell  her  mother  because 
she  was  afraid  that  her  mother  would  be  mad.  She  told  other  people  that  she  was  afraid  that 
respondent  would  threaten  or  kill  her  if  she  told.  MLS.  also  denied  that  she  told  her  friends 
that  respondent  had  touched  her  on  the  chest.  She  claimed  that  she  had  only  told  her  friends 
that  respondent  had  touched  her  hand  because  she  did  not  want  the  boys  to  know  that 
respondent  had  touched  her  chest.  However,  A.V.  who  was  a  friend  of  M.S.  and  LL, 
reported  that  both  M.S.  and  L.I.  told  her  that  respondent  had  touched  their  legs  and  chest 
area.  Furthermore,  A.R.  reported  that  M.S.  and  L.I.  told  him  that  respondent  had  touched 
LL.  “weird.”  They  did  not  tell  him  that  respondent  had  touched  MLS. 

133. 

M.S.  and  L.I.  also  had  different  versions  for  why  they  decided  to  speak  to  the 

principal  about  respondent.  M.S.  stated  that  she  and  L.I.  decided  if  respondent  touched  them 
again,  they  would  report  it  to  the  principal.  However,  respondent  had  not  touched  them  on 
the  day  that  they  spoke  to  Mr.  Bizzini.  M.S.  denied  that  she  or  L.L  had  spoken  to  their 
parents  about  the  incidents.  In  contrast,  L.I.  decided  to  talk  to  the  principal  after  her  father 
encouraged  her  to  do  so. 

26

134. 

The  District  contended  that  the  inconsistencies  in  M.S.  and  L.I.  statements 

concerning  the  events  are  due  to  their  learning  challenges.  While  their  learning  challenges 
may  explain  inconsistencies  such  as  confusion  with  seconds  versus  minutes,  it  does  not 
explain  the  progressive  changes  in  their  story.  The  learning  challenges  do  not  explain  the 
inconsistencies  concerning  when  the  alleged  touching  started,  how  many  times  it  occurred, 
where  it  occurred,  who  was  present  when  it  occurred,  the  manner  in  which  it  occurred,  and 
exactly  where  respondent  touched  M.S.  Nor  does  it  explain  the  inconsistencies  between 
M.S.  assertion  that  she  is  “100  percent  sure”  that  she  saw  respondent  touch  L.I.  on  the  breast, 
and  L.L’s  repeated  assertions  that  respondent  did  not  touch  her  on  the  breast. 

135. 

In  contrast,  respondent  credibly  denied  that  he  inappropriately  touched  MLS.  or 

L.I.  Respondent  did  not  seek  to  portray  M.S.  or  L.L  in  a  negative  light,  nor  did  he  appear  to 
harbor  any  animosity  towards  the  girls.  Respondent  testified  that  while  M.S.  and  L.I.  were  in 
his  class,  they  were  not  off  task  any  more  than  any  other  sixth  grade  student.  Respondent’s 
version  of  the  events  that  occurred  between  August  7  and  29,  2013,  was  consistent  and 
plausible.  He  did  not  deny  that  he  touched  M.S.  and  L.I.  on  the  shoulder.  He  did  so  to 
redirect  their  attention  and  he  used  this  technique  with  his  other  students  as  well.  Typically, 
he  did  not  touch  their  shoulders  until  he  first  gave  them  verbal  direction,  but  this  was  not 
always  the  case.  Respondent  admitted  that  once  he  pushed  L.I.  on  the  shoulder  to  turn  her 
around  to  face  the  computer,  without  first  giving  her  verbal  direction  to  do  so.  Unbeknownst 
to  respondent,  L.L.  had  a  bruise  on  her  shoulder.  When  respondent  pushed  her  shoulder  to 
turn  her  around,  it  caused  her  pain.  L.I.  did  not  inform  respondent  that  he  caused  her  pain. 

136. 

Respondent  also  credibly  testified  that  he  touched  MLS.  and  L.I.  on  the  hands 
on  a  few  occasions  in  an  effort  to  move  a  mouse  that  was  difficult  to  use.  Neither  M.S  nor 
LL.  ever  told  respondent  that  they  did  not  want  to  be  touched.  The  evidence  established  that 
it  was  not  inappropriate  nor  was  it  a  violation  of  the  District’s  policies  for  respondent  to 
touch  M.S.  and  L.L  on  their  shoulders  or  hands  to  redirect  their  attention  or  assist  them  with 
instructional  matters. 

137. 

Respondent’s  testimony  was  also  corroborated  in  many  respects  by  A.R.  and 

J.R.  Neither  of  the  boys  ever  witnessed  respondent  touch  MLS  or  L.I.  in  an  inappropriate 
manner.  Both  A.R.  and  J.R.  reported  that  they  had  seen  respondent  pat  other  students  on  the 
back  or  shoulders  and  that  it  usually  occurred  when  he  was  praising  a  student  for  doing  a 
good  job.  Neither  boy  saw  respondent  touch  the  girls  in  any  different  way  from  the  way  that 
he  touched  them. 

138. 

Furthermore,  there  is  no  evidence  that  respondent  engaged  in  any  type  of 

behavior  that  would  be  consistent  with  sexual  misconduct.  He  did  not  threaten  the  girls.  He 
also  did  not  make  any  sexual  comments  or  remarks.  Respondent  was  instructing  the  girls  on 
math  and  where  they  should  be  on  the  computer. 

139. 

The  evidence  also  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  “stroked”  MLS.’s  hair,  as 

alleged  by  the  District.  The  only  time  it  was  noted  that  M.S.  reported  that  respondent 
“stroked”  her  hair,  was  in  the  notes  prepared  by  Mr.  Bizzini.  There  is  no  mention  by  M.S.  in 
the  subsequent  interviews  or  at  hearing  that  respondent  “stroked”  or  touched  her  hair.  The 

27 

 

evidence  established  that  respondent  flicked  M.S.’s  hair  as  he  walked  passed  her  on  the  way 
to  the  computers.  Notably,  L.I.  was  not  afraid  to  respond  to  the  gesture  by  stating  “Ew.” 
Respondent  immediately  acknowledged  how  L.L  felt  about  his  actions  when  he  put  up  his 
hands  and  stated  “okay.”  Although  respondent  flicked  M.S.’s  hair  in  jest,  in  hindsight  he 
understood  that  this  was  not  appropriate  as  could  have  been  construed  by  M.S  as  unwelcome. 

140. 

Finally,  the  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  in  November  2010,  respondent 
engaged  in  corporal  punishment  of  a  student.  Respondent  did  not  willfully  inflict  or  cause 
pain  to  a  student.  Respondent  removed  a  student’s  hand  from  his  shoulder  and  lifted  the 
student’s  palm  up  to  prevent  the  student  from  grabbing  his  shoulder.  As a  result,  the  student 
fell  back  in  his  chair.  Respondent  did  not  hit  the  student.  The  student  was  not  injured.  ' 
Respondent  immediately  reported  the  incident  and  acknowledged  that  he  handled  the 
incident  incorrectly.  Furthermore,  after  respondent  received  a  45-day  Notice  to  correct  his 
behavior,  he  did  not  violate  the  Notice. 

141. 

As  set  forth  above,  when  all  of  the  evidence  is  considered,  the  District  failed  to 

establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched  M.S. 
and  L.I.  The  District  also  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  corporal  punishment 
or  violated  the  45-day  Notice  to  correct  his  behavior.  The  District  failed  to  establish  that 
respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  is  unfit  to  teach  or  persistently  and  willfully 
violated  the  school  laws  or  regulations  governing  his  employment.  As a  result,  the 
Accusation  filed  against  respondent  by  the  District  must  be  dismissed. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A  school  district  which  seeks  to  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  from  its  employment  bears  the  burden  of  proof  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 
164  Cal.App.3d  1035;  Bevii  v.  Brisco  (1989)  211  Cal.App.3d  986.) 

2. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  any  of  the  following 
causes:  “immoral  conduct,”  “evident  unfitness  for  service,”  or  “persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board 
of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(1),  (5), 
and  (7).) 

3. 
conduct  that: 

For  the  purpose  of  dismissal  of  a  teacher,  immoral  conduct  is  defined  as 

is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to 
good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual 
matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or 
as  wilful  [sic],  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 

28

indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the 
community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare. 

(Palo  Verde  Unified  Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal-App.3d  967,  972,  citing  Board of  Ed. 
of San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  CalApp.2d  808,  811.) 

4. 

As  set  for  the  in  Factual  Findings  8  through  22,  31  through  33,  45  and  46,  65 

through  68,  87  through  95,  and  114  through  141,  the  District  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct.  The  evidence 
did  not  establish  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched  MLS.  or  L.I.  Respondent  touched 
M.S.  and  L.I.  on  their  shoulders.  He  did  so  to  redirect  their  attention.  Respondent  also  did 
not  intentionally  touch  M.S.  on  the  breast.  Nor  did  he  stroke  her  hair.  Consequently,  the 
District  failed  to  established  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  under  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “evident  unfitness  for  service.”  In 
Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444  (Woodland),  the  Third  District  Court  of  Appeal  defined  the  term 
“evident  unfitness  for  service,”  as  used  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 
to  mean  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  The  court  found  that  the  term  “connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct 
fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Ibid.)  The  court  held  that 
the  Morrison  factors  “must  be  analyzed.  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited 
conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.”  Cd.  p.  1445.)  As  the  court  in  Woodland  explained, 
“Tilf  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’ 
is  ‘evident’;  i.c.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.” 
([bid.) 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  8  through  22,  31  through  33,  45  and  46,  65 

through  68,  87  through  95,  and  114  through  141,  the  District  failed  to  establish  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  respondent  is  unfit  for  service.  The  District  failed  to 
establish  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched  M.S.  and  L.L.  on  their  shoulders,  touched 
MSS.  on  her  breast  or  stroked  her  hair.  Since  the  District  failed  to  prove  that  respondent 
engaged  in  the  alleged  inappropriate  conduct  cited  in  the  Accusation,  an  analysis  of  the 
Morrison  factors  is  not  required.  Consequently,  the  District  failed  to  establish  cause  to 
dismiss  respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

7. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  a  school  district 

may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  a  school  district’s  governing  board.  A  charge  of 
persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  rules  requires  a  showing  of  insubordination, 
(Midway  School  Dist.  of Kern  County  v.  Griffeath  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  13,  18-19.)  Persistence 
requires  a  showing  of  “continuing  or  constant”  behavior.  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale 

29 

 

Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  The  District  contended  that 
respondent  violated  several  District  policies  and  Education  Code  regulations  related  to  sexual 
harassment  and  corporal  punishment. 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  8  through  22,  31  through  33,  45  and  46,  65  through 

68,  87  through  95,  and  114  through  141,  the  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence,  that  respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  by  the  District’s  Governing  Board  or  the  State  Board  of  Education.  The  District 
failed  to  establish  that  respondent  violated  the  District  policies  or  the  Board  of  Education 
regulations  prohibiting  sexual  harassment.  The  evidence  established  that  he  did  not 
inappropriately  touch  M.S.  or  L.I.  Furthermore,  the  District  failed  to  establish  that 
respondent  violated  the  prohibition  against  corporal  punishment.  Consequently,  the  District 
failed  to  established  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(7). 

Conclusion 

9. 

The  District  did  not  sustain  its  burden  of  proving,  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  is  unfit  for  service,  or  that  he 
persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  reasonable  regulations.  As  a  result,  respondent  shall 
not  be  dismissed  as  a  resource  specialist  program  teacher  from  the  Riverbank  Unified  School 
District. 

The  Accusation  filed  by  the  District  against  Jerry  Pief  is  DISMISSED. 

ORDER 

DATED:  February  24,  2015 

Kttea  (avn) 

KATHY  CRONIN,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

BINSON,  Member 

mmission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

Lo 

(WA  SLOW 
ARCIE  LARSON,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

30

  

