BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
SAN  JOSE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SANTA  CLARA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

GARRETT  GORDON, 
a  certificated  teacher, 

  

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2015041161 

DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  David  L.  Benjamin  served  as  the  chairperson  of  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Jody  Tims  and  Harry  Pabley  served  as  members 
of  the  commission.  The  matter  was  heard  on  October  5-9,  12-13,  and  November  2,  2015,  in 
San  Jose,  California. 

Ingrid  A.  Meyers,  Attorney  at  Law,  Dannis  Wolliver  Kelley,  represented  complainant 

Dr.  James  Lovelace,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  San  Jose  Unified  School 
District. 

Christopher  E.  Schumb,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Garrett  Gordon, 

who  was  present. 

The  record  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  November  2,  2015. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

2; 

Respondent  Garrett  Gordon  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  San 

Jose  Unified  School  District  (district). 

On  March  26,  2015,  complainant  James  Lovelace,  Ed.D.,  the  district’s 

Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  filed  with  the  district’s  governing  board  a 
“Statement  of  Charges  and  Recommendation  for  Dismissal  and  for  Immediate  Unpaid 
Suspension.”  In  the  Statement  of  Charges,  complainant  recommended  to  the  board  that

respondent  be  dismissed  from  employment.  The  board  approved  complainant’s 
recommendation  and  on  the  next  day,  March  27,  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  a  Notice  of 
Intent  to  Dismiss  was  served  on  respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  notice  of  defense  and 
a  request  for  hearing,  and  this  hearing  followed. 

33 

Broadly  speaking,  the  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  respondent’s 

performance  as  a  teacher  is  unsatisfactory  and  that  he  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  in 
various  instances,  most  notably  by  exhibiting  indifference  toward  a  student  who  was  having 
a  seizure  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  denies  the  charges.  He  asserts  that  he  welcomed 
criticism  of  his  teaching  and  that,  if  his  performance  was  deficient  in  any  respect,  he  was  not 
given  a  meaningful  opportunity  to  correct  it.  Respondent  denies  that  he  was  indifferent 
toward  the  student  who  had  a  seizure  in  his  class. 

Respondent 

4. 

Respondent  graduated  from  the  University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz,  in  1985 
with  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  Spanish  literature  and  a  minor  in  English.  He  has  a  BCLAD,  a 
multiple  subject  credential  in  math,  English  and  business,  and  a  single  subject  credential  in 
Spanish.  He  studied  special  education  at  San  Jose  State  University,  and  holds  a  Learning 
Handicapped  (LH)  credential. 

Ds 

After  graduating  from  college,  respondent  taught  children  of  migrant  farm 

workers  in  Watsonville  for  several  years.  He  then  worked  for  the  Salinas  High  School 
District,  for  the  San  Jose  Unified  School  District  in  an  intervention  class,  and  the  Alum  Rock 
School  District,  each  for  about  one  year.  He  returned  to  the  district  in  the  mid-1990’s.  In  or 
around  2000,  respondent  was  assigned  to  Bret  Harte  Middle  School  (BHMS),  where  he 
remained  until  March  2013. 

2011-2012  school  year 

6. 

In  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  to  BHMS  and  taught 

two  periods  of  math  and  three  periods  of  Spanish.  His  principal  for  this  year,  and  for  the 
years  he  remained  at  BHMS,  was  Cynthia  Maijala. 

7. 

One  of  Maijala’s  responsibilities  is  to  conduct  classroom  observations  of  her 

teachers,  and  to  evaluate  tenured  teachers  at  least  every  other  year.  She  observed  respondent 
on  December  12,  2011.  It  appears  that  respondent’s  teaching  was  under  scrutiny  even  before 
that  date,  as  respondent  already  had  two  math  coaches  assigned  to  him  (Laura  Fujikawa  and 
Helen  Arrington),  and  he  had  been  the  subject  of  parent  complaints  about  his  teaching. 

8. 

In  the  course  of  her  December  12,  2011  observation  Maijala  completed  a 

district  form  titled  “Classroom  Observation  Guide/Final  Assessment  Form  Phase  I,”  which 
asks  the  evaluator  to  rate  the  teacher  in  38  different  categories,  divided  into  five  areas:  A  — 
Planning  and  Preparation;  B  —  Learning  Environment;  C  — Instruction;  D  —  Assessment;  and  .

E  —  Professional  Responsibilities.  Maijala  gave  respondent  six  “ineffective”  ratings  in  the 
following  areas: 

C8:  —  Uses  instructional  time  effectively 
Di:  —  Collects  and  uses  multiple  sources  of  information  and  data  to  regularly  assess 

student  learning  and  to  modify  and  guide  instruction  as  needed. 
Assesses  the  effectiveness  of  the  lesson  and  the  extent  to  which  the  lesson 
reaches  the  instructional  goal. 
Keeps  records  and  reports  that  are  up-to-date  and  accurate,  and  is  punctual  in 
submitting  all  material. 

ES:  —  Collaborates  with  colleagues  to  continually  improve  professional  practices 

related  to  teaching  and  learning. 
Uses  self-selected  technologies  that  assist  in  areas  such  as  reporting  grades, 
preparing  assignments  and  assessments,  using  data,  and  communicating  with 
others. 

D4: 

E4: 

E10: 

Maijala  prepared  an  improvement  plan  dated  January  12,  2012,  which  she  gave  to 
respondent.  Among  other  things,  the  improvement  plan  directed  respondent  to:  complete 
training  in  Explicit  Direct  Instruction,  or  EDI;  check  for  student  understanding  during  his 
lessons;  assign  grouping  partners;  input  assignments  every  day  into  the  grading  system;  enter 
tests  and  quizzes  no  later  than  two  days  after  the  assessment;  review  learning  objectives  with 
the  class;  use  verbal  questioning  to  ensure  mastery;  use  a  seating  chart  so  that  a  range  of 
students  are  called  on;  and  update  student  homework  assignments  daily. 

9. 

Maijala  returned  to  respondent’s  classroom  on  January  26,  2012,  to  observe 

him  a  second  time.  She  found  that  his  teaching  remained  ineffective  in  the  same  areas  and  in 
one  additional  area:  D3,  “checks  for  student  understanding  by  listening,  observing,  and 
questioning  during  instruction  and  modifies  instruction  accordingly.”  Respondent  had  not 
yet  signed  up  for  EDI  training,  and  he  continued  to  have  difficulty  uploading  comments  and 
grades  into  the  district’s  electronic  grading  system,  called  “Infinite  Campus.”  Respondent 
could  not  master  Infinite  Campus  and  needed  last-minute  assistance  from  other  staff 
members  to  get  his  grades  in  at  the  end  of  the  fall  semester. 

10. 

Respondent  was  late  to  Back  to  School  Night  at  the  beginning  of  the  school 

year  on  August  31,  2011,  and  then  failed  to  appear  for  Open  House  at  BHMS  on  May  9, 
2012.  At  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  was  late  to  Back  to  School  Night  because  the 
time  for  the  event  had  changed,  but  he  acknowledged  it  was  his  responsibility  to  be  on  time. 
Respondent  states  that  he  was  “unaware  of  Open  House”  because  his  laptop  had  crashed  and 
he  did  not  have  access  to  his  school  calendar.  Respondent’s  testimony  on  this  point  was  not 
credible. 

11. 

On  May  21,  2011,  Maijala  met  with  respondent  to  give  him  her  final 

performance  assessment  for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  On  a  “Certificated  Employee 
Information  Sheet,”  Maijala  wrote:

Although  there  have  been  improvements  in  the  area  of 
professional  responsibility  and  instruction,  I  am  recommending 
that  you  be  evaluated  next  year.  Being  late  to  Back  to  School 
Night  and  neglecting  to  attend  Open  House  this  year  and  last 
year  are  problematic  and  in  violation  of  contract. 

The  Information  Sheet  asks  the  evaluator  to  rate  the  teacher’s  “Overall  Performance”  as 
Effective  or  Ineffective,  or  as  “Recommended  for  Phase  II  Assessment  based  on  formal 
observation,”  or  “Recommended  for  non-reemployment.”  Maijala’s  final  rating  of 
respondent  was  “Effective  Overall  Performance,”  the  highest  available  rating  on  the  form. 

12. 

On  May  31,  2012,  Maijala  sent  an  email  to  respondent  in  which  she  informed 

him  that  “I  have  set  aside  tomorrow  at  2:30  to  meet  with  you  about  your  teaching  assignment 
for  next  year.  Ms.  Nerhood  [assistant  principal]  and  I  will  meet  with  you  in  my  office  at  that 
time.”  Respondent  did  not  appear  for  the  meeting. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  “[a]lthough  Ms.  Maijala  confirmed  the  date 
and  time  of  the  meeting  with  Respondent  prior  to  the  meeting,  he  still  failed  to  show  up. 
Such  an  omission  constitutes  an  act  of  insubordination  and  defiance.”  This  is  not  a  fair 
statement  of  the  facts  concerning  respondents  failure  to  attend  the  meeting,  as  it  does  not 
mention  respondent’s  communication  to  Maijala  before  the  meeting.  On  May  31,  respondent 
sent  Maijala  an  email  in  response  to  hers,  in  which  he  wrote: 

. 

.  regarding 

I  have  already  contacted  my  off-site  union  reps . 
this  matter  and  other  concerns  surrounding  our  most  recent 
office  meeting.  It  is  doubtful  my  reps  would  be  able  to  honor 
my  request  to  attend  an  afternoon  meeting  tomorrow  on  such 
notice.  Moreover,  first,  the  union  reps  need  time  to  discuss  and 
respond  to  the  problems  with  me  that  I  have  brought  to  their 
attention,  which  has  not  yet  occurred.  Given  these 
circumstances  and  my  wish  to  protect  my  rights  in  regards  to 
these  issues  I  do  not  feel  obliged  to  meet  with  you  tomorrow. 

The  evidence  does  not  establish  that  respondent’s  desire  for  union  representation  excused 
him  from  attending  a  meeting  with  his  principal.  At  the  same  time,  the  evidence  does  not 
establish,  as  the  Statement  of  Charges  seems  to  imply,  that  respondent  failed  to  respond  to 
Maijala’s  email  or  that  he  failed  to  attend  the  meeting  without  explanation. 

13. 

The  relationship  between  Principal  Maijala  and  respondent,  which  had  been 
professional  at  one  time,  deteriorated  in  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Respondent  believes 
that  Maijala  discriminated  against  him  because  of  his  race  (respondent  is  African  American); 
he  filed  discrimination  complaints  against  her  when  she  was  his  principal.  Respondent  feels 
that  Maijala  intimidated  him  and  states  that  he  tried  to  avoid  her.  Maijala  denies  that 
respondent’s  race  has  anything  to  do  with  her  evaluations  of  his  performance  or  her  feelings 
towards  him.  Maijala  states  that  it  was  respondent  who  attempted  to  intimidate  her,  and  that 

4

his  words  and  manner  conveyed  a  veiled  threat  of  violence,  to  the  point  that  she  walked  out 
of  one  meeting  with  him  and  thereafter  refused  to  meet  with  him  alone. 

14. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  “[b]ecause  of  [respondent’s]  inability  to 

work  with  his  [math]  coach  and  refusal  to  respond  to  any  other  coaching  assistance,  the 
coaching  sessions  ceased  much  earlier  than  originally  scheduled.  .  ..  Respondent’s  refusal  to 
accept  offers  of  assistance  is  disappointing  to  the  District  and  further  evidences  his  difficulty 
in  engaging  in  professional  collaborations  with  his  colleagues.”  The  evidence  does  not 
support  these  allegations.  Respondent  did  not  cancel  his  coaching  sessions  with  Fujikawa;  it 
was  Fujikawa  who  decided  to  end  that  coaching  relationship.  Moreover,  respondent  testified 
that  Arrington  was  “wonderful,”  that  he  worked  with  her  on  checking  for  understanding,  on 
stating  the  purpose  of  each  lesson,  on  using  white  boards,  and  on  choosing  non-volunteers 
among  the  students  to  check  for  understanding.  Maijala  acknowledged  that  Arrington  never 
complained  about  any  problems  working  with  respondent,  and  that  Arrington  was 
complimentary  of  his  performance. 

15. 

The  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the  district  and  its  teachers’ 
union  establishes  a  “Peer  Assistance  and  Review”  (PAR)  process  for  teachers  who  need 
assistance  in  their  teaching  strategies  and  methods.  Maijala  did  not  refer  respondent  to  PAR. 

2012-2013  school  year 

16.  —  For  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Maijala  assigned  respondent  to  five  sections  of 

sixth  grade  math,  instead  of  two  sections  of  Spanish  and  three  of  math.  Maijala  felt  that, 
since  respondent  was  operating  under  an  improvement  plan,  it  would  be  easier  for  him  to 
prepare  for  one  subject  rather  than  two.  Respondent  was  unhappy  with  the  change  in  his 
schedule. 

17. 

By  November  2012,  Maijala  was  concerned  that  respondent  was  not  keeping 
pace  with  the  math  curriculum  and  his  partner  math  teacher.  Maijala  directed  respondent  to 
submit  his  lesson  plans  to  her,  beginning  November  19.  Respondent  complied  with  this 
directive  initially,  and  Maijala  found  that  the  lesson  plans  acceptable.  At  some  point, 
however,  respondent  began  to  provide  lesson  plans  only  sporadically,  and  then  stopped 
sending  them  to  Maijala  at  all. 

18. 

Maijala  observed  respondent  in  his  classroom  on  November  27,  2012.  On  the 

Classroom  Observation  Guide,  Maijala  again  gave  respondent  “ineffective”  ratings  in  the 
areas  identified  above  as  C8,  D1,  D4,  and  E10.  She  also  found  him  ineffective  in  five  new 
areas: 

A2: 

Organizes  curriculum  to  support  student  acquisition  and  understanding  of 
subject  matter. 

Cl:  —  Establishes  high  academic  expectations  for  all  students  and  endeavors  to  make 

all  students  successful.

C3: 

Uses  standards  to  design  and  implement  short-  and  long-term  curriculum  that 
builds  on  students’  prior  knowledge. 
Demonstrates  professional  conduct,  and  complies  with  contractual  agreements. 

El: 
E2:  —  Maintains  Board  of  Education  Policies  and  follows  Administrative 

Regulations. 

In  two  areas  that  Maijala  had  previously  found  respondent  to  be  ineffective,  she  found  him 
on  this  evaluation  to  be  “progressing”:  E4  (accurate  and  up-to-date  records)  and  E10  (use  of 
technologies  for  reporting  grades,  preparing  assignments  and  assessments,  etc.). 

19. 

Maijala  placed  respondent  on  another  improvement  plan  signed  on  December 

14,  2012.  Among  other  things,  the  plan  directed  respondent  to  obtain  and  analyze  “cluster 
data”  from  the  California  Standards  Tests,  and  to  use  that  data  to  make  any  appropriate 
changes  in  his  curriculum;  to  utilize  EDI;  to  insure  that  homework  review  is  completed 
within  the  first  10  minutes  of  class;  to  make  use  of  formal  and  informal  assessments  tools, 
such  as  pop  quizzes  and  homework,  to  assess  learning  and  modify  instruction;  and  to 
“conduct  himself  professionally  when  engaged  with  administration.  Should  [respondent] 
take  issue  with  anything  asked  of  him  by  administration,  he  will  put  this  into  writing  rather 
than  engage  in  public  or  request  that  the  issue  be  discussed  in  private  with  union 
representation.” 

20. 

The  relationship  between  respondent  and  Maijala  continued  to  deteriorate  over 

the  school  year.  The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  respondent  met  with  Maijala  in 
December  2012  and  told  her  that  she  was  “full  of  bullshit”  and  used  the  word  “bullshit”  more 
than  seven  times.  The  evidence  does  not  support  this  allegation,  as  Maijala  testified  that  she 
does  not  remember  particular  words  that  respondent  used  when  she  met  with  him.  Maijala, 
however,  found  respondent’s  body  language  and  the  volume  of  his  voice  to  be  angry  and 
hostile. 

21. 

Respondent  was  late  to  class  and  failed  to  timely  inform  the  district  on 

December  18,  2012. 

22. 

In  the  fall  and  winter  of  2012-2013,  the  district  received  numerous  complaints 

from  parents  about  respondent’s  teaching. 

23. 

In  January  2013,  respondent  failed  again  to  timely  post  his  grades  in  Infinite 
Campus.  He  was  given  a  one-day  extension,  and  failed  to  meet  it.  Asa  result,  none  of  the 
grades  for  students  at  BHMS  could  be  timely  uploaded  and  posted.  Respondent  states  that  he 
is  “technologically  challenged”;  he  also  blames  his  failure  to  timely  post  his  grades  upon  his’ 
partner  math  teacher,  stating  that  she  was  late  getting  her  grades  to  him.  Whatever  the  cause, 
the  timely  posting  of  grades  on  Infinite  Campus  is  an  important  obligation  that  respondent 
did  not  master,  at  least  through  the  2012-2013  school  year.  As  a  consequence,  fellow 
teachers  and  administrators  had  to  assist  respondent  in  performing  this  task  and  all  students 
at  BHMS  — not  just  respondent’s  students  —  had  to  wait  to  see  their  grades  until  respondent 
completed  his  task.

24. 

Respondent  requested  an  alternative  evaluator  to  Maijala.  Dane 

Caldwell-Holden,  the  principal  of  the  district’s  alternative  schools,  was  assigned  as  the 
alternative  evaluator. 

25. 

Caldwell-Holden  observed  respondent  in  the  classroom  on  January  15,  2013, 

and  found  him  ineffective  in  11  areas  —  seven  of  which  duplicated  Maijala’s  findings  in 
November  2012  (A2,  C1,  C3,  C8,  D4,  El,  and  E5),  plus  the  following: 

A4: 

D3: 

Demonstrates  a  general  knowledge  and  understanding  of  student 
developmental  characteristics  and  learning  styles  and  uses  them  to  motivate 
students  to  learn. 

CS:  —  Selects  and  uses  activities  that  encourage  students  to  make  connections,  pose 

questions,  and  solve  problems. 
Checks  for  understanding  by  listening,  observing,  and  questioning  during 
instruction  and  modifies  instruction  accordingly. 

In  November  2012,  Maijala  thought  respondent  was  progressing  in  the  area  of 
up-to-date  records  (E4),  but  Caldwell-Holden  found  him  to  be  ineffective  in  that  area.  Like 
Maijala,  Caldwell-Holden  thought  respondent  was  progressing  in  his  use  of  self-selected 
technologies  to  report  grades,  prepare  assignments  and  assessments,  and  to  perform  other 
tasks;  he  noted  that  he  observed  respondent  “asking  for  a  significant  refresher  surrounding 
gradebook,  setting  up  and  inputting  classes  and  grades.”  In  response  to  area  E6  (taking 
responsibility  for  professional  growth),  Caldwell-Holden  found  respondent  “effective”  and 
noted  that  he  was  actively  working  with  a  coach  and  that  his  lesson  plans  reflected  an  effort 
to  use  EDI. 

26. 

 Caldwell-Holden  worked  with  respondent  to  establish  an  improvement  plan, 

dated  January  29,  2013,  which  directed  respondent  to  take  the  following  steps  to  improve  his 
performance: 

(a) 

(d) 

(ec) 

(f) 

(b)  —  Re-teach  as  necessary; 
(c) 

Utilize  non-volunteers,  white  boards  and  other  instructional  techniques  to 
routinely  check  for  understanding  on  the  posted  learning  objective; 

Ensure  that  quiz  and  test  dates  are  prominently  displayed  on  the  board  2-3 
days  prior  to  the  date; 
Make  sure  that  standards  displayed  align  with  daily  objective  and  course 
content  in  general; 
Use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  that  encourage  students  to  ask 
questions  and  offers  multiple  opportunities  for  students  to  attempt  to  solve 
problems  and  actively  participate  in  class  rather  than  passively  read  along; 
Collect  homework  and  complete  warm  ups  during  the  first  fifteen  minutes  of 
class; 

(g)  |  Make  regular  use  of  formal  and  informal  assessment  tools  (pop  quizzes, 
homework,  tests,  etc.)  to  assess  learning  and  to  modify  instruction;  and

(h) 

Fax  over  to  the  evaluator  a  daily  lesson  plan  from  any  day  of  the  week  each 
week  that  demonstrates  differentiation. 

27. 

On  February  27,  2013,  the  district  issued  to  respondent  a  “Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Performance  and  Unprofessional  Conduct”  based  on  deficiencies  it  perceived 
in  his  teaching,  and  his  behavior  toward  his  colleagues,  administrators,  students  and  parents. 
(The  document  is  referred  to  as  a  ““NUP/NUC.”)  The  deficiencies  asserted  by  the  district 
included  all  of  the  matters  set  forth  above,  and  others.  By  law,  a  district  cannot  act  on 
charges  of  unsatisfactory  performance  unless  the  employee  has  been  given  90  days  to  correct 
his  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charges,  and  cannot  act  on  charges  of 
unprofessional  conduct  unless  the  employee  has  been  given  45  days  to  correct  his  faults. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44938,  subds.  (a)  &  (b).)  The  NUP/NUC  included  the  following  directives  to 
respondent: 

By  April  1,  2013,  attend  at  least  one  District-approved 
workshop  that  focuses  on  classroom  management,  effective 
instructional  strategies,  and  implementing  student  discipline. 

Be  trained  in  the  District’s  computer  systems  for  grade 
uploading,  and  meet  all  requisite  grading  deadlines. 

Attend  all  required  events  as  outlined  in  the  collective 
bargaining  agreement  between  your  union  and  the  District  in  a 
timely  and  appropriate  fashion.  You  are  responsible  for  finding 
out  the  dates  and  times  of  each  event;  ignorance  of  such 
information  is  not  an  excuse  for  non-attendance. 

Follow  all  District  directives  whenever  you  receive  one  and 
immediately  seek  clarification  should  you  be  unclear  with 
regard  to  the  contents  of  a  directive. 

Comply  with  all  past  and  future  directives  from  District  and/or 
site  administration. 

28. 

On  February  28,  respondent  failed  to  show  up  for  a  basketball  game  he  had 

agreed  to  supervise.  He  did  not  submit  his  weekly  lesson  plans  to  Maijala.  And,  in  an 
informal  observation  of  his  classroom  on  March  8,  Maijala  found  that  respondent  was  not 
clear  on  homework  and  testing  dates,  and  did  not  sufficiently  check  for  understanding. 

29. 

 Caldwell-Holden  conducted  an  observation  of  respondent’s  classroom  from 
about  8:00  to  9:00  a.m.  on  March  14,  2013.  Respondent  was  late  to  class,  disorganized  and 
seemed  to  be  unprepared. 

30. 

On  that  afternoon,  respondent  was  placed  on  administrative  leave  with  pay. 
He  was  escorted  out  of  his  classroom,  walked  to  his  car,  and  directed  to  leave  the  campus. 

8

Respondent  remained  on  administrative  leave  for  the  remainder  of  the  2012-2013  school 
year. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  is  silent  as  to  the  circumstances  that  led  to  respondent 

being  placed  on  paid  leave.  Respondent  is  not  charged  with  any  misconduct  in  connection 
with  being  placed  on  administrative  leave. 

31.  |  On  March  15,  the  day  after  respondent  was  sent  home,  Maijala  wrote  to 
respondent  and  told  him  that,  in  his  absence,  she  had  arranged  for  calibration  of  pacing  with 
his  partner  math  teacher.  She  went  on  to  write  that  “[p]art  of  your  Improvement  Plan  is  to 
collaborate  with  colleagues.  By  not  participating  in  the  lesson  writing  with  your  department 
you  are  failing  to  fulfill  your  responsibilities  in  the  process  of  instruction  improvement.”  At 
this  time,  however,  respondent  was  on  leave  and  had  been  directed  not  to  come  onto  district 
property. 

32. 

Also  on  March  15,  Maijala  directed  respondent  to  provide  weekly  lesson  plans 
and  to  monitor  student  engagement  and  actively  participate  in  instruction.  Again,  respondent 
had  been  placed  on  leave  the  day  before  and  therefore  could  not  comply  with  these 
directives. 

33. 

Before  being  placed  on  leave  on  March  14,  2013,  respondent  was  not  referred 

to  PAR. 

34. 

On  March  29,  2013,  respondent  submitted  to  the  district  a  request  for  a 

“voluntary  transfer”  to  a  “position  as  a  Special  Education  Teacher  at  the  high  school  level  or 
as  a  Teacher  of  Spanish  at  a  middle  school  other  than  Bret  Harte  or  high  school  within 
SJUSD  and  the  scope  of  two  of  my  credentials;  Single-Subject  in  Foreign  Language 
(Spanish)  and  Special  Education-Learning  Handicapped.”  No  immediate  action  was  taken 
on  respondent’s  request. 

2013-2014  school  year 

35. 

The  district  maintained  respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave  for  the  entire 

2013-2014  school  year.  On  June  27,  2013,  Meagan  Azevedo,  the  district’s  Manager  of 
Certificated  Human  Resources,  wrote  to  respondent  and  informed  him  that  the  district’s 
decision  to  keep  him  on  paid  leave  was  based  on  his  “continued  unsatisfactory  performance” 
since  being  issued  the  NUP/NUC  on  February  27,  2013.  Her  letter  continued,  “Indeed,  your 
workplace  performance  continues  to  remain  so  poor  that  the  District  has  decided  to  pursue 
charges  for  your  dismissal  once  the  moratorium  per  Education  Code  section  44936  lifts  on 
September  15,  2013.”  (Under  section  44936,  a  notice  of  dismissal  cannot  be  given  between 
May  15  and  September  15  of  any  year.) 

36. 

The  district  did  not  bring  dismissal  proceedings  after  September  15,  2013. 

During  the  time  he  was  on  leave,  respondent  was  prohibited  from  coming  onto  district 
property.

2014-2015  school  year 

37. 

On  July  2,  2014,'  Assistant  Superintendent  Lovelace  wrote  to  respondent  and  - 
informed  him  that  he  was  being  removed  from  paid  administrative  leave  status  and  assigned 
to  the  Human  Resources  Department  for  the  2014-2015  school  year.  The  letter  went  on  to 
inform  respondent  that  beginning  August  13,  2014,  he  would  serve  as  a  “roving  substitute 
teacher.” 

38. 

Respondent  grieved  his  assignment  as  a  substitute.  In  a  letter  to  Lovelace  on 

July  20,  2014,  respondent  wrote: 

I  have  served  the  District  as  a  professional  full-time  educator 
whose  job  it  had  been  to  develop  curriculum  and  implement  it. 
An  important  part  of  that  job  is  getting  to  know  the  students, 
assessing  their  performance  and  customizing  my  instruction  to 
meet  their  needs.  This  is  what  I  love  to  do  and  would  be 
deprived  of  it  if  1  was  made  a  “roving”  substitute.  This  will  not 
only  be  a  waste  of  my  talents  and  credentials,  but  will  hurt  my 
reputation  as  a  professional. 

Respondent  asked  for  an  assignment  teaching  ESL  or  Spanish. 

39. 

Respondent  returned  to  work  on  August  13  as  directed,  and  was  assigned  to 
Pioneer  High  School  where  he  was  used  as  a  “push-in”  to  assist  special  education  students, 
on  an  individual  basis,  in  social  studies  and  English.  Respondent  feels  that  he  had  a  good 
relationship  with  the  principal  and  that  he  had  no  problems  in  the  assignment.  There  is  no 
evidence  to  the  contrary. 

40. 

In  its  response  to  respondent’s  grievance,  the  district  agreed  that  respondent’s 

assignment  to  the  substitute  pool  did  not  comply  with  the  collective  bargaining  agreement. 
On  Thursday,  September  4,  2014,  Dr.  Lovelace  wrote  to  respondent  and  informed  him  that 
effective  Monday,  September  8 at  7:30  a.m.,  he  was  assigned  to  the  position  of 
Post-Secondary  SDC  Teacher  at  Cory  School.  The  abbreviation  SDC  means  “Special  Day 
Class.”  The  Post  Secondary  SDC  program  at  Cory  School  is  referred  to  as  the  “ACE” 
Program,  which  stands  for  Advanced  Career  Education. 

41.  |  The  ACE  Program  is  a  community-based  program  that  serves  students  18  to 

22  years  of  age  with  cognitive  disabilities.  ACE  students  are  enrolled  in  an  alternative 
graduation  plan  focused  on a life  skills  curriculum.  The  stated  goal  of  the  program  is  to  help 
students  “acquire  the  knowledge  and  skills  to  help  transition  successfully  into  the  real  world 
through  individualize  planning,  student  participation,  interagency  collaboration  and  family 
involvement.”  Students  in  ACE  spend  part  of  the  week  in  the  classroom,  and  part  of  the 

'  The  letter  is  misdated  2013. 

10

week  in  the  community,  visiting  employers  or  working.  Areas  of  instruction  include 
functional  academics;  independent  living  skills;  social  skills;  vocational  skills; 
self-advocacy;  mobility;  recreation  and  leisure;  and  community  access  and  connections. 
Each  of  the  teachers  in  the  ACE  Program  has  about  12  students,  and  each  of  the  teachers  has: 
at  least  one  instructional  aide  (IA).  The  ACE  Program  is  what  the  district  calls  a 
“noncategorical”  program,  meaning  that  students  are  assigned  to  classrooms  without  regard 
to  the  nature  or  severity  of  their  disability.  The  ACE  Program  includes  autistic  and  severely 
disabled  students. 

42. 

Respondent  reported  for  work  to  the  ACE  program  on  September  8,  as 
directed.  Before  he  arrived  at  work  that  day,  the  district  did  not  provide  him  with  any 
training  on  the  ACE  Program  or  any  information  about  the  program  —  no  curricula,  no  lesson 
plans,  and  no  Individualized  Educational  Plans  (IEP’s)  for  his  student.  The  district  did  not 
provide  him  with  any  training  for  his  new  assignment.  Respondent  had  worked  as  a  resource 
specialist  before,  but  he  had  never  worked  with  the  post-secondary  population  and  had  never 
worked  in  a  community-based  program  like  ACE.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  had 
no  idea  what  he  was  supposed  to  be  doing  or  what  he  was  supposed  to  teach.  On  his  first  day 
at  ACE,  Mary  Ann  Sy  came  to  respondent’s  classroom.  Sy  is  the  “workability  coordinator” 
for  the  ACE  Program.  She  gave  respondent  about  a  dozen  medium-sized  binders  of  about 
200  pages  each  concerning  the  ACE  Program.  Sy  discussed  the  ACE  Program  with 
respondent,  but  she  had  no  formal  role  in  transitioning  respondent  to  his  new  classroom. 

43. 

Over  the  next  few  days,  confronted  with  a  new  assignment,  a  new  population, 

new  procedures,  immediate  demands  for  new  IEP’s,  and  new  case  management  software, 
respondent  felt  that,  in  his  words,  he  was  going  “stir  crazy.”  He  concluded  that  he  was  in 
over  his  head  and  that  he  needed  individualized  training  for  him  to  succeed  in  the 
assignment.  Of  immediate  concern  to  respondent  was  the  need  to  use  a  computer  program 
called  “Web  IEP.”  Teachers  in  the  ACE  Program  are  expected  to  use  Web  IEP  to  manage  the 
TEP  process,  to  schedule  IEP  meetings,  and  to  prepare  and  complete  IEP’s  electronically. 
Respondent  had  no  previous  experience  with  Web  IEP.  He  had  not  prepared  IEP’s  since  the 
early  1990’s,  when  they  were  done  by  hand. 

44. 

Respondent  also  came  to  the  conclusion,  after  meeting  with  his  class  and 

attending  a  staff  meeting  with  the  other  ACE  teachers,  that  he  was  not  properly  credentialed  ° 
to  teach  his  class.  In  a  letter  to  Lovelace  dated  September  12,  2013,  respondent  stated  that 
his  position  at  Cory  “has  me  working  outside  the  realm  of  my  credential.  Since  starting  at 
Cory  I  have  been  informed  by  the  administration  to  not  divulge  my  credentials  to  parents  or 
in  other  words  — to  lie.  []  The  District  has  deliberately  assigned  me  to  this  position  for 
which  I  am  unqualified  and  untrained  for  purposes  only  known  to  it.” 

45. 

The  district  consulted  with  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of  Education  on 

respondent’s  claim  that  he  was  not  properly  credentialed  to  teach  his  class.  The  COE 
advised  the  district  that  an  LH  credential  authorizes  the  holder  to  teach 

11

handicapped  children  in  a  special  class  in  which  the  primary 
disability  is  “specific  learning  disability,”  “other  health 
impairment,”  or  “mentally  retarded  (mild)”  . 
and  below  .. 

.  and  in  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults. 

. 

.  in  grades  twelve 

The  COE  told  the  district  that  “Post-secondary  SDC  will  work.” 

Jennifer  Willis,  Manager  of  Special  Education  for  the  district,  forwarded  the  COE’s 
response  to  respondent  on  September  17  and  informed  him  forcefully  that  he  was  properly 
credentialed  for  his  assignment: 

Lovelace  reinforced  Willis’s  comments  in  an  email  to  respondent  on  October  8: 

...  [Y]our  valid  California  credential  documents  that  you  have 
demonstrated  satisfactory  study  in  an  authorized  preparation 
program  to  complete  the  tasks  associated  with  your  assignment. 
...  [Sl]...  [1]  Lexpect  this  email  to  have  formally  reminded 
you  of  your  certification  and  training  for  this  assignment.  Iam 
directing  you  to  cease  all  public  and  written  comments  in  which 
you  state  to  staff,  students,  or  community  members  that  you  are 
misassigned  in  your  present  position. 

Iam  deeply  concerned  about  your  on-going,  written, 
documented  refusal  to  accept  responsibility  for  your  students 
and  your  teaching  assignment.  . 
.  [Y]ou  have  been  directed  to 
stop  misinforming  parents  of  your  erroneous  misinterpretation 
of  your  certification  as  you  purposefully  attempt  to  cause  worry, 
concern  and  mistrust  among  the  community  of  the  ACE 
program  in  order  to  manipulate  the  District  into  changing  your 
teaching  assignment. 

. 

46.  —  Lovelace’s  criticism  is  carried  over  into  the  Statement  of  Charges,  which 

alleges  that  “[w]hile  properly  credentialed  to  teach  in  the  assignment,  Respondent  claimed 
not  to  be  credentialed  for  the  assignment  and  expressed  displeasure  with  the  assignment  to 
others.”  In  so  doing,  the  Statement  of  Charges  alleges,  respondent  exhibited  unsatisfactory 
performance  and  unprofessional  conduct. 

47. 

In  fact,  respondent  was  not  properly  credentialed  to  teach  the  Post-Secondary 

SDC  class  to  which  he  was  assigned.  Respondent’s  LH  credential  did  not  —  does  not  — 
authorize  him  to  teach  students  with  autism,  and  there  were  three  students  with  autism  in  his 
class.  On  or  about  October  9,  2014,  the  district  moved  the  three  students  to  a  different  class, 
an  event  that  was  emotionally  distressing  to  the  students.  At  hearing,  Willis  and  Elizabeth 
Doss,  the  district’s  Director  of  Special  Education,  continued  to  insist  that  respondent  was 
properly  credentialed  to  teach  his  class  at  the  ACE  program.  Confronted  with  evidence  that 

12

the  district  had  moved  autistic  students  out  of  respondent’s  class  in  October  2014,  they 
ultimately  conceded  that  respondent  had  been  misassigned,  just  as  respondent  had  contended. 

48. 

In  October  2014,  the  district  provided  individualized  training  to  respondent  on 

the  Web  IEP  program.  The  district  also  reprimanded  him  for  failing  to  timely  schedule  IEP 
meetings  —  a  process  that  required  familiarity  with  the  Web  IEP  program. 

49. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  respondent  was  absent  from  work 

without  excuse  on  October  23,  2014.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  called  in  to  the 
substitute  line  that  day.  Substitutes  do  not  always  accept  assignments  to  the  ACE  Program. 

50. 

On  October  30  or  31,  2014,  respondent  sought  medical  treatment  from  his 
primary  care  physician  for  a  condition  unrelated  to  his  heart.  Upon  taking  his  vital  signs, 
however,  respondent’s  physician  referred  him  to  a  cardiologist  on  an  urgent  basis. 
Respondent  was  kept  off  work  by  his  physician  until  March  2,  2015. 

51. 

Respondent  was  not  evaluated  during  the  short  time  he  worked  as  a  push-in 

substitute,  or  during  the  time  that  he  taught  in  the  ACE  Program.  The  closest  thing  to  a 
classroom  observation  occurred  on  various  occasions  when  Willis  looked  into  respondent’s 
classroom.  The  instruction  Willis  observed  on  those  occasions  appeared  to  her  to  be 
appropriate. 

A.C."S  SEIZURE 

52. 

Respondent  returned  to  work  at  the  ACE  Program  on  March  2. 

53. 

On  respondent’s  second  day  back,  March  3,  part  of  his  class  was  off  campus 

at  a  job  site.  He  received  a  phone  call  from  Sy,  who  informed  him  that  one  of  his  students, 
A.C.,  had  had  a  seizure  at  the  job  site  and  that  she  would  be  coming  back  to  class.  Sy  told 
respondent  to  call  A.C.’s  parents  to  tell  them  to  come  and  pick  her  up.  Sy  called  again  and 
told  respondent  to  “get  out  the  care  plan”  and  respondent  asked,  ““What’s  a  care  plan?”  Sy 
expressed  surprise  that  respondent  did  not  have  A.C.’s  care  plan,  and  told  him  to  call  the 
nurse,  Janet  Darrow,  to  get  it.  Respondent  called  Darrow,  who  told  him  that  she  had  “sent 
those  out,”  but  that  she  would  send  the  care  plan  again.  A.C.’s  care  plan  stated,  in  effect,  that 
the  district  should  call  9-1-1  only  if  a  seizure  lasts  longer  than  five  minutes. 

When  A.C.  arrived  back  in  the  classroom  with  one  of  the  aides,  respondent  was  at  his 

desk,  on  the  phone  speaking  Spanish  to  A.C.’s  mother. 
Respondent’s  IA,  Lynn  Sandoval, 
was  also  in  the  room.  A.C.  sat  by  respondent’s  desk  and  told  him  that  she  wanted  to  go  to 
the  bathroom.  Respondent  tried  to  talk  her  out  of  it,  and  asked  Sandoval  not  to  let  her  go  to 
the  bathroom  by  herself.  A.C.  stood  up,  reached  for  the  bathroom  key  and  fell  to  the  ground, 
shaking.  Sandoval  called  out,  “Get  Juvy.”  Juvy  Motas  is  a  special  education  instructional 
aide,  a  credentialed  nurse  in  the  Philippines,  and  a  certified  nursing  assistant  in  California; 
Motas  was  next  door  to  respondent’s  classroom.  She  came  immediately,  put  A.C.  onto  her 

13

side,  made  sure  her  airway  was  clear,  called  for  cushions  to  put  under  A.C.’s  head,  and  told 
someone  to  time  the  seizure. 

Respondent  was  at  his  desk,  on  the  phone  to  Darrow,  and  checking  his  computer  to 

see  if  he  had  received  the  care  plan.  At  some  point  he  either  received  it,  or  Darrow  told  him 
what  it  said,  as  Sandoval  remembers  respondent  looking  at  his  computer  and  saying  “Call 
9-1-1  if  it  is  five  minutes.”  The  seizure  lasted  less  than  a  minute. 

Respondent  testified  that  the  A.C.’s  seizure  was  shocking,  and  that  he  had  never  seen 

anything  like  it  before.  He  thinks  it  was  shocking  to  everyone,  even  Motas,  was  trained  to 
address  it  and  who  did  a  competent  job. 

54. 

Doss  investigated  the  incident  and  concluded  that  respondent  was  at  fault  in 

several  respects:  for  not  reviewing  A.C.’s  care  plan  when  it  was  emailed  to  him  on 
November  14,  2014;  for  not  providing  physical  assistance  to  A.C.  when  she  had  the  seizure; 
and  for  not  following  protocol  for  a  seizure.  Doss  feels  that  respondent’s  conduct  was 
“outrageous.”  Willis  is  “extremely  angry”  when  she  thinks  about  respondent’s  conduct,  as 
she  states  that  A.C.  could  have  died. 

55. 

The  next  day,  respondent  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave.  He  has 
never  returned  to  work  for  the  district.  The  district  issued  the  Statement  of  Charges  three 
weeks  later. 

56. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  respondent’s  failure  to  review  A.C.’s 

care  plan  when  it  was  sent  to  him,  his  failure  to  provide  assistance  to  A.C.,  and  his  failure  to 
follow  protocol  for  a  seizure  is  “incomprehensible,  inexcusable,  unprofessional,  and 
evidences  his  complete  disregard  for  his  responsibility  as  a  teacher  and  for  the  safety  of 
students.” 

57. 

The  evidence  does  not  support  these  allegations. 

Respondent  did  not  have  A.C.’s  care  plan  before  he  called  School  Nurse  Darrow  on 
It  is  true  that  Darrow  emailed  the  care  plan  to  respondent  on 

March  3  and  asked  her  for  it. 
November  14,  2014,  but  it  was  emailed  to  respondent’s  district  email  address  and  respondent 
was  home  and  off  work  for  medical  reasons.  Respondent  did  not  check  his  work  email  while 
he  was  off  work,  and  the  district  acknowledged  at  hearing  that  he  had  no  obligation  to  do  so. 
While  respondent  may  have  been  under  a  duty  to  review  those  emails  when  he  returned  to 
work,  A.C.’s  seizure  occurred  on  respondent’s  second  day  back  after  being  off  work  for  four 
months.  At  hearing,  Sy  testified  that  she  personally  handed  the  care  plan  to  respondent  when 
she  distributed  the  care  plans  in  November;  upon  being  reminded  that  respondent  was  off 
work  in  November,  however,  Sy  retracted  her  claim. 

The  district  asserts  that  applicant  was  trained  on  seizure  protocol  when  he  was 
directed  to  go  to  CPR  training  in  September  2014,  but  that  he  was  not  interested  in  the 

14

training.  The  evidence,  however,  failed  to  establish  that  seizure  protocol  was  included  in  the 
CPR  training. 

It  is  true  that  respondent  did  not  provide  any  physical  assistance  to  A.C.  when  she  had 

the  seizure.  His  conduct  under  these  circumstances,  however,  did  not  demonstrate 
indifference  to  her  welfare.  The  best  possible  person  —  Motas,  a  trained  medical  professional 
—was  Called,  responded  immediately,  and  took  control  of  the  situation.  There  was  nothing 
more  that  respondent  could  have  done.  Respondent  was  on  the  phone,  with  Darrow  and  with 
A.C.’s  parents,  and  it  is  apparent  that  he  was  doing  his  best  to  obtain  and  relay  A.C.’s  care 
plan  to  Motas.  Finally,  respondent’s  claim  that  he  was  in  shock  is  credible:  it  would  be  a 
disturbing  experience  for  anyone  who  had  not  experienced  a  similar  event  before,  and  who 
did  not  know  what  to  do.  Respondent  was  not  indifferent  to  A.C.’s  welfare. 

Significance  of respondent’s  reassignments  in  2014-2015 

58. 

Respondent’s  improvement  plans  and  the  February  2013  NUP/NUC  directed 

respondent  to  take  various  steps  intended  to  improve  his  effectiveness  as  a  middle  school 
classroom  teacher  in  a  general  education  program.  Working  as  a  push-in  substitute,  and 
teaching  adult  special  education,  are  very  different  assignments,  in  which  education  is  based 
on  the  individual  needs  of  each  student.  Changing  respondent’s  assignment  in  September 
2014  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  follow  through  on  the  improvement  plans  and  the  directives 
in  the  NUP/NUC,  and  created  a  barrier  to  remediation. 

59. 

The  evidence  justifies  a  further  inference:  respondent’s  assignment  to  the  ACE 

Program  was  not  intended  to  give  him  the  opportunity  to  remediate  his  deficiencies,  but 
intended  to  put  him  in a  situation  where  he  would  fail  and  thereby  facilitate  his  dismissal. 
Had  the  district  wanted  to  give  respondent  the  opportunity  to  remediate,  it  would  have  placed 
him  in  a  setting  that  provided  continuity  from  his  teaching  assignment  in  2012-2013. 
Instead,  it  gave  respondent  a  very  different  and  very  demanding  assignment,  one  in  which  he 
had  no  prior  training,  no  prior  experience,  and  one  for  which  he  was  not  properly 
credentialed.  In  so  doing,  the  district  also  did  a  disservice  to  its  adult  special  education 
students,  who  need  the  district’s  best  teachers  to  receive  the  free  and  appropriate  public 
education  to  which  they  are  entitled.  Respondent  was  not  given  a  fair  opportunity  to 
remediate  his  deficiencies. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  standard  of  proof  applied  in  making  the  factual  findings  set  forth  above  is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2013)  214  Cal.App.4th  1120,  1150.) 

Is

Causes  for  dismissal  asserted  in  the  Statement  of  Charges 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  sets  forth  eleven  exclusive  causes  upon  which  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  can  be  dismissed.  The  Statement  of  Charges  identifies  four 
causes  upon  which  the  district  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent:  “unprofessional  conduct”  (subd. 
(a)(1)),  “unsatisfactory  performance”  (subd.  (a)(4)),  “[e]vident  unfitness  for  service”  (subd. 
(a)(5)),  and  “[p]ersistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the... 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  . 

.”  (subd.  (a)(7)). 

. 

Unsatisfactory  performance/unprofessional  conduct 

35 

The  classroom  observations  of  Maijala  and  Caldwell-Holden  reveal  that 

respondent’s  classroom  teaching  was  ineffective  in  many  respects,  and  the  evidence  reveals 
many  instances  in  which  respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional. 

A  teacher,  however,  cannot  be  terminated  for  unsatisfactory  performance  or 
unprofessional  conduct  unless  he  is  first  given  the  opportunity  to  remediate  his  deficiencies. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44938,  subd.  (a)  &  (b).)  Respondent  was  never  given  a  fair  opportunity  to  do 
that.  After  the  NUP/NUC  was  issued  in  February  2013,  respondent  was  ultimately  given  two 
assignments  unrelated  to  the  general  education  classroom  setting  in  which  his  deficiencies 
had  been  identified.  Respondent’s  conduct  prior  to  February  2013  does  not  establish  that  he 
would  not  have  corrected  his  deficiencies,  or  that  he  could  not  have  done  so.  Despite 
deficiencies  that  she  noted,  Maijala  found  respondent’s  overall  performance  “effective”  in 
2012,  and  subsequent  evaluations  note  progress  and  motivation  to  change  in  some  areas. 

It  seems  that  respondent’s  perceived  indifference  to  A.C.’s  seizure  was  a  primary 
factor  in  bringing  the  Statement  of  Charges.  The  district  announced  its  intent  to  dismiss 
respondent  for  unsatisfactory  performance  and  unprofessional  conduct  in  July  2013,  but 
never  did;  it  allowed  him  to  return  to  work,  in  a  sensitive  and  demanding  position,  and  took 
no  action  to  dismiss  him  until  immediately  after  A.C.’s  seizure.  But,  contrary  to  the  district’s 
impressions,  the  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  had  ever  had  seizure  training; 
that  he  had  ever  received  A.C.’s  care  plan  before  the  day  of  her  seizure,  or  that  he  was 
indifferent  to  her  welfare. 

Cause  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance  unprofessional  conduct  was  not 

established. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service 

4. 

The  term  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  means 

“clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,”  “evident  unfitness  for  service” 

16

connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 

5. 

As  noted  above,  while  respondent  remained  on  an  improvement  plan  until 

dismissal  proceedings  were  brought,  he  accepted  coaching  and  criticism  from  several  sources 
and  was  able  to  improve  his  performance  in  some  areas,  though  certainly  not  all.  These  facts 
are  inconsistent  with  the  contention  that  respondent’s  inadequacies  are  due  to  a  fixed 
character  trait.  Although  district  alleges  that  respondent  is  unfit  for  service,  the  Statement  of 
Charges  does  not  identify  the  temperamental  defect  or  character  trait  that  the  district  believes 
respondent  suffers  from.  The  evidence  does  not  support  the  conclusion  that  respondent’s 
deficiencies  are  due  to  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.  Cause  for  dismissal  for 
evident  unfitness  for  service  was  not  established. 

Persistent  violation  of  school  rules 

6. 

The  district  asserts  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  persistent  violation. 

of  state  and  district  rules,  in  that  he  failed  to  use  appropriate  instructional  materials  to 
implement  the  district’s  curriculum,  misused  instructional  time,  failed  to  take  steps  to 
improve  his  performance  as  an  educator,  and  failed  to  provide  proper  “moral  instruction  and 
role  modeling  to  students.”  These  are  the  same  factual  allegations  offered  to  support  the 
charge  of  unsatisfactory  performance  and  unprofessional  conduct.  Under  Education  Code 
section  44938,  respondent  is  entitled  to  a  fair  opportunity  to  remediate  his  deficiencies.  He 
cannot  be  deprived  of  that  opportunity  by  dismissing  him  for  the  same  conduct,  alleged 
under a  different  legal  theory.  Cause  for  dismissal  based  on  persistent  violation  of  state  and 
local  rules  was  not  established. 

Discipline 

ds 

Cause  for  dismissing  respondent  from  employment  with  the  San  Jose  Unified 

School  District  was  not  established.  As  the  district  only  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal,  the 
commission  has  no  authority  to  impose  any  lesser  discipline.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd. 
(C)D(A)  &  (©)(3).) 

17

The  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Garrett  Gordon  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED: 

\  l22  |  \l 

DATED: 

2. 

t/t 

DATED: 

2ik  [ty 

bo  ell ln 
| 

HARRY  PABLEY  | 
Commission  Member 

aba  Lex 

Jour  TINS 
Commission  Member 

OA ).— 

DAVID  L.  BENJAMIN  | 
Chair,  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

18

