   

BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

MARCOS  ORTEGA,  A  Permanent 
Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  Case  No.  2015010085 

DECISION 

Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  heard  this  case  on  May  18,  2015,  at  Los  Angeles,  California.  Complainant 
was  represented  by  Kristine  E.  Kwong,  Musick,  Peeler  &  Garrett,  LLP,  with  Susan  E. 
Hyman,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  Los  Angeles  Unified  Schoo!  District  (LAUSD  or 
District).  Respondent  Marcos  Ortega  appeared  with  his  attorney,  Ronald  C.  Lapekas. 
However,  asserting  a  jurisdictional  objection,  Respondent  and  his  attorney  left  the 
proceeding  before  any  substantive  evidence  was  taken. 

On  May  19,  2015,  the  ALJ  wrote  Respondent’s  counsel,  informing  him  that 

Complainant  had  rested  its  case  on  May  18,  and  inquiring  if  Respondent  would  put  on  a 
defense.  On  May  20,  2015,  Respondent’s  counsel  notified  the  ALJ  that  Respondent,  in  light 
of  his  jurisdictional  objection,  was  not  going  to  testify  or  offer  evidence  in  his  defense. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  20,  2015.  The  ALJ  hereby  makes  his 

factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  order. 

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

In  this  proceeding  the  District  seeks  the  termination  of  one  of  its  tenured  teachers, 

Marcos  Ortega.  Five  statutory  grounds  were  asserted  as  justifying  termination: 
unprofessional  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1);  immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §§ 
44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  44939);  dishonesty  (Ed.  Code  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(3);  evident  unfitness 
for  service  (Ed.  Code  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(5);  and  persistent  violation  of  state  laws  or 
regulations  for  the  governance  of  schools  ($44932,  subd.  (a)(7).! 

    

All  statutory  citations  shall  be  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.   

‘ 

   

In  the  main,  it  is  alleged  that  Respondent,  while  teaching  at  Van  Nuys  High  School  in 

2012  and  2013,  engaged  in  profane,  threatening,  and  abusive  behavior  in  the  classroom  and 
in  the  presence  of  students.  It  was  alleged  that  he  sold  snacks  and  drinks  in  his  classroom 
over  three  school  years,  claiming  at  times  to  be  supporting  a  student  club,  in  violation  of 
District  policies,  and  without  providing  benefit  to  any  school  organization.  It  was  also 
alleged  that  Respondent  threatened  three  students  by  driving  his  car  at  them  while  they  were 
crossing  the  street,  then  braking  suddenly,  putting  them  in  fear  for  their  safety. 

As  noted  above,  Respondent  failed  to  adduce  any  evidence  to  contravene  the 

testimony  and  documentary  evidence  presented  by  the  District,  asserting  a  jurisdictional 
objection  instead. 

The  evidence  received  was  more  than  sufficient  to  support  the  termination  of 

Respondent,  who  is  clearly  unfit  to  teach. 

The  Parties,  Jurisdiction,  and  Procedural  History 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Complainant  Justo  H.  Avila  executed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  while 

acting  in  his  official  capacity  as  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  teacher  employed  by  the  District.  At  the  times 

relevant  to  this  case  he  was  assigned  to  teach  at  Van  Nuys  High  School. 

3. 

The  District  commenced  this  proceeding  on  November  14,  2014,  when 
Complainant  executed  a  Statement  of  Charges  against  Respondent.  That  Statement  of 
Charges  was  filed  with  the  District's  governing  board,  which  thereafter  determined  to 
terminate  Respondent. 

4, 

On  December  3,  2014,  the  District  gave  Respondent  written  notice  of  its  intent 

to  terminate  him,  and  served  Respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges. 
Respondent  made  a  timely  request  for  hearing,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of  the  Accusation. 
The  Accusation  was  served  on  Respondent  by  mail  on  January  14,  2015.  On  February  2, 
2015,  Respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  which  asserted  two  affirmative  defenses.” 

5. 

On  February  2,  2015,  the  parties  submitted  a  written  stipulation  to  OAH.  By 
that  stipulation,  the  parties  agreed  that  the  hearing,  then  set  to  commence  on  March  2,  2015, 
would  be  continued  so  as  to  commence  on  May  18,  2015.  Respondent  waived  the  “60  day 
tule,”  which  would  require  the  hearing  to  commence  before  May  18,  2015.  The  parties  also 

* 

This  Notice  of  Defense  was  not  received  in  evidence  with  the  other  jurisdictional 

    

documents.  The  ALJ  takes  notice  of  the  copy  in  the  OAH  records,  and  will  add  a  copy  to  the 
record  as  part  of  exhibit  10,  where  the  Supplemental  Notice  of  Defense  is  found. 

2

  

  

   

waived  the  right  to  convene  a  Commission  on  Professional  Conduct,  and  agreed  to  have  the 
matter  heard  by  an  ALJ  alone,  pursuant  to  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1)  (2014). 

6. 

(A)  On  February  15,  2015,  Respondent  filed  a  Supplemental  and  Special 

Notice  of  Defense.  There  is  no  evidence  that  OAH  or  the  ALJ  then  assigned  to  the  matter 
authorized  the  filing  of  that  Supplemental  and  Special  Notice  of  Defense  (Supplemental 
NOD)  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11506,  subdivision  (b). 

(B)  The  Supplemental  NOD  asserted  a  number  of  defenses.  Most  germane  to 

the  hearing  was  the  claim  that  the  District’s  governing  Board  did  not  have  subject  matter 
jurisdiction  to  initiate  dismissal  proceeding  because  it  had  not  complied  with  sections  44934 
and  44939,  This  claim  was  based  on  the  assertion  that  the  statement  of  charges  was  not  duly 
signed  and  verified  by  the  person  making  the  charges.  In  turn,  it  was  asserted  that  the  Notice 
of  Intent  to  Dismiss  was  therefore  a  nullity.  It  was  alleged  that  the  Accusation  was  improper 
because  it  did  not  assert  section  44939.  And,  Respondent  asserted  that  OAH  lacked 
jurisdiction  because  the  Accusation  was  not  verified,  and  should  have  been. 

7. 

As  noted  in  the  preamble,  when  the  hearing  commenced,  Respondent  orally 
reiterated  the  jurisdictional  objections  summarized  above,  and  objected  to  the  receipt  of  the 
jurisdictional  documents,  exhibits  1  through  12.  The  objections  were  overruled.  Respondent 
then  left  the  hearing,  standing  on  his  claim  that  there  was  no  subject  matter  jurisdiction. 
Notwithstanding  that  objection,  it  is  found  that  all  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 
(See  also  Legal  Conclusion  9.) 

8. 

Before  leaving  the  hearing,  Respondent’s  counsel  gave  notice  that  he  was 

going  to  appear  in  the  Superior  Court,  County  of  Los  Angeles,  on  the  morning  of  May  19, 
2015,  on  an  ex  parte  basis,  to  obtain  a  stay  or  other  relief.  Complainant  put  on  his  case  on 
May  18,  and  the  hearing  was  dark  on  May  19,  so  that  Complainant’s  counsel  could  attend  the 
The  ALJ  set  a  telephonic  status  conference  for  May  19,  2015. 
Superior  Court  proceeding. 
At  that  time,  Ms.  Kwong  reported  that  Respondent’s  counsel  had  decided  not  to  go  forward 
with  his  ex  parte  request  for  relief. 

9. 

On  the  afternoon  of  May  19,  2015,  the  ALJ  wrote  to  Respondent’s  counsel, 
informing  him  that  Complainant  had  presented  his  case  and  had  rested,  and  informing  him 
that  if  Respondent  wanted  to  offer  testimony  or  other  evidence,  he  should  write  to  the  ALJ 
by  noon  on  May  20  so  stating;  otherwise  the  matter  would  be  deemed  submitted.  (The  letter 
was  transmitted  by  fax.)  Respondent’s  counsel  replied  in  a  letter  faxed  to  the  ALJ,  ina 
timely  manner,  stating  that  Respondent  would  stand  on  his  jurisdictional  objections,  and 
would  not  appear  to  proffer  any  evidence  in  his  defense.  Those  letters  will  be  added  to  the 
record  as  exhibit  47.  The  matter  was  therefore  submitted  for  decision  on  May  20,  2015. 

    

i 
i 
it 
if

  

  

Findings  on  the  Allegations  Made  Against  Respondent 

10. 

Complainant  did  not  adduce  evidence  on  every  allegation  in  the  Accusation, 
and  in  some  instances  only  adduced  documentary  evidence.  For  example,  he  did  not  offer 
evidence  in  support  of  charge  number  10,  which  pertained  to  a  conversation  Respondent 
allegedly  had  in  February  2014,  after  he  had  been  removed  from  the  classroom  and  assigned 
to  the  Educational  Service  Center.  Complainant  did,  however,  offer  credible  evidence  on  the 
vast  majority  of  the  charges,  proving  them. 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charges  la,  2,  and  3—Respondent’s  Use  of Racial  Slurs 

11. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  in  September  2013,  student  JIK.,  who  is 
African-American,  was  transferred  into  Respondent’s  class.  Another  African-American 
student  had  transferred  out  of  another  class  taught  by  Respondent.  When  JK.  came  to 
class  for  the  first  time,  Respondent  said  to  him,  in  front  of  other  students,  “My  other  nigga 
just  checked  out  to  go  to  Period  6.  Now  I  got  another  one  in  Period  5.”  Respondent  is  not 
African-American. 

(B)  During  that  same  time  period,  Respondent  wrote  the  word  “nigga”  ona 

whiteboard  in  his  class.  He  later  said  to  a  class  that  he  needed  to  erase  it  before  his 
supervisor  Saw  it,  and  took  steps  to  fire  Respondent  for  putting  that  word  on  the  board. 

(C)  At  various  times  between  August  15,  2013  and  October  4,  2013, 

Respondent  referred  to  African-American  students  as  “brotha”  and  “my  nigga.” 

  

African-American  students  in  the  class  were  offended  by  Respondent’s  use  of 
.  did  not  want  to  go  to  Respondent’s  class,  and  instead  went  to  the 

12. 
such  racial  slurs,  J 
school  office,  and  killed  time  there. 
because  he  thought  Respondent  was  “crazy.”*  Students  who  were  not  African-American 
were  offended  by 
the  racial  slurs  as  well,  as  evidenced  by  the  statement  and  testimony  of 
student  CA.  and  JG. ’s  statements  to  his  mother.  (Finding  30.) 

aK.  didn’t  speak  up  about  Respondent’s  conduct 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charges  Ic,  Id,  le,  1f,  and  4a  through  4d—Respondent’s  Use 

of Foul  and  Vulgar  Language 

13. 

Respondent  would  routinely  use  foul  and  vulgar  language  in  the  presence  of 

students,  aside  from  the  racial  slurs  described  in  Factual  Findings  11  and  12. 

if 

  

*  Another  student,  i.  when  answering  questions  by  the  ALJ  stated  he 

didn’t  know  why  Respondent  did  some  of  the  things  he  did,  except  that  Respondent  ‘‘was 
crazy.”  Student  Ci...  in  a  written  statement  described  Respondent  as  having  an  anger 
issue,  further  stating  “.  . 

.  in  a  way  the  man  is  bi-polar.”  (Ex.  32,  p.  1.)

  

  

14. 

At  some  point  between  August  15,  2013,  and  October  4,  2013,  Respondent 

told  the  students  that  Mr.  Rosales,  one  of  his  supervisors,  wanted  to  fire  him.’  Respondent 
then  told  the  students:  “that  motherfucker  can’t  fire  me.” 

15. 

Respondent  told  students  that  they  should  not  bend  over  to  pick  something  up 
off  the  floor,  as  they  might  be  anally  raped.  He  tied  this  comment  into  a  statement  about  life 
in  prison. 

16. 

Respondent  would  routinely  yell  at  the  class  to  “shut  the  fuck  up.”  According 
to  one  student  witness,  this  would  happen,  in  that  student’s  class,  about  four  times  per  week. 

17. 

Respondent  regularly  used  words  such  as  “bitch,”  “shit,”  “fuck,”  and 

“motherfucker.”  One  student  testified  that  Respondent  called  some  kids  “a  piece  of  shit.” 
Another  recailed  Respondent  saying,  “Ill  teach  your  guys  about  this  shit  later.”  On  October 
3,  2013,  student  CfA.  surreptitiously  called  his  father  on  his  cellphone,  and  Mr.  A. 
could  hear  Respondent  speaking  in  class.  Respondent  was  soon  yelling  and  ranting  at  the 
class,  and  in  the  course  of  that  rant  referred  to  “fucking  niggers”  and  “motherfucking  spics.” 

18. 

On  October  4,  2013,  student  CAA.  again  diaied  his  father  with  his 

cellphone,  so  that  Mr.  A  could  hear  what  Respondent  was  saying.  Respondent  called  one 
student  “a  piece  of  shit.”  At  another 
parents,  homie?”  When  student  ME 
student  if  he  was  a  tough  guy.  Both  C 
trying  to  induce  the  student  into  a  fight,  as  the  teacher  was  aware  that  C 
boxer  and  MMA  fighter.  Respondent  told 
Respondent—was  a  “bad  motherfucker.”  Looking  at 
fair.”  At  another  point,  Respondent  said  he  was  the  devil. 

point,  he  asked  a  student  “what  is  wrong  with  your 
him  a  question,  Respondent  asked  the 
and  his  father  believed  that  Respondent  was 

A.  and  the  rest  of  the  class  that  he— 

    

ost 

mm  Respondent  said  “I  don’t  fight 

A.  trains  as  a 

19. 

(A)  Mr.  A.  was  so  alarmed  by  what  he  was  hearing,  that  he  drove  from 

Sylmar,  California,  where  he  works,  to  Van  Nuys  High  School  at  a  rather  high  (and  at  times 
illegal)  speed.  He  was  concerned  that  his  son  and  other  students  were  in  danger;  he  had 
formed  the  opinion  on  October  3  that  Respondent  was  about  to  snap.”  Mr.  A.  thought  that 
Respondent  was  indeed  going  to  snap  as  he  listened  to  Respondent’s  rant  on  October  4, 
which  lasted  from  the  time  Mr.  A.  answered  the  phone,  until  he  arrived  at  the  administrative 
office  of  the  high  school,  a  duration  of  15  to  20  minutes.° 

  

*  According  to  one  student  witness,  Respondent  said:  “That  motherfucker  [Rosales] 

wants  to  fire  me.” 

> 

This  is  found  in  Mr.  A.’s  written  statement.  Mr.  A.  also  expressed  respect  for 
teachers,  as  he  did  during  the  hearing,  and  he  went  on  to  state  that  he  hoped  Respondent 
would  “get  the  help  that  he  needs.”  (Ex.  33,  p.  2.) 

° 

The  ALJ  has  lived  in  the  San  Fernando  Valley  most  of  his  life,  and  is  aware  of  the 

distances  involved,  and  usual  traffic  conditions. 

(See  Gov.  Code,  §  11425.50,  subd.  (c).) 

5

    

  

(B)  When  Mr.  A.  entered  the  office,  he  spoke  to  Marc  Strassner  (Strassner), 
an  assistant  principle.  In  his  testimony,  Strassner  confirmed  that  Mr.  A’s  phone  was  open, 
and  he  could  hear  Respondent  yelling  and  screaming,  cursing  and  ranting  at  the  students. 
Strassner  asked  for  a  copy  of  what  he  thought  was  a  recording,  and  Mr.  A.  told  him  he  could 
not  provide  one,  because  what  they  were  hearing  was  live.  Shortly  after  Mr.  A.s’  arrival, 
administrators  went  to  Respondent’s  classroom,  to  send  him  home.’ 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charge  5—the  October  1,  2013  Confrontation  in  the  Quad 

20. 

On  October  1,  2013,  Respondent  saw  two  students,  a  boy  and  a  girl  mz 
O.),  in  the  school  quad.  The  boy  had  a  stick  or  tree  branch,  and  he  poked  at  the  girl  with  it. 
Respondent  perceived  that  the  boy  had  poked  the  girl  in  her  private  parts,  which 
later  denied. 

21. 

Respondent  began  yelling  at  the  two  students,  threatening  the  boy  with  jail, 
demanding  his  student  I.D.,  which  the  boy  could  not  produce.  (According  to y  |  the 
boy  had  lost  his  I.D.)  Respondent  was  angry  because  he  thought  that  the  male  student  had 
touched  JE  improperly,  something  she  denied  to  him. 

22. 

Eventually,  he  took  the  students  to  the  school  office.  He  then  left  the  office 

for  a  classroom.  Meanwhile,  an  office  staff  person  contacted  a  school  police  officer,  Officer 
Aleman.  The  officer  contacted  Respondent,  who  took  the  officer  to  the  quad  to  show  what 
happened.  After  he  went  through  the  story,  wherein  he  admitted  that  he  had  been  upset  and 
caused  a  scene,  the  officer  asked  why  he  just  didn’t  take  the  two  students  to  the  office  at  the 
outset.  Respondent  then  became  upset  with  Officer  Aleman,  yelling  at  her,  and  her  words, 
“ranting”  about  how  nothing  was  going  to  be  done  about  a  serious  situation.  (Ex.  31,  p.  2.) 

23. 

Apparently,  Respondent  perceived  that 

A  was  being  violated  in  some 
way.  He  kept  referring  to  the  fact  that  he  had  a  daughter  at  the  school,  and  he  would  not 
want  her  violated  in  some  way. 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charge  6—Use  of Profanity  During  a  Phone  Call  with  a 

Parent 

7 

24. 

Ona  date  not  clear  from  the  record,  Respondent  spoke  by  telephone  with  a 

was  concerned  about  her  child’s 
parent  of  one  of  his  students,  ina  (BE).  B 
grades  in  Respondent’s  class,  and  in  another.  She  phoned  each  teacher,  left  a  message,  but 
did  not  hear  back  from  them. 

if 

  

’ 

In  his  testimony,  Strassner  described  escorting  Respondent  across  the  campus  from 

the  classroom  to  the  offices  as  a  “spectacle,”  with  Respondent  yelling  out  the  “F-word”  and 
flailing  his  arms.

  

25. 

PR 

course  of  the  conversation,  Respondent  used  profanity,  yelled  at  B 
her. 

then  sent  a  note  to  each  teacher.  Respondent  phoned  her.  During  the 
and  he  hung  up  on 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charge  7—Respondent’s  Interaction  with  Ms.  DeMarcos 

26. 

Ms.  DeMarcos  is  the  mother  of  y 

G.,  who  was  a  student  in  one  of 

Respondent’s  classes  in  October  2013.  On  October  3,  2013,  Ms.  DeMarcos  contacted 
Respondent  because  she  was  concerned  about  her  son’s  grade  in  Respondent’s  class. 

27. 

When  she  was  able  to  get  Respondent  on  the  phone,  he  was  very  aggressive 

with  her.  He  asked  if  she  had  come  to  the  open  house  at  the  high  school.  When  she  replied 
that  she  had  not,  because  of  her  job,  he  said  “too  bad,” or  words  to  that  effect.  As  the 
conversation  continued,  Ms.  DeMarcos  asked  about  her  son’s  ability  to  compete  in  the  class, 
Respondent  said,  “I  don’t  know!  Why  don’t  you  ask  him  [her  son]  or  come  to  the  open 
house!” 

28. 

|  When  Ms.  DeMarcos  expressed  her  displeasure  with  the  way  Respondent  was 
talking  to  her,  he  said  that  he  wasn’t  her  son’s  baby  sitter,  and  further  said  “I  don’t  care  if  he 
goes  to  therapy  or  has  ADHD  [Attention  Deficit  Hyperactivity  Disorder]  or  he  is  special  ed, 
the  hell  with  that!”  In  fact, 

lc  does  have  ADHD  and  is  a  special  education  student. 

29. 

When  Ms.  DeMarcos  told  Respondent  he  was  being  rude,  he  said  “I  don’t  give 

a  fuck!” 

30.  JEG.  had  heard  his  mother  talking  on  the  phone  with  Respondent.  He 
did  not  want  her  to  do  so.  He  told  his  mother  that  Respondent  would  put  him  in  the  front  of 
the  room,  and  make  fun  of  him;  he  told  his  mother  that  Respondent  had,  on  another  occasion 
made  fun  of  him.  J§finformed  his  mother  of  some  of  Respondent’s  other  antics,  such  as 
his  use  of  the  word  “nigga,”  Respondent’s  references  in  class  to  anal  rape,  and  that 
Respondent  had  told  the  class  he  needed  to  erase  “nigga”  from  the  board  before  his 
supervisor  saw  it. 

31. 

|  Ms.  DeMarcos  contacted  her  son’s  counselor  the  next  day,  informing  the 
counselor  that  her  son  was  not  going  back  to  Respondent’s  class,  and  that  if  he  was  not 
immediately  transferred  from  Respondent’s  class,  he  would  not  be  coming  to  school.  The 
boy  was  transferred  to  another  class,  and  he  went  from  a  failing  grade  in  Respondent’s  class 
7 
to  an  A  with  his  new  teacher. 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charge  8--Respondent’s  Sale  of Food  and  Drinks  in  His 

Classroom 

32, 

On  October  4,  2013,  after  Respondent  was  removed  from  his  classroom, 

administrators  discovered  a  substantial  amount  of  snack  food  products,  such  as  potato  chips, 
cookies,  and  candy,  as  well  as  various  beverages,  such  as  soda  and  juice.  Respondent  used 

7

  

District  bookcases  and  storage  closets  for  his  inventory.  He  had  installed  a  commercial 
grade  refrigerator  in  his  classroom  to  keep  some  of  his  products  cold. 

33. 

Respondent  sold  the  items  to  students  before,  during,  and  after  class  sessions. 
He  claimed  that  he  was  doing  so  to  raise  money  for  some  student  clubs.  That  was  not  true. 
The  District  has  policies  and  protocols  for  such  fund  raising,  and  he  had  not  followed  them. 
While  he  had  ostensibly  the  sponsored  a  club  in  the  2012-2013  school  year,  he  was  not  listed 
as  sponsor  in  any  club  for  the  2011-2012  school  year,  or  for  the  2013-2014  year.  (Ex.  27,  pp. 
1-6.) 

Respondent  never  remitted  any  sale  proceeds  to  the  District  or  a  school 

34. 
organization.  J 
selling  the  food  in  his  classroom.  JAK.  saw  Respondent  put  the  proceeds  of  sales  in  his 
wallet.  On  October  4,  2013,  Respondent  took  a  metal  cash  box  with  him  before  he  was 
escorted  from  his  classroom.  He  did  not  leave  any  money  behind. 

K.,  as  did  other  student  witnesses,  confirmed  that  Respondent  was 

35. 

The  food  products  that  Respondent  was  selling  are  banned  from  District 

campuses  because  they  are  not  healthy.  He  had  been  told  by  the  administration  that  he  could 
not  sell  such  products.  The  District  would  not  have  authorized  Respondent  or  any  other 
teacher  to  sell  such  products  to  raise  money  for  a  club  or  for  other  student  activities.* 

Findings  Pertaining  to  Charge  9—Respondent’s  Threatening  Conduct  Toward 

Students 

36. 

On  February  14,  2014,  about  four  months  after  Respondent  was  removed  from 
his  classroom,  Cj  A.  and  two  female  students  were  walking  from  school  to  a  local  store. 
The  girls  are  cousins, 
c.  BEB  knew  who  Respondent  was,  but  had 
never  had  him  as  a  teacher.  C 
store  because  one  of  the  girls  wanted  to  buy  her  mother  a  Valentine’s  Day  present.  As  they 
were  walking,  the  three  saw  Respondent  driving  his  car.  He  had  apparently  come  to  school 
to  pick  up  his  child,  who  was  a  student  there. 

had  been  in  his  class.  The  three  were  walking  to  the 

iim”  C.  and CH 

37. 

The  three  students  were  in  the  crosswalk  when  Respondent  yelled  profanities 

at  CH.  which  included  yelling  “fuck  you”  at  the  boy,  and  giving  him  the  finger. 

38. 

Respondent  then  suddenly  accelerated  his  car  toward  the  three  students.  Each 
of  the  three  thought  Respondent  was  going  to  hit  them  with  his  car.  CHA.  tried  to  push 
the  two  girls  out  of  the  way  so  they  would  not  be  struck,  which  behavior  indicates  he  thought 
Respondent  was  going  to  hit  them. 

  

*  Strassner  testified  that  at  one  point  kids  on  the  campus  were  seen  eating  hot 
Cheetos,  but  the  administration  could  not  find  the  source  of  that  snack;  the  sales  were 
surreptitious,  and  Strassner’s  story  had  the  feel  of  an  effort  to  find  a  drug  dealer.  It  later 
became  evident  that  Respondent  had  been  the  source  of  the  hot  Cheetos. 

8

  

Findings  on  Charge  10—-Respondent’s  Alleged  Misbehavior  After  Reassignment 

39. 
the  claim. 

Charge  number  10  was  not  established,  as  there  was  no  evidence  submitted  on 

Other  Findings  Regarding  Respondent’s  Conduct 

40. 

The  witnesses  attested  to  other  misconduct  by  Respondent,  similar  to  that 

charged,  but  not  exactly  charged.  He  would  use  words  like  “bitch”  as  a  noun;  one  student 
recalled  Respondent  telling  a  student,  “don’t  be  braiding  that  bitch’s  hair.”  He  once  told  his 
students  that  Van  Nuys  High  was  a  “ghetto  ass  school.”  He  referred  to  some  students  as 
“cholos.” 

41. 

ma  C.,  one  of  the  girls  Respondent  scared  with  his  car,  testified  that  she 

did  not  learn  in  Respondent’s  class,  because  he  did  not  teach,  and  she  recalled  him  telling  the 
class  some  story  about  his  wife  looking  for  him  in  the  garage,  where  he  was  watching  porn. 
The  lack  of  instruction  was  echoed  by  other  students,  such  as 
was  always  off-topic  and  screaming. 
in  part  because  Respondent  spent  time  talking  about  himself  and  his  family.  TH  T., 
another  of  the  African-American  students,  testified  he  passed  the  class  by  reading  the 
material;  he  wasn’t  learning  from  Respondent. 

A.,  who  said  Respondent 
RK.  testified  that  there  was  not  much  instruction, 

42. 

Respondent  made  denigrating  statements  about  the  students  and  their  families. 

When  one  girl,  in  response  to  inquiries,  said  that  her  father  did  not  speak  English  well, 
Respondent  said  that  her  father  was  the  idiot  in  her  family.  At  an  open  house  he  inquired  of 
the  parents  regarding  their  racial  and  ethnic  backgrounds.  When  one  of  the  parents  objected 
to  that,  he  retaliated  against  her  daughter  in  class,  as  her  daughter,  who  is  college  bound  as  of 
the  hearing  date,  received  a  D  in  the  class.”  When  she  retook  the  history  class  in  the  summer, 
the  girl  earned  an  A.  Respondent  told  his  class  that  the  students  born  here  had  no  future,  but 
the  children  of  immigrants  did,  because  the  latter  children  worked  harder. 

43. 

Respondent  has  had  other  encounters  with  parents  where  he  was  at  best 

tactless,  but  his  conduct  is  better  described  as  hostile  and  rude.  He  plainly  did  not  want  to  be 
questioned  by  the  parents,  More  than  one  parent  complained  to  Van  Nuys  High 
administrators  about  his  behavior  toward  them.  More  than  one  concluded  that  if  he  would  be 
rude  or  profane  toward  them,  then  his  classroom  atmosphere  had  to  be  very  poor. 

44. 

Respondent  had  more  than  adequate  notice  that  his  behavior  was  not 

acceptable.  Aside  from  yearly  distribution  of  materials  to  the  teachers  regarding  their 
obligations  toward  the  students  and  the  District,  Respondent  had  been  counseled  by  his 
supervisors,  including  in  2012  and  in  March  and  September  2013.  Indeed,  in  February  2012, 

  

* 

The  daughter,  KA.  testified  that  Respondent  brought  up  the  open  house,  and 
said  he  got  in  trouble  over  it.  He  said  that  the  person  responsible  had  a  C,  but  was  going  to 
get  a  D.  She  took  his  statements  as  a  threat.

  

he  was  counseled  by  Strassner  because  a  student  had  complained  about  Respondent’s 
Statements.  Strassner  pointed  out  that  even  where  Respondent’s  intentions  were  good,  he 
had  to  be  careful  about  perceptions.  Plainly,  Respondent  did  not  care  about  perceptions  of 
his  comments,  which  became  increasingly  pernicious  and  hurtful. 

Credibility  Findings 

The  Morrison  Factors 

45. 

All  of  the  witnesses  were  credible  in  their  demeanor.  All  were  credible  in 

terms  of  the  content  of  their  testimony,  which  was  consistent  internally,  and  consistent  with 
the  testimony  of  other  witnesses. 
A.  and  his  father  were  especially  credible.  Given 
what  Respondent  put  them  through,  they  did  not  exhibit  any  rancor;  Mr.  A.  believes 
Respondent  needs  some  sort  of  help. 

46. 

Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an 

examination  must  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  teacher  in 
question  is  unfit  to  teach.  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  factors  that  may  be 
examined  to  determine  fitness  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely 
affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  and,  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of 
certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances;  the 
praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in 
question  will  recur;  and,  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on 
the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved,  or  other  teachers. 

| 

47. 

(A)  Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the  degree  thereof 

There  were  adverse  consequences  for  students  and  teachers.  Many  students  were 
negatively  affected  by  Respondent’s  conduct,  as  they  were  deprived  of  instruction  while 
insulted  or  denigrated.  When 
Respondent’s  class,  then  other  teachers  had  to  absorb  extra  students  into  their  classrooms. 

G.  or  other  students  were  transferred  out  of 

(B)  Proximity  in  time:  Most  of  the  misconduct  occurred  in  the  late  summer 

and  fall  of  2013,  and  is  therefore  recent. 

(C)  Type  of certificate  held  by  Respondent:  Not  fully  disclosed  by  the  record, 
but  it  must  be  inferred  that  he  holds  at  least  a  single  subject  certificate  allowing  him  to  teach 
history  to  high  school  students. 

(D)  Likelihood  of  recurrence:  The  chance  of  recurrence  is  very  high. 

Respondent’s  behavior  toward  Coalton  A.  and  his  two  classmates  in  February  2014,  months 
after  his  removal  from  the  classroom,  indicates  his  lack  of  insight  and  self-control.  Exhibit 

10

  

45,  a  letter  Respondent  wrote  to  District  administrators  in  late  May  2014,  indicates  a  lack  of 
remorse.  It  blames  others,  claims  that  some  conspiracy  existed  against  him,  and  denies  that 

A.  was  in  class  on  October  4.  That  latter  claim  is  refuted  by  the  testimony  of  the 

boy  and  his  father. 

(E)  Implication  of  constitutional  rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of  either  the 
Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated. 
A  teacher  has  no 
right  to  denigrate  his  students  and  their  families,  to  use  foul  language  on a  routine  basis,  fail 
to  instruct,  or  run  a  bodega  out  of  his  classroom. 

(F)  Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances:  In  aggravation,  Respondent’s 

misconduct  occurred  more  than  once,  and  appears  to  have  become  routine  by  the  fall  of 
2013. 

48. 

Under  all  the  circumstances,  Respondent’s  ongoing  conduct  establishes  that  he 

is  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Morrison  decision,  and  he  should 
be  terminated  as  a  teacher. 

Legal  Conclusions  Generally  Applicable  To  All  Claims: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Code  prescribes  the  procedures  to  be  followed  when  a  school  district 

wishes  to  dismiss,  suspend  or  otherwise  discipline  a  tenured  teacher.  (Wilmot  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1998)  64  Cal-App.4th  1130,  1132,  (Wilmot);  Paramount 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Teachers  Assn.  of Paramount  (1994)  26  Cal.App.4th  1371,  1378  :  see 
§  44660  et  seq.)  Among  the  statutes  pertinent  to  this  case  are  sections  44932,  which  sets  out 
grounds  for  termination,  and  section  44944,  which  sets  out  procedures  for  termination. 

2. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  may 

be  defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such 
conduct  that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  However,  the  conduct  in  question,  to  amount 
to  unprofessional  conduct,  must  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

3. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5), 

properly  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 
teason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,” 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  at  1444.)  Examples  of  conduct  establishing  evident 

  

  

 

11 

  

unfitness  to  teach  may  be  found  in  Palo  Verde  etc.  Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d 
967  (Hensey). 

4, 

“Immoral  conduct,”  of  which  Respondent  has  been  accused,  is  not  confined  to 
sexual  matters.  It  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general 
public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 
indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be  conduct  that 
is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 
respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v. 
Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland);  Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  at  973- 
977;  San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

5. 

(A)  The  factual  scenarios  in  Weiland  and  Hensey  are  helpful  in  understanding 
the  types  of  actions  that  can  constitute  “immoral  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for  service” 
as  bases  to  dismiss  a  teacher.  In  Weiland,  a  teacher  of  an  evening  class  was  aware  that  when 
the  number  of  students  in  a  class  was  down  to  15  participants  in  three  successive  evenings, 
the  class  would  be  automatically  dropped  off  the  roll  and  the  teacher  would  lose  her 
position.  The  teacher  testified  that  she  falsified  records  by  adding  the  names  of  three  persons 
who  were  absent.  Although  the  teacher  argued  that  other  teachers  did  the  same  and  she  did 
so  “to  expose  the  situation,”  nevertheless  her  conduct  was  not  justified  and  the  evidence  “that 
the  purpose  of  the  falsification  was  to  secure  appellant’s  continued  employment.  The 
evidence  was  clearly  sufficient  to  support  the  findings”  of  immoral  conduct.  (Weiland, 
supra,  179  Cal.App.2d  at  811.) 

(B)  In  Hensey,  dismissal  was  justified  for  a  junior  college  teacher  who  used 
vulgar  language  and  engaged  in  questionable  acts  in  his  classes.  It  was  not  necessarily  each 
individual  act  or  comment  but,  rather,  the  totality.  He  tore  out  a  loudspeaker  in  his 
classroom.  He  referred  to  the  school’s  bell  system  as  sounding  like  a  worn-out  phonograph 
in  a  whorehouse  and  made  numerous  references  throughout  the  year  to  whores  and 
whorehouses.  He  warned  Mexican-American  students  of  super-syphilis  in  a  town  on  the 
Mexican  border.  He  stated  that  the  district  superintendent  spent  too  much  time  licking  up  the 
board  and  simulated  licking  the  classroom  wall  with  his  tongue.  Although  he  explained  that 
he  meant  “face  licking,”  the  expression  “means  in  common  parlance  licking  an  entirely 
different  portion  of  the  anatomy”  and  was  obviously  so  intended.  He  also  referred  to  the 
school  walls  looking  as  though  someone  had  peed  on  them  and  then  smeared  them  with  baby 
crap.  The  court  stated  “while  it  could  be  assumed  that  both  male  and  female  students  of  that 
age  were  familiar  with  the  words  used,  a  classroom,  even  on  a  junior  college  level,  is  not  the 
time  or  the  place  for  the  use  of  such  language.”  (Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  at  974, 
975.)  The  different  actions  and  statements  were  described  as  creating  a  dangerous  situation 
(loudspeaker),  bearing  on  his  fitness  to  teach  (whorchouse),  humiliating  and  embarrassing  to 
the  Mexican-American  students  and  showing  a  lack  of  restraint  and  a  tendency  to  vulgarity 
and  bad  taste  (super-syphilis),  and  disruptive  conduct,  an  impairment  of  the  teaching  process, 

  

  

12

   

and  not  an  example  of  the  responsible  dissent  which  should  be  fostered  in  the  classroom 
(licking). 
court’s  determination  that  the  charges  of  ‘immoral  conduct’  and  ‘evident  unfitness  for 
service’  were  true  and  constituted  cause  for  dismissal.”  ([bid.) 

“AII  of  the  incidents  taken  in  the  aggregate  serve  as  a  substantial  basis  for  the  trial 

6. 

In  order  for  a  teacher  to  be  terminated  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7), 

for  persistent  disobedience  of  applicable  rules  and  regulations,  it  must  be  established  that 
there  has  been  continuous  and  constant  refusal  to  obey,  or  behavior  motivated  by  an  attitude 
of  continuing  insubordination;  a  single  instance  of  disobedience  is  insufficient.  (Governing 
Bad.  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.) 

7. 

“Dishonesty”  needs  no  especial  definition,  as  it  is  an  ordinary  term  known  to 
the  ALJ.  However,  within  the  context  of  these  proceedings,  not  every  act  of  dishonesty  will 
constitute  grounds  for  discipline.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45 
Cal.3d  208  (Fontana).)"° 

8. 

Even  where  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 

service,  or  refusal  to  follow  rules  and  regulations  is  or  are  established,  it  must  also  be 
established  that  such  conduct  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison);  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d 
208;  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445;  see  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 
(1958)  161  Cal-App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence,”  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.-App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  That  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence  in 

*°  As  stated  in  Fontana,  “Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smallest  fib  to  the 
most  flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct, 
and  not  every  falsehood  will  constitute  ‘dishonesty’  as  a  ground  for  discipline.”  (Fontana, 
supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  220,  fn.  12.) 

9. 

      

   13

   

support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative.  (Hutchinson  v. 
Contractors’  State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal.App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting  Marovich  v. 
Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.295,  304.) 

(C)  Discrepancies  in  a  witness’s  testimony,  or  between  that  witness’s 
testimony  and  that  of  others,  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  testimony  should  be 
discredited.  (Wilson  v.  State  Personnel  Bd.  (1976)  58  Cal  App.3d  865,  879.) 

(D)  "On  the  cold  record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached, 

uncontradicted  --  but  on  a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his 
credibility  factor  nil.  Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict 
himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who  sees, 
hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.” 
(Wilson  v.  State  Personnel  Board,  supra  at  877-878,  quoting  Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co. 
(1971)  17  Cal.  App.3d  127,  140.) 

Conclusions  Specific  to  This  Case 

10. 

(A)  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  section 
44944,  and  Factual  Findings  |  through  9,  notwithstanding  Respondent’s  objection  to  subject 
matter  jurisdiction. 

(B)  Respondent’s  objections  to  subject  matter  jurisdiction  rest  on  the  assertion 

that  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  not  properly  executed,  and  that  the  Accusation  was  not 
properly  verified.  At  most,  those  are  technical  objections  that  did  not  deprive  Respondent  of 
adequate  notice  and  an  opportunity  to  be  heard,  nor  the  ALJ  and  OAH  of  jurisdiction.  Such 
defects  are  not  cause  to  dismiss  the  action.  (Ed.  Code  §  44944,  subd.  (d)(2)  (2014);  DeYoung 
v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  of  the  Hueneme  Elementary  School  District 
(DeYoung)  (2014)  228  Cal.App.4th  568.) 

(C)  In  DeYoung,  students  reported  that  the  teacher  had  acted  out,  physically 
and  verbally  disciplining  his  students.  The  governing  board  of  the  district  voted  to  dismiss 
the  teacher,  and  that  vote  followed  an  oral  presentation  of  the  charges  in  a  closed  proceeding. 
While  written  charges  were  later  prepared  and  given  to  the  teacher,  the  Board  acted  without 
either  receiving  verified  written  charges  prepared  by  someone  on  the  District  staff,  or  written 
charges  generated  by  the  Board  itself. 
Code,  and  such  steps  were  allegedly  not  performed  in  this  case.  Notwithstanding  this 
significant  deviation  from  statutory  procedure,  the  Court  of  Appeal  refused  to  dismiss  the 
case. 

Such  are  steps  that  are  called  for  by  the  Education 

      

(D)  The  court  noted  that  section  44934  did  not  provide  a  remedy  for  cases 
where  there  is  a  failure  to  follow  the  preliminary  steps  of  providing  a  verified  statement  of 
charges,  and  that  in  that  case  the  language  had  to  be  treated  as  directory  rather  than 
mandatory.  (DeYoung,  supra,  228  Cal.App.4th  at  576.)  And,  the  court  relied  on  former 

14   

section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(2),  which  provided,  in  essence,  that  “nonsubstantive 
procedural  errors”  committed  by  a  district  or  its  governing  board  could  not  support  a  decision 
not  to  terminate  an  employee  unless  those  errors  were  prejudicial." 

(E)  Plainly,  if  the  failure  to  submit  a  written  statement  of  charges  to  a 

governing  board  for  consideration  is  insufficient  to  nullify  subsequent  proceedings,  then  the 
claim  that  the  head  of  the  District’s  human  resources  unit  has  improperly  signed  and  verified 
an  actual  statement  of  charges  must  fail. 

11. 

It  has  been  established  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  unprofessional 

conduct,  providing  cause  for  his  termination  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 
However,  it  was  not  established  that  he  was  provided  with  an  opportunity  to  cure  his 
unprofessional  conduct  after  he  received  his  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  in  April  2014,  as 
he  was  allegedly  assigned  to  the  Educational  Service  Center  North  after  removal  from  the 
classroom.  (See  Accusation,  ex.  6,  p.  3.)  This  is  fatal  to  the  unprofessional  conduct  claim. 
(Tarquin  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1978)  84  Cal.App.3d  251;  Woodland 
Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1446.) 

12. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  sections 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939,  based  on  Legal  Conclusions  1,  4,  5  and10,  and  Factual 
Findings  11-19,  24-44. 

13. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  Respondent  for  dishonesty  pursuant  to  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(3),  in  connection  with  his  sale  of  food  and  beverages  in  his  classroom, 
under  the  guise  of  sponsoring  a  student  organization,  where  he  kept  the  sales  proceeds  for 
himself.  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Legal  Conclusions  1,  7,  and  10,  and  Factual Findings 
32  through  35. 

14. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service, - 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5).  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Legal 
Conclusions  1,  3,  5,  and  10,  and  Factual  Findings  11-44. 

15. 

|  Cause  was  established  to  terminate  Respondent  for  persistent  violation  of,  or 

refusal  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
governance  of  the  schools  by  the  governing  board  of  the  District,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(7).  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Legal  Conclusions  1,  6,  10,  and  Factual 
Findings  11-44. 

if 

"The  language  from  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(2)  has  been  moved  to  section 

44944,  subdivision  (d)(2)  as  of  January  1,  2015;  this  was  part  of  a  substantial  amendment  to 
the  statutes  pertaining  to  teacher  termination. 

15 

  

 

    

16. 

Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  it  must  be  concluded  that  Respondent's 

conduct  and  temperament  render  him  unfit  to  teach  in  the  District,  based  on  Factual  Findings 
46  through  48. 

17. 

Based  on  all  the  foregoing,  Respondent  should  be  terminated  as  a  certificated 

employee  of  the  District. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Marcos  Ortega  shall  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District,  forthwith. 

,  2015    

June 

          

Adnpnistrative 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Law  Judge 

  

    
  

 

