BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
OCEANSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

CHRISTOPHER MUNSTERMAN,

OAH No. 2015100487

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) in Oceanside, California on January 5 through 7, 2016. The Commission was 
comprised of the following members:  Administrative Law Judge Susan J. Boyle, Jana Hegg
and Gary Brooks.

Daniel Shinoff and Amir Azimzadeh, Artiano, Shinoff & Holtz, represented the

Oceanside Unified School District (district).

Fern Steiner and Andrew Lockard, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented 

respondent Christopher Munsterman who was present throughout the hearing.

On February 5, 2016, the record was reopened to receive additional evidence. 

The matter was submitted on February 12, 2016.

CASE SUMMARY 

Respondent has been a certificated teacher for 18 years.  In the spring of 2014, while

working at Garrison Elementary School, respondent began having significant marital problems.
He became overwhelmed with the disintegration of his marriage and its impact on his 
relationship with his children. By late 2014 and into early 2015, respondent became 
preoccupied with his personal situation and spoke often about it to the district personnel who 
worked in his classroom.  In late January 2015, several district employees spoke to Garrison’s 
principal, Fausto Barragan, and raised concerns about respondent. Based on these
conversations, respondent was placed on administrative leave on February 11, 2015. On
November 23, 2015, the district gave respondent notice that it intended to dismiss him.

1

The Commission unanimously determined that the district failed to establish cause to 

dismiss respondent by a preponderance of the evidence. The Commission unanimously
determined that none of the charges alleged were sustained. The Commission unanimously
determined that insufficient evidence was offered to demonstrate that respondent was unable to
function as a teacher in the district or was unfit for service in the district, or that he 
persistently violated laws, rules, regulations and/or policies related to education, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(5) and (7). The Commission unanimously
dismissed the Notice of Charges that There Exists Cause to Dismiss Certificated Employee.

Jurisdictional Matters

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the district.  He possesses 
a clear moderate/severe teaching credential in special education. During the time relevant to
these charges respondent was a pre-school special education teacher at Garrison who taught 
autistic students with limited verbal skills and behavior problems.

2.

Respondent’s last day of work at Garrison was February 4, 2015.  He was on 
sick leave from February 5, 2015, until he was ready to return to work on February 11, 2015.
On February 11, 2015, respondent was instructed to report to the district’s Human Resources
Department rather than to his classroom.  He was put on paid administrative leave that day.

3.

On September 3, 2015,1 respondent was provided a Notice of Charges that 
There Exists Cause to Dismiss Certificated Employee (Notice of Charges).  The Notice of
Charges asserted that cause existed to dismiss respondent for (1) evident unfitness for service 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); and (2) persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey laws and regulations pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(7). The Notice of Charges included 145 pages of documents the district 
relied upon to terminate respondent’s employment, including board policies, emails, and 
computer logs.

4.

On September 23, 2015, Sheri Sanders, Associate Superintendent, Human

Resources, recommended to the Governing Board of the district that respondent should be 
dismissed as a certificated employee of the district.  The Governing Board approved that 
recommendation.2

1 The parties stipulated that respondent was served with the Notice of Charges on this 

date.

2 The Notice of Charges was dated September 25, 2015.  The parties stipulated that 
the governing board voted to accept Ms. Sanders’ recommendation on September 23, 2015, 
but that the Notice of Charges was inadvertently not signed until September 25, 2015.

2

5.

On September 23, 2015, respondent was provided a Notice of Intention to 
Dismiss Permanent Certificated Employee (Notice of Intention).  The Notice of Intention
advised him that the Governing Board had voted to dismiss him as a permanent certificated 
employee in 30 days unless he requested a hearing before the Commission on Professional 
Competence “to determine if there is cause to uphold the unpaid suspension.”3 The Notice of 
Intent included a copy of the charges the Board approved.

By a Request for Hearing and Notice of Affirmative Defenses dated

September 30, 2015, respondent timely appealed the dismissal action.

The district did not file an Accusation and relied on the Notice of Charges it 

previously provided to respondent.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  The parties to this 

disciplinary proceeding agreed that the panel members were qualified to serve.

6.

7.

8.

Background

9.

Respondent had been a certificated teacher for over ten years when he was
hired by the Oceanside School District in March 2011 and assigned to an early childhood
special education class.  After one year, respondent opted to transfer to a preschool autistic 
classroom at Garrison where he had up to 16 students in his class. Respondent received
satisfactory performance reviews while employed with the district. He had different
instructional aides in his classroom, with whom he developed personal relationships.

10. When he was hired by the district, respondent was married and had two young 

children. During the fall of 2014, respondent and his wife began having marital problems.
The discord with his wife and their eventual separation deeply affected respondent and so 
occupied his thoughts that he became obsessed with his impending divorce and how it was 
affecting his relationship with his own children. He frequently discussed the specifics of his 
marital problems with Garrison’s principal, the principal’s assistant, the instructional aides 
assigned to his classroom and other educational professionals who provided services for his 
students.

Performance Evaluations

2011 – 2013 PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS

11.

Respondent never received a negative performance evaluation while he 
worked for the district.  In an observation of respondent on November 1, 2011, for the 
2011/2012 school year, evaluator Pat Kurtz observed respondent leading his students in 
circle time.  Ms. Kutz noted that respondent used pictures and manipulative activities to 
teach about the letter “E.” “He differentiated questions with individual students to promote 

3 The parties stipulated that respondent was placed on paid leave.

3

development of their divergent IEP4 goals.  The students were focused on the facts and his 
presentation.  He asked questions about what he just told them.  He gave wrong ‘answers’ so 
the children would correct him and thus demonstrates [sic] their knowledge.”  Ms. Kurtz 
observed the students transition to an activity involving cutting and pasting.  She wrote that 
respondent was involved in the activity with his aides.  “Mr. Munsterman provided clear 
instruction by explaining/speaking in Spanish with [a student].”  Respondent gave genuine 
and positive praise to students when they completed a task, used their words, or responded 
appropriately to an instruction.  Ms. Kurtz observed respondent to simultaneously teach five 
lessons to five diverse students.  She “recognized [respondent’s] genuine appreciation and 
interaction in his relationships with his students and Instructional Assistants.  He utilizes his 
[instructional aides’] skills to their maximum potential while creating a positive working and 
learning environment.”

12.

In a “Summative Evaluation of respondent’s job performance for the 

2011/2012 school year signed on May 21, 2012, Ms. Kurtz rated respondent as 
“satisfactory”5 and noted that respondent “developed several visual prompts and organization 
structures to support his students’ learning success.  He also demonstrated exceptional 
flexibility and energy teaching multiple simultaneous lessons to his diverse group of 
students.”

13.

On September 23, 2013, Dr. Barragan conducted an informal observation of 

respondent’s classroom.  In an email to respondent, Dr. Barragan noted that, “Students have 
visuals and using tactile to learn numbers.”  Dr. Barragan observed that, “Students are being 
provided with visual cues with picture cards.  Students are aware/knowledgeable of schedule 
and routine of class.”  Dr. Barragan acknowledged respondent’s aides and stated, “You have 
a great group of [instructional aides] in your classroom.  You also provide good guidance and 
support for them.  They are calm, patient and utilize good strategies to address the 
behavioral, academic, vocational, self-monitoring needs of your students.”  Dr. Barragan said 
he enjoyed being in respondent’s classroom.

2014 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND REQUEST FOR RECOMMENDATION

14.

On April 11, 2014, respondent asked Dr. Barragan if he would write a letter of 

recommendation commenting on respondent’s work performance.  Dr. Barragan responded 
that he “would be honored” to do so. 

15.

On December 5, 2014, after he was aware of respondent’s marital problems, 

Dr. Barragan conducted a formal observation of respondent’s classroom and prepared a 
report.  Mr. Barragan observed respondent for at least 30 minutes.  He wrote that he observed 
circle time in which students were led by respondent to identify days of the week and months 
of the year through written words and songs and that “[t]eacher led students through a variety

4 IEP is an abbreviation for Individualized Education Plan.

5 The options were “Satisfactory” or “Unsatisfactory.”

4

of songs related to academic content.”  Mr. Barragan watched students transition to their 
work centers and then to independent play and the library.  Mr. Barragan noted that,
“Teacher used visuals (PECS) to communicate the next task/activity/procedure/expectation
to students.  Teacher supported individual students to transition through activities with 
visuals, prompts, etc.”  In the Post-Observation Conference notes dated December 11, 1014,
Mr. Barragan wrote that: 

Mr. Munsterman has organized a classroom environment where 
13 boys are working with aides in a variety of activities that 
provide them with access to academics.  Mr. Munsterman has 
trained his instructional aides to work with individual students 
to address their needs.  Mr. Munsterman schedules activities to 
keep students active at all times of the day.  Instructional Aides 
have knowledge of ABA strategies to support students on the 
spectrum.  The classroom environment is flexible, and all staff 
members work closely to support any of the classroom/student 
needs.  Mr. Munsterman communicates student progress to 
parents.  Activities are aligned with academic content and 
strategies are used based on individual student needs.  Mr. 
Munsterman uses a wide variety of tools including IPad, Picture 
Exchange Communication (PECS), motor lab, to support in 
meeting IEP goals [sic].

Respondent’s Discussions About His Marital Problems with Dr. Barragan and Dr.
Barragan’s Assistant

16.

On October 27, 2014, respondent spoke to Fausto Barragan, Jr., Ed.D, 

Garrison’s principal, about his marital problems.  After their conversation, respondent sent 
an email to Dr. Barragan thanking him for his “care, concern, and good advice.”  Respondent 
told Dr. Barragan he [respondent] is “feeling better by the second.”  Respondent said he was 
leaving early to get his children.  He added that his wife had “been taking them and keeping 
them away from me on purpose to hurt me.”  He promised to return to work the next day
“large and in charge.”

17.

Also on the same day, respondent sent an email to the principal’s assistant, 

Martina Boeck, in which he told her that he had a “talk” with Dr. Barragan.  He said he told 
Dr. Barragan that he was having serious back pain and that he was separating from his wife 
of ten years.  He wrote that his wife “went a little crazy.  No, she went a lot crazy.”
Nonetheless, respondent stated that, although he was sad, he was also “happy for the first 
time in ten years.” Ms. Boeck responded that she was sorry to hear about respondent and his 
wife and that she would pray for them both and their children.

18.

On October 28, 2014, respondent forwarded to Dr. Barragan an email 

respondent had sent to Ms. Boeck in which respondent thanked Ms. Boeck for listening to 
him. In that e-mail respondent told Ms. Boeck he did not “have any close family members or 

5

friends [he could] talk to.”  He provided Ms. Boeck with an “update” of what had been 
happening since he spoke to her the day before. Amongst other things, respondent told Ms. 
Boeck that his wife had “basically kidnapped” their children and took them to a friend’s 
home.  He said the children and he were “super sad.”  He also told Ms. Boeck that, on what 
was supposed to be “his night” with his children, his wife began texting him while he and the 
children were at a restaurant telling him she was coming for the children.  Respondent 
believed his wife did that to stop him from having a “great time” with the children.  Although 
respondent’s wife did not come to the restaurant, the fear that she would come diminished
respondent’s ability to enjoy his time with the children.  When respondent arrived at the 
family home to spend the night with the children, contrary to their agreement that his wife 
would stay with a friend on his nights, respondent’s wife was in the home.  When they
entered the house respondent’s wife “got weird again.”  He was grateful that his wife finally
agreed to start therapy.  He stated he would like to move out of the family house, but he did 
not have the money to stay somewhere else.

19.

On October 30, 2014, respondent sent an email to Dr. Barragan and Ms. Boeck 

regarding a confrontation he had with fellow teacher, Jennifer Knox.6 In the email, 
respondent referred to his attempts to repair his troubled marriage. He said it was difficult 
because his wife was “not being reasonable or rational.”  He advised them he was taking a 
day off to “get all my ducks lined up again” and that he needed “a little time away from
people who are not being so nice to me . . . .”  He stated that his wife had “sabotaged” the 
other days he took off to get work finished.

20.

On November 6, 2014, respondent sent an email to Dr. Barragan in which he 
requested “some time off, so I can regroup and come back strong.”  He said that for the past 
18 years of teaching, “it has been a rule of mine to leave personal issues at the door, so I 
could focus on the kids.  I have been having a tough time separating the two, especially when
I have younger, less experienced teachers yelling at me for working hard and doing a great 
job.” He stated that he was “nervous, shaking, crying, and feeling horrible.”

Respondent stated that he planned to take a full week off and “return as Chris the 
good teacher, not the shell of Chris.” He added that, “For some reason there has been a lot of 
[Ms. Knoxes] in [his] life for the past 18 years in education.  People who want to hurt me or 
knock me down for working my behind off and getting results.”

21.

On November 17, 2014, Ms. Knox sent an email to Dr. Barragan in which she 
expressed her concern that she and respondent were directed not to speak to one another until 
they met with him.  She noted that the meeting had not occurred and it was very awkward 
between her and respondent. She stated, “I am not sure how our team is supposed to 
function when we are not able to speak to each other and I am concerned that this situation 
has been going on too long.”

6 The confrontation between respondent and Ms. Knox is discussed below.

6

Staff Speak to Dr. Barragan About Respondent

22.

Beginning in or around October 2014, respondent began to discuss his marital 
problems and, later, his attempts to begin dating again, with his instructional aides.  Some of 
his comments contained sexual content which was considered unprofessional by some of the 
staff. As time went on, respondent’s discussions about his personal problems began to 
dominate his interactions with his aides and other professionals that came into respondent’s 
classroom. Respondent’s aides became concerned for respondent’s mental health and 
worried that his personal problems were impacting his teaching.

On January 27, 2015, the instructional aides in respondent’s classroom met with Dr.

Barragan about respondent. They told Dr. Barragan that respondent had been acting 
inappropriately, was distracted from his teaching obligations by his personal problems and 
that they were not comfortable working with respondent.  Dr. Barragan requested that they
put their concerns in writing, which some did.

Email from Dr. Barragan Documenting his Conversations with Instructional Aides

23.

On January 27, 2015, Dr. Barragan sent an email to Courtney Cook, Director 
of Special Education, Ms. Sanders and Todd McAteer, Ed.D, Director of Human Resources 
for Certificated Employees, advising them that he had met with “all of [respondent’s] 
Instructional Aides” that day and that “their anxiety level is extremely high because of 
[respondent’s] behavior during the last few months.”  He added that the aides “had not 
approached me with their concerns hoping that things would change,” but stated that the
aides did not “feel comfortable coming to work.”  He stated he planned to meet with 
respondent the following day to discuss his concerns, but he wanted Ms. Cook, Ms. Sanders 
and Dr. McAteer to have more information before he proceeded. 

Dr. Barragan’s Meeting with Respondent

24.

On Friday, January 30, 2015, Dr. Barragan met with respondent to discuss the
concerns raised by the instructional aides.  Dr. Barragan told Ms. Cook, Ms. Sanders and Dr.
McAteer in an email dated February 2, 2015, that respondent was “very emotional and cried 
several times.”  Dr. Barragan asked respondent if he needed to take some time off and 
respondent said he would let Dr. Barragan know if he did.  Respondent shared details with 
Dr. Barragan about “his divorce, sex life, etc.”

Complaint Regarding Respondent’s Handling of Student M

25.

In his February 2, 2015, email, Dr. Barragan stated that an instructional aide, 
[Ms. Bautista] had reported to him that day that there was tension in the classroom between 
respondent and the staff concerning the way he handled a situation involving Student M.
Ms. Bautista stated that while Student M was crying, respondent removed Student M from 
the classroom and sat him outside.  Ms. Bautista intervened and went to Student M.  She 
reported that respondent was angry that she had contradicted his strategy to handle the 

7

situation and made passive/aggressive comments under his breath expressing his frustration.
Ms. Bautista reported that another aide confronted respondent about his comments.  Dr. 
Barragan stated that Ms. Bautista was “usually very calm but became overwhelmed because 
of changing moods and the inconsistency in providing a structured classroom environment 
for students.”  Dr. Barragan said he was concerned that respondent was sharing personal 
things with his aides, and he would meet with respondent again the following morning to 
discuss his concerns. There is no documentation that this meeting took place.

Respondent is Placed on Leave

26.

On Wednesday, February 4, 2015, respondent sent an email to Dr. Barragan 

and Ms. Boeck advising them that he hurt his back and wrist while he was moving, had 
started physical therapy, and would not be at work for the rest of the week.

27.

By email dated Friday, February 6, 2015, Dr. Barragan told respondent he was

required to provide a medical release before he would be permitted to return to work.
Respondent said he would provide the required medical release and added that he had 
informed his aides that he was “taking some time off to get a little better both physically and
mentally.  My divorce and the circumstances related to it have been very difficult for me. . . .
This time off has been extremely helpful.  I feel that I will be able to fully do my job and 
meet the needs of the students and staff alike.”

28.

By email dated Tuesday, February 10, 2015, respondent advised Dr. Barragan 

that he had obtained a medical release and would be back to work the following day.  Dr. 
Barragan told respondent to report to the human resources department at the district rather 
than to Garrison. On February 11, 2015, respondent and a union representative attended the 
meeting at the human resources department. Respondent was placed on administrative leave 
that day.

Written Statements Provided to Dr. Barragan

29.

Pursuant to his request, three instructional aides and a speech language 
pathologist who provided services to students in respondent’s classroom provided Dr. 
Barragan written statements of their concerns about respondent.  One of the instructional 
aides who prepared a written statement was Beth Ford.  Beth Ford has been an instructional 
aide with the district for five years.  She was an aide in respondent’s pre-school autism 
classroom at Garrison for over four years.  Ms. Ford experienced family difficulties,
including that her husband was incarcerated.  She and respondent developed a friendship in 
which they trusted and confided in each other about personal matters.  In the Spring of 2014, 
respondent began confiding in Ms. Ford about the marital problems he and his wife were 
having.

By email dated February 6, 2015, Ms. Ford stated, “As you are aware, [respondent] is 

experiencing some personal issues that are effecting the classroom environment.  I am 
concerned not only for [respondent’s] well-being, but for the student[s] and staff.”  She noted 

8

that respondent’s personal problems had been affecting the classroom for several months.
She stated that respondent constantly discussed his personal life with her and that the nature 
of some of his comments, and the fact that he discussed his issues during instructional time, 
made her feel uncomfortable.  She said she had not discussed her discomfort with respondent 
because he told her he was hurt when his aides in his previous school “‘turned on him.’”

Ms. Ford wrote that there was a “lack of consistency in discipline, the absence of a 

defined and organized PECS system, the lack of planning with the other special Ed pre-
school classes, and [respondent was] not utilizing ABA therapies.”  While she believed 
respondent’s personal issues “played a role” in him not fulfilling his teaching 
responsibilities, she also believed he could use a refresher course in these areas.  Ms. Ford 
concluded by saying that respondent “is in deep emotional pain.  I do believe his actions are 
directly related to his life transition.  I hope the district can help him find the resources to 
alleviate his emotional distress and help him to better channel his emotions.”

30.

Amy De Matte was an instructional aide in respondent’s classroom.  In an

email dated February 5, 2015, Ms. De Matte wrote of her concerns about respondent.  She 
noted that “it has been increasingly uncomfortable in our class.  [Respondent’s] erratic and 
unprofessional behaviors have been fluctuating and becoming impossible to deal with.”  She 
stated that respondent “over shared” personal information, such as, his infidelity,
membership in match.com, his and his wife’s potential separation, his wife’s lack of intimacy
and her alleged mental condition.  Ms. De Matte recalled instances when respondent told her
about arguments he had with his wife, and he cried in front of the staff. Respondent showed
Ms. De Matte photographs of himself crying and said he sent one each night to his wife to 
show her what she was doing to him. Respondent also showed Ms. De Matte photographs on 
dating sites and asked for her opinion about them; she felt this was inappropriate. Ms. De 
Matte was reluctant to complain about respondent because he expressed his gratitude for his 
aides supporting him, and she believed things would calm down.

Ms. De Matte stated that she had heard respondent, in frustration, tell the parents of 
two children in his class that their failure to follow through and allowing the children to run 
the household was the reason their students were not succeeding in school.

Ms. De Matte expressed her opinion that “in his current emotional condition, 

[respondent] has become an ineffective teacher for the kids and makes the adults 
uncomfortable.”  She wrote that she hoped respondent “gets the help he needs.”

31.

Instructional aide Monessa Benavente has worked in the district for six years.
She first worked with respondent in the 2012/2013 school year.  In an email dated February 
11, 2015,7 Ms. Benavente wrote of her concerns regarding respondent.  She said her first 
impression of respondent was that he talked fast, and she had a hard time following him.  She 
stated, however, that his “erratic and unprofessional behavior has become unbearable this 

7 It is not known whether Dr. Barragan received this email before respondent was 

placed on administrative leave.

9

school year.”  She stated that, “Since going through personal issues (since October) he comes 
to work talking about it non-stop throughout the day.  He’ll try to carry on with our daily 
schedule with our students but, more often than none [sic], I feel like us aides [sic] are
running the class, fulfilling the duties’ of him [sic] and ensuring the goals of our students are 
being meet [sic].”  Ms. Benavente felt that “in frustration” respondent was harsh with two 
parents, essentially telling the parents that their sons were not doing well in school because 
the parents did not enforce the rules or program at home.  Ms. Benavente believed that, in 
“his emotional state, [respondent has] become an ineffective teacher.”  She described the 
classroom as an “unorganized mass chaos” with no structure.  She concluded by expressing 
her hope that respondent “gets the help he needs, but feel we need a competent teacher that 
will guide us aides [sic] and students to achieve their goals.”

32.

Priscilla Escalante began working for the district as a speech language 

pathologist in the 2014/2015 school year.  Prior to working for the district, she worked for 
six years as a speech therapist for the Imperial County Office of Education.  In her position 
with the district, Ms. Escalante provides speech and language evaluations at two schools.  On 
Thursdays and Fridays she performed intervention therapy at Garrison for students with 
communicative disabilities, which included students with emotional disturbances and autism.
In this capacity, Ms. Escalante was in respondent’s classroom for one hour twice a week 
until November 2014.

On February 10, 2015, Ms. Escalante spoke to Principal Barragan about her concerns 

regarding respondent.  She also provided a letter to Principal Barragan documenting her 
concerns.  Ms. Escalante stated that she had “informally expressed my concerns verbally to
my administrators . . . about [respondent’s] change in emotional stability in the classroom 
setting given personal information he has publically shared about his marital status prior to 
our Fall break.”  While providing speech and language services to student’s in respondent’s 
classroom, she observed that his personal issues “may be affecting his ability to teach his 
students effectively.” Ms. Escalante said respondent cried in front of the team in an IEP 
meeting when the student’s mother showed her appreciation for his hard work.  Respondent 
told the team that “it felt nice to be recognized because he didn’t feel this way at home.”  She 
also noted that, when she was in respondent’s classroom with students and staff nearby, he 
shared personal, private information that was not appropriate for the classroom setting.

Interviews Conducted by Todd McAteer After Respondent was Placed on Leave

33.

On February 11, 2015, the day respondent was placed on administrative leave,

Dr. McAteer interviewed instructional aides Ms. Ford, Ms. Bautista and Ms. De Matte, and
Speech and Language Pathologist Lena Media,8 each of whom had expressed concern about 
respondent’s emotional state. Dr. McAteer allowed each interviewee to make an opening

8 Beginning in December 2014, Ms. Media was in respondent’s classroom twice a 
week working with his students.  Ms. Media took over Ms. Escalante’s work in December 
2014 when Ms. Media and Ms. Escalante determined that Ms. Escalante would work with 
general education students, and Ms. Media would work with special education students.

10

statement and then asked each a series of 14 questions he had prepared beforehand.  The 
prepared questions included topics such as when the interviewee believed problems with 
respondent started, what respondent said that made the interviewee feel uncomfortable, how 
respondent’s conduct affected his teaching, did the interviewee ask respondent to stop saying
things that made her feel uncomfortable, did the interviewee suggest to respondent that he 
get help, and what did the interviewee want to happen as a result of relaying her concerns.
Dr. McAteer prepared summaries of the interviews. Dr. McAteer did not interview 
respondent.

34.

The aides who were interviewed stated respondent’s irregular behavior and 

constant discussion of his personal problems began between September and December 2014.
In general, they provided more details than they had given Mr. Barragan in their emails sent 
earlier in the month.

The instructional aides told Dr. McAteer that respondent talked to them about every
aspect of his divorce.  He made comments such as his wife never kissed him on the mouth;
he and his wife lacked sexual intimacy; and he cheated on his wife because of these 
problems. Once, respondent sent Ms. Ford 45 texts, beginning at 1:45 a.m., lamenting his 
marital problems. Instructional aides were aware that respondent searched on the classroom 
computer for information about personality defects he said his wife had. An instructional 
aide reported to Dr. McAteer that respondent made up inappropriate lyrics to songs he sang
in circle time when students were present. One instructional aide said that, in early February
2015 during circle time, respondent spontaneously said, “Do you know my wife has never 
swallowed?”  Several individuals were alleged to have heard respondent make this statement.

The individuals interviewed became frustrated by respondent’s constant comments 
about his personal life. One aide made attempts to redirect respondent’s conversations, but 
she was concerned he was so fragile and did not want to upset him more.  Ms. Media, who 
worked with respondent for a short time, was surprised respondent spoke so freely about his 
marital problems in front of her even though she hardly knew him. Some of the individuals 
interviewed reported seeing respondent crying in his classroom. Some described the
classroom environment as uncomfortable and stressful.

One instructional aide told Dr. McAteer that respondent sometimes talked down to his

students’ parents.  The aide stated she believed respondent was correct in what he was 
saying, but she did not like the way he presented it to the parents.

35.

Instructional aides felt respondent’s personal problems negatively affected his 
ability to teach effectively. They stated the classroom fell apart when respondent was upset.
Ms. De Matte believed respondent did not have a clear head to make decisions, he had mood 
swings, and the students did not make adequate progress. Some of the individuals 
interviewed complained respondent was disorganized, was not receptive to suggestions for
improvements, did not adequately prepare for the each day, did not use PECS consistently,
and did not follow established routines. One aide expressed the view that aides knew how to 
work effectively with the children, but respondent did not.

11

36. Ms. Bautista told Dr. McAteer about the incident that involved Student M.
Her statement to Dr. McAteer was consistent with what she had told Dr. Barragan.  Ms. 
Bautista believed she had Student M under control, and she criticized respondent for 
interfering.  She said Student M would have stopped crying if respondent had left him alone.
She claimed respondent became upset and did not speak to her the rest of the day.  Ms. De 
Matte told Dr. McAteer that the aides went to see Dr. Barragan because they were unhappy
with the way respondent treated Ms. Bautista following the incident with Student M.9 She
said that, prior to that incident, she was hoping things in respondent’s classroom would 
improve, and she was sorry she had to go to Dr. Barragan with her concerns.

37.

Those interviewed told Dr. McAteer they were concerned for respondent and 
his students.  Ms. Ford told Dr. McAteer that she and respondent were friends and she cared 
about him.  Several interviewees expressed their hope that respondent would obtain help to 
handle his emotional issues.  Respondent told at least one instructional aide he was seeing a 
therapist.

Ms. Media said she could continue to work with respondent if he got emotional help.

She believed he was a nice guy, but he was not appropriate for a preschool environment.  She 
did not have the opinion that respondent could not teach, rather she felt that the setting at 
Garrison was not a good fit for him. The three aides interviewed by Dr. McAteer stated they
would prefer not to work with respondent any longer. Most were concerned that respondent 
might hold a grudge against them if he returned to the same classroom. Some said they
believed respondent would work better with older students. 

Evidence Presented at the Hearing

TESTIMONY OF DR. FAUSTO BARRAGAN

38.

Dr. Barragan obtained his administrative credential in 2005.  He became the 

principal of Garrison in September 2013.  He was principal of a different school in the 
district for three years before he went to Garrison, and he was the principal of a school in 
the Los Angeles Unified School District for four years before that.  He was also a special 
education teacher in San Bernardino.

39.

Dr. Barragan described respondent’s classroom, including that it exited to a 
kindergarten playground that was fully enclosed.  The students in respondent’s class were 
non-verbal with high social and emotional needs.  Dr. Barragan described a non-verbal
student as one who would cry to express a disinterest in eating rather than express his 
feelings with words.

9 Ms. De Matte was incorrect in this belief.  The aides went to see Dr. Barragan on 

January 27, 2015.  The incident with Student M occurred on February 2, 2015.  Ms. Bautista
told Dr. Barragan about the incident with Student M on February 2, 2015.  There was no 
evidence, other than Ms. Bautista’s statement to Dr. McAteer, that anyone spoke to Dr. 
Barragan about Student M prior to February 2, 2015.

12

When Dr. Barragan observed respondent’s classroom, he looked to see how 

respondent worked with each child individually and how the individual needs of the 
students were handled in the group setting.  He expected instructional aides to support the 
teacher to meet the needs of each student as identified in the student’s IEP.  Teachers are in 
charge of aides and are responsible to train them about strategies to use when working with 
students.  If a teacher had concerns about his or her aides, Dr. Barragan expected the teacher 
to discuss the issue with him.

The students were present in respondent’s classroom from 8:15 a.m. to 1:15 p.m. each
day except Wednesday, which was a minimum day.  The pre-school was a social pragmatic 
program.  In addition to instructional time, students were expected to learn appropriate 
transitions.  If students were to leave from circle and go to snack time, he would expect to 
see the teacher guide the aides to have the children line up appropriately.  The teacher and 
aides must work with each student to meet their needs to get in line and demonstrate 
appropriate behavior.  Dr. Barragan believed it was never appropriate to place a student in 
time out, which he described as removing the student from the environment in which they
were supposed to be learning appropriate behaviors.  Dr. Barragan believed, however, that
consistent consequences must be implemented.  Teacher and aides were expected to work 
effectively and provide the consistency the students needed.

Dr. Barragan did not experience any problems with respondent during the 2013/2014 
school year.  When he observed respondent’s classroom, he noted that respondent spoke at a 
rapid pace but that did not concern him.  Dr. Barragan confirmed that in his December 2014 
observation he saw respondent use PECS, and effectively help the students to transition 
between activities.  He gave respondent a satisfactory evaluation.

Dr. Barragan observed IEPS in which respondent participated in the 2013/2014 and 

2014/2015 school years.  He did not observe any problems in the way respondent handled the 
IEPs.

40.

In October 2014, respondent began to share some of his marital problems with 

Dr. Barragan.  Respondent said his wife would not kiss him on mouth anymore; she was 
crazy and was trying to take his children away from him.  Respondent was emotional and 
cried.  Dr. Barragan suggested that respondent take time off and they discussed resources 
available through the district.  Respondent declined the offer.  Dr. Barragan stated he offered 
respondent help until February 2015.

Although he did not receive any complaints from his administrative assistant, Ms. 

Boeck, Dr. Barragan was concerned that respondent was talking about such personal issues 
with Ms. Boeck.

41.

In late October 2014, Ms. Knox and respondent separately told Dr. Barragan 

about an argument they had concerning moving a child to Ms. Knox’s class.  Ms. Knox 
admitted she became angry, stormed out of the room and said “screw you Chris.”  Dr. 
Barragan requested that Ms. Knox and respondent attend a meeting with him to discuss the 

13

argument they had.  Respondent did not accept the request for a meeting but responded by
discussing more issues with his wife and taking the day off when the meeting was to occur.

42.

Although in his November 6, 2014, email, respondent requested time off to 

regroup and come back strong, respondent took only a few days off, he did not take any
significant time off, and his emotional state did not appear to be improved.

Dr. Barragan stated that everyone had concerns about respondent by February 2015,

and everyone asked him to get help.  Although the Education Code allows the district to 
obtain a mental health examination if there are mental health related concerns, he did not 
discuss whether there was a way to put respondent on leave for mental/emotional reasons.
No one suggested to him that a mental health leave was a way to deal with respondent’s 
conduct.

TESTIMONY OF TODD MCATEER, ED.D.

43.

Dr. McAteer is the Director of Human Resources for certificated personnel.
Sheri Sanders is his supervisor.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree from UCLA, a 
master’s degree from Pepperdine University, and his doctorate in education from the 
University of LaVerne.  In his career he served as a long term substitute, elementary school
teacher, Vice Principal, Principal and Human Resource personnel.

Dr. McAteer identified board policies that constitute the guiding principles of the 

district.  Employees are provided copies of the policies when hired and at the beginning of 
each school year.  Employees are expected to comply with the board policies.  The board 
policies overlap with the California standards for teacher conduct.  Dr. McAteer also 
identified administrative regulations that originate from the Education Code. He believed 
respondent violated several board policies and regulations.

TESTIMONY CONCERNING WHEN RESPONDENT’S IMPROPER CONDUCT STARTED

44.

Instructional aides and other educational professional who took issue with 

respondent’s conduct did not have concerns about him before October 2014.  Ms. Ford stated 
that respondent began having significant personal problems beginning in October 2014; she 
did not believe respondent had any problems that affected his teaching prior to October 2014.
She stated that by December 2014, respondent was so distraught he cried several times and 
she felt, at that point, his emotional state affected the classroom.

Ms. Benavente observed that, prior to October 2014, respondent was happily married
and talked about his wife and children and their activities. In October 2014, Ms. Benavente 
saw a change in respondent’s conduct, and the environment of the classroom worsened.

Ms. Bautista testified that she did not have an issue with respondent when she first 

began to work in his classroom.  However, things changed when respondent brought his 
personal life concerns into the classroom.  She said his discussions about his wife and his 

14

marriage gradually increased as the year progressed, and she believed things began to get out 
of control in November 2014.

Ms. Escalante confirmed that she spoke with Dr. Barragan before the holiday break in 
December about her concerns regarding respondent because she saw a marked change in his 
emotional stability, and she felt it was affecting his work and his students.  Ms. Escalante 
observed that respondent “all of a sudden” appeared overwhelmed by his personal problems 
which resulted in his inability to be fully available to the students and his job.

Ms. De Matte described respondent’s emotional state as “on and off,” but she said it 
“peaked” on the day she went to Dr. Barragan in January 2015.  She said the first year she 
was in respondent’s class the personal discussions were not to a point where they were a 
problem, and overall, that school year was “all right.”

Dr. Barragan’s January 27, 2015, note confirmed that the instructional aides told him 

they were concerned about respondent’s “behavior during the last few months.”  The 
instructional aides told Dr. McAteer respondent’s irregular behavior and discussion of
personal problems began between September and December of 2014.

ISSUES REGARDING MS. FORD’S HEARING TESTIMONY

45. Ms. Ford testified at the hearing. Periodically during her testimony, Ms. Ford 

became upset and expressed her frustration with the hearing process. It was apparent she 
was a reluctant witness, and she regretted the things she had told Dr. Barragan and Dr. 
McAteer.  In the midst of her testimony, Ms. Ford requested a break.  When she left the 
hearing room, she approached the district’s counsel, drew her finger across her throat in a 
cutting motion, and advised him she was not returning to finish her testimony, and he would 
have to subpoena her to get any additional testimony. She did not return to the hearing room
that day.

The following day Ms. Ford returned under subpoena and finished her testimony.

Her demeanor changed dramatically from her first day of testimony to her second day.
During her second day of testimony, Ms. Ford mostly kept her head down and answered in 
short statements. Although she continued to appear reluctant, she answered the questions put 
to her.

MS. FORD’S HEARING TESTIMONY

46. Ms. Ford testified that respondent followed a schedule for the classroom 

although it may not be followed exactly each day.  She denied that respondent’s classroom 
was disorganized.  She said the classroom materials and play items were organized in 
buckets.  The arts and crafts materials were organized in the classroom cupboard.

15

She stated respondent effectively used music and songs in the classroom and the 

students enjoyed the songs.  Respondent sang songs about the alphabet, numbers and other 
educational topics.

Ms. Ford and respondent developed a personal friendship.  They talked to each other 

about family issues and concerns and shared personal information about themselves and their 
families.  They talked before and after school and when the students were at recess.
According to Ms. Ford, they did not talk in front of students.  She stressed that working with 
children with special needs required their full attention.  Ms. Ford understood that the 
discussions she engaged in with respondent were not appropriate in his role as her 
supervisor, but as her friend the discussions did not bother her.

Ms. Ford denied that she felt she could lose her job because of respondent.  She did 
not believe that respondent was inappropriate with the other aides even though that opinion 
was attributed to her in Dr. McAteer’s summary of his interview with her.  Although 
respondent talked some about his sex life, she did not feel she was sexually harassed.  He 
was her friend and they had both agreed to talk confidentially about things that were 
happening in their lives.  She believed respondent was a good listener.  She was more 
concerned with the constant nature of things respondent talked about than the content.

Ms. Ford was respondent’s friend and she wanted to help him.  She believed 
respondent needed to take time off to get help.  She suggested it to him and thought he was 
moving towards getting help. She did not know what happened that stopped him from taking 
the time off he needed.  She was not as direct with him as perhaps she should have been 
because she did not want him to feel she turned on him.

As related to a comment attributed to her in Dr. McAteer’s summary, she 
acknowledged that she said respondent was not focused on teaching, but clarified that she 
was referring only to the time beginning in October 2014.  Contrary to a statement that she 
did not confront respondent because she did not want to lose her job, Ms. Ford recanted the 
statement and said it was taken out of context.  She also clarified her comment that 
respondent was inappropriate “with the ladies.”  She did not mean to imply that respondent 
had engaged in any inappropriate sexual activities or speech; she said she was referring to 
respondent’s conduct with regard to Ms. Bautista and Student M.  She also denied she heard 
respondent say anything inappropriate to a parent.  Ms. Ford emphasized that when she 
spoke to the district administration about respondent she was concerned about him and hoped 
that the district would help him.

Nonetheless, Ms. Ford did state that respondent’s stress affected the classroom 

environment and caused her personal stress.  Ms. Ford was also going through a hard time
because of some personal issues, and respondent’s stress added to her stress.  She was upset 
that she was not at her best for the students when she was experiencing the combined stress.
Because all of the aides were hearing about respondent’s problems all the time, the stress 
level was magnified and had a negative impact on the other aides, as well.

16

RESPONDENT’S DISCUSSIONS ABOUT HIS WIFE, MARITAL PROBLEMS AND DATING

47.

Like those who spoke to Dr. Barragan and/or Dr. McAteer, witnesses at the 

hearing confirmed that, beginning at least by October 2014 and continuing until he was 
placed on leave, respondent spoke openly and frequently to any and all of the staff with
whom he worked about his marital problems. Ms. De Matte said respondent commented 
about his life four times a day in the five hours of class time.

48. Witnesses testified respondent said his wife was not affectionate towards him, 

she did not touch him, and they were not intimate. He told some staff members that he had 
appointments with a masseuse who touched him in a way his wife had not touched him. He
spoke of his asserted sexual prowess, stating he had been with many women while his wife
had only been with one sexual partner.  Respondent told Ms. Ford that he was concerned he
had contracted a venereal disease when he cheated on his wife. Although respondent asked 
Ms. Ford to not repeat his concerns, she later heard the story from another employee. Ms.
Benavente testified that respondent told her that he may have contracted a sexually
transmitted disease from having sex outside his marriage. Respondent talked about being 
lonely and accessing online dating applications to get a date. Respondent became upset 
about his problems to the point of crying on occasion.

Ms. Bautista testified she heard respondent say, “Can you believe that my wife has 

never swallowed.” Ms. Bautista understood respondent to be referring to oral sex. Ms.
Brown was working in respondent’s classroom when respondent made that comment.  Ms. 
Brown testified her hearing was not very good, and she thought she had misheard the 
comment until others in the room remarked about it.  She interpreted respondent’s remark to 
refer to a sexual act, and it made her uncomfortable.  She believed the comment was 
inappropriate for any school setting and it was particularly inappropriate to have been said in 
front of female staff members. Ms. Ford denied that she heard this comment; she stated she
heard about it from others and repeated it.

Ms. Media testified that the first day she entered respondent’s classroom in December 
2014, she heard respondent talking loudly about his wife.  She was surprised that respondent 
continued the conversation when he saw her enter the room.

Ms. Brown was assigned to respondent’s classroom in or around January 2015.

Although she worked with respondent only a few days because he was absent quite a few 
days and then on leave, she testified respondent talked about his home life each time they 
worked together.  On her first day, respondent discussed that he was getting a divorce and 
that he believed his wife was narcissistic.  Ms. Brown was surprised to learn so much about 
respondent’s personal life so quickly.

Ms. Escalante stated that respondent made personal comments when students were 
around and could hear them. Respondent would share these details spontaneously without
being asked about what was going on with him. She felt his thoughts were always “going, 
going, going,” and he verbalized his thoughts without a filter.

17

Ms. Ford heard respondent make sexual comments about people he dated or was 

going to date.  She believed it was inappropriate for respondent to make those comments at 
school, but he said them to her as a friend not as her supervisor.  Ms. Ford stated that 
respondent did share personal things about his life with other aides, but he did not tell the 
other aides as much as he told her. One evening he sent Ms. Ford 45 text messages 
lamenting his situation.

During this period, respondent frequently discussed with staff his belief that his wife 
was narcissistic.  Ms. Brown, heard respondent discuss this on her first day in respondent’s 
classroom.

49.

Respondent often used singing and music as an instructional tool in his 

classroom. Sometimes respondent would insert pop cultural references in the songs to keep 
his student’s attention.  Witnesses agreed that respondent’s students were attentive to his 
guitar playing and that when used appropriately, the singing and music were effective for
educational purposes.

Respondent was heard by several instructional aides to sing a song that included the 

phrase “story of my life.”  He said he related to the song because the story of his life was that 
he always had problems. On one occasion two witnesses heard respondent change the lyrics
to a song so that the words had a sexual connotation. When an instructional aide was critical 
of the changed lyric, respondent shrugged it off, said he was just having fun, and continued 
with the song. On other occasions, instructional aides heard respondent change song lyrics
so that they related to his personal relationships and problems with his wife. Ms. Escalante 
stated that the songs, as modified, sometimes distracted her from the time that was to be 
devoted to the students, and she was concerned that it could also distract the students.  Ms. 
Benavente stated that respondent would say anything on his mind; he had no filter.

Respondent’s instructional aides and others who worked in his classroom 

unanimously agreed that respondent’s comments about his personal life were inappropriate 
and unprofessional.  Ms. Benavente stated she was “floored, uncomfortable, and in disbelief” 
when respondent spoke so openly about highly personal matters.

COMPUTER AND TELEPHONE USAGE

50.

Respondent was observed on his telephone and/or the class computer during
instructional time. On Ms. De Matte’s first day in respondent’s classroom, respondent told 
her that he was on the telephone to cancel his match.com account because he and his wife 
were trying to work things out. Ms. Benavente said respondent showed her photographs of a 
young woman on a singles’ website, such as Tinder. Ms. De Matte said respondent looked 
up narcissistic on the school computer and invited the aides to see what he had found.

Ms. De Matte stated that when respondent was busy on the computer or not following 

the established routine, it affected the students.  Respondent could “get it together” to do 
circle time, but afterwards he went to his computer.

18

Ms. Escalante said that in the beginning, respondent would work with her to help 

students.  Later, instead of helping, he was on the computer at his desk.  Respondent would 
apologize for having his back to her, but told her he was going through a lot.  Ms. Escalante 
did not observe any dating sites, but respondent spoke to her about wanting to find a woman 
that surfed on a dating site.  Respondent spoke to Ms. Escalante about these things in the 
classroom.

Ms. Ford saw respondent on the classroom computer searching websites.  She did not 
believe the websites were inappropriate.  Once he showed her a photo of female he saw on a
dating site.

Ms. Media observed that respondent was on the computer and behind the desk, not 
with students, a lot of the time.  This, in her experience, was unusual.  However, she was 
leading instruction for the group of students when she was there.

51.

The district submitted evidence of respondent’s computer usage for fifteen 

days between December 3, 2014, and January 29, 2015.  The evidence showed the following:

Hours

Dates and No. of Websites

Total No.
Websites

8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.

January 13, 2015

9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.

December 1     (2)
December 15   (5)
January 6         (7)
January 9         (4)
January 23       (2)

10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. December 3 (4)
December 18  (14)
January 6        (19)
January 9        (12)
January 14      (17)
January 20      (3)
January 28      (7)
January 29      (6)

11:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.

January 9        (7)
January 15      (19)

12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m.

December 16  (5)
January 5        (6)

19

37

20

82

26

195

January 9        (3)
January 13    (76)
January 20    (1)
January 23    (105)

1:00 p.m. to 2:00 p.m.

January 9      (26)

2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.

January 20     (4)
January 29     (4)

TOTAL SITES

26

8

394

Almost 70 percent (272) of the non-educational websites were viewed on three days -

January 9 (52); January 13 (113); and January 23 (107).  Approximately 50 percent of the 
websites were viewed between 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m. (195).  The next highest computer
usage was from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. (82).

According to a class schedule identified by several witnesses, respondent’s students 

were finishing lunch (11:40 to 12:05), having bathroom break (12:05 – 12:15), going to 
recess (12:15 – 12:40) and participating in circle time (12:40 – 12:55) between 12:00 p.m.
and 1:00 p.m. From 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. students were involved in motor skills training 
(9:45 to 10:15), bathroom breaks (10:15 to 10:30), recess (10:30 to 10:55) and beginning 
circle time (10:55 to 11:15). Witnesses testified that during bathroom, lunch, motor skills 
training, and recess, the students were primarily supervised by instructional aides. It was 
agreed that respondent was responsible for, among other things, leading circle time.  No 
witnesses testified that respondent failed to lead circle time.

RESPONDENT’S EMOTIONAL STATE’S IMPACT ON STUDENTS AND HIS CLASSROOM

52. Ms. Bautista testified consistently with her statements to Dr. McAteer that 

respondent’s classroom was chaotic and disorganized; there was no set time schedule, and 
PECS was not used for students that needed visual clues to follow the schedule.  Ms. Bautista 
stated that the environment in respondent’s classroom when respondent was going through 
his divorce was stressful to the students who were on the autism spectrum, had individual 
needs, and required structure.  She believed respondent became more concerned about his 
own needs than the students’ needs. Ms. Bautista said there was minimal instructional 
content in the classroom and that the children played most of the day.  Instructional time 
diminished – then stopped in December 2014.  Respondent would be on task one day out of 
the month.  She said respondent was easily distracted.  There was a class schedule, but it was 
not followed.

20

53. Ms. De Matte observed that respondent’s emotional state affected the students.
Behavior plans were not in place, not followed or not updated.  The students in respondent’s 
class had severe behavioral problems; the students’ needs had to be constantly evaluated and 
strategies changed if they were not producing the desired results. Ms. Benavente and Ms. 
Brown described respondent’s classroom as disorganized.  According to Ms. Benavente, the 
disorganization made the classroom an unpleasant place to work.

Ms. De Matte acknowledged that respondent had centers in the classroom where 
students worked on projects, such as cutting and pasting items or words starting with the 
letter of the alphabet on which they were working.  Ms. De Matte said some students were 
able to go from non-verbal to verbal.  This was a big achievement, and all of the staff was
very excited when it happened.

54. Ms. Escalante stated that respondent’s aides tried to support him and keep the 

students on track.  Respondent knew what he wanted to do but had difficulty achieving it.
She had not worked with respondent before but believed respondent could do a good job if 
he did not have so many personal distractions. Respondent knew the needs of his students 
and relayed them to Ms. Escalante.  She observed that he had a schedule, but it was not 
always followed and respondent often changed it.  Ms. Escalante believed the students 
needed a consistent schedule. She observed that when respondent was out for the day, and
the aides were able to follow the schedule, she saw fewer outbursts, and the students were 
calmer.

55. Ms. Media was disappointed that respondent would not accept help from her.

If she offered a suggestion for working with a student to encourage speech, respondent
rebuffed the suggestion either by saying he already did what was suggested or he asserted 
that the student already knew how to talk but would not. Ms. Media found it difficult to 
consult with respondent.  He did not follow through with prepared lesson plans.  Respondent 
was very fast talking.  The goal in respondent’s classroom was to elicit speech from the 
students.  Ms. Media noticed that because he was fast talking, respondent sometimes did not 
give students time to respond verbally. However, Ms. Media testified that she observed the 
students at circle or play time when she walked in to work with the students.  There were 
centers in the classroom and she did speech related center activities.

56. Ms. Benavente observed that some instructional aides took advantage of 

respondent.  They frequently arrived late, which meant that respondent was required to get 
his students from the bus.  This was supposed to be done by the aides.  Ms. Benavente 
believed that the aides “turned on” respondent and were not helping him as they should.  She 
was “shocked” the aides did this, and she did not know why they did it.  Despite not 
approving of all of the other aides’ actions, Ms. Benavente felt the aides were running the 
class, keeping the students on schedule and on task and making sure the students’ goals were 
being met.  Ms. Benavente loved her job, but she did not like working with respondent. 

21

ISSUE WITH MS. BAUTISTA AND STUDENT M

57. Ms. Bautista testified in detail about the incident involving Student M. She

stated Student M’s snack was taken from him because he was playing with it.  When 
Student M cried, he was taken from the lunch room for a time out.  Ms. Bautista asked 
Student M if he was ready to come back and she wiped his tears away.  Respondent 
approached Student M and “got in his face,” telling Student M “you don’t need to cry.”
Student M began crying again. Ms. Bautista became angry because Student M had stopped 
crying and respondent had caused him to cry again.

Respondent moved Student M from the classroom to outside the door of the 
classroom and said he would watch him from the door.  Respondent heated his own lunch
while Student M was outside alone.  Ms. Bautista said she had reached her limit and did not 
want to listen to respondent anymore. She went to Student M to comfort him.  Respondent 
accused Ms. Bautista of being rude and disrespectful.  Ms. Bautista knew respondent was 
upset with her because she disregarded his instruction.  She agreed that some students 
needed a stern approach because they hit or bite, but, she testified Student M was “one of 
the most soft” and she did not feel he was treated appropriately.  This incident occurred one 
week after respondent made the “swallow” comment, and those two incidents spurred Ms. 
Bautista to complain to Dr. Barragan about respondent’s constant talking about his personal 
life and its impact on the students.  Ms. Bautista did not see respondent again after she
spoke with Dr. Barragan.

Ms. Bautista challenged respondent’s assertion that she babied students when she 

tried to soothe them when they were crying.  She believed she gained a student’s trust when 
she hugged him, picked him up or wiped away his tears when he was upset, especially if the 
child was non-verbal.  She also felt respondent spoke inappropriately to a student’s mother 
when he told her to either get on board with what he was doing or the child would not 
improve.

Ms. Bautista was aware there are various behavior modification techniques that are 

appropriate to use when working with children on the autism spectrum.  She understood that 
wiping tears and providing comfort to a student could reinforce bad behavior.  Nonetheless, 
she disagreed with how respondent handled Student M and believed she knew better how to 
deal with him.

Ms. Bautista was shown a schedule that purported to be for Student M.  She denied 

having seen this schedule before. Contrary to her statement that respondent did not use 
PECS in the classroom; Ms. Bautista said she was aware that Student M used images to 
communicate. Ms. Bautista agreed that she did not usually review IEPs, and she would not 
necessarily know what the IEP team had determined were the individual needs of each
student.

Ms. Benavente was present when respondent took Student M outside after the student

had a “meltdown.” She was aware that Ms. Bautista went to the child and took him for a 

22

walk outside.  Respondent was annoyed that Ms. Bautista took it upon herself to do that, and 
he complained to Ms. Benavente about it.  Ms. Benavente felt that respondent should have 
gone after Ms. Bautista and handled it then rather than complain to Ms. Benavente.  Ms. 
Benavente acknowledged that the student engaged in behaviors that needed to be modified.

Ms. De Matte said she was motivated to talk to Dr. Barragan about respondent after 

the incident with Student M and because respondent continued to talk about his marital 
problems.  She was upset that respondent openly criticized Ms. Bautista who went to comfort 
Student M.  He told the other aides he could not believe Ms. Bautista interfered with his 
strategies and that he knew what he was doing.  Ms. De Matte did not agree that the student 
should have been left outside.  Ms. De Matte decided that it was time to get the aides 
together and talk to Dr. Barragan.10

DISTRICT STAFF WANTED RESPONDENT TO GET HELP

58. Ms. Ford testified that she and the other instructional aides were motivated to 
talk to Dr. Barragan and Dr. McAteer by a desire for respondent to get help coping with his 
marital problems.  As his friend, when respondent became obsessed with his separation and 
divorce, Ms. Ford became concerned about him and his well-being.  She worried that his 
preoccupation with his marital problems could impact his job.  She was concerned that if 
respondent lost his job, lost his wife and family and lost the friendships of his aides and co-
workers, it would be too much for him.  She knew he was very stressed out and hoped the 
district would help him.

59. Ms. Bautista talked to the other aides about respondent.  The focus of the 
discussion was to get help for respondent.  They agreed the situation was getting out of hand 
and that respondent’s personal issues were too much for him to handle. Ms. Bautista 
believed respondent needed family therapy to help him get himself together.  She told
respondent that he needed to get help.  Respondent told her he was all right and that he could 
take care of himself.

60. Ms. Benavente believed respondent needed help and she hoped he would get 

it.  The first time she mentioned respondent needed help was in February 2015.

61. Most of the time, Ms. De Matte felt empathy for respondent.  She understood 

that he was having serious marital problems.  She tried not to be rude or shut respondent 
down when he spoke of personal matters, and she tried to make general comments to 
encourage him and gently move him on to student related tasks.  She did not directly tell him 
to stop talking about personal matters.  Ms. De Matte was aware that someone once asked 
respondent to limit talking about personal matters and he reacted negatively.  He announced
sarcastically that “we can’t talk about personal things.”  She hoped respondent would get the 
help he needed and that things would change.  She told him there were programs in the 

10 As noted supra., the aides spoke to Dr. Barragan before the incident with Student M 

occurred.

23

courthouse that might be able to direct him where to get help.  She stated that all of the aides 
wanted respondent to get help and return to the classroom “in full capacity.”  Respondent 
told Ms. De Matte that his previous aides had turned on him after he thought everything was 
going well.  She did not want respondent to feel he did not have a support system or that she 
had turned on him.

62. Ms. Escalante told Dr. Barragan that respondent was going through something 

and suggested that someone talk to him.

63. Ms. Media confirmed the statements she made to Dr. McAteer in February
2015.  She affirmed her original opinion that the issue was not that respondent could not 
teach, but that his placement in the pre-school classroom at Garrison was not a good fit. 

DISCUSSION OF PERSONAL MATTERS BY OTHERS

64. Ms. Bautista agreed that she had discussed some personal matters with 
respondent, but she said they were either very general or involved significant events such as 
when her sister died in a car accident.  She stated that other aides also talked about personal
matters at school.  Ms. De Matte also agreed that all of the staff had engaged in some off-
topic discussions, but that they were limited in number and duration and not to the degree 
that respondent shared.  Ms. Ford and respondent developed a friendship and mutually
confided in each other about personal matters.

RESPONDENT’S TREATMENT OF PARENTS

65. Ms. Benavente was critical of the way respondent sometimes spoke to parents.
She felt his duty as a special education teacher was to help and guide parents to get the help 
they needed for their child.  Ms. Benavente observed respondent scolding a parent for failing 
to follow through at home with the techniques used in the classroom.  The parent appeared 
upset and offended when he spoke to her that way.

66. Ms. De Matte was present when respondent spoke to a student’s parent in a 

way she felt was inappropriate. Although she agreed with what respondent told the parents, 
she did not agree with how respondent spoke to them. Ms. Ford denied that she heard 
respondent say any inappropriate things to students’ parents.  She does not believe 
respondent said anything to parents that was inappropriate or unprofessional. 

CONDUCT IN IEPS

67.

Robin Ancona is a Program Specialist, Special Education, with the County

Office of Education and provides services to the district.  Among her job duties, are
attending IEP meetings and providing guidance about special education laws and procedures.
She knew respondent when he worked for the Chula Vista Elementary School District, and
she worked with him in Oceanside.

24

68.

In October/November 2014, Ms. Ancona helped prepare for, and she attended,

an IEP requested by a parent of a student in respondent’s classroom.  The parent was 
concerned about her son’s continuing maladaptive behavior, seen more often at school than 
at home.  Prior to the IEP, Ms. Ancona had heard that respondent was going through a 
difficult time and was having trouble handling student behaviors that he had previously been
able to handle.

Ms. Ancona and respondent exchanged emails regarding the upcoming IEP.  Ms. 

Ancona had some concerns about how respondent would conduct himself in the IEP due to 
the tone of his emails.  In a conversation between Ms. Ancona and respondent the day before
the IEP, respondent seemed to be in an escalated state and shared personal problems he was 
experiencing. She described him as talking about things in all directions at once.  After this 
conversation, Ms. Ancona believed that respondent needed some time to get himself 
together.  She was concerned that his personal problems could impact his effectiveness as a 
teacher.

In the IEP, Ms. Ancona found that respondent was open to suggestions from the
behavioral specialist and speech therapist and conducted himself properly.  She had no 
concerns about the way he handled himself at the IEP.

69. Ms. Escalante was present at an IEP meeting in which the parent of a student 

commended respondent for his work with her son.  Respondent became overwhelmed and 
cried at the compliment and said that he was emotional because he was not appreciated at 
home.  Ms. Escalante believed it was inappropriate to bring his personal life into the IEP.
The student’s mother consoled respondent and shared a personal situation of her own which 
caused Ms. Escalante to be concerned that the focus of the IEP had shifted to respondent and
away from the student.

COMPLAINTS MADE BY MS. FORD ABOUT OTHER STAFF

70. Ms. Ford complained about other district employees.  She complained to
respondent that Ms. De Matte’s involvement in other school-related activities meant Ms. De 
Matte was often out of the classroom.  Ms. Ford found her absence disruptive to classroom 
activities.  Ms. De Matte was involved in so many school activities that she earned the 
nickname “Mayor of Garrison.” 

Ms. Ford also expressed her concerns about teacher Jennifer Knox.  She wrote an 

email complaining about Ms. Knox not acting in the best interest of her students.  Ms. Ford 
also said she was not comfortable working with Ms. Knox because Ms. Knox talked down to 
her and yelled at her.

Evidence Relating to Violation of School District Policies

71.

The Notice of Charges alleged that respondent violated the board policy and 
administrative regulation governing Professional Standards (4119.21), the board policy and

25

administrative regulation governing sexual harassment (4119.11), the board policy and
administrative regulation governing the use of technology (4040), and the board policy
governing civility (1313).

a.

The Professional Standards policy and regulation contained very general 
language.  The policy stated that the district expects employees to “exhibit professional 
behavior, follow district policies and abide by the law.” “Employee conduct should enhance 
the integrity of the district and advance the goals of the district’s educational programs.”  The 
regulation incorporates a Code of Ethics and provides, among other things, that an educator 
“Shall make reasonable efforts to protect the student from conditions harmful to learning or 
to health and safety.”

b.

The sexual harassment regulations included the following definition of sexual 

harassment: “The conduct has the purpose or effect of having a negative impact upon the 
individual’s work . . . .  The conduct is sufficiently severe, persistent, pervasive or 
objectively offensive so as to create a hostile or abusive working environment . . . .”
Examples of conduct that might constitute sexual harassment included, “overly personal
conversations . . . .”

The sexual harassment regulation provides that “[t]he accused shall also be fully

notified of such rights pursuant to this administrative regulation at the earliest appropriate 
time.”  The regulation delegates the responsibility to investigate sexual harassment 
complaints to the Associate Superintendent – Human Resources.  At the conclusion of the 
investigation, the Associate Superintendent – Human Resources is required to prepare a 
written report “giving consideration to the record as a whole and the totality of
circumstances, including the nature of sexual advances and the context in which the alleged 
incidents occurred.”  According to the regulation, the sexual harassment complainant and the 
accused harasser “shall” receive a copy of the written report.

c.

Board polices and regulations provide that employees “shall use the district’s 

technological resources primarily for purposes related to their employment.”  Neither the 
policy nor the regulation prohibits an employee from ever using district technology for 
personal reasons.

d.

The district’s civility policy provides that one of its basic purposes is to 

“promote a work and learning environment that is safe, productive, and nurturing for all staff 
and students.” The examples used to demonstrate uncivil conduct include using vulgar, 
obscene or threatening gestures or communication to another person, yelling during a 
meeting or conference, interrupting a person speaking, invading a person’s space and 
blocking a person’s exit from a room or location.

Dr. McAteer testified that respondent violated each of these policies and regulations.

72.

On March 24, 2011, as part of his “employment paperwork,” respondent 

acknowledged receipt of certain board policies and administrative regulations. The policies 

26

and regulations governing use of technology and sexual harassment were included in the 
documents respondent received. Neither the professional standards nor the civility policy
were listed as having been provided to respondent. No evidence was presented that showed 
respondent had ever acknowledged receipt of the professional standards or civility policies.

Respondent’s Testimony and Evidence Presented on Behalf of Respondent

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY

73.

Respondent received his Bachelor of Arts degree from San Diego State

University.  He has a level 1 and 2 teaching credential for teaching moderate to severe level 
students.  In or about 2011, respondent received a Master’s Degree in early childhood special 
education from National University.  He has 18 years’ experience teaching special education.

74.

Respondent began working for the district in 2011 at a Ditmar Elementary

School satellite while Santa Margarita Elementary School was being built.  He taught early
childhood special education, primarily children on the autism spectrum.  When Santa 
Margarita opened, he taught pre-school autism there.  One of his aides at Santa Margarita 
was Ms. Ford.  After his first year at Santa Margarita, respondent was offered the opportunity 
to stay there or transfer to Garrison for the 2012/2013 school year.  He chose to transfer to 
Garrison to teach a pre-school autistic class.

75.

Respondent applied to teach summer school each year he taught for the 

district, with the exception of when he was on administrative leave.  He was selected and 
approved by the district’s human resources department to teach each of the three years he 
applied.

STRATEGIES IN THE CLASSROOM

76.

Respondent said his classroom was designed to address the individual needs of 
each student; he used whatever strategies worked with each student. Respondent had at least 
eight “centers,” or educational environments in the classroom so that his students had varied 
educational experiences.  He testified he was organized.

77.

Respondent consistently used visual prompts (PECS) in the classroom because
eighty percent of what the students took in and retained was visual. He stated he “caught on 
early” that PECS were an effective way for autistic students to advance.

Respondent provided a sample basic schedule he maintained almost the entire time he 
taught for the district. The schedule included pictures and words to describe the activities for
the day.  For example, bathroom time showed a cartoon-style depiction of a toilet, recess 
showed a cartoon-style depiction of a swing set and sliding board. Modifications were made 
to the schedule for special services given to the students.  Additionally, respondent’s students 
had significant behavioral concerns, and a student having a behavioral issue could interrupt 

27

the flow of the instructional time and impact the schedule.  The class schedule was posted
several places in the classroom so the aides could see it.

78.

Respondent’s students had limited verbal capability but all of the students had 
some.  Some students spontaneously spoke, but more often the students needed to be directed
to speak.  The level of his student’s verbal abilities went from those who had two to five 
words to one student who could read on a fifth grade level.  Respondent worked towards 
increasing his students’ language and life skills.

For encouraging speech, respondent catered to the interests of each individual student.

One student had an interest in Spiderman and respondent used this interest to facilitate and
support speech. Because speech and music have such a strong connection, respondent used 
songs, guitar, and small preschool instruments to get students motivated to use words.
Respondent had multiple students who advanced from being non-verbal to verbal.  When a 
student advanced, respondent was elated.

79.

Respondent had a notebook with goals and documentation sheets for each of 
his students.  The notebooks were kept in an organized area in a cabinet and were available
to the instructional aides.  The instructional aides were to use the notebooks to become 
familiar with the students’ goals and needs, and they were expected to make notes in the
notebooks about the students. Respondent used the notebooks as a way to measure the 
students’ progress. Respondent maintained these notebooks each year he taught for the 
district.

DISCUSSIONS WITH AIDES

80.

Respondent admitted that he spoke to his instructional aides and others about 
his personal life.  He was trying very hard to hold his family and his job together at the same 
time.  Because of the divorce, he had to move a lot and times were stressful.

He shared more intimate details about his divorce, concerns for his children and 
beginning to date again with Ms. Ford.  He admitted that he discussed aspects of his and his 
wife’s sexual life and things he learned about his wife during the course of the divorce. He
also shared with her a concern that he could have contracted a venereal disease from a post-
separation sexual encounter. He recalled that he stepped outside of the classroom to talk to 
Ms. Ford about this and asked her to keep their conversation confidential.  Ms. Ford shared 
very personal information about her life, family, and her relationships with her family with
respondent.  He considered Ms. Ford a friend, and when they spoke of personal things, he 
expected that their conversations were confidential. He talked to Ms. Ford about these more 
personal matters either before the students arrived in his classroom or after; he arrived at 
school early to prepare for the day.11

11 Respondent stated his hours were 7:45 a.m. to 3:15 p.m.  Students were in the 

classroom from 8:15 a.m. to 1:15 p.m. except on Wednesdays.

28

81.

Respondent was forthcoming about the personal information he shared with

other staff, as well. He admitted he spoke to Ms. De Matte about his divorce, wife, and 
children, but he stated she also talked to him about personal issues. He and Ms. De Matte
spoke about personal matters before and after school when students were not around.  Ms. 
De Matte had children who were musical, and he and the children played music, sang, and
practiced for plays together.  Respondent also shared some personal information with Ms. 
Benavente, Ms. Escalante and Ms. Media. Respondent sometimes helped Ms. Benavente’s
son with school work after school when respondent’s students were not present.

82.

Respondent was surprised that his staff raised complaints against him.  He 

believed they all got along well and were comfortable with him. As proof that he thought the 
staff liked him, respondent pointed to the fact that the staff had recently given him birthday
presents.

Although most personal conversations occurred when respondent’s students were not 

in the classroom, respondent admitted that some of the discussions about his wife and his 
divorce occurred when students were around.  He said he was trying to hold it all together; he
talked a lot and to everyone.

83.

Respondent admitted he made the comment about his wife not swallowing.
He was singing a song with his students about a “slippery fish” that included lyrics, “gulp
gulp.”  He said he was in the back of the room not facing the students when he made the 
remark.  He said the thought came into his head and then slipped out.  He thought no one 
heard the remark and was very apologetic when he learned some aides had heard it.  He 
apologized at the hearing and unequivocally agreed the comment was vulgar and not 
acceptable.  He never made a similar comment on any other occasion. He understood that 
this comment violated the district’s sexual harassment policy.

84.

Respondent felt comfortable discussing personal matters because some of the 

aides also talked about their sex lives.  He did not discuss personal issues in a group but in 
conversations between himself and one other person. He recalled that Ms. De Matte
“nonchalantly” suggested to him that he stop talking about personal details; however, other 
than that, none of his aides asked him not to talk about his personal issues anymore.
Respondent did not recall how he responded to Ms. De Matte. Ms. Ford and Ms. De Matte 
suggested he get help from a church group, or surfing or somewhere. Respondent did attend 
a support group at his church and he continued to surf.

Respondent talked to Dr. Barragan and to Ms. Boeck.  He wanted them to know what 

was going on in his life in case he needed to leave to deal with problems that might occur.
Because Ms. Boeck was a person of faith, respondent felt comfortable sharing his personal 
struggles with her.  Neither Dr. Barragan nor Ms. Boeck told him not to send emails to them 
about personal matters.

29

Respondent acknowledged he told people at work that his wife did not hold his hand 
or kiss him on the mouth and that there was a general lack intimacy between himself and his 
wife.

USE OF COMPUTER

85.

Respondent was aware of the district’s policy concerning the use of district 
computers. Respondent admitted he used the classroom computer during his break time to
check his personal email and that he accessed websites on the classroom computer to search
about narcissistic personalities.  He believed his wife, who he had been in a relationship with
for 10 years, had the symptoms of a narcissistic personality disorder.  He was concerned 
about what the impact might be on his children if she had such a disorder.  Respondent also 
admitted he researched topics pertaining to divorce proceedings and custody issues on the 
classroom computer.  He stated that he clicked on a link in an email that went to a “Pilipino”
dating site, but he said he did not look through the website.

Respondent stated he limited his computer usage to after school, when he was on a 

break, or when he was not responsible for teaching, such as when the students were 
supervised by his aides, or the speech therapist was working with them.

Respondent denied using Tinder during school hours and said he did not have the app 
for Tinder on his phone.  He admitted he showed Ms. Ford and Ms. De Matte photographs of 
potential dates two to three times during his preparation period.

REGARDING THE INCIDENT WITH MS. BAUTISTA AND STUDENT M

86.

Student M had developed a pattern of crying when he wanted something or 

was unhappy. Respondent testified that Student M cried 90 percent of the school day and his 
crying had a negative effect on the other students who had auditory sensitivity.  Respondent 
had been working with Student M using a picture exchange board to encourage Student M to
use words to communicate what he wanted rather than crying. For example, if Student M 
wanted a book, he was directed to point to a picture of a boy with the words “I want” under 
it, and then to a picture of a book with the word “book” under it. 

Respondent created a behavior plan for his aides to use when working with Student 
M.  The behavior plan stated clearly, “100% ignore, I mean 100%.  When he stops crying,
then go talk with him and prompt him to use language.  Use picture or verbal prompts to get 
him to ‘say’ what he wants.  If he cries, show him visual prompts and simply state ‘Every
time you scream and cry, you are going to take a break.12 You need to use your words.’
Show use your words visual prompt.”  Additional instructions for working with Student M 
emphasized that Student M must remain in the break area of the classroom until he uses 
words to get what he wants.  “The breaks and opportunities for language need to be 

12 Respondent’s classroom had a “break” area in which there were bean bag chairs, 

books and toys.

30

consistent.  [Student M] is persistent and will try to break you down by excessively crying
for long periods of time. . . .  Do not give in.  Expect and accept verbal language 100% of the 
time.  [Student M] is very capable of talking and stopping his crying behavior. . . . .”

One day, Student M was crying to get a snack.  Respondent worked with Student M 
and tried to make him use the picture exchange board to get the snack, but Student M did not
cooperate and continued to cry.  Respondent saw that other students were reacting to Student 
M’s crying, so respondent sent Student M outside as he had done on other occasions.  Where 
he was outside, Student M could be seen by respondent and the instructional aides.
Respondent went to heat his lunch and had planned to sit with Student M and read a social 
story13 to enforce the behavior respondent wanted from Student M.  Before he could get back 
to Student M, Ms. Bautista went to him, took him for a walk, and tried to calm him down.

Respondent did not want Ms. Bautista to take Student M.  He was upset and frustrated 
that she had interfered with the lesson he was trying to enforce. He said the best practice was 
not to interrupt a behavior intervention. Respondent stated that Student M was doing better 
in school.  He had not cried for three days before the incident with Ms. Bautista, and he had
been progressing. Student M was also receiving Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) therapy
at home.  The ABA therapy had the same goal of teaching Student M to use words instead of 
crying. Consistently reinforcing the learning strategies at school and home was important for
Student M to learn that he will only get what he wants or needs by using words.

Under his breath, respondent expressed his disappointment with Ms. Bautista going 

against the behavior plan and interfering with his lesson.  The aides heard him complain 
about Ms. Bautista, but no one told him they were upset by his remarks.

MANNER RESPONDENT SPOKE TO PARENTS

87.

The Notice of Charges alleges that respondent spoke harshly and
inappropriately to his students’ parents. Respondent denied that he was mean or rude to any
of his students’ parents and that his only purpose was to help his students. He specifically
denied Ms. Benavente and Ms. De Matte’s suggestion that he acted inappropriately towards
Student M’s mother.  He stated that Student M’s mother requested an IEP to better 
coordinate Student M’s home-based ABA therapies with those provided at school.  In an
email dated November 12, 2014, respondent stated his professional belief that Student M was 
“very smart and wants to be challenged.”  However, respondent noted that he saw little 
change in his behavior since being provided ABA services in the home.  He stated his belief 
that Student M’s “crying behavior must be reinforced somewhere and serve a purpose, or it 
would have stopped (extinguished) a while ago.” Respondent believed that Student M’s 
parents were giving in to him at home and not requiring that Student M use words to get his 
needs met. Respondent’s comments were intended to help the parents and the student.

13 A social story is a book written for a student with picture symbols that demonstrates 
the teacher’s desired outcome by using a story.  For example, the picture symbols would tell 
a story such as: M likes trains, M wants train, M needs to use the picture board to get a train.

31

POSITIVE FEEDBACK FROM STUDENTS’ PARENTS

88.

Respondent received positive feedback from his students’ parents.  On May 9,

2013, Student M’s mother sent an email praising respondent and his staff for their “hard 
work with the kids . . . .”  She thanked respondent for being “respectful and loving and 
caring” towards her son.

By email dated November 4, 2013, Student A’s parents expressed how thrilled and 
amazed they were that their child was able to attend a general education pre-kindergarten.
The parents reported that Student A’s teachers were impressed with Student A’s ability to
follow rules, academic advancement, counting and cutting skills which they attributed to 
early intervention and respondent’s teaching.  Student A’s parents expressed their hope that 
respondent would “continue being the outstanding teacher you are and continue to make a 
difference in other children’s lives.”

Other parents referred to respondent and his aides as “angels making miracles happen 
and giving us so much hope.”  Parents described them as “amazing people” for helping their 
students succeed.  In a card dated January 18, 2013, a parent wrote to respondent and told
him “You are the best example of what a great dedicated teacher should be.”  The parents 
stated they “never thought my little boy would progress the way he did.”  They described
respondent as “patient and loving with all the children and your love for teaching such 
special kids like [their child] doesn’t go unnoticed.”  Another parent thanked respondent for 
the way he taught and challenged her son.  Parents attributed their children’s growth and 
progress to respondent’s efforts.

An April 24, 2014, email from a student’s mother thanked respondent for providing 

an update on her son and expressed that she was very pleased with her son’s progress.

An August 11, 2014, letter from a parent thanked respondent and provided a summary

of how her son did over the summer.

IEP MEETINGS ATTENDED BY RESPONDENT

89.

Respondent was the case manager for each of his 16 students and he attended 

all of his student’s IEP meetings.  He acknowledged that he cried “tears of joy” in an IEP 
meeting when a student who was behaviorally challenged showed a “huge improvement” 
after two years with respondent as his teacher.  He stated that he likely cried tears of joy on 
one or two other occasions when students succeeded.  He noted that no one had ever 
criticized him for crying in an IEP meeting.

SHORT STAFFED

90.

In response to testimony that respondent appeared unorganized, respondent 
stated that there was a recurring problem getting sufficient qualified instructional aides to 
support the special education needs at Garrison.  He consistently operated his classroom with 

32

fewer aides than he was supposed to have.  When he could, respondent would share his 
instructional aides with other teachers who were short.  Many times respondent had 
substitute aides in his classroom to try to maintain the correct number.  He stated that 
sometimes he did not have students in educational centers or was unable to have students 
engage in planned activities because the classroom was not fully staffed.

In 2013 to 2015, respondent did not have the number of instructional aides he was 
supposed to have. In mid-January 2013, the district notified respondent that a new student 
was being placed in respondent’s class.  The email recognized that respondent’s classroom 
was “quite impacted.” 

91.

In February 2013, respondent was short staffed as a long term sub left and a 

replacement was not immediately found.

92.

On August 14, 2014, the district determined that an additional aide needed to 

be added to respondent’s classroom to maintain the aide/teacher to student ratio. At that
time, respondent had one female and 13 male students.

93.

On August 21, 2014, respondent expressed continuing concerns with 

insufficient staffing to Dr. Barragan.  He stated, “I am a little confused why the more mild 
programs with less students and behaviors are well supported [while] we are struggling 
every day to meet the needs of the 13 very busy, behaviorally involved students.”  Dr. 
Barragan responded that he supported respondent’s request for another instructional aide.

94.

Also on August 21, 2014, respondent sent an email to Dr. Barragan and others 
acknowledging the shortage of aides.  He stated that, “I feel we are not meeting the needs of 
the students with the current staffing.  Students are sitting around waiting for someone to 
work with them because of the lack of staff.  Other times 2-3 staff are dealing with the 
behavior of one or two students leaving 1-2 staff to meet the needs of 10-11 students who 
are also very active with behaviors.”  He noted that in the prior school year there were five
aides with three less students, and in the current year there were only four aides.  He 
requested additional support for the “academic, social, and behavioral needs of the 
students.”

95.

In mid-December, 2014, the district requisitioned two new instructional aide

positions for one classroom and extended the substitute authorization for substitutes to 
provide extra support to respondent’s and Ms. Knox’s classrooms.

In an email exchange in late January 2015, between respondent, Dr. Barragan and 
others, the participants discussed the problem of hiring and retaining quality instructional
aides.

33

ISSUES RELATING TO FELLOW TEACHER JENNIFER KNOX14

96.

The Notice of Charges includes reference to an argument that occurred 

between respondent and fellow special education teacher Jennifer Knox in October 2014.
Respondent contended that, other than that one incident, he and Ms. Knox had a congenial 
and professional relationship.  He further noted that, although there had been complaints 
made against Ms. Knox’s demeanor in the classroom, including her conduct towards parents,
students, and aides, no charges were filed against her.

97. Ms. Knox wrote a letter of recommendation for respondent dated February 14,

2014. In the letter, Ms. Knox stated that, “With his knowledge of the program and Autism 
he helped me [a] great deal with the transition into teaching this program.  It has been a 
pleasure to work with him and see the energy he brings to the classroom.”  She described 
respondent as “a strong leader in his classroom” who “builds strong and respectful 
relationships with his students.”  She observed that respondent’s program “is well structured 
and facilitated by himself and the staff he leads in the classroom.  He is able to instruct not 
only the students but also manage his staff effectively to accommodate the needs of his 
students.”  She noted that respondent helped her improve her program “through collaboration 
and support with materials.”  She stated that respondent utilizes a “variety of instructional 
methods with his students to help them stay engaged in learning.”

98.

In an email to Dr. Barragan dated October 29, 2014, Michelle Bosserman, an 

instructional aide in Ms. Knox’s classroom, complained that she had had “been witnessing an 
increasingly hostile environment coming from Mrs. Knox.  I have seen her behave in a very 
inappropriate and unprofessional manner toward her coworkers, the parents of the children in 
our classroom, our school O.T., and most upsetting to me, toward the children in our care. 
. . .  I have tried to just stay focused on my responsibilities to our students, but she is making 
her mistreatment of others impossible to ignore.” Ms. Bosserman described Ms. Knox as 
unprofessional, volatile and unpredictable.  Ms. Bosserman said she had 17 years of pre-
school experience before she worked at Garrison and she had not experienced the “level of 
unprofessionalism” that she had with Ms. Knox.  She also stated that another teacher was in 
the classroom multiple times a day taking Ms. Knox’s attention away from the children.  She 
said Ms. Knox and the other teacher discussed issues relating to other teachers and staff 
members.  These discussions made Ms. Bosserman uncomfortable.

99.

On October 29, 2014, Ms. Ford sent an email to Dr. Barragan complaining
about Ms. Knox.  She recited her years of experience and course work in early childhood
education and stated that she believed Ms. Knox’s “behavior was [not] age appropriate for 
her classroom assignment.  She stated that Ms. Knox tried to move students into her class, 
not for the benefit of the students, but to keep her classroom numbers up so as not to lose a 
particular aide.

14 Jennifer Knox did not testify at the hearing.

34

100. On October 29, 2014, respondent “emotionally” reported to Dr. Barragan that

he had had a “verbal altercation” with Ms. Knox over a disagreement about a student’s 
placement.  After the argument, Ms. Knox was reported to have “got[ten] in [respondent’s] 
face and yelled “‘screw you Chris.’” Dr. Barragan later received two emails from Ms. Knox 
asking to speak with Dr. Barragan.  When he met with her, Ms. Knox stated she felt offended 
that respondent would question her professionalism, but acknowledged she was 
unprofessional in her use of words.

Dr. Barragan confirmed in an email dated October 30, 2014, that, prior to 
respondent’s complaint, he had “had several complaints from instructional aides (IAs) and
another teacher regarding the unprofessional behavior of Jennifer Knox.”  He stated he “met 
with two IAs who feel extremely uncomfortable working with Mrs. Knox because of the 
disrespectful and ‘mean’ manner in which she treats them.  They were in tears during our 
meeting.  According to the IAs they are treated negatively and yelled at.  They also expressed 
their discomfort with the way Mrs. Knox treats her students.  They hesitated to report any
incidents to me for fear of retribution and because they wanted to give Mrs. Knox the benefit 
of the doubt because of her emotional state with her husband’s 11 month deployment.  Her 
husband is back from deployment and no change.”

Dr. Barragan wrote that he was “concerned for both teachers because they were both 

experiencing personal situations that are affecting their work.

101. On October 30, 2014, respondent wrote an email to Dr. Barragan and Ms. 

Boeck.  He acknowledged that it had been “a rocky and bumpy two weeks.”  He expressed 
his distress at being yelled at and called names by Ms. Knox, “[e]specially since I did 
absolutely nothing to warrant the verbal abuse.”  He also referenced he was in great physical
pain and trying to repair his marriage.

102. On November 21, 2014, respondent sent an email to Ms. Knox thanking her
for soup she gave him. Ms. Knox responded and said she was glad he enjoyed it and hoped
he had a “wonderful Thanksgiving.”

103.

In an email exchange in late January 2015, respondent recommended that two

students who had shown significant progress be moved to a less restrictive classroom 
environment.  Ms. Knox thanked respondent for putting his recommendation in writing and 
said she looked forward to discussing the two students in their next meeting.

RESPONDENT’S THERAPY

104. When respondent spoke to Dr. Barragan about his personal issues, Dr. 

Barragan told him about resources available through the district to get help.  Respondent 
moved from his home on November 7, 2014, and sought help on his own rather than going
through the district’s resources. Respondent entered therapy paid for by his insurance. He
saw this therapist for approximately six to eight months.  He then found a specialist for 
personality disorders.  He saw both therapists for a while and later saw only the specialist.

35

He did not share with anyone at the school district that he was seeing a psychiatrist. He is 
still seeing the specialist.

Respondent has surfed competitively since he was 14 years old.  He also participates 

in other sports.  During his divorce, respondent worked with quadriplegic surfers and a
special needs program that helps autistic children learn to surf.  These activities helped him 
during the divorce.

The district questioned why respondent did not apply for a leave of absence when he 

was having such a difficult time dealing with his divorce and accompanying issues.
Respondent stated he took some days off, but felt a responsibility to be present for his 
students.  He also stated that, although Dr. Barragan suggested he take some “time,” he did 
not suggest to respondent that he take a week or two off, and respondent was unaware that he 
could have asked for a leave of absence to devote to his emotional health.

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of 
the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 
1035, 1039-1040.)  A preponderance of the evidence means that the evidence on one side of 
an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than the evidence on the other side of 
the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in the convincing effect the 
evidence has on those to whom it is addressed.  In other words, the term refers to evidence 
that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.  (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union
Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Due Process under the Education Code

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal

hearing conducted in accordance with the Education Code.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934 and 
44944.)

3.

The dismissal hearing must be conducted by a three-member Commission on 

Professional Competence Two members of the Commission must be non-district teachers,
one chosen by the respondent, one by the district, and the third member of the Commission 
must be an administrative law judge from the Office of Administrative Hearings.  (Ed. Code,
§ 44944, subd. (b).) The Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final decision of the 
district’s governing board.  (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (c).).

4.

A Commission on Professional Competence has broad discretion to determine 

the issues before it and to determine whether dismissal is the appropriate sanction.
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California, (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343.) When a 

36

school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may only vote for or against 
it.  The Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or 
an alternative sanction.  (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).

Statutory Grounds for Dismissal

5.

Education Code section 44932 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or 
more of the following causes:

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(5) Evident unfitness for service.

(7) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools . . . by the governing board of 
the school district employing him or her.

[¶] . . . [¶]

Relevant Legal Authority

6.

A Commission has broad discretion in disciplinary matters.  Its role is not 

merely to determine whether the charged conduct in fact occurred, but to decide whether that 
conduct - measured against the criteria established in Morrison v. State Board of Education 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 - demonstrates unfitness to teach.  (Fontana Unified School Dist. v. 
Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220.)

7.

Fitness to Teach: The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher 

dismissal cases is whether the person is fit to teach. Unfitness or fitness to teach is a 
question of ultimate fact.  (West Valley-Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion
(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1775, citing Board of Education v. Jack M., (1977) 19 Cal.3d 
691, 698, fn. 3.)

In Board of Education v. Jack M., supra, the court delineated the process to be 
considered when determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the standard established 
in Morrison, that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in which not only his
alleged conduct but the following factors must be analyzed:  (1) likelihood of recurrence of 
the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the 
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ relationships; (5) 
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of 

37

conduct. These factors may be used to determine whether the teacher’s future classroom
performance is likely to meet the board’s standards.

The Morrison factors can be applied to all the charges in the aggregate.  When a 

camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load to see which 
one could have done the deed.  A trier of fact is entitled to consider the totality of the 
offensive conduct.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.)

8.

Evident Unfitness for Service:  As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria must 

be examined to determine whether the conduct in question indicates unfitness for service.  “If 
the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is 
‘evident,’ i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” 
(Woodland, supra., at p. 1445.)

Evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), is 
established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable 
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  (Woodland,
supra., at p. 1,444.)

Unlike unprofessional conduct, “evident unfitness for service connotes a fixed 

character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct 
fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.”  (San Diego Unified School 
District v. Commission on Professional Competence (Lampedusa) (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 
1454, 1462.)

The definition of “evident unfitness for service” does not include the terms 

“incompetent” and “physically or mentally unsound” since those characteristics are specified 
as separate causes for dismissal in the statute.

9.

Persistent Violation: The word “persistent” is defined as “refusing to relent; 

continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly
repeated.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) A school district has the right to adopt rules governing the conduct of its 
employees and to require employees to observe those rules.  Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(7), pertains to unintentional as well as intentional transgressions.  The
Legislature has decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal,
apparently to allow the opportunity for a correction.  It is the persistent disregard of school 
rules that the subsection is designed to regulate. (Id., at p. 84.)

A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be 
established by reference to the Morrison factors.  If unfitness to teach is shown, then the district
must further establish that the employee’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was 
“persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.”  (San Dieguito Union High School District v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) Isolated

38

incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally
considered “persistent.” (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 
Cal.App.3d 317.) 

Evaluation and Analysis

EVALUATION OF THE FACTS

10.

Respondent engaged in inappropriate discussions with his instructional aides 
and other district employees who were in his classroom to provide services to his students.
From October 2014 to February 2015, these discussions were constant, and they negatively
impacted respondent’s classroom environment. All parties, including respondent, agreed that 
the conversations about intimate details of respondent’s marital situation; that included 
sexually suggestive comments; that referenced his beliefs about his wife’s psychological
status; and that discussed his efforts at dating; were inappropriate and did not belong in the 
educational environment. Respondent’s belief that the instructional aides were his friends 
does not justify his constant discussion of such personal matters during the school day and in 
his classroom.

Respondent testified that he spoke about his personal life before and after school, 
during breaks, and during times he was not responsible for supervising the students, for 
example when the students were supervised by the aides during bathroom breaks, recess and 
lunch, and when other employees were providing services to the students. This alleged
mitigation does not diminish the wrongfulness of respondent’s conduct or provide a valid 
reason for respondent to be discussing intimate details of his life.  Regardless of when during 
the day he made the comments, he created a stressful and unprofessional environment in his 
classroom.  Significantly, respondent was paid for being a district employee from 7:45 a.m. 
until 3:15 p.m. each day; his students were in the classroom most days from 8:15 a.m. to 1:15
p.m. Respondent was not relieved of duty, nor was his compensation reduced, during times
the students were not directly under his supervision or had been released for the day. He had 
a responsibility to the students, district employees and the district to remain focused on his 
teaching obligations and to use the time he was paid to improve the educational experience 
of his students.

11.

Respondent similarly testified that his use of the classroom computer for 
personal reasons was mostly done during times he was not responsible for supervising 
students.  The computer data for ten days of internet usage showed respondent’s pattern of 
usage.  For the same reasons as those discussed above, respondent’s contention that use of 
the classroom computer for personal matters was somehow excused because he did that
when he was not directly responsible for students is rejected.

12.

Respondent made critical comments “under his breath,” but within the hearing 

of other aides and potentially students, about how Ms. Bautista handled Student M.
Respondent was unprofessional in the manner in which he dealt with this situation.
Respondent had very specific instructions about how to handle Student M. Ms. Bautista 

39

decided she knew better than respondent, ignored his instructions and directly interfered
when respondent was implementing his behavior modification strategies. In this situation, it 
would have been appropriate for respondent to counsel Ms. Bautista, but it was not
appropriate to criticize her in front of other employees and refuse to speak to her. 

13.

The district did not meet its burden of proof that respondent’s conduct in 

placing Student M outside the classroom, in an enclosed area and where he could be seen, for 
a short time was cause for discipline.

14.

The district did not meet its burden of proof that respondent spoke improperly

to students’ parents.  Witnesses to statements alleged to be improper, nonetheless agreed 
with the substance of respondent’s comments.  As with Student M, respondent held strong 
beliefs that, for the benefit of the student, the behavior modification strategies had to be 
employed 100 percent of the time, and if they were not, the student would regress.  No 
evidence was presented that any parents complained of the way respondent treated them or
that respondent was counseled about how he spoke to them.  Respondent, however, presented
evidence of appreciation shown to him from his students’ parents.

15.

The Notice of Charges alleges that respondent frequently text messaged his 
wife during instructional time, sang “last call for alcohol” when prompting students with 
“drinking” for the letter “D” of the alphabet, discussed his parents’ divorce, and complained
that his mother did not support him financially and did not offer to babysit his children.
These allegations were not proven.

FITNESS FOR SERVICE AND APPLICATION OF MORRISON FACTORS

16.

The district proved by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent’s

conduct caused by his emotional state during his divorce and interactions with his ex-wife
during the months of October 2014 through February 2015, adversely affected district staff 
who worked with him to such an extent that they felt compelled to speak with the principal
of the school and ask him to intervene.15 Respondent’s conduct occurred during a time that 
he was under significant emotional stress, and it was limited in time to four and one-half
months between October 2014 and February 2015.16 Respondent is aware of the impact his 
conduct had upon the district’s staff.  He has received and is continuing to receive 
psychological therapy.  His divorce appears to be finalized and there was no evidence 
presented that suggested he is under the extreme emotional turmoil he experienced in late 
2014.  Based on these facts, it is unlikely he will engage in the inappropriate conduct in the 
future.

15 It is determined, however, that respondent’s conduct was not the source of the 

conflict between himself and Ms. Knox in October 2014.

16 It is noted that the district was on winter break from December 19, 2014, to January

3, 2015.

40

The application of the Morrison factors results in a finding that the district failed to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent is unfit to teach.  It is likely that 
respondent’s future classroom performance and overall impact on his students are likely to
meet the board’s standards. Respondent taught school for 18 years. But for his conduct from
October 2014 to February 2015, respondent had an exemplary teaching record.  No evidence 
of prior complaints, performance issues or discipline was presented.  In fact, Dr. Barragan
performed a formal evaluation of respondent in December 2014, after respondent had 
confided in him about the intimate details of his marital problems. Dr. Barragan’s evaluation
report was very complimentary of respondent and described respondent as an organized and 
effective teacher.

17.

If respondent had been found to be unfit for service, to uphold a dismissal, the 

Commission would also be required to determine whether respondent’s “unfitness” was 
“‘evident,’ i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” 
(Woodland, supra., at 1,445.) Evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(5), is established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly
not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies.” (Ibid, at 1,444.)

Unlike unprofessional conduct, “evident unfitness for service connotes a fixed

character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct 
fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.”  (San Diego Unified School 
District v. Commission on Professional Competence (Lampedusa) (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 
1454, 1462.) The definition of “evident unfitness for service” does not include the terms 
“incompetent” and “physically or mentally unsound” since those characteristics are specified 
as separate causes for dismissal in the statute.

The evidence presented at the hearing proved that respondent’s inappropriate conduct 

was situational and temporary.  The instructional aides told Dr. Barragan they were
concerned about respondent’s conduct because it was unlike his usual demeanor and they
had noticed a sudden change. No evidence demonstrated that respondent suffered from a 
fixed character trait that was not remediable upon notice. Respondent was not given notice 
that his discussions about his personal problems were unwelcomed by, or offensive to,
district staff. To the contrary, respondent confided in the district’s administration and staff,
who listened to him and tried to give him words of encouragement and support. Respondent
told Dr. Barragan intimate details of his relationship with his wife, but Dr. Barragan did not 
tell respondent he should not speak of such things. Respondent first learned that his aides 
complained about him on Friday, January 30, 2015. Respondent was in the classroom for 
only three days after that, until he was placed on administrative leave on February 11, 2015.
Prior to placing him on leave, the district did not tell respondent to stop talking about 
personal issues.  He was not told to stop using the computer for personal research.  He was 
not told his conduct was considered a violation of district policies and regulations.  In 18 
years of teaching, respondent had no prior written or oral warnings, counseling memoranda, 
or other discipline.  The district failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that 
respondent was evidently unfit to teach in the district.

41

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF POLICIES AND REGULATIONS

18.

The District contended that respondent’s conduct constituted a persistent 

violation of specific district policies and regulations.  As noted above, the application of the 
Morrison factors results in a finding that the district failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that respondent is unfit to teach.

It is not disputed that the district has the right to adopt policies and require 

compliance with those policies.  “Persistent” violations are those in which respondent 
refused to comply with district policies, continued his conduct when instructed to stop or 
constantly repeated violations of policy.  The evidence did not support a finding that 
respondent knew or understood that his conduct could be interpreted as a violation of the 
very general language in the district’s professional standards or civility policies and 
regulations.  Nonetheless, a dismissal can be based upon unintentional violations of policies
and regulations.  Respondent testified that he understood his personal use of his classroom 
computer could be a violation of the district’s use of technology policy, but that policy does 
not, on its face, prohibit all personal use of district computers.  Respondent understood that 
his comment regarding “gulp, gulp” could fall under the district’s sexual harassment policies.

19.

Here, respondent was never counseled about his conduct and was not provided 

an opportunity to correct it.  The admittedly inappropriate conduct committed by a teacher 
with 18 years of teaching experience, was limited to a brief period of time when respondent 
was under significant emotional stress; his actions were not motivated by a desire to offend 
district staff; and he was not asked to stop the conduct.  It is significant that the instructional 
aides and others who went to the district’s administration to “complain” about respondent, 
expressed their desire that respondent get help for his emotional problems.  Instead, within a 
matter of a few days, respondent was removed from the classroom and placed on leave.  It 
took the district another seven months to serve him with a Notice of Charges.  Considering 
the totality of the circumstances, it is found that the alleged violations of the professional 
standards, use of district technology, sexual harassment17 or civility policies and regulations 
do not rise to the level of warranting dismissal.

Cause Does Not Exist to Dismiss Respondent from Employment

20.

Cause does not exist for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(5), because respondent’s conduct is not the result of fixed traits of character, 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.

17 The sexual harassment regulation requires the district to follow specific procedures, 
including conducting an investigation, preparing a written report and providing a copy of the 
written report to the alleged harasser.  Other than mentioning that respondent was 
interviewed by an investigator, the district did not provide evidence of compliance with the 
terms of its sexual harassment policy.

42

21.

Cause does not exist for dismissal pursuant to Education Code section 44932,

subdivision (a)(7), because respondent’s conduct was not a persistent violation of laws, rules, 
regulations and policies related to education.

ORDER

Christopher Munsterman’s appeal of his dismissal from employment with the 
Oceanside Unified School District is granted.  The district’s request to dismiss Christopher 
Munsterman is denied.  Christopher Munsterman shall not be dismissed from the district.

May 23, 2016
DATED:  ____________

May 23, 2016
DATED:  ____________

May 23, 2016

DATED:  ____________

Re  ansoFTRPe  ed  SE 

_____________________________________
SUSAN J. BOYLE, Administrative Law Judge
Commission on Professional Competence

Docusigned  by: 

DocuSigned  by: 

c=  Neg 

_____________________________________
JANA HEGG, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

Cm  pes

______________________________________
GARY BROOKS, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

43

