BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SIMI VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF VENTURA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 

DECISION 

  
OAH No. 2015080498 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
CAROL CARLSON, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
                                               Respondent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  Simi  Valley  Unified  School  District,  County  of  Ventura,  State  of  California 
(Commission),  in  Simi  Valley,  California,  on  May  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6,  2016.    The  Commission 
consists of the following members:  
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(District). 
 
 
present throughout the proceedings. 
 
The District seeks to terminate Respondent’s employment with the District on grounds of 
 
unsatisfactory  performance  and  unprofessional  conduct.    Respondent  disputes  the  factual 
allegations and argues that grounds for dismissal do not exist.   
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by oral and written stipulation on the record, 
was  received  at  the  hearing.    The  record  was  left  open  for  the  submission  of  written  closing 

 
 
 
 
Robert  Thurbon,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Simi  Valley  Unified  School  District 

Robert Jackson, Member     
 
Amy Nash, Member 
 

Samuel D. Reyes, Chairperson 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

Robert  A.  Bartosh,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Carol  Carlson  (Respondent), who was 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

3. 

1. 

2. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.  

argument.  Closing argument was received on June 6, 2016 (Initial), and on June 27, 2016 (Reply). 
The matter was submitted for decision on June 27, 2016.  
 
 
 
 
Jurisdictional Findings 
 
 
 
On  June  2,  2015,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services,  Dan  Houghton 
 
(Houghton)  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
Respondent’s termination pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44932, 44934, 44936, 44939, and 
44941.  The Governing Board approved Houghton’s recommendation on the same date.  
 
 
On June 3, 2015, the District filed Written Charges, Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 
Accusation (Accusation), seeking Respondent’s dismissal.  On June 26, 2015, Respondent filed a 
Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense.  
 
 
 
Respondent’s Background and Employment With The District 
 
Respondent has a Master’s Degree in Language and Literacy.  She holds a multiple 
 
subject credential, which allows her to teach all subjects in self-contained classrooms in preschool 
through adult schools, including grades one through six.  She started teaching in 1991 in another 
school district, and was hired by the District in 2004.  Her first assignment was as a third-grade 
long-term substitute.  After teaching third grade students for two years, Respondent was assigned 
as an itinerant science teacher for fourth, fifth, and sixth graders in several elementary schools.  In 
2008,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  fourth  grade  at  Garden  Grove  IMPACT  Academy 
(Garden Grove or School).  She first taught first grade during the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
District’s Evaluation Process 
 
 
The  applicable  evaluation  requirements  for  district  certificated  employees, 
referred  to  as  the  professional  accountability  and  evaluation  process,  is  contained in Article 
XVI  of  the  2014-2017  Contract  of  Agreement  between  the  District  and  the Simi Educators 
Association (Association or Union) (Collective Bargaining Agreement).2 
                     

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

6. 

5. 

4. 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

2  At  its  November  18,  2014  meeting,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Revised  Board 
Policy and Administrative Regulation 4115, which provides, in pertinent part:  “Evaluation of 
certificated  employees  shall  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  established  in 
 
 

2 

7. 

District  certificated  employees  are  placed  on  an  “assessment  cycle.”    Non-
 
permanent employees are evaluated annually.  Ten-year employees with above-average prior 
evaluations are evaluated every five years.  All other permanent teachers are evaluated not less 
than every other year. 
 

a. 

9. 

8. 

Subject  to the supervision of the site principal, certificated teachers have four 
options  in  the  formal,  professional  accountability  evaluation  program:  administrative-
mandated  option,  administrative-choice  option,  portfolio  option,  and  partner  option.  
Administrative-mandated  option  is  for  probationary,  temporary,  interns,  or categorical (non-
permanent)  certificated  employees  and  requires  the  teacher  and  administrator  to  jointly 
develop  goals  generated  from  analysis  of  a  self-assessment  of  the  Continuum  of  Teaching 
Practice.  The administrative-choice option is one in which the certificated employee chooses 
to investigate student work, abilities, and behaviors in partnership with an administrator.  In 
the portfolio option, the teacher develops a portfolio with reflections to validate professional 
development.  The partner option is a peer coaching model in which teachers collaborate and 
coach each other to determine success of professional development goals.  (Exh. GG, at pp. 
72-73.) 
 
“The  primary  purpose  of  assistance  is  to  improve  the  quality  of 
 
classroom  instruction  and  promote  higher  student  achievement.    Any  tenured  unit  member 
identified  as  performing  below  the  Professional  Standards  by  the  Site  Administrator  or 
designee shall be placed on an Assistance Program.”  (Exh. GG, at p. 73.)  Assistance has two 
phases:    Phase  I  or  Pre-Assistance  and  Phase  II  or  Assistance.    The  requirements  for  each 
phase are set forth in the Collective Bargaining Agreement.  
 
 
The Pre-Assistance Phase is to last ten weeks.  A written notice (form 
D-30,  entitled  “Pre-Assistance),  is  to  be  given  to  the  teacher,  setting  forth  the  areas  of 
concern,  the  date(s)  the  concerns  were  discussed,  the  desired  behavior  in  relation  to  the 
Professional Standard, the recommendations and suggestions for improvement, and the next 
meeting date.  The notice is followed up by additional observations and conferences.  Three 
outcomes are possible: resolution of the problem and return to the existing evaluation option; 
placement on assistance; or continuing with observations and conferences. 
 
 
The  duration  of  Phase  II  is  a  minimum  of  20  weeks,  and  includes 
placement  as  a  Referred  Teacher  in  the  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  program.  The 
program  is  expected  to  last  the  entire  school  year,  unless  the  teacher  corrects  the  noted 
problems earlier.  The PAR program is to provide guidance and support, including a written 
Assistance Plan, which, as required by the Collective Bargaining Agreement, must include a 
statement of the problem and existing conditions, specific objectives for the Referred Teacher, 
specific methods and resources which the Referred Teacher will use to remedy the problem, 
                                                                  
this administrative regulation and applicable collective bargaining agreements.  To the extent 
that any of this provisions conflict, the procedures in the collective bargaining agreement shall 
be implemented.”  (Exh. DD, subexhibit B, at p. 1.)  
 
 

b. 

c. 

 

 

3 

10. 

and specific guidance that will be offered to the Referred Teacher.  Consulting Teachers are 
to be permanent unit members, i.e., Respondent’s peers, and chosen by the PAR Council, a 
five-member labor-management committee.  If the certificated employee does not agree with 
placement on an Assistance Plan, the teacher can appeal to the PAR Council.3   
 
 
The District has adopted the California Standards for the Teaching Profession 
(Standards)  to  measure  teacher  performance.    The  Standards  were  developed  by  the 
Department  of  Education,  the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the New Teacher 
Center, and are composed of six specific standards (Engaging and Supporting all Students in 
Learning  (Standard  1),  Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective  Environments  for  Student 
Learning  (Standard  2),  Understanding  and  Organizing  Subject  Matter  for  Student  Learning 
(Standard  3),  Planning  Instruction  and  Designing  Learning  Experiences  for  All  Students 
(Standard 4), Assessing Students for Learning (Standard 5), and Developing as a Professional 
Educator (Standard 6)), with several elements under each standard.  
  
2013-2014 School Year 
 
 
29 and 33 students in her class at different times of the year.  She taught in room number 2. 
 

Respondent taught first grade for the 2013-2014 school year, and had between 

11. 

12. 

The  2013-2014  school  year  was  Martha  Feinstein  (Feinstein)’s  first  year  as  a 
principal.  Feinstein started working for the District in 2002.  She worked for one year as a 
resource  specialist,  before  working  for  four  years  as  a  program  specialist  at  District 
headquarters.    From  2007  through  2012,  she  worked  at  the  Ventura  County  Office  of 
Education  in  the  area  or  certification  and  development  services.    Feinstein  returned  to 
administrative duties with the District from April to August 2012.   

 
13.  During  2013-2014  school  year,  Feinstein  conducted  brief,  approximately  five 
minutes, informal observations to learn about her new staff.  Starting in September, she tried 
to visit each classroom once or twice each week.   

 
14. 

The 2013-2014 school year was Respondent’s evaluation year.  She and Doug 
 
White,  another  first  grade  teacher,  partnered  for  the  evaluation  process,  a  process  in  which 
each  was  to  observe  and  comment  on  the  other’s  performance.    On  October  31,  2013, 
Respondent met with Feinstein to finalize her Professional Development Plan and to discuss 
the Standards Respondent would be working on in her evaluation.  Respondent had chosen to 
work  on  Standard  5  (Assessing  Students  for  Learning),  Element  6  (Using  Available 
Technologies  to  Assist  in  Assessment,  Analysis,  and  Communication  of  Student  Learning). 
Feinstein  added  Standard  6  (Professional  Responsibility),  Element  7  (Demonstrating 
                     

3 The PAR Council has not been active in the recent past due to lack of funding.  The 
District and the Association had agreed to convene the Council as necessary, provided there 
was funding.  No evidence was presented regarding the any specific attempt to convene the 
PAR Council to deal with Respondent’s case.  
 
 

4 

a. 

15. 

18. 

17. 

16. 

Professional  Responsibility, Integrity and Ethical Conduct) to the Professional Development 
Plan,  as  an  element  Respondent  needed  to  address,  and  wrote  on  the  document: 
“[Respondent] will turn in required documents to office on time. . . .”  (Exh. 3, at p. 357.) . 
 
 
Teachers at Garden Grove issue student grade progress reports just before the 
winter recess.  The reports contain comments, and the School requires teachers to submit their 
draft comments for the principal’s review five days before the start of the break.  Respondent 
turned in her draft comments to Feinstein on the last day of school.   
 
 
Respondent  met  with  Feinstein  on  January  16,  2014,  for  a  discussion  of  her 
progress in the evaluation.  Respondent presented a document entitled “Mid-Year Portfolio or 
Partner  Observation  –  Consultation  Reflection.”    (Exh.  3,  at  pp.  358-359.)    During  the 
ensuing  discussion,  Feinstein  raised  concerns  about  the  late  submission  of  report  cards  for 
review before the winter break and advised Respondent to be prepared for the final evaluation 
meeting in April 2014. 
 
 
Feinstein testified that she likes to conduct evaluation meetings early so that she 
can meet required deadlines.  Feinstein therefore scheduled a meeting on March 7, 2014, to 
review work samples and to discuss progress toward the standards subject to the evaluation. 
 
 
Respondent and Feinstein met on March 7, 2014, but did not conclude 
the  evaluation  process.    On  April  3,  2014,  Respondent  submitted  a  “Final  Accountability 
Summaries,”  discussing  her  progress  toward  meeting  evaluation  goals.    Respondent  and 
Feinstein held their final evaluation meeting of the year on April 16, 2014.   
 
 
Feinstein  concluded  that  Respondent  had  not  met  Standard  6.7,  and 
decided  to  have  Respondent  repeat  the  evaluation  cycle  during  the  following  school  year, 
placing  Respondent  on  what  she  referred  to  as  “administrative  mandated  professional 
accountability cycle.”  Feinstein set forth the reasoning behind her decision in a section of the 
“Final  Accountability  Self-Assessment”  form  entitled  “Administrative  Comments  and 
Recommendations Related to the Goal”:  “[Respondent] and I met on March 7.  She brought 
work samples but was not prepared to discuss the two standards we agreed upon.  She was to 
meet  with  me  in  2  to  3  days  to  complete  this  conference.    On  March  7  we  discussed  the 
Continuum  of  Teaching  Practice,  self-evaluation,  partner  evaluation,  and  how  to  record 
evidence to determine her development along the [Continuum of Teaching Practice].  Carol 
was not prepared to meet in March.  We have now scheduled our final conference for April 
14.  Carol missed the April 14 meeting and we rescheduled for April 16.  We discussed that I 
have asked for her to be on the Professional Accountability next year to monitor Standard 6.  
We discussed if there was any additional assistance from the office she needed.  This was her 
first time in first grade.  She thought first grade was challenging.  She met Standard 5.6 at the 
application level.”  (Exh. 3, at pp. 365-366.)   
 
In  addition,  Feinstein  testified  that  as  the  year  progressed  she  noticed 
 
what  she  termed  “red  flags”  in  Respondent’s  teaching  that  she  wanted  to  have  addressed 
 
 

b. 

c. 

 

 

5 

through the formal evaluation process.  For example, Feinstein testified she did not actually 
see  teaching  in  progress  during  her  informal  “walkthroughs”  of  Respondent’s  classroom 
because Respondent would ask the students to show the visiting principal a specific thing or 
to sing a song instead of continuing with the lesson in progress, a process Feinstein referred to 
as  a  “dog  and  pony  show.”    In  addition,  Feinstein  was  concerned  about  the  timeliness  of 
Respondent’s  submission  of  students’  grades  and  thought  Respondent’s  room  was  very 
untidy. 
 
 
19.  As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  8,  the  administrative-mandated 
evaluation  option  is  for  probationary,  temporary,  interns,  or  categorical  (non-permanent) 
certificated  employees.    Board  policy,  which  incorporated  the  Collective  Bargaining 
Agreement, required permanent certificated employees, as Respondent was at the time, who 
were believed by the site administrator to be performing below the professional standards, to 
be placed on the Assistance Program.  Respondent was not placed on the Assistance Program 
or  given  the  specific  Assistance  Program  notice  required  by  the  Collective  Bargaining 
Agreement.    In  order  to  use  evaluation  forms  that  referred  to  “administrative  mandated”  in 
Respondent’s off-cycle evaluation, Feinstein changed the evaluation forms intended for use in 
the  administrative-mandated  process  involving  non-permanent  employees  by  whiting-out 
references  to  “non-permanent”  teachers  in  three  of  the  forms  and  by  adding  the  word 
“mandated” to one of the forms.  
 
20.  Year-end  report  cards,  with  teacher  comments,  were  to  be  sent  home  with 
 
students on the last day of school.  Feinstein required submission of the grades to her by May 
30,  2014,  so  that  she  may  review  the  teacher  comments  before  they  were  finalized.  
Respondent  turned  in  her  report  cards  to  Feinstein  on  June  4,  2014.    Feinstein  made 
corrections that night, and Respondent incorporated them in her final report cards by June 6, 
2014. 
 
On June 6, 2014, the last day of school, Feinstein observed Respondent 
 
taking boxes in a red wagon from her current room to the room she was scheduled to use the 
following year.  As it was instruction time, Feinstein asked Respondent about the children, to 
which  Respondent  replied  they  were  in  the  classroom  with  the  aide.    Feinstein  directed 
Respondent  to  return  to  the  classroom,  as  the  students  needed  to  be  with  a  credentialed 
instructor, and Respondent complied.  
 
At the hearing, Respondent explained that it was the last day of school 
 
and that no instruction was taking place, as students were wrapping up and getting ready for 
summer.  The aide had remained in the classroom with some of the students, and Respondent 
had brought one of the parents and some of the students with her. 
 
 
22.  During  a  conference  on  June  9,  2014,  which  was  attended  by  two  Union 
representatives,  Ginny  Jannotto  (Jannotto)  and  Dale  Gillick  (Gillick),  Feinstein  issued  the 
following directives to Respondent:  materials that have a deadline must be turned in on time, 
such  as  grade  level  goals,  report  cards,  and  professional  teacher  development  goals  and 
 
 

21. 

b. 

a. 

 

6 

23. 

24. 

meeting  notes;  report  card  comments  must  be  educationally  relevant  and  not  opinion;  there 
must  be  a credentialed teacher in the classroom with students at all times; Respondent is to 
read emails in the morning and prior to lunch; Respondent will teach third grade in the 2014-
2015 school year, in room 22, with a white board; Respondent will work at building herself 
up and becoming a stronger teacher versus making excuses for why she is disorganized and 
turning materials late; and Respondent will have substitute plans than can be followed up by 
the substitute.  On June 11, 2014, Feinstein provided Respondent with a memorandum setting 
forth her concerns and directives. 
 
First Graders Requiring Additional Assistance 
 
 
In  February  2015,  Feinstein  learned  that  some  second  grade  students,  12  of 
whom  had  been  in  Respondent’s  first  grade  class  during  the  2013-2014  school    year,  were 
having difficulties in their second grade classes during the 2014-2015 school year.  In the first 
grade,  the students had below-grade scores on reading comprehension at some point during 
the school year, but their year-end progress reports showed that they were meeting first grade 
standards.  The reading comprehension scores were issued by STAR, an accelerated reading 
computer program, which assigned scores based on the student’s answers to questions about 
what they had read. 
 
 
Respondent  explained  that  she  relied  on  the  STAR  scores  to  assign  reading 
material,  but  that  she  assessed  the  students  based  on  their  overall  work  and  her  familiarity 
with  them.    It  was  also  her understanding that at the end of the school year she had to rate 
students as meeting standards or not meeting them; “progressing toward the standard” was no 
longer  an  option  at  the  end  of  the  school  year.    In  some  cases,  Respondent  explained,  she 
suggested some remediation to help the student even if she thought the student was meeting 
the standards.   
 
25. 

Respondent  referred  students  to  a  remediation  team  during  the  year  as 
appropriate  and  she  recommended  retention  of  some.    For  instance,  she  concluded  that 
student A.O., one of the 12 having difficulties in second grade, was not meeting standards and 
recommended retention in first grade.  The family did not want to retain the student, and he 
was advanced to second grade.  She also recommended retention of A.E., another of the 12 
former first graders, and he was receiving special education services.  
 
In  light  of  the  multiple  variables  involved,  such  as  student  maturity  and  life 
 
circumstances, and the passage of time, it was not established that Respondent’s assessment 
of the children’s progress was incorrect at the time she made the assessments. 
 
Respondent’s Assignment and Start of the 2014-2015 School Year 
 
27.  At the end of the 2013-2014 school year, Feinstein informed Respondent that 
 
she  would  be  teaching  third  grade  and  that  she  would  be  in  room  22.    During  the  summer 

26. 

 
 

7 

29. 

30. 

break, Respondent prepared her materials to teach third grade, and prepared room 22 for the 
assignment.  She was out of the State on vacation from July 29 to August 6, 2014.  
 
28.  During the summer, it became necessary for Feinstein to change Respondent’s 
 
assignment and room.  Respondent was assigned to teach sixth grade in room 11.  Feinstein 
expected  Respondent  to  work  together  with  Kylie  Donlon  (Donlon),  the  other  sixth  grade 
teacher,  who  was  very  experienced  in  teaching  the  grade.    Feinstein  believed  that 
Respondent’s science background would complement Donlon’s strength in math, and that the 
two  would  successfully  teach  the  students  as  a  team.    Feinstein  also  hoped  that  placing 
Respondent with a strong teacher would improve Respondent’s teaching.    
 
 
Respondent  learned  about  the  change  in  grade  assignment  through  an 
electronic message from Donlon just before the start of school.  Respondent did not realize at 
the time that the room had also been changed. 
 
 
Respondent  first saw her new room on Friday, August 15, 2014, the first day 
for teachers to return to school.  The room had apparently been used as a storage room, as it 
contained furniture, including 12 cabinets, school supplies, such as globes, and materials from 
the prior sixth grade teacher and from the teacher who had taught third grade the year before.  
The things Respondent had earlier moved to room 22 were also moved into room 11. 
 
Room 11 presented an emotional challenge for Respondent.  During the 2012-
 
2013 school year, a teacher by the name of Malia Brooks (Brooks) had taught sixth grade in 
the room.  Respondent had taught science in the room twice per week.  Respondent’s son was 
a student in the class.  Brooks was relieved of her assignment after allegations of sexual abuse 
toward one of her students surfaced.  Her son was not personally abused, but saw pictures that 
were very disturbing and required help to cope with the trauma.   
 
 
started working on getting her room ready after the meeting. 
 
Respondent  asked  Feinstein  for  help  removing  materials  from  the  room,  and 
 
was  informed  there  was  no  storage  room  for  all  the  items  in  room  11.    Respondent  placed 
some boxes outside the room, and took some items home.  
 

Respondent attended a staff meeting on the morning of August 15, 2014, and 

31. 

33. 

32. 

34. 

Respondent made several trips to her home to store some items there.  She did 

35. 

not obtain permission for leaving the school during the afternoon of August 15, 2014. 
 
Respondent worked on her room for the next three days, Saturday, Sunday, and 
 
Monday,  before  the  start  of  school  on  Tuesday,  August  19,  2014.    Some  of  the  school 
custodians helped move items around, and Donlon and two other teachers helped by putting 
up some wall materials. 
 

 
 

8 

36.  Donlon’s room was adjacent to Respondent’s.  Respondent and Donlon agreed 
 
to a team teaching arrangement, whereby Respondent would teach science to the students in 
both  classes  and  Donlon  would  teach  math  to  all  the  students.    They  also  agreed  to  divide 
students based on their reading test scores in the teaching of language arts, with Respondent 
taking a smaller group of children from both classes who required more assistance.   
 

a. 

37. 

Respondent  and  Donlon  agreed  to  work  together  in  planning  their 
activities.    Before  the  start  of  the  school  year,  the  planning  consisted  primarily  of  Donlon 
helping  Respondent  get  ready  for  a  new  grade  and  a  new  year.    After  school  started, 
Respondent  and  Donlon  engaged  in  planning  about  the  subject  matters  to  be  covered.  
However,  the  planning  decreased  as  the  year  progressed,  and  there  were very few planning 
meetings by the end of September 2014.  The planning meetings took place after school, and 
Respondent  had  to  pick  up  her  three  children  from  other  schools.    After  September  2014, 
planning often took the form of quick exchanges during the day about what they were each 
doing.  In addition, toward the end of the first semester, Respondent had a student from her 
class photograph the agenda board on Donlon’s class to get an idea about what Donlon was 
teaching.     
 
 
Despite  the  decrease  in  planning  activities,  it  was  not  established,  as 
alleged  in  item  15  of  the  Accusation,  that  Respondent  “refused  and  failed  to  prepare 
comprehensive lesson plans and workbooks for the team teacher’s common students, refused 
to  use  the  comprehensive  lesson  plans  and  workbooks  created  by  her  teammate,  refused  to 
teach  from  those  fully  prepared  and  comprehensive  materials  and  failed  to  create  her  own 
lesson plans or workbooks.”  (Exh. 1, at p. 5.)   
 
It  was  not  established  that  “Respondent  does  not  have  adequate  knowledge  of 
 
subject matter, refuses to demonstrate adequate knowledge and to implement proper instruction for 
her students,” as alleged in paragraph 9 of the Accusation.  (Exh. 1, at p. 4).  While Respondent 
admittedly  faced  a  “learning  curve”  in  teaching  sixth  grade  material,  she  sought  to  implement 
proper instruction for her students. 

38. 

b. 

 

 
39. 

Respondent recognized Donlon  as a good teacher, with a lot of experience in 

40. 

sixth grade and was grateful for Donlon’s assistance. 
 
 
Respondent encountered difficulties at the start of the school year in accessing 
computer resources in her room. Initially, she did not have access at all, as the system was set 
up for the teacher who taught in the room the year before.  She was eventually able to access 
one of the two computers in the room.  Her Google email account had not been set up at the 
start of the year. 
 
41. 

The District implemented a digital grading system, Aeries, for the sixth grade 
during the 2014-2015 school year.  At the start of the year, Respondent’s log-in identity was 
associated with a different group of students, not her sixth graders.  She also initially lacked 
the “tool kit” containing information to access Aeries.  Other teachers appeared to be having 
 
 

9 

difficulty  with  Aeries,  and  the  Association  and  District  administration  met  to  resolve  the 
issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  Aeries.    District  Director  of  Elementary  Education 
Kathleen Roth (Roth) conceded there were some “bumps” in the Aeries roll out.   

 
42. 

Respondent received training on Aeries, and was informed by the Association 
that she could hand-write her first progress reports for later entry into the system.  Feinstein 
later informed Respondent that the progress reports had to be in Aeries by October 31, 2014.  
  

44. 

43. 

45. 

The  District  had  been  providing  training  in  common  core  standards  for  math 
and  language  arts,  and  the  new  standards  were  implemented  for  the  sixth  grade  during  the 
2014-2015 school year.  At the start of the year, Respondent did not have the current common 
core books for sixth grade language arts or math.  
 
 
The  District  employs  a  classroom  behavioral  management  program  called 
CHAMPS.  The program includes visual aids to model appropriate behavior.  Respondent had 
employed the program while in first grade, but did not have the materials for the sixth grade at 
the start of the school year.  She requested the materials from Feinstein on September 5, 2014, 
and  Feinstein  offered  a  compact  disc  (CD)  for  Respondent  to  copy the necessary materials.  
Respondent  did  not  create  visual  materials  from  the  CD  and  did  not  fully  implement 
CHAMPS. 
 
Homework Assignments and Grades in the 2014-2015 School Year 
 
 
Respondent  and  Donlon  planned  to  assign  the  same  amount  of  homework  to 
both sixth grade classes.  However, as the year progressed, Respondent was not assigning the 
same  amount  of  homework  as  Donlon.    Respondent  explained  she  fell  behind  in  the 
homework assignments because she was going through her own learning curve, and it would 
take her longer to complete the material.  Respondent’s practice was not to grade homework, 
but to review the answers and concepts in class.  
 
 
Respondent  also  planned  to  administer  the  same  tests  as  Donlon.    As  with 
homework,  Respondent  fell  behind  in  her  testing.    Respondent  was  also  slower  in  grading 
tests,  a  process  hampered  in  part  by  the  absence  of  answer  keys.  Respondent keep student 
work in folders she planned to share with the students and their parents at meetings during the 
year. 
 
 
“Pendulum Swing,” which grades did not all correctly reflect student performance. 
 
 
Early in the year, Donlon became concerned that Respondent was not providing 
timely  feedback  on  the  work  her  students  were  performing  in  Respondent’s  class.    Donlon 
had  to  routinely  remind  Respondent  to  grade  the  work  of  her  students,  and  Respondent 
provided the grades and other feedback. 
 
 
 

Respondent  assigned  grades  for  an  August  19,  2014  assignment  entitled 

46. 

48. 

47. 

10 

50. 

49. 

The  Aeries  grading  system  contained  a  parent  portal  through  which  students’ 

 
parents could see progress reports and other grades during the year.   
 
Progress  reports  were  to  be  posted  in  the  Aeries  computer  system  between 
 
October 10 and 17, 2014, for parents to access before teacher parent conferences during the 
week of October 20, 2014.  Respondent missed the October 10-17, 2014 window to post the 
progress  reports  online.    She  prepared  written  progress  reports  to  discuss  with  parents,  and 
provided a copy to Feinstein.   
 
 
51.  As  early  as  mid-September  2014,  some  parents  complained  to  Feinstein  that 
their  children  were  not  receiving  enough  homework.    Feinstein  relayed  the  concern  to 
Respondent.  Two parents met with Respondent to express their concerns.     
 
 
Related to the lack of homework complaints, some parents also complained to 
Feinstein  that  they  were  not  seeing  enough  feedback  or  assessment  about  their  children’s 
progress.    Some  of  the  complaints  were  in  writing,  but  parents  did  not  want  their  written 
complaints given to Respondent, and did not want to discuss the matter with her.  Feinstein 
periodically  told  Respondent  about  the  nature  of  the  complaints.    One  of  the  parents  who 
testified at the hearing, D.D., expressed concern that Respondent had only provided a general 
statement that his daughter was doing “fine.”  Two parents who testified at the hearing, D.D. 
and F.T., were dissatisfied at not being able to look at progress reports online before parent 
conferences in October 2014. 
 
 
Respondent misrepresented the progress of students to their parents. 
 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  paragraph  17  of  the  Accusation,  that 

52. 

53. 

a. 

55. 

54. 

Respondent failed to timely record student progress reports and grades, as 

Respondent  entered  the  progress  reports  in  the  Aeries  system  on  October  31, 
2014.    Feinstein noticed discrepancies between the handwritten comments Respondent had 
provided,  and  what  she  saw  online.    Feinstein  met  Respondent  at  approximately  2:39 p.m., 
and,  in  the  presence  of  Jannotto,  directed  Respondent  to  correct  the  discrepancies  by  4:00 
p.m.,  when  the  window  for  corrections  closed.    Respondent  made  the  corrections  with  the 
assistance of Jannotto. 
 
 
set forth in factual finding numbers 15, 20, 46, 48, and 50.   
 
 
However,  it  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  paragraph  6  of  the 
Accusation,  that  Respondent  “has  no  rational  understanding  of  the  requirement,  value  and 
importance of preparing report cards.”  (Exh. 1, at p. 4.) 
 
2014-2015 School Year: Evaluation of Respondent’s Performance: August to October 31 
 
Feinstein  testified  that  she  started  observing  Respondent’s  classroom  on  the 
 
first  or  second  week  of  the  2014-2015  school  year.    She  conducted  “many”  observations, 
 
 

56. 

b. 

 

11 

57. 

58. 

approximately two to three per week when Respondent was in school, staying from 10 to 45 
minutes.  Feinstein further testified that she discussed her observations with Respondent five 
or  six  times  between  August  and  October  31,  2014,  and  that  she  suggested  resources  for 
improvement,  including  other  teachers.    Feinstein  provided  general  testimony  about 
Respondent’s perceived deficiencies.  These included criticisms that Respondent did not use 
her classroom time efficiently, that she did not use the proper classroom management system, 
CHAMPS, that she was not teaching to the expected sixth grade common core standards, that 
she did not provide instruction which differentiated between the more advanced and the less 
advanced students, and that she did not check her students for understanding of the material.  
Feinstein  took  notes  during  some  of  her  observations,  and  presented  Respondent  with 
memoranda summarizing some of her concerns.   
 
The first formal meeting of the 2014-2015 school year to discuss Respondent’s 
 
performance  occurred  on  September  8,  2014.    Roth,  Feinstein,  Respondent,  Jannotto,  and 
Gillick  were  present.    Feinstein  counseled  Respondent  about  leaving  school  on  August  15, 
2014,  and  about  posting  pictures  of  room  11  on  Facebook.    Feinstein  discussed  her 
expectations  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Respondent  expressed  concerns  about  Feinstein 
not  providing  assistance  in  the  move  from  room  22  to  room  11,  about  her  placement  in 
Brooks’ room, and about teaching sixth grade for the first time.   
 
Feinstein  observed  Respondent’s  classroom  on  September  23,  2014,  and 
 
observed  an  activity  that  involved  cups  of  different  sizes  and  the  sound  they  made.    On  a 
second  day,  Feinstein  observed  Respondent  ask  students  to  prepare Venn diagrams to chart 
the information obtained from the cup activity.  
 
 
59.  On  September  26,  2014,  Feinstein  met  Respondent  and  Julie  Deitz  (Deitz), 
another  teacher  at  the  School,  who  acted  as  Respondent’s  Union  representative.    Feinstein 
expressed her view that the cup activity was not aligned to the Common Core standard, and 
was  not satisfied with Respondent’s explanation about the scientific purpose of the activity.  
On October 3, 2014, Feinstein provided a memorandum to Respondent outlining her concerns 
in  this  regard,  and  setting  forth  her  expectations  for  Respondent  to  align  her  curriculum  to 
common  core  standards  and  for  Respondent to turn in grade level goals for the school year 
with baselines for all students. 
 
 
Respondent  provided  grade  level  goals  documents  to  Feinstein  on  October  3 
and 10, 2014, and they  were discussed.  Respondent also reported on materials she still did 
not have. 
 
61.  On October 15, 2014, Respondent met with Feinstein to discuss the 2014-2015 
 
evaluation process.  She was presented with the same “Professional Accountability Status ‘On 
Cycle’ Teachers” Form that had been used for the 2013-2014 school year, except that the box 
“Admin. Mandated” was checked.  A new Professional Development Plan set forth under the 
“Goals” section, the standard Respondent would be working on, number 6, and the Element, 
6.6  (Managing  Professional Responsibilities to Maintain Motivation and Commitment to all 
 
 

60. 

12 

Students.”    (Exh.  3,  at  p.  367.)    In  the  “Assessment  of  Progress”  section  Feinstein  wrote: 
“Report  cards  [¶]    Getting  grades  to  partner  teacher  [¶]    Grade  book  set  up  but  grades  not 
entered yet [¶]  Lesson Plans up to date with [sic].”  (Ibid.)   
 

 

a. 

b. 

62. 

64. 

63. 

In mid-October 2014, the District brought in Peggy Noisette (Noisette) to work 
with  Respondent.    Noisette  is  a  retired  teacher  and  consultant  with  extensive  training  and 
experience  in  peer  assistance  and  peer  review.    Feinstein  did  not  regularly  observe 
Respondent after Noisette was retained, but received reports from the consultant.  
 
 
In mid-October 2014, Noisette met with Respondent, Feinstein, Jannotto, and 
Gillick,  to  explain  her  role.    Feinstein  opened  the  meeting  by  detailing  her  concerns  about 
Respondent.  Noisette  explained  that  she  would  observe  Respondent  in  the  classroom,  and 
give her feedback to address Feinstein’s concerns. 
 
On  October  22,  2014,  Noisette  conducted  her  first  observation  of 
 
Respondent’s  teaching.  The visit was unannounced, and Respondent was participating in a 
joint,  or  “buddy,”  project  involving  her  class and a Kindergarten class.  Noisette concluded 
that  Respondent’s  interaction  with  the  students  was  positive.    Respondent  got  down on her 
knees so she was on level with the students.  She asked questions about what they were doing. 
 She spoke to one or more of the students in their native Spanish language.   
 
Noisette  concluded  that  Respondent  had  applied  Standards  1.2  (Using 
 
Knowledge of Students to Engage Them in Learning), 1.4 (Using a Variety of Instructional 
Strategies,  Resources,  and  Technologies  to  Meet  Students’  Diverse  Learning  Needs),  1.5 
(Promoting  Critical  Thinking  Through  Inquiry,  Problem  Solving,  and  Reflection),  1.6 
(Monitoring  Student  Learning  and  Adjusting  Instruction  While  Teaching),  2.1  (Promoting 
Social Development and Responsibility Within a Caring Community Where Each Student Is 
Treated  Fairly  and  Respectfully),  and  2.3  (Establishing  and  Maintaining  Learning 
Environments That Are Physically, Intellectually and Emotionally Safe.)        
 
 
65.  As was her practice, Noisette prepared a detailed observation note, describing 
the  sequence  of  events  and  noting  specific  times  for  her  observations.    She  met  with 
Respondent to discuss the observation and to provide suggestions for improvement.    
 
Noisette’s  next  observation  occurred  on  October  29,  2014,  and  lasted 
 
about one hour.  Noisette entered the room while Respondent was teaching a science lesson.  
Approximately  twenty  minutes  into  the  class,  students  from  Donlon’s  class  rotated  into 
Respondent’s  class,  and  a  new  science  class  commenced.    Noisette  had  both  positive  and 
negative comments about Respondent’s performance.  On the positive side, Respondent had 
an  understanding  of  the  curriculum  and  used  some  good  teaching  strategies.    Of  concern, 
Respondent  did  not  seem  to  use  her  time  efficiently.    She  did  not  seem  to  be  checking  for 
understanding of the lesson she was teaching.  Respondent seemed to be calling on primarily 
five or six students in the very front tables.  Respondent asked a question of a student at the 

66. 

a. 

 

 
 

13 

 

b. 

end of the class.  Instead of answering the question, the student said it was time to go, and all 
students picked up their books and left.   
 
During  the  post-observation  meeting,  Noisette  spoke  to  Respondent 
 
about  the  students  leaving  at  the  end  of  the  class,  and  provided  suggestions  to  prevent  the 
students from dismissing themselves.  Noisette also made suggestions for better use of “equity 
sticks” to call on more students during class.  Respondent explained to Noisette that she had 
emotional  problems  with  the  room  that  prevented  her  from  concentrating  on  her  lesson 
planning and grading.  Noisette suggested that Respondent rearrange the furniture and do as 
much planning and grading outside the room as possible.   
 
Respondent’s Leave of Absence 
 
 
doctor, who subsequently placed her on leave, which Respondent referred to as stress leave.  
 

Respondent  was  absent  from  work  on  November  3,  2014.    She  went  to  the 

67. 

69. 

68.  During the leave of absence, Roth decided to move Respondent from Brooks’ 
former  room,  as  recommended  by  Respondent’s  doctor.    Feinstein  assigned  Respondent  to 
room 12, and assigned the teacher in room 12 to room 11.  
 
 
In early January 2015, before Respondent returned to school, Donlon informed 
Respondent  that  she  would  no  longer  participate  in  team  teaching.   At the hearing, Donlon 
explained that it was too much work dealing with Respondent and rotating students into her 
class and that it was easier for her to remain on her own. 
 
January 2015 
 

70. 

Respondent returned from her leave of absence on the first day of school in the 

a. 

71. 

next semester, January 5, 2015. 
 
 
On  January  9,  2015,  Feinstein  called  another  conference  with 
Respondent and Jannotto to continue the evaluation process.  Respondent and Jannotto asked 
for  the  process  to  commence  in  February  since  Respondent  was  just  back  from  a  leave  of 
absence.    Feinstein  agreed  to  the  request,  but  expressed  the  following  non-negotiable 
expectations: Respondent was to align her classroom work, homework, and tests to common 
core  standards;  Respondent  was  to  have  better  communication  with  parents,  which  would 
include  timely  grading  and  posting  of  grades;  and  Respondent  was  to  meet  all  school  and 
District deadlines. 
 
 
During the meeting, Feinstein inquired about any materials Respondent 
may  need.    Respondent  stated  that  she  did  not  have  math  books  that correlated to common 
core standards.  Feinstein informed Respondent that the materials did not exist, and directed 
Respondent to a District resource to create her own materials. 
 
 
 

b. 

 

14 

 

a. 

b. 

74. 

72. 

Respondent had not taught math to sixth grade students based on the common 
 
core  concepts  the  District  was  using,  and  did  not  have  a  teacher’s  edition  math  book  with 
which to teach the students.  Donlon had been teaching a math pilot program, and had created 
her  own  materials.    Respondent  eventually  obtained  materials  and  assistance  from  the 
District’s math teacher on special assignment, Matt Guzzo. 
 
73.  On January 18, 2015, D.O., the mother of one of the students in Respondent’s 
 
class, A., requested that her son remain with Donlon for math and language arts.  Respondent, 
Feinstein, and D.O. held a conference on January 21, 2015.  Respondent did not object to the 
parent’s request, stating the student, who was an advanced student, would be better off with a 
more experienced teacher in a classroom and with better access to internet resources (students 
in  Donlon’s  class  had  individual  laptops  and  those  in  Respondent’s  did  not.)    A.  was 
transferred to Donlon’s class, effective January 26, 2015.  
 
On  January  15,  2015,  Noisette  conducted  an  observation  of 
 
Respondent’s  language  arts  and  math  classes,  from  10:05  a.m.  until  12:06  p.m.    Noisette 
noted  some  positive  developments.    Respondent  incorporated  the  suggestions  regarding 
proper dismissal of students.  When the students started to leave as they had on October 29, 
2014, Respondent said, “No, wait,” and gave proper dismissal instructions.  Respondent had a 
warm relationship with the students.  She was also tying math lessons to real world skills.  
 
There  were  also  areas  on  which  Noisette  suggested  further  work.  
 
Respondent was still not using classroom time efficiently.  For instance, Respondent took 36 
minutes to explain the first math problem, and it took over one hour to work through the first 
three  problems.    Respondent  was  accepting  student  responses,  and  was  not  clarifying 
concepts or checking for understanding.     
 
 
had concerns about Respondent teaching students Common Core standards for sixth grade. 
 
 
76.  On January 20, 2015, Noisette discussed her January 15, 2014 observation with 
Respondent.    Noisette  made  suggestions  for  improvement,  and  provided  input  for  a  lesson 
Noisette planned to observe the following day.  Respondent was receptive to the suggestions. 
 Noisette asked to see student tests, and Respondent provided a blank copy of the test and the 
students’ scores.   
 
 
77.  As planned, Noisette returned for a classroom observation on January 21, 2015. 
 Noisette observed a math class for about two hours.  As suggested by Noisette, Respondent 
started the class by clearly explaining that two sides of an equation must be equal, using visual 
tools  to  explain  the  concept.    After  giving  the  students  a  problem  to  work  on,  Respondent 
walked around the room to check their progress, as Noisette had also suggested.  However, 
she failed to assist students who appeared to have difficulties with the problem or to explain 
why a student had arrived at an incorrect answer.  When working with a particular student, 
Respondent  did  not  always  keep  her  eyes  on  the  rest  of  the  class.    By the end of the class, 
 
 

Feinstein conducted two observations, on January 16 and January 20, 2015, and 

75. 

15 

there  were  several  students  off  task.    On  a  positive  note,  Respondent  followed  another 
suggestion  from  Noisette  to  differentiate  instruction, giving more advanced students a more 
difficult task.    
 
 
78.  A  meeting  was  scheduled  for  January  22,  2015,  at  3:30  p.m.,  to  discuss 
Noisette’s January 21, 2015 observation with Respondent and Feinstein.  Noisette arrived ten 
minutes earlier to review the observation with Feinstein. 
 

79.  Upon  arrival  to  the  conference,  Respondent  overheard  Noisette  tell  Feinstein 
inside the principal’s office that she always sides with the principal, which gave Respondent 
concern  about  Noisette’s  objectivity.    Noisette  denied  making  the  statement  and  explained 
that she was just updating Feinstein on her observations of Respondent’s performance, as she 
had told Respondent she would.  In light of Noisette’s contrary testimony and the absence of 
corroboration,  Respondent’s  testimony  is  insufficient  to  establish  that  Noisette  made  the 
statement attributed to her by Respondent.   

 
80.  At the January 22, 2015 conference, which was also attended by Deitz, Noisette 
presented  her  comments  about  the  January  21,  2015  observation.    Respondent  expressed 
concerns about being assigned to sixth grade, about not having the necessary materials, and 
about not having sufficient support from administration or parents.  In an effort to focus on 
the  future,  Noisette  made  further  suggestions  to  address  the  areas  of  concern  observed  on 
January  21,  2014.    For  example,  Noisette  suggested  that  when  explaining  a  problem 
Respondent should go beyond explaining what to do and how to do it, but also explain why it 
is done this way and why it works this way. 

 
81.  Noisette  next  observed  Respondent’s  classroom  performance  on  January  27, 
 
2015,  during  another  math  class.    She  concluded  that  Respondent  was  meeting  teaching 
standards  in  some respects and that she was not meeting them in others.  On the one hand, 
Respondent  improved  on  her  classroom  efficiency.    Classroom  management  was good.  As 
she presented the first problem, Respondent used appropriate questions to focus the students 
on the task.  However, she was still having difficulty checking for understanding.  She asked 
general questions about who was having difficulties, instead on focusing on specific students 
and posing specific questions.  She walked around the room, but did not comment on any of 
the  students’  work  or  speak  to  any  individual  about  the  work.    Some  of  the  students  who 
raised  their  hands  were  ignored.    She  did  not  check  student  homework  assignments  before 
beginning work based on the homework.   
 
It was not established that “Respondent has persistently exhibited poor judgment in 
 
managing her classroom,” as alleged in paragraph 7 of the Accusation.  (Exh. 1, at p. 4).  Students 
were  observed  off-task  on  certain  occasions  and  Respondent  did  not  always  manage  her  time 
efficiently.    However,  Respondent  made  improvements  in  these  areas  following  Noisette’s 
suggestions.    For  instance, concerns about the dismissal of students on October 29, 2014, were 
corrected  following  suggestions  by  Noisette.    Noisette  observed  on  January  27,  2015,  that 
Respondent’s classroom management was good.   
 
 

82. 

16 

Administrative Leave and Remediation Plan 
 
 
83.  On  January  27, 2015, the District placed Respondent on  administrative leave.  
On  January  28,  2015,  Houghton  provided  Respondent  with  a  letter,  which  stated,  in  part:  
“This letter confirms the substance of our conference.  You are hereby immediately placed on 
paid  administrative  leave.    The  District  continues  to  receive  a  substantial  number  of 
complaints  pertaining  to  your  performance  as  a  classroom  teacher.    I  have  reviewed  your 
previous  performance  history,  discussed  the  situation  with  your  site  principal  at  length  and 
determined that at a minimum the District needs to prepare a comprehensive remediation plan 
to  assist  you,  and  require  you  to  improve  your  performance  as  a  classroom  teacher  to  a 
satisfactory level.  I am in the process of continuing to review the information available from 
several sources to determine the precise requirements of the remediation plan. . . .”  (Exh. 1D, 
at p. 178.)  
 
84.  On March 4, 2015, Houghton presented Respondent with a “Ninety (90) Day 
 
Notice of Unsatisfactory Performance; Forty-Five (45) Day Notice of Unprofessional Notice 
(90/45  Notice).”    (Exh.  1C,  at  p.  24.)    The  document  detailed  Respondent’s  alleged 
deficiencies, and advised Respondent that “You will have 90 days to satisfactorily participate 
in a remediation program, and demonstrate through your participation and the results of your 
actions in the next 90 days that you have the requisite skill and ability to immediately improve 
your  performance  to  at  least  a  satisfactory  level  in  all  aspects  of  your  classroom  teaching 
assignment.    If  you  fail  to  accept  responsibility  for  your  own  satisfactory  performance  and 
your  deficiencies,  or  otherwise  do  not  perform  satisfactorily  during  the  90  day  remediation 
period,  the  district  will,  on  June  5,  2015  issue  a  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss  you  from  your 
employment with this district.”  (Exh. 1C, at p. 29.)              
 
 
85.  Houghton asked Ross to develop a remediation plan for the rest of the year to 
enable Respondent to return to the classroom for the 2015-2016 school year.  Ross developed 
what  she  described  as  a  dynamic  plan  to  enable  Respondent  to  draw  from  various  District 
resources  while  continuing  to  work  with  Noisette.    The  plan  contained  the  following 
provisions: 
 
“Beginning  March  23,  Respondent  will  meet  with  [Noisette]  every  Monday  and 
 
Thursday morning from 8-10 am at the district office.  [Noisette] will provide instruction and 
resources to include, but not [be] limited to, the following topics: lesson planning, classroom 
management, differentiated instruction for all levels of learners, other best teaching practices, 
formative  and  summative  assessments,  Common  Core  implementation,  targeted  and 
integrated English Language Development, collaboration with Special Education teachers and 
accommodations for special education students, etc. 
 
“[Noisette]  will  assign  [Respondent]  practicums  that  will  be  completed  at  home  and 
 
turned in at the beginning of the next session or when [Noisette] indicates the assignment is 
due.    [Noisette]  will  review  the  assignments  with  [Respondent]  and  ask  [Respondent]  to 

 
 

17 

“[Roth]  will  assign  [Respondent]  to  attend  appropriate  conferences  and  trainings.  

reflect  on  the  assignments  and/or  suggest  additional  work  o  the  assignments  as  [Noisette] 
deems necessary. 
 
 
Registration costs and travel expenses will be covered by the district. 
 
“[Respondent]  will  be  assigned  to  shadow/observe  [teachers  on  special  assignment] 
 
and other exemplary teachers at school sites to be exposed to model lessons and best teaching 
practices.    [Respondent]  will  be  required  to  keep  a  journal  with  notes/reflections  following 
each observation, which [Noisette] will discuss with her at their next weekly meetings.  
 
“[Respondent]  will  be  assigned  to  participate  in  online  webinars  and  other  online 
 
trainings that inform her about best teaching practices or current topics relating to elementary 
education.  A  one  page  written  summary  will  be  required  following  such  online 
webinar/training and reviewed by either [Noisette] or [Roth] within one week of the viewing. 
 
 
appointments and in turning in all assignments and other required paperwork. 
 
“If  [Respondent]  does  not  follow  through  on  the  meetings/assignments/requirements 
 
outlined  above,  a  conference  will  be  held  with  district  staff  and  documentation/conference 
summary  to  follow  (which  will  be  placed  in  [Respondent’s]  personnel  file).    [Respondent] 
will be asked to sign the conference summary and may provide a written rebuttal if she is not 
in agreement with what is documented in the conference summary.  As always, [Respondent] 
may ask for [Association] representation to be present.”  (Exh. 14C, at p. 918.) 
 
 
 
Compliance with the Remediation Plan 
 
 
 

“There is an expectation that [Respondent] will be timely in attendance to all required 

The remediation plan was presented to Respondent on March 16, 2015. 

Meetings with Noisette and Written Assignments  

86. 
 

87. 

The  first  meeting  between  Respondent  and  Noisette took place on March 23, 
2015.  Using a California Standards for the Teaching Profession booklet, Noisette reviewed 
several standards and elements within a standard.  Noisette gave Respondent an assignment 
involving standard 3 (Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning) to 
be  completed  before  their  next  meeting,  and  provided  instruction  on  what  she  expected  for 
completion of the assignment.   
 
 
88.  Noisette  did  not  recall  if  Respondent  completed  the  first  assignment,  but 
testified  that  Respondent  often  did  not  complete  the  assignments  at  home.    At  times 
Respondent  had  not  done  any  work  on  the  assignments,  and  Noisette  could  not  remember 
Respondent completing an entire assignment before the meeting in which the assignment was 
due. 
 
 

18 

90. 

89. 

Respondent  agreed  she  did  not  complete  all  homework  assignments,  and 
 
attributed  her  failure  to  being  scared  and  paralyzed  about  the  whole  process.    Respondent 
worked on the assignments with Noisette during their meetings.    
 
 
Respondent  attended  all  but  two  of  the  scheduled  biweekly  meetings  with 
Noisette,  on  March  23  and  26,  April  13,  16,  20,  and  27,  May  19,  21,  and  28,  and  June  1, 
2015.  She missed a meeting on April 23, 2015, because of an emergency involving her son’s 
glasses and one on April 30, 2015, because her car was leaking fluid.  Respondent did not call 
Noisette  to  cancel  the  April  23,  2015  meeting  prior  to  Noisette’s  arrival  at  the  District’s 
office.    Respondent  did  not  inform  Roth  she  would  be  unable  to  attend  the  April  30,  2015 
meeting. 
 

91. 

The meetings covered the subjects required by the remediation plan.  Noisette 
provided instruction and materials, and Respondent completed the homework assignments in 
Noisette’s presence.   
 
 
92.  As Noisette and Respondent agreed in their hearing testimony, Respondent was 
engaged  during  the  biweekly  meetings.    Respondent  was  pleasant,  cooperative,  attentive, 
actively  engaged,  and  eager  to  understand  and  add  ideas  to  her  repertoire.    On  occasion, 
Respondent expressed her view that the work she was doing with Noisette did not address the 
real problems of lack of materials and lack of support from the administration.  
 

93.  At  the  conclusion  of  her  meetings  with  Respondent,  Noisette  concluded  that 
there were still deficiencies in Respondent’s teaching, as she had noted during her classroom 
observations.  However, Noisette could not assess the level of Respondent’s progress because 
Respondent  had  not  demonstrated,  by  completing  all  of  her  homework,  that  she  had 
internalized all of the concepts covered during their meetings. 

 
Observation of Other Teachers and Remediation Journal 

94. 

 
 
Cori  Orlando  (Orlando),  English  Language  Arts  Teacher  On  Special 
Assignment,  invited  Respondent  to  observe  her  class  on  several  occasions.    Respondent 
missed two of the opportunities because she was meeting with Noisette.  Respondent could 
not  attend  one  of  the  demonstrations  because  of  her  daughter’s  emergency  illness,  and 
Respondent  notified  Orlando  that  she  could  not  attend.    Respondent  observed  Orlando’s 
classes on April 17, May 12, and May 13, 2015.  Respondent observed Guzzo’s sixth grade 
math  class  on  May  22,  2015.    Respondent  also  observed  experienced  teachers  on  May  14, 
May 18, and May 19, 2015.  On May 14, 2015, she observed multiple teachers during a two-
hour period, during which Noisette accompanied her.  
 
Respondent maintained a “Remediation Journal,” and the 212-page document 
 
was  received  in  evidence.    It  contained  documents  provided  by  Noisette,  notes  generated 
during  the  meetings  with  Noisette,  homework  assignments,  notes  of  observations  of  other 
teachers, and Respondent’s reflections and ideas. 
 
 

95. 

19 

 

a. 

b. 

96. 

Noisette saw Respondent working on her journal during their meetings, 

 
but did not ask to see the document, believing it was Respondent’s private document.   
 
Respondent testified that she brought the journal to every meeting with 
 
Noisette,  but  that  Noisette  never  asked  to  see  it.    During  their  meetings,  Noisette  told 
Respondent  to  view  the  journal  as  a  reference  tool  to  help  her  in  the  future.    Based  on  the 
conversations  between  Noisette  and  Respondent,  it  is  concluded  that  both  expected 
Respondent to return to the classroom the following school year to implement the techniques 
being discussed.  
 

Participation in Online Webinars 

98. 

97. 

 
 
Roth recalled giving Respondent three to four webinars to watch.  In an April 
29, 2015 email, Roth asked Respondent to register for a May 20, 2015 Family Engagement 
Webinar.  On April 29, 2015, Roth sent Respondent an email asking her to register for a May 
20, 2015 Family Engagement Webinar. 
 
Respondent  signed  up  for  four  webinars  and  watched  three  of  them,  Data-
 
Driven Conversations and Decision Making, Family Engagement, and Rigor for Instructional 
Leaders.    She  failed  to  watch  one  webinar  because she did not realize its starting time was 
based on Eastern Daylight Savings Time.  Respondent informed Noisette about the webinars 
she watched, but did not make notes or enter reflections in her journal.  
 
Notice of Non-Compliance 
 
99.  On May 8, 2015, Houghton gave Respondent a “Progress Report and Notice of 
 
Non-Compliance  with  Remediation  Plan  and  Continuing  Unsatisfactory  Performance, 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unfitness  for  Service.”    (Exh.  1F,  at  p.  180.)    In  part,  the 
document  stated:    “You  are  now  more  than  2/3  of  the  way  through  your  ninety  (90)  day 
remediation  period  and  I  have  received  written  reports,  as  well  as  some  oral  reports.  .  .  .  
These  documents  demonstrate  that  you  have  substantially  failed  to  participate  in  the 
remediation  program  as  designed,  that  you  have  not  accepted  responsibility  to  effectively 
participate  in  the  remediation  plan.  .  .    .[¶]    We  will  continue  to  offer,  and  require  your 
participation  in  this  specific  remediation  program  for  the  balance  of  the  ninety  (90)  day 
period.  As I made clear in my original notice to you, your participation in this program is not 
optional.    Your  participation  is  required.    I  have  scheduled  a  meeting  with  you,  your 
representative and assigned consultants and me, on Monday, May 18, 2015 at 9:00 a.m. in my 
office to revisit the remediation program for the balance of the ninety (90) day period.”  (Exh. 
1F, at pp. 181-182.) 
 

100. 

In late May or early June 2015, Houghton concluded that Respondent had not 

made sufficient progress in her remediation, and recommended her dismissal. 

 

 
 

20 

102. 

Respondent’s Fitness to Teach4 
 
 
101.  As set forth above, Respondent engaged in conduct that raises concerns about her 
fitness to teach.  Thus, she failed to submit grades and progress reports in a timely manner (factual 
finding numbers 15, 20, 46, 48, 49, 50, and 55a); on June 6, 2014, she left some students in the 
classroom  with  an  aide,  not  a  certificated  professional  (factual  finding  number  21);  during  the 
afternoon of August 15, 2014, she left the School without permission while taking materials from 
her room to her home (factual finding number 34); she assigned grades for an August 19, 2014 
assignment that did not correctly reflect student performance (factual finding number 47); and, 
she failed to fully implement CHAMPS (factual finding number 41). 
 
 
In  addition,  as  primarily  established  by  the  testimony  of  Noisette,  with 
corroboration  from  Feinstein  and  partially  from  Respondent  herself,  there  are  shortcomings  in 
Respondent’s  teaching  performance.5    Thus,  Respondent  at  times  failed  to  efficiently  use  her 
classroom time (factual finding numbers 66 and 74), to check that her students were understanding 
the material being taught (factual finding numbers 66, 74, and 81), to equitably call on students in 
class (factual finding numbers 66 and 81), to give guidance to students (factual finding number 
77), and to properly dismiss her students (factual finding number 66). 
 
In terms of the pertinent Morrison factors, Respondent’s conduct is related to her 
 
fitness to teach.  The conduct set forth in factual finding numbers 101 and 102 has likely adversely 
affected  students,  although  the  degree  of  such  adversity  varies.    Lesser  adverse  impact  is likely 
from the conduct set forth in factual finding number 101.  For instance, while Respondent did not 
meet deadlines to provide preliminary comments to the principal and miss computer windows to 
                     

103. 

4 Courts require evaluation of a teacher's alleged misconduct in terms of its impact on 
fitness  for  service  utilizing  the  following  criteria  first  enunciated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (Morrison): the likelihood that the 
conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity 
anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching certificate 
held by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding 
the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 
the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.  Not all factors may apply in each case and 
only  the  pertinent  ones  need  to  be  examined.  (West  Valley-Mission  Community  College 
District v. Conception (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777; Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 
28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384  (Haar).)  The  determination  of  fitness  for  service  required  by 
Morrison is a factual one. (Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 698, fn. 3 
(Jack  M.);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d.  208,  220-221 
(Fontana); Haar (1994), supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 384). 

 
5 Noisette’s testimony has been found most credible and reliable, as she was detailed, 

systematic, and balanced in her observations of Respondent’s performance. 
 
 

21 

The conduct at issue occurred in the relatively recent past. 

upload  grades,  she  did  issue  final  grades.    Even  though  she  left  students  without  certificated 
employee  supervision  on  June  6,  2014,  Respondent  did  not  leave  them  unsupervised  and  no 
instruction  was  actually  taking  place  on  the  last  day  of  school.    Deficiencies  impacting  actual 
teaching performance can have a more significant impact, particularly if not remediated.   
 
 
 
In  terms  of  extenuation  or  aggravating  circumstances,  there  were  more  of  the  former.  
 
Respondent faced a last-minute assignment change into a grade she had never taught.  She was 
initially  placed  in  a  room  that  presented  emotional  challenges  for  her.    Issues  with  technology, 
equipment, and materials also adversely impacted Respondent’s ability to teach and impacted her 
learning curve.   
 
 
In addition, remediation was intermittent and less than optimal.  The remediation efforts 
were interrupted by Respondent’s leave of absence and by her placement on administrative leave.  
While not much evidence was received at the hearing about the reason(s) for Respondent’s leave 
of absence, it appears to have been medically-related.  Before her leave, and following her work in 
the  classroom  with  Noisette  in  January  2015,  Respondent  was  addressing  her  shortcomings.  
While she still had work to do, Respondent was making progress and was prematurely pulled from 
the classroom.  
 
In aggravation, Respondent did not complete all the assigned homework assignments.  On 
 
the other hand, she completed the assignments in class, obtaining the benefits of the lessons, and 
was otherwise cooperative with Noisette.  Respondent was engaged in the remediation program, 
and substantially complied with its requirements.    
 
 
With respect to likely recurrence of the conduct in question, some of the conduct set forth 
in factual finding number 101, such as the incident in which she left the students with her aide, the 
August 15, 2014 absences, and implementation of CHAMPS, was isolated and not likely to recur. 
 Whether issues relating to correct and timely assignment of grades or to teaching to professional 
standards will recur cannot be fairly assessed, as Respondent was not permitted to complete the 
2014-2015 school year in the classroom where she would have had opportunities to grade student 
work and apply teaching concepts discussed with Noisette. 
 
 
The  type  of  certificate  held,  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  motives  for  the 
conduct,  and  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the 
constitutional rights of teachers are neutral factors.    
 
 
 
Concluding Finding 
 
 
not established at the hearing by credible evidence.    
 
 

104.  Except as set forth in this Decision, all other allegations in the Accusation were 

In these circumstances, it was not established that Respondent is unfit to teach. 

22 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

 
 
Section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), permits dismissal of a permanent employee 
for “unprofessional conduct.”  Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by 
the Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach.  (Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d 691 at pp. 
696-697; Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-
74.)  Section 44938 requires written notice of unprofessional conduct before an employee can be 
terminated for unprofessional conduct.  
 
 
Respondent  argues  that  the  Commission  lacks  jurisdiction  in  this  matter 
because  the  District  failed  to  give  Respondent  the  notice  required  by  section  44938, 
subdivision (a).  Alternatively, Respondent argues that the District deprived her of due process 
in not affording her an opportunity to remediate the alleged deficiencies.   
 
Section 44938, subdivision (a), provides: “The governing board of any school district 
 
shall not act upon any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 calendar days prior 
to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 
against whom the charge is filed, written notice of the unprofessional conduct, specifying the 
nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to 
furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for 
the  charge.    The  written  notice  shall  include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee.” 
 
Respondent relies on Tarquin v. Commission on Professional Competence (1978) 84 
 
Cal.App.3d 251 (Tarquin), which construed section 13407, the predecessor to section 44938 
which  contained  the  same  pertinent  language.    In  Tarquin,  the  district  gave  a  teacher  two 
notices  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  transferred  him  to  a  nonclassroom  assignment.  
The court concluded that the commission was without jurisdiction to act because two of the 
notices  did  not  include  required  performance  evaluations,  one  notice  was  untimely  under 
section  13407,  and  the  school  district’s  transfer  of  the  employee  to  a  nonclassroom 
assignment deprived him of the opportunity to correct his faults. 
 
 
However,  subsequent  courts  have  concluded  that  only  the  notice  requirement  of 
section 44938, i.e., the 45-day requirement, is jurisdictional, not the language that pertains to 
the  opportunity  to  correct  behavior.    Instead,  the  lack  of  opportunity  to  correct  deficiencies 
may  be  considered  in  evaluating  the  evidence.    (Blake  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1989)  212  Cal.App.3d  513  (Blake);  Crowl  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1990)  225  Cal.App.3d  334  (Crowl).)    In  Blake,  the  notice  of  unprofessional 
conduct was both  timely and complete, but the teacher was absent for much of the time  the 
notice was in effect.  The court stated “Although there is no jurisdictional defect here which 
precluded [c]ommission action, we are nonetheless concerned about the fairness of dismissing 
a  teacher  who  was  allegedly  unable  to  take  advantage  of  her  last  opportunity  to  remedy 
unacceptable behavior because of extended illness. . . .”  (Blake, supra, 212 Cal.App.3d 513, 
518.)    The  court  proceeded  to  examine  the  evidence  and  concluded  that  the  teacher’s  own 
 
 

23 

3. 

actions,  including  unexcused  absences,  prevented  him  from  having  the  opportunity  to 
remediate his deficiencies. 
 
The March 4, 2015 notice given to Respondent was timely, and the Commission has 
 
jurisdiction to hear the matter consistent with the rulings in Blake and Crowl.  Nevertheless, 
the fact that Respondent was not permitted to demonstrate her remediation in a classroom has 
been considered in determining whether cause exists for dismissal.   
 
 
Respondent  also  argues  that  cause  for  dismissal  does  not  exist  because  the 
District failed to follow its evaluation procedures.  She relies on Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. 
v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1977)  20  Cal.3d  309  (Pasadena  USD)  in 
support of her argument.  In Pasadena USD, the district involuntarily transferred a teacher in 
violation of its  policy governing such transfers and sought to dismiss her for her subsequent 
failure  to  report  to  the  new  assignment.    The involuntary transfer policy required notices of 
involuntary transfer to be given by May 15th, absent an emergency.  The notice was given on 
September  10,  1974.    The  commission and the superior court concluded that no emergency 
existed  for  the  failure  to  give  proper  notice  of  the  involuntary  transfer  and  that,  therefore, 
cause  for  dismissal  did  not  exist.    The  California  Supreme  Court  affirmed  the  Superior 
Court’s determination.  The District counters that it followed all required procedures.  As with 
respect  to  the  opportunity  to  remediate  her  deficiencies,  the  process  through  which 
Respondent  was  evaluated  has  been  considered  in determining whether cause exists for her 
dismissal. 
 
 
In this case, the District failed to follow the requisite evaluation procedures.  Once it 
concluded  that  Respondent  had performance deficiencies, the District was required to place 
Respondent on a 10-week Pre-Assistance period, which has specific requirements regarding 
notices, observations, and conferences.  It was only after Respondent’s failure to successfully 
resolve  problems  in  the  Pre-Assistance  Phase  that  the  District  could  properly  place 
Respondent  on  the  Assistance  Program.    The  Assistance  Program  also  has  specific 
requirements  and  protections,  such  as  a  minimum  20-week  remediation  period,  a  written 
assistance plan, assistance from peers, and appeal to a labor-management committee, the PAR 
Council.    These  protections  were  not  afforded  to  Respondent.    Instead  of  following  the 
required  evaluation  process,  the  District  placed  Respondent  on  another  evaluation  cycle,  an 
administrative mandated professional accountability cycle typically reserved for temporary and 
probationary employees.   
 
 
The argument that it actually placed Respondent on the Pre-Assistance and Assistance 
evaluation  process  is  not  supported  by  the  evidence  and  is  not  persuasive.    The  process 
followed  by  the  District  did  not  resemble  that  outlined  in  the  Collective  Bargaining 
Agreement,  and  Respondent  was  never  told  about  critical  components  of  the  sanctioned 
process.  Thus, Feinstein informed Respondent that she was on a full-year assessment cycle, 
not  on  a  Pre-Assistance  process  that  could  be  resolved  in  ten weeks.  Nor was Respondent 
ever told that she was part of the Assistance Program, with its recourse to peer mentors and 
the PAR Council.  
 
 

24 

5. 

4. 

It was not established that Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct, by 

 
reason of factual finding numbers 6 through 103 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3.  
 
Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), permits dismissal of a permanent employee 
 
for  “unsatisfactory  performance.”    While  the  District  established  that  Respondent’s 
performance  needs  improvement  in  some  respects,  it  failed  to  establish  that  she engaged in 
unsatisfactory  performance,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  6  through  103  and  legal 
conclusion  numbers  2  and  3.    In  this  regard,  the  District  failed  to  follow  the  required 
evaluation procedures, which afforded Respondent the opportunity of peer participation and a 
shorter formal Pre-Assistance Phase.  Moreover, removal from the classroom in the existing 
circumstances  deprived  Respondent  a  meaningful  opportunity  to  remediate  performance 
shortcomings. 
 
 
through 104 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 5. 

Cause for dismissal was not established, by reason of factual finding numbers 6 

6. 

Respondent  Carol  Carlson  shall  be  retained  as a permanent certificated employee of the 

COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 

 
 
ORDER 

 
 
Simi Valley Unified School District.   
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

September 30, 2016

 
 
DATED:  _________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  _________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  _________________________ 
 
 
 

SSeptember 29, 2016

September 30, 2016

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
  
 

 
 
 

25 

DocuSigned by: 

____________________________ 
SAMUEL D. REYES, Chairperson 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

[Roark  jackson. 

____________________________  
ROBERT JACKSON  
Commission Member  

 

DocuSigned  by: 

(  Amy  asl

___________________________ 
AMY NASH   
Commission Member 

 

 

