BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SIERRA SANDS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2015110258 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
PETER KONOPAK, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
                                                    Respondent. 
 
 
 

 

 

DECISION 
 

 
The Commission on Professional Competence heard this matter on March 9 through 
11, 2016, in Ridgecrest, California.  The Commission consisted of Vince J. Rosato, Charley 
Clark, and Matthew Goldsby, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings and Commission Chairperson (Commission). 

Dean Adams, attorney at law, appeared and represented complainant David Ostash, 
 
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, with the Sierra Sands Unified School District 
(District). 

Daniel B. Rojas and Eli Naduri-Weissman, attorneys at law, appeared and represented 

 
respondent Peter Konopak. 

At the outset of the hearing, respondent made an oral motion to exclude evidence 

 
pertaining to respondent’s arrest.  After hearing oral argument, the motion was denied. 

At the conclusion of the hearing, complainant’s Request for Protective Order Sealing 
 
Confidential Records was taken under submission.  The request was granted in part and the 
protected names list was sealed in an envelope with a copy of the Sealing Order affixed to 
the exterior of the envelope.  The court reporter was instructed to use initials in the place of 
those names on the protected names list in the preparation of any transcript.  The parties had 
previously redacted the last names of the protected parties on all documentary evidence 
presented during the hearing.  Except as provided in this order, the request to seal exhibits 
was denied.   

The parties submitted the matter for decision at the conclusion of the hearing on 

March 11, 2016. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Complainant brought the Statement of Charges in his official capacity.  

Respondent timely submitted a Demand for Hearing.  

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District currently 

assigned as a fifth grade teacher at Las Flores Elementary School (Las Flores).  The District 
first employed respondent in 1987 and observed and evaluated his performance on a regular 
basis throughout his employment.  Respondent consistently performed to the satisfaction of 
the District and his evaluators consistently recommended reemployment.  He has no record 
of employment discipline.  

3. 

On May 18, 2015, respondent began distributing papers to his students in order 

to administer a benchmark assessment in mathematics.  The students had previously 
completed the benchmark assessment electronically, but the results failed to process.  When 
a student commented out loud that he thought there would be no further testing, respondent 
threw the papers he was holding onto the floor and said, “I lied.” 

4. 

Immediately after this incident, respondent noticed that his student AM was 

opening and closing his desk.  Respondent had previously established a rule prohibiting 
eating in the classroom.  Respondent had repeatedly reprimanded AM for eating in the 
classroom in violation of the established rule.  Respondent credibly testified that he believed 
that AM was again violating the rule against eating.  Respondent approached AM, put his 
hands on the corner edges of the desk lid, and slammed the desk down at least five 
successive times while reprimanding AM for eating in the classroom. 

5. 

Respondent realized that these two successive outbursts were inappropriate 

and caused fear among his students.  Respondent called the principal and asked her to come 
to the classroom.  When she arrived, respondent said “I was supposed to be the adult in the 
room and I have not behaved as an adult.”  In the presence of the principal and the students, 
respondent apologized for his behavior.  In his testimony, respondent acknowledged that “it’s 
not what teachers do” and stated that he regretted his conduct. 

6. 

At 9:01 p.m. on May 18, 2015, the parent of one of the students in 

respondent’s classroom sent the District an email to complain about respondent (EM 
Complaint).  The parent reported that respondent’s emotional and physical outburst caused 
her son EM to become upset.  She wrote “our son reported spending his entire morning 
recess in tears unable to calm down and return to the classroom.  (Ex. 1.)  This incident was 
“the last straw,” following perceived unfair tracking system of her son’s progress and reports 
of respondent’s use of foul language in the classroom.  EM reported that respondent 
frequently said “damn” and “pissed off” in the presence of his fifth grade students.  The 
District’s secretary gave assurances to the parents that the EM Complaint would be reviewed 
and investigated. 

7. 

On May 19, 2015, all Las Flores fifth graders went on a field trip to Long 
Beach.  Respondent organized the field trip and students raised money for the event by 

 

2 

selling candy bars.  At 4:30 a.m., all participants boarded a bus in Ridgecrest, California, and 
drove approximately four hours to Long Beach, California.  At approximately 10:00 a.m., the 
participants boarded a boat for a whale watching tour.  Once out on the open sea, many 
students and parents became nauseous.  Respondent helped sick participants get to the side of 
the boat, where they vomited overboard.  Respondent got water to help the ill members 
freshen up, and he tried to comfort his students by telling them, “You are now officially 
sailors.” 

8. 

Respondent testified that EH got “very ill” on the boat.  EH is a student in 

respondent’s classroom with known medical complications.  On March 20, 2015, respondent 
observed that EH was flush and feverish.  Respondent sent EH to the school secretary for 
observation.  EH was taken directly to the hospital where he underwent surgery to remove 
his appendix.  EH was absent from school for three weeks while he recovered from surgery 
and respondent arranged for the class to send EH a get-well card.  The surgeon advised EH to 
avoid physical activity during his recovery.  Surgical staples were subsequently removed 
from three incisions made in EH’s abdomen. 

9. 

On the boat, EH suffered nausea and vomited.  Once back on land, EH and the 

other ill boat riders recovered sufficiently to continue the field trip.  The group went to the 
Long Beach Aquarium in the afternoon and then returned to Ridgecrest by bus, arriving at 
approximately 11:30 p.m. 

10. 

The next day was May 20, 2015, the last full day of the school year.  Near the 
end of the school day, EH was in the front of the classroom with his friend AG.  They started 
play fighting, standing face to face, two feet apart, and waving their arms and fists towards 
each other in a mock boxing fashion.  Within five seconds, respondent observed the boys, 
briskly walked to them, and stated, “We don’t hit here.”  

11. 

There was a conflict in the evidence as to what happened next.  In the 

Statement of Charges, the District alleges “[respondent] then closed [his] hand into a fist and 
punched EH in the stomach with an underarm swing, near an area of his stomach where EH 
had recently undergone surgery.”  (Ex. 12.)  The District presented the following evidence in 
support of its allegation: 

(A)  EH testified that respondent walked up to him, said “Don’t punch each 

other,” and then, with a clenched fist with his knuckles facing up, and punched him in the 
stomach with a straight downward jab.  In E.H.’s opinion, the punch was not an accident or 
an act of trying to intervene.  EH testified that he and AG were not touching each other as the 
play-fought.  He testified that respondent was mad at the time and yelled at everybody after 
the punch.  He testified that he did not believe he was breaking the rules and that he had 
never play fought before. With respect to the May 18 incident, he testified that he saw 
respondent “smash” AM’s hands in his desk, then clarified that he reached the conclusion 
based on AM’s reaction to the desk being slammed.   

(B)  AG testified that respondent walked up, said in a normal voice “no 

punching allowed,” then punched EH with his fist in an uppercut position with the knuckles 

 

3 

facing the floor.  He testified that respondent used medium force and that EH “bent over and 
started crying.”  He testified that respondent was in a playful mood when he punched EH.  
He testified that he saw respondent hit AM in the face when he slammed the desk two days 
earlier.  He acknowledged that he and EH engaged in play-fighting before the incident. 

(C)  AM testified that he was sitting in the back of the room and saw 

respondent punch EH in a straight jab with a loose fist.  He testified that the punch could 
have been an accident.  AM could not recall respondent’s mood at the time of the incident.  

(D) 

JG testified that he was standing next to EH and AG when respondent 
walked up to them, said “stop acting like you’re fighting,” and then punched EH with his fist 
in an uppercut position.  He testified that respondent used medium power and that it appeared 
to hurt EH because EH was on the floor crying.  

(E) 

Principal Susan Marvin testified that she interviewed the above 

students about the incident and took contemporaneous notes of their comments.  According 
to her notes, students made the following observations:  “[respondent] punched [EH] with a 
fist . . . [respondent] had a closed fist and pushed his arm forward, underarm . . . [JG] 
described it as a punch straight forward, with an underarm swing.”  (Ex. 3.) 

(F) 

Complainant testified that he interviewed students on June 1, 2015, 
while Principal Marvin took contemporaneous notes.  According to those notes, students 
made the following observations: EH reported that respondent “looked me in the eye and told 
me not to punch people.  And then he punched me.  Straight on and with a fist . . . I tried to 
walk away and he punched me . . . He used a fist and punched me straight on.”  (Ex 3.)  

(G)  Respondent did not refer either EH or AG to the principal’s office for 
misconduct.  He did not immediately report the incident to Principal Marvin.  Respondent 
had ample opportunity to explain that the physical contact was accidental, when Principal 
Marvin approached him the day of the incident, when complainant interviewed him with a 
union representative present, and when his attorney furnished a written statement in lieu of 
an in-person Skelly meeting.  However, respondent did not characterize the incident as an 
accident until opening argument at the hearing more than nine months after the incident. 

(H)  When respondent saw that EH was crying, he offered EH to hit him 

back.  Although respondent testified that he made the request as a means to gauge the force 
of the blow, the offer of reciprocity raises an inference that respondent’s strike was 
intentional.  

12. 

Respondent denied the allegation that he punched EH.  He admitted striking 

EH accidentally in his effort to intervene and separate the boys.  The following evidence 
supports his denial of the allegation: 

(A)  Respondent testified that he saw EH hit AG in the stomach, that he 
believed the two boys were seriously in conflict, and that the altercation would escalate.  
Respondent demonstrated that he quickly thrust his right hand between EH and AG with his 

 

4 

fingers clenched in a loose fist, intending to separate the boys, and accidently hit EH in the 
process.  

(B)  Respondent is 6 feet 2 inches tall and weighs 245 pounds.  EH is 4 feet 

7 inches tall and weighs 70 pounds. 

(C) 

Immediately before the strike, respondent made the comment, “We 

don’t hit here,” a statement inconsistent with the act of punching. 

(D) 

Immediately after the strike, according to Principal Marvin’s 

contemporaneous notes, students made the following observations: “[EH] grabbed his 
stomach and closed his eyes . . . [EH] started crying . . . [EH] went to the water fountain and 
was holding his stomach . . . [EH] went to his desk and put his head down and was crying . . . 
he put his head down on one arm with the other arm holding his stomach.” 

(E) 

The conduct described in Factual Finding 12(C) and (D) is not 

consistent with a man of respondent’s size “punching” a boy of EH’s size.  No evidence was 
presented to show that EH was propelled backwards, sustained any actual injury to his ribs or 
organs, or suffered any diaphragm spasm, commonly known as “getting the wind knocked 
out you” and commonly occurring after a sudden blunt force to the abdomen.  Other than 
crying and holding his stomach, EH exhibited no physical signs of trauma that would be 
expected if a man of respondent’s size punched a boy of EH’s size with a full-force straight 
jab or uppercut. 

(F) 

EH was more sensitive in the abdomen than the average 5th grade 

student, having undergone an appendectomy eight weeks before the incident, and vomited 
the day before the incident. 

(G)  On June 16, 2015, EH was examined by a medical doctor who was 

informed of the purported punch.  After examining his abdomen, the doctor concluded 
“There is no pain, no tenderness, no peritoneal sign, no guarding . . . no objective findings on 
physical examination to suggest any pain, tenderness or discomfort . . . I do not detect 
anything abnormal on examination and he appears to have recovered nicely from his 
surgery.”  (Ex. A.) 

13. 

The common meaning of the verb “punch” is “to hit (someone or 

something) hard with your fist” or “to strike with a forward thrust especially of the 
fist.”  (Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2015).)  The Commission considers the 
verb to involve a willful act, done with the intent to cause harm.   The evidence fails to 
establish that respondent punched EH in the plain meaning of the verb. Although four 
students testified that they observed respondent “punch” EH, their versions and 
demonstrations were inconsistent and respondent’s evidence outweighs the evidence in 
support of the allegation.  Their observations of the AM desk slamming incident were 
inaccurate, giving rise to doubt about the accuracy of their observations of the EH incident.  
However, the Commission makes the following findings based on the evidence 
presented: 

 

5 

(A)  Respondent willfully and wrongfully thrust his hand between EH and 

(B)  Respondent hit EH in the abdomen with the back of his right hand, 

AG. 

causing EH to suffer pain. 

(C)  Respondent would not have hit EH in the abdomen and caused EH to 
suffer pain if respondent had followed established District procedures to remediate conflict 
or horseplay.1 

14.  After the class adjourned at 2:15 p.m. on May 20, 2015, respondent did not 

report the incident to the District because he was assigned after-class duty to escort students 
to the designated pick-up area. At 2:30 p.m., Principal Marvin began receiving reports from 
students, accusing respondent of punching EH. 

15.  After completing his after-class duty, respondent then went directly to a staff 

meeting, which lasted more than one hour.  Principal Marvin was also attending the staff 
meeting, but respondent did not tell her about incident during the meeting because he 
believed the meeting was not the “appropriate venue to discuss it.”  

16.  After the staff meeting, respondent returned to his classroom and began to 
compose an email message to EH’s legal guardians.  He wrote the following, but did not 
transmit the email message on May 20, 2015:2 

Today a few minutes before the end of school, I hurt [EH].  I 
wrapped him on the stomach with my knuckles.  After I did it 
he went to his desk and put his head down.  After a minute 
when he did not put his head up I walked over to him to see if 
he was o.k.  He was angry, and I apologized.  I told him that I 
had seen him hitting another boy in the stomach, which he does 
often, and I reacted by putting my hand between him and the 
other boy.  He did not accept my apology, and walked away. 

                                                           

1 The District adopted and published the following Professional Standard: “Employee 
conduct should enhance the integrity of the District and advance the goals of the educational 
program.” (Ex. 14.) The District also adopted and published policies to provide “an orderly, 
caring, and nurturing environment in which all students can feel safe . . . and to promote 
nonviolent conflict resolution techniques.”  (Ex. 15.)  

2 In response to complainant’s request during the hearing, respondent produced a 
printed copy of the draft email.  The draft reflects that the email was sent on March 10, 2016, 
the second day of hearing, but respondent credibly testified that he mistakenly sent the 
message, intending only to print it, and that the message had been saved as a draft and 
unaltered since May 20, 2015. 

 

6 

17.  At approximately 3:50 p.m. on May 20, 2015, while respondent was 

composing the above message, he stopped and stared at his computer while “the enormity [of 
the incident] came crushing down on [him].”  Principal Marvin came to respondent’s 
classroom and asked whether he hit EH.  Respondent did not explain the incident. 
Respondent asked “As my administrator, should I have my union rep?”  Marvin discontinued 
all questioning, deferring the interview to the next day. 

18.  On May 21, 2015, respondent appeared before complainant and Principal 

Marvin with a union representative.  Respondent testified “At this point, I was scared out of 
my wits . . . and became emotional . . . I knew there would be serious repercussions . . . I 
didn’t know exactly what, but I knew it was going to be unpleasant.”  Later that day, 
respondent went home to his wife and said “something has happened that I need to tell you 
about.”  Respondent told his wife that he saw EH hit AG in the stomach and intervened, 
hitting EH in the process.  Respondent’s wife had observed respondent become frustrated, 
but she had never seen him lose his temper to the point of losing control, and she had never 
seen him hit anyone of any age.  

19.  On May 21, 2015, respondent was arrested on charges including battery.  He 
retained counsel and was advised “to say nothing.”  The District Attorney for Kern County 
did not file or prosecute a criminal complaint. 

20. 

 On June 9, 2015, the District concluded its investigation of the EM 

Complaint.  In his letter to EM’s parents, complainant concluded that respondent “should 
have taken additional steps to improve his performance on day-to-day decisions, professional 
discretion, and communication among students.”  (Ex. 8.) 

21.  On July 16, 2015, the District issued a draft Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 

Immediately Suspend without Pay and Statement of Charges.  The notice was mailed to 
respondent with a cover letter containing the following advisory: “You may request an 
informal ‘Skelly’ conference . . . to determine whether cause exists to terminate your 
employment.”  (Ex. 9.) 

22.  On August 7, 2015, through his attorney, respondent submitted a letter in lieu 
of an in-person Skelly meeting.  Respondent acknowledged slamming a child’s desk on May 
18, 2015, and he expressed regret of his behavior.  Respondent did not acknowledge 
throwing papers on the floor and denied that the May 18 incident was immoral conduct.  He 
denied that he “closed his hand into a fist and punched EH in the stomach” on May 20, 2015, 
explaining that he “quickly intervened to prevent the two children from causing serious 
physical harm to one another.”  (Ex. 9.) 

23.  On August 12, 2015, complainant replied to respondent’s letter dated August 

7, 2015, expressing his intent to recommend to the Board of Education of the District 
(Board) that respondent be immediately suspended without pay and that respondent’s 
employment be terminated.  On August 20, 2015, the Board held a regularly scheduled 
meeting and resolved to move forward with complainant’s recommendations.  

 

7 

24.  On August 24, 2015, complainant hand delivered his letter to respondent, 

notifying him of the Board’s action and respondent’s right to a hearing. 

25.  A colleague, who has worked with respondent in the past and currently teaches 

a second grade class at Las Flores, testified about respondent’s character.  She specifically 
requested respondent to instruct five of her children when they reached the fifth grade 
because she “thought he was the best.”  She never heard any of her children report that 
respondent lost his temper.  She never observed respondent lose his temper in the classroom.  
She considers respondent to be patient, firm, and caring.  

26.  A parent of two former students in respondent’s classroom testified that she 

was allowed to observe the classroom anytime.  She observed respondent with her son every 
Friday and never saw respondent lose his temper.  She found that respondent helped her son 
gain focus and improve in his scholastic performance.  She testified that respondent is “very 
honorable” and that she loved him as a teacher and a person. 

27. 

Respondent testified that he wants to continue teaching, that he would act 
differently around children, and that he would never touch another child again under any 
circumstances.  He testified that he would be willing to take anger management seminars if 
required as a condition to reinstatement, but he has not independently sought anger 
management or therapeutic counseling.  In 2012, respondent requested conflict resolution 
training, but the course was fully enrolled by the time of the request.  When the administrator 
sent respondent a reminder to sign up for a similar course offered at a later date, respondent 
replied, “I will let you know in the next 24 hours;” respondent took no action to follow up.  
Respondent testified that he plans to retire in two years. 

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

3. 

1. 

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof is 

preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.)  Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more 
convincing force than that opposed to it.  (In re Shelley J. (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 322.) 

The District is authorized to dismiss a permanent employee for immoral 

conduct or evident unfitness for service.  (Educ. Code, § 44932, subd. (a).) 

Immoral conduct is that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals.  It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness.  Immoral conduct can be conduct that is 
willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and  an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 
the public welfare.  (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. 
Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808.) 

8 

 

 

4. 

Evident unfitness for service means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  
Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character 
trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet 
the expectations of the employing school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at 1444.) 

5. 

The Commission should look at the proven conduct in the aggregate.  This 

applies also to its determination of unfitness for service.  The Woodland court found that it 
was not necessary to determine if each and every act demonstrated unfitness for service.  
Rather, it was proper to examine the totality of the offensive conduct. 

6. 

In this case, within a period of three days, respondent exhibited three violent 
outbursts, including throwing papers on the classroom floor, slamming a child’s desk while 
reprimanding the child, and hitting a boy in the abdomen causing pain.  Although each 
incident of misconduct may not, in and of itself, demonstrate unfitness for service, the 
totality of the offensive conduct exhibits a fixed character trait unsuitable for teaching.  The 
undesirable trait was not remediable by the District’s previously adopted and published 
standards and policies designed to prohibit the offensive conduct. 

7. 

The evidence does not establish that respondent intended to injure EH.  
Accordingly, respondent did not engage in corporal punishment under Education Code 
section 49001, subdivision (a).  Nonetheless, by thrusting his hand near EH’s abdomen, 
knowing EH had recently undergone surgery in that area of his body, respondent engaged in 
a willful act in a careless manner, and in flagrant disregard of EH’s well-being.  The pattern 
of violent outbursts was hostile to the welfare of his students and contrary to good morals. 

8. 

Although the totality of respondent’s conduct may justify his dismissal, the 

Commission must examine whether respondent is unfit to teach under the factors set forth in 
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  In that case, the school district 
discovered that a teacher “engaged in a limited, non-criminal physical relationship [with a 
colleague] . . . of a homosexual nature.”  The California Supreme Court held that a school 
district cannot abstractly characterize conduct as immoral or unprofessional, but must show 
that retaining a teacher poses a significant danger of harm to students, school employees, or 
others who may be affected by the teacher’s conduct.  The misconduct must have some 
rational connection to the teacher’s ability to teach, expressed more specifically as follows: 

In determining whether the teacher’s conduct thus indicates 
unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as the 
likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students 
or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the 
proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the type of 
teaching certificate held by the party involved, the extenuating 
or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, 
the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

 

9 

resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the recurrence of the 
questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action 
may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.  
(Morrison v. State Bd. of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 

9. 

Examined in the context of the Morrison factors, the facts of this case weigh in 

favor of dismissal as follows: 

(A)  Violent outbursts are likely to adversely affect students, parents, and 

fellow teachers.  The District has a compelling interest to protect students from violent 
outbursts by teachers (and others).   

(B) 

The degree of adversity that may arise from violent teacher outbursts is 

potentially severe.  Although no evidence was presented to show that respondent’s conduct 
caused any actual or substantial injury, he caused EH to suffer physical pain and other 
students to suffer emotional upset and fear. 

The three incidents of violent outbursts were proximate in time and 
reveal a progressive decline in respondent’s ability to manage his anger and frustration.  

(C) 

(D)  Respondent teaches fifth graders, small children who are more 

vulnerable to violent outbursts than would be the case if respondent were credentialed to 
teach high school students. 

(E)  Respondent presented evidence of extenuating circumstances.  He has 

worked to the satisfaction of the District for 28 years without any record of employment 
discipline.  He presented compelling evidence to show that parents trusted respondent and 
specifically requested respondent to teach their children.  A reasonable inference is drawn 
that respondent was fatigued on the day of the EH incident, having spent 19 hours the prior 
day leading a field trip to Long Beach.  In aggravation, a parent complained to the District 
about respondent’s conduct at the time of the series of outbursts.   

(F) 

In spite of his long history of proper behavior, respondent engaged in a 

series of violent acts.  Accordingly, respondent’s past good behavior is not sufficiently 
compelling evidence that he is not likely to engage in violence again.  Respondent has taken 
no voluntary action since the period of the violent outbursts to seek counseling or treatment 
so as to prevent a recurrence.  Although respondent testified that he plans to retire in two 
years, he is not obligated to retire and his continuing employment poses the potential risk of 
injury in the event of any recurrence. 

(G)  Dismissing respondent may cause other teachers to become overly 

cautious with students and refrain from touching students for legitimate purposes.  However, 
any such chilling effect does not rationally relate to any constitutional rights of respondent or 
his colleagues. 

 

10 

10.  A Commission on Professional Competence has broad discretion in 

determining what constitutes unfitness to teach and immoral conduct, and whether dismissal 
or suspension is the appropriate sanction.  (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California 
(1999) 84 Cal.Rptr.2d 425, 20 Cal.4th 327, 975 P.2d 622.) 

11. 

The District established by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists 
to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for immoral conduct and 
evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and (6). 

 
ORDER 

Respondent Peter Konopak is dismissed as a permanent employee of the District. 

 
 
 

 
  
 
 
DATED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

April 20, 2016

DocuSigned  by: 

AApril 19, 2016

April 19, 2016

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

_________________________ 
MATTHEW GOLDSBY, Chairperson 
Commission on Professional Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

Vinee g.  Rosto 

_________________________ 
VINCE J. ROSATO, Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

OO narley, Clark

_________________________ 
CHARLEY CLARK, Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

 

11 

