BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

RICHARD  HOUSTON  (EN  655401), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2015100881 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission),  comprised  of 

Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Angela  Villegas,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  Ryan  8.  Hickman,  and  Henry  D.  Montelongo,  heard  this 
matter  February  16-18,  May  9-11,'  June  29,  and  July  1,  6,  and  7,  2016,  in  Los  Angeles, 
California. 

Attorneys  Michele  M.  Goldsmith  and  Jonathan  M.  Lebe,  of  Bergman  Dacey 
Goldsmith,  represented  complainant  Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (LAUSD  or  District). 

Attorneys  Daniel  J.  Kolodziej,  Rosty  G.  Gore,  and  Roshanne  Katouzian,  of  Trygstad, 

Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondent  Richard  Houston,  who  was  also  present. 

Evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  presented.  The  matter  was  submitted  July 

7,  2016.  The  Commission  deliberated  July  8,  2016. 

ADDITION  OF  HEARING  TIME  AND  DELAYED  CLOSING  OF  RECORD 

lL. 

This  matter  was  initially  set  for  hearing  February  16-18,  2016.  The  parties 

were  unable  to  complete  the  presentation  of  evidence  within  the  time  allotted.  They 
requested  and  were  given  additional  hearing  time,  from  May  9-11,  2016;  evidence  was 
received  on  May  9  and  10,  2016.  The  parties  were  again  unable  complete  their  presentation 
of  the  case.  As  a  result,  three  more  hearing  days  were  added  and  scheduled  for  August  29- 
31,  2016,  the  earliest  dates  on  which  all  parties,  counsel,  OAH,  and  Commission  members 

'  Evidence  could  not  be  taken  May  11,  2016,  due  to  the  unexpected  absence  of  a 

Commission  member. 

 

were  then  available.  Later,  with  the  parties’  agreement,  the  August  29-31,  2016  hearing 
dates  were  advanced,  to  June  29,  July  1,  and  July  6,  2016,  and  an  additional  day  of  hearing 
was  added  on  July  7,  2016. 

2. 

The  record  closed  July  7,  2016,  more  than  seven  months  after  respondent’s 

request  for  hearing,  which  was  dated  October  19,  2015.  Nevertheless,  as  acknowledged  by 
the  parties  on  the  record  of  the  proceeding,  good  cause  existed  for  the  delayed  closing  of  the 
record.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (b)(1).)’ 

SEALING  AND  REDACTION  OF  CONFIDENTIAL  INFORMATION 

During  and  after  the  hearing,  the  ALJ  ordered  the  following  exhibits  sealed:  30,  67, 

88,  89,  and  AAA.  The  ALJ  also  redacted  children’s  surnames  (except  for  initials)  from 
exhibits  51,  53,  98  through  100,  B,  H,  and  LLL. 

OTHER  PRELMINARY  MATTERS 

Before  and  during  the  hearing,  complainant  and  respondent  brought  various  motions, 

including  a  motion  to  compel,  a  motion  to  exclude,  written  objections,  motions  in  limine,  and 
a  motion  to  have  an  “affidavit”  (actually,  a  declaration)  admitted  in  evidence.  The  rulings  on 
those  matters  are  as  indicated  on  the  record  of  the  proceeding. 

ISSUES  AND  SUMMARY  OF  DECISION 

1. 

Complainant  seeks  to  dismiss  a  tenured  teacher,  respondent  Richard  Houston, 

on  the  following  grounds: 

immoral  conduct,  including  without  limitation  egregious  misconduct  (§  44932, 

immoral  conduct  (§  44939); 
unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(2)); 
unsatisfactory  performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)); 
evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(6));  and 
persistent  violation  of  school  laws  and/or  regulations  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(8)). 

2. 

The  issues  in  this  case  are: 

(a) 

Did  respondent  engage  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  the  Statement  of 

subd.  (a)(1)); 

(1) 

(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

Charges? 

?  Further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  indicated. 

 

(b) 

If  so,  does  that  conduct  constitute  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his 

position  as  a  tenured  teacher  with  LAUSD? 

(c)  |  Assuming  cause  for  dismissal  exists,  is  dismissal  appropriate? 

3. 

This  decision  concludes  respondent  did  engage  in  conduct  substantially  as 
alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,  that  cause  for  dismissal  exists,  and  that  dismissal  is 
appropriate. 

Parties;  Jurisdiction;  Background 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  September  25,  2015,  complainant  executed  the  Statement  of  Charges 

against  respondent.  On  October  14,  2015,  LAUSD  gave  respondent  written  notice  of  its 
intent  to  dismiss  him,  and  served  him  with  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  On  October 
19,  2016,  respondent  demanded  a  hearing,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of  an  Accusation.’ 
Respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for  Hearing.  This  proceeding  followed. 

2. 

Respondent  holds  a  clear  single-subject  credential  to  teach  social  science, 

issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  on  September  1,  2001.  and 
renewed  through  September  1,  2016. 

3. 

Respondent’s  teaching  career  began  in  1991,  before  he  obtained  his  clear 

credential.  From  1991  to  1994,  under  an  emergency  credential  or  waiver,  respondent  taught 
English,  history,  and  other  subjects  at  a  non-public  school,  Valley  High  School,  to  severely 
emotionally  disturbed  students,  ages  12  through  22. 

4. 

Respondent  began  working  for  LAUSD  in  1994,  at  Le  Conte  Middle  School, 

still  under  an  emergency  or  substitute  credential,  where  he  taught  “mild  to  moderate” 
(respondent’s  testimony)  special  education  students,  with  disabilities  including  audio-visual 
difficulties,  processing  deficits,  and  emotional  disturbance.  Respondent  remained  at  Le 
Conte  Middle  School  through  May  1995. 

?  The  Statement  of  Charges  and  Accusation  are  almost  congruent,  the  differences 
being  (a)  dates;  (b)  the  relief  sought  (the  Accusation  seeks  only  respondent’s  dismissal,  while 
the  Statement  of  Charges  seeks  both  immediate  unpaid  suspension  and  dismissal);  (c)  minor 
changes  in  wording;  (d)  added  verbiage  at  the  end  of  the  Accusation;  and  (e)  erroneous 
statutory  references  in  the  Accusation  (see  ex.  9,  Accusation,  at  pp.  1,  line  26,  to  2,  line  3). 
Neither  party  appeared  to  notice  the  erroneous  statutory  references;  no  request  was  made  to 
amend  them;  and  respondent  did  not  object.  Moreover,  the  Statement  of  Charges,  which  is 
the  operative  pleading  (§  44934,  subd.  (e)),  did  not  contain  similar  errors.  Further  references 

in  this  decision  are  to  the  Statement  of  Charges,  unless  the  context  requires  otherwise.    

5. 

From  May  1995  to  June  1996,  respondent,  still  with  LAUSD,  moved  to  Henry 

Clay  Middle  School,  where  he  taught  English  and  history  to  mild  to  moderate  specific 
learning-disabled  students. 

6. 

From  1996  to  2000,  respondent  was  assigned  to  LAUSD’s  Wright  Middle 

School,  where  he  initially  taught  a  special  day  class  for  students  with  mild  to  moderate 
specific  learning  disabilities.  At  some  point  during  this  period,  respondent  became  a 
resource  teacher,  providing  remedial  and  tutorial  services  to  special  education  students. 

7. 

Respondent  was  next  assigned  to  Mark  Twain  Middle  School  (MTMS),  where 
he  taught  social  studies,  including  history,  to  seventh—  and  eighth-grade  students.  The  events 
giving  rise  to  this  case  occurred  while  respondent  was  teaching  at  MTMS,  and  respondent’s 
last  day  teaching  there  was  November  21,  2014,  the  date  of  those  events.  (See  Factual 
Finding  10.) 

8. 

Other  than  the  matters  giving  rise  to  this  case,  respondent  has  no  history  of 

discipline,  either  in  his  employment  or  of  his  credential,  revealed  by  the  evidence. 

Findings  on  the  Factual  Allegations  Against  Respondent 

9. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  specifies  a  single  charge,  articulated  in  several 

subparts.  Each  is  addressed  in  turn. 

10. 

As  alleged  in  Charge  1,  the  events  giving  rise  to  this  case  occurred  on 

November  21,  2014,  the  final  day  of  school  before  the  Thanksgiving  break  that  year.  As  also 
alleged  in  Charge  1, ABE.  was  an  eighth-grade  special  education  student  in  respondent’s 
fifth-period  history  class.  Moreover,  as  further  alleged  in  Charge  1,  the  events  occurred  in 
the  presence  of  other  students  in  the  classroom, 

11. 

As  alleged  in  Charge  l{a),  respondent  forcefully  removed  Atom  the 

classroom,  substantially  in  the  manner  described  in  Charges  1(a)(ii)  and  1(a){iv),  as  follows. 

(a) 

It  was  the  passing  period  leading  into  fifth  period,  and  respondent  was 
writing  an  assignment  on  the  white  board  at  the  front  of  the  classroom.  He  became  aware  of 
a  “blur”  in  his  peripheral  vision  (respondent’s  testimony),  and  turned  to  see  two  students, 
HEED.  and  ABIG.,  running  in  the  classroom.  Hijwas  chasing AZ.  Respondent  did 
not  tell  the  students  to  stop  running  or  sit  down, 

(b) 

Respondent  intercepted  Als  path  of  travel  and  the  two  found 

themselves  face  to  face.  The  evidence  did  not  disclose  by  a  preponderance  exactly  how  the 
physical  contact  between  respondent  and  Aj  began,  but  respondent  ended  up  behind 

He 
if 
if 

 

ABBE  securing  AME  with  one  arm  around  Ais  neck/clavicle  area,  in  a  headlock  or 
chokehold  grip,  as  alleged  in  Charge  1(a)(ii)." 

c 

As  respondent  continued  to  secure  AfgjJin  the  headlock  or  chokehold, 
to  the  classroom  door,  opened  it,  and  maneuvered  Afkhrough  the  door, 

he  moved 
across  a  concrete  walkway,  and  onto  a  grass  quadrangle  area  approximately  eight  feet  from 
the  classroom  door,  as  alleged  in  Charge  1(a)(iv).°  Several  students  from  respondent’s  class 
followed  respondent  and 

outside  and  continued  to  watch  the  incident. 

(d) 

On  the 

grass,  respondent  continued  to  restrain  AWB and  tried  to  place 
resisted  and  told  respondent,  “Get  the  fuck  off  me,”  at  which 
him  on  the  ground,  but 
point  respondent  released  him,  as  alleged  in  Charge  1(b).  The  entire  incident  lasted  between 
10  and  30  seconds. 

(e) 

Immediately  following  the  incident,  AB and  two  other  students 

found  the  school’s  Dean,  Kary  Pounders,  across  the  grass  quadrangle  and  reported  the 
incident  to  him.  As  alleged  in  Charge  1(b),  Ahad  red  marks  on  his  throat  from  the 
pressure  of  respondent’s  arm.  Dean  Pounders  took 
examined  him,  gave  him  some  ice  for  his  neck,  and  released  him.  (See  Factual  Finding  22.) 

to  the  school  nurse,  who 

12. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  respondent  i  claimed  he  had  not  used  a 

headlock  or  chokehold  on Am  but  instead  had  grasped 
rather  than  holding  him  from  the  back,  and  had  simply  led  A 
shoulders. 

   

*s  shoulders,  facing  him 
out  of  the  room  by  the 

13. 

fa) 

Respondent’s  version  of  events  was  not  believable.  It  was  contravened 

by  at  least  one  prior  admission  by  respondent  and  by 
(Testimony of respondent, 
G.,  |Ec.,  v 
K,  and  W.) 

the  accounts  of  many  students. 

G.;  exs.  51,  52,  54-59,  61,  63,  64, 

if 

  

*  Given  this  finding,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  more  likely  than 
not  “/a/pproached  Af§ffrom  behind[,]”  as  alleged  in  Charge  1(a)(i)  (emphasis  supplied). 
Likewise,  the  evidence  was  equivocal  as  to  what  respondent  did  with  his  other  arm:  that  is, 
the  arm  he  was  not  using  to  brace ARs  neck/clavicle  area.  Accordingly,  the  evidence  did 
not  establish  that  respondent  more  Hkely  than  not  “[p]laced  his  other  arm  around.  A  |  5 
abdomen[,]”  as  alleged  in  Charge  1(a)(1ii). 

°  Charge  1(a)(iv)  alleges  respondent  “pushed”  Aor  the  classroom.  The  verb 

“push”  does  not  accurately  depict  what  occurred.  To  ‘“‘push”  something  connotes  a  shoving 
movement  from  the  rear  of  the  thing  being  pushed.  The  evidence  did  not  establish 
respondent  more  likely  than  not  shoved  or  pushed ABBE  through  the  door  from  behind. 
Rather,  as  noted  above,  the  evidence  indicated  respondent  physically  moved AP 
the  door  while  continuing  to  restrain  him  in  the  headlock  or  chokehold. 

through 

 

    

  

(b)  |  Respondent  likewise  acknowledged  “maybe”  he  had  caused  the  redness 

to  appear  on  ABB  s  neck,  which  was  inconsistent  with  his  denial  that  he  touched  ARs 
neck.  (Respondent’s  testimony.) 

(c) 

In  addition,  in  communications  with  school  administrators,  respondent 
described  his  action  as  “immobiliz[ing]”  Aj}  (Exs.  32  and  69.2;  see  Factual  Finding  26.) 
The  shoulder-grasping  action  .  -  described  at  the  administrative  hearing  would  have 
and  respondent  could  not  have  had  any  reasonable 
been  ineffective  to  immobilize  / 
expectation  of  immobilizing 
using  such  a  maneuver.  A  headlock  or  chokehold,  on  the 
other  hand,  could  readily  have  been  expected  to  immobilize  the  person  on  whom  it  was  used. 
It  could  also  reasonably  be  expected  to  cause  injury  such  as  redness  or  bruising. 

14. 

In  sum,  respondent’s  account  of  the  November  21,  2014  incident  was  not 

credible  and  appeared  to  reflect  either  deliberate  untruthfulness  or  self-deception. 
Respondent  attempted  to  explain  the  inconsistencies  in  his  accounts  by  claiming  it  was  hard 
to  remember  what  he  did  because  the  incident  was  “very  scary,”  “out  of  control,”  and  it  had 
been  “the  fastest  [respondent  had]  ever  seen  students  run  in  a  classroom.”  This  explanation 
did  not  ring  true.  For  most  people,  an  unusual  incident  is  more  memorable  than  a  usual  one. 
Moreover,  respondent’s  apparently-vivid  recall  of  the  students’  running  suggested  his 
memory  of  the  incident  was  not  clouded.  It  was  not  believable  that  respondent’s  recollection 
would  have  been  compromised  only  as  to  his  own  conduct. 

History  Between  Respondent  and  Austin  Leading  to  the  November  21,  2014  Incident 

15, 

Ahad  been  a  student  in  respondent’s  fifth-period  history  class  since  the 
was  eligible  for  special  education  services 
beginning  of  the  2014-2015  school  year.  A 
because  of  a  specific  learning  disability;°  he  had  an  Individualized  Education  Program  and  a 

_  Behavior  Support  Plan.  Information  about  AWB s  needs  and  accommodations  was  made 
available  to  his  teachers,  including  respondent,  at  the  beginning  of  the  2014-2015  school 
"s  needs  was  to  be  allowed  to  explain  himself,  and  not  to  be  treated 
year.  Among 
confrontationally,  which  “tend[ed]  to  set  him  off.”  (Ex.  72;  testimony  of  Raye  Robertson.) 

16.  ABB haa  difficulty  focusing  in  class  and  staying  on-task,  and  displayed 

behavior  problems  in  classes  including  respondent’s.  Indeed,  the  November  21,  2014 
incident  was  precipitated  by 

poor  behavior.  He  “hummed”  persistently  in  the  ear  of 

s 
who  is  autistic,  to  taunt  him.  Ejjjjbecame  annoyed  and  chased 

through  the 

classroom. 

17. 

The  relationship  between  respondent  and  Ahad  been  troubled  virtually 

from  the  start  of  the  2014-2015  school  year. 
s  behavior  in  respondent’s  class  was 
often  disruptive.  In  addition,  he  had  shot  a  rubber  band  toward  another  student,  and  had 
“flipped  off’  respondent.  Respondent  also  reasonably  suspected  Aor  throwing  a  book 

  

°  According 

s 
(Testimony  of  AC .  and  D 

to 

FE 

) 

parents,  he  also  had  attention-deficit  hyperactivity  disorder. 

 

  

  

  
      

  

in  class  and  of  placing  water  on  the  floor  to  create  _a  slipping  hazard  for  respondent.  Two 
weeks  before  the  November  21,  2014  incident, ABB  had  dangled  from  the  classroom  door 
regulator  and  respondent  had  told  him  to  get  down; ABB felt  respondent  was  “in  his  face” 
G.)  and  threatened  to  hit  respondent  if  respondent  “got  any  closer”  (ex. 
(testimony  of 
49),  or  words  to  that  effect. 

(a) 

18. 

Respondent  dealt  with Am  s  behavior  using  various  approaches, 
including  some  positive  reinforcement,  and  also  progressive  discipline,  including  verbal 
reprimands  and  changing  As  seat  assignment.  On  several  occasions,  respondent  sent 
out  of  the  classroom,  sometimes  on  referral  to  the  Dean,  sometimes  to  another 

teacher’s  room,  and  sometimes  simply  to  stand  outside  until  he  calmed  down. 

(b) 

|  Respondent  also  talked  with AR;  parents  about  A  s  behavior 

issues.  Initially, ‘_  s  parents  welcomed  respondent’s  communications  and  tried  to 
reinforce  discipline  at 
them  too  much  and  stopped  cooperating  with  him. 

home,  but  eventually  they  came  to  feel  respondent  was  contacting 

(c) 

In  addition,  respondent  communicated  with Am  :  other  teachers, 

including  special  education  teacher  Raye  Robertson,  and  with  the  school’s  Dean  and 
administrators,  about Am  s  behavior  problems.  Despite  respondent’s  efforts, Am  S 
behavior  did  not  improve. 

(d) 

|  Onone  occasion,  when  respondent  became  frustrated  with Am 

respondent  said  words  to  the  effect  of  “T’ll  see  you  when  you  get  out  of  college,”  implying 
he  wanted  to  confront AB 

grew  up. 

when 

intent  or  Motivation jor  Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  Conduct  Toward  A= 

19. 

The  evidence  varied  as  to  how  respondent  appeared  during  the  November  21, 
2014  incident.  ARB ana  some  student  statements  described  respondent  as  looking  angry, 
while  another  student,  JNIC.,  testified  respondent  had  looked  as  though  he  was  simply 
trying  to  calm Afdown. 

20. 

(a) 

Respondent  himself  claimed  he  restrained ABB  01  out  of  emotion, 

but  as  a  safety  measure.  That  was  not  believable.  The  evidence  indicated  respondent 
impulsively  restrained  Aim 
at  least  in  part  out  of  frustration  with  him  (see  Factual 
Findings  15-18),  and  that  safety  was  not  the  motivating  factor,  but  respondent’s  post-hoc 
rationale  for  his  action.  Nevertheless,  the  evidence  did  not  show  respondent  intended  to 
harm  Am  rather,  respondent’s  statements  to  schoo]  administrators  that  he  had  wanted  to 
“immobilize” 
ppeared,  more  likely  than  not,  accurate.  (See  Factual  Finding  26;  exs. 
32  and  69.2.) 

(b) 

Even  if  respondent’s  action  had  been  motivated  by  safety  concerns,  as 

he  claimed,  it  showed  exceedingly  poor  judgment.  Although  students  running  in  the 
classroom  might  pose  a  potential  danger  to  themselves  and/or  others,  physically  restraining 

 

one  of  the  running  students  also  posed  a  danger  of  injury  to  that  student,  left  the  other 
student’s  running  unaddressed,  and  was  neither  a  necessary  nor  effective  means  of 
addressing  the  potential  danger  caused  by  the  students’  activity  in  the  first  instance. 

Aftermath  of Incident 

21. 

As  Austin  was  leaving  school  on  the  day  of  the  incident,  he  walked  by 

Mr. 

Bear’s  classroom,  across  the  grass  quadrangle  from  respondent’s  classroom.  AMIE  cursed 
loudly 
, 

at  respondent,  who  was  listening  from  his  own  classroom.  Respondent  yelled  back  at 
“You  were  out  of  control!”  and  other  words  to  similar  effect. 

22. 

When  ABB  saw  the  school  nurse  immediately  following  the  November  21, 
2014  incident  (see  Factual  Finding  11),  he  did  not  have  pain  or  range-of-motion  [imitatton.. 
(Testimony  of  Lori  Nelson;  ex.  67.)  The  following  day,  however, Am  went  to  the  hospital 
and  was  diagnosed  with  a  cervical  contusion  and  strain,  for  which  he  was  given  a  single  dose 
of  Acetaminophen  (also  known  as  Tylenol)  and  a  cervical  collar  neck  brace.’  (Exs.  30  and 
AAA.)  The  doctor  also  excused 
gym  class. 

from  contact  sports,  other  sporting  activities,  and 

23, 

AR  s  family  retained  an  attorney  and  notified  the  media  of  the  incident; 

they  later  sued  the  District,  among  others.  During  the  Thanksgiving  break,  channel  KTLA-5 
news  ran  a  story  in  which  AR  appeared  wearing  the  cervical  collar.  Many  people  saw  the 
news  story,  including  students  and  employees  of  MTMS. 

24. 

Students  who  observed  the  incident  between ABB and  respondent  were 

alarmed  and  shaken.  When  students  and  school  employees  returned  from  the  Thanksgiving 
,  the  incident  became 
break,  many  of  them  having  seen  the  KTLA-5  news  story  about 
a  topic  of  conversation  and  rumor  among  students  for  approximately  one  week. 
was 
the  butt  of  bawdy  teasing,  including 
“dick.”  (Testimony  of  ABG.: 
changed  the  screen  saver  in  the  school’s  computer  laboratory  to  show a  picture  of 
wearing  the  cervical  collar. 

choked  on  respondent’s 
C.)  In  addition,  someone 

    

students’  claiming  he  had 

;  ABC. 

25. 

|MTMS  administration  notified  police  of  the  incident  and  police  investigated. 

Respondent  was  not  criminally  charged. 

26. 

On  January  28,  2015,  MTMS  administrators  met  with  respondent  and  his 

union  representative  to  discuss  the  incident,  and  on  February  11,  2015,  MTMS 
administrators  held  a  formal  conference  with  respondent  and  his  union  representative.  On 
February  13,  2015,  Instructional  Specialist  Carol  Ariza  issued  a  conference  memorandum 
(ex.  69.1),  to  which  respondent  provided  a  written  response.  “(Ex.  69.2.)  It  was  in  the 

  

’  The  records  from  AMPs  visit  to  the  hospital  (exs.  30  and  AAA)  are  ambiguous 
regarding  the  cervical  collar.  Although  the  records  indicate  the  doctor  ordered  the  cervical 
collar,  they  also  indicate  the  order  was  discontinued  the  same  day. 

   

  

interview  and  respondent’s  response  to  Ms.  Ariza’s  conference  memorandum  that  respondent 
explained  his  action  as  an  attempt  to  “immobilize” Am.  (Exs.  32  and  69.2;  see  Factual 
Finding  20.) 

. 

27. 

On  March  18,  2015,  the  District  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  and  a 

Notice  of  Suspension  to  respondent  (collectively,  Notice)  (exs.  69  and  70);  respondent 
provided  a  written  response  (ex.  Z).  The  Notice  concluded  with  the  statement: 

This  notice  is  being  given  to  you  in  order  to  allow  you  an 
opportunity  to  correct  the  above-listed  deficiencies  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charges.  Additionally,  your 
failure  to  show  marked  and  sustained  improvement  .. 
result  in  further  discipline[.] 

.  will 

(Ex.  69.) 

LAUSD  Policies 

28. 

Respondent  was  not  thereafter  given  an  opportunity  to  return  to  teaching. 

29. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  respondent  violated  District  policies, 
“including”  (ex.  1)  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics; 
Bulletin  5046.0,  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment;  the  Board  Resolution  regarding 
Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;  Bulletin  1347.0,  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting 
Requirements;  Bulletin  5212.1,  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy;  and  the  Discipline  Foundation 
Policy.*  District  policies  are  distributed  to  employees  regularly,  and  respondent  was  aware 
of  them. 

, 

30. 

(a) 

 Ofthe  policies  identified  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,  respondent’s 

November  21,  2014  conduct  toward ABB iolated  one:  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

(b) 

In  relevant  part,  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  prohibits 

“{e]ngaging  in  any  behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a  student(s)  or  in  the  presence 
of a  student(s),  that  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative[,|’’  and/or 
“[t]ouching  or  having  physical  contact  with  a  student(s)  that  is  not  age-appropriate  or  within 
the  scope  of  the  employee’s  individual’s  responsibilities  and/or  duties.”  (Ex.  69.12.) 

(c)  |  Respondent’s  physical  restraint  of Am  on  November  21,  2014  was 

unprofessional  and  outside  the  scope  of  his  duties.  (See  Factual  Findings  11-20.) 
Accordingly,  the  physical  restraint  violated  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

  

*  Tt  was  not  clear  from  the  Statement  of  Charges  what  other  policies  the  District 

intended  to  invoke  by  using  the  word  “including”;  therefore,  “including”  is  deemed 
surplusage. 

   

31. 

The  remaining  policies  identified  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  included  in 

complainant’s  evidentiary  presentation  were  inapposite,  were  not  violated,  and/or  were  not 
yet  fully  implemented. 

32. 

(a) 

For  example,  the  evidence  did  not  show,  more  likely  than  not,  that 

respondent  failed  to  strive  to  demonstrate  excellence,  integrity,  or  responsibility,  and  a  single 
instance  of  conduct  did  not  constitute  a  failure  on  respondent’s  part  to  create  an  overall 
environment  of  trust,  respect,  and  non-discrimination.  Rather,  respondent’s  November  21, 
2014  physical  restraint  of 
was  not  implicated. 

as  an  impulsive  act.  Hence,  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics 

(b) 

=‘  In  addition,  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward Am 

was  not  “discipline”  and  was  not  intended  to  inflict  pain  on 
ambit  of  the  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  bulletin.  (See  §  49001,  subd.  (a)  [defining 
“corporal  punishment”  as  “the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of, 
physical  pain  on  a  pupil[.}”).)” 

removing  it  from  the 

(c) 

Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward Am  also  did  not 

implicate  the  Respectful  Treatment  resolution  because  it  was  not  intended  to  harm 
and  it  did  not  involve  any  slur  or  other  form  of  prohibited  discrimination. 

(ad) 

Respondent  was  not  required  under  the  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect 

Reporting  Requirements  policy  to  self-report  (ex.  69.11);  moreover,  the  Statement  of 
Charges  is  concerned  with  respondent’s  conduct,  not  his  failure  to  report  it. 

(ce) 

|  Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward Am  although  not 

a  model  of  appropriate  behavior,  likewise  did  not  constitute  bullying  because  the  evidence 
did  not  reveal  an  intent  on  respondent’s  part  to  inflict  psychological  or  physical  distress  or 
injury,  or  to  cause 
to  immobilize  nt 

physical  discomfort,  injury,  or  pain.  Rather,  respondent  acted  on  impulse 

(f) 

Finally,  the  Discipline  Foundation  Policy—subtitled  “School-Wide 
Positive  Behavior  Support”  (ex.  69.18)—was  new  as  of  November  2014,  and  had  not  yet 
been  fully  implemented.  (Testimony  of  Carol  Ariza.)  Hence,  respondent  did  not  violate  the 
policy,  which  in  any  event  is  only  marginally  applicable,  if  at  all,  to  a  sudden  occurrence 
such  as  the  November  21,  2014  incident  giving  rise  to  this  case. 

33. 

Additional  District  and  school  policies  included  in  complainant’s  evidentiary 

presentation,  but  not  identified  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,  are  not  at  issue  in  this  case. 

if 
i/ 
if 
  

”  Thus,  under  section  49001,  the  actor  must  deliberately  cause  physical  pain. 

10 

   

  

Other  Circumstances 

34. 

Respondent  is  originally  from  New  York,  but  has  lived  in  California  since 

1962.  He  has  a  12-year-old  son  who  has  autistic-like  symptoms.  Respondent  testified  his 
philosophy  toward  working  with  children  with  special  needs  is  to  approach  them  with  a 
patient  and  nurturing  attitude,  and  to  use  flexible  teaching  modalities.  In  respondent’s  career 
at  MTMS,  he  served  as  the  History  department  chair,  chair  of  a  local  leadership  council, 
audio-visual  equipment  manager,  and  organizer  of  the  school’s  Jeopardy!  tournament  and 
field  trips. 

35. 

Ina  2011-2012  Stull  evaluation,  respondent’s  classroom  management 

techniques  were  judged  to  “need{  ]  improvement[.]”  (Ex.  69.19.)  The  evaluation  also  noted 
respondent  made  “inappropriate  comments”  in  class.  Ud}  Respondent  was  advised  to 
undertake  Peer  Assistance  Review  (PAR),  but  PAR  was  not  provided,  and  respondent  was 
not  subsequently  re-evaluated.  Even  into  the  2014-2015  school  year,  however,  according  to 
student  witnesses  and  statements,  respondent  ran  a  relatively  disorganized  classroom  and  did 
not  always  specify  clear  consequences  for  student  behavior. 

36. 

In  May  2016,  respondent  took  a  two-day  course  entitled  “Nonviolent  Crisis 

Intervention  for  School  Site  Teams”  (NCI),  in  which  he  studied  methods  of  dealing  with 
“situations  where  students  act  out.”  (Respondent’s  testimony;  ex.  JJJ.) 

37. 

From  taking  the  NCI  course,  respondent  learned  he  should  respond  to  a 

situation  in  which  students  are  running  in  the  classroom  by  first  yelling,  “Stop!”  and,  if  that 
does  not  work,  then  by  physically  impeding  the  students’  path,  but  not  touching  them,  and 
finally  by  calling  for  help.  Looking  back  at  the  November  21,  2014  incident,  respondent 
now  believes  he  could  have  been  more  proactive  in  informing  the  special  education  teacher 
and  school  administration  of  A;  behavior  issues  and  the  need  for  remedial  action. 

38. 

(a) 

Respondent  would  like  to  be  able  to  return  to  teaching  because  he 

enjoys  sharing  his  enthusiasm  for  history  and  the  joy  of  learning.  Given  all  that  has 
occurred,  respondent  cannot  imagine  himself  ever  again  physically  engaging  a  student  as  he 
did  AM]:  Respondent  appeared  sincere  in  this  belief.  Nevertheless,  several  circumstances 
suggested  it  was  overly  optimistic. 

(b) 

Respondent’s  classroom-management  difficulties  and  his  exercise  of 
poor  judgment—not  only  on  November  21,  2014,  but  before  and  after  as  well—in  making 
inappropriate  comments,  both  while  being  observed  in  class  and  toward Am  in  failing  to 
be  entirely  truthful  about  his  conduct  toward Am  and  in  failing  to  seek  NCI  or  similar 
training  until  well  after  the  hearing  in  this  case  had  begun  (ex.  JJJ)—all  pointed  to  an 
individual  who  has  not  fully  acknowledged  or  accepted  responsibility  for  his  actions.  This 
failure  makes  future  lapses  in  judgment  and/or  in  impulse  control  more  likely,  and  such 
lapses  could  again  endanger  or  harm  a  student. 

if 

11 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Introduction 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  exists.  (Factual  Finding  1.) 

Complainant  had  the  burden  to  establish  the  matters  alieged  in  the  Statement 

of  Charges  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Com.  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.) 

3. 

Complainant  established  some,  though  not  all,  of  the  causes  for  dismissal 
asserted  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,  and  further  established  that  respondent  should  be 
dismissed  from  his  teaching  position  with  LAUSD. 

Causes  for  Discipline  Not  Established 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

4. 

Cause  3  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed 
for  unprofessional  conduct,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2).  Complainant  did  not 
establish  this  cause  for  dismissal. 

5. 

‘“Unprofessional  conduct”  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession,  or 

is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  profession  in  good  standing  (Bd.  of Education  v.  Swan 
(1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553  [overruled  on  other  grounds,  Bekiaris  v.  Bd.  of Education  (1972)  6 
Cal.3d  575,  587,  fn.  7]),  and  indicates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Com.  on  Prof. 
Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.)  Dismissal  based  on  unprofessional 
conduct  requires  the  school  district  to  give  the  teacher  written  notice  of  the  objectionable 
conduct  and  “an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the 
charge.”  (§  44938,  subd.  (a).) 

6. 

Respondent’s  conduct  toward  Aon  November  21,  2014  was 

unprofessional.  (Factual  Findings  10-20  and  30.)  Moreover,  respondent  was  given  written 
notice  of  his  objectionable  conduct,  in  the  form  of  the  Notice.  (Factual  Finding  27.)  But 
because  respondent  was  not  allowed  to  return  to  teaching  after  November  21,  2014,  he  was 
not  given  “an  opportunity  to  correct  his...  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the 
charge[,]”  as  mandated  by  section  44938,  subdivision  (a).  (Factual  Finding  28.) 
Accordingly  Cause  3  was  not  established. 

UNSATISFACTORY  PERFORMANCE 

7. 

Cause  4  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  unsatisfactory 

performance,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5).  Complainant  did  not  establish  this 
cause  for  dismissal. 

| 

12 

 

8. 

Neither  the  Education  Code  nor  case  law  defines  “unsatisfactory 
performance,”  but  it  is  distinct  from  unprofessional  conduct.  (§§  44932,  subd.  (a)(2)  and  (5); 
44938,  subd.  (c)}.  As  with  unprofessional  conduct,  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory  performance 
requires  the  District  to  give  the  teacher  written  notice  of  the  objectionable  behavior  and  “an 
opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her.  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.”  (Ed.  Code, 
§  44938,  subd.  (b)(1).) 

9. 

It  is  doubtful  in  this  case  whether  respondent’s  allegedly-unsatisfactory 

performance  was  distinct  from  his  unprofessional  conduct,  considering  that  both  causes  for 
dismissal  rest  on  the  same  November  21,  2014  occurrence.  (Factual  Findings  10-14.)  Even 
if  a  distinction  could  be  drawn,  however,  respondent’s  removal  from  the  classroom  after 
November  21,  2014,  without  the  opportunity  to  return  and  “correct  his  . 
.  faults”  renders 
this  cause  for  dismissal  fatally  defective.  (Factual  Findings  27  and  28.) 

. 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  SCHOOL  LAWS,  REGULATIONS,  AND/OR  POLICIES 

10. 

Cause  6  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  persistently  violating 

school  rules  and  regulations:  i.e.,  the  District  policies  enumerated  in  the  Statement  of 
Charges.  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(8).)  Complainant  did  not  establish  this  cause  for  dismissal. 

tf. 

Asimplied  by  the  word  “persistent,”  a  single  violation  is  not  cause  for 

dismissal.  (Governing  Bd.  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  81-84,  rehg.  den.,  id.  at  p.  85.) 

(a) 

12. 

In  this  case,  the  Statement  of  Charges  identified  only  a  single  instance 
of  conduct  as  the  “persistent  violation,”  and  the  evidence  showed  that  conduct  violated  only 
one  District  policy.  (Factual  Findings  29-33.)  By  definition,  a  single  violation  cannot 
constitute  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  and/or  regulations. 

(b) 

Likewise,  it  would  be  fallacious  to  infer  “persistent”  violation  from  a 
single  instance  of  conduct,  even  if  that  conduct  happened  to  violate  multiple  policies,  laws, 
or  regulations.  Hence,  even  if  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward 
ad 
violated  every  LAUSD  policy  invoked  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  and/or  covered  by  the 
evidence,  which  it  did  not  (i.),  it  still  would  not  have  demonstrated  a  “persistent”  violation. 
No  cause  for  dismissal  exists  based  on  respondent’s  persistent  violation  of  District  policy, 
rule,  or  regulation. 

13. 

Cause  2  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  immoral  conduct,  under 

section  44939,  Complainant  established  this  cause  for  dismissal. 

Causes for  Dismissal  Established 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

[] 

13 

 

14. 

“Immoral  conduct”  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary 
to  good  morals,  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
and  dissoluteness.  It  can  also  be  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community  and  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Bd.  of Education  of the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

15.  | Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward ABB  involved  poor 
judgment  and  unchecked  impulsiveness,  and  was  followed  by  a  failure  to  be  entirely  truthful, 
the  invention  of  an  after-the-fact  justification,  and  non-acceptance  of  responsibility.  (Factual 
Findings  10-20.) 

16. 

Poor  judgment  and  insufficient  impulse  control  can  be  immoral  in  and  of 

themselves,  reflecting  willfulness,  moral  indifference,  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  public  welfare—or,  in  this  case, AR  s  welfare  and  the  welfare  of 
respondent’s  other  fifth-period  students.  Respondent’s  subsequent  untruthfulness  and 
attempts  to  justify  his  initially-immoral  impulsive  act,  rather  than  own  up  to  it,  compounded 
his  wrongdoing  and  betrayed  a  tacit  consciousness  on  his  part  that  his  action  had  been 
improper.  (Factual  Findings  10-26  and  34-38.) 

17. 

Hence,  Cause  2  was  established. 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT  INCLUDING  EGREGIOUS  MISCONDUCT 

18.  |  Cause  1  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed  for  immoral  conduct, 

including  without  limitation  egregious  misconduct,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1).  Complainant  established  this  cause  for  dismissal. 

19. 

Egregious  misconduct  “is  defined  exclusively  as  immoral  conduct  that  is  the 

basis  for  an  offense  described  in  Section  44010  or  44011  of  this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2 
to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the  Penal  Code.”  (§  44932,  subd  (a)(1).) 

20. 

As  explained  above,  respondent’s  conduct  was  immoral.  (See  Legal 

Conclusions  13-17.) 

21. 

Both  parties  agree,  and  the  plain  language  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1), 

confirms,  that  a  person’s  conduct  need  not  result  in  criminal  prosecution  or  conviction  in 
order  to  constitute  “the  basis  for  an  offense  described”  in  one  or  more  of  the  enumerated 
statutes.'°  Hence,  the  fact  that  respondent  was  not  criminally 
connection  with  his  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward 
not  dispose  of  this  cause  for  dismissal. 

charged  or  convicted  in 

(Factual  Finding  25)  does 

  

'°  This  conclusion  makes  it  unnecessary  to  examine the  legislative  history  of  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  proffered  by  complainant. 

14 

   

22.  —  Still,  respondent’s  conduct  can  be  deemed  “egregious  misconduct”  only  if  it 

satisfies  the  elements  of  one  or  more  of  the  enumerated  statutes.  It  does.  Respondent’s 
November  21,  2014  conduct  toward AG 
Code  sections  11165.2,  11165.3,  11165.5,  and  11165.6."' 

constituted  the  basis  for  an  offense  under  Penal 

23. 

(a)  —  Penal  Code  section  11165.2  defines  “neglect”  of  a  child  to  include 
“negligent  treatment”  or  “maltreatment  of  a  child  by  a  person  responsible  for  the  child’s 
welfare  under  circumstances  indicating  harm  or  threatened  harm  to  the  child’s  health  or 
welfare.” 

(b) 

Penal  Code  section  11165.2,  subdivision  (a),  further  defines  “severe 

neglect”  to  include  “those  situations  of  neglect  where  any  person  having  the  care  or  custody 
of  a  child  willfully  causes  or  permits  the  person  or  health  of  the  child  to  be  placed  in  a 
situation  such  that  his  or  her  person  or  health  is  endangered,  as  proscribed  by  [Penal  Code] 
Section  11165.3[.]” 

(c) 

Penal  Code  section  11165.3,  in  turn,  defines  “the  willful  harming  or 

injury  of  a  child  or  the  endangering  of  the  person  or  health  of  a  child”  as 

a  situation  in  which  any  person  willfully  causes  or  permits  any 
child  to  suffer,  or  inflicts  thereon,  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or 
mental  suffering,  or  having  the  care  of  custody  of  any  child, 
willfully  causes  or  permits  the  person  or  health  of  the  child  to  be 
placed  in  a  situation  in  which  his  or  her  person  or  health  is 
endangered. 

qd) 

@ 

Under  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  and  11165.3,  the  term 

“willfully”  refers  to  the  volition  necessary  to  accomplish  an  action.  Unlike  the  manner  in 
which  “willfully”  is  used  in  section  49001  (see  Factual  Finding  32  and  Legal  Conclusion  22), 
in  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  and  11165.3,  the  term  “willfully”  does  not  require  that  the 
actor  intend  to  inflict  pain;  it  requires  only  that  the  actor’s  conduct  be  voluntary,  as  opposed 
to  accidental  or  inadvertent. 

(ii) 

Moreover,  section  49001’s  requirement  that  the  actor  intend  to 

inflict  pain  cannot  be  read  into  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  or  11165.3,  because  the  term 
“corporal  punishment,”  and  by  extension  section  49001’s  definition  of  “corporal 
punishment,”  is  not  incorporated  by  reference  into  these  statutes,  as  it  is  into  Penal  Code 
section  11165.4.  (See  Legal  Conclusion  22.)  The  use  of  the  term  “corporal  punishment”  in 

  

'’  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  implicate  sections  44010  or  44011,  which  define  “sex 

offense”  and  “controlled  substance  offense,”  respectively.  Likewise,  because  respondent’s 
conduct  was  not  intended  to  inflict  physical  pain  on ABBE  (Factual  Findings  13,  19,  and  20), 
it  did  not  form  the  basis  for  the  offense  described  in  Penal  Code  section  11165.4,  which 
employs  the  term  “corporal  punishment([,]”  defined  under  section  49001  as  the  willful—i.e., 
deliberate—infliction  of  physical  pain  on  a  pupil.  (See  Factual  Finding  32.) 

15 

   

one  statute,  but  omission  from  other,  related  statutes,  denotes  that  the  omission  was 
purposeful,  and  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  read  section  49001’s  definition  into  the 
other  statutes. 

(a) 

 Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward Af 

24. 
general  and  severe  neglect  under  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  and  11165.3.  As 

both 
    
a  teacher,  respondent  had ARB in  his  care  or  custody  and  was  responsible  for 
(Factual  Findings  10  and  15.)  Respondent  willfully—that  is  to  say, 

ABBR s  welfare. 
volitionally—engaged  in  an  act  that  could  reasonably  be  expected  to,  and  did  cause  or  permit 
to  suffer  physical  pain,  physical  injury,  and  mental  suffering,  and  endangered 
’s  health  and  person.  (Factual  Findings  10-20  and  22.)  Neither  respondent’s  conduct 
nor  the  infliction  of  physical  pain  on  A{g}was  justified.  (Factual  Findings  10-20  and  30.) 

constituted 

   

(b) 

The  absence  of justification  for  respondent’s  conduct  dispenses  with 
respondent’s  argument  that  his  action  was  privileged  under  sections  44807  and/or  49001, 
subdivision  (a),  both  of  which  allow  teachers  to  intervene  physically  with  students  to  the 
’  extent  reasonable  and  necessary  to  prevent  injury  or  maintain  order.  In  particular,  section 

44807  exempts  teachers  from  criminal  sanction  for  exercising  “the  same  degree  of  physical 
control  over  a  pupil  that  a  parent  would  be  legally  privileged  to  exercise[.]” 

(c) 

Buta  parent’s  privilege  depends  on  the  existence  of  “(1)  a  genuine 

disciplinary  motive;  (2)  a  reasonable  occasion  for  discipline;  and  (3)  a  disciplinary  measure 
Dept.  of  Social  Services 
reasonable  in  kind  and  degree.”  (Gonzalez  v.  Santa  Clara  County 
(2014)  223  Cal.App.4th  72,  91.)  In  this  instance,  although 
s  running 
s  and 
presented  a  reasonable  occasion  for  discipline,  respondent  acted  impulsively,  without  a 
genuine  disciplinary  motive,  and  his  physical  interaction  with  A 
kind  or  degree.  (Factual  Findings  10-20,  30,  and  38.)  It  was  not  privileged. 

was  not  reasonable  in 

   

  

25. 

Accordingly,  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  toward Am 

constituted  the  basis  for  an  offense  under  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  and  11165.3. 

(a) 

26. 

Likewise,  respondent’s  conduct  constituted  the  basis  for  an  offense 
under  Penal  Code  sections  11165.5  and  11165.6.  Both  of  these  statutes  define  “abuse  or 
neglect”  of  a  child.  Penal  Code  section  11165.5  applies  to  situations  involving  “out-of- 
home”  care,  and  encompasses  abuse  or  neglect  perpetrated  by  an  “employee  of  a  public  or 
private  school”  who  is  “responsible  for  the  child’s  welfare[.]”  Penal  Code  section  11165.6 
applies  generally.  Since  respondent  was Am  s  schoolteacher,  both  Penal  Code  sections 
11165.5  and  11165.6  apply  to  him.  (Factual  Findings  10  and  15.) 

(b) 

Both  statutes  define  “abuse  or  neglect”  to  include  a  violation  of  Penal 
Code  section  11165.2  and/or  11165.3.  Because  respondent’s  conduct  violated  Penal  Code 
sections  11165.2  and  11165.3,  it  also  violated  Penal  Code  sections  11165.5  and  11165.6. 
(See  Legal  Conclusions  22-25.) 

if 

    

16 

   

  

(c) 

Penal  Code  sections  11165.5  and  11165.6  also  define  “abuse  or 

neglect”  to  include  “physical  injury  . 
means[.|”  Respondent  inflicted  physical  injury  on  ABB by  other  than  accidental  means. 
(Factual  Findings  10-20  and  22.)  Accordingly,  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct 
toward AM violated  Penal  Code  sections  11165.5  and  11165.6  under  this  provision  as 
well. 

.  inflicted  upon_a  child”  “by  other  than  accidental 

. 

27. 

Because  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  immoral  conduct  toward  n 

constituted  the  basis  for  an  offense  under  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2,  11165.3,  11165.5, 
and/or  11165.6,  respondent  engaged  in  egregious  misconduct  within  the  meaning  of  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(1).  Cause  1  for  dismissal  was  established. 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

28. 

Cause  5  asserts  respondent  should  be  dismissed  on  grounds  of  evident 

unfitness  for  service,  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6).  Complainant  established  this 
cause  for  dismissal. 

29, 

A  teacher  displaying  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  is  one  who  is 

clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service 
connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Com.  on  Prof.  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1444  [internal  quotation  marks  omitted].) 

30. 

Respondent’s  conduct  toward ABB  on  November  21,  2014  revealed  a 

temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy  unlikely  to  be  remediable  at  this  point.  Respondent’s 
conduct  reflected  not  only  insufficient  impulse  control  and  poor  judgment—both  of  which 
are  difficult  to  remedy—but  also  a  failure  of  insight  and  character,  as  shown  by  his 
subsequent  untruthfulness  and  reluctance  to  accept  responsibility  for  his  conduct.  (Factual 
Findings  10-20,  26,  and  27.) 

31. 

|  While  respondent’s  taking  the  NCI  course  is  worthy  of  acknowledgment,  his 

delay  in  doing  so  until  well  into  the  hearing  of  this  matter  illustrates  a  person  not  so  much 
committed  to  real  reform  as  to  making  a  showing  of  reform.  (Factual  Findings  36  and  37.) 
The  showing  was  unconvincing.  Particularly  in  light  of  respondent’s  lengthy  experience 
with  difficult-to-manage  children  (Factual  Findings  3-6),  his  conduct  toward ABE 
esa 
to  reflect  a  compulsion,  impulse,  and  failure  of  self-control  and  judgment  he  is  unlikely  to  be 
able  to  change.  Accordingly,  Cause  5  was  established. 

   

   

   

17 

   

Dismissal  Is  Appropriate 

32. 

|  Even  where  cause  for  dismissal  appears,  the  Commission  has  broad  latitude  in 

determining  whether  dismissal  is  appropriate.  (California  Teachers  Assn.  vy.  State  of  Cal. 
(1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343;  Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208, 
215-222.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  Commission  has  no  discretion  to  fashion  discipline  short  of 
dismissal  where,  as  here,  dismissal  is  the  remedy  requested.  (§  44944,  subd.  (d)(1)  &  (3).) 
The  relationship  between  a  teacher’s  conduct  and  his  or  her  overall  fitness  to  teach  must  be 
considered  in  deciding  whether  dismissal  is  warranted.  (Morrison  v.  State  Bd.  of Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229.  (Morrison.)) 

33. 

Under  Morrison,  the  operative  factors  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 

may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity 
anticipated;  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of certificate  held 
by  the  teacher;  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances;  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  teacher’s  motives;  the  probability  of  recurrence;  and  the  likelihood 
that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  With  regard  to  the  last  factor,  public  employers  have 
some  discretion  to  regulate  the  on-the-job  speech  or  expression  of  their  employees.  (Garcetti 
v.  Ceballos  (2006)  547  U.S.  410,  421;  Kaye  v.  Bd.  of Trustees  of  San  Diego  County  Public 
Law  Library  (2009)  179  Cal.App.4th  48,  56-59.) 

34, 

In  this  case,  the  Morrison  factors  weigh  in  favor  of  dismissal. 

35. 

|  Respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct  adversely  affected  the  school 

community.  Students  who  saw  the  incident  found  it  frightening,  and  students  generally  took 
a  lurid  interest  in  it  and  visited  teasing  and  humiliation  on 
(Factual  Finding  24.)  In 
addition,  respondent’s  students  lost  their  teacher  when  respondent  was  pulled  from  the 
classroom  in  the  wake  of  the  incident,  and  other  teachers  would  have  been  left  to  wonder 
what  had  happened.  (Factual  Findings  7  and  28.)  Furthermore,  although  the  school 
community’s  interest  in  the  story  died  down  after  about  a  week  (Factual  Finding  24),  the 
degree  of  adversity  the  incident  occasioned  was  very  high. 

36. 

The  incident  occurred  less  than  two  years  ago:  1.e.,  recently.  (Factual  Findings 

7  and  10.)  Respondent’s  type  of  certificate,  a  single  subject  credential  (Factual  Finding  2), 
does  not  make  dismissal  less  appropriate,  since  his  character  and  teaching  traits  would 
dispose  him  to  fare  similarly  with  high  school  students  as  he  did  with  middle-schoolers. 
(Factual  Findings  10-21  and  38;  see  Legal  Conclusions  28-31.) 

37. 

 Respondent’s  motive  in  restraining  Acannot  be  said  to  have  been  either 
praiseworthy  or  blameworthy.  While  preserving  student  safety  might  have  been  a  laudable 
aim,  respondent  did  not  act,  in  the  moment,  out  of  a  concern  for  student  safety;  rather,  he 
acted  impulsively,  then  offered  “safety”  as  an  after-the-fact  justification  for  his  conduct. 
(Factual  Findings  10-20.)  On  the  other  hand,  respondent  did  not  intend  to  harm A cd; 
Factual  Findings  26  and  32),  such  that  his  motive  was  not  blameworthy,  either. 

18 

 

38. 

Given  respondent’s  lack  of  insight  into  his  conduct  and  reluctance  to  accept 
responsibility  for  it  (Factual  Findings  12-14,  20,  26,  and  35-38),  instances  of  poor  judgment 
and  impulsivity  are  likely  to  recur.  Indeed,  even  on  the  date of the  incident,  respondent 
displayed  further  failure  to  control  his  impulse  to  yell  back  at 
him  at  the  end  of  the  day.  (Factual  Finding  21.) 

     
when ‘BB  cursea  at 

39. 

Finally,  respondent’s  dismissal  as  a  result  of  the  November  21,  2014  incident 

is  not  likely  to  chill  respondent’s  or  other  teachers’  exercise  of  their  Constitutional  rights, 
because  no  Constitutional  right  was  implicated  by  respondent’s  November  21,  2014  conduct. 

40. 

 Insum,  despite  respondent’s  lengthy  career,  positive  contributions  to  his 

school  and  other  virtuous  attributes  (Factual  Findings  3-7  and  34-38),  his  actions  of 
November  21,  2014—however  brief—betrayed  character  deficiencies,  which  were  made 
even  more  plain  by  his  subsequent  attempts  to  justify  and  minimize  the  incident.  These 
deficiencies  render  respondent  too  great  a  risk  to  return  to  his  teaching  position  at  LAUSD. 
Accordingly,  dismissal is  appropriate. 

41. 

Except  as  set  forth in  this  decision,  all  other  allegations  and  contentions  lack 

merit  or  constitute  surplusage. 

if 
if 
if 
Hf 
i 
i 
i/ 
if 
if 
if 
if 
if 
ff 
i] 
HI 
if 
if 
i 
if 
Hf 
ff 
Hf 
if 
if 
if 

19 

 

Respondent  Richard  Houston  shall  forthwith  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee 

of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

ORDER 

Dated: 

July  18,  2016 

Dated: 

July  18,  2016 

Dated: 

July  18,  2016 

DocuSigned 

sy 

ae  ae 

ANGELA  VILLEGAS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Chair,  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: = 

BIESIBESED2AES.. 

RYAN  HICKMAN,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

‘DocuSigned  by: 

Bey Dp  Wobh 

62F7D9B6AZ214E7. 

HENRY  D.  MONTELONGO,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence    

