BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

ANTHONY LIALI (EN 671331),
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2015091133

Respondent.

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission), comprised of 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Angela Villegas, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), Mary Bennett, and Gordon Brown, heard this matter March
21-April 6 and May 16-19, 2016, in Los Angeles, California.

Kristine E. Kwong, of Musick, Peeler & Garrett, LLP, represented complainant Justo

H. Avila, Chief Human Resources Officer of the Los Angeles Unified School District 
(LAUSD or District).

Rosemary O. Ward, attorney at law, and Rosty G. Gore, of Trygstad, Schwab & 

Trystad, represented respondent Anthony Liali, who was also present.

Evidence was received.  The matter was submitted May 19, 2016.1 The Commission 

deliberated on May 24, 2016.

ADDITION OF HEARING TIME

This matter was initially set for hearing from March 21-April 8, 2016. The parties 

requested and were given additional hearing days, from May 16-19, 2016. When the record 
closed on May 19, 2016, more than seven months had elapsed since respondent’s request for 
hearing, dated September 24, 2015.

//

1 After the submission of the matter, it was discovered that a document designated as
complainant’s exhibit 11, but not marked or admitted, remained in an exhibit binder due to 
inadvertence.  That document has not been read or considered in rendering this decision.

1

As stated on the record of the proceeding, good cause existed for the delayed closing 
of the record. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (b)(1).) On four of the days initially scheduled for 
the hearing, evidence could not be taken. On two of those days, this was due to the 
replacement of one Commission member; on the other two days, a Commission member was 
out of the country. The parties were unable to complete the presentation of evidence in the 
shortened time available, and the additional dates selected were the earliest on which all 
parties, counsel, panelists, and OAH were available.

AMENDMENT OF STATEMENT OF CHARGES AND ACCUSATION

On May 17, 2016, complainant orally moved to add the words “and erasers” to the 

Statement of Charges and Accusation at page 5, paragraph 9(c), to conform to proof, so that 
the allegation would read, “Threw dry erase board erasers and erasers at students[.]”
(Emphasis supplied.)

Respondent opposed the motion to amend.  Both parties presented argument.  For the 

reasons stated on the record, good cause existed for the amendment, and respondent had an 
adequate opportunity to defend, and did defend, against the proposed amended allegation.
(Ed. Code, 2 §§ 44934, subd. (d); 44944, subd. (b)(1)(B); Gov. Code, § 11507.) On May 19,
2016, the motion was granted, and the Statement of Charges and Accusation3 were amended 
by interlineation to include the new language

SEALING AND REDACTION OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION

After the hearing concluded, the ALJ ordered portions of the hearing transcripts 
sealed, as reflected in the record of the proceeding.  The ALJ also ordered the following 
exhibits sealed:  Complainant’s exhibits 38 (pp. -10 – 38-16 and 38-18 – 38-25), 41 (pp. 41-
18 – 41-24 and 41-26 – 41-33), and 42 (pp. 42-18 – 42-24 and 42-26 – 42-33); respondent’s 
exhibits F, J, L, V, FF-MM, PP-RR, TT, UU, WW, ZZ, CCC-GGG, KKK, PPP, TTT, 
GGGG, HHHH, JJJJ, MMMM, PPPP, ZZZZ, PPPPPP, GGGGGGG, JJJJJJJ, and 
RRRRRRR.

The ALJ also redacted children’s surnames (except for initial) from exhibits EEEEE,

HHHHHH and IIIIII.

//
//
//

2 Further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise indicated.

3 The Statement of Charges and Accusation are congruent except for their dates;
unless the context dictates otherwise, further references are to the Statement of Charges only.

2

ADDITIONAL PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND PRELMINARY MATTERS

Prehearing Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (MIRS)

On September 29, 2015, respondent filed a motion to reinstate respondent to paid 

status, with benefits, pending the hearing; the motion was deemed a MIRS.  OAH assigned 
case number 2015091099 to the MIRS.  On October 6, 2015, complainant filed an opposition
to the MIRS; on October 12, 2015, respondent filed a reply.  On October 16, 2015, the ALJ 
heard oral argument on the MIRS, and on October 20, 2015, issued an order denying it.

Prehearing Motion to Strike and/or Dismiss Portions of the Accusation

On October 13, 2015, respondent filed a motion to strike and/or dismiss portions of 

the Accusation.  On December 3, 2015, complainant filed an opposition to the motion; on
December 14, 2015, respondent filed a reply.  On December 18, 2015, the ALJ heard oral 
argument on the motion, and on December 21, 2015, issued an order denying it.

Intrahearing Motions

Complainant and respondent brought various oral and written motions as the hearing 

progressed, including motions in limine, a motion to close the proceedings to the public, a
motion regarding hearing conduct, and a motion by respondent, renewed several times, to
redact and/or remove material from various exhibits.  The rulings on those motions are as 
reflected on the record of the proceeding.4

INTRODUCTION; ISSUES; SUMMARY OF DECISION

1.

Complainant seeks to dismiss a tenured teacher, respondent Anthony Liali, on 

the following grounds: 

//

4 Respondent’s motions to redact and/or remove material concerned documents 
imposing discipline on respondent in the past.  Under section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(B), 
the ALJ ruled prior-discipline documents were admissible as “records regularly kept” by the
District, but to the extent they reflected “matters occurring more than four years before the 
filing of the notice” in the present case, they could not be used as a basis for this decision,
except to the extent they concerned Charges 11-13.  As such, the District conceded, and the 
ALJ ruled, that the relevance of the prior-discipline documents in question was limited to 
respondent’s notice of District expectations and policies, and the existence of progressive 
discipline.  The ALJ declined to redact or remove information from these materials, but the 
Commission has not considered the portions of the materials relating to matters other than
notice and the existence of progressive discipline, and has not based this decision on any
other such matters appearing in those documents.

3

(a)(1));

(a)(8)); and 

(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

immoral conduct, including egregious misconduct (§ 44932, subd. 

immoral conduct (§ 44939);
unprofessional conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(2));
evident unfitness for service (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6)); 
persistent violation of school laws and/or regulations (§44932, subd. 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments (§ 44939).

2.

The issues in this case are: 

(a)
Statement of Charges occurred?

Did complainant establish that the factual matters alleged in the 

(b)

If so, do these matters constitute cause to dismiss respondent from his 

position as a tenured teacher with LAUSD?

3.

This decision finds complainant established three of the factual matters alleged 
in the Statement of Charges: namely, yelling during the period between August 12, 2014 and 
January 28, 2015,5 and, on April 26, 2010, tossing a chair to the side and slamming a phone 
receiver down three or four times.  The Commission concludes these matters do not 
constitute cause to dismiss respondent from his tenured teaching position with LAUSD.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Complainant brought the Statement of Charges (and Accusation) in his official 

capacity.6 On September 1, 2015, LAUSD gave respondent written notice of its intent to 
dismiss and suspend him and a copy of the Statement of Charges (ex. 2), and removed him 
from the classroom.  On September 24, 2015, respondent timely demanded a hearing. This
proceeding followed.

2.

Respondent, who holds a multiple-subject credential, has been a certificated 

employee of LAUSD since July 1, 1995.

//

5 This time period is sometimes referred to as the “first semester” or “Fall semester” 
of the 2014-2015 school year. This denomination is for ease of reference only, and does not 
imply a finding that the school year was divided in any particular manner.

6 The Statement of Charges is dated August 14, 2014; since the Statement of Charges 

refers to matters occurring after August 14, 2014, this date appears to be incorrect. 

4

3.

The Statement of Charges concerns events that allegedly occurred at two 

different times and at two different schools: over the course of the first semester of the 2014-
2015 school year at 49th Street Elementary School (49th St.) (Charges 1-10 and 14-16), and 
on April 26, 2010 at Los Angeles Academy Middle School (LAAMS) (Charges 11-16).

Background; Respondent’s Disciplinary History, Performance, and Notice of District’s 
Expectations and Policies

4.

(a)

Until mid-2010, respondent taught elementary school, including at 

Wadsworth Elementary School,7 where his principal was Lorraine Abner.

(b)

On December 18, 2009, Principal Abner issued a conference 

memorandum to respondent (ex. 12), which attached various LAUSD policies, including the
Respectful Treatment Policy, and directed respondent to follow the policies. Principal
Abner’s conference memorandum was follow by a May 5, 2010 letter of reprimand, also
directing respondent to follow the LAUSD Respectful Treatment Policy. (Ex. 23.)

(c)

On March 4, 2010, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act
and a notice of a three-day or five-day unpaid suspension (the notice is ambiguous), arising 
from a different incident. (Exs.17 and 18.)

5.

On March 15, 2010, respondent was reassigned to LAAMS (ex. 19) to teach 
eighth-grade math and science. Respondent received notice of his transfer to LAAMS via a 
March 12, 2010 letter from Assistant Superintendent Christopher Ziegel, which also directed 
respondent to follow policies including the LAUSD Ethics Policy, Code of Conduct with 
Students, Respectful Treatment Policy, and “Anti-bullying Policies” (id.), and to cooperate 
with staff, follow administrators’ directives, and conduct himself respectfully toward
everyone.  The policies referenced in Mr. Ziegel’s letter were not attached to the copy of the 
letter received in evidence, though respondent believably testified he received them from Mr. 
Ziegel.

6.

(a)

LAAMS’s principal while respondent taught there was Maria Borges.

On April 27, 2010, Principal Borges issued a conference memorandum to respondent arising 
from an incident that had occurred the previous day, directing respondent “to behave in a 
professional manner at all time[s] and to follow both the LAUSD Code of Conduct and 
Respectful Treatment of all Persons policies[,]” and attaching those policies. (Ex 21.)

(b)

On June 10, 2010, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act

and a Notice of Suspension arising from the April 26, 2010 incident. (Exs. 25 and 26.)

(c)

Respondent’s May 19, 2010 performance evaluation from LAAMS, 

prepared shortly after the incident that led to his discipline, rated him “meets standards” 

7 The evidence did not readily disclose whether respondent taught at other LAUSD 

schools before Wadsworth Elementary.

5

overall, but “below standards” in the areas of “[e]stablish[ing] and maintain[ing] standards 
for student behavior and creat[ing] a climate that promotes fairness and respect”; “plan[ning] 
and implement[ing] classroom procedures and routines that support student learning”; and 
“provid[ing] an effective classroom environment[.]”  (Exs. 41; 49; D.) Nevertheless, the 
evaluation noted respondent to be “open to input from colleagues.”

(d)

By respondent’s next performance evaluation from LAAMS on May

23, 2011, his overall rating continued to be “meets standards,” but with no “below standards” 
categories. Respondent was noted to “operate[ ] in a positive way to help student[s] 
overcome their problems.”  (Exs. 41; B.)

7.

(a)

In July 2011, Respondent was assigned to 49th St., where he taught 
first grade. Respondent’s April 26, 2013 performance evaluation (prepared by 49th St.’s
former principal, Heather Lowe) rated respondent as “meets standards” and praised his 
“positive classroom environment” and collaborative work with his grade level.  (Exs. 41; A.)

(b)

Beginning in October 2014, the principal of 49th St. was Maria “Maya”

Rosas. On February 18, 2015, Principal Rosas issued a conference memorandum to 
respondent (ex. 37), in which she reminded him of his previous discipline, and directed him 
to follow District policies, including the Code of Conduct with Students, the Employee Code 
of Ethics (also referred to as the Ethics Policy), the Board Resolution on the Respectful 
Treatment of All Persons (also referred to as the Respectful Treatment Policy), and to treat 
students with respect, courtesy, and sensitivity.  (Id.)  Principal Rosas’ conference 
memorandum attached policies including the ones noted above.

(c)

On March 20, 2015, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory

Act (ex. 41) and a notice of a 15-day unpaid suspension. (Ex. 42.)

(d)

Respondent taught at 49th St. for the remainder of the 2014-2015

school year, and 11 days of the 2015-2016 school year, without further incident. As noted 
above, on September 1, 2015, the District suspended respondent indefinitely and removed 
him from the classroom.

Findings on the Allegations Against Respondent Regarding His 49th St. First-Grade Class

PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF RESPONDENT’S CLASSROOM

8.

Respondent’s first-grade classroom at 49th St. had a white board at the front of 

the room. (Exs. T, Z, DD, and JJJJJJJ; respondent’s testimony.) A large area rug, used as a 
student seating area for some lessons, took up the front-middle portion of the room.  The 
rug’s front edge lay approximately 18 inches to two feet from the front wall, where the white 
board hung, so that there was little space between the students seated on the rug and 
respondent, when he was teaching at the white board. (Id.)

//

6

9.

Near a back outer corner of the area rug stood a desk with an overhead “Elmo” 

projector, where respondent sometimes sat or stood to teach. (Id.) Student tables were
arranged around the edges of the area rug.  (Id.) Bookcases and closets lined the walls of the 
classroom.  (Id.)

CHARGES 1 AND 2

10.

Charge 1, alleging that on or about January 20, 2015, respondent “threw a dry

V., hitting him in or around R

 V.’s 

erase board eraser at 6-year-old student R
leg[,]” was not substantiated.

11.

R

V. testified at the hearing, but did not recount this incident.  Even if he 

had, his testimony lacked credibility. R
 was reputed and acknowledged, even by his
mother, to have an active imagination, which was on display during his testimony. He was
also markedly inattentive while testifying, and often contradicted himself and manifestly
exaggerated.  He appeared to have difficulty separating truth from fancy, even
acknowledging his testimony had contained “a lot of lies and a lot of truths.” No other 
student witness from respondent’s 49th St. first-grade class recounted this alleged incident.

R

12.

 V.’s mother testified to R

’s mother testified that “almost every day[,]” R

’s having complained to her that 
respondent “threw an eraser at me[,]” but that statement was not tied to any particular 
occasion; rather, R
(Testimony of Erica Nunez.) Although R
of their consistency, R
Moreover, the statements R
support a finding that an eraser was thrown at him, let alone that it occurred on the date(s) 
alleged. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).) Likewise, they did not supplement or explain any
other non-hearsay evidence.

 made to his mother are not sufficient by themselves to 

’s own testimony belied the reliability of his reporting.

reported it.
’s reports because

’s mother credited R

13.

The same is true of R

’s undated written statement about respondent, 

which reads, “[H]e changes my pin still changes my pin8 when he throws the eraser at 
Mauricio it bumpt the window.  It bumpt on my leg he yells wen it is P.E.” (Ex. 56.) 
Although R
indicate the eraser was thrown at R
occurred.  Given R
viewed skeptically, though some aspects of it are consistent with other students’ accounts.
(See, e.g., Factual Finding 48.) Even if R

’s statement notes an eraser “bumpt [his] leg[,]” the statement does not 

’s overall lack of credibility, his written statement must also be 

, and does not indicate when the bump supposedly

’s statement could be read as indicating that 

8 The reference to changing a student’s “pin” refers to a behavior chart respondent 

employed in his classroom.  Each student’s behavior was tracked with a clothespin, and the 
chart was divided into various colors: green for good behavior, yellow for a warning, red for 
an office referral, and so forth. Students would start the day with their pins on green, and 
changing the pin meant the student’s clothespin was moved into a different color on the 
behavior chart.

7

 in the 
respondent threw an eraser at R
leg, that statement alone could not support such a finding.  (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

 on or about January 20, 2015, which hit R

14.

In addition, notes from an interview Principal Rosas conducted with R

 on 
 did not recount respondent’s throwing an eraser at him 

January 28, 2015, reflect that R
and hitting his leg, despite the principal’s suggestive instruction to him: “Tell me about the 
time he threw the eraser @ you.” (Ex. 63. ) R
he did it but not. . . . He had one + then he threw at me + then at M
on the window.”  (Id.) The suggestive nature of Principal Rosas’ prompt made the 
information solicited unreliable, and R
’s interview statements do not indicate that the incident alleged in Charge 1 more 
R
likely than not occurred.  In any event, the interview statements alone would not be sufficient 
to support a finding.  (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

 was already an unreliable source.  Hence, 

’s response to that query was, “Last time 

 . . . .  It bounced 

15.

Respondent’s explanation for this allegation, by contrast, was believable.  He 
claimed he had been erasing the white board while teaching a lesson with the class seated on 
the area rug. He lost his grip on the eraser, which popped out of his hand and landed on 
R
to the white board, to respondent’s right. (Ex. Z.) The eraser would not have had to travel 
very far out of respondent’s hand to land on a student’s leg in the first row. (Exs. T and DD.)

 was seated in his assigned place in the row closest 

’s leg.  When this occurred, R

16.

In sum, Charge 1 was not established. By extension, Charge 2, alleging 

respondent’s “misconduct in Charge #1” violated administrative directives and policies, also 
was not substantiated.

CHARGES 3 AND 4

17.

Charge 3, alleging that sometime between August 12, 2014 and January 28, 

2015—i.e, the first semester of the school year—respondent “threw a dry erase board eraser 
at 6-year old S

 E.,9 hitting her in or around her head[,]” was not substantiated.

18.

(a)
, however, was also a non-credible witness.  She had a reputation for being 

 E. did testify respondent threw an eraser, which “touched [her] 

face.” S
untruthful, and the evidence revealed malleability in her reporting.

S

(b)

’s written statement and in her interview with 
For example, in S
Principal Rosas on February 3, 2015, S
indicated respondent would “pull ther pen” 
[sic] (ex. 57) or “pull their pin” (ex. 64) when students misbehaved. These were obvious 
references to respondent’s behavior chart, but when questioned about the behavior chart 
during her testimony, S
their pen,” she had meant respondent takes away students’ pens as punishment.  This was not 
credible; indeed, the evidence showed respondent’s first-grade students did not use pens. It

 denied its existence, and explained that when she wrote “pull 

9 Various spellings of S

used in the Statement of Charges.

E.’s name appeared in the evidence; this is the spelling

8

appeared S
in her accounts.

was trying to explain away what she herself perceived as an inconsistency

(c)

In addition, S

claimed not to have misbehaved in class, but other 
students, as well as respondent himself, consistently attested the contrary. Her behavior as a 
witness was likewise somewhat uncooperative. These matters cast doubt on S
overall veracity and the reliability of her recollection.

’s

(d)
recounted this alleged incident.

No other student witness from respondent’s 49th St. first-grade class 

S

19.

’s written statement from February 3, 2015 does not mention that 
respondent threw an eraser at her, hitting her in the head.  Her statement does indicate, 
“Mistr Leyale tros tens at studens hed” (ex. 57), but the evidence did not disclose what
had in mind when she wrote this, and given S
occurrence(s) S
unreliability, the soundness of this statement was also dubious.  In any event, the statement 
could not independently support a finding. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

’s overall 

20.

The same is true for Principal Rosas’ notes of her February 3, 2015 interview

. (Ex. 64.) The notes recount S

’s report that respondent threw an eraser to 

with S
her, which landed on her head.  (Id.) This is not necessarily the same thing as respondent’s 
throwing an eraser at S
’s
remarks had indicated the incident happened as alleged in Charge 3, her overall lack of 
credibility would still have cast doubt on those claims.  Moreover, even to the extent 
’s interview statements tended to substantiate Charge 3, they could not, by
S
themselves, support a finding that the incident occurred. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

(see Factual Findings 24, 35, 36, and 42), but even if S

21.

Conversely, respondent’s account of the alleged incident was believable.  He 
credibly explained that, once again, the students were seated on the area rug, and the eraser 
came out of his hand while he was vigorously erasing the white board, and landed on 
S
’s head.  Respondent’s explanation was once again bolstered by the seating 
arrangement in the class and the proximity of the white board to the students. (Exs. T, DD, 
and Z.)

22.

In sum, Charge 3 was not established, and by extension, neither was Charge 4, 

alleging respondent’s “misconduct in Charge #3” violated administrative directives and 
policies.

CHARGES 5 AND 6

//

23.

Charge 5, alleging that during the first semester of the 2014-2015 school year,
 and 

 B., missing M

respondent “threw a dry erase board eraser at 6-year old M
hitting the window[,]” was not substantiated.

9

24.

Respondent did not dispute that he cast such an eraser in M

’s direction, 

but the evidence did not show respondent more likely than not threw the eraser at M
or intended to hit M

 with the eraser,10 or that the eraser hit the window.

,

’s spot was near the back edge of the rug.  M

As respondent credibly explained the incident,11 the children were seated on 
became fixated on the

25.
the rug; M
windows at the back of the classroom, and did not respond to respondent’s verbal attempts to 
’s attention, respondent moved from the 
refocus him.  As a means of trying to get M
front of the room to the back part of the rug, and lobbed the eraser into the area he believed 
to be the focal point of M
bounced on the floor in the then-unoccupied back part of the classroom.

 himself.  The eraser landed and 

’s gaze: i.e., not at M

26.

’s written and interview statements did not establish, more likely than not, that 

V.’s written statement and interview notes mention the
 (exs. 56 and 63), no student testified to this alleged incident.

Although R
eraser being thrown at M
R
respondent cast the eraser with the intention of hitting M
 with it.  Even if they had
unequivocally stated such a thing occurred, their source was unreliable.  And even if that 
were not the case, they still would be insufficient, by themselves, to support a finding.  (Gov. 
Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

27.

Respondent acknowledged, in retrospect, that throwing the eraser was an error 
’s attention.  He now recognizes he should have 

in judgment and a poor way to get M
walked over to M

 and personally intervened to get his attention.

28.

Nevertheless, Charge 5 was not established. Likewise, Charge 6, alleging 

respondent’s “misconduct in Charge #5” violated administrative directives and policies, was 
also not substantiated.12

CHARGES 7 AND 8

29.

Charge 7, alleging that during the first semester of the 2014-2015 school year,

 B. by the shirt and pushed him out of the 

respondent “grabbed 6-year-old student A
classroom[,]” was not substantiated.

10 Such an intention is implied by Charge 5’s allegation that the eraser was thrown 

“at” Mauricio, but “missed” him.

11 Respondent’s explanation was consistent with the account he gave at the time of the 

school’s investigation, and accorded with the physical arrangement of his classroom.

12 Even if respondent’s action Charge 5 were deemed partially substantiated by
respondent’s action, it did not violate the policies and directives invoked in the Statement of 
Charges.  (See Factual Findings 51-59.) Although showing questionable judgment, 
respondent’s action was not unprofessional, unethical, disrespectful, or bullying.

10

30.

No student testified this incident occurred as alleged.  Student A

D.

; A

 and S

’s shirt collar and “push” A

 did not testify that respondent pushed 

 out of the classroom. The only evidence presented that respondent “[g]rab[bed] the 

’s] shirt and pushe[d] him out of the door” was Principal Rosas’ undated

testified he saw respondent pull A
physical fight between A
A
front of [A
notes of an interview with student K
to Principal Rosas was doubtful—for example, K
 H.;13 ex. IIIIII.) Even if K
mother. (Testimony of S
been wholly believable, they would not be sufficient, by themselves, to support a finding.
(Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

did not make a similar report to her 
’s interview statements had

 H.  (Ex. 61.)  The reliability of K

, but only to stop a 

’s statements

31. Moreover, Principal Rosas’ interview with A

allegation.  Even when she asked A
respondent had grabbed him by the hand or the shirt, A
shirt.14 (Testimony of Maria Rosas; ex. 59.) Rather, when asked, “What about to you?
What has [respondent] done to you?”, A
out, he sends me to the Principal office, he calls your mom, that’s it.”  (Ex. 59.)

 himself did not support the 
a suggestive, closed-ended question about whether 
 denied respondent grabbed his 

told Principal Rosas, “He put[s] me on time 

32.

For respondent’s part, he recalled writing a referral for A
shepherding or corralling, not pushing, him out the door.  Respondent’s testimony was
believable and was consistent with his prior recounting of the incident, as related by
respondent’s union representative, Jose Govea, to LAUSD administrator Kristen Murphy.

, and

33.

In sum, Charge 7 was not established, and neither was Charge 8, alleging that 

respondent’s “misconduct in Charge #7” violated administrative directives and policies.

CHARGES 9 AND 10

34.

Charge 9, alleging various types of conduct during the first semester of the 
2014-2015 school year, consisted of five subparts, one of which was substantiated. Each
subpart is addressed in turn.

35.

Charge 9(a), alleging respondent  “[t]hrew pencils at students,” was not

substantiated.

36.

Respondent more likely than not occasionally tossed pencils to students, but

did not throw pencils at students. (E.g., testimony of A  D.; S
R
 A.; Maria Rosas; Jose Govea; exs. 38, HHHHHH, OOOOOOO, and PPPPPPP.)
The wording of Charge 9(a) implies a forceful action with the intent of striking a student 
with the object thrown. The evidence did not indicate respondent forcefully hurled objects or 
intended to strike children with them. Rather, respondent more likely than not occasionally

 O.; I

 J.; 

13 The last initial, rather than the full surname, is used to protect the child’s privacy.

14 A

 did maintain respondent had held his wrist.

11

lightly pitched pencils to students who asked for them, and sometimes tossed pencils he 
picked up from the floor into the receptacle where they were kept.15

37.

Charge 9(b), alleging respondent “[t]hrew pencil boxes at students,” was not 

substantiated.

38.

No student testified to it. Moreover, respondent’s explanation of the incident 

that was the likely source of this charge was believable and consistent with his prior 
explanations.  (Testimony of respondent, Kristen Murphy, and Jose Govea; ex. 38.)
According to respondent, he had provided each student with a plastic pencil box filled with 
school supplies at the beginning of the school year, and one day in class, student A
was playing with his pencil box in a disruptive way and would not stop. Accordingly,
respondent took A
to the floor.

’s pencil box, and reached behind his own chair to drop the pencil box 

 G. 

39.

Principal Rosas’ notes of her interview with K

 said 
respondent threw “pencil boxes” (ex. 61), but the accuracy of this statement was doubtful, 
because it stood alone, and because K
(Testimony of S
sufficiently credible to overcome the contrary evidence, it could not, by itself, support a 
finding.16 (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).)

 did not report any such thing to her mother.

 H.; ex. IIIIII.)  Besides, even if K

’s interview statement were 

 H. indicate K

40.

Charge 9(c), as amended, alleging respondent “threw dry erase board erasers 

and erasers at students,” was not substantiated.

41.

The evidence did not demonstrate that respondent, more likely than not, threw 

dry erase board erasers at students.  The dry erase board eraser incidents have already been
discussed. No incidents beyond these were substantiated. (See Factual Findings 10-28.)

42. With regard to erasers, respondent more likely than not did occasionally toss

“Pink Pearl” eraser halves to students, just as he occasionally tossed pencils to students.17
(See Factual Findings 35 and 36.)

//

15 Respondent credibly explained that knee pain discouraged him from walking 
around the classroom to put objects away or hand them to students.  Nevertheless, respondent 
conceded, also credibly, that his knee pain did not actually prevent him from walking to
accomplish these tasks.

16 According to another student, R

 A., it was S

E. who actually threw a 

pencil box. 

17 These were standard oblong pencil erasers, approximately one-and-a-half inches 

long, bisected to make two roughly square halves. (Ex. BBBB.) 

12

43.

Charge 9(d), alleging respondent “threw markers at students,” was not 

substantiated.

44.

Two students, R

 V. and S

E., testified respondent threw markers.

Their testimony in this regard was consistent with the notes Principal Rosas took of her
interviews with them (exs. 63, 64, and PPPPPPP), but was not consistent with their 
handwritten statements (exs. 56 and 57).  Moreover, R
 recanted his testimony, and both 
of these students’ testimony lacked credibility in any event, for the reasons previously noted.

45.

Other students denied respondent threw things, and the parents of two 

additional students indicated their children never reported respondent’s throwing things.
(Testimony of A
likewise consistently and credibly denied throwing markers.  (Respondent’s testimony;
testimony of Kristen Murphy.)

 J., Azucena Calderon, and Patricia Lopez.) Respondent

 D., I

46.
B., and J

Notes from Principal Rosas’ interviews with three other students—A

 G., 

 P. recanted this in a later statement (ex. CCCCC), which was consistent with 

 P.—indicate those students reported that respondent threw a pen or a 

A
marker.  J
what he reported to his mother: i.e., that respondent did not throw things.  (Testimony of
Rebeca Santos Alcala.) Principal Rosas’ interview notes were insufficient to bolster 
R
finding that respondent threw markers.  (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d.).)

’s testimony on the subject, and could not, by themselves, support a 

’s or S

47.

Charge 9(e), alleging respondent “[y]elled at students,” was substantiated.

The colloquial, common understanding of the word “yell” includes speaking in a loud, sharp,
and/or assertive voice.  It was with this understanding that the Commission determined 
respondent “yelled” at students. 

48.

 E., by S

One student, A

 D., credibly described respondent as having yelled and 
 D.’s testimony was corroborated by that of I

turned pink or red in the face.18 A
S
E.’s written statement (ex. 57), and by the notes of Principal Rosas’ 
interviews with A
E.  (Exs. 59, 60, 62, 63,
 V., and S
 B., A
and 64.)19 Even respondent admitted he had “raised [his] voice on a couple of occasions” 
(ex. 38), though respondent unconvincingly attributed his raised voice to a throat infection.

 P., R

, J

 J. and 

18 Respondent denied this, but his denial was not credible, since respondent most

likely could not have seen his own face redden.  He also suggested he might have “blood 
pressure issues” that could have caused reddening, but this was implausible since it such 
reddening would not likely be confined to times when respondent spoke loudly.

19 Although the testimony and reporting of R

 V. and S

E. lacked 

credibility overall, on this subject, their testimony and reporting found substantial and 
reliable corroboration; therefore, in this instance, it was credible. (See Stevens v. Parke 
Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67-68 [factfinder may accept or rejects portions of 
testimony, and “weav[e] a cloth of truth out of selected available material”].)

13

It was more believable that respondent raised his voice, sometimes to a yell, when trying to 
control the class or certain students and refocus them on the lesson.

49.

(a)

Other evidence, however, bolstered the conclusion that respondent’s

yelling was in the nature of an occasionally raised voice, and did not constitute verbal abuse.

(b)

Principal Rosas did not observe respondent yelling when she visited his 

class.  (Testimony of Maria Rosas.) Respondent’s teacher’s aide also did not hear him
yelling at students.  (Testimony of Christopher Epps.) Two parents who observed 
respondent, sometimes unbeknownst to him, did not hear him yell at students. (Testimony of
S

 H. and Saleena Twyman.)

(c)

Likewise, another student, S

 O., described respondent’s yelling

 A. denied that respondent “scream[ed] loud” or scared him. (Testimony of 

as “a raised voice,” of “medium” intensity, not a scream. (Testimony of S
Student R
R
yelling.  (Testimony of A
M

 A.) According to several parents (and guardians), their children did not report 
, M  

 H., and S

, P
.)

 O.)

, R

, S

 A

 C

 T

 L

 S

50.

All of this was largely consistent with, and supported, respondent’s assessment 

that he sometimes used his “teacher voice,” (testimony of respondent and Jose Govea), a 
voice that is projected assertively, but not harshly or abrasively.  On the other hand, it was 
not believable that respondent never, during the entire first semester of the 2014-2015 school 
year, used a voice sharper or louder than a “teacher voice.”  Accordingly, Charge 9(e) was 
substantiated to the extent that respondent sometimes used a voice that could be described as 
“yelling.”

51.

Charge 10 alleges that “the misconduct in Charge #9 above” contravened an 
administrative directive “to behave in a professional manner at all times,” and violated the
following District policies: (a) the LAUSD Code of Conduct with Students; (b) the LAUSD 
Ethics Policy; (c) the LAUSD Anti-bullying Policy; and (d) the LAUSD Respectful 
Treatment of All Persons Policy, and that these policies had been made known to respondent 
when he received discipline in 2009 and 2010 (see Factual Findings 4-6).

52.

Even assuming an ongoing, specific directive to behave in a professional 

manner at all times could be inferred from respondent’s 2009 and 2010 discipline, and even 
assuming respondent should reasonably have interpreted that directive to apply to his vocal 
volume (see Factual Findings 4-6), respondent’s yelling at students did not contravene that
directive. Respondent’s yelling was not shown to have risen to an “unprofessional” level.
On the contrary, it was an occasional occurrence, which, although not maximally effective to 
control students’ behavior (testimony of Laura Zeff), was nevertheless within the realm of 
what is normal and acceptable for teachers.  (Gov. Code, § 11425.50, subd. (c).)

53.

Respondent’s yelling at students did not violate the District’s Code of 
Conduct with Students. (E.g., ex 37.) The Code of Conduct with Students directs teachers, 

(a)

14

in the interest of student safety, “to avoid situations including, but not limited to, the 
following[,]” and then lists 12 situations. The only situation listed that might connect with 
respondent’s yelling is number 3: “Engaging in any behaviors, either directly or indirectly
with a student(s) or in the presence of a student(s), that are unprofessional, unethical, illegal, 
immoral, or exploitative.”

(b)

Respondent’s yelling was not unethical, illegal, immoral, or 

exploitative. As explained in Factual Finding 52, above, it was not unprofessional either.
Accordingly, respondent’s yelling did not violate the Code of Conduct with Students.

54

Furthermore, although Charges 9(a) and 9(c), alleging respondent threw 

objects at students, were not substantiated, the conduct in which respondent did engage—
tossing pencils and pencil eraser halves to students—would not have violated this policy
either.  Although it did not represent the best choice respondent could have made, it also did
not rise to the level of “unprofessional.” (Gov. Code, § 11425.50, subd. (c).)

(a)

55.

Respondent’s yelling at students did not violate the District’s Ethics
Policy.  The Ethics Policy, also known as the Employee Code of Ethics (e.g., ex 37), “is 
intended to help us achieve success by setting common expectations and increasing trust, 
commitment and teamwork within the District, and between the District and the community.”

(b)

The Ethics Policy is largely concerned with avoiding conflicts of 

interest and maintaining institutional integrity, but its “Commitment to Excellence” section 
also sets forth guidelines for teacher behavior in the classroom. Among those guidelines are 
for teachers to “provid[e] the best example we can, striving to demonstrate excellence,
integrity and responsibility” and to “[c]reate an environment of trust, respect and non-
discrimination.”

(c)

Respondent’s yelling did not violate the Ethics Policy because it was 
not unprofessional, did not create an environment of distrust, disrespect, or discrimination, 
and did not indicate that respondent failed to do his best to strive for excellence, integrity,
and responsibility.

(d)

The same applies to respondent’s tossing pencils and eraser halves to 

students.

56.

The Anti-bullying Policy was not among the evidence presented to the 

Commission.20 Even if such a policy had been presented, respondent’s yelling would not 
have violated it, because the evidence did not show respondent yelled in such a way as to
bully, frighten, or coerce students. Neither would tossing pencils and eraser halves to 
students have violated such a policy, also because that behavior also was not for the purpose 
of intimidating, dominating, or scaring students.

20 If the Anti-bullying Policy was present among the materials received, the 

Commission could not locate it, despite a thorough and careful effort to do so.

15

57.

(a)

Respondent’s yelling at students did not violate the Respectful 

Treatment Policy—actually a Board of Education resolution (e.g., ex. 37)—which in relevant 
part reaffirms District 

policy that students and adults in both schools and offices 
should treat all persons equally and respectfully and refrain from 
the willful or negligent use of slurs against any person on the 
basis or [sic] race, language spoken, color, sex, religion, 
handicap, national origin, immigration status, age, sexual 
orientation, or political belief[.]

(b)

There was no indication that respondent’s yelling had any connection to 

students’ race, language spoken, color, sex, religion, or other category listed. The same is 
true for tossing pencils and eraser halves to students. Indeed, these behaviors cannot fairly
be characterized as disrespectful even in a general sense, apart from the specific wording of 
the Respectful Treatment policy.

58.

Complainant presented evidence that respondent’s approaches to classroom 

discipline and management were inconsistent in some ways with LAUSD’s Discipline 
Foundation Policy and policy of Schoolwide Positive Behavior Support, and the school-
specific versions of those policies.21 But the Statement of Charges did not allege respondent 
violated these particular policies, and complainant’s presentation regarding these policies had
no bearing on whether respondent violated the policies actually mentioned in the Statement
of Charges.

59.

In sum, despite the substantiation of Charge 9(e), Charge 10 was not 

substantiated by respondent’s yelling at students.  Moreover, even if Charges 9(a) and 9(c) 
were deemed partially substantiated by respondent’s having tossed pencils and eraser halves 
to students, that conduct was also insufficient to substantiate Charge 10.

Findings on the Allegations Against Respondent Regarding the April 26, 2010 Incident at 
LAAMS

60.

Charges 11 through 13 arise from an April 26, 2010 incident at LAAMS.

Charge 11 alleges that,

while attempting to deal with a student problem, [respondent] 
threw a book at the student, tossed a chair to the side, slammed 
the class phone three to four times, kicked the trash can and told 
the class to get out of the class prior to the bell ringing for the 
end of class.

21 Curiously, positive behavior support has been accepted by the District as its

approach to improving and managing student behavior, but no such policy is in force for 
employees. (Testimony of Laura Zeff.)

16

61.

Of these alleged instances of misconduct, two were established. More likely

than not, respondent did “toss[  ] a chair to the side,” and did slam or, in respondent’s words, 
“jiggle,” the classroom phone a few times in a futile attempt to summon help.  (Respondent’s
testimony.  Accord, testimony of Bertha Parra and Joseph Zeccola.)

62.

The remaining instances of alleged misconduct were not established.

(Testimony of Maria Borges and respondent; exs. 21 and 22.)

63.

The April 26, 2010 incident occurred within six weeks of respondent’s transfer 

from Wadsworth Elementary School to LAAMS (see Factual Findings 4-6), and respondent
was not accustomed to teaching middle-school students (see Factual Findings 2 and 4). In
addition, on April 26, 2010 respondent had a new group of eighth-grade students for his 
“flex” period—a temporary remedial math class.

64.

(a)

A few of the students in that class defied and challenged respondent

verbally, and confronted him physically.

(b)

Respondent’s response to the situation included moving rapidly across
the classroom toward the phone so he could call for help.  On the way across the classroom, 
respondent did move, shove, or toss a chair out of his way—though not toward any students.
He also ran into a trash can, kicking it accidentally. When he reached the phone, he could 
not make it work, and slammed or “jiggled” it in an attempt to use it. The evidence did not 
establish that respondent more likely than not threw a book or evicted the class before the 
, and 
bell rang.  (Testimony of Maria Borges, respondent, S
E  M

; exs. 21 and 22.)22

, B

 P

 P

65.

Three of respondents’ students—Ms. P

, Ms. P

, and Ms. M

—

characterized respondent as having thrown the chair aside in a violent manner, and indicated
respondent did throw a book.

66.

Nevertheless, the contemporaneous documents memorializing the incident—

particularly Principal Borges’ conference memorandum—did not indicate respondent
violently threw the chair or threw a book. (Exs. 21 and 22.) Principal Borges convincingly
testified that if such things had been reported or alleged, she would have put them in her 
memorandum, and also would have called police.  She did neither. Principal Borges’ 
testimony thus implied that these things were not reported, which in turn implied they did not 
occur. (Testimony of Maria Borges and respondent; exs. 21 and 22.) Rather, the students’
testimony, nearly six years after the fact, appeared to reflect inaccurate recollections of
events and exaggerated impressions of respondent’s conduct.

22 Respondent did tell a student to “sit the fuck down” and otherwise verbally engaged

the students, but these matters were not pled in the Statement of Charges, and were outside 
the four-year rule in any event (see Legal Conclusions 4-11).

17

67.

No student was harmed or endangered, mentally or physically, by respondent’s 

actions. Consequently, Charge 12, alleging that respondent intended to and did cause harm 
and/or mental suffering to student(s), was not substantiated.

68.

Charge 13 alleges respondent’s conduct on April 26, 2010 constituted an act 
described in Penal Code sections 11165.2 through 11165.6.  This is a legal contention, not a 
factual allegation.  As discussed in Legal Conclusions 4 through 11, Charge 13 was not 
substantiated.

Findings on the Remaining Charges

CHARGE 14

69.

Charge 14, alleging, “The above conduct identified in [Charges] 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 
and 11” violated the District’s rules and regulations, “including, but not limited to, the Code 
of Conduct with Students, the Ethics Policy, the Anti-bullying Policy, and the Respectful 
Treatment of All Persons Policy[,]” was not substantiated.

70.

As previously explained, the conduct alleged in Charge 9, as established in this 

case, did not violate the enumerated policies.23

71.

(a) With regard to respondent’s conduct on April 26, 2010, it occurred

more than four years before “the filing of the notice” of respondent’s dismissal and 
suspension. (See Factual Findings 1 and 7.) As is explained in Legal Conclusions 4 through 
11, respondent’s April 26, 2010 conduct did not constitute “an act described” in Penal Code 
sections 11165.2 through 11165.6; therefore, no decision relating to respondent’s dismissal
can be based on it. Hence, the question whether respondent’s April 26, 2010 conduct 
violated the enumerated policies need not be answered.

(b)

Nevertheless, it did not. In the context of the incident, respondent’s 

moving the chair and slamming or jiggling the phone was not unprofessional; rather, it was a
predictable response to an unexpected and alarming situation. (Gov. Code, § 11425.50, 
subd. (c).) Nor can respondent’s brushing the chair aside or slamming the phone be deemed 
unethical, bullying, or disrespectful.

CHARGE 15

72.

Charge 15, alleging that respondent’s violation of “the above reasonable rules 

of the District” constituted a willful refusal to perform regular assignments, was not 
substantiated.  As previously noted, respondent did not violate the District’s “rules and 
regulations[.]” (See Factual Findings 51-59.)

23 It was not clear what other “rules and regulations” respondent’s conduct allegedly

violated; therefore, the phrase “including, but not limited to” is deemed surplusage.

18

CHARGE 16

73.

Charge 16, alleging that “[t]he above charges, separately and in any

combination, support [respondent’s] dismissal from the District[,]” is a legal contention, and
is addressed in the Legal Conclusions, below.  Charge 16 was not substantiated.

Findings Concerning Respondent’s Overall Fitness to Teach

74.

Respondent’s yelling during the 2014-2015 school year did not have a material 
adverse effect on students or coworkers. It was in the nature of normal teacher behavior, and 
was not shown to have been worse than that.24

75.

Respondent’s multiple-subject credentialing means he is likely to teach 

elementary school—younger children—more often than not, as has been the case during his
career.  Teaching younger children, who are especially impressionable, means the teacher 
must be sensitive to the effects of his or her behavior on students. (Testimony of Laura 
Zeff.) Respondent seemed to have been unaware he was perceived as yelling in class.

76.

Respondent’s yelling is somewhat likely to recur, but is not likely to exceed 

what is customary and tolerable for a teacher, since that is the kind of yelling respondent has 
previously done. It is to some extent unavoidable that students will perceive a teacher as 
“yelling,” whether or not the teacher’s conduct actually warrants such a label. Nevertheless,
to the extent the present proceeding has chastened respondent, he is likely to be more careful 
in his future vocal expression.

77.

To discipline a teacher for “yelling” in the manner respondent did would have 

a significant adverse or chilling effect on respondent and other teachers.  Occasionally
raising the voice is a normal part of teaching and of a teacher’s expression.  (Gov. Code, § 
11425.50, subd. (c).) For a teacher to be disciplined for engaging in this behavior would 
send a message to students that they can wrest control from a teacher by reporting, or
threatening to report, the teacher for “yelling,” and thereby jeopardize the teacher’s 
livelihood.25

78.

Furthermore, respondent took conscientious measures, at both LAAMS and 

49th St., to help students learn, and rewarded them for good behavior and academic 
accomplishments. Overall, although respondent displayed questionable judgment,

24 Likewise, respondent’s use of a dry erase board eraser to get a child’s attention on 

one occasion, and his tossing pencils and erasers to students, while not ideal classroom 
procedure, also did not have material adverse effects, and is not likely to recur in light of the 
present proceeding. 

25 This is not to suggest that a teacher who verbally abused students should not be 

disciplined, but verbal abuse was not established in this case.

19

exasperation, and ineffective classroom management on some occasions, including during 
the first semester of the 2014-2015 school year at 49th St., he is fit to teach.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Introduction

1.

2.

Jurisdiction exists.  (Factual Finding 1.)

Complainant had the burden to establish the matters alleged in the Accusation 

by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Com. on Prof. Competence (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1040.)

3.

Complainant did not establish any cause to dismiss respondent. This

conclusion dispenses with Charge 16, which alleges the contrary.

No Cause for Dismissal Based on Respondent’s April 26, 2010 Conduct

4.

Under section 44944, subdivision (b)(2), evidence “relating to matters that 

occurred more than four years” before the “filing of the notice” of dismissal is inadmissible 
in a teacher-dismissal proceeding, and “no decision relating to the dismissal . . . shall be 
made based on charges or evidence of any nature relating to matters occurring more than 
four years before the filing of the notice[.]”  This is commonly referred to as the four-year
rule.

5.

An exception to the four-year rule exists for “records regularly kept” by the 

school district (§ 44944, subd. (b)(2)(B)), though their use is circumscribed as set forth 
above. (Id.)  In this case, “records regularly kept” of respondent’s discipline from 
Wadsworth Elementary School were received for the limited purposes of establishing the fact 
of discipline and notice of District policies and directives. (Factual Findings 4-6.)

6.

Another exception to the four-year rule exists for “allegations of an act 

described in Section 44010 of this code or Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive, of the 
Penal Code.”  (§ 44944, subd. (b)(2)(A) & (B).) For such allegations, evidence may be
received and may form the basis for a decision to dismiss.

7.

Section 44010 defines “sex offense” according to various provisions of the 

Penal Code. Penal Code sections 11165.2 through 11165.6 encompass child neglect (§ 
11165.2), willful child harm or endangerment (§ 11165.3), unlawful corporal punishment or 
injury (§ 11165.4), abuse or neglect in out-of-home care (§ 11165.5), and child abuse or 
neglect (§ 11165.6).

8.

April 26, 2010 was more than four years prior to September 1, 2015, the date 

of “filing” of respondent’s notice of dismissal and suspension.  (Factual Findings 1, 3, 7, and 

20

60-68.) Thus, respondent’s April 26, 2010 conduct would presumptively be subject to the 
four-year rule.

9.

Nevertheless, respondent’s alleged conduct on April 26, 2010 was claimed to

constitute an act described in one or more of the cited Penal Code sections, which is why 
evidence of the April 26, 2010 incident was admitted and why findings about that incident 
have been made in this decision.26 (Factual Finding 60-68.)

10.

The conduct in which respondent was shown to have engaged on April 26, 
2010—tossing a chair to the side and slamming the classroom phone (Factual Findings 60-
68)—did not constitute an act described in any of the statutory exceptions to the four-year
rule, because it was not sexual in nature, did not harm or endanger any child, and did not 
constitute neglect or a failure to supervise. (Id.)

11.

Accordingly, respondent’s April 26, 2010 conduct was not within any of the 

exceptions to the four-year rule, and cannot form the basis of any decision to dismiss him.
Charge 13, alleging the contrary, is not substantiated. Since respondent’s April 26, 2010 
conduct is not cause for dismissal, it will not be further addressed in the sections of this 
decision discussing the asserted causes for dismissal, except where appropriate in context.

No Cause for Dismissal Based on Egregious Misconduct or Immoral Conduct

12.

Causes for dismissal 1 and 2 assert respondent’s employment should be 

terminated for immoral conduct, including without limitation egregious misconduct, within 
the meaning of sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939. Complainant did not establish 
these causes for dismissal. Respondent’s conduct, as established in this case, was neither 
egregious nor immoral.

NO EGREGIOUS MISCONDUCT

13.

Egregious misconduct “is defined exclusively as immoral conduct that is the 

basis for an offense described in Section 44010 or 44011 of this code, or in Sections 11165.2 
to 11165.6, inclusive, of the Penal Code.”  (§ 44932, subd (a)(1).)

14.

As noted above, section 44010 defines “sex offense” according to various

provisions of the Penal Code.  Section 44011 likewise defines “controlled substance offense” 
according to various provisions of the Health and Safety Code. Penal Code sections 11165.2
through 11165.6 are as previously described.

//
//

26 As noted previously (Factual Finding 64), respondent’s verbal utterances during 

that incident were not pled in the Statement of Charges, and even if they had been, they
would not likely fall within any of the Penal Code exceptions to the four-year rule.

21

15.

Respondent’s occasional yelling and tossing of items during the first semester 

of the 2014-2015 school year did not constitute, or even approach, any of these things.
(Factual Findings 10-50.) Hence it was not “egregious misconduct.”27

NO IMMORAL CONDUCT

16.

“Immoral conduct” is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary
to good morals, inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity,
and dissoluteness. It can also be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community and an
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  (Bd. of Education of the 
San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

17.

Respondent’s conduct during the 2014-2015 school year at 49th St., as 

described in the substantiated portion of Charge 9, was not immoral.  It included occasional 
“yelling” and the tossing of implements to students for their use—and the latter was not the 
conduct actually charged.  (Factual Findings 10-50.)  These actions cannot fairly be
characterized as hostile to general welfare, contrary to good morals, corrupt, indecent, 
depraved, dissolute, flagrant, shameless, or demonstrative of moral indifference.

No Cause for Dismissal Based on Unprofessional Conduct

18.

Cause 3 asserts respondent should be dismissed for unprofessional conduct,

within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). Complainant did not establish this
cause for dismissal.

19.

“Unprofessional conduct” violates the rules or ethical code of a profession, or

is unbecoming of a member of the profession in good standing (Bd. of Education v. Swan
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553), and indicates unfitness to teach.  (Perez v. Com. on Prof. 
Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) Dismissal based on unprofessional 
conduct requires the school district to give the teacher written notice of the objectionable
conduct and “an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for the 
charge.”  (§ 44938, subd. (a).)

27 Although similar sets of Penal Code and Education Code sections define “egregious

misconduct” and constitute an exception to the four-year rule (see Legal Conclusions 6 and 
7), those statutes still do not apply to respondent’s chair-tossing and phone-slamming on 
April 26, 2010.  That conduct cannot be considered cause for dismissal for the reasons 
previously stated. Even if it could constitute grounds for dismissal, it was not “the basis for 
an offense described” in section 44010 or 44011, or any of the cited Penal Code sections:  No 
criminal prosecution or conviction was alleged or proven; indeed, the police were not even 
called.  (Factual Finding 66.) The conduct was not sexual in nature, did not involve 
controlled substances, did not harm or endanger any student, and did not constitute a failure 
to supervise.  (Factual Findings 60-68.)  Accordingly, respondent’s April 26, 2010 conduct
was not “egregious misconduct.”

22

20.

Respondent’s conduct at 49th St. during the first semester of the 2014-2015

school year did not rise to the level of “unprofessional.”  (Factual Findings 51-59.)  It did not 
violate the rules or ethical code of the District.  (Id.)

21.

Even if some of respondent’s choices could be characterized as unbecoming 
of a teacher in good standing—which they were not shown to be—respondent corrected his 
behavior after receiving notice of them: he finished the 2014-2015 school year without 
further incident.  (Factual Finding 7.) Accordingly, no cause to dismiss respondent for 
unprofessional conduct was shown.

No Cause for Dismissal Based on Persistent Violation of School Laws and/or Regulations, or 
Based on Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments

22.

Causes for dismissal 5 and 6, respectively, assert respondent should be 

dismissed for violating school rules and regulations—i.e., the District policies enumerated in 
the Statement of Charges—and that his violation of those policies constitutes a willful refusal 
to perform regular assignments. Charge 15 (Factual Finding 72) is in accord.  Complainant
did not establish these causes for dismissal.

23.

As implied by the word “persistent,” a single violation of a law or rule is not 

cause for dismissal.  (Governing Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 81-84, rehearing denied, id. at p. 85.)  The District must establish more than a 
single violation.

24.

In this case, no violations were established with regard to respondent’s 

conduct during the first semester of the 2014-2015 school year. (Factual Findings 51-59.)
Accordingly, no cause for dismissal exists based on violation of District policy, rule, or 
regulation.

25.

“Willful refusal to perform regular assignments,” is not defined by either

statute or case law.  Nevertheless, since the Statement of Charges equates it with 
respondent’s alleged violation of District policies, rules, and regulations, complainant’s 
failure to establish any violations means complainant also failed to establish respondent’s 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments. (Factual Findings 51-59; see Legal 
Conclusion 27.)

No Cause for Dismissal Based on Evident Unfitness for Service

26.

Cause 4 asserts respondent should be dismissed on grounds of evident

unfitness for service.  (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6).) Complainant did not establish this cause for 
dismissal.

27.

A teacher displaying “evident unfitness for service” is one who is “clearly not
fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. Unlike unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service connotes a 

23

fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.”  (Woodland Joint 
Unified School Dist. v. Com. on Prof. Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 [internal 
quotation marks omitted].)

28.

Respondent’s conduct at 49th St. during the 2014-2015 school year did not 
reveal temperamental defects or inadequacies in his character rendering him unfit to teach.
(Factual Findings 10-50 and 74-78.) To the extent respondent’s conduct was undesirable or 
deficient, when advised of those problems, he made corrections, and finished the 2014-2015
school year without further incident.  (Factual Finding 7.)

Even if Cause Had Been Established, Dismissal Would Not Be Appropriate

29.

Even where cause for dismissal appears, the Commission has broad latitude in

determining whether dismissal is the appropriate sanction. (California Teachers Ass’n v. 
State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343; Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman
(1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 215-222.) On the other hand, the Commission has no discretion to 
fashion discipline short of dismissal.  (§ 44944, subd. (d)(1).) The relationship between a 
teacher’s conduct and his or her overall fitness to teach must be considered in deciding 
whether dismissal is warranted. (Morrison v. State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
229. (Morrison.))

30.

Under Morrison, the operative factors include the likelihood that the conduct 

may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity 
anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of certificate held 
by the teacher; extenuating or aggravating circumstances; the praiseworthiness or
blameworthiness of the teacher’s motives; the probability of recurrence; and the likelihood
that discipline will cause an adverse or chilling impact on the constitutional rights of the 
teacher involved or other teachers. With regard to the last factor, public employers may
regulate on-the-job speech or expression of their employees. (Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006)
547 U.S. 410, 421; Kaye v. Bd. of Trustees of San Diego County Public Law Library (2009)
179 Cal.App.4th 48, 56-59.)

31.

In this case, although respondent’s relevant conduct—that is, his yelling—was
recent, it was not shown to have had material adverse effects. (Factual Findings 47-50.) No
significant extenuating or aggravating circumstances appeared.  Although prior discipline 
might have been an aggravating circumstance in another context, here it was not, because it 
had occurred several years before, at other schools, based on unrelated events. (Factual
Findings 4-6.) On the other hand, respondent’s motives for yelling were not likely
blameworthy; rather, he was trying to control the classroom and focus the students on 
instruction—albeit yelling was not the ideal way to accomplish these things. (Factual
Findings 47-50.)

//

24

32.

Although some recurrence of occasional yelling is probable, the yelling is 

likely to be in accord with what is normal and acceptable for teachers, and is not likely to rise 
to the level of verbal abuse.  (Factual Findings 7, 47-50, and 76.)

33.

Finally, the chilling effect on respondent and other teachers would be 

significant, if respondent were to be dismissed for the kind of yelling that occurred in this 
case.  (Factual Findings 47-50 and 77.)

34.

Even considering respondent’s other conduct—tossing a chair and slamming 
the phone on April 26, 2010, and tossing items in his classroom during the first semester of 
the 2014-2015 school year—dismissal is too drastic a remedy. None of this conduct was 
shown to have had material adverse effects. (Factual Findings 10-50 and 60-68.)  The April 
26, 2016 incident is long past, and was extenuated by the context in which it occurred.
(Factual Findings 60-68.) Similarly, the tossing of objects during the Fall semester of 2014-
2015 was extenuated to a degree by respondent’s knee pain, which discouraged him from 
moving around the classroom.  (Factual Finding 36.) Finally, respondent is unlikely to
repeat any of this behavior—as shown by his improved performance.  (Factual Findings 6 
and 7.) Accordingly, even if every instance of conduct proven in this case were factored in, 
dismissal would still not be appropriate.

35.

On balance, respondent has had a 20-year teaching career, marked by a few 

instances in which he handled situations less than ideally.  This does not subject him to 
dismissal.

//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//

25

ORDER

Respondent Anthony Liali shall not be dismissed as a certificated employee of the 

Los Angeles Unified School District.

(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)

Dated:

  

(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)

Dated:

  

(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)

Dated:

  

DocuSigned  by: 

( agele  gue 
____________________________
ANGELA VILLEGAS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

DocuSigned  by: 

( Mary  Duet 
____________________________
MARY BENNETT
Commission Member

DocuSigned  by: 

( Zordow.  Brown.
____________________________
GORDON BROWN
Commission Member

26

