BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Statement  of  Charges 
Against, 

OAH  No.  2015061031 

NICHOLAS  WOODS, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in 

Huntington  Beach,  California,  on  January  19,  20,  and  26,  and  February  4,  5,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12, 
16,  17,  18,  19,  22,  23,  and  24,  2016.  The  Commission  consisted  of  M’Liss  Patterson, 
designated  by  the  Huntington  Beach  Union  High  School  District  (District  or  Complainant), 
Dorothy  Stafford,  designated  by  Respondent  Nicholas  Woods  (Respondent),  and 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Carla  L.  Garrett,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 
of  California,  who  presided. 

Anthony  DeMarco  and  Heather  Dozier,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  District. 

District  representative,  Dr.  Carolee  Ogata,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources, 
attended  all  days  of  hearing,  except  February  18,  2016  and  the  afternoon  of  February  19, 
2016,  when  Dr.  Dan  Bryan,  Director  of  Student  Services,  appeared  in  her  stead. 

Daniel  Sorrenson,  Michael  Kennedy,  and  Tionna  Dolin,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented 

Respondent.  Respondent  appeared  on  all  days  of  hearing. 

The  parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  February  24,  2016. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  assigned  as  a  Language 

Arts  teacher  at  Westminster  High  School.  District  alleged  that  Respondent  demonstrated 
unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(2)),'  unsatisfactory  performance  (§  44932,  subd. 
(a)(5)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(6)),  and  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  school  district  employing  him  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)  (8)).  District  seeks  Respondent’s 
dismissal. 

1 

All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  May  15,  2015,  District  served  Respondent  with  a  Statement  of  Charges 
executed  by  Carolee  Ogata,  Ed.D.,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  acting  in 
her  official  capacity.  On  May  26,  2015,  Respondent  served  his  Request  for  Hearing. 

2. 

Respondent  has  taught  English  at  Westminster  High  School  (WHS)  since  the 
commencement  of  the  2002-2003  school  year.  Prior,  he  taught  at  other  districts  for  a  period 
of  10  years.  Respondent  earned  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  English  and  theology,  a  master’s 
degree  in  education,  and  holds  a  teaching  credential.  Over  the  years  at  WHS,  Respondent 
has  taught  English  4  CP  (college  prep),  California  High  School  Exit  Examination  (CAHSEE) 
remediation,  English  3  CP,  English  4  sheltered,”  and  English  1  sheltered. 

3. 

Respondent  was  motivated  to  go  into  teaching,  because  he  wanted  to  work 
with  and  interact  with  people,  and  felt  teaching  was  the  direction  of  his  life.  Respondent 
enjoys  teaching,  not  because  he  has  been  doing  it  for  so  long,  but  because  of  his  interactions 
with  students,  helping  and  directing  them. 

Teacher  Position  Description 

4. 

District  expected  its  teachers  to  perform  duties  in  compliance  with  its  teacher 

position  description.  The  teacher  position  description  listed  seven  major  duties:  (1) 
“provides  instruction  in  areas  of  knowledge  and  skills  in  assigned  subject  areas,  utilizing  the 
adopted  courses  of  study,  and  effective  learning,  including  but  not  limited  to  interests, 
attitudes,  appreciations,  and  values”;  (2)  “utilizes  the  appropriate  instructional  techniques, 
activities  and  materials  which  will  adapt  the  curriculum  to  the  needs  of  pupils  and  be 
consistent  with  departmental,  school  and  district  goals”;  (3)  “communicates  with  parents, 
peers  and  school  counselors  on  the  individual  pupil’s  progress”;  (4)  “advises  students  and 
provides  personal  support  of  students”;  (5)  “cooperates  with  other  professional  staff 
members  in  assessing  and  helping  pupils  solve  health,  attitude,  and  learning  problems”;  (6) 
“establishes  and  maintains  standards  necessary  to  preserve  a  suitable  learning  environment”; 
and  (7)  “performs  basic  student  attendance  accounting,  textbook  accounting,  and  business 
services  as  required  by  staff  rules  or  established  local  procedures.” 

California  Standards for  the  Teaching  Profession 

5. 

District  required  its  teachers  to  apply  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching 
Profession  (the  standards)  in  the  course  of  their  duties,  which  included  six  key  standards:  (1) 
engaging  and  supporting  all  students  in  learning;  (2)  creating  and  maintaining  effective 
environments  for  student  learning;  (3)  understanding  and  organizing  subject  matter  for 

2 

A  sheltered  class  is  one  in  which  students’  primary  language  is  other  than 

English,  but  the  students  have  become  proficient  in  English  well  enough  to  meet  the 
demands  of  the  curriculum.  Students  who  require  more  support  in  English  fluency  are 
assigned  to  English  Development  classes. 

 

student  learning;  (4)  planning  instruction  and  designing  learning  experiences  for  all  students; 
(5)  assessing  students  for  learning;  and  (6)  developing  as  a  professional  educator. 

2011-2012  School  Year 

6. 

During  the-2011-2012  school  year,  Teddy  Reid,  who  testified  at  hearing,  had 

been  an  administrator  since  1993,  and  was  the  assistant  principal  over  guidance  at  WHS. 
Prior,  he  served  as  a  teacher  from  1986  to  1992,  and  taught  English,  music,  and  drama. 

7. 

As  an  assistant  principal  at  WHS,  Mr.  Reid  was  responsible  for,  among  other 
In  that  regard,  and  as  part  of  the 

things,  conducting  formal  evaluations  of  certificated  staff. 
formal  evaluation  process,  Mr.  Reid,  at  the  beginning  of  each  school  year,  would  meet 
individually  with  certificated  teachers  and  discuss  individual  plans  and  goals.  Specifically, 
Mr.  Reid  discussed  each  teacher’s  Individual  Performance  Plan  (IPP),  a  draft  of  which  each 
teacher  prepared  prior  to  meeting  with  Mr.  Reid.  The  IPP  included a  list  of  objectives  on 
which  the  teacher  endeavored  to  work  during  the  course  of  the  evaluation  period,  a  work  plan 
to  meet  those  objectives,  and  a  timeline  in  which  the  teacher  hoped  to  meet  those  goals. 
During  the  meeting  between  Mr.  Reid  and  the  teacher,  the  two  would  review  the  draft  IPP, 
discuss  any  modifications  or  additions,  and  then  would  mutually  agree  upon  the  final  IPP. 

8. 

After  several  meetings,  Mr.  Reid  and  Respondent  finalized  Respondent’s  IPP 

for  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Respondent’s  IPP  aligned  to  the  standards  and  included 
objectives,  work  plans,  and  evaluation  plans  to  address,  among  other  things,  incorporating 
instructional  and  engagement  strategies  into  the  curriculum;  making  the  classroom 
environment  conducive  to  learning;  notifying  parents  and  students  of  classroom  expectations 
and  student  progress;  endeavoring  to  help  students  improve  and  maintain  good  attendance; 
enforcing  classroom  rules  so  that  the  learning  environment  would  be  quiet,  safe,  and 
industrious  and  free  from  electronic  devices;  posting  on  the  wall  student  work  and  grades; 
and  enforcing  classroom  behavior  requirements. 

9. 

When  Mr.  Reid  wished  to  conduct  observations  of  teachers,  he  generally  gave 
them  two  weeks’  notice  that  he  was  going  to  observe  their  class.  During  the  observations,  he 
sat  in  the  back  of  the  class  taking  notes  on  his  laptop  computer.  Thereafter,  he  would  prepare 
a  written  progress  review  and  subsequently  meet  with  the  teacher  to  discuss  the  progress 
review.  He  also  conducted  unannounced  “drop  in”  classroom  observations  approximately 
four  or  five  times  per  school  year  of  each  teacher  under  his  charge.  During  all  observations, 
Mr.  Reid  evaluated  whether  the  teacher  adhered  to  the  standards,  the  teacher  position 
description,  best  teaching  practices,  district  and  site  expectations,  and  other  standards. 

10. 

During  Mr.  Reid’s  observations  of  Respondent,  Respondent  performed  below 

standard,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  and 
instructional  strategies.  Specifically,  in  the  area  of  classroom  management,  Mr.  Reid 
observed,  among  other  things,  students  placing  their  heads  on  the  desks,  talking  while 
Respondent  taught  class,  talking  during  announcements,  and  despite  Respondent’s  classroom 
rules  prohibiting  such  conduct,  students  also  played  with  electronic  devices  (e.g.,  cell  phones 

3 

 

and  ipods),  maintained  earbuds  in  their  ears,  and  ate  in  class.  In  the  area  of  student 
engagement,  Mr.  Reid  observed,  among  other  things,  a  lack  of  participation  by  students 
during  classroom  discussions,  Respondent  skipping  pages  when  reading  aloud,  causing 
confusion  in  students  attempting  to  follow  him  in  the  text,  Respondent  failing  to  relate  the 
material  to  the  students’  lives,  and  Respondent  distributing  materials  one  student  at  a  time, 
causing  students  to  engage  in  personal  discussions  while  waiting  for  Respondent  to  complete 
his  distribution  of  materials.  In  the  area  of  instructional  strategies,  Mr.  Reid  observed, 
among  other  things,  Respondent’s  failure  to  ask  questions  designed  to  engage  students  in 
critical  thinking  and  analysis,  to  employ  effectively  strategies  to  check  for  understanding, 
and  an  overall  lack  of  rigor. 

11. 

On  January  24,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  told  Respondent  during  a  progress  review  that 
“significant  improvement  will  be  needed  in  order  for  [Respondent]  to  receive  a  final,  formal 
evaluation  indicating  he  has  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  [IPP]  and  [the  District’s] 
teacher  position  description.”  Consequently,  Mr.  Reid  required  Respondent  to  participate  in 
a  Mutual  Assistance  Plan  (MAP).  A  MAP  is  a  program  designed  to  help  struggling  teachers 
improve  their  classroom  performance,  which  is  implemented  after  a  teacher  and  an 
administrator  meet  and  develop  mutual  objectives  and  work  plans  targeting  the  areas 
requiring  improvement.  A  MAP  is  generally  in  effect  for  no  fewer  than  four  weeks. 

MAP  Period  of January  31,  2012  -  March  9,  2012 

12. 

On  January  27,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  and  Respondent  executed  a  MAP  targeting 
classroom  management,  instructional  strategies,  and  student  engagement.  In  the  area  of 
classroom  management,  the  objective  Respondent  was  expected  to  achieve  involved 
Respondent  creating  a  climate  of  behavior  and  enforcing  standards  of  behavior  that  were 
conducive  to  high  levels  of  learning.  This  involved  establishing  and  communicating 
classroom  expectations  related  to  student  behavior  and  academic  performance,  as  well  as 
consequences  for  students’  failure  to  meet  those  expectations.  Respondent  was  also  expected 
to  consistently  enforce  and  apply  the  established  expectations  and  consequences. 

13. 

In  the  area  of  student  engagement,  the  objective  Respondent  was  expected  to 

achieve  involved  Respondent  implementing  an  effective,  consistent  program  of  Sustained 
Silent  Reading  (SSR),  *  which  included  establishing  routine  practices  that  resulted  in  students 
having  an  ongoing  reading  project  and  reading  for  the  entire  SSR  period.  Respondent  was 
also  expected  to  increase  student  participation  in  classroom  discussions  and  activities,  which 
included  Respondent  developing  and  employing  a  variety  of  proven  strategies  for  effectively 
drawing  all  students  into  discussions  and  holding  all  students  accountable  for  participating, 
and  developing  and  employing  a  variety  of  strategies  for  the  effective  use  of  cooperative 
learning  experiences. 

5 

SSR  was  a  District-wide  program  aimed  at  getting  students  in  the  habit  of 
reading.  As  such,  teachers  were  expected  to  require  their  students  to  read  silently  in  the 
classroom,  eight  to  thirteen  minutes  a  day,  ideally  from  the  same  book  until  completion. 

4 

 

14. 

In  the  area  of  instructional  strategies,  the  objective  Respondent  was  expected 
to  achieve  involved  Respondent  increasing  the  level  of  rigor  with  which  he  taught  literature, 
including  helping  students  develop  the  skills  they  needed  to  think  critically,  developing  a 
hierarchy  of  questions  in  lessons  that  would  require  students  to  think  at  various  levels  of 
cognition  with  an  emphasis  on  questions  requiring  high-level,  critical  thinking. 

15, 

Additionally,  Respondent  was  expected  to  allow  students  to  read  aloud  in  class 

for  a  higher  percentage  of  time,  as  Respondent  tended  to  read  aloud  more  often  than  his 
students.  This  objective  was  particularly  important  because  students  in  Respondent’s  class 
and  in  most  other  classes  at  WHS  were  primarily  English  language  learners  (ELL),  mainly 
Vietnamese  and  Hispanic,  and,  although  they  had  been  deemed  proficient  in  English,  reading 
aloud  helped  them  practice  and  enhance  their  ELL  skills. 

16. 

On  February  3,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent’s  class,  in  which  ten 

students  arrived  to  class  after  the  bell  rang,  without  any  acknowledgement  from  Respondent. 
Additionally,  Mr.  Reid  noted  some  items  on  the  bulletin  remained  covered  after  he  had 
previously  instructed  Respondent  remove  the  obstruction.  Respondent  did  not  model  reading 
a  book  during  the  period  of  SSR.  Mr.  Reid  noticed  that  every  time  Respondent  handed  out 
materials  or  handouts,  he  went  around  the  room  and  individually  handed  each  student  the 
item,  instead  of  the  more  traditional  and  efficient  approach  of  counting  items  off  and  handing 
them  down  the  rows  for  the  students  to  distribute.  Respondent  distributed  an  Animal  Farm 
handout  that  contained  inaccessible  information  because  some  of  the  information  was  cut  off 
from  the  bottom  of  the  page.  Respondent  also  spoke  inaccurately  about  historical  affairs. 
For  example,  he  said,  “For  your  generation,  the  Soviet  Union  is  not  the  threat  it  was  for  our 
generation,”  without  telling  the  students  that  the  Soviet  Union  no  longer  existed. 
Additionally,  he  told  the  students,  “Stalin  killed  10  thousand,  maybe  15  thousand  people— 
[’'m  not  sure—he  killed  more  than  Hitler,”  even  though  Stalin  killed  20  miflion  people  or 
more,  and  killed  more  than  Hitler.  Respondent  also  failed  to  relate  stories  from  George 
Orwell’s  Animal  Farm  to  the  students’  contemporary  lives  to  make  them  more  relevant  to 
students.  Additionally,  Mr.  Reid,  while  observing  from  the  back  of  the  room,  noticed  stacks 
of  graded  papers  with  no  comments  or  other  feedback.  Finally,  Mr.  Reid  noted  that  the 
lesson  plans  previously  submitted  by  Respondent  were  vague  and  overly  ambitious  in  terms 
of  the  number  of  activities  to  cover  over  the  course  of  a  week. 

17. 

At  hearing,  Respondent  explained  it  was  not  his  practice  to  single  out  students 
It  was  his  custom  and  practice  to  walk  around  the  class  with 

who  walked  into  his  class  late. 
his  seating  chart,  mark  on  the  seating  chart  whether  the  student  was  late  or  not,  and  then 
enter  the  information  in  the  SB  2000,  which  was  the  computer  system  WHS  teachers  used  to 
track  attendance.  Additionally,  it  was  his  custom  and  practice  to  distribute  materials  to  each 
student  one  at  a  time,  because  it  provided  more  of  a  personal  touch  and  disrupted  off-task 
behavior.  With  respect  to  his  reference  to  the  Soviet  Union,  he  meant  that  the  Soviet  Union 
no  longer  existing  meant  it  was  no  longer  a  threat.  Respondent  denied  stating  that  Hitler 
killed  more  people  than  Stalin.  Notwithstanding  Mr.  Reid’s  opinion,  Respondent  claimed  he 
related  materials  to  student  experiences.  Respondent  could  not  recall  what  graded  papers 

 

  

were  on  the  table  Mr.  Reid  saw,  but  believed  they  were  left  over  from  students  who  were  not 
there  that  day. 

18. 

On  February  9,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the  contents  of 

the  conference  summary  memorandum  prepared  by  Mr.  Reid.  Additionally,  Mr.  Reid 
advised  Respondent  in  the  conference  summary  that,  in  order  to  help  Respondent  improve 
his  performance,  he  arranged  for  Respondent  to  observe  two  teachers  as  they  delivered  their 
lessons:  Ms.  Angus,  who  was  an  English  teacher  and  the  department’s  chair,  and  Ms. 
Dadabhoy,  a  very  credible  and  highly  respected  English  teacher,  who,  like  Respondent, 
taught  an  English  college  preparation  course.  The  ethnic  makeup  of  these  classes  was 
similar  to  ethnic  makeup  of  Respondent’s  classes,  and  most  classrooms  at  WHS:  mostly 
Asian  and  Hispanic,  most  of  whom  were  English-language  learners.  Mr.  Reid  directed 
Respondent  to  take  notes  during  his  observations  of  these  teachers,  and  pay  particular 
attention  to  how  SSR  occurred  and  what  the  respective  teachers  did  during  SSR,  whether 
there  was  a  warm-up  activity,  how  the  respective  teachers  led  into  small  group  activities, 
how  they  held  students  accountable  for  engagement  in  the  activity.  Mr.  Reid  also  wanted 
Respondent  to  pay  attention  to  the  flow  of  the  activity,  the  connection  of  the  lesson  and  the 
discussion  to  the  standard,  the  levels  and  diversity  of  questions  asked  by  these  teachers  (e.g., 
simple  recall,  drawing  inferences,  critical  thinking,  etc.),  the  techniques  and  strategies  these 
teachers  used  to  get  all  students  engaged  in  the  discussion,  and  the  amount  of  time  the 
teachers  spent  on  each  activity  in  the  lesson. 

19, 

On  February  14,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary 

memorandum  and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  its  contents.  Specifically,  Mr.  Reid 
advised  that  during  an  observation  of  Respondent’s  class,  he  noted  that  one  student  had  come 
to  class  approximately  20  minutes  late,  but  Respondent  neither  marked  the  student  late  nor 
requested  a  late  pass.  Another  student  had  walked  into  class  approximately  one  hour  and  40 
minutes  late,  but  Respondent,  as  required  by  attendance  procedures,  did  not  mark  the  student 
absent.  Per  the  attendance  procedures,  a  student  who  walked  into  class  more  than  30  minutes 
jate  had  to  be  marked  absent,  and  required  Respondent  to  send  the  student  to  the  attendance 
office  to  check  in.  Consequently,  during  the  conference,  Mr.  Reid  provided  Respondent  with 
a  copy  of  the  District’s  teacher  position  description  to  remind  him  of  his  duties. 

ff} 

f/f 

‘tf 

‘Tf 

Mii 

fii 

 

  

20. 

Also  in  the  February  14,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum,  Mr.  Reid 
described  how  he  went  to  Respondent’s  classroom  a  minute  or  so  before  the  bell  rang,  and 
found  no  one  there,  and  the  door  unlocked.  Consequently,  Mr.  Reid  admonished  Respondent 
for  leaving  his  classroom  unlocked  while  no  one  was  in  the  room,  and  for  not  keeping 
students  in  the  classroom  until  the  end  of  the  period.’  Mr.  Reid  also  noted  in  the  conference 
summary  memorandum  that  when  he  instructed  Respondent  to  provide  him  with  an 
approximate  time  frame  during  which  Respondent  would  cover  items  on  the  students’  senior 
language  arts  portfolio,”  Respondent  seemed  to  imply  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  complete 
all  items  on  the  list,  due  to  Mr.  Reid’s  insistence  that  the  students  complete  an  essay  in  the 
second  semester.  Respondent  believed  an  essay  was  required  in  the  first  semester,  but  not  in 
the  second. 

21, 

Mr.  Reid  also  noted  in  the  February  14,  2012  conference  summary 

memorandum  that  Respondent  seemed  to  be  confused  about  the  function  and  purpose  of  an 
“anticipatory  set.”  An  anticipatory  set  refers  to  an  activity  to  focus  the  students’  attention 
and  help  the  student  get  mentally  or  physically  ready  for  the  lesson.  Finally,  Mr.  Reid  noted 
Respondent  failed  to  provide  feedback  to  students  between  their  first  and  final  drafts  of  an 
essay. 

22. 

In  response,  Respondent  expressed  at  hearing  that  he  felt  he  had  no  voice  in 

the  conference  summary  meetings,  therefore  he  did  not  tell  Mr.  Reid  that  Mr.  Reid  had  come 
to  his  class  during  a  conference  period,  where  no  students  would  be  present.  Respondent 
denied  telling  or  implying  to  Mr.  Reid  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  get  his  seniors  to 
complete  their  senior  portfolios.  Respondent  also  denied  not  knowing  or  harboring 
confusion  about  the  meaning  and  purpose  of  an  anticipatory  set.  With  respect  to  the  lack  of 
feedback  on  the  essay  draft  and  final  essay,  Respondent  explained  his  class  was  using  Jane 
Schaffer  writing  templates  to  create  their  drafts,  which  were  created  in  class  with  student 
generated  responses.  As  such,  there  was  no  feedback  necessary,  as  it  was  an  assignment  the 
class  had  completed  together. 

‘ 

At  hearing,  Respondent  provided  conflicting  testimony  regarding  the  unlocked 

door  and  the  absence  of  students  in  the  classroom.  He  first  testified  that  neither  he  nor  his 
students  were  in  the  classroom,  because  Mr.  Reid  had  come  during  Respondent’s  conference 
period.  Respondent  subsequently  testified  that  neither  he  nor  his  students  were  in  the 
classroom  because  he  had  taken  the  class  to  the  computer  lab.  Yet  in  a  written  response  to 
the  February  14,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum,  Respondent  mentioned  nothing 
about  his  conference  period  or  his  escorting  the  students  to  the  computer  lab.  Instead,  he 
merely  mentioned  that  he  would  lock  the  door  when  leaving  the  classroom,  and  he  always 
maintained  a  policy  of  keeping  students  in  the  classroom  until  the  end  of  the  period.  Given 
Respondent’s  conflicting  versions,  the  Commission  found  Respondent’s  testimony  incredible 
here. 

5 

The  senior  language  arts  portfolio  was  an  accumulation  of  students’  work 

dating  back  to  their  freshman  year. 

 

  

23. 

On  February  17  and  21,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent’s  class,  and,  on 

February  23,  2012,  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum,  Mr.  Reid  met  with 
Respondent  on  February  23,  2012,  and  advised  Respondent  that  after  consulting  with  the 
curricular  map  and  members  of  the  English  Language  Arts  department,  Mr.  Reid  learned  that 
students  were  required  to  write  not  one  essay  for  their  student  portfolios,  but  three  essays  in 
the  spring  semester. 
During  his  observations,  Mr.  Reid  noticed  Respondent  engaged  in  no 
eye  contact  with  the  students  during  the  delivery  of  Respondent’s  lesson,  and  students  did 
not  look  at  Respondent.  Additionally,  students  had  their  heads  on  their  desks  and  were  not 
engaged  in  the  lesson.  Respondent  distributed  a  course  syllabus  to  his  students  that  included 
the  incorrect  name  of  the  class.  He  also,  during  the  delivery  of  his  lesson,  did  not  involve  the 
students,  as  he  asked  few  questions,  all  of  them  low-level,  leading  to  a  lack  of  active  student 
engagement.  Mr.  Reid  also  noticed  that  Respondent  often  skipped  a  page  or  two  when 
reading  aloud,  without  letting  the  students  know,  making  it  difficult  for  the  students  to  follow 
him.  He  also  failed  to  relate  the  material  relevant  to  the  students’  lives.  Also,  despite  Mr. 
Reid’s  prior  discussions  with  Respondent  addressing  the  time  Respondent  wasted  by 
distributing  material  to  students  one  at  a  time,  Respondent  continued  to  walk  around  to  each 
student  and  hand  them  material.  Specifically,  it  took  three  minutes  for  Respondent  to 
distribute  materials,  thereby  wasting  valuable  instructional  time.  Mr.  Reid  also  noticed  three 
students  walked  into  class  late,  as  well  as  students  with  earbuds  using  electronic  devices,  but 
Respondent  imposed  no  consequences.  Respondent  also  noticed  that  during  the  tutorial 
period,  Respondent  was  unaware  that  students  he  announced  could  leave  were  not  the 
students  who  actually  left.  Finally,  Mr.  Reid  found  Respondent’s  lessons  lacked  variation 
and  creativity,  as  he  followed  the  same  routine  every  day,  which  lacked  opportunities  for 
cooperative  learning. 

24. 

In  response,  Respondent  explained  at  hearing  that  his  lesson  planning  provided 

students  with  a  full  chance  to  get  their  student  portfolios  completed.  Even  though  he 
disagreed  that  the  pacing  guide  required  an  additional  essay,  he  was  happy  to  do  what  Mr. 
Reid  wanted  him  to  do,  and  get  an  additional  essay  completed.  Respondent  said  it  was  his 
practice  and  policy  to  require  students  to  be  quiet,  especially  during  announcements,  and  to 
prohibit  the  non-instructional  use  of  electronics.  Additionally,  it  was  his  custom  and  practice 
not  to  allow  students  to  lay  their  heads  on  their  desks.  Respondent  testified  that  when  he  saw 
such  conduct,  he  would  make  eye  contact  with  the  student  or  move  in  close  proximity  to  the 
student,  which  would  generally  prompt  the  student  to  correct  his  or  her  behavior.  If  the 
student  failed  to  comply,  he  would  knock  on  the  student’s  desk  and  wait  for  compliance. 
Respondent  disagreed  with  Mr.  Reid’s  observation  that  he  skipped  pages  in  the  text  without 
telling  students.  Respondent  disagreed  he  failed  to  engage  his  students  or  relate  lessons  to 
their  experience.  With  respect  to  Mr.  Reid’s  criticism  of  Respondent’s  lesson-based 
questions  posed  to  students,  Respondent  explained  he  considered  the  students’  backgrounds, 
particularly  those  in  his  sheltered  English  class,  and  asked  foundational  questions  in  the 
lower  part  of  Bloom’s  taxonomy.®  Respondent  believed  that  if  he  had  started  at  a  higher 

‘ 

Bloom’s  taxonomy  provides  an  important  framework  for  teachers  to  use  to 

focus  on  higher  order  thinking.  By  providing  a  hierarchy  of  levels,  this  taxonomy  can  assist 
teachers  in  designing  performance  tasks,  crafting  questions  for  conferring  with  students,  and 

8 

 

| 

| 

| 

point  in  Bloom’s  taxonomy,  it  would  have  caused  a  disconnection  between  him  and  the 
students.  Respondent  felt  he  had  to  adjust  his  teaching  strategy  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
population  with  whom  he  worked,  which  included  scaffolding,  laying  foundational 
information,  and  asking  low-level  questions  to  help  establish  that  foundation.  Mr.  Reid 
rejected  the  notion  that  students  in  the  sheltered  class  were  incapable  of  understanding 
higher-level  questions,  or  required  mostly  low-level  questions,  as  they  were  deemed 
proficient  in  speaking,  reading,  and  understanding  English. 

25. 

With  respect  to  Mr.  Reid’s  criticism  about  Respondent’s  distribution  of 
materials  one  student  at  a  time,  in  addition  to  his  initial  explanation  that  he  distributed 
materials  in  that  way  to  provide  more  of  a  personal  touch  and  to  disrupt  off-task  behavior, 
Respondent  explained  he  could  see  out  of  one  eye  at  a  time  only,  because  he  has  a  condition 
called  Alternating  Strabismous.’  This  condition  impacts  his  peripheral  vision,  according  to 
Respondent.  Therefore,  he  preferred  passing  out  materials  one  at  a  time,  as  it  helped  him  get 
a  vantage  point  for  classroom  management  and  student  engagement  purposes.  With  respect 
to  students  arriving  late  to  his  class  without  any  consequences,  Respondent  contends  Mr. 
Reid  never  disclosed  to  him  what  kind  of  consequences  he  should  impose. 

26. 

With  respect  to  Mr.  Reid’s  criticism  that  students  sneaked  out  of  the  tutorial 

period  without  his  knowledge,  when  he  learned  they  had,  he  contacted  the  students’  parents. 
In  regard  to  Mr.  Reid’s  criticism  that  Respondent’s  lessons  lacked  variation,  creativity,  and 
opportunities  for  cooperative  learning  experiences,  Respondent  disagreed  and  claimed  he 
utilized  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies,  such  as  think-pair-share,  think-write-share,  dry 
erase  boards  to  check  for  understanding,  thumbs-up-thumbs-down,  and  other  strategies. 

27, 

On  March  1,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum 

and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  Respondent’s  progress  on  the  MAP.  Mr.  Reid  told 
Respondent  that  he  had  not  achieved  the  goals  of  the  MAP.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed 
to  develop  and  employ  a  variety  of  proven  strategies  for  effectively  drawing  all  students  into 
discussions  and  holding  all  students  accountable  for  participating.  He  also  failed  to  develop 
and  employ  a  variety  of  strategies  for  the  effective  use  of  cooperative  learning  experiences, 
help  students  develop  the  skills  to  think  critically,  and  develop  a  hierarchy  of  questions 
requiring  students  to  engage  in  high-level,  critical  thinking.  Respondent  failed  to  allow 
students  to  read  aloud  for  higher  percentages  of  the  time,  and  failed  to  consistently  enforce 
and  apply  established  expectations  and  consequences. 

  

providing  feedback  on  student  work.  The  levels  are  knowledge  (level  one)  comprehension 
(level  two),  application  (level  three),  analysis  (level  four),  synthesis  (level  five),  and 
evaluation  (level  six). 

7 

Respondent  produced  no  independent  evidence  demonstrating  he  suffered 

from  Alternating  Strabismous,  and  proffered  no  expert  testimony  describing  the  symptoms  of 
the  condition. 

 

  

28. 

Mr.  Reid  also  noted  Respondent,  who  had  observed  the  classrooms  of  Ms. 

Asya,  Ms.  Dadabhoy,  and  Ms.  Lanz  and  had  submitted  summaries  of  his  observations  to  Mr. 
Reid,  failed  to  do  an  effective  job  in  attempting  to  learn  from  those  teachers  about  effective 
teaching  strategies.  Instead,  Respondent  seemed  to  focus  on  what  he  believed  to  be  negative 
aspects  of  the  classrooms,  and  described  one  of  the  classrooms  as  having  a  “party 
atmosphere.”  Mr.  Reid,  who  observed  the  classrooms  with  Respondent,  disagreed  that  the 
classroom  contained  a  party  atmosphere.  Mr.  Reid  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  require 
his  students  to  remain  quiet  during  announcements  from  the  public  address  (P.A.)  system, 
and  that  the  delivery  of  his  lessons  lacked  organization  and  did  not  follow  his  lesson  plans. 
Finally,  Mr.  Reid  noted  Respondent  said,  “shh,”  at  least  50  times  per  period,  in  an  effort  to 
quiet  his  students. 

29. 

On  March  8,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum 

concerning  a  recent  observation  of  Respondent’s  class,  and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 
his  observations.  Mr.  Reid  observed  the  students  engaged  in a  lot  of  talking,  laughing,  and 
conversation  unrelated  to  the  lesson,  students  completed  work  from  other  classes,  talked 
during  P.A.  announcements,  and  fiddled  with  their  cell  phones  or  ipods.  Students  also  failed 
to  comply  with  Respondent’s  instructions,  and  Respondent  demonstrated  an  inability  to 
motivate  students.  Respondent  also  lacked  of  awareness  of  his  students’  lack  of  engagement 
and  compliance.  Additionally,  it  took  Respondent  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  to  get  his 
students  to  listen  and  comply  with  his  instructions  for  them  to  engage  in  SSR  activities,  and 
students  also  failed  to  comply  with  instructions  to  get  into  groups  of  four  for  an  in-class 
activity.  Finally,  Respondent  provided  a  handout  to  his  students  that  did  not  relate  to  the 
standard  Respondent  was  teaching. 

30. 

Overall,  Respondent  disagreed  with  what  Mr.  Reid  said  he  observed,  and 

claims  he  engaged  in  classroom  management  by  moving  around  the  classroom  to  enforce  his 
rules.  Respondent  believed  that  if  the  class  produced  work,  it  meant  the  students  were 
engaged  and  that  his  classroom  management  was  effective. 

31. 

On  March  14,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum 

and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  a  possible  unsatisfactory  performance  review. 
Specifically,  Mr.  Reid  stated,  “I  am  notifying  you  that,  based  on  your  inability  to  meet  the 
goals  established  in  the  Mutual  Assistance  Plan  dated  January  31,  2012  through  March  9, 
2012,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  is  warranted.” 

32. 

On  March  21,  2012,  Respondent  prepared  and  submitted  to  Mr.  Reid  a 

response  to  his  March  14,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum,  stating  that  based  on 
Respondent’s  “cooperation,  adequate  performance,  and  significant  improvement  in  Mutual 
Assistance  Plan  goals  .. 
.  a  Notice  of  Satisfactory  Performance  is  warranted  and  deserved.” 
(Emphasis  original).  Respondent  argued  Mr.  Reid  engaged  in  agenda-based  observations  of 
Respondent  to  show  Respondent  “in  a  bad  light  rather  than  to  assist  [Respondent]  in  any 
improvement  plan.”  Respondent  further  asserted,  among  other  things,  that  a  finding  of 
unsatisfactory  performance  “is  for  a  teacher  who  will  not  try  to  improve,  will  not  try  to 

10 

 

  

change,  will  not  cooperate  with  Evaluator,  is  unfit  to  teach  by  reason  of  excess  absence, 
drugs,  smoking,  liquor,  and  arrest  record  or  criminal  record.” 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  (March  22,  2012) 

33. 

On  March  22,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  issued  Respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Progress  for  the  MAP  period  of  January  31,  2012  to  March  9,  2012.  In  the  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory,  Mr.  Reid  listed  six  formal  observations  during  the  MAP  period,  and 
mentioned  he  informally  observed  Respondent’s  class  for  10  to  15  minutes  on  three  or  four 
other  occasions.  Mr.  Reid  stated  Respondent  failed  to  meet  his  MAP  goals  addressing 
student  engagement,  classroom  management,  cooperative  learning  experiences,  critical 
thinking,  enforcing  expectations  and  consequences,  tutorial  procedures,  and  students  reading 
aloud. 

34. 

Mr.  Reid  also  concluded  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  that 

Respondent  had  not  met  goals  in  his  IPP  and  in  the  teacher  position  description. 
Specifically,  Respondent  did  not  maintain  an  environment  conducive  to  learning,  given  how 
often  Mr.  Reid  observed  students  in  Respondent’s  class  fiddling  with  electronic  devices, 
earbuds  in  their  ears,  and  talking  about  matters  unrelated  to  the  lesson.  Mr.  Reid  also  noted 
that  the  repetitive,  unengaging  nature  of  Respondent’s  instruction  was  such  that,  rather  than 
being  conducive  to  learning,  it  engendered  boredom,  apathy,  frustration,  and  inattentiveness. 
Mr.  Reid  noted  Respondent  frequently  provided  students  with  faulty  lessons,  unreliable 
information  and  inaccurate  allusions  and  illustrations.  For  example,  Respondent  announced 
to  his  class  that  he  was  giving  them  a  worksheet  to  help  develop  skills  related  to  Greek, 
Latin,  and  Anglo-Saxon  roots,  but  the  worksheet  applied  in  no  way  to  such  root  words,  but 
rather  to  the  students’  recall  of  terms  related  to  1984.  He  also  said  or  did  nothing  to  clarify 
his  use  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  the  present  tense  when  describing  the  potential  threat  posed  by 
the  Soviet  Union,  and  did  not  explain  the  Soviet  Union  no  longer  existed.  Respondent  was 
also  grossly  inaccurate  about  who  killed  more  people,  Hitler  or  Stalin,  and  the  number  of 
people  they  killed.  He  also  pronounced  Peace  Corps  as  peace  “corpse.” 

35. 

Additionally,  Mr.  Reid  stated  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  that 

even  with  close  supervision  over  the  course  of  the  MAP  period,  Respondent’s  lesson  plans 
had  proven  to  be  ill-conceived  and  reflected  the  confusion  that  characterized  much  of 
Respondent’s  work.  Mr.  Reid  concluded  that,  based  on  his  observations,  virtually  no 
effective  learning  occurred  in  Respondent’s  classroom.  Mr.  Reid  stated  that  in  order  for 
Respondent’s  present  unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  judged  satisfactorily,  he  must 
satisfactorily  complete  a  second  MAP  period  to  begin  on  March  27,  2012  and  end  on  April 
30,  2012.  The  MAP,  itself,  would  focus  on  (1)  significantly  increasing  active  student 
engagement;  (2)  improving  questioning  techniques,  including  the  cognitive  level  of  questions 
asked,  appropriateness  of  questions,  and  the  framing  of  questions;  (3)  increasing  and 
improving  formative  assessments,  including  checking  for  understanding;  and  (4)  improving 
classroom  management. 

ll 

 

36. 

Respondent  refused  to  sign  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  initially, 

but  then  signed  it,  under  protest,  on  March  27,  2012,  as  he  believed  he  had  met  all  of  the 
goals  of  the  MAP,  and  concluded  Mr.  Reid  was  “trying  to  get  rid  of  him.” 

California  State  University  Early  Assessment  Program  Testing 

37. 

On  March  5,  2012,  a  representative  from  the  California  State  University 
(CSU)  Early  Assessment  Program  (EAP)  met  with  all  English  teachers  who  would  be 
administering  the  EAP  test.  At  the  meeting,  the  representative  discussed  the  directions  for 
giving  the  test,  and  stated  it  was  essential  that  no  student  use  a  booklet  identified  with  the 
name  of  another  student. 

38. 

Prior  to  the  March  27,  2012  test,  Respondent  received  four  or  five  test 

booklets  pre-slugged  for  students  who  were  in  Respondent’s  class  in  the  first  semester,  but 
not  in  Respondent’s  present  class.  Respondent  gave  those  pre-slugged  test  booklets  to  four 
students  in  his  class  who  did  not  have  a  test  booklet.  Respondent  instructed  those  students  to 
cross  out  the  demographic  information  that  was  on  the  pre-slugged  tests,  and  to  write  their 
own  demographic  information  in  the  blanks  at  the  top  of  the  page.  Administrators  retrieved 
those  pre-slugged  documents  from  Respondent  and  got  them  to  the  students  for  whom  they 
were  originally  pre-slugged. 

39. 

If  administrators  had  not  retrieved  those  pre-slugged  documents,  CSU  could 

have  discovered  an  anomaly,  which  could  have  resulted  in  severe  consequences  for  the 
school,  and  could  have  jeopardized  the  validity  of  all  of  the  students’  tests.  Mr.  Reid 
counseled  Respondent  about  this  on  March  27,  2012,  and  instructed  him  to  follow  testing 
directions  in  the  future.  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum  recapping 
the  substance  of  his  discussion  with  Respondent,  which  Respondent  and  Mr.  Reid  signed  on 
March  27,  2012. 

40. 

On  April  2,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr.  Reid’s 

March  27,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum.  Respondent  believed  that  once  the  pre- 
slugged  name  was  crossed  out,  the  document’s  original  identity  ceased  to  exist.  Once  the 
student  wrote  his  or  her  name  at  the  top  of  the  document,  that  document  took  on  a  new 
identity.  Respondent  apologized  for  any  problem  caused  by  his  actions. 

MAP  Period  of  March  27,  2012  —  April  29,  2012° 

41. 

The  time  period  set  forth  for  the  MAP  was  March  27,  2012  to  April  29,  2012, 
and  included  three  main  objectives:  (1)  increase  student  active  engagement  in  the  learning; 
(2)  increase  the  number,  variety,  and  quality  of  checks  for  understanding;  and  (3)  create  a 
climate  and  enforce  standards  of  behavior  that  are  conducive  to  high  levels  of  learning. 

§ 

Although  Mr.  Reid  signed  the  MAP  on  March  27,  2012,  Respondent  refused 
to  do  so.  Mr.  Reid  advised  Respondent  that  the  MAP  would  still  take  effect  on  March  28, 
2012.  After  some  minor  revisions,  Respondent  signed  the  MAP  on  April  19,  2012. 

12 

 

  

42, 

In  order  to  accomplish  these  goals,  Respondent  was  to  develop  and  employ  no 

fewer  than  three  proven  strategies  based  on  best  practices  in  the  teaching  profession  for 
effectively  drawing  students  into  discussions  and  holding  all  students  accountable  for 
participating  in  the  discussions;  develop  and  employ  no  fewer  than  three  proven  strategies 
based  on  best  practices  to  be  used  when  assigning  cooperative  learning  experiences  that  will 
result  in  active  student  engagement;  develop  and  employ  no  fewer  than  three  proven 
strategies  based  on  best  practices  for  effectively  making  lesson  content  relevant  to  students; 
develop  and  employ  no  fewer  than  three  proven  strategies  based  on  best  practices  in  the 
teaching  profession  for  ensuring  that  distribution  of  students’  opportunities  to  read  aloud  in 
class  occurred  and  that  all  students  were  held  accountable  for  being  ready  to  read  when 
called  upon  to  do  so.  Additionally,  when  reading  aloud  was  required,  Respondent  was 
expected  to  permit  students  to  read  no  less  than  70%  of  the  time. 

43. 

Respondent  was  also  expected  to  submit  detailed  lesson  plans  to  Mr.  Reid  for 

each  week  of  the  MAP  period.  Those  plans  were  to  include  in  their  implementation 
questions  that  would  call  on  students  to  respond  at  various  levels  of  cognition  including 
simple  recall,  drawing  inferences,  comprehension,  application,  analysis,  synthesis,  and 
evaluation.  He  was  also  expected  to  implement  in  each  class  period  no  fewer  than  three 
proven  strategies  based  on  best  practices  in  the  teaching  profession  to  assess  whether  or  not 
all  students  understood  the  content  of  the  lesson.  Finally,  Respondent  was  expected  to 
develop  effective  consequences,  based  on  best  practices  used  in  the  teaching  professions,  to 
discourage  students  from  violating  behavioral  norms  established  by  Respondent. 

44, 

Respondent  disagreed  that  the  MAP  was  actually  a  mutual  document,  as  it  was 
prepared  without  his  input  and  felt  the  goals  were  immeasurable.  Despite  this,  he  felt  that  he 
put  strategies  in  play  that  addressed  the  goals  of  the  MAP,  such  as  pair-share,  read-write- 
share,  working  in  collaborative  groups,  incorporating  content  in  lessons  applicable  to  the 
students’  lives,  ensuring  more  students  participated  in  reading  by  pulling  name  cards  from  a 
hat,  using  the  name  generator,  and  using  an  electronic  dart  board.  He  also  used  dry  erase 
boards  to  check  for  understanding,  as  well  as  thumbs-up-thumbs-down,  and  implementing 
progressive  discipline  such  as  losing  points  and  calling  parents. 

45. 

Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent’s  class  on  March  30,  2012  and  April  4,  2012, 
and  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum  and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  his 
observations.  Mr.  Reid  observed  that  there  were  no  cooperative  learning  experiences  during 
the  March  30,  2012  observation,  except  for  one  student  who  turned  her  seat  to  work  on  an 
anti-hero  assignment  with  her  neighbor.  During  SSR,  several  students  were  writing  instead 
of  reading,  presumably  working  on  assignments  from  other  classes,  according  to  Mr.  Reid. 
Two  students  sitting  in  the  front  row  talked  incessantly  for  nearly  the  entire  period,  but 
Respondent  failed  to  address  the  behavior.  He  also  failed  to  ensure  the  equal  distribution  of 
opportunities  for  students  to  read  aloud  in  class.  Additionally,  Respondent  demonstrated 
inconsistency  in  distributing  participation  points  for  students  reading  aloud.  Respondent  still 
handed  out  papers  one  sheet  at  a  time  to  one  student  at  a  time,  which  took  three  minutes  of 
instructional  time. 

13 

 

  

  

46. 

During  his  April  4,  2012  observation,  Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent 

distributing  material  one  student  at  a  time,  which  consumed  five  minutes  and  fifty-seven 
seconds  of  instructional  time.  Students  talked  and  laughed  during  the  period,  some 
incessantly,  even  during  Respondent’s  presentation  of  the  lesson  and  during  P.A. 
announcements.  Respondent  mostly  failed  to  address  this  behavior,  and  when  he  did,  it  was 
in  the  form  of  raising  his  voice  to  get  their  attention.  Mr.  Reid  also  observed  that  posters 
containing  writing  strategies  and  literary  concepts  were  covered  by  other  posters.  During 
Respondent’s  presentation  of  the  lesson,  Respondent  gave  students  the  incorrect  definition  of 
the  word  “urbane,”  and  failed  to  correct  students’  incorrect  answers  concerning  the  definition 
of  the  word. 

47. 

At  hearing,  Respondent  explained  he  had  given  his  students  ownership  to  post 
posters  in  his  class,  and  claimed  not  know  what  posters  Mr.  Reid  was  talking  about,  and  had 
difficulty  extracting  information  from  Mr.  Reid  regarding  the  specific  posters  Mr.  Reid 
wished  for  him  to  address.  He  further  explained  that  the  class  period  was  one  hour  and  forty- 
five  minutes  long,  which  made  classroom  management  more  challenging.  Ifa  student  had 
his  or  her  head  on  the  desk,  but  appeared  to  be  working,  Respondent  did  not  correct  the 
student,  as  he  did  not  consider  himself  the  “posture  police.”  Respondent  maintained  that  as 
long  as  the  students’  work  product  showed  they  understood  the  lesson,  he  was  satisfied  that 
he  had  employed  effective  classroom  management  and  student  engagement. 

48. 

As  for  the  poster,  Respondent  acknowledged  that  an  older  poster  slightly 
covered  another,  but  denied  it  interfered  with  the  text  of  the  newer  poster.  Respondent 
denied  telling  the  students  the  wrong  definition  of  “urbane.”  In  response  to  Mr.  Reid’s 
criticism  that  he  failed  to  correct  students  who  provided  incorrect  answer  to  questions 
Respondent  posed  to  the  class,  Respondent  explained  that  it  was  his  practice  not  to  embarrass 
students  when  they  got  an  answer  wrong,  given  the  ethnic  background  of  the  students,  as 
honor  was  very  important.  Consequently,  he  would  tell  the  students  that  they  were  on  the 
right  track  and  then  elicit  the  correct  answer  from  someone  else  in  the  class.  Respondent 
acknowledged  he  sometimes  raised  his  voice,  but  once  he  gained  the  attention  of  the 
students,  he  would  lower  his  voice  again. 

49. 

Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent’s  class  on  April  19,  2012  and  prepared  a 

conference  summary  memorandum  outlining  his  observations.  Mr.  Reid  observed 
Respondent  had  yet  to  change  the  posted  materials  covering  the  other  posted  materials  on  the 
walls  and  bulletin  boards.  The  students  were  off-task,  as  some  had  their  heads  down,  one 
student  was  playing  a  game,  a  student  was  listening  to  music  through  his  earbuds,  a  student 
was  shuffling  cards,  and  students  were  talking  and  laughing.  The  environment  was  not 
conducive  to  learning,  and  Respondent  was  ineffective  in  getting  the  students  to  engage. 
Respondent  would  ask  a  question,  but  would  not  allow  the  students  to  respond,  thereby 
promoting  a  lack  of  expectation  of  student  engagement.  During  student  presentations, 
Respondent  duplicated  materials  at  the  copier  machine  instead  of  giving  the  student 
presenters  his  full  attention. 

14 

 

  

50. 

Overall,  Respondent  disagreed  with  Mr.  Reid’s  characterization  of  his  class  on 

April  19,  2012.  Respondent  believed  the  students  were  engaged  in  hearing  student 
presentations,  asking  questions,  and  interacting  with  the  presenters,  which  Respondent 
believed  Mr.  Reid  interpreted  as  social  talking.  In  those  situations  when  he  would  ask  a 
question  and  not  wait  for  an  answer,  Respondent  stated  he  was  in  a  re-teaching  mode. 

51. 

On  April  23,  2012,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  Mr.  Reid’s 

April  19,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum.  Respondent  asserted,  among  other 
things,  that  80%  of  the  class  was  engaged,  to  which  Mr.  Reid  vehemently  disagreed  at 
hearing.  Respondent  also  stated  that  his  students  were  making  first-time  attempts  to  exercise 
self-discipline  regarding  their  cell  phones,  as  Respondent  provided  students  with  plastic  bags 
in  which  to  store  their  phones  during  the  class  period. 

52. 

Mr.  Reid  observed  Respondent’s  class  on  April  26,  2012  and  prepared  a 

conference  summary  memorandum  outlining  his  observations.  Mr.  Reid  observed  students 
coming  into  class  late,  as  well  as  Respondent’s  difficulty  in  getting  students  to  quiet  down  to 
begin  SSR.  Respondent  often  said,  “shh,”  to  quiet  the  students,  but  it  was  ineffective.  Mr. 
Reid  had  had  multiple  discussions  with  Respondent  about  his  effective  use  of  “shh,”  yet 
Respondent  failed  to  curtail  his  use  of  it  and  find  another  way  to  quiet  his  students.  Students 
were  off-task,  as  one  student  had  earbuds  in  his  ears,  one  student  was  working  on  something 
from  another  class,  one  student  had  his  head  on  his  desk  with  his  eyes  closed,  and  one 
student  was  putting  on  make-up.  Despite  making  an  announcement  at  the  commencement  of 
class  that  he  would  take  away  any  electronic  devices  he  saw  out,  some  students  had  their  cell 
phones  out.  When  Respondent  approached  one  student  to  demand  her  phone,  the  student 
shoved  the  cell  phone  into  her  purse.  Respondent  did  not  take  the  cell  phone  or  take  any 
further  action  addressing  the  student’s  noncompliance,  such  as  applying  progressive 
discipline  strategies. 

53. 

On  May  3,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum  and 
met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  a  possible  unsatisfactory  performance  review.  Specifically, 
Mr.  Reid  stated,  “I  am  notifying  you  that,  based  on  your  inability  to  meet  the  goals 
established  in  the  Mutual  Assistance  Plan  dated  March  27,  2012  through  April  9,  2012,  a 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance  is  warranted.” 

54. 

On  May  7,  2012,  Respondent  prepared  and  submitted  to  Mr.  Reid  a  response 

to  his  March  3,  2012  conference  summary  memorandum,  stating  that  Respondent  had 
worked  hard  to  cooperate  with  Mr.  Reid  and  to  make  changes  during  both  MAP  periods. 
Given  his  past  and  ongoing  efforts,  Respondent  believed  he  should  receive  a  notice  of 
satisfactory  performance. 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  (May  10,  2012) 

55. 

On  May  10,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  issued  Respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
Progress  for  the  MAP  period  of  March  27,  2012  to  April  29,  2012.  Mr.  Reid  found  that 
Respondent  employed  strategies  that  had  the  potential  to  draw  students  into  his  lessons,  but 

15 

 

  

the  results  were  minimal.  In  other  words,  there  were  only  four  to  six  students  contributing  to 
discussions  led  by  Respondent,  and  when  they  did  contribute,  their  responses  involved  very 
few  words,  very  little  critical  thought,  and  very  little  enthusiasm.  This  was  the  case  because 
Respondent’s  attempts  to  generate  discussion  were  little  more  than  asking  simple  recall 
questions  that  elicited  short  responses.  On  infrequent  occasions  when  Respondent  asked  a 
question  or  posited  an  idea  that  had  the  potential  to  generate  a  meaningful  dialogue,  a  brief 
response  from  a  student  elicited  no  follow-up  questions  or  ideas  from  Respondent  to  generate 
ongoing  discussion. 

56. 

Mr.  Reid  also  stated  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  that  Respondent 

attempted  to  employ  the  cooperative  learning  teaching  method  on  two  occasions  that  Mr. 
Reid  observed,  but  in  neither  of  those  instances  were  70%  of  students  discussing  the  assigned 
topic,  nor  were  they  held  accountable  for  group  product  even  though  Respondent’s  written 
lesson  plan  indicated  they  would  be.  Instead,  the  groups  were  engaged  in a  lot  of  social 
conversation  and  laughter.  Respondent,  who  stood  at  various  points  in  the  room,  seemed  to 
have  no  awareness  that  the  students  were  not  engaged  in  the  assigned  activity. 

57. 

Respondent  met  the  goal  of  developing  and  employing  no  fewer  than  two 

proven  strategies  for  ensuring  students  read  aloud  in  class,  but  it  was  not  clear  to  Mr.  Reid 
whether  Respondent  kept  track  of  which  students  read  and  which  did  not,  nor  did  Mr.  Reid 
see  evidence  that  Respondent  organized  the  execution  of  his  strategies  to  ensure  that  students 
who  had  not  read  one  day  were  called  upon  on  future  days.  Respondent  also  met  the  goal  of 
allowing  students  to  read  no  less  than  70  %  of  the  time. 

58. 

Mr.  Reid  found  that  Respondent  failed  to  fully  understand  the  nature  of 

checking  for  understanding,  as  his  attempts  had  been  misguided  and  minimally  effective. 
Respondent  only  seemed  to  check  for  simple  recall  of  people,  places,  and  events  in  the 
literature,  and  never  checked  to  see  if  students  understood  abstract  ideas  in  the  literature. 

59. 

Mr.  Reid  also  stated  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  that  every  time 
he  entered  Respondent's  classroom,  he  would  see  students  with  cell  phones  in  their  hands 
and/or  earbuds  in  their  ears.  On  one  occasion,  for  students’  multimedia  presentations, 
Respondent  provided  pouches  in  which  students  were  encouraged  to  place  their  phones,  but 
fewer  than  half  of  the  students  complied,  and  Respondent  imposed  no  consequence  for 
students  who  did  net  comply. 

60. 

Mr.  Reid  recommended  that  Respondent  decrease  the  amount  of  time  allocated 

in  daily  lessons  for  SSR  and  the  tutorial  period,  as  Respondent  seemed  to  need  more  time  to 
cover  all  of  the  material,  given  the  loss  of  instructional  time  that  would  occur  as  a  result  of 
Respondent’s  poor  classroom  management  skills.  Mr.  Reid  also  recommended  that 
Respondent  develop  and  employ  the  ability  to  set  up  questions  in  a  manner  that  increased 
student  interest  and  responsiveness. 

61. 

Mr.  Reid  stated  Respondent  would  undergo  formal  evaluations  for  the  2012- 

2013  school  year,  as  well  as  another  MAP  period  beginning  on  September  17,  2012  and 

16 

 

  

ending  October  19,  2012.  The  new  MAP  would  include  goals  requiring  Respondent  to 
increase  and  improve  the  number  and  quality  of  student-centered  learning  activities,  increase 
student  interest  in  and  responsiveness  to  lessons,  increase  the  number  and  improve  the 
quality  of  formative  assessments,  and  improve  classroom  management. 

62. 

Respondent  refused  to  sign  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress. 

Formal  Evaluation  Report  (May  11,  2012) 

63. 

On  May  11,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  prepared  a  formal  evaluation  report  concerning 
Respondent.  Mr.  Reid  stated  that  while  Respondent  met  or  partially  met  some  of  his  goals 
set  forth  in  his  IPP,  he  failed  to  meet  some  significant  goals,  particularly  those  associated 
with  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  and  instructional  strategies.  Mr.  Reid 
stated  Respondent  made  ineffective,  disorganized,  and  repetitive  instructional  strategies  that 
resulted  in  students  leaving  Respondent’s  classes  with  deficits  in  knowledge  and  skills 
related  to  English  language  arts.  Mr.  Reid  further  stated  there  was  very  little  evidence  of 
student  interest  in  or  valuing  the  curriculum  as  presented  in  Respondent’s  classes,  and 
students  were  often  disruptive  and  inattentive.  Respondent  seemed  unaware  of  the  student 
behaviors  that  impeded  learning,  and,  when  he  was  made  aware  of  them,  he  seemed  unable 
to  make  changes  that  would  improve  the  learning  environment.  Mr.  Reid  stated  that,  to 
Respondent’s  credit,  Respondent  took  deliberate  steps  in  an  effort  to  correct  the  observed 
deficiencies;  however,  most  of  his  attempts  were  of  little  or  no  effect  in  terms  of  increasing 
student  engagement  and  improving  the  learning  environment. 

64. 

The  formal  evaluation  included  commendations.  Specifically,  Mr.  Reid 

commended  Respondent  for  employing  various  strategies  for  selecting  students  to  read  in 
class,  standing  throughout  the  delivery  of  his  instruction  and  moving  around  the  room,  and 
improving  the  use  of  tutorial  time.  However,  Mr.  Reid  recommended  that  Respondent 
increase  and  improve  the  number,  variety,  and  quality  of  student-centered  learning  activities, 
increase  student  interest  in  and  responsiveness  to  lessons,  increase  the  number  and  improve 
the  quality  of  formative  assessments,  and  improve  classroom  management. 

65. 

Respondent  signed  the  formal  evaluation  under  protest. 

66. 

Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  the  formal  evaluation,  stating, 

among  other  things,  he  disagreed  with  Mr.  Reid  and  believed  his  classroom  environment  was 
conducive  to  learning  and  to  high  levels  of  rigor,  that  Mr.  Reid  had  not  given  him  credit  for 
the  changes  he  made  in  helping  student  learning  and  engagement.  Rather,  Respondent 
believed  the  subjective  nature  of  the  evaluation  did  not  seem  to  apply  to  all  teachers  equally, 
and  asserted  the  standard  used  to  evaluate  him  was  not  applied  to  other  permanent  teachers  at 
the  school.  Finally,  Respondent  stated  there  was  no  mutuality  in  the  development  of  the 
MAP,  and  it  included  an  excessive  number  of  goals. 

17 

 

  

California  Standards  Test  (CST)  Training 

67. 

On  May  11,  2012,  Assistant  Principal  Jessica  Krimker  sent  an  email  to  the 

teachers  of  WHS  instructing  them  to  attend  CST  training  on  May  14,  2012  concerning  the 
administration  of  CST  examinations.  Respondent  and  several  other  teachers  failed  to  attend 
the  meeting.  Consequently,  Ms.  Krimker  sent  another  email  stating  she  would  be  holding  a 
make-up  training  session  on  May  21,  2012  during  the  lunch  period.  Respondent  failed  to 
attend  the  make-up  session,  citing  his  failure  to  read  his  email.  As  a  result  of  these  failures, 
on  May  21,  2012,  Mr.  Reid  met  with  Respondent  reminding  him  of  his  contractual  duties, 
and  the  importance  of  attending  such  trainings  to  ensure  fidelity  of  the  tests.  Mr.  Reid 
prepared  a  conference  summary  memorandum  on  May  21,  2012  memorializing  his 
discussion  with  Respondent. 

68.  |  Respondent  said  he  had  not  received  the  email  regarding  the  training. 

2012-2013  School  Year 

Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  Program 

69. 

District  provided  Respondent  with  an  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  PAR 
program  during  the  2012-2013  school  year,  in  an  effort  to  improve  Respondent’s  teaching 
skills.  The  PAR  program  provides  a  teacher  who  requires  improvement  with  a  PAR 
professional  (i.e.,  a  teacher  consultant/coach/mentor)  to  meet,  generally  weekly,  to  discuss 
goals,  the  development  of  lesson  plans,  the  implementation  of  lesson  plans,  and  the  adoption 
of  teaching  tools  and  strategies.  Additionally,  the  PAR  professional  provides  reflection 
conferences  with  the  teacher,  refers  the  teacher  to  learning  resources  and  developmental 
opportunities  throughout  the  school  year,  and  arranges  for  the  teacher  to  observe  other 
teachers  for  modeling  purposes. 

70. 

Dr.  Robert  Rasmussen  served  as  Respondent’s  PAR  professional  from 

November  2012  through  May  2013.  Dr.  Rasmussen,  who  testified  at  hearing,  has  been 
employed  by  the  District  for  11  years,  and  is  currently  an  assistant  principal.  Prior,  Dr. 
Rasmussen  served  as  a  social  science  teacher  for  eight  years,  and  then  as  a  teacher  on  special 
assignment  for  one  year.  He  holds  a  teaching  credential  and  an  administrator’s  credential. 

71. 

On  November  30,  2012,  Dr.  Rasmussen  met  with  Respondent  to  develop  four 
goals  to  assist  Respondent  in  becoming  a  better  teacher:  (1)  use  multiple  teaching  strategies 
to  enhance  the  learning  experience  and  student  engagement;  (2)  improve  student  engagement 
such  that  there  was  a  greater  level  of  participation  during  the  delivery  of  lessons;  (3)  improve 
classroom  organization;  and  (4)  improve  communication  by  explaining  lessons  effectively, 
improving  the  level  of  communication  between  Respondent  and  his  students,  and  vice-versa. 

72. 

During  the  PAR  period,  Dr.  Rasmussen  met  with  Respondent  more  than  20 

times,  attended  a  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  (BTSA)  workshop  with 
Respondent  on  the  subject  of  English  language  learners  and  lesson  design,  observed  the 

18 

 

  

English  classes  of  premier  teachers  with  Respondent,  sent  Respondent  to  a  professional 
development  workshop  on  teaching  strategies,  and  engaged  in  collaborated  lessons  with 
Respondent.  The  premier  teachers  served  as  examples  of  exceptional  classroom 
organization,  as  they  showed  that  they  had  written  detailed  standards  on  the  board  that 
included  everything  the  students  would  be  doing  that  day.  Additionally,  these  teachers 
showed  how  students  participated  and  worked  well  together  in  pairs  or  small  groups,  their 
effectiveness  in  communicating  with  the  students  to  keep  them  on  task,  their  effectiveness  in 
refocusing  and  redirecting  students,  and  their  effective  use  and  enforcement  of  very  strict 
classroom  rules.  The  teachers  also  used  effective  small  group  strategies,  and  the  students 
appeared  very  familiar  with  the  routine  and  remained  on  task.  Additionally,  the  teachers 
were  very  clear  in  their  directions  and  instructions,  suffered  no  discipline  problems,  and 
taught  in  a  way  where  the  lesson  flowed  very  well.  Dr.  Rasmussen  also  had  Respondent 
observe  Dr.  Rasmussen’s  class  to  see  how  he  designed  his  lessons  and  organized  his 
classroom.  Dr.  Rasmussen  also  wanted  Respondent  to  see  his  seating  chart  and  how  he  used 
it  to  take  attendance,  and  how  he  organized  his  lessons  into  three  or  four  activities  instead  of 
one  long  lesson. 

73. 

Dr.  Rasmussen  conducted  observations  of  Respondent’s  class  on  December  6, 

2012,  February  5,  2013,  and  February  6,  2013.  During  the  December  6,  2012  observation, 
Dr.  Rasmussen  noted  Respondent  had  difficulty  with  classroom  management  and  student 
engagement,  which  resulted  in  a  high  noise  level  in  the  classroom.  Students  talked 
throughout  the  period,  worked  on  assignments  from  other  classes,  and  some  had  their  heads 
down  on  the  desk.  He  also  noted  Respondent  needed  to  improve  his  lesson  design,  as  the 
worksheets  Respondent  distributed  to  the  class  were  very  fuzzy,  had  very  small  font,  and 
were  not  connected  to  the  lesson.  Respondent  also  demonstrated  difficulty  with  transitioning 
from  one  activity  to  another  while  simultaneously  keeping  students  engaged  and  on-task. 
Respondent  also  rushed  the  closing  of  the  lesson,  because  the  period  was  ending.  Dr. 
Rasmussen  recommended  that  Respondent  structure  lessons  to  include  the  use  of  more 
visuals  and  technology,  improve  the  sequencing  and  designing  of  lessons,  include  the  use  of 
a  summative  closure  activity,  improve  in  classroom  management  including  the  creation  of  a 
weekly  agenda  board  outlining  the  topic  of  the  lessons,  standards  addressed,  and 
assignments,  and  improve  in  student  engagement  and  student  participation. 

74. 

During  the  February  5,  2013  observation,  Dr.  Rasmussen  observed  continued 
problems  with  Respondent’s  classroom  management  and  student  engagement.  Respondent 
often  chose  the  same  students  to  participate  as  opposed  to  asking  other  students  to  volunteer. 
Respondent  did  not  address  students  who  came  to  class  late,  which  promoted  a  climate  of 
apathy,  as  students  knew  there  would  be  no  consequences  for  their  behavior.  Respondent 
also  demonstrated  difficulty  connecting  one  activity  with  the  next,  as  Respondent  failed  to 
ask  students  guiding  questions  that  linked  the  activities  together.  He  also  failed  to  allow  time 
at  the  end  of  the  period  to  review  or  recap  the  lesson. 

75. 

During  the  February  6,  2013  observation,  Dr.  Rasmussen  noted  that  many 

students  were  missing  and  a  number  had  walked  into  class  late,  which  Dr.  Rasmussen 
attributed  to  a  lack  of  classroom  management.  Several  students  had  their  heads  on  the  desk, 

19 

 

  

  

but  Respondent  failed  to  address  these  students.  Later,  when  the  class  filled  up,  only  nine 
students  participated  in  the  lesson,  while  the  majority  of  the  class  appeared  disconnected  and 
disengaged.  Respondent  again  needed  to  allocate  more  time  for  the  closure,  as  he  failed  to 
leave  enough  time  for  students  to  ask  questions  about  the  lesson  or  about  the  assignment  they 
needed  to  complete. 

76. 

On  March  15,  2013,  Dr.  Rasmussen  conducted  a  collaborated  lesson  with 
Respondent.  Days  prior,  Dr.  Rasmussen  met  with  Respondent  so  they  could  brainstorm 
teaching  strategies  to  present  for  the  collaborative  lesson.  On  the  day  before  the 
collaborative  lesson,  Dr.  Rasmussen  presented  Respondent  with  the  lesson  plan  Dr. 
Rasmussen  had  prepared,  which  the  two  rehearsed.  During  the  collaborative  lesson  of 
Respondent’s  class,  Dr.  Rasmussen  modeled  how  to  present  the  lesson.  Students  were 
engaged,  participating,  and  contributing.  Dr.  Rasmussen  also  modeled  how  to  get  the 
students  thinking  critically,  as  he  designed  the  lesson  to  be  a  conversation  piece  and 
emphasize  communication  between  the  students  and  the  teacher  and  vice  versa. 

77. 

After  the  lesson,  Dr.  Rasmussen  explained  to  Respondent  that  he  was 

expecting  Respondent  to  prepare  the  lesson  plan  for  the  next  collaborative  lesson,  and  be 
prepared  to  deliver  the  lesson  to  the  students.  Dr.  Rasmussen  told  Respondent  he  expected  to 
see  an  improvement  in  his  lesson  plan  design  and  implementation.  In  that  regard,  Dr. 
Rasmussen  provided  Respondent  with  two  lesson  plan  templates  so  he  could  look  at  two 
different  styles  of  lessons.  One  was  a  Madeline  Hunter  template,  which  began  with  an 
anticipatory  set,  followed  by  a  purpose  or  objective,  instructional  input,  modeling,  checking 
for  understanding,  and  guided  practice.  The  other  was  a  Western  Accreditation  Schools  & 
Colleges  (WASC)  lesson  plan  template  which  addressed  goals  of  the  lesson,  objectives, 
materials,  procedure,  expectations,  including  integration  of  core  knowledge,  effective 
communication,  critical  thinking,  and  teacher  reflection. 

78. 

For  the  next  collaborative  lesson,  which  occurred  on  April  25,  2013,  Dr. 

Rasmussen  and  Respondent  met  on  April  15,  2013  to  develop  the  co-teaching  plan,  and  on 
April  24,  2013  to  rehearse  the  collaborative  lesson. 
was  very  similar  to  the  one  Dr.  Rasmussen  had  prepared  for  the  March  15,  2013 
collaborative  lesson.  Dr.  Rasmussen  observed  as  Respondent  presented  the  lesson  to  the 
class.  Respondent  encountered  student  engagement  problems,  evidenced  by  the  noise  level 
in  the  room.  Respondent  also  asked  low  level  questions.  Dr.  Rasmussen  noticed  no 
difference  or  improvement  in  Respondent’s  classroom  management. 

Respondent  submitted  a  lesson  plan  that 

79. 

Following  the  second  collaborative  lesson,  Dr.  Rasmussen  told  Respondent 

that  he  needed  to  take  greater  risks  in  trying  out  more  strategies  and  activities,  as  opposed  to 
generating  a  lesson  that  basically  mirrored  his.  Dr.  Rasmussen  felt  he  had  provided 
Respondent  with  enough  material  to  incorporate  other  activities  and  strategies. 

80. 

The  third  collaborative  lesson  occurred  in  May  2013.  Prior  to  the  lesson,  Dr. 

Rasmussen  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  goals,  objectives,  and  strategies.  Respondent 
prepared  a  lesson  plan,  but  it  was  not  as  dynamic  as  Dr.  Rasmussen  would  have  liked,  as  it 

20 

 

  

was  still  similar  to  the  previous  lesson.  Like  before,  Dr.  Rasmussen  did  not  teach  the  lesson 
with  Respondent,  but  rather  observed  as  Respondent  delivered  the  lesson  to  the  class.  Dr. 
Rasmussen  noticed  no  improvement  between  Respondent’s 
delivery  of  this  lesson  and  the 
second  collaborative  lesson,  as  Respondent  continued  to  encounter  classroom  management 
and  student  engagement  issues,  This  created  a  situation  where  Respondent  had  to  rush  to  get 
through  the  material.  There  was  little  student  participation. 

81. 

On  June  11,  2013,  Dr.  Rasmussen  submitted  a  report  to  the  PAR  panel,” 

summarizing  Respondent’s  performance.  Dr.  Rasmussen  reported  that  while  Respondent 
demonstrated  some  improvement  in  the  areas  of  teaching  strategies,  lesson  design,  and 
student  engagement,  and  demonstrated  a  positive  attitude  and  a  willingness  to  do  what  was 
asked  of  him,  Respondent  required  more  work  in  the  areas  of  classroom  management  and 
organization.  As  such,  Dr.  Rasmussen  advised  that  Respondent  would  benefit  from 
additional  support  and  professional  development  opportunities.  At  hearing,  Dr.  Rasmussen 
stated  he  could  have  been  more  critical  of  Respondent’s  performance  in  the  report,  as  he  did 
not  find  Respondent’s  performance  satisfactory. 

82. 

The  PAR  panel  concluded  Respondent  did  not  make  sufficient  progress,  and, 

as  such,  determined  Respondent  would  continue  to  participate  in  the  PAR  process  during  the 
upcoming  2013-2014  school  year. 

More  Administration  Observations  (2012-2013) 

83. 

| Owen  Crosby,  who  began  serving  as  WHS’s  principal  just  prior  to  the 

commencement  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  testified  at  hearing,  and  was  responsible  for 
conferencing  with  certificated  employees  and  developing  IPPs,  and  subsequently  evaluating 
these  employees.  At  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  Mr.  Crosby  and  Respondent 
developed  Respondent’s  IPP,  which  addressed,  among  other  things,  performing  classroom 
duties  according  to  school  and  district  policies,  providing  a  classroom  conductive  to  learning, 
and  using  various  teaching  strategies,  activities,  and  classroom  materials. 

84. 

After  conducting  formal  and  informal  observations  of  Respondent’s  classroom 

on  a  number  of  occasions,  Mr.  Crosby  developed  concern  about  Respondent’s  skills  in  the 
areas  of  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  lesson  design,  and  the  level  of 
classroom  rigor.  Specifically,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  formal  observations  of  Respondent  on 
November  i,  2012,  December  5,  2012,  and  April  10,  2013,  where  he  sat  in  Respondent’s 
class  for  approximately  an  hour  and  took  notes.  After  each  observation,  Mr.  Crosby 
prepared  a  written  progress  review  record  and  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 
observations  and  progress  review  record.  During  each  conference,  Mr.  Crosby  received 

° 

The  PAR  panel  consisted  of  Dr.  Carolee  Ogata,  who,  at  the  time,  was 
District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  Shawn  Warner,  who  was 
Respondent’s  union  representative,  Cathy  Leo  and  Darla  Morrow,  union  representatives,  and 
Connie  Mayhugh,  who  was  the  Director  of  Curriculum  Instruction. 

21 

 

  

Respondent’s  feedback,  which  Mr.  Crosby,  in  Respondent’s  presence,  typed  into  the 
progress  review  record. 

85. 

During  the  conference  regarding  the  November  1,  2012  observation,  Mr. 

Crosby  commended  Respondent  for  utilizing  a  variety  of  instructional  activities  and 
strategies  throughout  a  lesson,  utilizing  the  available  technology  resources  throughout  the 
lesson,  such  as  the  computer  and  document  camera,  and  utilizing  several  differentiated 
strategies  to  provide  student  access  to  the  content,  such  as  white  boards,  audiotape,  teacher- 
directed  questions,  and  teacher  and  student  led  reading.  However,  Mr.  Crosby  told 
Respondent  he  required  further  growth  in  incorporating  a  variety  of  effective  strategies  to 
check  for  understanding;  setting  and  upholding  high  expectations  for  student  behavior  and 
addressing  off-task  behavior  effectively  and  promptly  when  it  occurred;  utilizing  more 
student-based  strategies  and  activities  that  effectively  engage  students  in  the  learning; 
building  connections  between  students’  life  experiences  and  the  subject  matter  to  help  build 
relevance  with  the  content;  and  utilizing  higher  level  questioning  techniques  that  require 
students  to  provide  justification  for  their  responses  and  cite  specific  examples  from  the  text. 

86. 

During  the  conference  regarding  the  December  5,  2012  observation,  Mr. 

Crosby  discussed  how  he  observed  students  engaged  in  personal  conversations,  as  well  as  a 
few  yelling  across  the  room.  Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  he  required  further  growth  in 
identifying  key  standards  and  concepts  and  articulating  them  to  his  students;  incorporating 
student-centered  strategies  to  check  for  understanding  of  the  content  and  making  “on  the 
spot”  changes  to  the  lesson  delivery  based  on  student  engagement,  understanding  and 
questions;  setting  and  upholding  high  expectations  for  student  behavior  and  addressing  off- 
task  behavior  effectively  and  promptly  when  it  occurred;  utilizing  higher  level  questioning 
techniques  that  required  students  to  provide  justification  for  their  responses,  including  citing 
specific  examples  from  the  text;  and  further  developing  classroom  procedures,  routines,  and 
transitions  to  maximize  instructional  time. 

87. 

During  the  conference  regarding  the  April  10,  2013  observation,  Mr.  Crosby 

discussed  how  he  observed  nine  students  walk  into  class  tardy,  and  students  engaged  in 
personal  conversations  at  the  beginning  of  class  because  Respondent  had  no  activity  prepared 
for  students  as  soon  as  they  walked  into  the  classroom.  Additionally,  as  the  period 
progressed,  Mr.  Crosby  observed  students  participating  in  off-task  behaviors,  engaged  in 
personal  conversation  instead  of  in  the  assigned  activity,  and  completing  homework  from 
other  classes.  Respondent  never  addressed  these  students.  Rarely  did  students  volunteer  to 
answer  questions  when  Respondent  would  ask  them.  As  a  result  of  the  lack  of  volunteers, 
the  lack  of  student  engagement,  and  discussion,  Respondent  did  most  of  the  talking. 
Respondent  often  talked  before  he  had  the  attention  of  all  the  students.  At  one  time,  students 
began  packing  to  leave  while  Respondent  spoke,  which  caused  Respondent  to  raise  his  voice 
to  talk  over  the  noise.  When  the  bell  rang,  the  students  dismissed  themselves. 

88. 

Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  he  required  further  growth  in  incorporating  a 

variety  of  strategies  in  the  lesson  to  systematically  check  for  student  understanding;  walking 
around  the  classroom  to  closely  observe  student  participation  and  engagement  in  the 

22 

 

  

activities;  setting  and  upholding  high  expectations  for  student  behavior  and  addressing  off- 
task  behavior  effectively  and  promptly  when  it  occurred;  following  his  own  classroom  rules 
and  using  progressive  discipline  to  redirect  students’  off-task  behaviors;  utilizing  more 
structured  engagement  strategies  to  seek  student  input  and  provide  opportunities  for  more 
students  to  share  before  moving  forward  in  the  lesson;  establishing  a  productive, 
achievement-oriented  climate  in  the  classroom  by  setting  and  upholding  high  academic 
expectations  for  all  students;  having  the  attention  of  all  the  students  and  ensuring  all  students 
were  ready  to  listen  before  moving  forward  in  the  lesson;  and  having  an  activity  prepared  for 
the  students  to  work  on  as  soon  as  they  walked  into  the  classroom,  thereby  establishing  the 
expectation  that  they  were  to  begin  working  immediately  when  the  bell  rang. 

MAP  Period of  April  15,  2013  —  May  10,  2013 

89. 

On  April  18,  2013,  Mr.  Crosby  prepared  a  memorandum  to  Respondent 

discussing  his  overall  concern  regarding  Respondent’s  instructional  practices.  Specifically, 
Mr.  Crosby  noted  the  following  deficiencies:  (1)  Respondent’s  checking  for  understanding 
strategies  did  not  engage  all  students;  (2)  lesson  plans  were  not  adjusted  to  meet  student 
needs;  (3)  students  were  not  actively  engaged  in  the  planned  learning  activities;  (4)  a  variety 
of  instructional  strategies  were  either  not  used  or  not  used  effectively;  (5)  students  were 
permitted  to  opt  out  when  called  upon  to  participate;  (6)  students  were  not  engaged  in 
meaningful  classroom  activities  that  required  bell-to-bell  student  engagement;  (7)  classroom 
rules  and  procedures  were  not  effectively  and  consistently  enforced;  and  (8)  students 
continued  to  arrive  tardy  to  class.  As  a  result,  a  MAP  was  developed  to  help  remediate  these 
deficiencies. 

90. 

The  time  period  set  forth  for  the  MAP  was  April  15,  2013  to  May  10,  2013, 

and  included  the  following  objectives:  (1)  increasing  the  use  of  effective  checking  for 
student  understanding  strategies  to  monitor  student  learning;  (2)  increasing  student 
engagement  in  learning;  (3)  designing  student-learning  tasks  that  promoted  bell-to-bell 
instruction;  and  (4)  setting  and  upholding  high  expectations  for  student  behavior. 

91. 

Respondent  contended  the  MAP  was  not  mutual,  as  his  input  was  not 

requested.  Consequently,  he  signed  the  MAP  “under  duress  and  protest.” 

92. 

Mr.  Crosby  observed  Respondent’s  class  on  April  23,  2013.  Fourteen  students 

were  late  to  class,  which  Respondent  addressed  by  verbally  explaining  his  new  policy  that 
one  tardy  would  result  in  a  warning,  a  second  tardy  would  result  in  a  second  warning,  and  a 
third  tardy  would  result  in  a  call  home  to  the  student’s  parents.  During  Respondent’s 
presentation  of  the  lesson,  he  attempted  to  check  for  understanding  by  instructing  students  to 
use  their  individual  white  boards  to  write  an  answer  to  a  question  he  posed,  and  then 
instructed  them  to  hold  up  their  white  boards;  however,  not  all  of  the  students  complied. 
Respondent  did  not  address  these  students.  He  also  did  not  address  students’  noncompliance 
when  Respondent  asked  students  to  share  their  white  board  answers  with  a  partner.  Instead, 
many  students  engaged  in  off-task  behaviors  such  as  having  personal  conversations  and 
applying  make-up.  Additionally,  when  Respondent  asked  the  students  to  show  him  thumbs- 

23 

 

  

up  or  a  thumbs-down,  signifying  whether  they  understood  the  material,  half  of  the  class  did 
not  comply.  However,  Respondent  did  not  address  these  students.  As  Respondent  spoke,  he 
had  to  tell  the  class  four  times  to  listen,  after  he  had  lost  control  of  the  class  when  he  turned 
his  attention  to  distributing  paper  to  his  students.  Students  began  engaging  in  additional  off- 
task  activities  such  as  doodling  on  their  individual  white  boards. 

93. 

|  Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  he  required  further  growth  by  effectively  using  a 

variety  of  student-centered  instructional  strategies  (i.e.,  allotting  appropriate  time  for  students 
to  complete  the  instructional  task  that  Respondent  designed);  consistently  following  and 
enforcing  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and  consequences  in  the  classroom;  addressing  all 
off-task  behaviors  immediately  and  effectively;  having  all  of  the  students’  attention  before 
moving  forward  with  a  lesson;  ensuring  students  consistently  follow  instructions;  and 
establishing  expectations  for  students  coming  to  class  on  time  and  addressing  tardy  students 
during  times  that  did  not  disrupt  the  flow  of  instruction. 

Formal  Evaluation  Report  (May  15,  2013) 

94. 

On  May  15,  2013,  Mr.  Crosby  prepared  Respondent’s  formal  evaluation  report 
concerning  Respondent’s  performance.  Mr.  Crosby  indicated  that  Respondent’s  lesson  plans 
typically  provided  an  explanation  of  the  activities,  but  sometimes  they  did  not  include 
explanations.  Additionally,  when  it  became  evident  that  students  did  not  understand  the 
content  or  were  not  engaged  in  the  activity,  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  adjust  the  lesson 
plans  to  meet  students’  needs.  While  Respondent  incorporated  checking  for  understanding 
activities  into  his  instruction,  they  did  not  always  engage  the  students,  and  not  all  students 
participated  in  them.  Also,  although  Respondent  developed  a  classroom  plan  and 
communicated  it  to  his  students,  Respondent  failed  to  consistently  follow  and  enforce  the 
plan.  Students  continued  to  engage  in  off-task  activities,  such  as  having  personal 
conversations,  applying  make-up,  and  laying  their  heads  down  on  the  desk,  yet  Respondent 
failed  to  address  these  students.  Additionally,  students  talked  frequently  while  Respondent 
tried  to  address  the  entire  class,  and  they  would  not  follow  instructions  given  by  Respondent. 
Moreover,  students  continued  to  come  to  class  tardy  after  Respondent  implemented  his 
attendance  plan.  Finally,  Respondent  lacked  effectiveness  in  lesson  delivery,  and  he  often 
lost  classroom  instructional  time  as  a  result  of  his  failure  to  maintain  control  over  his 
students’  behavior.  Generally  speaking,  during  lessons,  Respondent  asked  the  students 
questions  that  were  in  the  lower  levels  of  rigor  (i.e.,  simply  recall  questions),  as  opposed  to 
questions  asked  pursuant  to  Bloom’s  taxonomy  as  Mr.  Crosby  had  instructed  him  to. 

95. 

Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  he  required  further  growth  by  effectively  using  a 

variety  of  student-centered  instructional  strategies  (i.e.,  allotting  appropriate  time  for  students 
to  complete  the  instructional  task  that  Respondent  designed);  consistently  following  and 
enforcing  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and  consequences  in  the  classroom;  addressing  all 
off-task  behaviors  immediately  and  effectively;  having  all  of  the  students’  attention  before 
moving  forward  with  a  lesson;  ensuring  students  consistently  follow  instructions; 
establishing  expectations  for  students  coming  to  class  on  time  and  addressing  tardy  students 
during  times  that  did  not  disrupt  the  flow  of  instruction;  establishing  a  rigorous  learning 

24 

 

  

environment  and  classroom  climate  that  promoted  mutual  respect  between  Respondent  and 
students;  and  creating  high  academic  expectations  for  all  students. 

96.  |  Mr.  Crosby  concluded  that  while  Respondent  had  made  progress  in  some  areas 

of  his  MAP,  it  was  evident  that  there  continued  to  be  areas  in  which  Respondent  performed 
at  an  unsatisfactory  level.  Therefore,  Respondent  would  continue  to  be  evaluated  during  the 
2013-2014  school  year. 

97. 

Respondent  acknowledged  he  struggled  with  transitions  “from  time  to  time,” 

but  “not  for  a  significant  amount  of  time.”  Other  than  that,  he  believed  he  had  accomplished 
the  tasks  set  forth  in  Mr.  Crosby’s  recommendations.  Additionally,  he  believed  he 
performed  satisfactorily  overall,  notwithstanding  areas  he  conceded  on  which  he  needed  to 
work.  Respondent  based  this  belief  on  the  evaluation’s  lack  of  “comprehensive  language” 
concerning  his  purported  unsatisfactory  performance. 

2013-2014  School  Year 

Letter  of Reprimand 

98. 

Pursuant  to  the  PAR  panel’s  determination,  Respondent  was  to  continue 

participating  in  the  PAR  program  for  the  2013-2014  school  year.  In  that  regard,  Mr.  Crosby 
made  several  attempts  in  October  2013  to  schedule  a  meeting  between  Respondent,  Dr. 
Ogata,  and  himself  to  discuss  the  PAR  process  and  introduce  Respondent  to  his  new  PAR 
teacher  consultant.  However,  Respondent  declined  each  meeting  request  because  he 
believed  he  had  already  completed  the  PAR  process.  Specifically,  Respondent  said  he 
believed  he  was  out  of  PAR  because,  among  other  things,  he  had  received  no  written  notice 
that  the  PAR  panel  expected  him  to  continue  in  PAR,  and  Dr.  Rasmussen’s  final  report 
indicated  that  he  had  shown  improvement. 

99. 

However,  in  a  written  response  Respondent  submitted  to  Dr.  Ogata,  Dr. 

Rasmussen,  and  Mr.  Crosby  on  June  15,  2013,  Respondent  demonstrated  he  was,  in  fact, 
aware  the  PAR  panel  had  expected  him  to  continue  the  PAR  process,  evidenced  by 
Respondent’s  statement  that,  “it  would  be  unfair  for  the  panel  to  refuse  Teacher’s  release 
from  PAR  ....” 

100. 

Additionally,  Mr.  Crosby  wished  to  meet  with  Respondent  to  develop  his  IPP, 

but  Respondent  failed  to  appear  for  the  scheduled  meeting  of  October  7,  2013.  After  five 
attempts  to  confirm  a  meeting,  Respondent  finally  met  with  Mr.  Crosby  on  October  15,  2013 
to  develop  his  IPP.  Because  Respondent  failed  to  meet  to  discuss  the  PAR  process  and 
delayed  in  meeting  to  develop  his  IPP,  Mr.  Crosby  issued a letter  of  reprimand  to 
Respondent  on  November  6,  2013,  stating  Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional  and 
unacceptable. 

25 

 

  

  

Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

101. 

On  January  30,  2014,  Dr.  Ogata’?  issued  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance  outlining  the  deficiencies 
demonstrated  by  Respondent  over  the  years,  specifically  in  the  areas  of  classroom 
management,  organization,  teaching  strategies,  student  engagement,  lesson  planning,  and 
academic  rigor,  among  others. 

In  order  to  overcome  the  deficiencies,  Dr.  Ogata  directed  Respondent  to 
(1)  preparing  and  submitting  weekly  lesson  plans  by  the  timelines 

102. 
remediate  them  by: 
specified  by  the  principal;  (2)  planning  grade  level  appropriate  lessons  and  units  to  capture 
student  attention  and  interest,  utilizing  grade  level  state  and  district  standards;  (3)  designing 
lessons  that  sequence  subject  matter  knowledge  to  promote  understanding  and  critical 
thinking  for  all  students;  (4)  preparing  for  each  lesson  ahead  of  time  to  maximize  the 
instructional  presentation,  instructional  practice,  and  instructional  minutes;  (5)  providing 
detailed  directions  to  students  to  maximize  their  interactions  with  Respondent  and  each  other 
so  that  they  would  know  on  what  they  were  to  be  working  and  what  they  were  to  be  learning 
at  all  times;  (6)  employing  appropriate  curriculum  utilizing  a  variety  of  instructional 
strategies  to  introduce,  explain,  and  restate  subject  matter  concepts  and  processes  so  that  all 
students  understood;  (7)  developing  and  implementing  an  effective  instructional  program  by 
using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  in  a  cohesive  manner;  (8)  accurately  modeling 
written  and  spoken  lesson  objectives  without  errors;  (9}  employing  differentiated  lessons 
based  on  students’  current  levels  of  performance  and  accommodate  the  different  ways  in 
which  students  learn;  (10)  effectively  using  a  variety  of  student-centered  instructional 
strategies;  (11)  relating  instructional  activities  to  short-term  and  long-term  goals;  (12) 
establishing  high  expectations  that  promote  critical  thinking;  (13)  regularly  checking  for 
understanding,  using  a  variety  of  formative  assessments;  (14)  having  a  learning  activity 
prepared  for  students  to  begin  as  soon  as  they  walk  into  the  classroom  and  establish  the 
expectation  that  they  should  begin  working  immediately  when  the  bell  rings;  (15)  developing 
and  implementing  and  effective  student  discipline  program  and  making  sure  all  students 
remain  on  task;  (16)  making  sure  that  when  giving  students  instructions,  they  are  paying 
attention;  (17)  monitoring  students  appropriately  at  all  times  including  observing  their  verbal 
and  nonverbal  cues  as  indicators  of  their  engagement  and  understanding,  and  walking 
throughout  the  classroom  to  closely  observe  student  participation  and  engagement;  (18)  not 
spending  an  excessive  amount  of  time  on  any  one  lesson  or  activity;  (19)  providing  students 
with  appropriate  activities  they  can  complete  without  going  off-task  when  working 
independently;  (20)  designing  student  learning  tasks  that  promote  bel]-to-bell  instruction; 
(21)  communicating  the  objective  of  each  lesson  clearly  so  that  students  know  what  is 
expected  of  them;  (22)  establishing  and  teaching  classroom  routines  and  implementing  them 
on a  daily  basis;  (23)  establishing  a  rigorous  learning  environment  and  classroom  climate 

10 

Dr.  Ogata  was,  at  the  time,  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 

Resources.  Prior,  she  was  the  Director  of  Instruction  at  the  Garden  Grove  Unified  School 
District,  and  taught  English  for  six  years  at  the  middle  school  level.  She  currently  serves  as 
District’s  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources. 

26 

 

  

that  promotes  mutual  respect  between  teacher  and  student  and  high  academic  expectations 
for  all  students;  (24)  establishing  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and  consequences,  including 
tardy  and  attendance  rules,  and  consistently  ensuring  students  follow  such  rules;  (25) 
supervising  students  during  all  instructional  duty  hours;  (26)  responding  promptly  to  emails 
and  voicemails  from  supervisors  and  other  District  personnel;  (27)  attending  all  meetings 
scheduled  by  supervisors  or  by  those  assigned  to  assist  Respondent  in  improving  his 
performance;  (28)  communicating  in  a  professional  and  respectful  manner  at  all  times;  (29) 
timely  fulfilling  all  professional  obligations;  (30)  efficiently  using  instructional  time;  (31) 
working  professionally,  collaboratively,  and  respectfully  with  colleagues  to  attain  common 
student  goals;  (32)  showing  students  progressing  toward  grade  level/content  standards;  (33) 
minimizing  distractions  in  the  classroom  and  minimizing  time  spent  in  transition  and  in 
handing  out  papers;  (34)  utilizing  available  support  resources,  including  observing  teachers 
and  others  to  assist  Respondent  in  remediating  his  performance;  (35)  maintaining  an 
enriching  classroom  environment,  displaying  model  student  work  and  student  resources;  (36) 
timely  reviewing  student  work  and  developing  an  appropriate  system  for  allowing  students  to 
be  regularly  apprised  of  their  current  grades  on  assignments,  missing  assignments,  and  other 
important  information;  (37)  creating  a  weekly  agenda  board,  outlining  the  topics  of  lessons, 
standards  to  be  addressed,  and  student  assignments;  (38)  refraining  from  overusing  the 
sound,  “Shhh”  as  a  method  of  hushing  the  personal  conversations  of  students,  and  use  an 
effective  method  instead;  (39)  utilizing  high  level  questioning  techniques  and  activities,  and 
improving  the  level  of  cognitive  questions  asked  of  students,  to  help  set  and  uphold  high 
academic  expectations  for  all  students;  and  (40)  following  all  previous  directives  given  by 
site  or  District  administrators  to  assist  Respondent  in  overcoming  his  deficiencies. 

103. 

Respondent  was  surprised  he  had  received  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

and  Unsatisfactory  Performance,  because  “it  was  not  preceded  by  a  MAP”  and  he  had 
demonstrated  an  overall  improvement  in  his  performance. 

104. 

Dr,  Ogata  requested  different  administrators  to  observe  Respondent,  including 

administrators  from  different  sites,  because  she  wanted  their  input  and  perspectives. 

More  Administration  Observations  (2013-2014) 

105. 

On  February  12,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s 
classroom  and  prepared  a  memorandum  describing  his  observation,  which  he  reviewed  with 
Respondent.  Mr.  Crosby  noted  Respondent  failed  to  display  the  standards  Respondent 
intended  to  cover  for  that  period,  and  failed  to  list  student  learning  tasks.  Additionally, 
Respondent  failed  to  ensure  he  had  bell-to-bell  student  engagement  and  instruction,  as  he 
failed  to  have  the  students  complete  a  warm-up  activity  as  Respondent  took  roll.  When 
Respondent  asked  questions  of  his  class  regarding  the  lesson,  very  few  students  responded, 
or  they  did  not  respond  at  all,  which  prompted  Respondent  to  answer  his  own  questions  and 
move  forward.  Mr.  Crosby  recommended  that  when  students  fail  to  respond  to  his  questions, 
it  was  an  indication  that  the  students  did  not  understand  the  material,  were  not  engaged  in  the 
learning  activity,  or  did  not  feel  safe  taking  risks  in  class.  As  such,  Mr.  Crosby 
recommended  that  Respondent  engage  in  student-centered  checking  for  understanding 

27 

 

  

strategies.  If  students  did  not  understand,  Mr.  Crosby  recommended  that  Respondent  stop 
and  re-teach  the  concept  and  provide  further  examples. 

106. 

Mr.  Crosby  also  observed  students  with  their  heads  down  on  the  desk,  and 

others  engaged  in  personal  conversations,  yet  Respondent  failed  to  address  these  students. 
Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  elicit  deeper  critical  thinking  from  his  students,  as  he 
asked  low  level  questions.  Overall,  Mr.  Crosby  continued  to  see  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the 
40  areas  listed  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

107. 

Overall,  Respondent  disagreed  with  Mr.  Crosby's  characterization  of  his 

performance,  and  believed  the  students  were  engaged  in  the  lesson,  as  the  entire  lesson  was 
designed  to  engage  the  students. 

108. 

On  February  18,  2014,  Joe  Fraser,  who  was  an  assistant  principal  of  WHS 

during  the  2013-2014  school  year,  observed  Respondent’s  classroom,  and  prepared  a 
memorandum  directed  to  Respondent.  Mr.  Fraser,  who  testified  at  hearing,  is  the  current 
principal  of  WHS,  and  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  six  years.  Prior,  he  was  the 
assistant  principal  over  curriculum  at  WHS,  an  assistant  principal  at  Fountain  Valley  High 
School  (FVHS),  and  also  served  as  a  teacher  on  special  assignment.  Before  that,  he  worked 
for  the  Paramount  Unified  School  District  for  six  years.  He  holds  a  multiple  subject 
credential,  a  physical  education  credential,  and  an  administrator’s  credential. 

109. 

When  the  bell  rang,  students  continued  to  engage  in  personal  conversations 

and  several  students  were  on  their  cell  phones.  Respondent  took  attendance,  which  took 
several  minutes,  but  Respondent  had  no  bell-starter  activity  for  the  students  to  do  as  he  took 
roll.  Consequently,  students  continued  their  social  conversations,  and  when  Respondent 
asked  students  to  be  quiet,  they  ignored  him.  Mr.  Fraser  observed  that  it  took  approximately 
10  minutes  to  get  the  students  on  task  from  the  start  of  the  period.  When  Respondent 
transitioned  into  a  PowerPoint  presentation,  Respondent  did  not  have  the  PowerPoint 
presentation  cued  up  and  ready  to  go.  During  the  presentation,  students  had  their  heads  on 
the  desks,  and  one  student  was  sleeping  right  in  front  of  Respondent.  Students  talked  during 
the  presentation,  and  other  students  looked  in  directions  other  than  where  the  images  were 
projected.  Seven  students  left  the  class  during  the  period.  Students  remained  off-task, 
disengaged,  on  their  phones,  and  had  personal  conversations  during  the  entire  period. 
Overall,  Mr.  Fraser  saw  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  40  areas  listed  in  the  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

110. 

In  his  capacity  as  assistant  principal  at  WHS,  Mr.  Fraser  conducted  informal 

observations  of  Respondent’s  class  on  15  to  20  occasions,  and  observed  the  same 
deficiencies  he  saw  during  the  February  18,  2014  evaluation.  Specifically,  he  saw  students 
engaged  in  personal  conversations,  heads  down  on  desks,  using  cell  phones,  and  leaving 
class,  and  observed  student  engagement  issues,  instructional  strategy  deficiencies, 
particularly  in  the  areas  of  checking  for  understanding  and  transitions,  and  deficiencies  in  the 
use  of  instructional  time.  Mr.  Fraser  had  numerous  discussions  with  Respondent  to  help 

28 

 

  

remediate  his  deficiencies,  but  giving  Respondent  suggestions  “was  like  giving  him  a 
hammer  and  watching  him  turn  it  around  and  use  the  wooden  handle.” 

111. 

Overall,  Respondent  disagreed  with  Mr.  Fraser’s  characterization  of  his 
performance,  and  believed  the  observation  summaries  he  received  after  the  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance  “blew  things  out  of  proportion”  and 
seemed  more  critical. 

112. 

On  March  5,  2014,  Chris  Herzfeld,  who  was  the  principal  of  FVHS,  observed 

Respondent’s  classroom  at  Dr.  Ogata’s  behest,  and  prepared  a  memorandum  directed  to 
Respondent.  Mr.  Herzfeld,  who  testified  at  hearing,  has  been  employed  with  the  Laguna 
Beach  Unified  School  District  since  October  2014,  and  serves  as  the  principal  of  Laguna 
Beach  High  School.  Prior,  he  worked  as  a  principal  at  FVHS  for  11  years,  and  as  a  teacher 
in  Colorado  for  nine  years,  where  he  taught  social  studies,  history,  world  history,  philosophy, 
job  readiness,  and  government.  He  holds  teaching  and  administrator  credentials. 

113. 

Mr.  Herzfeld  noted  Respondent’s  lesson  did  not  match  the  written  lesson  plan. 

As  the  bell  rang,  students  continued  talking  with  each  other,  even  after  Respondent  told  the 
students  to  be  quiet  as  he  took  attendance.  Respondent  shouted  instructions  over  the  students 
who  continued  talking  amongst  themselves.  Mr.  Herzfeld  observed  two  students  arm 
wrestling,  three  students  eating,  including  one  who  ate  a  full  lunch,  and  one  student  who 
threw  a  pizza  bread  sandwich  across  the  room  to  another  student.  As  Respondent  distributed 
handouts  desk  to  desk,  students  continued  chatting.  Students  also  continued  talking  while 
Respondent  provided  instructions  to  the  class  concerning  the  activity  he  wanted  them  to 
complete.  Additionally,  a  student  held  up  his  cell  phone  and  took  a  selfie.  Respondent  did 
not  address  these  behaviors.  One  student,  who  sat  at  the  front  of  the  room,  talked  to  her 
friend  the  entire  period.  A  student  placed  his  head  down  on  the  desk,  but  after  a  while, 
Respondent  tapped  the  student’s  shoulder,  prompting  the  student  to  lift  his  head.  One 
student  threw  scraps  of  paper  at  the  girl  sitting  in  front  of  him,  after  he  spent  time  tickling  her 
shoulder  with  a  pencil.  Students  continued  to  talk  throughout  the  period,  which  sometimes 
prompted  Respondent  to  say,  “Shhh,”  which  the  students  ignored.  One  student  left  for  the 
bathroom,  and  did  not  return  for  nearly  20  minutes.  When  Respondent  asked  teacher- 
directed  questions,  they  tended  to  be  leading,  low  level  questions,  which  required  yes  or  no 
responses.  At  no  time  were  all  students  engaged. 

114. 

Mr.  Herzfeld  stated  Respondent  needed  to:  (1)  plan  grade  level  appropriate 

lessons  and  units  to  capture  student  attention  and  interest,  utilizing  grade  level  state  and 
district  standards;  (2)  design  lessons  that  sequence  subject  matter  knowledge  to  promote 
understanding  and  critical  thinking  for  al]  students;  (3)  provide  detailed  directions  to  students 
to  maximize  their  interactions  with  Respondent  and  each  other  so  that  they  would  know  on 
what  they  were  to  be  working  and  what  they  were  to  be  learning  at  all  times;  (4)  employ 
appropriate  curriculum  utilizing  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  to  introduce,  explain,  and 
restate  subject  matter  concepts  and  processes  so  that  all  students  understood;  (5)  develop  and 
implement  an  effective  instructional  program  by  using  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  in 
a  cohesive  manner;  (6)  employ  differentiated  lessons  based  on  students’  current  levels  of 

29 

 

  

performance  and  accommodate  the  different  ways  in  which  students  learn;  (7)  effectively  use 
a  variety  of  student-centered  instructional  strategies;  (8)  relate  instructional  activities  to 
short-term  and  long-term  goals;  (9)  establish  high  expectations  that  promote  critical  thinking; 
(10)  regularly  check  for  understanding,  using  a  variety  of  formative  assessments;  (11)  have  a 
learning  activity  prepared  for  students  to  begin  as  soon  as  they  walk  into  the  classroom  and 
establish  the  expectation  that  they  should  begin  working  immediately  when  the  bell  rings; 
(12)  develop  and  implement  an  effective  student  discipline  program  and  make  sure  all 
students  remain  on  task;  (13)  make  sure  that  when  giving  students  instructions,  they  are 
paying  attention;  (14)  monitor  students  appropriately  at  all  times  including  observing  their 
verbal  and  nonverbal  cues  as  indicators  of  their  engagement  and  understanding,  and  walk 
throughout  the  classroom  to  closely  observe  student  participation  and  engagement;  (15) 
provide  students  with  appropriate  activities  they  can  complete  without  going  off-task  when 
working  independently;  (16)  establish  and  teach  classroom  routines  and  implement  them  on  a 
daily  basis;  (17)  establish  a  rigorous  learning  environment  and  classroom  climate  that 
promotes  mutual  respect  between  teacher  and  student  and  high  academic  expectations  for  all 
students;  (18)  establish  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and  consequences,  including  tardy  and 
attendance  rules,  and  consistently  ensure  students  follow  such  rules;  (19)  efficiently  use 
instructional  time;  (20)  minimize  distractions  in  the  classroom  and  minimize  time  spent  in 
transition  and  in  handing  out  papers;  (21)  maintain  an  enriching  classroom  environment, 
displaying  model  student  work  and  student  resources;  (22)  create  a  weekly  agenda  board, 
outlining  the  topics  of  lessons,  standards  to  be  addressed,  and  student  assignments;  (23) 
refrain  from  overusing  the  sound,  “Shhh”  as  a  method  of  hushing  the  personal  conversations 
of  students,  and  use  an  effective  method  instead;  and  (24)  utilize  high  level  questioning 
technique  and  activities,  and  improve  the  level  of  cognitive  questions  asked  of  students,  to 
help  set  and  uphold  high  academic  expectations  for  all  students. 

115. 

Respondent  testified  there  were  no  sleeping  students  in  his  class,  but  rather 
there  was  a  student  with  his  head  down  on  his  desk.  Respondent  said  the  student  was  still 
engaged,  evidenced  by  the  work  the  student  completed  in  class,  so  he  did  not  address  him. 
He  also  stated  that  because  students  completed  their  assignment,  it  served  as  evidence  that 
the  students  were  engaged.  With  respect  to  students  leaving  class,  Respondent  said  he  was 
not  “the  bladder  police,”  so  he  did  not  verify  whether  students  really  needed  to  go  and  relieve 
themselves. 

116. 

On  March  11,  2014,  Melissa  Chan-Nauli,  who  was  the  assistant  principal  of 

guidance,  observed  Respondent’s  classroom  at  Mr.  Crosby’s  behest,  and  prepared  a 
memorandum  directed  to  Respondent.  Ms.  Chan-Nauli,  who  testified  at  hearing,  has  been 
employed  with  District  for  three  years:  two  years  as  an  assistant  principal  of  guidance  at 
WHS  and  one  year  as  assistant  principal  of  educational  services.  Prior,  Ms.  Chan-Nauli 
served  as  a  counselor  for  11  years  at  Cerritos  High  School.  Ms.  Chan-Nauli  co-taught  a  peer 
leadership  class  during  her  tenure  at  Cerritos  High  School,  but  taught  no  academic  courses. 
She  is  currently  pursuing  her  doctorate,  and  holds  a  pupil  services  credential  and  an 
administration  credential. 

30 

 

  

117. 

Ms.  Chan-Nauli  observed  students  with  heads  down  on  their  desks,  and 

students  engaged  in  personal  side  conversations,  yet  Respondent  often  failed  to  address  these 
behaviors.  Ms.  Chan-Nauli  directed  Respondent  to  comply  with  the  40  directives  listed  in 
the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

118. 

On  March  17,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s 

classroom  and  prepared  a  progress  review  record  describing  his  observation,  which  he 
reviewed  with  Respondent.  When  the  bell  rang,  students  were  chatting  with  each  other. 
Respondent  came  into  the  class,  but  the  students  did  not  stop  talking,  which  prompted 
Respondent  to  raise  his  voice.  Respondent  had  not  set  up  processes  and  procedures  in  his 
classroom  such  that  the  students  would  have  already  known  they  were  expected  to  come  into 
class  and  begin  working  on  an  activity.  Several  students  had  their  heads  down  on  their  desks 
and  engaged  in  off-task  behavior,  yet  Respondent  never  addressed  these  students. 
Respondent  implemented  no  effective  intervention  to  address  off-task  behaviors.  Mr.  Crosby 
noted  that  at  no  time  during  his  observation  were  all  students  engaged.  There  were  students 
always  off-task. 

119. 

Based  on  his  observation,  Mr.  Crosby  found  that  Respondent  continued  to  be 
deficient  in  the  areas  identified  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory 
Performance.  Mr.  Crosby  concluded  Respondent  needed  to:  (1)  effectively  utilize  student- 
centered  strategies  to  check  for  understanding  of  the  content  and  make  “on  the  spot”  changes 
to  the  lesson  delivery  based  on  student  engagement  understanding  and  questions;  (2)  utilize 
higher  level  questioning  techniques  and  activities  to  help  set  and  uphold  high  academic 
expectations  for  all  students;  (3)  set  and  uphold  high  expectations  for  student  behavior  and 
address  off-task  behavior  effectively  and  promptly  when  it  occurs;  and  (4)  utilize  student 
engagement  strategies  that  require  all  students  to  participate. 

120. 

On  March  24,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s 

classroom  and  prepared  a  memorandum  describing  his  observation,  which  he  reviewed  with 
Respondent.  Mr.  Crosby  noted  standards  posted  on  the  board,  but  these  standards  did  not 
align  with  the  lesson  plan  Respondent  prepared  for  that  day.  When  the  bell  rang,  students 
continued  talking  with  one  another,  so  Respondent  shouted  over  their  voices.  Six  students 
had  their  heads  down  on  their  desks  initially,  followed  by  nine  students  later  on  in  the  period. 
Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  that,  in  order  to  ensure  students  were  in  engaged  in  the  activity, 
Respondent  needed  to  set  and  uphold  high  expectations  for  student  behavior  and  address  off- 
task  behavior  effectively  and  promptly  when  it  occurred.  Mr.  Crosby  also  noted  that  few 
students  participated  or  volunteered  to  answer  questions  posed  by  Respondent  regarding  the 
lesson,  and  he  failed  to  address  students  who  were  engaged  in  off-task  behaviors,  such  as 
having  side  conversations  and  looking  around  the  classroom.  Additionally,  Respondent  only 
asked  low-level  questions  designed  to  elicit  a  choral  response.  Mr.  Crosby  advised 
Respondent  that,  in  order  to  engage  more  students  in  the  lesson,  he  needed  to  design  learning 
activities  that  required  all  students  to  participate,  and  provide  students  opportunities  to  work 
at  the  higher  levels  of  Bloom’s  taxonomy.  Moreover,  Respondent  moved  forward  with  the 
lesson  without  ascertaining  whether  all  the  students  understood  the  material.  In  that  regard, 
Mr.  Crosby  told  Respondent  that,  in  order  to  ensure  student  understanding  of  the  content, 

31 

 

  

Respondent  needed  to  utilize  student-centered  checking  for  understanding  strategies  that 
engaged  all  students.  Mr.  Crosby  also  told  Respondent  that  if  students  did  not  understand  the 
material,  or  were  not  engaged  in  the  activity,  Respondent  needed  to  stop,  adjust  his  lesson, 
and  reteach  the  concept.  Finally,  Mr.  Crosby  noted  that  Respondent  walked  up  and  down 
every  row  and  individually  distributed  a  worksheet  to  each  student,  which  took  several 
minutes,  and  Respondent  gave  no  instructions  regarding  the  completion  of  the  worksheet. 
During  this  time,  students  engaged  in  off-task  behaviors.  As  such,  Mr.  Crosby  advised 
Respondent  he  needed  to  use  classroom  management  techniques  that  ensured  optimal  use  of 
instructional  minutes  and  provided  for  quick  transitions  between  activities.  Overall,  Mr. 
Crosby  continued  to  see  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  40  areas  listed  in  the  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

121. 

On  March  27,  2014,  Connie  Mayhugh,  Executive  Director  of  Curriculum, 

Instruction  and  Categorical  Programs,  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s  classroom 
at  Dr.  Ogata’s  behest,  and  prepared  a  memorandum  describing  her  observation. 
Mayhugh,  who  testified  at  hearing,  has  been  employed  with  District  since  2000,  initially  as  a 
principal,  then  as  the  Director  of  Curriculum  Instruction,  and  now  as  Executive  Director  of 
Curriculum.  She  also  taught  high  school  English  for  five  years  with  the  Santa  Ana  Unified 
School  District. 

Ms. 

122. 

Ms.  Mayhugh  observed  that  initially,  most  students  worked  quietly  on  as 

assignment  Respondent  had  given  them,  but  three  students  in  the  front  of  the  class  talked 
continuously,  and  a  student  in  the  second  row  turned  around  completely  to  talk  to  his 
neighbor  behind  him.  After  about  two  minutes,  more  students  began  talking  with  each  other. 
Respondent  neither  inquired  whether  the  students  had  completed  their  work  nor  attempted  to 
refocus  students  on  the  task.  Respondent  also  took  three  minutes  to  set  up  a  slide  show, 
because  he  did  not  have  it  set  up  ahead  of  time,  which  resulted  in  students  losing  their  focus. 
Respondent  asked  questions  based  on  the  literature,  but  they  were  at  the  lowest  level, 
requiring  recall  of  information  and  no  other  explanation,  no  requirement  for  the  students  to 
return  to  the  text  to  find  passages,  and  no  requirement  to  justify  their  responses.  At  one  time, 
Respondent  walked  around  the  room.  Several  students  were  working,  but  many  were  not. 
Respondent  did  not  address  any  off-task  behavior. 

123. 

Ms.  Mayhugh  stated  Respondent  needed  to: 

(1)  design  lessons  that  sequence 
subject  matter  knowledge  to  promote  understanding  and  critical  thinking  for  all  students;  (2) 
prepare  for  each  lesson  ahead  of  time  to  maximize  the  instructional  presentation, 
instructional  practice,  and  instructional  minutes;  (3)  provide  detailed  directions  to  students  to 
maximize  their  interactions  with  Respondent  and  each  other  so  that  they  would  know  on 
what  they  were  to  be  working  and  what  they  were  to  be  learning  at  all  times;  (4)  employ 
appropriate  curriculum  utilizing  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  to  introduce,  explain,  and 
restate  subject  matter  concepts  and  processes  so  that  all  students  understood;  (5)  begin  to 
frame  questions  in  a  way  that  would  elicit  responses  beyond  yes  or  no;  (6)  regularly  check 
for  understanding,  using  a  variety  of  formative  assessments;  (7)  establish  high  expectations 
to  promote  critical  thinking;  (8)  develop  and  implement  an  effective  student  discipline 
program  and  make  sure  all  students  remain  on  task;  (9)  make  sure  that  when  giving  students 

32. 

 

  

instructions,  they  are  paying  attention;  (10)  monitor  students  appropriately  at  all  times 
including  observing  their  verbal  and  nonverbal  cues  as  indicators  of  their  engagement  and 
understanding,  and  walk  throughout  the  classroom  to  closely  observe  student  participation 
and  engagement;  (11)  communicate  the  objective  of  each  lesson  clearly  so  that  students 
know  what  is  expected  of  them;  (12)  establish  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and 
consequences,  including  tardy  and  attendance  rules,  and  consistently  ensure  students  follow 
such  rules;  (13)  efficiently  use  instructional  time;  (14)  refrain  from  overusing  the  sound, 
“Sbhh”  as  a  method  of  hushing  the  personal  conversations  of  students,  and  use  an  effective 
method  instead;  (15)  utilize  high  level  questioning  techniques  and  activities,  and  improve  the 
level  of  cognitive  questions  asked  of  students,  to  help  set  and  uphold  high  academic 
expectations  for  all  students;  (16)  relate  instructional  activities  to  short-term  and  long-term 
learning  goals;  and  (17)  follow  all  previous  directives  given  by  site  or  District  administrators 
to  assist  Respondent  in  overcoming  his  deficiencies. 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  (March  28,  2014) 

124. 

On  March  28,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Progress,  stating  Respondent  was  unsatisfactory  for: 
(1)  using  checking  for 
understanding  strategies  that  did  not  engage  all  students;  (2)  failing  to  adjust  lesson  plans  to 
meet  student  needs  when  students  did  not  understand  the  content  or  were  not  engaged  in  the 
activity;  (3)  failing  to  engage  students  in  the  planned  learning  activities;  (4)  failing  to  use  or 
effectively  use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies;  (5)  failing  frequently  to  utilize  student 
learning  tasks  and  activities  that  required  students  to  work  in  the  higher  levels  of  Bloom’s 
taxonomy;  (6)  failing  to  use  differentiated  lessons  and  activities  to  support  student  needs;  and 
(7)  failing  to  effectively  and  consistently  enforce  classroom  rules  and  procedures. 

125. 

Mr.  Crosby  stated  that  in  order  for  Respondent’s  to  remediate  his 

unsatisfactory  performance,  he  needed  to: 
(1)  utilize  a  variety  of  teacher-centered  and 
student-centered  check  for  understanding  strategies;  (2)  utilize  student  input  to  monitor 
attainment  of  desired  learning  outcomes  and  adjust  instruction  as  necessary  based  on  student 
understanding  and  engagement;  (3)  identify  and  describe  each  student  learning  activity  in  his 
written  lesson  plans,  and  provide  step-by-step  descriptions  of  the  instructional  strategies;  (4) 
effectively  utilize  a  variety  of  structured  student  learning  strategies  throughout  the  lesson;  (5) 
utilize  higher  order  questioning  techniques  requiring  students  to  operate  at  higher  levels  of 
Bloom’s  taxonomy;  (6)  utilize  a  variety  of  student-centered  instructional  strategies  to 
differentiate  instruction;  and  (7)  provide  a  classroom  environment  that  promoted  and 
reflected  student  learning,  fairness,  and  mutual  respect. 

MAP  Period  of March  31,  2014  —  May  2,  2014 

126. 

On  March  28,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  gave  Respondent  written  notice  that,  because 

Respondent  needed  to  make  improvements,  they  needed  to  develop  a  MAP  to  provide 
Respondent  with  support  to  remediate  his  deficiencies.  As  such,  Mr.  Crosby  scheduled  a 
meeting  with  Respondent  for  March  31,  2014  to  begin  the  MAP  process. 

33 

 

  

  

127. 

The  time  period  set  forth  for  the  MAP  was  March  1,  2014  to  May  2,  2014,  and 

included  the  following  objectives:  (1)  increasing  the  use  of  effective  checking  for  student 
understanding  strategies  to  monitor  student  learning;  (2)  increasing  student  engagement  in 
learning;  (3)  creating  a  rigorous  learning  environment  with  high  expectation  and  appropriate 
support  for  all  students;  and  (4)  setting  and  upholding  high  expectations  for  student  behavior. 

128. 

On  April  8,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent's 
classroom  and  prepared  a  progress  review  record  describing  his  observation,  which  he 
reviewed  with  Respondent.  Mr.  Crosby  noted  that  when  Respondent  broke  up  the  students 
into  small  groups,  the  students  began  moving  their  desks  and  engaging  in  off-task 
conversations  that  made  it  very  difficult  to  hear.  Once  the  students  were  in  their  groups,  they 
continued  to  engage  in  personal  conversations,  yet  Respondent  never  addressed  this 
behavior.  Additionally,  many  students  were  not  engaged  in  the  lesson,  and  were  not 
responding  to  teacher-directed  questions.  Mr.  Crosby  also  noted  that  later  on  in  the  period,  a 
transition  period  took  eight  minutes  because  Respondent  had  failed  to  provide  his  students 
with  the  correct  page  number  to  start  the  new  activity.  During  this  period,  students  talked, 
yawned,  drew,  placed  their  heads  down  on  the  desk,  or  completed  homework  for  other 
classes.  Mr.  Crosby  recommended  that  Respondent,  in  order  to  ensure  smooth  transitions, 
prepared  ahead  of  time  and  ensured  the  activity  was  ready  to  go.  Additionally,  Mr.  Crosby 
told  that,  in  order  to  establish  a  student-centered  classroom  environment  that  promoted 
mutual  respect,  Respondent  needed  to  address  all  off-task  students  and  demonstrate 
consistency  in  enforcing  his  classroom  rules  and  expectations. 

129. 

On  April  24,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s 

classroom  and  prepared  a  progress  review  record  describing  his  observation,  which  he 
reviewed  with  Respondent.  Mr.  Crosby  observed  a  student  walk  in  the  class  11  minutes  late, 
drinking  a  beverage.  Respondent  told  him  to  go  outside  and  finish  his  drink.  Respondent 
invited  the  student  back  into  the  class  after  he  had  missed  18  minutes  of  class.  Mr.  Crosby 
told  Respondent  that  if  it  was  his  expectation  for  students  not  to  eat  or  drink  in  class, 
Respondent  should  have  required  the  student  to  throw  away  his  drink  or  save  it  for  later,  but 
not  miss  instructional  time.  When  Respondent  broke  students  up  into  groups,  they  engaged 
in  off-task  conversations,  yet  Respondent  failed  to  address  this  behavior.  Additionally, 
students  used  cell  phones,  drew  pictures,  read  material  from  other  classes,  listened  to  music 
through  their  earbuds,  and  rested  their  heads  on  their  desks,  yet  Respondent  failed  to  address 
these  behaviors. 

130. 

Mr.  Crosby  stated  that  in  order  for  Respondent’s  to  remediate  his 

unsatisfactory  performance,  he  needed  to: 
(1)  utilize  a  variety  of  teacher-centered  and 
student-centered  check  for  understanding  strategies;  (2)  utilize  student  input  to  monitor 
attainment  of  desired  learning  outcomes  and  adjust  instruction  as  necessary  based  on  student 
understanding  and  engagement;  (3)  effectively  utilize  a  variety  of  structured  student  learning 
strategies  throughout  the  lesson;  (4)  effectively  utilize  higher  order  questioning  techniques 
requiring  students  to  operate  at  higher  levels  of  Bloom’s  taxonomy;  (5)  establish  a 
productive,  achievement-oriented  climate  within  the  classroom;  (6)  set  and  uphold  high 
academic  and  behavioral  expectations  for  all  students  and  consistently  follow  and  enforce 

34 

 

  

classroom  rules;  (7)  design  lessons  with  sufficient  content  to  support  student  learning;  and 
(8)  provide  a  classroom  environment  that  promoted  and  reflected  student  learning,  fairness, 
and  mutual  respect. 

131. 

On  April  25,  2014,  Ms.  Chan-Nauli  observed  Respondent’s  classroom,  and 

prepared  a  memorandum  directed  to  Respondent.  Out  of  a  class  of  34  students,  only  16  were 
present.  When  Respondent  randomly  asked  a  student  to  read,  he  realized  the  student  was 
texting  on  his  phone.  Consequently,  Respondent  asked  the  student  for  the  phone,  but  the 
student  refused.  Respondent  did  not  address  the  student’s  defiance.  Additionally,  Ms.  Chan- 
Nauli  observed  one  student  with  earplugs  in  his  ears  and  another  student  with  her  head  down 
playing  on  her  phone.  During  the  lesson,  only  two  students  repeatedly  volunteered  to  answer 
questions  posed  by  Respondent.  Ms.  Chan-Nauli  directed  Respondent  to  comply  with  the  40 
directives  listed  in  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

132. 

On  May  6,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent’s 

classroom  and  prepared  a  memorandum  describing  his  observation,  which  he  reviewed  with 
Respondent.  Mr.  Crosby  noted  deficiencies  in  Respondent’s  classroom  management,  lesson 
delivery,  and  student  engagement.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  provide  students  with 
an  activity  to  complete  at  the  commencement  of  class  while  Respondent  took  attendance. 
Respondent  also  provided  answers  to  his  own  questions  instead  having  the  students  answer 
his  questions,  failed  to  engage  all  of  his  students,  and  failed  to  adequately  check  for 
understanding.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  address  students  engaged  in  off-task 
behavior.  Overall,  Mr.  Crosby  continued  to  see  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  40  areas  listed  in 
the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance. 

133. 

On  May  7,  2014,  Ms.  Mayhugh  observed  Respondent’s  classroom  again  at  Dr. 
Ogata’s  behest,  and  prepared  a  memorandum  directed  to  Respondent.  Ms.  Mayhugh  saw  no 
improvement  in  Respondent’s  performance  since  her  last  observation.  Ms.  Mayhugh 
observed  that  when  the  bell  rang  and  Respondent  reviewed  activities  noted  on  the  board, 
Respondent  made  no  attempt  to  fully  obtain  the  attention  of  every  student.  Students 
continued  to  talk,  including  those  at  the  front  of  the  classroom,  and  one  student  slept,  but 
Respondent  did  not  address  the  behavior.  Respondent  used  the  overhead  display  during  his 
lesson,  but  the  information  Respondent  exhibited  was  messy  and  incorrect.  Respondent  also 
failed  to  collect  the  students’  work  and  provide  feedback,  or  otherwise  verify  that  students 
participated  in  an  activity  initiated  by  Respondent. 

134. 

Ms.  Mayhugh  stated  Respondent  needed  to: 

(1)  design  lessons  that  sequenced 
subject  matter  knowledge  to  promote  understanding  and  critical  thinking  for  all  students;  (2) 
provide  detailed  directions  to  students  to  maximize  their  interactions  with  Respondent  and 
each  other  so  that  they  would  know  on  what  they  were  to  be  working  and  what  they  were  to 
be  learning  at  all  times;  (3)  employ  appropriate  curriculum  utilizing  a  variety  of  instructional 
strategies  to  introduce,  explain,  and  restate  subject  matter  concepts  and  processes  so  that  all 
students  understood;  (4)  ensure  Respondent  accurately  modeled  written  and  spoken  lesson 
objectives  without  errors;  (5)  effectively  use  a  variety  of  student-centered  instructional 
strategies;  (6)  regularly  check  for  understanding,  using  a  variety  of  formative  assessments; 

35 

 

  

(7)  have  a  learning  activity  prepared  for  students  to  begin  as  soon  as  they  walk  into  the 
classroom  and  establish  the  expectation  they  were  to  begin  working  immediately  when  the 
bell  rang;  (8)  develop  and  implement  an  effective  student  discipline  program  and  make  sure 
all  students  remained  on  task;  (9)  make  sure  that  when  giving  students  instructions,  they 
were  paying  attention;  (10)  monitor  students  appropriately  at  all  times  including  observing 
their  verbal  and  nonverbal  cues  as  indicators  of  their  engagement  and  understanding,  and 
walk  throughout  the  classroom  to  closely  observe  student  participation  and  engagement;  (11) 
provide  students  with  appropriate  activities  they  could  do  without  going  off-task  when  they 
worked  independently;  (12)  communicate  the  objective  of  each  lesson  clearly  so  that  students 
know  what  was  expected  of  them;  (13)  establish  a  rigorous  learning  environment  and 
classroom  climate  that  promoted  mutual  respect  between  teacher  and  student  and  high 
expectations  for  all  students;  (14)  establish  classroom  rules,  expectations,  and  consequences, 
including  tardy  and  attendance  rules,  and  consistently  ensure  students  follow  such  rules;  (15) 
efficiently  use  instructional  time;  (16)  minimize  distractions  in  the  classroom,  and  minimize 
time  spent  in  transition  and  in  handing  out  papers;  (17)  utilize  high  level  questioning 
techniques  and  activities,  and  improve  the  level  of  cognitive  questions  asked  of  students,  to 
help  set  and  uphold  high  academic  expectations  for  all  students;  and  (17)  follow  all  previous 
directives  given  by  site  or  District  administrators  to  assist  Respondent  in  overcoming  his 
deficiencies. 

: 

135. 

On  May  10,  2014,  Donald  B.  Austin,  Ed.D.,  who  was  the  Assistant 

Superintendent  of  Educational  Services  for  District,  observed  Respondent’s  classroom  at  Dr. 
Ogata’s  behest,  and  prepared  a  memorandum  directed  to  Respondent.  Dr.  Austin,  who 
testified  at  hearing,  has  been  the  Superintendent  with  the  Palos  Verdes  Unified  School 
District  for  the  past  two  years,  was  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  District  for  three  years, 
and  served  as  a  teacher  of  social  studies,  English,  student  government,  and  physical 
education.  Dr.  Austin  has  teaching  and  administrator’s  credentials,  and  has  earned  a 
doctorate  in  educational  leadership. 

136. 

Dr.  Austin  heard  students  talking  inside  of  Respondent’s  class  as  Dr.  Austin 
approached  the  classroom.  His  initial  observation  included  one  student  with  a  closed  book 
and  working  on  something  else,  another  student  completing  a  worksheet  for  another  class, 
and  five  students  wearing  earbuds  and  listening  to  music.  Respondent  attempted  to  lead  a 
discussion  regarding  the  book,  /984,  but  students  talked  throughout  his  lesson;  yet 
Respondent  failed  to  address  their  poor  behavior.  Respondent  asked  low-level  questions  that 
required  little  more  than  regurgitation  of  names  and  places  from  the  book.  When  students 
made  no  attempt  to  engage  in  the  teacher-directed  questions,  Respondent  simply  offered  the 
correct  responses  for  them.  As  a  whole,  the  class  was  completely  disengaged  in  the  activity. 
Respondent  walked  the  aisles,  but  he  failed  to  correct  any  student  behavior. 

137. 

Overall,  Dr.  Austin  saw  deficiencies  set  forth  in  the  40  areas  listed  in  the 

Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance.  Dr.  Austin  concluded 
Respondent  was  subpar  in  every  category.  Respondent’s  class  was  the  poorest  class  Dr. 
Austin  had  ever  seen  in  his  years  as  an  administrator.  Dr.  Austin  described  it  as  witnessing 

36 

 

  

something  worse  than  watching  the  worst  substitute  teacher,  exacerbated  by  Respondent 
obliviousness  to  his  demonstrated  deficiencies. 

Formal  Evaluation  Report  (May  14,  2014) 

138. 

On  May  14,  2014,  Mr.  Crosby  prepared  Respondent’s  formal  evaluation  report 

and  stated  Respondent  failed  to  improve  in  the  area  of  increasing  the  use  of  effective 
checking  for  student  understanding  strategies  to  monitor  student  learning.  While  lesson 
plans  included  check  for  understanding  strategies  to  be  used  in  the  lesson,  Respondent’s 
implementation  of  the  strategies  was  not  effective  and  did  not  engage  all  students.  Mr. 
Crosby  noted  Respondent  frequently  used  teacher-directed  questions,  thumbs-up-thumbs- 
down,  and  ticket  out  the  door  strategies  to  check  for  understanding,  but  these  strategies  did 
not  require  students  to  demonstrate  their  understanding  of  the  content.  Not  all  students 
participated  in  the  checking  for  understanding  activities,  which  led  to  a  varied  level  of 
student  engagement  in  the  activities.  Mr.  Crosby  also  noted  that  when  it  was  evident 
students  did  not  understand  a  concept  or  were  not  engaged  in  an  activity,  Respondent  rarely 
modified  the  lesson  or  activity  to  reteach  a  concept  or  to  re-engage  the  students. 

139. 

Mr.  Crosby  also  noted  Respondent  failed  to  increase  student  engagement  in 

learning.  While  lesson  plans  identified  more  than  one  type  of  instructional  strategy, 
Respondent  failed  to  use  the  strategies  effectively.  Specifically,  Respondent  incorporated 
direct  instruction  activities,  individual  and  small  group  learning  activities,  discussions, 
PowerPoint  presentations,  and  visual  aids  in  his  lessons,  but  frequently,  few  to  no  students 
responded  to  teacher-directed  questions  or  participated  in  small  group  activities,  because  they 
did  not  understand  the  content,  or  because  they  were  engaged  in  off-task  activities  instead. 

140. 

Mr.  Crosby  stated  Respondent  also  failed  to  improve  in  creating  a  rigorous 

learning  environment  with  high  expectations  and  appropriate  support  for  all  students. 
Respondent’s  questioning  techniques  typically  required  students  to  answer  yes  or  no,  or 
answer  comprehension  questions.  Rarely  did  Respondent’s  questions  require  students  to 
work  in  the  higher  levels  of  Bloom’s  taxonomy,  specifically  in  the  areas  of  analyzing, 
evaluating,  and  creating. 

141. 

Mr.  Crosby  noted  Respondent  failed  to  improve  in  setting  and  upholding  high 
expectations  for  student  behavior.  Students  often  engaged  in  off-task  behaviors  throughout 
the  lessons,  such  as  applying  make-up,  engaging  in  personal  conversations,  placing  their 
heads  on  the  desks,  drawing  pictures,  and  using  their  cell  phones,  but  Respondent  often  did 
not  address  these  behaviors. 

142. 

Mr.  Crosby  stated  classroom  instructional  time  continued  to  be  lost  during 

transitions  between  activities  and  when  Respondent  failed  to  gain  and  maintain  control  over 
his  students. 

143. 

Mr.  Crosby  stated  that  in  order  for  Respondent  to  remediate  his  unsatisfactory 

performance,  he  needed  to: 

(1)  utilize  a  variety  of  teacher-centered  and  student-centered 

37 

 

  

check  for  understanding  strategies;  (2)  utilize  student  input  to  monitor  attainment  of  desired 
learning  outcomes  and  adjust  instruction  as  necessary  based  on  student  understanding  and 
engagement;  (3)  effectively  utilize  a  variety  of  structured  student  learning  strategies 
throughout  the  lesson;  (4)  effectively  utilize  higher  order  questioning  techniques  requiring 
students  to  operate  at  higher  levels  of  Bloom’s  taxonomy;  and  (5)  provide  a  classroom 
environment  that  promoted  and  reflected  student  learning,  fairness,  and  mutual  respect. 

144. 

Finally,  Mr.  Crosby  stated  that  while  Respondent  attempted  to  address  the 

goals  of  his  MAP,  Respondent  made  little  to  no  improvement.  Mr.  Crosby  concluded 
Respondent  continued  to  perform  at  an  unsatisfactory  level  and,  as  such,  would  continue  to 
be  evaluated  during  the  2014-2015  school  year. 

2014-2015  School  Year 

145. 

Mr.  Fraser  and  Respondent  developed  Respondent’s  IPP.  Respondent  created 

the  vast  majority  of  the  IPP,  which  Mr.  Fraser  believed  contained  too  many  goals.  Mr. 
Fraser  suggested  that  Respondent  state  three  or  four  goals  instead.  Respondent  declined. 
The  IPP  goals  included  Respondent:  (1)  using  student  knowledge;  (2)  connecting  student 
knowledge,  experiences,  and  interests;  (3)  using  a  variety  of  strategies,  resources,  and 
technologies;  (4)  promoting  critical  thinking;  (5)  monitoring  student  learning  and  adjusting 
instruction  as  needed;  (6)  promoting  social  community  for  student  fairness  and  respect;  (7) 
creating  a  safe  learning  environment  to  promote  productive  interaction;  (8)  maintaining  safe 
physical,  emotional,  and  intellectual  learning  environments;  (9)  creating  a  learning 
environment  with  expectations  and  support;  (10)  developing  and  maintaining  high  standards 
for  individuals  and  groups;  (11).employing  classroom  routines  and  norms  for  positive 
behavior;  (12)  using  instructional  time  to  optimize  learning;  (13)  demonstrating  subject 
matter  knowledge  with  standards;  (14)  applying  student  knowledge  development  to 
understanding;  (15)  organizing  curriculum  to  facilitate  student  understanding;  (16)  using 
instructional  strategies  appropriate  to  subject  matter;  (17)  using  resources,  technologies,  and 
standards  for  all-student  access;  and  (18)  addressing  needs  of  English  learners  for  fair  access 
to  content. 

146. 

On  November  5,  2014,  Mr.  Fraser  observed  Respondent’s  class,  prepared  a 

progress  review  record,  and  reviewed  it  with  Respondent.  When  Mr.  Fraser  entered  the 
classroom,  students  were  talking  and  off-task.  Respondent  often  uttered,  “Shhh,”  even 
during  times  the  class  was  quiet,  which  Mr.  Fraser  believed  served  as  a  distraction.  When 
the  period  was  over,  Respondent  had  not  closed  the  lesson,  and  most  of  the  class  was 
engaged  in  off-topic  conversations  and  eager  to  leave.  Mr.  Fraser  noted  that  during  his 
observation,  Respondent’s  attempts  to  engage  students  fell  short,  that  his  level  of  questioning 
still  remained  at  the  first  level  (i-e.,  recall  and  reproduction),  that  the  lesson  was  fragmented 
and  did  not  flow,  and  that  students  were  often  off-task  and  disengaged  in  the  lesson. 

147. 

Mr.  Fraser  recommended  that  Respondent:  (1)  effectively  use  check  for 

understanding  strategies  to  ensure  student  comprehension;  (2)  effectively  use  higher  level 
thinking  questions  to  maximize  student  engagement;  (3)  effectively  use  engagement 

38 

 

strategies;  (4)  improve  on  lesson  planning  and  lesson  delivery;  (5)  additional  observations; 
and  (6)  undergo  the  MAP  process. 

Formal  Evaluation  Report  (May  1,  2013) 

148. 

On  May  1,  2015,  Mr.  Fraser  prepared  a  formal  evaluation  report.  Mr.  Fraser 

concluded  Respondent  had  not  met  the  goals  set  forth  in  Respondent’s  IPP,  and  had  failed  to 
adequately  address  skill  deficiencies  outlined  in  previous  conferences,  observations,  and 
discussions.  The  deficiencies  included  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  and 
maintaining  a  classroom  environment  conducive  to  learning.  Mr.  Fraser  further  concluded 
Respondent  had  not  met  the  expectations  outlined  in  the  teacher  position  description,  as 
Respondent’s  teaching  remained  ineffective,  evidenced  by:  (1)  students  sleeping  in  class;  (2) 
student  using  personal  devices  for  non-instructional  purposes;  (3)  students  engaged  in  off- 
topic  conversations;  (4)  students  frequently  leaving  class  for  long  periods  of  time;  (5) 
students  playing  soccer  in  the  classroom;  (6)  students  sitting  outside  of  the  classroom;  (7)  the 
lack  of  effective  active  engagement  strategies;  (8)  the  lack  of  checking  for  understanding 
strategies;  (8)  the  lack  of  timely  and  helpful  feedback  to  students;  (9)  the  lack  of  diversified 
instructional  techniques  to  effectively  address  the  varied  learning  styles  of  the  students;  (19) 
long  pauses  during  presentations;  (20)  the  use  of  “Shhh”  to  quiet  class;  (21)  inability  to 
eliminate  classroom  interruptions  and  maximize  instruction;  (22)  inability  to  secure  and 
maintain  students’  attention  and  participation;  (23)  time  management  and  lack  of  sufficient 
time  for  closure  of  activities;  and  (24)  the  inability  to  design  learning  objectives  and 
activities  that  reflected  high  expectations  for  student  learning. 

149. 

Mr.  Fraser  concluded  Respondent’s  performance  in  the  classroom  continued  to 

be  unsatisfactory,  therefore  Respondent  would  continue  to  be  evaluated  in  the  2015-2016 
school  year. 

150. 

Mr.  Fraser  recommended  that  Respondent:  (1)  effectively  use  check  for 

understanding  strategies  to  ensure  student  comprehension;  (2)  effectively  use  higher  level 
thinking  questions  to  maximize  student  engagement;  (3)  effectively  use  engagement 
strategies;  (4)  effectively  plan  and  design  lessons  that  were  both  rigorous  and  engaging  for 
students;  (5)  effectively  use  classroom  management  strategies  to  minimize  distractions  in 
class;  and  (6)  effectively  provide  a  safe  classroom  environment  that  is  both  physically, 
socially  and  emotionally  conducive  to  learning. 

151. 

Because  Respondent  had  not  improved  his  classroom  performance  over  the 

years,  despite  the  resources  used  to  help  Respondent  remediate  his  deficiencies,  District 
initiating  teacher  dismissal  proceedings  on  May  15,  2015. 

Mf} 

Mf] 

{ft 

39 

 

  

Credibility  Findings’! 

152. 

The  Commission  found  credible  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Reid,  Mr.  Crosby,  Dr. 

Rasmussen,  and  Mr.  Fraser,  as  they  observed  Respondent  independently  over  a  period  of 
time,  and  reached  similar  conclusions  concerning  Respondent’s  performance.  Their 
perspectives  were  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Herzfeld,  Dr.  Austin,  and  Ms. 
Mayhugh,  who  also  observed  Respondent,  and,  like  Mr.  Reid,  Mr.  Crosby,  Dr.  Rasmussen, 
and  Mr.  Fraser,  witnessed  Respondent’s  deficiencies  and  lack  of  effectiveness  in  the  areas  of 
classroom  management,  student  engagement,  instructional  strategies,  and  lesson  design  and 
rigor,  which  persisted  throughout  the  years,  despite  Respondent’s  efforts  to  remediate  his 
deficiencies.  All  of  these  witnesses  testified  in  a  clear,  concise,  unequivocal  manner, 
supported  their  perspectives  with  descriptive  facts,  buttressed  by  their  individual  and 
collective  experience  in  the  teaching  profession.'*  The  Commission  afforded  great  weight  to 
the  testimony  of  these  witnesses. 

153. 

The  testimony  of  Respondent  was  afforded  less  weight,  as  his  testimony  was 

disjointed,  difficult  to  follow,  and  inconsistent.  Respondent  contradicted  himself  throughout 
his  testimony,  particularly  during  cross-examination,  and  at  times  appeared  to  fabricate 
testimony.  Respondent’s  testimony  neither  discredited  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Reid,  Mr. 
Crosby,  Dr.  Rasmussen,  Mr.  Fraser,  Mr.  Herzfeld,  Dr.  Austin,  and  Ms.  Mayhugh,  nor  the 
memoranda  penned  by  them. 

{ti 

f/f 

qu 

In  this  matter,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses 

pursuant  to  the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the  demeanor  and  manner  of 
the  witness  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the  capacity  to  perceive  at  the 
time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty,  the  existence  of  bias  or 
other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the 
testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness  testified,  and  the  attitude 
of  the  witness  toward  the  proceeding  in  which  the  testimony  has  been  given.  The  manner 
and  demeanor  of  a  witness  while  testifying  are  the  two  most  important  factors a  trier  of  fact 
considers  when  judging  credibility.  The  mannerisms,  tone  of  voice,  eye  contact,  facial 
expressions  and  body  language  are  all  considered,  but  are  difficult  to  describe  in  such  a  way 
that  the  reader  truly  understands  what  causes  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  or  disbelieve  a 
witness. 

” 

Although  the  testimony  and  conclusions  of  Melissa  Chan-Nauli  were 

consistent  with  those  of  Mr.  Reid,  Mr.  Crosby,  Dr.  Rasmussen,  Mr.  Fraser,  Mr.  Herzfeld,  Dr. 
Austin,  and  Ms.  Mayhugh,  the  Commission  was  less  impressed  with  her  testimony,  given  her 
minimal  experience  as  a  teacher.  Specifically,  Ms.  Chan-Nauli  never  taught  any  core 
academic  courses,  and  spent  the  bulk  of  her  career  as  a  counselor. 

40 

 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Absent a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 
Fountain  Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden  of  proof” 
means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to  establish  by 
evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency  v.  Norm's  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this 
proceeding  is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging  allegations. 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039- 
1040;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  “The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  is  usually  defined  in 
terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed  with  that  opposed  to  it, 
has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of  truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)” 
(1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and  Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (§§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4. 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (c),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be  conducted 

by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  unless  waived  by  the  parties. 
Two  members  of  the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the  employee 
(Respondent)  and  one  by  the  governing  board  (District),  and  the  third  member  of  the 
Commission  must  be  an  administrative  law  judge  from  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings. 

5. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission  may 

only  vote  for  or  against  it.  The  Commission  may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by 
imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (§  44944,  subd.  (d)(3).) 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or 

(a) 
more  of  the  following  causes: 

if] 

(2) 

(5) 

(6) 

(f]---  [1 

Unprofessional  conduct. 

Unsatisfactory  performance. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service. 

41 

 

  

(il... 

Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the 

(8) 
state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing 
board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

7. 

Unprofessional  conduct  as  used in  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(2), may  be 

defined  as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is 
unbecoming  a  member  of  a  profession in  good  standing.  (Board  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953) 
41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled  in  part,  on  another  ground,  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Ed. 
(1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588,  fn.  7.) 

8. 

The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Unsatisfactory  performance  must  be  analyzed  with  an  eye 
toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing  school  district. 
Section  44938  supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of  unsatistactory 
performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  refers  to 
section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school  districts  should 
evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for 
discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  unsatisfactorily  to  his 
employing  school  district.  However,  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to 
insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice 
for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties 
efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist. 
(2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal. Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p. 
757.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable  limitation  is  that  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be 
arbitrary  or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated  employee  has 
performed  unsatisfactorily. 

9. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  “‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (fd.) 

10. 

|  Even  where  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service  are  established,  it 

must  also  be  established  that  such  immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  renders  the 
Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 
230  (Morrison);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208 
(Fontana);  Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at  1444-1445.)  In  Morrison,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  set  forth  guidelines  (eight  factors)  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct 
in  question  indicates  such  unfitness: 

42 

 

  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students, 
fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such 
adversity  anticipated. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 

The  type  of  credential  held  by  the  person  involved. 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 
the  conduct. 

The  likelihood  of  the  reoccurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 
chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or 
other  teachers. 

(8) 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

11. 

Not  all  “Aforrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 

satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 
Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established, 
but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.) 

12. 

“Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her,”  which 
concerns  Education  Code,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  requires  a  “showing  of 
intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

13. 

Section  44939,  subdivision  (b),  provides  in  part: 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified  by  the  person 
filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  upon  a  written 
statement  of  charges  formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  ...  with  willful  refusal  to 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
.  the 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  . 
governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary,  immediately  suspend 

. 

43 

 

  

the  employee  from  his  duties  and  give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that 
30  days  after  service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  demands  a 
hearing. 

14. 

Section  44944,  subdivision  (b)(2)(A),  provides  that  no  testimony  shall 

be  given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years 
prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice.  As  such,  in  the  instant  matter,  the  statute 
of  limitations  began  running  on  May  15,  2011,  based  on  Factual  Finding  1. 

15. 

Here,  District  established,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that 

Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(2)),  unsatisfactory 
performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(6)), 
and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)  (8)). 
As  such,  as  set  forth  in  more  detail  below,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  his 
position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  District. 

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

16. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  8,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 
analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher’s  performance  as  evaluated  by  Respondent’s 
employing  school  district.  The  evidence  showed  that  from  February  3,  2012  to  April  25, 
2014,  administrators,  in  addition  to  conducting  a  number  of  informal,  drop-in  observations, 
conducted  more  than  25  comprehensive  observations  of  Respondent’s  classroom 
performance,  and  followed  them  by  detailed  conference  summary  memoranda  or  progress 
reviews.  Every  single  summary  noted  Respondent’s  deficiencies  in  the  areas  of  classroom 
management,  student  engagement,  instructional  strategies  and  lesson  design.  Specifically,  in 
the  area  of  classroom  management,  the  administrators  observed,  among  other  things,  students 
placing  their  heads  on  the  desks,  talking  while  Respondent  taught  class,  engaged  in  off-task 
behaviors,  and,  despite  Respondent’s  classroom  rules  prohibiting  such  conduct,  they 
witnessed  students  playing  with  electronic  devices  (e.g.,  cell  phones),  and  maintaining 
earbuds  in  their  ears. 
other  things,  a  lack  of  participation  by  students  during  classroom  discussions,  off-task 
behaviors,  Respondent  failing  to  relate  the  material  to  the  students’  lives,  and  Respondent 
distributing  materials  one  student  at  a  time,  causing  students  to  engage  in  personal 
discussions  while  waiting  for  Respondent  to  complete  his  distribution  of  materials.  In  the 
area  of  instructional  strategies,  administrators  observed,  among  other  things.  Respondent’s 
failure  to  ask  questions  designed  to  engage  students  in  critical  thinking  and  analysis,  to 
effectively  employ  strategies  to  check  for  understanding,  and  to  promote  an  overall 
environment  of  rigor. 

In  the  area  of  student  engagement,  the  administrators  observed,  among 

17. 

Despite  these  detailed  memoranda  and  progress  reviews,  the  evidence  showed 

Respondent  failed  to  significantly  improve  his  performance,  notwithstanding  the  additional 
support  and  interventions  District  provided  Respondent  to  remediate  his  deficiencies. 
Specifically,  District  provided  Respondent  additional  support  in  the  form  of  MAP  programs, 
twice  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  once  during  the  2012-2013  school  year,  and  a  final 
44 

 

time  during  the  2013-2014  school  year,  to  help  Respondent  improve  his  classroom 
performance.  Additionally,  District  arranged  for  Respondent  to  participate  in  the  PAR 
program,  where  he  was  assigned  a  PAR  professional  (Dr.  Rasmussen),  who  provided 
Respondent  with  comprehensive  one-on-one  guidance  during  the  2012-2013  school  year, 
including  observing  premier  teachers,  attending  workshops,  and  co-teaching  Respondent’s 
classes.  Because  Respondent  failed  to  remediate  his  deficiencies,  the  evidence  showed 
District  provided  Respondent  with  eight  different  documents  over  the  years  formally 
expressing  its  dissatisfaction  with  Respondent’s  performance,  and  detailing  with  painstaking 
specificity  the  reasons  it  found  Respondent’s  performance  unsatisfactory.  Specifically, 
District  issued  Respondent  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress  on  March  22,  2012,  May  10, 
2012,  and  March  28,  2014,  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Satisfactory 
Performance  on  January  30,  2014,  and  formal  evaluation  reports  on  May  11,  2012,  May  15, 
2013,  May  14,  2014,  and  May  1,  2015,  all  of  which  detailed  Respondent’s  deficiencies  in  the 
areas  of  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  instructional  strategies  and  lesson 
design. 

18. 

Despite  the  formal  notices  and  observation  summaries  over  the  years,  the 

evidence  showed  that  Respondent’s  deficiencies  persisted,  established  by  the  credible 
testimony  of  Mr.  Reid,  Mr.  Crosby,  Dr.  Rasmussen,  Mr.  Fraser,  Mr.  Herzfeld,  Dr.  Austin, 
and  Ms.  Mayhugh.  As  such,  and  given  the  above  factors,  District  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  performed  unsatisfactorily  for  multiple 
consecutive  years,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5). 

Persistent  Violation  of or  Refusal  to  Obey  School  Laws  /  Willful  Refusal  to  Perform 
Regular  Assignments 

19. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  12,  cases  interpreting  whether  a  teacher  has 

persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  school  laws  require  a  showing  of  intentional  and 
continual  refusal  to  cooperate.  Here,  the  evidence  showed  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow 
multiple  directives,  and  failed  to  show  marked  improvement  after  the  issuance  of  multiple 
Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress,  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Satisfactory 
Performance,  and  multiple  formal  evaluation  reports.  Additionally,  Respondent’s 
performance  demonstrated  a  failure  to  adhere  to  the  seven  major  duties  set  forth  in  District’s 
teacher  position  description:  (1)  “provides  instruction  in  areas  of  knowledge  and  skills  in 
assigned  subject  areas,  utilizing  the  adopted  courses  of  study,  and  affective  learning, 
including  but  not  limited  to  interests,  attitudes,  appreciations,  and  values”;  (2)  “utilizes  the 
appropriate  instructional  techniques,  activities  and  materials  which  will  adapt  the  curriculum 
to  the  needs  of  pupils  and  be  consistent  with  departmental,  school  and  district  goals”;  (3) 
“communicates  with  parents,  peers  and  school  counselors  on  the  individual  pupil’s 
progress;”  (4)  “advises  students  and  provides  personal  support  of  students”;  (5)  “cooperates 
with  other  professional  staff  members  in  assessing  and  helping  pupils  solve  health,  attitude, 
and  learning  problems”;  (6)  “establishes  and  maintains  standards  necessary  to  preserve  a 
suitable  learning  environment”;  and  (7)  “performs  basic  student  attendance  accounting, 
textbook  accounting,  and  business  services  as  required  by  staff  rules  or  established  local 
procedures.” 

45 

 

  

20. 

|  Moreover,  the  evidence  showed  Respondent  failed  to  apply  the  California 

Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  as  required  by  the  District.  Specifically,  Respondent 
failed  to  effectively  and  consistently  adhere  to  six  key  standards:  (1)  engaging  and 
supporting  all  students  in  learning;  (2)  creating  and  maintaining  effective  environments  for 
student  learning;  (3)  understanding  and  organizing  subject  matter  for  student  learning;  (4) 
planning  instruction  and  designing  learning  experiences  for  all  students;  (5)  assessing 
students  for  learning;  and  (6)  developing  as  a  professional  educator. 

21. 

These  failures  demonstrated  Respondent’s  refusal  or  inability  to  perform 

regular  assignments.  Respondent  also  failed  to  comply  with  the  multiple  directives  issued  by 
administrators  over  the  years,  as  set  forth  in  the  multiple  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress, 
a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Satisfactory  Performance,  multiple  formal 
evaluation  reports,  and  conference  summaries.  Given  the  above,  District  has  demonstrated 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey 
school  laws,  and  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments,  in  violation  of  Education 
Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  and  44939,  subdivision  (b). 

Evident  Unfitness for  Service  /  Unprofessional  Conduct 

22. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  9  and  7,  evident  unfitness  for  service  and 

unprofessional  conduct  address  whether  a  teacher  is  unfit  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  by 
reason  of  inadequacies,  and  whether  a  teacher’s  conduct  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a 
profession  in  good  standing,  respectively.  Here,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Respondent 
failed  to  adhere  to  and/or  carry  out  specific  teaching  duties,  in  direct  violation  of  numerous 
directives  issued  by  multiple  administrators  over  the  years,  as  set  forth  in  the  Notices  of 
Unsatisfactory  Progress,  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Satisfactory 
Performance,  the  multiple  formal  evaluation  reports,  and  in  more  than  25  conference 
summaries  and  progress  reviews.  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply  with  the  sheer  number  of 
directives  and  recommendations,  most  of  them  recurring,  issued  to  him  from  February  3, 
2012  through  May  1,  2015,  and  correct  his  teaching  inadequacies,  represented  a  sustained 
inability  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  District,  thereby  demonstrating  his  unfitness  for 
service. 

23.  -  Similarly,  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply  with  repeated  directives  and 
recommendations  related  to  a  continual  unwillingness  or  inability  to  adhere  to  specific  orders 
issued  by  those  in  authority  over  him,  including  tasks  requiring  easy  execution.  For 
example,  despite  numerous  directives,  Respondent  continued  to  distribute  materials  one 
student  at  a  time,  despite  the  amount  of  instructional  time  it  wasted.  He  also  failed  to  stop 
uttering  “Shhh”  instead  of  utilizing  more  effective  methods  of  quieting  his  class,  and  failed 
to  require  students  to  adhere  to  classroom  rules.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  follow 
testing  protocols  of  the  CSU  by  giving  pre-slugged  test  booklets  to  students  for  whom  they 
were  not  intended,  which  could  have  invalidated  the  results  of  the  CSU.  Moreover, 
Respondent  repeatedly  failed  to  meet  with  Mr.  Crosby  concerning  the  implementation  of  a 
second  PAR  program,  which  resulted  in  Mr.  Crosby  issuing  Respondent a  letter  of 

46 

 

  

reprimand,  stating  Respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional  and  unacceptable.  These 
failures  demonstrated  a  level  of  defiance,  constituting  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a 
profession  in  good  standing  (i.e.,  unprofessional  conduct). 

Morrison  Factors 

24. 

Asset  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  10,  after  establishing  evident  unfitness,  or 

unprofessional  or  immoral  conduct,  it  must  be  established  whether  such  evident  unfitness  or 
conduct  renders  Respondent  unfit  to  teach,  pursuant  to  the  Morrison  factors: 

a. 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students, 
fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated. 
This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  As  set  forth  in 
detail  above,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  numerous  directives  and  recommendations  issued 
by  administrators  and  correct  a  number  of  teaching  deficiencies,  despite  an  inordinate 
amount  of  assistance,  guidance,  and  interventions,  including  MAP  periods,  observing 
premier  teachers,  and  participation  in  the  PAR  program.  Consequently,  Respondent’s 
students  experienced  a  constant  loss  of  instructional  time,  instruction  that  lacked  rigor,  a 
noisy  and  poorly  managed  classroom,  and  a  number  of  other  unacceptable  practices,  all 
obstructing  their  ability  to  access  the  curriculum. 
Further,  the  District—his  educational 
community—expended  resources  in  an  effort  to  remediate  Respondent’s  deficiencies. 

b. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  This  factor  has 

moderate  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action,  in  that  the  events  in  question  are 
not  remote,  as  they  occurred  as  late  as  a  year  ago. 

c. 

The  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved.  This 

factor  has  minimal  application,  in  that  the  type  of  credential  held  by  Respondent  did  not 
serve  as  a  relevant  factor  either  explaining,  defending,  or  excusing  his  failures  to  carry  out 
his  duties  as  a  teacher. 

d. 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct. 

This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  The  evidence 
showed  that  Respondent  was  given  extensive,  intensive,  and  repeated  assistance  and 
guidance,  including  more  than  25  conference  summaries  and  formal  evaluations  during  the 
2011-2012,  2012-2013,  2013-2014,  and  2014-2015  school  years,  multiple  MAP  periods,  and 
participation  in  the  PAR  program,  yet  Respondent  failed  to  make  a  marked  and  sustained 
improvement  in  his  performance  as  a  teacher.  In  addition  to  the  assistance  and  guidance, 
Respondent  received  multiple  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Progress,  and  a  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance,  but  none  of  those  actions  resulted 
in  Respondent  correcting  his  deficiencies. 

e. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct.  While  Respondent’s  performance  was  not  praiseworthy,  there  was  no  evidence 

47 

 

  

determining  Respondent’s  underlying  “motives.”  Therefore,  this  factor  has  minimal 
application. 

f. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  This  factor 

has  maximum  application  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  The  evidence  clearly 
established  that  Respondent  was  unsuccessful  in  remediating  his  deficiencies,  despite 
substantial  intervention.  As  such,  if  Respondent  is  permitted  to  return  to  the  classroom,  the 
likelihood  is  great  that  he  would  continue  to  perform  with  evident  unfitness. 

g. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 

chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person  involved,  or  other  certified 
persons.  The  parties  raised  no  constitutional  issues  in  this  matter. 

h. 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct.  This  factor  has  no 

application  in  this  matter,  as  the  record  includes  no  evidence  of  publicity  or  notoriety 
stemming  from  Respondent’s  conduct. 

25. 

—  In  light  of  the  above,  the  Morrison  factors,  on  balance,  indicate  that 
Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach,  as  the  number  of  factors  with  maximum  application  outweighs 
the  number  of  factors  with  less.  Specifically,  District  has  met  its  burden  of  demonstrating 
that  Respondent’s  retention  in  the  District  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  its  students, 
school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher. 

Conclusion 

26. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  Commission  has  determined,  by  unanimous  vote, 

that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District  as  a 
permanent  certificated  employee,  for  his  unsatisfactory  performance,  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  unprofessional 
conduct. 

MT} 

fff 

MTf 

‘tf 

Mth 

‘ff 

Mtl 

48 

 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Nicholas  Woods  is  sustained  and  shall  be 
dismissed  as  an  employee  of  the  Huntington  Beach  Union  High  School  District  forthwith. 

ORDER 

DATED:  May  31,  2016 

DATED:  May  __,  2016 

DATED:  May  __,  2016 

‘DocuSigned  by: 

Carla  Garrett 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

M’LISS  PATTERSON 
Commission  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DOROTHY  STAFFORD 
Commission  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

49 

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondemt  Nicholas  Woods  is  sustained  and  shall  be 

dismissed  as  an.  employee  of the  Huntington  Beach  Union  High  Schoo!  Distniet  forthasth. 

DATED:  May.  2016 

DATEL:  May  3).  20168 

DATED:  May.  2018 

_ 
CARLA  L,  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
tilice  of Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

A  a  thes  Pati 
   
MEISSPATTERSON 
Commission  Member 
Cammission  on  Prefessional  Competence 

9 

ee cncsatnnnnnnne 
DOROTHY  STAFFORD 
Commission  Member 
Cesmrmniasion  on  Professional  Competence 

  
   

  

49 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Nicholas  Woods  is  sustained  and  shall  be 

dismissed  as  an  employee  of  the  Huntington  Beach  Union  High  School  District  forthwith. 

DATED:  May  __,  2016 

DATED:  May  _,  2016 

DATED:  May  3 /,  2016 

CARLA  L.  GARRETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

M’LISS  PATTERSON 
Commission  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

 

  

  

  49 

