BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MICHAEL FUOROLI (EN 586861), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

                                              Respondent.

OAH No.  2015030017 

DECISION 

 
This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) on May 23-25, 2016, June 1-3, 2016, and September 8, 9, 12-15, 2016, in Los 
Angeles.  The Commission consisted of Mark Frenn, Kristi Harabedian, and Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ) Erlinda G. Shrenger, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 
California, who presided. 

Michele M. Goldsmith, Esq., Bergman Dacey Goldsmith, represented the Los 

 
Angeles Unified School District (District).  Meredith Karasch, Assistant General Counsel for 
the District, was present for most days of the hearing.  Daniel J. Kolodziej, Esq., Trygstad, 
Schwab & Trygstad, represented Michael Fuoroli (Respondent). 

Pursuant to an Order issued on July 15, 2015, the ALJ granted Respondent's 

 
motion to exclude evidence regarding Charges 1-21 of the Accusation based on the 
limitations period of Education Code section 44944.  The hearing proceeded only as to 
Charges 22-38 of the Accusation.  Oral and documentary evidence was received, and 
argument was heard.  The record was closed and the matter submitted for decision on 
September 15, 2016. 

Parties and Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.   

2.

By a letter dated February 11, 2015, Respondent was notified that written 

charges, duly signed and verified, were filed with the Governing Board of the District 
(Governing Board) charging that grounds for his dismissal existed, and that he was 
suspended without pay.  The letter further notified Respondent that it was the Governing 
Board's intention to dismiss him within 30 days unless he demanded a hearing.    

3.

On February 25, 2015, Respondent filed a Request for Hearing and Notice of 

Defense in which he timely objected to the statement of charges and requested a hearing.  On 
March 3, 2015, the District served Respondent with an Accusation and Statement of Charges, 
and other required documents.  All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

4.

The Accusation and Statement of Charges allege cause for dismissal pursuant 
to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939 for immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, 
unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of or refusal to 
obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed by the State Board of 
Education or the governing board of the District.  

Respondent's Background 

5.

Respondent is 57 years old.  He graduated from California State University, 

Northridge, where he received his bachelor's degree in history in 1987 and his master's 
degree in education in 1994.  Respondent holds a clear secondary teaching credential in 
history and social studies that he received in 1989, and an administrative services credential 
that he received in 1993. 

6.

Respondent has worked for the District for 29 years.  He has not worked for 

any other school district.  He has been assigned to Holmes Middle School since September 
1987 as a history teacher.  For the school years at issue in this case, which are the 2009-2010 
through 2011-2012 school years, Respondent taught seventh grade world history. 

Holmes Middle School 

7.

Holmes Middle School (Holmes) has approximately 1,500 students and 70 

teachers.  The school campus consists of a main office building and multiple other buildings 
where the classrooms are located.  Respondent's classroom was on the second floor of 
Building A.  The second floor has four classrooms on one side of the hallway and three 
classrooms on the other side of the hallway.  Respondent occupied the same classroom for 
the 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years and moved to one of the classrooms across the 
hallway for the 2011-2012 school year. 

8.

Respondent's classroom for the 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years had two 

doors.  There was a chalkboard and a pull down projector screen in the front of the 
classroom.  The rows of student desks were placed close together such that Respondent could 
only walk vertically, and not horizontally, between the rows of student desks.  There were no 
bookshelves in the classroom.  Instead, a set of text books was stored at each student desk.  

2

Respondent had a teacher's desk, other tables, and chairs in the back of the classroom.  There 
was computer equipment on and around the teacher's desk.  Filing cabinets were located 
behind the teacher's desk. 

9.

  At all relevant times, there were six periods in the school day at Holmes.  The 
teachers taught for five periods and had one conference period.  The teachers at Holmes were 
organized into teams.  History, science and math teachers worked on the same team and 
shared students.  The teacher teams collaborated about lessons and discussed issues and 
attended parent conferences regarding their shared students. 

10.

The school day at Holmes ended at approximately 2:55 p.m.  Intervention 

classes for math and English were held afterschool from approximately 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 
p.m.  The afterschool intervention classes were paid assignments for the teachers.  Students 
were assigned to an intervention class and required to attend.  Teachers were given a roster 
of students for taking attendance.  The intervention classes had prescribed lessons that the 
teachers were required to present.  Separate from the intervention classes for math and 
English, teachers at Holmes were allowed to provide afterschool tutoring on a voluntary, 
unpaid basis.  Unlike the intervention classes, tutoring sessions did not have a formal student 
roster, no attendance was taken, and there were no prescribed lessons.  Tutoring sessions 
were held during the same one-hour period after school as the intervention classes.  

11.

For the 2009-2010 through 2011-2012 school years, Respondent held tutoring 

sessions in his classroom afterschool in order to provide students with assistance, 
encouragement, and a safe environment for completing their homework assignments.  
Students who came for the tutoring sessions could also complete make-up work for absences 
or use the classroom computer.  During the tutoring sessions, Respondent generally had the 
students sit together in the front of the classroom because that made it easier to supervise the 
students and also encouraged them to collaborate and work together on their assignments.  
For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent ended his tutoring sessions around 4:30 p.m. 
because he had to pick up his own son from school. 

Investigation and Disciplinary Action 

12. On May 3, 2012, the District was notified by the Los Angeles Police 

 W.,1 reported that he had been 
Department (LAPD) that a former Holmes student, I
sexually abused by his teacher, Respondent, two years earlier when he was in the seventh 
grade.  The LAPD conducted an investigation of the allegations, which included interviews 
of I
 W., Respondent, and Respondent's current and former students at Holmes.  The 
case was referred to the City Attorney's Office at the conclusion of the LAPD investigation.  
The City Attorney's Office declined to file criminal charges against respondent. 

13.

In 2013, after the LAPD investigation was concluded, the District commenced 
its own administrative investigation of the sexual abuse allegations against Respondent.  The 

1 Students are identified by first name and last initial to protect their privacy. 

3

District interviewed a random sample of students who had Respondent as their teacher 
during the 2009-2010 school year. The District's investigation was initially focused on the 
sexual abuse allegations against Respondent.  However, during the investigation, the students 
interviewed described other conduct and incidents involving Respondent.  The students' 
verbal interview statements and written statements formed the basis for the other charges 
alleged in the Accusation. 

14.

The District removed Respondent from his classroom on May 3, 2012.  He was 

placed on paid administrative leave on May 4, 2012.  The District issued Respondent a 
Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and Notice of Suspension on September 5, 2014.  A Skelly
hearing was held on October 7, 2014.  Respondent denied the allegations made against him.  
By letter dated October 30, 2014, the Skelly officer notified Respondent of his 
recommendation that the District should move forward with its dismissal action.  On 
February 11, 2015, a statement of written charges was filed with the Governing Board and 
Respondent was placed on immediate suspension without pay.  Respondent demanded a 
hearing.  This dismissal action ensued. 

Findings and Analysis Regarding Charges 27 and 28 

15.

Student I

 W. (I

) was a seventh grade student at Holmes Middle 

School for the 2009-2010 school year.  Respondent was I
school year.  Charges 27 and 28 allege that Respondent engaged in sexual misconduct 
against I

.  Respondent denies the allegations. 

's history teacher for that 

16.

 made no report of sexual abuse by respondent during the 2009-2010 
 did not report any alleged abuse by respondent until approximately two 

I
school year.  I
years later when, in May 2012, he told a counselor at Phoenix House (a drug and alcohol 
rehabilitation facility) that he had been sexually abused in the seventh grade by his teacher.  
 was in the ninth grade when he made this report to the counselor at Phoenix House.  
I
A report of suspected child abuse was subsequently made to the LAPD. 

I

, who is now 18 years old, testified at the hearing.  According to 

17.
, the alleged incident with Respondent occurred on one occasion in the seventh 

's grade in history had been slipping.  Respondent suggested that he come by 

I
grade.  I
the classroom afterschool for tutoring.  I
Respondent's classroom afterschool for tutoring.  That same day, about 15 to 20 minutes 
after the school day ended, I
arrived at the classroom, I
no other students in the classroom.  I

 went to Respondent's classroom for tutoring.  When he 
 saw Respondent sitting at the teacher's desk.  There were 
 sat in the chair next to Respondent. 

 was aware that students went to 

18. According to I

's thigh and began 
's body reacted and he got an erection.  Respondent saw the erection and 

rubbing it.  I
touched I
I
's shorts and grabbed his penis and tugged it slightly.  Respondent touched I
penis and scooped up his testicles through the zipper.  Respondent pulled the waistband of 

's penis and private areas through his clothing.  Respondent then unzipped 

, Respondent put his hand on I

's 

4

 did 

's private areas, I

 for four to five minutes.  I

 how interested he was to raise his 

 to put his mouth on him for oral sex.  I

 sat in his chair with his arms at his side 

 was just slightly leaning back in his chair.  Respondent 

's briefs over his erect penis, and touched his penis and testicles.  Respondent 

I
touched him skin-to-skin.  When Respondent grabbed I
not say or do anything.  I
touched I
and he slightly opened his leg.  Respondent asked I
grade and asked I
back and ran out of the room crying.  He hit his wrist on the door as he ran out of the 
 was running 
classroom and was quickly shoving "his stuff" back through his zipper.  I
and looking for a restroom.  He was crying ("balling") the whole time.  The first restroom he 
found was locked.  He ran around the gym to another restroom near the cafeteria, which was 
open.  I
the restroom.  I
he ran out crying and looking for an open restroom.  I
incident.  The following week, I
I
"come back" as he passed by him.   

 went back to Respondent's class only two times.  
 testified that, during class, Respondent would whisper in his ear "I miss you" and 

, found him in 
 testified he was in Respondent's classroom for 12-13 minutes before 

 was washing his face and still crying when his brother, 

 did not tell anyone about the 

 scooted his chair 

19. Respondent denies the allegations made by I
 and the incident described by I

the acts claimed by I
Respondent was never alone with I

 and never touched him.   

.  He testified he did not do 
 never happened.  

20. Charge 27 of the Accusation alleges as follows: 

During or about the period commencing January 2010 to March 2010, on not 
less than one occasion, [Respondent]: 

a.  Was alone in the classroom with 7th grade student, I

 W.; 

b.  Sat next to him and asked him if he wanted to earn extra credit and how 
bad he wanted to improve his grade; 

 W. that he could earn extra credit in other ways by doing 

c.  Told I
things to get his grade up; 

d.  Rubbed the student's leg; 

e.  Unzipped I
fondled his penis and testicles, skin to skin, with his hand; 

 W.'s pants, put his hand in the student's pants and 

f.  Asked I

 W. if he liked how it felt; 

g.  Told him that he liked the student's mouth and that he wanted I
to perform oral sex on him[;] 

 W. 

5

h.  Told the student to keep his mouth shut and not tell anybody when I
W. asked [Respondent] to stop, after which the student ran out of his class. 

 

21. Charge 28 of the Accusation alleges as follows: 

During the period commencing on or about January 2010 to June 2010, 
[Respondent] on multiple occasions during class, whispered in student I
W.'s ear, words to the effect of: 

 

a.  "I miss you;" 

b.  "I miss you and the times we hand;" 

c.  "Comeback [sic], I miss you;" 

d.  "Comeback [sic] so we can do it again[.]" 

22.

The Commission finds that the factual allegations of Charges 27 and 28 were 
's 

not established by a preponderance of the evidence.  The Commission finds that I
testimony was not supported by the evidence and/or not consistent with his prior statements, 
and therefore not credible. 

23.

 (A) It was not established that I

 was alone in Respondent's classroom 
 testified that he went to Respondent's classroom about 15-20 minutes 

after school.  I
after the school day ended at 2:55 p.m.  He also testified he was in the classroom for 12 to 13 
minutes.  Based on I
approximately 3:15 p.m. and ran out of the classroom at approximately 3:28 p.m.  Tutoring 
and intervention classes were held for one hour after school starting at 3:15 p.m.  The 
incident with I
tutoring hour. 

, if true, would have occurred during the middle of the intervention and 

's testimony, he arrived at Respondent's classroom at 

 

(B) The evidence established that Respondent regularly had students in his 
 
classroom after school working on their homework and other assignments.  Students were 
aware that Respondent offered tutoring in his classroom after school.  I
 himself was 
aware that students went to Respondent's classroom after school for tutoring.  Teachers also 
visited Respondent's classroom after school.  Lauren Blackmon was an English teacher at 
Holmes during the 2009-2010 school year.  Her classroom was next door to Respondent's 
classroom.  Blackmon testified that she went to Respondent's classroom after school three to 
four times a week to get a snack (which Respondent kept in his classroom) or just to "shoot 
the breeze" with Respondent.  Blackmon testified there was usually a "slew of students" in 
Respondent's classroom working on homework or other assignments.  At around 4:30 p.m., 
Blackmon often heard Respondent tell the students it was time to leave.  Blackmon testified 
that parents would wait and linger in the hallway to pick up their children.  Blackmon never 
saw Respondent's classroom doors closed during tutoring.  Ricky Avecilla is currently a 
teacher at Holmes.  In the 2009-2010 school year, his classroom was in the same hallway as 

6

Respondent's classroom, and he provided tutoring on the same days as Respondent.  Avecilla 
testified that he had 10 or more students who came afterschool for tutoring.  He further 
testified that, since there was no fixed schedule for tutoring, students could go from room to 
room to get tutoring from different teachers. 

 

 
(C) Holmes had many afterschool activities on campus.  Teacher Blackmon 
testified that the campus was not desolate afterschool because of those activities.  Michal 
Jones-Long was an assistant principal at Holmes in the 2009-2010 school year.  Her 
testimony established that administrators were assigned to walk the hallways and campus 
during the after school hours to provide supervision for afterschool activities, including 
intervention and tutoring classes.  The Commission believes that I
noticed if, as he claims, he came running out of Respondent's classroom, disheveled and 
crying, which would have been at or around 3:30 p.m.  No evidence was presented that such 
was the case. 

 would have been 

's 

24.

 testified that he did not do or say anything while Respondent touched his private 

The Commission reviewed the transcript and video recording of I
interview on May 22, 2012, with the Center for Assault Treatment Services (CATS).  The 
's statements during the CATS interview 
Commission noted inconsistencies between I
's demeanor reflected in the CATS 
and his testimony in this hearing.  For example, I
interview differed from his hearing testimony.  In the CATS interview, I
 repeatedly 
stated that he was begging Respondent to "please stop," he was telling Respondent "I don't 
like this," and he was pushing Respondent's hand away from him.  However, in this hearing, 
I
area for four to five minutes.  He just sat leaning back in his chair with his arms at his side, 
and, at one point, he slightly opened his leg.  Another example is that, during the CATS 
interview, I
 stated that he got an erection when Respondent was rubbing his leg.  
I
was out and exposed when Respondent unzipped his shorts.  At this hearing, I
testified that his penis became erect when Respondent rubbed his leg, Respondent unzipped 
I
Another example of inconsistency relates to how I
running from Respondent's classroom.  In the CATS interview, I
the gym, where his brother 
crying, and I
restroom.  In this hearing, I
 in the gym.  
washing his face.  There was no mention of encountering 
testified at this hearing he was at a park across the street from school while I
tutoring.  He went to look for I

 found him in the restroom 
 himself 
 was at 

's shorts, and Respondent pulled the waistband of his briefs over his erect penis.  

 stated that his erect penis poked through the front slit of his underwear and his penis 

 when their dad arrived to pick them up from school.     

 stated that he ran to 
 why he was 

 responded that tutoring did not go well.  I

 was playing basketball.  

 testified that his brother 

 encountered his brother 

 then ran to the 

 asked I

 

 after 

25.

The Commission is persuaded by Respondent's contention that I

's 

 spoke of Respondent "boldly" touching him.  (Exh. 102, p. 19.)  He used the term 

description of the alleged incident during the CATS interview sounds scripted and insincere.  
I
"caressing" when describing how Respondent touched his penis with his hand.  (Exh. 102, p. 
23.)  I
 also stated that he did not know how to react to Respondent's touching, but he 
had "heard of situations" where "you have to be compliant while at the same time expressing 

7

 was in the ninth grade when he reported 
your need to get away."  (Exh. 102, p. 56.)  I
that Respondent sexually abused him in the seventh grade.  I
 testified that, during the 
ninth grade, he regularly watched the television show "Law & Order: Special Victims Unit" 
(Law & Order SVU), which is a police show about sex crimes.  Ishmael testified he could 
relate to the victims depicted in the show.  I
to have been influenced by his interest in the Law & Order SVU television show. 

's allegations against Respondent appear 

26.

The Commission notes that I

 reported he was sexually abused in the 

seventh grade by Respondent to a counselor at Phoenix House.  The Commission finds that 
the evidence presented supports a reasonable inference that I
 reported being abused to 
garner sympathy from his mother, who could reasonably be expected to have been displeased 
with I
 since he was using drugs and/or alcohol to such an extent that she had to enroll 
him in the rehabilitation program at Phoenix House.  There was no evidence that Respondent 
contacted I
stated he saw Respondent's picture in a news article announcing his receipt of a teaching 
award.  The evidence suggests to the Commission that I
 reported being abused by 
Respondent after seeing his picture in the news article, but he made sure to repeatedly insist 
in his reporting of the alleged abuse that he was not gay.  I
concern about how others perceiving him, and was especially concerned that he not be 
perceived as being gay.      

 between seventh grade and ninth grade.  In the CATS interview, I

 has expressed repeated 

 

Findings and Analysis Regarding Charges 22-26 and 29 

27.

The factual allegations of Charges 22-26 and 29 relate to matters from the 
2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years.  Since Respondent was given notice of intent to 
dismiss on February 11, 2015, pursuant to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2), 
the Commission is barred from making a decision regarding Respondent's dismissal (or non-
dismissal) based on charges and evidence relating to matters occurring prior to February 11, 
2011, unless an exception applies.2

28. Referring to Charge 22, it was established that on one occasion in the 2009-
2010 school year, Respondent stated aloud in the presence of other students that student 
K
 G. had a "big booty," which caused another student to say "Eww."  This incident 
occurred during class time. Respondent and student K
in the front of the class. Respondent was teaching a "Legacies of Rome" lesson involving a 
large domed cathedral.  Respondent drew a large M-shaped symbol on the chalkboard.  
Student M  R. was present in the class.  She testified credibly that she heard Respondent 
say that K
 had a "big booty" and another student say "Eww."  Student A
's behind 
present in the class.  She testified credibly that she heard Respondent compare K
 W. 
to something when he said words to the effect, "Just like your big butt."  Student I
 had a "big booty."   Respondent's testimony that 
testified that he heard Respondent say K
he told K
 
did not testify at the hearing.  The District presented documentary evidence of her statements 

 "you're big" and that he was not referencing her behind was not credible.  K

 G. were working at the chalkboard 

 R. was 

2 See Legal Conclusion 3, below. 

8

made during the police and District investigations, in which she reported making a complaint 
about Respondent's statement to the main office.  The District's investigator, Steven Munoz, 
asked school administrators for a copy of a complaint by K
none.  K
made against Respondent about this incident. 

's statements are hearsay and insufficient to establish that any complaints were 

 but he was told there was 

29.

(A) Referring to Charge 23, it was established that during the 2009-2010 school 
year, Respondent stared at student M  R., which caused her to feel uncomfortable. Student 
M  R. testified credibly that on one occasion when she was in the main office, she caught 
Respondent staring at her as if he were "checking her out" (her words).  Respondent's staring 
made her feel uncomfortable.  M  R. did not make any report or complaint 
contemporaneous to the incident. 

 

 
(B)(1) However, the Commission finds it was not established that during the 
2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years, Respondent stared at female students, including at 
their buttocks, on multiple occasions, which was observed by several students and caused the 
students to feel uncomfortable.  Student M  R. testified that she "heard" that Respondent 
stared at other girls but she did not speak with the other girls about that.  M  R.'s 
testimony is hearsay and not sufficient to establish allegations of Respondent staring at other 
female students.  The District also presented the testimony of student K
in Respondent's history class in the 2010-2011 school year.  Student K
he saw Respondent staring at girls during the entire school year, that Respondent stared at 
 
girls with a look of being aroused, and Respondent stared at girls' behinds.  Student K
A. testified he caught Respondent staring at girls during class when he had questions and 
looked for Respondent in the classroom to get help.  The Commission did not find student 
K
hostile and biased against Respondent, as he repeatedly mentioned being treated unfairly 
because Respondent did not give him full credit for make-up work he submitted after a 
lengthy absence. 

.A. to be a credible witness.  Student K

.A.'s demeanor and testimony appeared 

.A., who was 
.A. testified that 

 

(B)(2) The Commission finds the more persuasive explanation for 

 
Respondent's conduct is that students are misconstruing his use of the behavior management 
technique known as the "teacher stare."  The teacher witnesses and Respondent 
acknowledged that they use this technique to manage behaviors in their classroom.  When a 
student is off-task or misbehaving, the teacher will stare at the student to get the student's 
attention and indicate displeasure at the misbehavior and the student needs to stop.  The 
Commission believes that the teacher stare is what Respondent's former students, two to 
three years later, are now recalling as Respondent staring at students. 
 

  
30. Referring to Charge 24, it was not established that during the 2010-2011 school 
B. "gay G " in the presence of other students.   The 

year, Respondent called student G
District presented the testimony of student N
some of his friends by nicknames, but he could not recall which friends or what nicknames 
were used by Respondent, and he specifically could not recall if one of the nicknames used 
.A.'s testimony 
by Respondent was "gay G ."  The District also presented student K

 L., who testified that Respondent called 

9

that he heard Respondent call student G  B. by the name "gay G " on multiple 
occasions.  The Commission did not find student K
his hostile and biased demeanor against Respondent. 

.A. to be a credible witness, given 

31. Referring to Charge 25, it was not established that during the 2010-2011 school 
year, Respondent, in view of students, unbuttoned his pants to tuck in his shirt, which caused 
the students to look away.  Respondent denied this allegation.  Respondent testified credibly 
that he had been losing weight since the previous school year and his clothes were not fitting 
properly.  As he moved around the classroom, Respondent's shirt would become untucked.  
He would tuck in his shirt without unbuttoning his pants.  Respondent tucked in his shirt to 
keep a professional appearance.  He might also adjust his belt to make it tighter but he never 
unbuttoned his pants or unbuckled his belt.   Student K
Respondent have an erection when he unbuttoned his pants and tucked in his shirt was not 
credible. 

.A.'s testimony that he saw 

32. Referring to Charge 26, it was not established that, during the 2010-2011 

school year, Respondent put his hand on the back and shoulder area of student N  L. and 
 L. initially testified 
rubbed up and down in a circular motion.  At this hearing, student N
that Respondent did not touch him.  However, after reading his written statement from 2013, 
student N
in his statement.  Student N  L. admitted that, before reading his statement during the 
hearing, he had no recollection of Respondent touching his back and shoulder area and 
rubbing up and down in a circular motion.  The Commission finds student N  L.'s 
testimony to be insufficient to establish this charge. 

 L. testified that Respondent must have touched him because he wrote it down 

33. Referring to Charge 29, it was established that in the spring of 2010, 
Respondent patted and rubbed student M  R.'s back with his hand.  But the Commission 
also finds that Respondent's patting and rubbing student M  R.'s back was a form of 
encouragement or congratulations.  Respondent testified that, as he moved through the 
classroom during class, he would pat his students on their back to encourage their work or 
congratulate them for giving a good answer or doing a good job.  Student M  R. testified 
that Respondent said, "atta girl" when he touched her back. 

34. After finding that Charges 22, 23, and 29 were established by the evidence, the 
Commission next considered whether the factual allegations of these charges met any of the 
statutory exceptions to the four-year rule enumerated in Education Code section 44944, 
subdivision (b)(2).  The Commission finds that the factual allegations for these three charges 
do not involve acts described by Education Code section 44010 (sex offenses) or Penal Code 
sections 11165.2 (child neglect), 11165.3 (willful harming or endangering a child), 11165.4 
(unlawful corporal punishment or injury), 11165.5 (willful harming or endangering a child), 
or  11165.6 (child abuse or neglect).  The Commission finds that Respondent's conduct 
established by these charges demonstrates poor judgment and poor taste, but does not rise to 
the level of the criminal offenses that qualify for a statutory exception to the four-year 
limitations period.   

10

35.

The Commission next considered whether, as alleged in Charge 38, Respondent 

"concealed" his conduct established by Charges 22, 23 and 29, such that the District had no 
way to know that Respondent was engaging in such conduct until May 2012.   No evidence 
was presented by the District to establish that Respondent took action to "conceal" his 
conduct.  Notably, these charges involved conduct that occurred during class in front of other 
students or in public view (e.g., in the main office).  

36. Because no exception and no "concealment" was established, the Commission 

is not permitted to make a decision regarding Respondent's dismissal (or non-dismissal) 
based on those charges and evidence because they relate to matters barred by the four-year 
limitations period.  The Commission disregarded Charges 22, 23, and 29. 

Findings Regarding Charges 30-34 

37.

It was established, as alleged in Charge 30, that during the 2011-2012 school 
's desk, but it was not established that 
.  Respondent testified credibly 

year, Respondent banged a hammer on student M
Respondent did so because he became angry at M
regarding this incident.  Respondent had tools he kept in his classroom over the years, such 
as a screwdriver and hammer.  Respondent had strung up wire on the wall to hold up puppets 
made by the students.  The wire came down during the middle of class.  Respondent used a 
hammer to tap the wire back into the wall.  As he was doing that, Respondent noticed that 
student M
called to him.  Respondent walked over and banged the hammer on M
woke up, took out his book, and applied himself during the rest of the class.  M
have an angry or fearful reaction.  Respondent was not angry at M
hammer on the desk but was merely trying to get the student's attention.  Respondent had not 
used a hammer in class in that manner before or since, and during the hearing he expressed 
regret for using a hammer in that manner.  Respondent was unaware of any complaint made 
against him for this incident.  

 did not respond when Respondent 
 

 did not 
 when he banged the 

 appeared to be asleep at his desk.  M

's desk.  M

38.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 31, that during the 2011-2012 

school year, Respondent stated toward a student, "I can't believe you are in our class, you are 
not going . . . ," thereby indicating that the student did not belong and would not be there 
long.   The District's evidence was insufficient to establish this charge.   

39.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 32, that during the 2011-2012 

school year, Respondent called student I
Student I
teacher.  The District's evidence was insufficient to establish this charge. 

 W. attended seventh grade at Holmes but he did not have Respondent as a 

 a "jackass."  Respondent denies this allegation.  

40.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 33, that during the 2011-2012 
school year, Respondent called students names such as "fool."  Respondent denied this 
allegation.  Respondent testified credibly that he has told students they are "acting like a 
fool" or "acting foolishly," but he denied calling a student a "fool."  Student G
 O. 
testified that Respondent called student M

 names, such as jackass, stupid, and dumbass.  

11

Again, Respondent denied ever calling a student "jackass" or telling a student they are 
"acting like a jackass," as those names and phrases are too harsh and inappropriate for 
students.  The District offered the testimony of student K
.A., who testified that 
Respondent called him names.  However, K
2010-2011 school year, not 2011-2012, so the District's reliance on K
Charge 33 is misplaced.  

A. was in Respondent's class for the 

's testimony for 

41.

It was not established, as alleged in Charge 34, that during the 2011-2012 

.  G

 O. 
 O. saw 

 A. on her shoulder and held it there for two 

 O. sat behind C

's shoulder.  However, G

 A. in Respondent's class.  G

 testified that, after the incident, she and C

 testified she felt awkward by seeing Respondent touch 

school year, Respondent touched student C
to three seconds while whispering in her ear about her behavior, which student G
observed.  Student G
Respondent place his hand on Caprice's shoulder, but she did not hear Respondent say 
anything to C
C
"brushed off" the incident and did not discuss it.  It was not until two years later, in April 
2013, that the girls mentioned the incident in their interviews and written statements to the 
District's investigators who were investigating the allegations of student I
Respondent does not recall touching C
tapped or patted C
her work.  The incident has not adversely affected C
another Holmes teacher, Brant Armbruster, were attending a union rally when C
 A. 
recognized and approached the two teachers.  She greeted both teachers, gave them each a 
hug, and chatted with them.  Armbruster testified that C
him and Respondent.  

 on her shoulder, as a form of congratulations or encouragement in 

 A.  In 2014, Respondent and 

 A., but he admitted it was possible he may have 

 A. appeared enthusiastic to see 

 W.  

 

Credibility 

42. Respondent and the teachers who testified on his behalf (Kevin Waitley, Chau 

Cao, Brant Armbruster, and Lauren Blackmon) were credible in their testimony.  They 
appeared sincere in their demeanor, and their testimony, for the most part, was 
straightforward and forthcoming, using their best efforts to answer questions put to them.  
Respondent's testimony was credible and amply supported by the evidence. 

43.

Similarly, the witnesses who were Respondent's former students were, for the 

most part, credible in their testimony, and appeared to use their best efforts to answer 
questions put to them.  As for student K
credible as it demonstrated hostility and bias against Respondent due to K
being treated unfairly by him.  Student I
by Respondent was found not credible for the reasons stated above.  

's feeling of 
's testimony regarding alleged sexual abuse 

.A., the Commission did not find his testimony 

//
//
//
//
//

12

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof is 

preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 

2.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, the grounds for dismissal alleged 
against Respondent in this case are:  immoral conduct [subd. (a)(1)]; unprofessional conduct 
[subd. (a)(2)]; unsatisfactory performance [subd. (a)(5)]; evident unfitness for service [subd. 
(a)(6)]; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or reasonable regulations 
prescribed by the employing school district [subd. (a)(8)].  The District also relies on the 
ground for immediate suspension in section 44939 of willful refusal to perform regular 
assignment without reasonable cause. 

3.

(A) Cause for dismissal was not established based on the factual allegations of 

Charges 22-26 and 29 of the Accusation, in conjunction with Charge 38 of the Accusation, 
on the grounds that those charges involve evidence relating to matters occurring more than 
four years before the filing of the notice of intent to dismiss, and no exception applies, or the 
charges were not established by the evidence.  (Factual Findings 27-36.) 

 

 
(B) Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A), provides in part:  
"Testimony shall not be given or evidence shall not be introduced relating to matters that 
occurred more than four years before the date of the filing of the notice, except allegations of 
an act described in Section 44010 of this code or Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive of 
the Penal Code."  Subdivision (b)(2)(B) provides in part:  "[N]o decision relating to the 
dismissal or suspension of an employee shall be made based on charges or evidence of any 
nature relating to matters occurring more than four years before the filing of the notice, 
except allegations of an act described in Section 44010 of this code or Sections 11165.2 to 
11165.6, inclusive, of the Penal Code." 

 

 
(C) The District's contention, as alleged in Charge 38 of the Accusation, that 
Respondent concealed his misconduct such that the misconduct was not discovered by the 
District until May 2012, was not established by the evidence.  The District's contention is 
based on the holding of Atwater Elementary School District v. California Department of 
General Services (2007) 41 Cal.4th 227, which held that a school district may introduce 
evidence older than four years if it can establish it was prevented by the teacher from 
discovering the acts such that the teacher should be equitably estopped from using the four-
year limitations period.  (Id. at pp. 233-235.)  The District presented no evidence establishing 
that Respondent "concealed" his conduct to prevent discovery by the District.  The conduct 
established (Charges 22, 23, and 29) occurred in the presence of students, during class, or in 
a public place (i.e., the main office). 

4.

Cause for dismissal was not established as alleged in Charges 27, 28, and 31-

34 of the Accusation, based on the Commission's findings that those allegations were not 
established by the evidence.  (Factual Findings 15-26 and 38-41.) 

13

5.

However, cause for dismissal was established based on Charge 30 of the 
.  (Factual 

Accusation that Respondent banged a hammer on the desk of student M
Finding 37.)  The Commission concludes that the only statutory ground for dismissal 
supported by that factual allegation is for unprofessional conduct pursuant to Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(2).  Unprofessional conduct as used in section 44932 may be 
defined as "conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such 
conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing."  (Gardner v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 

6.

The Commission finds that the other statutory grounds alleged in the 

Accusation – immoral conduct, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, 
and persistent violation of school rules -- are not supported by the factual allegation that 
Respondent banged a hammer on a student's desk.  The Commission finds that Respondent's 
conduct does not constitute immoral conduct.  The Commission finds that the conduct, which 
was a one-time isolated incident, does not constitute unsatisfactory performance or persistent 
violation of school rules sufficient to warrant dismissal.  Finally, the Commission finds that 
the conduct does not demonstrate evident unfitness for service.  Respondent does not dispute 
the conduct, and credibly explained the motivation for his action.  He was not motivated by 
anger towards the student, and there was no evidence of any adverse effect caused to the 
student, M
contemporaneous report or complaint to the main office.  She did not make any statement 
about the incident until 2013 when she was interviewed as part of the District's investigation 
of I
manner, and has not done so since.  This was a one-time isolated incident and is not likely to 
recur.  Respondent has expressed regret and recognizes his conduct displayed poor judgment.   

's allegations.  Respondent had not previously used a hammer in class in that 

 O. expressed shock at the conduct, but she made no 

.  Student G

7.

The Commission considered the factors enumerated in the case of Morrison v. 

State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 to determine whether Respondent's 
unprofessional conduct in banging the hammer on the student's desk demonstrates he is unfit 
to teach.  For the reasons stated in Legal Conclusion 6 above, Respondent's conduct does not 
demonstrate he is unfit to teach and he should not be dismissed from employment with the 
District.  (Factual Findings 1-43 and Legal Conclusions 1-6.) 

//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//
//

14

ORDER

The Accusation against Respondent Michael Fuoroli is hereby dismissed and he shall 

 
remain employed with the Los Angeles Unified School District. 

DATED:  __________________ 

December 17, 2016

December 17, 2016

DATED:  __________________ 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

DATED:  __________________ 

December 19, 2016

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

___________________________ 
MARK FRENN 
Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

___________________________ 
KRISTI HARABEDIAN 
Member 
Commission on Professional Competence 

___________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

15

