BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

MATTHEW SANCHEZ (EN 699255),
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2015030317

DECISION

On August 24, 2016, March 14-17, 2016, March 29-30, 2016, and May 3-4, 2016,

Michael A. Scarlett, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, and Isela Macias and Anthony Botts, Commission Members, heard this 
matter in Los Angeles, California on behalf of the Commission on Professional Competence
(Commission).1

Ellen C. Wu, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelly, and Susan Hyman, Assistant 

General Counsel, Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or District) represented
Justo H. Avila, Chief Human Resources Officer (complainant), LAUSD.

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented

Matthew Sanchez (respondent), a permanent certificated employee of the District, who was 
present throughout the hearing.

ÿ

ÿ

1 ÿOn August 24, 2015, the hearing convened before ALJ Scarlett, Karen Schuett, and 
Gregory Lane (the previous Commission Members) and testimony and evidence was taken.
However, an ex parte communication between respondent’s attorney Richard Schwab and 
Commissioner Gregory Lane resulted in the disqualification for cause of Commissioner 
Lane.  Consequently, the Commission panel was dismissed and the hearing continued 
pending designation of new panel members.  On October 22, 2015, the parties stipulated that
ALJ Scarlett would remain as the assigned ALJ on the new Commission panel.  The parties 
also stipulated that the testimony and evidence taken on August 24, 2015, could be 
considered by the new Commission panel including Commissioners Macias and Botts.  The 
parties further agreed that all prior motion rulings by ALJ Scarlett would remain binding and 
in effect.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the record was closed and

submitted for decision on May 4, 2016. The Commission finds as follows:

Jurisdiction and Allegations

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On January 23, 2015, complainant issued a Statement of Charges against

respondent.  On February 26, 2015, respondent filed his Request for Hearing and Notice of 
Defense.  On March 13, 2015, complainant made and filed an Accusation against respondent 
in his official capacity. On May, 2, 2016, complainant filed an Amended Accusation
intended to conform the charges in the Accusation to the evidence admitted at hearing.2
Complainant’s motion to amend the Accusation was granted, without objection by
respondent. All jurisdictional requirements were met to proceed to hearing.

2.

On September 26, 2014, the District issued to respondent a Notice of 

Unsatisfactory Service or Acts of Certificated Employee specifying allegations and charges 
that ultimately constituted the January 23, 2015, Statement of Charges.  On September 26, 
2014, the District also issued respondent a Notice of Suspension for a period of 15 days
without pay. The Notice of Suspension indicated that the District was providing notice 
pursuant to Education Code section 44938. 3

3.

The District alleges that respondent is subject to dismissal from his 

employment as a permanent certificated employee of the District for immoral conduct, in 
violation of sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939; unprofessional conduct, in
violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(2); unsatisfactory performance, in violation of 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); evident unfitness for service, in violation of section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6); persistent violation or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State 
Board of Education or by the Governing Board of the school district, in violation of section 
44932, subdivision (a)(8); and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, in violation of section 44939.

4.

The District’s Statement of Charges and Amended Accusation allege that

during the 2012-2013 school year respondent engaged in inappropriate conduct with several
of his second grade female students.  The misconduct allegedly included allowing students to 
sit on respondent’s lap, hugging students, rubbing and touching students’ backs, shoulders,

ÿ

ÿ

2 ÿComplainant filed a “Corrected Amended Accusation” on May 5, 2016, to 

specifically delineate the deletions and amendments in the Amended Accusation.

3 All further statutory references shall be to the Education Code unless otherwise 

specified.

2

waists, sides, stomachs, thighs and legs, and commenting inappropriately about students’
appearances and bodies.

Background

5.

Respondent is a second grade teacher at West Vernon Elementary School

(Vernon).  He has worked with LAUSD since approximately October 1997, all 19 years at 
Vernon.  Respondent received his Bachelor of Science degree in Behavioral Science in 1997 
and has a Clear Clad Multi-Subject teaching credential.  Respondent is married, 18 years, 
and has an eight-year old son who was in second grade as of the date of this hearing.

6.

 H., 
In late April or early May 2013, Maria Alvarez, the mother of G
one of respondent’s second grade students, noticed a change in her daughter’s behavior and 
became concerned.  G
respondent rubbed her back and hugged her in class which made G
uncomfortable. On May 6, 2013, Ms. Alvarez went to Principal Lupe Buenrostro’s office at 
Vernon and told Ms. Buenrostro that her daughter was afraid to come to school because of 
H. told Ms. Buenrostro that respondent rubbed her back 
respondent’s conduct.  G
and asked her for hugs.  Ms. Buenrostro initiated an investigation into the student’s
complaint which led to the District’s Accusation/Amended Accusation against respondent.

H., who was then seven years old, told Ms. Alvarez that 
 H. feel very

7.

On May 7, 2013, respondent was removed from his second grade classroom 

 H. had told W

N. that respondent rubbed her back.

N., one of respondent’s second grade students, and 

N.’s mother stated that the student was afraid to return to respondent’s 

and temporarily reassigned to the LAUSD Education Service Center – East, pending an 
investigation into the allegations by G
 H. and Ms. Alvarez. On May 7, 2013, Ms. 
Buenrostro interviewed several students from respondent’s second grade class. On May 8,
2013, Ms. Buenrostro interviewed W
her mother.  W
classroom because G
Wendy N. also told her mother that respondent rubbed her and in Spanish told W
she was very slender and respondent liked her slender. On May 14, 2013, a conference 
meeting was convened with respondent to discuss allegations made by G
W
after approximately one week, the District returned him to his second grade classroom to
complete the 2012-2013 school year.  G
grade class and placed in another class to finish the school year. W
from respondent’s because Ms. Buenrostro informed the mother that W
reassigned to the same classroom as G
N. in respondent’s class. Ms. Buenrostro informed respondent that the District would leave 
his case open and continue the investigation by interviewing respondent’s present and former 
second grade students. 

 H. was removed from respondent’s second 
N. was not removed 
 N. could not be

N., both students in his second grade class.  Respondent denied the allegations, and 

 H., and the mother decided to leave W

 H. and 

N. that 

8.

Respondent began the 2013-2014 school year in his classroom.  However, 

based on information obtained from subsequent interviews of respondent’s students during 
the 2013-2014 school year, respondent was again removed from the classroom on October 
10, 2013. Respondent was again reassigned at the LAUSD Education Service Center until

3

September 26, 2014, at which time he was provided a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service or 
Act, and Notice of Suspension. On February 11, 2015, after the District had issued its 
Statement of Charges against respondent, the LAUSD School Board notified respondent of 
its intent to dismiss and to place respondent on immediate unpaid suspension.

9.

At all times relevant to the Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges the 

following District policies or guidelines were in effect: the LAUSD Code of Conduct with 
Students (CCS); the LAUSD Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Requirements Policy; the
LAUSD Employee Code of Ethics (ECE); the LAUSD Sexual Harassment Policy; and the 
Board Resolution reaffirming the District’s policy requiring the “Respectful Treatment of All 
Persons.”  (Exhs. 21-25.) Respondent is familiar with and received annual training on these
policies and guidelines, some years receiving bi-annual training on some of the policies.

Charges No. 1-7 (G

 H. Allegations)

10.

Charges No. 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7 allege that respondent called G
his desk, allowed her to sit on his lap, and rubbed her back in a circular motion, while his 
desk was surrounded by easels and/or charts to obstruct other students’ view of his desk.
The District also alleges that respondent asked G
established that respondent committed these acts.

 H. for hugs. The evidence 

 H. up to 

11.

G

 H., K

 P., K

 E., and K

 M., all credibly testified that 

respondent set up two charts or easels around his desk, one in front and one on the side of his 
desk, in a manner that effectively blocked respondent’s desk from the view of the students
for extended periods of time during classroom instruction. In January 2014, Tamica Cruze, 
the LAUSD Student Safety Investigation Team (SSIT) investigator, interviewed several 
students in connection with the District’s investigation into respondent’s conduct.
G
positioned charts and/or easels around his desks in a manner that blocked the students’ view 
of respondent’s desk when he was seated at his desk. Maria Alvarez, G
mother, stated that she observed two charts or easels position in this manner around 
respondent’s desk on one occasion during parent/teacher night.

 G. all told Ms. Cruze that respondent

 P. and H

 M., K

 H., K

 H.’s

12.

Respondent testified that he never placed the charts or easels around his desk 
in a manner intended to block the students’ view of his desk.  He stated that charts or easels 
were never placed in front of his desk like many of the students described.  But he admitted 
that he positioned a chart or easel on the side of his desk facing the kidney table when he was
instructing students seated at that table. However, respondent told Ms. Cruze that he did not 
recall positioning the charts in front of and on the side of his desk as described by the
students, but he admitted it was possible the charts were position that way.

13.

The evidence established that two charts and/or easels were placed in a manner 

around respondent’s desk that effectively blocked the students’ view of respondent while he 
was seated at his desk for extended periods of time during classroom instruction.

4

14.

On May 6, 2013, G

 H. told Ms. Buenrostro that respondent rubbed 

 H. could not

 H. consistently asserted these allegations 

 H. to sit on his lap.  She sat on respondent’s lap on the 

 H. testified that respondent called her up to his desk and patted his leg to indicate 

her back and asked for hugs.  G
throughout the District’s investigation and at hearing. At hearing, G
recall when respondent rubbed her back during the school year, the evidence established that 
these incidents occurred during the second semester of the 2012-2013 school year.
G
that respondent wanted G
corner of his knee. The charts and/or easels were around respondent’s desk when G
H. sat on his lap. Respondent rubbed G
on his lap. G
five times. She stated that respondent rubbed her back most of the time on top of her 
uniform, but that sometimes he rubbed her back under her clothes, but not making skin-to-
skin contact. In a statement to Ms. Buenrostro on May 20, 2013, W
N. corroborated 
G
K
rubbing G
per day.

 H.’s back in a circular motion while she sat 
 H. testified that this occurred on more than one occasion, but less than 

 M. also told Ms. Cruze during the SSIT interview that she observed respondent 

 H.’s back in circular motion over the student’s clothes at least two times 

 H.’s allegation that respondent rubbed G

’s back on multiple occasions.

15.

G

H. stated that she sat on respondent’s lap because she did not know 

it was wrong. She stated that respondent’s rubbing her back made her feel very
uncomfortable.  When she realized it was wrong for respondent to ask her to sit his lap and 
rub her back, she became mad.  G
respondent’s conduct.  She told her mother she was not feeling well to avoid going to school.
G
On at least one occasion, respondent asked G
scoot over so she could sit on the chair next to him, and did not sit on his lap.

 H. became scared to go to respondent’s class because of respondent’s conduct.
 H. to sit on his lap, she told him to

 H. did not want to go to school because of 

16.

In January 2014, G

 H. initially told Ms. Cruze that she did not sit on 
respondent’s lap when he requested her to do so, instead stating that she sat next to him on 
the edge of the chair.  She also told Ms. Cruze that respondent touched her skin when he 
rubbed her back under her clothes, but she denied skin-to-skin contact to her mother and in 
her testimony hearing.  G
respondent’s conduct. Although her prior statements regarding sitting on respondent’s lap 
and him rubbing her back, were not exactly consistent, this is not unusual given the student’s 
age. G
 H. credibly testified that she sat on respondent’s lap on multiple occasions at 
his request, that respondent’s desk was blocked from the view of other students by two easels 
and/or charts, and that respondent inappropriately rubbed her back which made her 
uncomfortable.

 H. was clearly uncomfortable testifying about 

17. Multiple students corroborated G

 H.’s allegation that she sat on 

 P. and S

respondent’s lap. K
respondent’s lap in class, either at respondent’s desk or at the computer table.  Both of these 
witnesses’ testimony was consistent with statements they made to SSIT investigator Ms. 
Cruze. M
 H. sitting on 
respondent’s lap in the classroom. K

 E. testified that she and another student, A

 O. testified that they observed G

 C. testified that they saw G

 H. sitting on 

 M. and M

5

G., sat on respondent’s lap on at least occasion.  Several other students, H
J., W
that they witnessed students, including G
classroom.

N., and T

G., who did not testify at hearing, gave statements to Ms. Cruze 

 H., sitting in respondent’s lap in the 

 G., J

 

18.

Respondent also hugged G

 H. on multiple occasions. Although

 H. also told Ms. 

 R., A

 H. told Ms. Cruze that 

G
 H. did not testify that respondent hugged her, G
respondent hugged her in the classroom on at least one occasion. G
Cruze that she observe respondent hugging several students in the classroom, including 
T
 G. Y
respondent hugging G
respondent hugged G
 M. testified that respondent hugged female
respondent’s leg on multiple occasions. K
 H., on multiple occasions, although she 
students in the classroom, including G
 H.,
denied respondent ever hugged her.  T
W
 G. stated 
that respondent told students that he was feeling sad and would call students to his desk to 
give him a “group” hug. She estimated that this occurred about two times per week. 

G., M
 M., and K
 H. on more than one occasion. K
 H. at the computer table and pick her up sit her down on 

 G. told Ms. Cruze that she, G
M. gave respondent group hugs in the classroom.  T

 M.  Multiple students observed 

 P. testified that

N., and K

19.

Respondent denied that he ever requested G

 H. or any other student

 H., or any other student, to sit on his lap at his desk with charts or easels around 

to sit on his lap during the 2012-2013 school year. He stated that he never allowed 
G
his desk, or to sit on his lap at the computer table.  Respondent categorically denied this 
allegation, although multiple students credibly testified that respondent allowed G
H. to sit on his lap. He also denied that he rubbed G
or received hugs from G
G
attempt to deflect the hug by giving the student a “high five” or “fist pump.”  He admitted 
that sometimes a group of students would run towards him and attempt to hug him, and if he 
could not overt the contact he would pat the students on the head and gently direct them 
away.  Respondent stated that he was a jovial and joking teacher and that he liked to have fun 
with his students, but he denied that he had any inappropriate contact with G

 H. tried to hug him on numerous occasions in class but that he would always

 H. or any other student.  Respondent admitted that 

 H.’s back or that he requested

 H.

20.

It was established that respondent rubbed G

 H.’s back, hugged her 
and sat the student on his lap at his desk when his desk was blocked from the view of other 
students by easels and charts during the 2012-2013 school year, as alleged in Charges No. 1,
3 through 5, and 7.

21.

Charge No. 2 alleges that respondent inappropriately spoke to G
stating words to the effect of “Did I tell you how beautiful you are?,” that he called her “baby
girl,” and told her “I miss you” in the classroom. Although G
that respondent made these statements, and also told Ms. Buenrostro that respondent called 
her “baby girl,” G
comments to her.  She recalled that once respondent told her that she should not put her hair 
up in a “scrunchie” because she looked nice with her hair down, but the comments alleged in 

 H. did not testify at hearing that respondent made these 

 H. told Ms. Cruze 

 H. 

6

Charge No. 2 were not corroborated by G
during the investigation or at hearing, corroborated G
respondent made these comments to her.  Finally, although Ms. Cruze indicated in her report 
 H. stated that respondent made these comments, Ms. Cruze did not 
(Exh. 26) that G
corroborate these statements in her testimony at hearing. Consequently, there is insufficient 
evidence to support Charge No. 2.

 H.’s testimony.  No other students, either 
 H.’s allegation that 

22.

 H. for no educational reason. G

Finally, Charge No. 6 alleges that respondent purchased a mermaid doll and
 H. testified that respondent 

gave it to G
gave her more attention than he gave other students.  She stated that on one occasion 
respondent gave her a “Little Mermaid” doll and told her not to tell other students about the 
H. stated that respondent told her not 
doll and to place the doll in her backpack. G
to tell T
G. She threw
the doll away when she realized that it was wrong for respondent to give her a gift.

 G. because respondent was supposed to give the doll to T

23.

Respondent denied that he gave G

 H. the doll as a gift or that he told 
her not to tell anyone about the doll.  Respondent testified that he had a “reward system” for 
the students in his class.  When students performed well he gave them stars or points and at 
the end of the week, the highest performing three students were allowed to pick a prize from 
a group of inexpensive toys, school supplies, etc. that had been donated or that he purchased.
The top three students each week were allowed to pick a prize. Respondent testified that he
never gave students the prizes, instead they would select their own prizes from the items.
Multiple students corroborated respondent’s testimony that he had a rewards systems and 
that the top performing students could choose their prizes.

24.

The evidence established that G

 H. was frequently a top performer in 
respondent’s class, and that if she obtained the doll in respondent’s class, it was as a result of 
respondent’s “reward system” in which he allowed students to choose their prizes.
G
evidence, other than mother’s testimony.  Consequently, there was insufficient evidence to 
establish Charge No. 6.

 H.’s testimony regarding the doll gift was not corroborated by any other 

Charges No. 8-12 (W

 N.’s Allegations)

25.

Charges No. 8-12 allege that respondent spoke to and touched W

 N.

N. words to the effect of “Estas bien delgada, W

inappropriately during the 2012-2013 school year.  Charge No. 8 alleges that respondent 
stated to W
delgada” (Exh. 3), translated in English to mean “You are very slender, W
you are slender.” Respondent denied making this statement and W
hearing.  No other witness testified that they actually heard respondent make these comments 
to W
occasion and stated words to the effect of “wow, you’re very flaca (thin).”  (Exh. 8.)
Respondent admitted that he patted W
Consequently, there is insufficient evidence to sustain Charge No. 8, but respondent admitted 
Charge No. 9, an allegation which is sustained.

N.  Charge No. 9 alleges that respondent patted W

N. on the shoulder and made this statement.

.  I like that 
N. did not testify at

.  Me gustas que estas 

N.’s shoulder on one 

7

26.

Charge No. 10 alleges that respondent hugged W

N. on multiple 
occasions during the 2012-2013 school year. Multiple students observed respondent
frequently hugging students in his classroom.  T
requested hugs from students, including W
K
Although W
established that respondent frequently hugged students, and respondent was observed 
N. by at least two other students, one of which was K
hugging W
hearing. Consequently, there is sufficient evidence to establish Charge No. 10.

N. in the classroom.
N. told Ms. Cruze that respondent never hugged her, the evidence 

 P. testified that he observed respondent hugging W

 N. told Ms. Cruze that respondent 
N., and that students gave him “group hugs.”

 P, who testified at 

27.

Charges No. 11 and 12 alleged that respondent rubbed W

N.’s lower back 

N. to sit on his lap at his desk while he touched her 

N. told Ms. Buenrostro in her initial interview in May 8, 2013, that 
N. told 

N. also told Ms. Buenrostro that respondent asked her to sit on his lap, and she told 
N. did not 

during recess, and allowed W
inappropriately. W
respondent had rubbed her back on one occasion.  However, in January 2014, W
Ms. Cruze that respondent had never touched her in any way. On December 13, 2013, 
W
Ms. Cruze in January 2014, that she sat on respondent’s lap.  However, W
testify at hearing to corroborate statements to investigators, and no other student testified that 
they witnessed respondent rubbing W
lap.  Given the inconsistencies in W
insufficient evidence to sustain these two allegations.  Consequently, Charges No. 11 and 12 
were not established.

N.’s statements on these allegations, there is 

N. sitting on respondent’s 

N.’s back or W

Charges No. 13, 14, and 16 (T

 G.’s Allegations)

Charges No. 13 and 16 allege that respondent participated in group hugs with 

28.
G. and other students. The evidence supported these allegations. T

T
provided a written statement to Ms. Buenrostro that respondent hugged her in the classroom.
She also told Ms. Cruze that students, including T
when he was feeling sad.  K
statement that respondent hugged T
students. Consequently, Charge Nos. 13 and 16 were established by the evidence. 

G.’s
G. and participated in group hugs with female 

G., gave respondent group hugs

 M.’s testimony corroborated T

 P.’s and K

 G.

29.

It was not established that respondent allowed T

G. to sit on his lap at his 

 G. told Ms. Cruze that respondent allowed her (T

G. inappropriately as alleged in Charge No. 14.
G.) to sit on his 

desk or computer table and touch T
Although T
lap, T
testified that they observed T
observed respondent hugging T
inconsistent with T
hearing, there was insufficient evidence to corroborate her statement to Ms. Cruze that 
respondent allowed T
 G. to sit on his lap.  Consequently, Charge No. 14 was not 
established by the evidence.

 G. did not tell Ms. Buenrostro that she sat on respondent’s lap.  No other student
 P. testified that he 
G. sitting on respondent’s lap. K
 G. at the computer table.  However, this testimony is 
 G. did not testify at

 G.’s statement to Ms. Cruze. Because T

8

Charge No. 15 (A

 F.’s Allegation)

30.

The District alleged that respondent touched A

 F.’s shoulder in a way
that made her feel uncomfortable on multiple occasions during the 2012-2013 school year.
When interviewed by Ms. Buenrostro, A
her in any manner. She stated that she observed respondent touching female students’ 
shoulders or stomachs when he walked by their desks to let the students know that they could
 F. testified that respondent never 
stop working and leave for free time. At hearing, A
touched her in any manner.  Consequently, Charge No. 15 was not established by the
evidence.

 F. did not state that respondent had touched 

Charge Nos. 17- 21 (A

 G., K

 E., M

 M. Allegations)

 E., A

G. and

The District alleged that respondent allowed K

 E. told Ms. Cruze that she sat on respondent’s lap once because she got hurt 

 G. sitting on respondent’s on at least one 
 E.’s testimony corroborated her 

31.
 M. to sit on respondent’s lap. The evidence established that Kattelyn E. Ashley G.,
 M. all sat on respondent’s lap in the classroom during the 2012-2013 school 

M
and M
year. K
during recess, and that she observed A
occasion during the 2012-2013 school year.  K
statement to Ms. Cruze.  She observed A
times, once because A
 E. also sat on respondent’s lap one at 
least one occasions when she was crying after being teased by one of the boys in the class.
K
in the classroom. M
least one occasion and she did sit on his lap.  She stated that sitting on respondent’s lap made 
her feel uncomfortable. K
 M. sitting on respondent’s 
lap, thereby corroborating Kattelyn E.’s and M
stated that female students sat on respondent’s lap all the time in the classroom.
Consequently, Charges No. 17, 20, and 21 were established by the evidence.

G. and M
 M.’s statements and testimony. He

 M. testified that respondent requested her to sit on his lap on at 

 E. credibly testified that respondent allowed both she and A

G. sitting on respondent’s lap at least two 

G. was crying.  K

G. to sit on his lap 

P. observed A

Charges No. 18 and 19 (H

 G. and R

 P.’s Allegations)

32.

The District alleged that respondent allowed R

on his lap in the classroom during the 2012-2013 school year. H
that he once sat on respondent’s lap when he was crying in the classroom.  However, 
H
incident. R
never touched her inappropriately in any manner.  Consequently, Charge Nos. 18 and 19 
were not established by the evidence. 

 G. did not testify at hearing and no other student testified that they observed this 
 P. testified that that she did not sit on respondent’s lap and that respondent

 P. and H

 G. to sit 
 G. told Ms. Cruze 

Charge Nos. 24 and 25 (K

 E. and R

 P. Allegations)

The District alleged that on one occasion respondent hugged K

33.
that he hugged R
E. told Ms. Buenrostro that respondent hugged her on one occasion, but she did not tell Ms. 

 P. on multiple occasions during the 2012-2013 school year.  K

 E. and 

9

Cruze or testify at hearing that that respondent hugged her in the classroom.  She only stated
that respondent allowed her to sit on his lap.  R
saw respondent hug any student and testified that respondent never touched her in any
manner.  Consequently, Charge Nos. 24 and 25 were not established by the evidence.

 P. told Ms. Buenrostro that she never 

Charge Nos. 22, 23, 26 and 27 (Respondent Inappropriately Touched Students’ Backs, 
Shoulders, Waists, Hips, Sides, Stomachs, Torsos, Thighs, and Legs )

34.

 C.’s statements during the investigation and their testimony at hearing. M

The District alleged that respondent inappropriately touched female students 
on their backs, shoulders, waists, hips, thighs, stomachs, thighs and legs while the students 
 M. and 
were seated at their desks.  These allegations were primarily supported by M
S
 M. 
testified that respondent would go around to female students’ desks checking their work and 
tell them they were doing a great job.  While commenting on the students’ work, respondent 
would rub the students’ thighs and/or legs telling them they did a great job.  M
stated that respondent did this to her on multiple occasions and that she observed respondent
doing the same thing to G
respondent only rubbed female students’ thighs and legs when complimenting them on their 
school work and patted the boys on their backs to compliment them for doing good school 
work.

 M. stated that 

 F., and Y

 R.  M

 H., A

 M. 

35.

S

 C. testified that when students were good in class, respondent would

squat down next to their desks and rub their sides and/or torso and whisper in their ears.  She 
testified that respondent did this to her at least three times, and that she observed him doing 
G., T
the same thing to A
observed respondent tickling G
and/or sides or waists on multiple occasions.

G. on their stomachs 

 M., and W

G. and T

 C. also 

 H., A

G., M

N.  S

K

36.

 F., Y

 G., A

 M. testified that respondent would walk up to female students’ desks,
come up from behind them and grab or hug them by their waist while they were seated at 
their desk.  She testified that she observed respondent do this to M
A
touched female students in this manner at least two times per week.  K
respondent reach over female students while they were seated at their desks and rub the
students’ thighs and/or legs.  She observed respondent touching M
A
also recalled that respondent would squat down next to the students’ desk and whisper in 
their ears when he was checking their work so that he would not disturb other students.

 G.,
 M., T
 M. stated that respondent 

 O. in this manner.  K

 R., and M

 R., and G

 M., G

 G., Y

 H.  K

 C., T

 F., S

 H., 
 M. 

 M. also observed 

37.

A

 F. told Ms. Cruze that she observed respondent tapping the shoulders 

or stomachs of female students when he walked by their desk to let them know that they
could stop working and go play for free time. At hearing, A
 F. corroborated her 
statement to Ms. Cruze when she testified that she observed respondent squat down next to 
G

 H. and touched her waist and abdomen area and whisper something in the 

10

student’s ear while G
respondent’s behavior and conduct was “weird.”

 H. was seated at her desk.  A

 F. thought that 

38.

S

 C., M

 M., K

 M. and A

 F. made statements to Ms.

Cruze that respondent squatted down next to students while they were seated at their desks 
and rubbed the students’ waist, stomach, sides, torso, hips, thighs, legs, or shoulders.  These
students’ SSIT statements were consistent with their testimony at hearing.

District’s Investigation Witnesses 

39.

On May 6, 2013, Ms. Buenrostro initiated the District’s investigation after 

 H.’s mother.  Ms. Buenrostro interviewed 19 or 20 

receiving the complaint from G
students from respondent’s second grade class, including G
During the course of the investigation, she interviewed some of the students a second time 
and interviewed several of respondent’s former students.  Ms. Buenrostro did not learn that
respondent allowed students to sit on his lap until she interviewed G
N. a second time in December 2013. During, her initial interviews in May 2013, she only
asked students whether they hugged by respondent and whether they observed respondent 
touching G

 H. and W

 H. and W

 H.

N.

40. Ms. Buenrostro testified that respondent was returned to the classroom in May 

H. and W

N.  Based on the information she then had, she did not believe

2013, after the initial student interviews because the Los Angeles Police Department
declined to pursue a case against respondent, and respondent denied the allegations by
G
 H. 
returning respondent to the classroom posed a safety risk to the students, and G
had been removed from respondent’s classroom.  Thus, she believed returning respondent to 
the classroom at that time was a proper decision.  Ms. Buenrostro, however, would not have 
returned respondent to the classroom if she had been aware of G
2013 allegation that respondent requested her to sit on his lap, and that he allowed multiple 
female students to sit on his lap. She stated that it is never appropriate for a student to sit on 
a teacher’s lap and that such conduct violated the District’s Code of Conduct with Students.

 H.’s December 

41. Ms. Buenrostro visited respondent’s classroom unannounced during the 2012-

2013 school year and had never observed inappropriate conduct by respondent with his 
students.  She testified that the doors to respondent’s classroom were closed and locked when 
she conducted the classroom visits.  Ms. Buenrostro never received any reports of 
inappropriate conduct by respondent with students from administrative staff or any teachers.
There were no parent or student complaints against respondent until the May 6, 2013 
complaint.

42.

Eugene Hernandez, LAUSD Administrator of Operations, made the decision 
to return respondent to the classroom in May 2013 because the allegations were vague and 
respondent categorically denied that he had rubbed G
student.  However, Mr. Hernandez also stated that had he known about the allegations that 
surfaced later in the investigation, such as  students sitting on respondent’s lap and

 H.’s back or hugged the 

11

respondent hugging and touching students inappropriately, he would not have returned 
respondent to the classroom.  Mr. Hernandez confirmed that respondent’s conduct with his 
students, specifically allowing students to sit on his lap, violated the District’s Code of 
Conduct with Students policy.

43.

Kristen Murphy, the District’s Field Director in the Office of Staff Relations,
is charged with determining whether a teacher should be disciplined based on the results of 
an investigation for misconduct. Ms. Murphy believed that respondent’s conduct with
G
 H., as alleged in the May 6, 2013 complaint, was serious and inappropriate
conduct by respondent. The other interviews conducted by Ms. Buenrostro on May 7, 2013,
also revealed that respondent inappropriately hugged students on multiple occasions. Ms.
Murphy believed that there was enough evidence to recommend respondent’s dismissal in 
May 2013, but because respondent categorically denied the allegations, the Office of Staff 
Relations decided to return respondent to the classroom, and to continue the investigation.
The subsequent student interviews in September and December 2013 raised a concern for 
Ms. Murphy that respondent was “grooming” the female students in his class with 
inappropriate physical contact. She recommended that respondent be removed from the 
classroom again in October 2013, and requested a formal SSIT investigation into 
respondent’s conduct.

44.

 H. and W

Tamica Cruze was the lead investigator for SSIT.  Ms. Cruze testified at 
hearing and presented as an experienced investigator who is competent in interviewing 
young children. The SSIT investigation included 31 student interviews, 20 of which were 
students from respondent’s 2012-2013 second grade class, with some interviews conducted 
by Ms. Buenrostro. Ms. Cruze personally interviewed 16 students, 15 from respondent’s 
2012-2013 second grade class, and one of his students from a prior school year. Ms. Cruze’s 
SSIT report found that G
their interviews; that G
was transferred out of his second grade class and into the next school year, 2013-2014; and 
that respondent had made inconsistent statements regarding the student allegations.
Respondent first stated that he never had physical contact with students, but later admitted
that he patted W
he patted students on the head or shoulder, while stating “atta boy” or “good job.” Finally,
respondent suggested that students in his 2012-2013 second grade class may have made the 
allegations against him because he had given them a lot of school work in May 2013, but the
report noted that student interviews with respondent’s former students revealed that 
respondent hugged students in those classes as well, thus confirming some of his then current
students’ allegations.

N. on the shoulder and told her she was “flaca.” He also admitted that 

 H. continued to voluntarily visit respondent’s class after she 

N. had made consistent statements during

45.

The SSIT reported found that 20 students alleged that they observed 

respondent hugging and/or touching/rubbing students; seven students observed students 
sitting on respondent’s lap; four students alleged respondent placed charts or easels around 
his desk which blocked the students’ view of him at his desk; six students alleged that they
observed respondent seated at his desk as he hugged, touched, or allowed a student to sit on 

12

his lap; and three students stated that they never witnessed respondent hug or touch any
students.

46.

After reviewing Ms. Cruze’s SSIT report, Ms. Murphy believed there was a 
serious problem.  Based on Ms. Buenrostro’s student interviews and the SSIT report by Ms.
Cruze, Ms. Murphy recommended that the District proceed with dismissal proceedings
against respondent. Ms. Murphy believed that respondent’s conduct, as found in the SSIT 
report (Exh. 26), violated the District’s Code of Conduct with Students policy.  Specifically,
she believed respondent’s conduct violated the provisions of the policy that prohibits
teachers from: (1) engaging in behaviors with students that are unprofessional, unethical, 
illegal, immoral or exploitative; (2) giving gifts, rewards, or incentives to students that are 
not school related, in exchange for a student to say or do something; (3) making statements 
or comments to students that are not age-appropriate, professional, or which may be
considered sexual in nature, harassing, or demeaning; and (4) touching or having physical
contact with a student that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of a teacher’s 
responsibilities or duties.  (Exh. 23.) Ms. Murphy also believed that respondent’s conduct 
violated the District’s Sexual Harassment Policy and the Employee Code of Ethics. Ms.
Murphy was particularly concerned that respondent continued to categorically deny all of the 
allegations in the face of multiple student statements to the contrary.

Respondent’s Defense to the Allegations

47.

Respondent has categorically denied all of the students’ allegations.  On

August 29, 2014, respondent stated that all of the students’ allegations were “absolutely and
unequivocally false.”  (Exh. 16.)  Respondent denied that his desk was ever surrounded by
easels and charts or that he had any contact with any physical contact with any student,
including G
 H., at his desk that was obstructed from the view of other students.
Respondent admitted that students frequently came up to his desk for help with school work,
but he insisted that he never assisted any student at his desk when the view of his desk was 
obstructed by charts or easels.

48.

Respondent denied that he requested or allowed G

 H. or any other
student to sit on his lap.  He stated that if a student tried to sit on his lap he would simply
stand up to prevent the student sitting.  Respondent also denied initiating hugs G
or any other student in his students. Respondent admitted that students would come up and 
hug him, but he did not hug the students back.  Respondent stated he would simply pat the 
students on their head and/or back and send them away, unless he was surprised by the
student and could not avoid the hug. Respondent also denied that he touched W
an inappropriate manner.  He admitted that he patted W
her shoulder blade and said “wow, your very flaca.”  (Exh. 8.) However, he maintained that
if he patted or touched a student on their back or shoulder, it was normally intended as praise
like an “atta boy” or “good job.” 

N. in 
N. on her upper back and felt 

 H. 

49.

Respondent testified that he never allowed any student to sit on his lap, that he 

never requested hugs from students because he was sad, that he never participated in group 

13

hugs students, and that he never had any physical contact with any student, including rubbing 
a students’ back, side, stomach, waist, thigh or leg.  Respondent stated that the only physical
contact he had with his students was when he patted or tapped them on their upper back, 
shoulders, or heads or gave them high fives or fist pumps to show praise or encouragement 
for school work well done.

50.

Respondent stated that he only whispered in students’ ears to provide 

corrective feedback regarding classwork or their behavior so as not to embarrass the student
in from of their peers.  Respondent also stated that he had a reward system for students in his 
class in which students were designated as superstars, blue stars, and yellow stars.  He would 
 H. got a 
give students free time or prizes as rewards. Respondent testified that if G
“Little Mermaid” in his class, it was because she had earned a prize for doing school work 
and she picked the doll out of the group of prizes he had in the classroom for his reward 
system.

51.

Respondent asserted that it would be impossible for him to commit the 

misconduct alleged by the District in its Amended Accusation because his classroom was 
always open and frequently visited by administrative staff, the teacher next door, parents, and 
volunteers. Respondent admitted that female students frequently remained in his classroom 
during recess but explained that the female students typically did not want to play outside in 
the yard during recess whereas the male students preferred being outdoors.  He allowed his 
female students to stay in the classroom and draw on the board or help him with other tasks 
in the classroom.  However, respondent emphasized that the classroom door was never 
closed when the female students were present during recess.

52.

Respondent did not have a teacher assistant assigned to his second grade class 
for the 2012-2013 school year. However, Andrea Alcorn, who taught in the classroom next 
door, frequently walked into respondent’s classroom unannounced through an open unlocked 
adjoining door between the two classrooms. Ms. Alcorn testified that she collaborated a lot 
with respondent and his students during the 2012-2013 school year, changing students daily
for instructional purposes. Ms. Alcorn testified that she entered respondent’s class daily
unannounced and never observed respondent engaging in inappropriate conduct with his 
students.

53. Ms. Alcorn observed students walking up to respondent and hugging him but 

she did not feel this was uncommon or inappropriate for second grade students. She never
observed students sitting on respondent’s lap or respondent rubbing or touching a student’s 
back. Ms. Alcorn only spent a few minutes per day actually in respondent’s classroom 
because she had to teach her own class, but it was not uncommon for her to stand in the 
doorway between the two classrooms. Ms. Alcorn testified that respondent was well liked by
his students and respected by parents.  She considered respondent a very good teacher.  Ms. 
Alcorn enrolled her grandchild into respondent’s class although she was aware of his 
students’ allegations.

14

54.

Stacie Webster has taught at Vernon for almost 18 years, including teaching 

second graders, and has known respondent this entire time. She stated that respondent had a 
great reputation for honesty and professionalism as a teacher. In Ms. Webster’s opinion, 
both teachers and students respected respondent as a teacher.  Ms. Webster was aware of the 
allegations against respondent.  She admitted that she has personally rubbed students’ backs 
to calm them down and make them feel comfortable and secure. However, Ms. Webster 
would not just rub the backs of male students, and not female students, but would treat the 
students the same. She described teachers as social workers and nurses and stated that 
having physical contact with students, particularly young students, is almost unavoidable.
She expressed that young students like second graders are very emotional and sometimes 
need support. She admitted, however, that the District’s policy is that it is never appropriate
for a teacher to touch or rub students’ backs because such touching can be misinterpreted.
She also admitted that it is never appropriate to rub a student’s thigh, waist, side or torso.
Ms. Webster stated that a teacher should never initiate hugs with students, but she admitted 
that she hugged students on occasion if they became emotional.  Again she reiterated that it 
would be wrong for her to just give hugs to male students and not female students, or to 
students of one particular sex.  Finally, Ms. Webster admitted that it would never be 
appropriate for teacher to allow a student to sit on the teacher’s lap.

55.

Respondent testified that during the 2013-2014, G

 H.’s behavior and Ms. Buenrostro, after observing the students approaching 

 H. and a circle of 
her friends or classmates would frequently come by his classroom and giggle, peak inside of 
his class and asked if respondent needed any help.  Respondent informed Ms. Buenrostro of 
G
respondent’s class, advised G
Respondent stated that on at least one occasion, in September 2014, G
behind him and hugged him. He was extremely shocked and disturbed by G
conduct.  Respondent stated that G
afraid of him, and suggested that her conduct proved that he had not committed the 
inappropriate conduct alleged by the student.

 H. came up 
 H.’s 
 H.’s behavior showed that the student was not 

 H. to no longer come to respondent’s class.

Credibility Findings

56.

The students’ statements throughout the District’s investigation have been 

 H.’s statements to Ms. Buenrostro and Ms. Cruze were 

overall consistent.  G
generally consistent and her testimony at hearing was consistent and credible regarding her 
allegations against respondent.  The other students credibly and consistently described
incidents in which respondent inappropriately touched students in his 2012-2013 second 
grade class.  There is overwhelming credible evidence and testimony that respondent allowed 
students to sit on his lap, hugged students, and inappropriately touched, rubbed, and patted,
students’ backs, shoulders, waists, stomachs, torsos, thighs or legs during instruction in his 
classroom.

57.

It is important to emphasize that the students generally did not harbor any ill

will against respondent which could be perceived to bias or taint their statements or 
testimony.  To the contrary, most of the students spoke favorably of respondent when asked 

15

whether they liked him as a teacher. The students’ testimony generally was candid, frank, 
and honest, and their demeanors evidenced sincerity and truthfulness.  Of course some of the 
students’ testimony was slightly inconsistent with prior statements, and some students 
appeared to be reluctant to fully disclose all of the incidents they may have observed in the 
classroom.  However, this is not unexpected of fifth grade students who are eleven and 
twelve years old.  In totality, the students’ testimony was credible and consistent with the 
facts that were discovered during the District’s investigation.

58.

Respondent consistently denied the allegations in the District’s Amended 

Accusation at hearing and during the District’s investigation.  He categorically denies that he 
ever allowed a student to sit on lap, that he ever initiated or requested hugs from students, or 
that he inappropriately touched a student in any manner.  Respondent’s categorical denial of
all charges, in light of the credible testimony and statements of multiple students from his 
second grade class, is simply not believable.  The evidence clearly established that 
respondent allowed students to sit on his lap, that he hugged students, and that he frequently
had physical contact with his students, including rubbing, patting, and touching their backs,
shoulders, waists, sides, stomachs, torsos, hips, thighs and legs.  Respondent initially denied
that he had any physical contact with students, but later admitted that he patted their upper 
backs or shoulders to praise the students for a job well done with their school work.
Respondent admitted that students initiated hugs with him, but denied he hugged them back.
However, the evidence established that respondent actually requested hugs from his students 
and participated in group hugs with his students.

59.

Although physical contact with students is prohibited by District’s policies, 

age-appropriate contact with students is sometimes expected, particularly with second grade 
students.  Ms. Webster testified that she would hug students that were emotionally distraught
or needed comforting.  Although she understood the risk of the physical contact being 
misinterpreted, she truthfully admitted that unfortunately some physical contact with students 
this young is unavoidable.  Respondent, who admitted that he had a jovial and joking 
personality, steadfastly denied any mutual physical contact with his students. His statements
and testimony are simply not credible given the substantial evidence to the contrary.
Consequently, respondent’s testimony is not credible.

Performance Evaluations

60.

Prior to the allegations in the Statement of charges and Amended Accusation, 

respondent received satisfactory performance evaluations annually from the District 
indicating an overall evaluation that he “Meets Standard Performance,” or that he “Exceeds 
Standard Performance.”

61.

Respondent has no prior history of disciplinary action taken by the District.
By all accounts, prior to the Statement of Charges and Amended Accusation in this case, 
respondent had met all of the performance standards required by the District.

16

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District has the burden of proof in this matter and the standard of proof in 
a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission 
on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1040.) Proof by a
preponderance of the evidence requires a showing that it is more likely than not to be true.
In other words, the evidence is more convincing than that which is offered in opposition.
(People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) When a school board recommends
dismissal for cause, a Commission on Professional Competence may only vote for or against
the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing 
probation or an alternative sanction.  (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)4 The
Commission’s decision is deemed to be the final decision of the District’s governing board.
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 331.) “The
Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to teach . . ., and 
whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.”  (Id. at pp. 343-344.) Thus,
even where cause for dismissal has been established, a Commission still has broad discretion 
to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted.  (Fontana Unified School Dist. v. 
Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)

Determination of Charges

I.

3.

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT &UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for unprofessional conduct 

pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), or unsatisfactory performance pursuant to
section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).

4.

Unprofessional conduct as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), may be
defined as conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is unbecoming a 
member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of Ed. v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553,
overruled in part, on another ground, in Bekiaris v. Board of Ed. (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, 
fn. 7.)

5.

The term “unsatisfactory performance” is not specifically defined in the 

Education Code or case law.  Inasmuch as there is separate cause for dismissal for 
unprofessional conduct in subdivision (a) of section 44932, and we are not to presume the 

ÿ

ÿ

section 44944, subdivision (d). 

4 ÿEffective January 1, 2015, section 44944, subdivision (c)(1-3), was changed to 

17

Legislature intended to enact completely duplicative statutes (In re Maes (2010) 185 
Cal.App.4th 1094, 1110), unsatisfactory performance must mean something different from 
unprofessional conduct.  In fact, section 44938, subdivision (c), specifies that “unsatisfactory
performance” does not include any other cause for dismissal specified in section 44932.

6.

While unprofessional conduct can be determined by analyzing a teacher’s 

conduct relative to the broader educational community, unsatisfactory performance must be 
analyzed with an eye toward the teacher’s performance as evaluated by his or her employing
school district. Section 44938 supports this proposition.  Section 44938 requires a charge of 
unsatisfactory performance to be preceded by a written notice of unsatisfactory performance,
and refers to section 44660 et seq., which in turn establish guidelines for how school districts 
should evaluate and assess the performance of their certificated employees. Thus, cause for 
discipline may be established if a certificated employee performs unsatisfactorily to his 
employing school district. 

7.

However, the purpose of the statute giving tenure to teachers is to insure an 
efficient permanent staff of teachers whose members are not dependent on caprice for their 
positions as long as they conduct themselves properly and perform their duties efficiently
and well.  (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006)
145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1293, fn 20, citing 56 Cal.Jur.3d (2003) Schools, § 411, p. 757.) 
Therefore, a reasonable limitation is that an employing school district cannot be arbitrary or
capricious in making decisions regarding whether a certificated employee has performed 
unsatisfactorily.

8.

Section 44938, subdivision (a), provides that “[t]he governing board of any
school district shall not act upon any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 
calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the board or its authorized representative has 
given the employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice of the unprofessional 
conduct, specifying the nature thereof with such specific instances of behavior and with such 
particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and 
overcome the grounds for the charge. …”

9.

Section 44938, subdivision (b), provides that the governing board shall not act 

upon any charges of unsatisfactory performance unless it acts in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraph (1) or (2):

(1) At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the board 
or its authorized representative has given the employee against whom 
the charge is filed, written notice of the unsatisfactory performance,
specifying the nature thereof with such specific instances of behavior 
and with such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity to
correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. …”

(2) The governing board may act during the time period composed of the last 
one-fourth of the schooldays it has scheduled for purposes of computing 

18

apportionments in any fiscal year if, prior to the beginning of that time period, 
the board or its authorized representative has given the employee against 
whom the charge is filed, written notice of the unsatisfactory performance,
specifying the nature thereof with such specific instances of behavior and with 
such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or 
her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. …”

10.

Here, although respondent’s conduct as alleged in Charge Nos. 1, 3-5, 7, 9-10,

13, 16-17, 20-23, and 26-27 may have constituted unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory
performance, the District failed to provide respondent the required notice under section 
44938, subdivisions (a) and (b), and an opportunity to correct or cure his unprofessional 
conduct or unsatisfactory performance after he received notice of such conduct.  The 
evidence established that the District provided respondent a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts or 
Services on September 26, 2014, and issued the Statement of Charges in this case on January
23, 2015.  However, respondent was removed from his classroom and placed at one of the 
District’s administrative offices on October 10, 2013, where he remained until he received 
the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts or Services and his Notice of Suspension on September 26, 
2014. Consequently, respondent was not provided an opportunity to correct his faults and 
overcome the grounds for the charges giving rise to the causes for dismissal based on 
unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance after receiving the September 26, 2014
notice. (See Tarquin v. Commission on Professional Competence (1978) 84 Cal.App.3d 251; 
Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1446.) This jurisdictional defect is fatal to the District’s causes for 
dismissal on the grounds of unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance.

II.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

11.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct pursuant to section 

44932, subdivision (a)(1), by reason of Factual Findings 5 through 20, 25-26, 28, 31, 34-38,
and 39-58.

12.

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, 

has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  It is sometimes used as 
synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness.  (Board of Education of the 
San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)
Immoral conduct can be construed according to common usage.  “The term ‘immoral’ has 
been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes 
conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward 
good order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. 
Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)

19

13.

The Commission may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject 

another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens v. Parke Davis & 
Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact, here the Commission, may also “reject part of 
the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted 
portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus 
weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. 
Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)  And, the testimony of “one credible witness 
may constitute substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of 
Medical Quality Assurance, 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.)

14.

A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent’s conduct as 

alleged in Charge Nos. Charge Nos. 1, 3-5, 7, 9-10, 13, 16-17, 20-23, and 26-27 of the 
Amended Accusation constituted immoral conduct. Respondent allowed students to sit on 
his lap on multiple occasions, engaged in hugging students and participated in group hugs
 P. 
with his students. Statements and testimony by G
were particularly persuasive regarding these allegations. Respondent’s categorical denial of 
these incidents was not supported by the evidence.  Had respondent admitted this conduct 
and offered justification for his actions, i.e., that the physical contact with the students was 
age-appropriate and required because of the emotional needs of his second grade students, 
respondent actions, although violative of District’s policies, may have been explainable or 
understood.  However, his steadfast denial of the incidents, couple with evidence that 
respondent set up easels and charts around his desk to obstruct the students’ view of his desk 
when students were observed sitting on his lap at his desk, suggest a nefarious intent by
respondent.

 E., and K

 H., K

15.

Additionally, a preponderance of the evidence established that respondent 

inappropriately rubbed and touched students’ waists, sides, torsos, backs, shoulders, thighs, 
and legs while students were seated at their desks.  The students stated that respondent would 
come around to their desks and while checking their school work, squat down or lean over 
them, and rub or touch their waist, stomachs, sides, torsos, backs, shoulders, thighs, or legs
while praising them for doing good school.  Respondent defended that he would simply pat
the student on the upper back or shoulder or give students a high five or fist pump to praise 
the student.  Respondent’s testimony was contradicted by multiple students, including 
M
students gave statements or testified that respondent touched or rubbed them in an 
inappropriate manner.  These allegations of respondent touching and rubbing students’ 
waists, stomachs, torsos, thighs and legs are particularly egregious because there is no 
reasonable justification for a teacher touching a student below the waist in this manner.

N.  All of these 

 H., and W

 M., A

 M., S

 C., K

 F., G

16.

Of significance and particularly disturbing is that evidence establishing that 

respondent committed his misconduct with only the female students in his class.  There were 
no allegations that male students were allowed to sit on respondent’s lap or engaged in 
hugging activity with respondent.  Respondent’s conduct was specifically targeted towards 
the female students in his second grade class.  On these facts, the preponderance of the 

20

evidence established that respondent engaged in immoral conduct with students in his second 
grade class during the 2012-2013 school year.

III.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

17.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for evident unfitness for service pursuant to 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), by reason of Factual Findings 5 through 20, 25-26, 28, 31, 
34-38, and 39-58.

18.

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), provides that the District may suspend or 
dismiss a permanent employee for “evident unfitness for service.” “Evident unfitness for 
service,” within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), means clearly not fit or 
suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of a temperamental defect or inadequacy.
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445 (Woodland).)  Evident unfitness for services requires that 
unfitness be attributable to a defect in temperament which “connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.”  (Id.)

19.

Here, respondent engaged in multiple acts of misconduct, as alleged in Charge 
Nos. 1, 3-5, 7, 9-10, 13, 16-17, 20-23, and 26-27, and established by the evidence at hearing, 
established that respondent is evidently unfit for service.  Respondent allowed multiple 
students to sit on his lap at his desk, while his desk was blocked from the view of other 
students by easels and charts, inappropriately rubbed G
his lap, engaged in solicited hugs with students, individually and in groups, and 
inappropriately rubbed students on their waists, stomachs, sides, torsos, backs, shoulders, 
thighs, and legs.

 H.’s back while she sat on 

20.

Based on these multiple incidents of misconduct, the District has established 
that respondent suffers from a temperamental defect and inadequacy that connotes a fixed 
character trait that is presumed not remedial. Accordingly, the District established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent is evident unfit for service.

IV.

APPLICATION OF THE MORRISON FACTORS

21.

To terminate the teacher on grounds of immoral conduct, dishonesty, or 

evident unfitness for service, it must also be established that the conduct renders the teacher 
unfit to teach.  (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230.) The
Morrison analysis does not apply to causes for dismissal for unsatisfactory performance or 
persistent violation of school rules, laws or policies because such causes of action, by
definition, have a direct nexus to teaching. (Id., at pp. 227-230.) “[A]n individual can be 
removed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the 
profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others 
who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  (Id., at p. 235.) Thus, a determination of 
unfitness requires an analysis based on criteria set forth in Morrison.

21

22.

In Morrison, the Supreme Court of California held that the determination of 

whether a person is fit to teach must be based on an objective and analytical approach, 
consisting of a review of the teacher’s conduct and an assessment of a variety of specific 
factors.  “In determining whether the teacher’s conduct thus indicates unfitness to teach the 
board may consider such matters as the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely
affected students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the proximity
or remoteness in time of the conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party 
involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood 
of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may
inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.” (Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 
227-230.) In reaching a conclusion that grounds exist to dismiss a certificated employee on 
the basis of evident unfitness for service, not all Morrison factors need be examined, only the
pertinent ones.  (Governing Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 
369, 384.) Moreover the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact 
established, but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively.
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence, supra, 2
Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.)

23.

In this case, application of the Morrison factors demonstrate that respondent

engaged in conduct that is related to teaching and render him unfit to teach as follows:

(1)

The likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers:

 H. who was reassigned from his 

 H. was scared to go to school because of respondent’s conduct and 

 H. continued to visit his classroom after being taken out of his class, the 

Respondent’s conduct adversely affected G
classroom. G
expressed that she did not want to remain in respondent’s class. Although respondent stated 
that G
evidence showed that the student was accompanied with friends or classmates whenever she
returned to respondent’s classroom.  That was no longer assigned to or attending 
respondent’s class, may have also explained her lack of fear in visiting his classroom with 
friends. Several students expressed that they were made uncomfortable by respondent’s
conduct and described his conduct as weird.  K
 O., and
M

 M. particularly expressed their discomfort with respondent’s conduct.

 H., M

 M., G

(2)

The degree of such adversity anticipated: G

 H. was required to be 

removed from respondent’s classroom because of his inappropriate conduct.

(3)

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct: Respondent’s conduct 

occurred between August 2012 and May 2013. Thus, it is not remote in time within the 
meaning of Morrison.

(4)

The type of teaching credential held by the party involved: Respondent has a 

Clear CLAD Multi-Subject teaching credential which places him in elementary or middle 

22

school classrooms with young students that would be at risk for the inappropriate behaviors 
that have been established in this case.

(5)

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 

conduct: Respondent’s categorical denial of all allegations is of particular concern.
Additionally, respondent placed or set up charts and easels at his desk to obstruct the view of 
students when he allowed female students to sit on his lap at his desk.  Respondent also 
engaged in conduct in which he rubbed or touched the waists, stomachs, thighs, and legs of 
female students.

(6)

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct: Respondent attempted to establish a motive for the students’ allegations by stating 
that the students were upset with the amount of work he gave them in May 2013.  However, 
this motive was not substantiated.  In fact, most students spoke favorably about respondent as 
a teacher.  Respondent also attempted to justify touching his students by stating he patted the 
students on the upper back or shoulder in offering praise for the their school work.
Respondent conduct is blameworthy and his attempt to establish legitimate motives for his 
actions was not credible. There simply was not legitimate motive for touching or rubbing a 
students’ body below the student’s waist or on their thighs or legs.

(7)

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct: It is highly likely

that respondent would again engage in inappropriate activity in the future.  Respondent 
accepted very little responsibility for his conduct, categorically denying all of the charges
and providing incredible explanations for his conduct.

(8)

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers: This
factor is not at issue.  There is no constitutional right that would be adversely affected by the
District imposing discipline for respondent’s misconduct and appropriately touching his 
students.

V.

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OR REFUSAL TO OBEY SCHOOL LAWS OR REGULATIONS

24.

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for persistent violation of or refusal to obey
school laws or regulations pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), by reason of Factual 
Findings 5 through 20, 25-26, 28, 31, 34-38, and 39-58.

25.

Persistent violation of or a refusal to obey school laws or regulations under

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), requires that the violation be either “persistent” or
“motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.” (Governing Bd. of Oakdale Union 
School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.)  Isolated events or incidents 
involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are generally not considered persistent.
(Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) Cases
interpreting section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), require a “showing of intentional and 
continual refusal to cooperate.”  (San Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on 

23

Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.)  Cause for discipline may be
based on the violation of school rules.  (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-1181.)

26.

Here, respondent was aware of the school policies prohibiting engaging in 

inappropriate conduct with students.  Respondent was trained on the District’s policies 
annually, including the LAUSD Code of Conduct with Students, the LAUSD Sexual
Harassment Policy, and the LAUSD Employee Code of Ethics.  There is no dispute that 
respondent’s conduct, as established by the preponderance of evidence in this case, violated
these District policies. Respondent allowed students to sit on his lap, engaged in both 
individual and group hugs with students, and inappropriately touched female students on
multiple occasions during the 2012-2013 school year, in violation of the LAUSD Code of 
Conduct with Students, the LAUSD Employee Code of Ethics, and the LAUSD Sexual 
Harassment Policy. Respondent’s misconduct constituted a persistent violation of or refusal 
to obey the District’s policies and regulations.5

Disposition

27.

Respondent’s misconduct with his second grade female students in this case is
a serious concern for the District.  Although respondent’s conduct was not overtly sexual in 
nature, the District is justifiably and reasonably concerned that his conduct can and will lead 
to more direct sexual misconduct with female students. Respondent’s students were 
adversely impacted by his conduct, ultimately requiring one student to be removed from his 
classroom.  Although respondent had no prior history of disciplinary action prior to the 
charges alleged in this proceeding, respondent’s conduct clearly shows that he is unfit to 
continue teaching with the District.  Under these circumstances respondent’s dismissal from 
the District is the appropriate disposition in this case.

28.

The Commission on Professional Competence concludes that cause exists to 
dismiss respondent based on immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent
violation of or refusal to obey school laws or regulations.  The Commission reached this 
decision on a vote of two to one, with Commission Member Isela Macias in dissent.

//

//

//

//

ÿ

ÿ

5 The District also alleged that respondent’s misconduct constituted a willful refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules 
and regulations of the employing district, pursuant to section 44939.  However, there is 
insufficient evidence to sustain this cause for discipline.

24

ORDER

The determination of the Governing Board of the Los Angeles Unified School District 

in the Amended Accusation to dismiss respondent Matthew Sanchez (EN 699255) pursuant
to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939 is upheld. Accordingly, respondent shall be 
dismissed as a certificated employee of the District.

AAugust 26, 2016
DATED: _________________________

August 26, 2016
DATED: _________________________

DocuSigned  by: 

(  utleon  Dots 

August 26, 2016
DATED: _________________________

DocuSigned  by:

DoacuSsigned  by: 

( pteztaed  A,  Seaertett 
____________________________
MICHAEL A. SCARLETT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

____________________________
Anthony Botts
Commission Member

___________________________
Isela Macias
Commission Member

25

