BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
MARSHA MAIETTA,  
a permanent certificated employee, 
 
                                                  Respondent. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
  

DECISION 
 

 
OAH No. 2015031119  
 
 
 

Dannis Woliver Kelley, Ingrid A. Meyers, Esq., and Pamela S. Townsend, Esq., 

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Lompoc, on August 3-7 and 10-14, 2015.1 
 
 
represented complainant Trevor McDonald, Superintendent of the Lompoc Unified School 
District (District). 
 
 
 
  
argument briefs, which were timely received and marked for identification as follows: 
complainant’s, exhibit 74; respondent’s, exhibit 127.  The record was closed and the matter 
deemed submitted for decision upon receipt of the closing briefs on October 5, 2015. 
 
 

Marsha Maietta (respondent) represented herself. 

The record was held open after the end of the hearing so the parties could submit closing 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
 

1. 

The Board of Education (Board) is the duly elected, qualified and acting 
governing board of the District, and is organized, existing and operating pursuant to the 
provisions of the California Education Code and other laws of the State of California. 
 

2. 

Respondent was at all times a permanent certificated employee of the District. 

1  On April 24 and 25, 2015, the parties stipulated to waive their right to designate a 

                                                
  
commissioner to hear this matter, and elected to have the ALJ hear the matter alone pursuant 
to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1). 

3. 

On January 13, 2015, complainant, in his official capacity as Superintendent 

for the District, filed with the Board a Statement of Charges and Recommendation for 
Dismissal against respondent. 
 

4. 

At a properly noticed Board meeting held on January 13, 2015, the Board 

determined that cause existed to dismiss respondent from her position as a permanent 
certificated employee with the District. 
 

5. 

On January 15, 2015, the District personally served respondent with the 
Statement of Charges (Charges) and a Notice of Intent to Dismiss (Dismissal Notice), 
notifying her that, at the expiration of 30 days from receipt of the Charges and Dismissal 
Notice, her employment with the District would be terminated, unless she timely demanded a 
hearing. 
 

6. 

On February 17, 2015, respondent submitted a request for a hearing to 

challenge her dismissal. 
 
Respondent’s Background Information 
  

7. 

Respondent has obtained the following credentials and certificates from the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing: 
 

A. 

Since 1983, respondent has possessed a single subject teaching 

credential in social sciences, allowing her to teach that discipline in grades 12 and below.  
She testified that she received a math waiver from a local junior college and therefore was 
able to teach pre-algebra at the seventh and eighth grade levels, as well as algebra, if there is 
a shortage of credentialed math teachers. 
 

B. 

Since 1987, respondent has also possessed a multiple subject credential, 

allowing her to teach all general subjects in a self-contained class and, as a self-contained 
classroom teacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in grades twelve 
and below, including preschool.   

 
C. 

Since 1999, respondent has also held a Crosscultural, Language and 

Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate.  Respondent can teach in Spanish and English. 
  

8. 

Respondent first began teaching approximately 31 years ago for the Los 

Angeles Unified School District.  She taught there for six years, teaching grades one through 
six.  Respondent next taught for the Hesperia Unified School District from 1993-1996. 
 

9. 

Respondent was hired by the District in 1996.  She taught math and Spanish in 
a bilingual program at Lompoc Valley Middle School, and she was also assigned to Fillmore 
Elementary School.  In 2006, she taught regular, non-bilingual math and science core classes. 

 

2 

10. 

In 2008, respondent was assigned to teach English Language Learners classes 

in reading, language and writing.  She later was assigned to teach seventh grade math and 
eighth grade pre-algebra classes. 
 

11.  At the start of the 2010-2011 school year, respondent voluntarily transferred to 

take an Independent Study position at the Camino Real Charter School (charter school), 
which was located on the campus of Maple High School (Maple).  Maple is a continuation 
high school for students who did not succeed at traditional comprehensive high school 
programs because they had class credit shortages, attendance or behavior problems, or all 
three.  The Independent Study position was not a direct teaching assignment.  Within one 
month of her transfer, however, the charter school dissolved. 
 

12. 

The charter school students were reabsorbed by Maple or Mission Valley High 

School.  Respondent remained at Maple.  The principal at Maple then, and at all relevant 
times thereafter, was Kim McCollum (Principal McCollum).  In the 2011-2012 school year, 
Respondent continued with Independent Study classes, which were self-paced by the 
students, but she was also transitioned to be assigned direct teaching classes at Maple in the 
future, such as Parenting and Study Skills. 
 
The 2011-2012 School Year 
 

13. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44660, et seq., and in alignment with the 
California Standards for the Teaching Profession (CSTP) and the Certified Bargaining Unit 
Contract (CBUC) between the District and the Lompoc Federation of Teachers (LFT), the 
District adopted a uniform system for the evaluation and assessment of the performance of its 
certificated employees.  Respondent testified that she had been evaluated as a teacher at the 
District under the CSTP for several years before coming to Maple.  The evaluation is based 
on the following six standards contained with the CSTP: 
 

(1)  Engaging and supporting all students in learning; 
 
(2)  Creating and maintaining effective environments for student 
learning; 
 
(3)  Understanding and organizing subject matter for student 
learning; 
 
(4)  Planning instruction and designing learning experiences for 
all students; 
  
(5)  Assessing student learning; and 
 
(6)  Developing as a professional educator. 

 
 

 

3 

14.  On December 7, 2011, Principal McCollum conducted an informal 
observation of respondent’s classroom performance while she was teaching her Parenting 
class.  By December 21, 2011, respondent acknowledged that she had seen and discussed the 
Informal Observation of Professional Performance Report drafted by Principal McCollum.  
In that report, Principal McCollum observed that only approximately five students were 
engaged during the lesson, while the rest were passive or distracted, and that respondent 
engaged in arguments with her students.  Respondent was rated as “Satisfactory” in all of the 
aforementioned CSTP standards, except standard 2, in which she received a “Needs 
Improvement” rating.  The report included recommendations for respondent’s improvement.  
As a result of this report, respondent voluntarily began working with a District teaching 
coach, Carolina Allen. 
 

 

B.  On February 16, 2012, Principal McCollum met with respondent in her 

15.  A.  In February 2012, a few District staff members advised Principal 
McCollum that respondent had expressed to them that she was upset with the courses she 
was assigned and the lack of students enrolling in them.  Those staff members expressed 
concern over respondent raising those issues with them and their discomfort with having 
those discussions with her. 
 
  
classroom to discuss the concerns expressed by respondent to others.  Principal McCollum 
did not tell respondent who had reported their concerns to her.  Respondent advised Principal 
McCollum that she was upset over not teaching math and that students were not enrolling in 
the classes she had been assigned to teach.  She also complained that students assigned to her 
class had more behavior issues than those assigned to other teachers at Maple.  Principal 
McCollum reminded respondent that she had agreed to teach the Parenting and Study Skills 
classes.  She also told respondent that she would be assigned to teach math classes when she 
was ready.  Principal McCollum reminded respondent of the classroom control problems she 
had earlier observed during the above-described informal observation.  Respondent 
complained that she felt overwhelmed and needed more time to prepare for her new courses.   
 
  
on respondent’s Independent Study course to give her more time to prepare for other 
assignments, and to ask the two Maple math teachers, David Zivich and Melinda Darway, to 
help her prepare a math course.  Principal McCollum advised respondent to bring such 
concerns to her in the future, and not fellow teachers. 
 

C.  At the conclusion of the meeting, Principal McCollum agreed to cut-back 

 

16.  A.  In March 2012, respondent received a Professional Development Report 

(or PDR) covering the period of August 2011 to March 2012, which was drafted by Principal 
McCollum.  The PDR contained evaluations of respondent’s performance under the six 
CSTP categories described above.   
 
  
 
 
/// 

B.  Respondent received “Satisfactory” ratings in CSTP standards 3 through 6. 

 

 

4 

 

 

C.  Respondent received a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 1 

  
(Engaging and Supporting All Students in Learning).  Among other concerns, Principal 
McCollum observed that respondent had a hard time calling students by name; respondent 
did not spend time during independent practice talking with, sitting with, or in-depth 
questioning of students to see if they were learning; and respondent’s methods for checking 
students’ understanding were not adequate. 
 
D.  Respondent also received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 2 
  
(Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning).  Principal 
McCollum observed that respondent began lessons before the bell rang; students were 
reprimanded in front of the class - leading to arguments between students and respondent; 
and students were not signing up for respondent’s classes or were asking to transfer out of 
her classes.  Respondent also was not following basic classroom management procedures.  
Her students were not: asking for permission to move about the room; staying on task during 
the lesson; or refraining from side conversations.  In addition, students argued with 
respondent; blurted out answers; and laughed at other students during reprimands.  Finally, 
Principal McCollum noted there was a hostile tone in the classroom when respondent was 
working with students, and students expressed they did not feel respected.  Students also 
remarked that they felt they “g[o]t in trouble for small things.”  These issues made it difficult 
for students to connect with respondent and created a difficult classroom environment.   
 
  
coach through the Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) process to address respondent’s 
“Unsatisfactory” and “Needs Improvement” ratings.  Principal McCollum concluded that 
respondent had worked “very hard” to develop and implement her Parenting and Study Skills 
classes, and that math classes would be added to her schedule the following session at her 
request.  Principal McCollum also noted that respondent spent long hours preparing her 
classes and was performing satisfactorily in several of the other CSTP standards. 
 
The 2012-2013 School Year 
 

E.  Principal McCollum recommended that respondent work with a District 

 

 

17.  A.  For many years, David Zivich had been the sole math teacher at Maple.  At 
the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year, he was excited to have two new colleagues help 
him teach the math classes:  Melinda Darway (who was a fairly new teacher at that time) and 
respondent (who had recently agreed to take on math classes).  Mr. Zivich was the senior 
math teacher, but was never formally recognized as a Math Department Chair. 
 
  
information about their prospective students’ abilities and decided assignments.  Because 
respondent lacked experience in direct math teaching in a high school environment, Mr. 
Zivich gave respondent the “cushiest” schedule.  However, Mr. Zivich became upset when 
information he needed from respondent was not provided.  After he and Ms. Darway spent 
considerable time working on their own to segregate students and organize the upcoming 
math classes, Mr. Zivich became incensed when respondent balked at continuing to 
contribute “unless she was paid.” 

B.  As the new school year approached, the three math teachers reviewed 

 

5 

 

C.  Mr. Zivich and Ms. Darway decided to finish the preparatory work on their 
  
own.  Finally, after respondent complained to Ms. Darway about the math class schedule that 
had been devised, Mr. Zivich sent an e-mail about the situation to Principal McCollum.  In it, 
Mr. Zivich described how respondent placed Ms. Darway in an uncomfortable situation 
while complaining about the schedule (which Darway and Zivich had crafted) and intimating 
that the union should become involved.  Ms. Darway also advised Principal McCollum of 
respondent’s reaction to the math assignments.  Even after respondent vented her displeasure, 
Ms. Darway volunteered to take one of respondent’s Parenting classes to give her more time 
to prepare for the math classes. 
 

18.  A.  On October 29, 2012, and as a result of the e-mail from Mr. Zivich and 

 

B.  During the meeting, Principal McCollum informed respondent that, after 

comments made by Ms. Darway, Principal McCollum met with respondent to discuss 
respondent’s conduct.  The following day, October 30, 2012, Principal McCollum provided 
respondent with a written conference summary of the meeting. 
 
  
the master schedule was created one week prior, at least two other District teachers informed 
her that respondent was vehemently complaining about respondent’s course assignment for 
the following session.  Principal McCollum stated that “several staff members” had 
complained to her, and she testified that “many students” had similarly complained about 
respondent, but no corroborating evidence was presented of such, other than the complaints 
by Zivich and Darway.  Principal McCollum informed respondent that her negative behavior 
violated CSTP standard 6.7, which states the expectation that teachers will demonstrate 
professional responsibility, integrity and ethical conduct in the classroom and school 
environment; violated the CBUC grievance procedure; interrupted other teachers’ 
educational duties; and constituted creation of a hostile working environment.  Principal 
McCollum also reminded respondent of the meeting they had in February 2012 about 
respondent complaining to other teachers about her assignments.   
 
  
directed respondent to cease this conduct immediately and bring all future complaints to her 
directly so as not to disrupt the school environment. 
 
  
conference summary.  She told Principal McCollum that she had a right to have 
conversations with staff and express herself.  Principal McCollum told her she could do so on 
breaks or after school, but she was not to engage in such behavior when it interfered with 
staff performing their duties. 
 
  
Ms. Darway or otherwise acted inappropriately.  She testified that she did not know that Mr. 
Zivich was upset with her.  Because Principal McCollum did not identify who had 
complained, respondent testified that she was unable to fully respond to Principal McCollum. 
 
 

C.  Principal McCollum, verbally and in writing in the summary she issued, 

D.  Respondent disagreed with Principal McCollum and refused to sign the 

E.  In her testimony, respondent denied that she vehemently complained to 

 

 

 

 

6 

19.  A.  On March 7, 2013, respondent received a Formal Observation of 

 

 

C.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 2 (Creating and 

Professional Performance Report (or formal observation report), drafted by Principal 
McCollum, for a CAHSEE math class taught by respondent on March 6, 2013.  The 
CAHSEE math class was to prepare students for the math portion of the California High 
School Exit Examination, which they would need to pass in order to graduate.  A few days 
prior to conducting the formal observation, Principal McCollum met with respondent and 
explained her expectations.  In November and December 2012, Principal McCollum also had 
discussions with respondent regarding her CAHSEE math class, during which she offered 
thoughts on how respondent could meet the standards in which she had previously received 
lower ratings, as well as recommended resources respondent could use.  In her formal 
observation report, Principal McCollum rated respondent’s performance as follows. 
 
B.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 1 (Engaging 
  
and Supporting All Students in Learning).  Principal McCollum observed that respondent 
continued to begin the lesson objectives and instructions while students were still entering 
class; her attempt to use different learning techniques was ineffective as the techniques did 
not inform instruction or check for understanding; students were consistently shouting out 
answers with no wait time between the question and answer, nor any structure as to which 
student answered; and students were engaged in off-task behavior during the lesson.   
 
  
Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning).  Principal McCollum observed 
respondent continue to reprimand students in front of the class; and classroom management 
and progressive discipline rules and procedures were still not being followed.   
 
  
(Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning).  The training and 
information respondent received was not implemented effectively; she was unable to adapt 
resources, technology or instructional materials without major support; she was slow to 
develop courses and consistently requested additional time; and she was still regularly 
discussing her dissatisfaction with her assigned courses with District staff. 
 
   
(Planning Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for All Students).  Principal 
McCollum observed that respondent had been working with Maple staff to review student 
data and plan instruction, however, no impact was observed in the classroom; respondent had 
developed goals for the year, but they had no impact on the classroom; and respondent 
consistently stated that she needed more time, more training and more help.   
 
F1.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 6 (Developing 
  
as a Professional Educator) because she had not met her learning goals; her educational goals 
(additional training, observations and District Task Force meetings) still had no impact on 
respondent’s instruction or student learning; and respondent was continuing to bring 
complaints to District staff during school hours, disrupting the school environment and 
creating a hostile work environment.   

D.  Respondent received a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 3 

E.  Respondent received a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 4 

  

 

 

 

7 

 

F2.  Although not clear, it appears that this part of the formal observation 

  
report related to an e-mail complaint Principal McCollum received from Teresa Redden on 
November 16, 2012, about an interaction she had with respondent in a copy room.  Ms. 
Redden reported that respondent “was complaining about having to grade CAHSEE prep 
math tests and only have 3 days to prep for this course.”  Ms. Redden explained that she tried 
to redirect respondent and offer solutions, but she found the conversation with respondent 
was negative and uncomfortable.  Principal McCollum sent respondent an e-mail on 
November 26, 2012, reminding her of the prior directive that respondent should bring 
concerns or complaints to Principal McCollum and not disrupt the school environment.    
 
  
respondent’s improvement, including that she receive support through the District’s PAR 
program.  During their meeting, respondent disagreed with Principal McCollum’s criticisms, 
and she was not receptive to Principal McCollum’s suggestions.  Respondent testified that 
because Principal McCollum did not identify who had complained about her, she 
(respondent) did not know whether Ms. Redden actually had a problem with her.  She also 
testified that she did not receive help from her fellow math teachers.  She generally disagreed 
that she was performing poorly at this time and testified that she was following directions 
given to her by Principal McCollum. 

G.  Finally, Principal McCollum listed several recommendations for 

 

 
20.  A.  On April 19, 2013, respondent received a PDR, drafted by Principal 

 

B.  Relying primarily on her observations contained in the above-described 

McCollum.  The PDR covered respondent’s performance as a teacher for the 2012-2013 
school year, teaching classes in Parenting, Study Skills and CAHSEE math. 
 
  
October 30, 2012 conference summary and March 7, 2013 formal observation report, 
Principal McCollum gave respondent ratings of “Unsatisfactory” in standard 1 (Engaging 
and Supporting All Students in Learning); “Unsatisfactory” in standard 2 (Creating and 
Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning); “Needs Improvement” in 
standard 3 (Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning); “Needs 
Improvement” in standard 4 (Planning Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for 
All Students); “Needs Improvement” in standard 5 (Assessing Student Learning); and 
“Unsatisfactory” in standard 6 (Developing as a Professional Educator).  Principal 
McCollum listed several recommendations for respondent’s improvement, including that she 
participate in the District’s PAR program.  In conclusion, Principal McCollum noted that, “I 
believe [respondent] needs continuous sustained support to meet the requirements of the 
district and state on teacher effectiveness in the classroom.  It is my hope that with sustained 
supervision and review, she will make the necessary progress to ensure the appropriate 
classroom climate. . . .” 
 
C.  Respondent testified that, in her view, Principal McCollum’s PDR was 
  
unfair, focused too much on negatives, and ignored her positive performances.  She also 
testified that Principal McCollum overly focused on “small things” and micro-managed her 
teaching. 

  

 

8 

 

D.  Respondent submitted a written rebuttal to the PDR on or about April 29, 

 
2013.  She provided a lengthy discussion wherein she essentially denied all of the 
observations and deficiencies noted by Principal McCollum, and concluded that she believed 
the PDR contained items that were “false, or intentionally misleading.”  In addition, 
respondent submitted a complaint to the District against Principal McCollum, in which she 
alleged, “Principal was unfair and unprofessional in her evaluation methods in my PDR, 
including behaviors and accusations that violated my due process rights as a teacher.  She has 
created a ‘hostile work environment’ toward me.”  Because this was an internal “staff versus 
staff” complaint, the LFT did not become involved.  Respondent testified that her complaint 
was investigated by the Human Resources Department, but that no other action was taken. 
 
Respondent is Referred to the District’s PAR Program 
 

21.  Due to her consistent unsatisfactory performance ratings of respondent and 
noted ongoing areas of concern, Principal McCollum referred respondent to the District’s 
PAR program on or about April 25, 2013.  In the PAR referral document she drafted, 
Principal McCollum noted respondent’s need for continued support to meet the requirements 
of the State and District for teacher effectiveness in the classroom.  Specifically, Principal 
McCollum requested support for respondent in classroom management and progressive 
discipline; as well as delivery of direct instruction lessons using appropriate, research-based 
strategies, checking for understanding, and consistent classroom procedures.  Respondent 
was advised of the referral. 
 

22. 

Referrals of tenured certificated staff to the District’s PAR program are 

governed by the Trust Agreement between the District and LFT.  The Trust Agreement states 
that the purpose of the PAR program is to provide quality support and assistance to tenured 
teachers who have been referred for having unsatisfactory performance.  Decisions in the 
PAR program are made by a panel, which is comprised of four members designated by the 
LFT and three members designated by the District.  The PAR panel reviews all referrals and 
independently decides whether to accept the teachers in question; and if so, what plan of 
action is necessary for improvement.  The Trust Agreement also contains an “Adjudication” 
clause, providing a pathway for the resolution “if a dispute arises concerning this trust 
agreement. . . .” 
 

23. 

Respondent’s referral was reviewed by the PAR panel.  The panel decided that 

“as a result of [respondent’s] progress during the 2012-2013 school year and the 
corresponding Professional Development Report (PDR), the [PAR] panel directed that 
[respondent] participate in the Peer Assistance Review (PAR) Program.  The action plan will 
focus on the [CSTPs].”  Carol Arnerich, the LFT Executive Director, testified that the PAR 
panel must have access to a reasonable amount of documentation before it decides to accept 
a tenured teacher referred to PAR.  After being accepted into PAR, Heather Anderson was 
assigned as respondent’s PAR Consulting Teacher.  Ms. Anderson was tasked with providing 
respondent support and assistance to help her improve her performance. 
 

 

9 

24.  A.  By June 4, 2013, a PAR Action Plan was created and provided to 
respondent.  The Action Plan detailed the specific areas of concern and focus, actions to be 
taken by respondent, and support to be provided to her.  The Action Plan specified that the 
following areas of the CSTPs were unsatisfactory or in need of improvement: 
 
  
 

Standard One:  Engaging and Supporting All Students in Learning 

1.4  Uses a variety of instructional strategies, resources and 
technologies to meet students' diverse learning needs. 
 
1.6  Monitors student learning and adjusts instruction while 
teaching 

Standard Two:  Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student 

All elements. 

Standard Three:  Understanding/Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning 

3.1  Demonstrates knowledge of subject matter/ academic 
content standards, and State curriculum frameworks 
 
3.3  Organizes curriculum to facilitate all students' 
understanding of the subject matter. 
 
3.4  Utilizes instructional strategies that are appropriate to the 
subject matter. 

Standard Four:  Planning Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for All 

4.1  Uses knowledge of students' academic readiness, language 
proficiency, cultural background and individual development to 
plan instruction. 
 
4.2  Establishes and articulates goals for student learning. 
 
4.4  Plans instruction that incorporates appropriate strategies to 
meet the learning needs of all students. 

Standard Five:  Assessing Student Learning 

5.1  Applies knowledge of the purposes, characteristics, and 
uses of different types of assessments. 

10 

 
  
Learning 
 
  
 
  
 

 

 
  
Students  
 

 
  
 

 

5.2  Collects and analyzes data from a variety of sources to 
inform instruction. 
 
5.3  Reviews data, both individually and with colleagues, to 
monitor student learning. 
 
5.4  Uses assessment data to establish learning goals and to plan, 
differentiate and modify instruction. 

 
  
 

Standard Six:  Developing as a Professional Educator 

6.7  Demonstrates professional responsibility, integrity and 
ethical conduct. 

24. 

 
  
directives.  Respondent was directed to follow the recommendations noted below: 
 

B.  The Action Plan further provided for “Teacher Behaviors” with specific 

1.  Create and maintain a physical environment that engages all 
students.  Design and implement specific procedures and 
routines to effectively use instructional time. 
 
2.  Create plans for daily lessons that implement direct 
instruction techniques and a variety of instructional strategies. 
 
     a.  Lesson plans for the following week will be submitted by 
Thursday to the administrator and consulting teacher to allow 
for feedback and recommendations. 
 
3.  Establish effective protocols for assertive discipline utilizing 
the BEST manual for consistent implementation of positive and 
corrective reinforcements. 
 
4.  Use a variety of instructional strategies and resources to 
increase the assessed learning needs and rigor for all students.  
Will differentiate instruction based on students’ strengths, 
interests, and needs. 
 
5.  Organize and utilize instructional strategies and curriculum 
materials to support student achievement and ensure access to 
the CORE curriculum. 
 
6.  Provides opportunities for students to use available materials, 
resources, and technologies to extend understanding and critical 
thinking. 
 

 

11 

7.  Develop and articulate goals for student learning  
 
8.  Develop a system to routinely communicate accurate and 
timely information with stakeholders in a professional manner. 
 
9.  Collaborate with colleagues concerning instruction and 
student achievement.  Bring concerns and complaints directly to 
the administrator. 

24.      C.  The Action Plan specified the various forms of support that respondent 

 
  
would be provided, mainly focusing on the functions performed by Ms. Anderson and 
Principal McCollum.   
 
  
action plan serves as a condition of employment.” 
 

D.  Finally, the Action Plan provided that “[s]atisfactory completion of this 

 

25. 

In her complaint submitted to the District in May 2013, respondent stated that 

she had been referred to PAR simply because Principal McCollum did not like her and 
because respondent had exercised her union rights in the past.  Respondent offered no 
testimony concerning the propriety of the PAR panel accepting her referral to the program. 
 
The 2013-2014 School Year and Respondent’s Performance in PAR 
 

26.  On September 16, 2013, Principal McCollum observed respondent teach her 

CAHSEE math class and thereafter completed an Informal Observation of Professional 
Performance Report.  Principal McCollum rated respondent as “Unsatisfactory” and “Needs 
Improvement” in each category she observed.  She noted that respondent began instruction 
before the bell rang; students had side-conversations and were not paying attention; and 
respondent was unaware of her surroundings to the extent that one student was standing 
beside her and she did not seem to notice him.  The informal observation report included 
recommendations for respondent’s improvement.  Respondent submitted a written rebuttal. 
 

27.  A.  On September 5 and 11, 2013, Ms. Anderson visited respondent’s 
classroom to observe her.  She thereafter sent e-mails to respondent summarizing what she 
saw.  Ms. Anderson tried to include encouraging remarks and constructive criticism.  The 
two met on September 13th.  At respondent’s request, Ms. Anderson agreed to focus on 
standard 2 (Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning) because 
respondent seemed overwhelmed with the Action Plan.  Ms. Anderson testified that she had 
never before had to make such a limitation with other teachers she coached in PAR.  The two 
discussed an upcoming informal classroom observation that Ms. Anderson would conduct.       
 
  
Parenting class and completed an Informal Observation of Professional Performance Report.  
Ms. Anderson rated respondent as “Unsatisfactory” and “Needs Improvement” in many 
categories she observed; and gave respondent such ratings overall for standards 1-4.  Ms. 

B.  On September 17, 2013, Ms. Anderson observed respondent teach her 

 

 

12 

 

C.  It was clear from Ms. Anderson’s testimony that this was the time when 

Anderson noted that respondent asked questions of the class, but then answered them herself 
– meaning that there were minimal expectations placed on students.  Ms. Anderson observed 
that classroom procedures were not established; students were calling out answers; students 
were not following directions; not all students participated; cell phones were visibly used; 
students were listening to music while wearing headphones; students interrupted respondent 
with demands; students dismissed themselves at the end of class; and one student told 
respondent to “shut up” as he left.  Recommendations for improvement were noted. 
 
  
she first became concerned about respondent.  At this point in time, Ms. Anderson had 
noticed that her meetings with respondent were difficult because respondent was not focused, 
was defensive and she complained about not having various resources.  Ms. Anderson felt 
the complaints were not warranted.  For example, respondent complained about not having a 
textbook “to teach out of,” but Ms. Anderson’s view was that teachers rarely, if ever, have a 
textbook that will provide them with all of their curriculum and almost always they have to 
devise or create parts of their own curriculum.  Ms. Anderson felt that respondent’s 
complaints distracted her from focusing on improving her performance. 
 
  
she was “rebutting what I feel to be exaggerated and unfair unsatisfactories in some of the 
Standard 2 areas.”  Respondent concluded, “I feel that Ms. Anderson’s lack of experience 
with continuation schools is causing her to micro-manage everything I do!”  
 

D.  Respondent wrote a rebuttal to Ms. Anderson’s report, in which she stated 

 

28.  On October 15, 2013, Principal McCollum observed respondent teach her 

CAHSEE math class and completed an Informal Observation of Professional Performance 
Report.  Respondent received ratings of “Unsatisfactory” and “Needs Improvement” for 
standards 1 through 5, and a “Satisfactory” for standard 6 (Professional Development).  The 
informal observation report included several recommendations for respondent’s 
improvement.  Principal McCollum testified that at this point, respondent had been late 
turning in lesson plans.  Respondent had requested Principal McCollum to focus on just one 
or two standards at a time, but Principal McCollum was advised by the District that she could 
not ignore other standards that were part of the Action Plan.  Around this time, respondent 
had asked for materials to help her develop her CAHSEE curriculum.  Principal McCollum 
advised respondent where she could get them and facilitated transfer of a cabinet to store 
them in her classroom.  Principal McCollum also agreed to allow respondent to take time 
away from her classes so she could observe other Maple teachers perform in their 
classrooms. 
 

29.  A.  On December 2, 2013, Ms. Anderson observed the end of respondent’s 
second period class and the beginning of her third period class.  Ms. Anderson noted that 
respondent had not implemented her recommendations regarding classroom management and 
respondent reprimanded students from the front of the room at least three times.  Ms. 
Anderson had advised her previously to approach them and quietly remind them of her 
expectations.  Ms. Anderson documented this observation in an e-mail she sent to 
respondent, which included additional recommendations for improvement.   

 

13 

 

 

B.  Ms. Anderson testified that she was disheartened by what she saw that day.  

  
Respondent was teaching as she had when she started the PAR program.  The students were 
not engaged.  She felt as though respondent was not following her recommendations and 
spent her time deflecting responsibility for her poor performance. 
 
C.  Respondent replied to Ms. Anderson’s e-mail.  She asked Ms. Anderson to 
  
model BEST practices for her, as well as to observe Principal McCollum and other teachers 
perform.  Ms. Anderson testified that respondent’s e-mail did not make sense to her because 
she did not need to see other teachers model her suggestions in order for respondent to 
improve.  Nonetheless, in the ensuing weeks, Principal McCollum modeled one class for 
respondent, as did Ms. Anderson.  As discussed below, respondent was also allowed to watch 
other Maple teachers perform in their classrooms. 
 

30.  On December 10, 2013, Ms. Anderson accompanied respondent on four 
classroom observations in which they observed four teachers use different instructional 
strategies.  Ms. Anderson summarized these strategies and provided them to respondent in a 
detailed e-mail on December 13, 2013.  Some of respondent’s students were in the classes 
taught by the other teachers.  Ms. Anderson testified that those students behaved better than 
in respondent’s class.  Ms. Anderson was also surprised when respondent told her that the 
observations confirmed to her that she was teaching satisfactorily, because she felt she was 
doing everything that was being done by the four teachers observed.  Ms. Anderson did not 
agree with respondent.  Ms. Anderson grew more concerned about respondent. 
 

31.  On December 12, 2013, Principal McCollum conducted a demonstration 
lesson in respondent’s classroom, at her request.  Her primary intent was to show respondent 
how she should manage her classroom.  Principal McCollum’s demonstration was observed 
by Ms. Anderson.  On December 16, 2013, Ms. Anderson summarized the lesson for 
respondent in a detailed e-mail.  She pointed out various strategies respondent could use.  
Ms. Anderson testified that respondent did not need to see many of those strategies modeled 
for her; but in time she realized that respondent was not using them anyway.   
 

32.  On December 19, 2013, Principal McCollum and Ms. Anderson reviewed 

respondent’s PAR Action Plan with her and revised it as necessary.  A copy of the 
augmented Action Plan was provided to respondent.  The December revisions to the Action 
Plan noted that all of the directives were still “ongoing,” and that additional 
recommendations were added.  For example, respondent was directed to ensure daily 
instruction matched the lesson plans; create seating charts; greet students as they entered the 
classroom; use less than 25 percent of weekly instruction for copying notes; and 
communicate daily lesson objectives clearly.  Ms. Anderson testified that she did not believe 
that respondent was following her recommendations. 
 

33.  A.  Over the following weeks, Principal McCollum and Ms. Anderson 
conducted several informal observations of respondent teaching in her classroom.  At various 
points during these observations, Ms. Anderson noted students were off-task; lesson plans 
were not provided on time; more than one daily lesson objective was on the board; seating 

 

14 

 

charts were not created; respondent was not meeting students at the door; instruction 
provided was at odds with the lesson plan; no introduction was given to provide context; and 
students were not using established procedures to answer questions.   
 
  
B.  Ms. Anderson testified that during this period she was becoming frustrated 
because respondent was not implementing her suggestions; or when respondent did try them, 
she did not consistently use them.  Ms. Anderson’s frustration was demonstrated by her 
demeanor during her testimony, in which she appeared to become emotional when discussing 
these events.  Ms. Anderson felt that respondent was arguing with her over elementary 
suggestions, such as using seating charts, and that it seemed to her as though respondent felt 
she knew better how to teach.  For example, Ms. Anderson told respondent at least ten times 
to greet students at the door, a suggestion echoed by Principal McCollum.  However, 
respondent did not consistently do so.  Ms. Anderson was also frustrated that respondent 
consistently failed to timely turn in her lesson plans for review prior to her classes, a subject 
covered in several e-mails from Ms. Anderson to respondent. 
 

 

 

34.  A.  On January 24, 2014, respondent met with Principal McCollum to go over 
her expectations of respondent’s performance in an upcoming formal observation.  The two 
reviewed respondent’s PAR Action Plan, the CSTP, and the formal observation report 
template.  Respondent agreed to submit a lesson plan before the observation. 
 
B.  On January 27, 2014, Principal McCollum conducted a formal observation 
  
of respondent teaching her CAHSEE math class.  On January 29, 2014, respondent received 
the Formal Observation of Professional Performance Report drafted by Principal McCollum.   
 
C.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 1 (Engaging 
  
and Supporting All Students in Learning).  Principal McCollum observed several students 
engaging in side-conversations in off-task subjects throughout the lesson; proximity was not 
being used as a behavior management tool; students were waiting for answers to be given 
instead of solving problems themselves; students were without materials as the lesson began; 
respondent failed to follow-up on assertive discipline; and the directive given to establish 
effective protocols for assertive discipline using BEST practices for consistent 
implementation of positive and corrective reinforcements was not followed. 
 
  
and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning).  Principal McCollum 
observed that expected classroom procedures were not clear; students were still calling out 
answers; students became noisy and off-task; corrective reinforcements were not consistently 
implemented; seating charts were not submitted; students using cell phones were not 
corrected; and PAR Action Plan items 1 and 3 were not in place. 
   
E.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 3 
  
(Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning).  Principal McCollum 
observed the lesson plans were consistently late; lesson plans did not always match the 
objective; and lesson plans were not always followed during the class.   

D.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 2 (Creating 

 

 

 

15 

 

 

 

H.  Respondent received a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 6 

G.  Respondent received a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 5 

F.  Respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 4 (Planning 
  
Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for All Students) for many of the reasons 
stated above.   
 
  
(Assessing Student Learning) because Principal McCollum did not observe respondent using 
pre-testing and/or post-testing in the classroom or effective formative assessment to tie 
instruction to verified student needs.   
 
  
(Developing as a Professional Educator), as the Action Plan and directives were not wholly 
being implemented and respondent’s lesson plans were not turned in on time.   
 
  
 
  
complained that Principal McCollum had made “some untrue remarks” about her and that the 
process was unfair because Principal McCollum did not acknowledge her improvements or 
positive changes.  She also complained that she had not been given any publisher curriculum 
to teach her courses and concluded that “I believe this is now a union issue.”  Through the 
course of several pages of comments, respondent specifically denied most of the 
observations noted by Principal McCollum in her observation report and the poor ratings. 
 

I.  Principal McCollum listed several recommendations for improvement. 

J.  Respondent wrote a rebuttal to the formal observation report.  She 

 

 

35.  Over the following few weeks, Principal McCollum and Ms. Anderson made 

informal observations of respondent’s classroom.  Ms. Anderson provided written 
recommendations on how respondent could improve her teaching, suggested resources she 
could use, and reiterated prior requests for timely lesson plan submission.  Principal 
McCollum testified that during these informal observations, she saw respondent 
demonstrating the same problems as before, especially poor classroom management. 
 

36.  On February 25, 2014, Ms. Anderson observed respondent teach her CAHSEE 

math class and completed a Formal Observation of Professional Performance Report on 
March 3, 2014.  Respondent received “Unsatisfactory” and “Needs Improvement” ratings in 
four of the six standards that were observed, but “Satisfactory” ratings in standards 3 and 6.  
Ms. Anderson included recommendations for improvement and detailed recommendations 
for continued implementation of the PAR Action Plan.  Ms. Anderson testified that 
respondent had selected this class for the formal observation.  However, respondent later 
complained to Ms. Anderson that she still felt she was new to CAHSEE.  Ms. Anderson 
testified that was not a valid excuse, because she felt even a brand new teacher could meet 
the standards teaching this class.  She also testified that respondent continued to disregard 
many of her suggestions. 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

16 

 

 

C.  The PDR noted that the PAR Action Plan was not being followed or 

B.  For the reasons discussed above, among others, the PDR detailed that 

37.  A.  On February 27, 2014, respondent received a PDR, drafted by Principal 
McCollum and Ms. Anderson.  The PDR details their informal and formal observations of 
respondent from August 2013 to February 2014.   
 
  
respondent received an “Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 1 (Engaging and Supporting All 
Students in Learning); a “Needs improvement” rating in standard 2 (Creating and 
Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning); an “Unsatisfactory” rating in 
standard 3 (Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning); an 
“Unsatisfactory” rating in standard 4 (Planning Instruction and Designing Learning 
Experiences for All Students); a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 5 (Assessing 
Student Learning); and a “Needs Improvement” rating in standard 6 (Developing as a 
Professional Educator).   
 
  
implemented in a consistent way by respondent, as required items were often late or missing 
elements; lessons and instructional strategies were not embedded into daily instruction and 
classroom procedures or vital elements were missing; instruction was interrupted by 
classroom management issues on a regular basis; and progressive discipline was not being 
effectively utilized.  Accordingly, overall, respondent’s effectiveness of instruction had not 
improved significantly.  Several recommendations for improvement were included in the 
PDR. 
 
  
reviewed it and suggested revisions.  Both finalized the PDR document together and 
concurred on the ratings and conclusions expressed therein.  Ms. Anderson testified that 
respondent had not improved while she worked with her.  In some areas, respondent showed 
temporary improvement; but the following day she would revert back to old practices.  Ms. 
Anderson believed that students were not learning in respondent’s classroom and their time 
was being wasted.  Principal McCollum testified similarly.  Specifically, she noted that, by 
the time of the PDR, respondent had not shown sustained improvement.  While respondent 
put some suggestions into practice, she did not thereafter sustain them.  Principal McCollum 
concluded that respondent had not followed the PAR Action Plan. 
 
  
March 16, 2014.  She complained that the PAR process was unfair, in that Ms. Anderson met 
with and shared information with Principal McCollum and vice versa.  She was concerned 
that Principal McCollum was unfairly influencing Ms. Anderson’s observations and 
conclusions about her.  Respondent complained that she was accountable for too many 
standards and that nobody could have focused on so many.  She also complained that she had 
not received intensive support, and that Ms. Anderson and Principal McCollum only 
modeled one lesson for her each.  She explained in great detail why she disagreed with most 
of the ratings given to her.  In conclusion, she stated that she was following the PAR Action 
Plan, she was improving as a teacher and was proud of her performance at Maple. 
 

E.  Respondent disagreed with the PDR and submitted a rebuttal on or about 

D.  The PDR was initially drafted by Principal McCollum.  Ms. Anderson 

 

 

 

17 

Respondent is Formally Disciplined in Spring 2014 
 

38.  A.  On April 8, 2014, the District served respondent with a “Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance,” pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44932 and 44938 (Notice).  The Notice described the events discussed above, 
including respondent’s unsatisfactory performance documented in her March 2012 PDR, her 
negative interactions with colleagues, referral to PAR and documented poor performance 
during the PAR program thus far.  Respondent was advised that her conduct toward fellow 
staff members was unprofessional and thereby violated District Board Policies 4119.21 and 
4119.21 E, copies of which were attached to the Notice. 
 
  

B.  The Notice also provided the following directives to respondent: 

 
 

Conduct yourself in a professional manner at all times; 

(cid:120) 
 
(cid:120) 
You have been provided with a significant amount of 
comprehensive directives in the numerous reports, referenced 
above and attached hereto.  Immediately review and comply 
with all of the directives given to you by the District in those 
reports; 

Immediately review and comply with any future 

(cid:120) 
directives given to you by the District; 

 

   

Review and comply with the Education Code sections 

(cid:120) 
and Board Policies referenced above.     

 

 
C.  On April 30, 2014, respondent submitted a written rebuttal to the Notice.  
  
She reiterated her prior rebuttals and denials of the events described in the Notice.  She also 
contended that she was improperly placed into the PAR program because she was “targeted” 
by Principal McCollum.  She complained that the comments attributed to other teachers were 
untrustworthy hearsay and that many of the critiques of her teaching were “blatant lies,” 
untruths, or the product of her not being provided with adequate support or resources.   
 

39.  A.  On April 9, 2014, Principal McCollum received a written complaint from 
Mr. Zivich, who indicated that respondent had disrupted him, earlier that morning, as he was 
preparing for his classes, with complaints about a report she received from the District, 
presumably the aforementioned Notice.  Mr. Zivich wrote that respondent spoke to him in an 
aggressive and unprofessional tone and, when he told her that he did not wish to discuss the 
subject with her any longer, that respondent aggressively pursued him into another building 
and continued to “rant.”  Mr. Zivich also complained that respondent had “wrongly accused” 
him on many occasions of “divulging sensitive information.”  During the hearing, Mr. Zivich 
testified that students were nearby when respondent confronted him.  He also testified that 
after abruptly telling her to stop and then leaving for the office, respondent put her hand on 

 

18 

 

 

B.  That same day, Principal McCollum spoke with respondent about this 

his back or shoulder and followed him into the office.  Mr. Zivich denied divulging any 
confidential or sensitive information about respondent and testified that he was extremely 
bothered by this incident, which was clear from his complaint to Principal McCollum, as 
well as his demeanor while testifying about it. 
 
  
incident.  Respondent admitted that she showed Mr. Zivich “the letter she received from the 
District about unprofessional conduct.”  But she told Principal McCollum she only 
approached Mr. Zivich about the document because he was the Maple site representative for 
the LFT; she denied continuing to discuss it with him after he told her to stop. 
 
  
C.  During the hearing, respondent testified similarly to the account she gave 
to Principal McCollum.  Her testimony that she only approached Mr. Zivich in his capacity 
as the site union representative was disingenuous.  It is clear that she believed Mr. Zivich had 
disclosed something personal or confidential about her to Principal McCollum and/or the 
District and she wanted to confront him about that.  There is no indication that she attempted 
to enlist him to support her in challenging the Notice or sought his guidance as a site 
representative.  Respondent also denied accusing Mr. Zivich of doing anything improper, but 
her testimony was not credible.  It is clear from Mr. Zivich’s written complaint, as well as his 
testimony during the hearing, that that was precisely what respondent was doing.  
Respondent admitted that she asked Mr. Zivich about how information that only he knew got 
into the Notice.  There would have been no purpose for this conversation but for respondent 
to confront Mr. Zivich about the information in that part of the Notice. 
 
D.  In her testimony, respondent denied following Mr. Zivich into the office or 
  
touching him.  She testified that she also had business in the office, and that she “held back” 
for a minute before also entering the office.  No other witness to this incident was presented.  
However, Mr. Zivich was interviewed about the incident by LFT Executive Director Carol 
Arnerich in August 2014, during which time Mr. Zivich denied being pushed or physically 
touched by respondent.  Under these circumstances, it was not established that respondent 
continued to aggressively pursue Mr. Zivich after he told her to stop talking to him or that 
she became physical with him after he did so. 
 

 

40.  A.  On April 22, 2014, Principal McCollum received a copy of a complaint 

about respondent from Maple Counselor Laura Newbre to LFT President Martha Bauer.  Ms. 
Newbre complained that respondent had confronted her in an unprofessional, aggressive 
manner and accused her of “stacking” her classes with difficult students.  Respondent 
threatened to raise her complaint with the union, which presumably precipitated Ms. Newbre 
to contact Ms. Bauer.  Ms. Newbre stated that respondent’s actions made her feel stressed 
and uncomfortable, so much so that she experienced back spasms.  Ms. Bauer advised Ms. 
Newbre that she was not sure she could help, but she referred Ms. Newbre to the District’s 
Human Resource Department and advised her to further document any negative interactions 
with respondent.  It is clear from Ms. Bauer’s e-mail response that she was sympathetic to 
Ms. Newbre and did not believe she had done anything wrong to respondent.  Moreover, 

 

19 

 

during the hearing Ms. Bauer testified that she had received complaints from other teachers 
about respondent’s similar behavior, which she believed were credible.  
 
B.  Ms. Newbre testified during the hearing and reiterated the substance of her 
  
written complaint to the LFT.  Ms. Newbre testified that respondent accused her of stacking 
her classes with problem students in order to make her life “miserable.”  Ms. Newbre 
credibly denied that assertion, testifying that she had a hard enough job finding appropriate 
classes for the diverse student body at Maple without adding an overlay of making things 
hard on respondent.  Moreover, respondent presented no credible evidence explaining why 
Ms. Newbre would behave in such a way.  To the contrary, Ms. Newbre credibly explained 
how class schedules were developed and certain students were assigned to respondent. 
 
  
complaint was true, but that she behaved in that manner because she was upset over the 
events as they were unfolding.  However, respondent questioned whether Ms. Newbre 
suffered back spasms. 
   

C.  During the hearing, respondent testified that most of Ms. Newbre’s 

 

 

 
 

C.  On April 24, 2014, Maple teacher Doug English submitted a written 

41.  A.  In April 2014, other staff members complained to Principal McCollum 
about respondent bringing up her personnel issues to them under unwelcomed circumstances.   
  
B.  One such staff member was Brian Murphy, Maple’s Safe School Liaison.  
  
Mr. Murphy submitted a written complaint to Principal McCollum on April 25, 2014, about 
an incident that happened a few days before when respondent approached him and began an 
unsolicited “tirade” about certain students assigned to her class by Ms. Newbre.  During the 
hearing, Mr. Murphy credibly testified that this “tirade” made him feel uncomfortable and 
that he did not think it was fair or appropriate for respondent to involve him in such an issue.  
During the hearing, respondent conceded that she was frustrated at that time; she probably 
told Mr. Murphy what he recounted; and that she was just “griping” but not “ranting.” 
 
  
complaint to Principal McCollum in which he advised her that respondent approached him in 
the copy room and remarked that her classes were “full of discipline problem” students, and 
that she “insinuated” how that happened.  Mr. English did not testify, but respondent did not 
necessarily deny the substance of his complaint.  Instead, respondent testified that while the 
two were in the copy room she simply expressed her opinion to him on how difficult students 
(who she called “toxic twins”) were assigned to her class.  Respondent testified that she did 
not seek out Mr. English and that she did not interrupt his teaching. 
 
  
the complaints she received from respondent’s co-workers.  She advised respondent that such 
comments made her co-workers uncomfortable, interfered with their educational duties and 
were in direct violation of the directives that had been given to her previously.  Respondent 
told Principal McCollum that she had the right to express her displeasure about events at 
school with co-workers. 

D.  On April 29, 2014, Principal McCollum met with respondent concerning 

 

 

20 

42. 

It was not established by a preponderance of the evidence, as alleged in the 
Charges, that students shared complaints about respondent on a regular basis, or that other 
teachers had to calm students down after their interactions with respondent.  None of 
respondent’s former students were called to testify, nor were any statements or other 
documents from any former student offered.  None of the teachers who were called as 
witnesses testified about any such events.  While Principal McCollum vaguely alluded to 
such problems, she did not offer any details in her testimony. 
 

43.  A.  On or about May 6, 2014, respondent received a written reprimand (May 

Reprimand) from Hugo A. Pedroza, Ph.D., the District’s Director of Human Resources, 
regarding the various complaints made about her to Principal McCollum by her co-workers.  
The May Reprimand also mentioned the student complaints discussed immediately above 
(which were unsubstantiated).  Respondent was reminded that she previously had been 
directed by Principal McCollum and the District to refrain from bringing her concerns and 
complaints to staff other than her principal in October 2012, November 2012, in her June 
2013 PDR and in the April 2014 Notice.  Respondent was advised that her conduct violated 
CSTP standard 6.7, in that her complaining to other staff disrupted the school environment 
and created a hostile work place.  Respondent was advised that her conduct similarly violated 
portions of her PAR Action Plan pertaining to standard 6.  Respondent was also advised that 
her conduct violated Board Policies 4119.21 and 4119.21 E for the same reasons.  
Respondent was given a number of directives, including that she “[t]reat all District 
employees, or any individual with whom you interact, with proper respect, courtesy, and 
professionalism.” 
 
  
Reprimand.  She contended that most of the reprimand was “full of illegalities and untrue 
accusations” that were “meant to be ‘defamatory’ to me.”  She denied having any 
inappropriate interactions with co-workers, and she vehemently denied that any of her 
students shared complaints about her to others.  Respondent contended that Principal 
McCollum prompted the other co-workers to complain about her and that she (respondent) 
was one of the “LEAST disruptive people here of the school environment.”  Respondent 
concluded that she had the right to express her opinions on such matters to her colleagues. 
 
The 2014-2015 School Year 
 

B.  On May 19, 2014, respondent submitted a written rebuttal to the May 

 

44. 

Before the beginning of the 2014-2015 school year, respondent met with Ms. 

Arnerich, Ms. Bauer, and Mike Terman, a field representative of the California Federation of 
Teachers.  Mr. Terman had attended prior meetings with respondent and LFT staff.  Ms. 
Arnerich advised respondent that she would start the school year under the 90 day period of 
improvement specified in the Notice and subject to the PAR Action Plan.  Ms. Arnerich 
advised respondent that she was subject to further discipline for violating the Notice and she 
encouraged respondent to comply with the PAR Action Plan.  Respondent told Ms. Arnerich 
that she was out of line for making those suggestions.  Mr. Terman told respondent that he 
did not want to see her situation turn into a termination.  Respondent told the group, “It’s 
okay if I am dismissed from employment.  I will just take my case to court.” 

 

21 

45.  A.  Between August 15, 2014, and August 20, 2014, Principal McCollum 

 

 

B.  In each instance, the involved staff members complained that they felt 

C.  On September 2, 2014, Principal McCollum met with respondent to go 

received complaints from several Maple staff members that respondent disrupted their work 
to complain about perceived work issues in a confrontational and accusatory manner.  Those 
complaints were submitted by certificated employees Kristin Anderson, Melinda Darway, 
Doug English, David Zivich, and non-certificated staff April Martin and Brian Murphy. 
 
  
uncomfortable by respondent’s actions and found it difficult to work under the 
circumstances.  In fact, Mr. Zivich advised Principal McCollum that he would no longer 
speak to respondent unless a third party was present to witness the interaction.  Ms. Darway 
had also been gravely offended by some untrue comments respondent made about her 
relationship with Mr. Zivich.  Ms. Newbre similarly did not want to be alone with respondent 
as a result of her conduct. 
 
  
over the complaints she received from the Maple staff members.  Respondent was assisted by 
LFT President Bauer and LFT Executive Director Arnerich.  Because Principal McCollum 
did not identify the six complaining staff members, but only summarized the substance of 
their complaints, respondent did not know exactly how to respond, though she had an idea of 
the identities of some of the complaining staff members.  Respondent did not necessarily 
deny making the comments.  She maintained that she had the right to express herself on 
campus and commented that some of those involved were “tattlers.”  She also accused some 
of the teachers of having secret meetings without inviting her to join. 
 
  
(September Reprimand) to respondent regarding these incidents.  Respondent was once again 
directed to bring her complaints about work-related issues to the principal and to not disrupt 
the school environment “with your issues.” 
 
  
E.  On or about September 29, 2014, respondent submitted a written rebuttal.  
She contended that she was being prohibited from expressing herself in the workplace, and 
denied that she disrupted other teachers or negatively impacted the school environment.  She 
accused other teachers of engaging in similar conduct.  For the most part, she argued that she 
simply made “comments” but not “complaints.”  Since she had not been provided with the 
identities of those involved, she commented on interactions with other staff members who 
were not the subject of complaints made to Principal McCollum. 
 
  
the complaints made against her by the others.  She reiterated many of the points she made in 
her rebuttal to the May Reprimand.  She admitted that she was upset over the events of the 
prior spring, but she tended to down-play her conduct.  She testified that she did not 
understand why she could not express herself to her colleagues; in her mind, she was not 
complaining, she was just communicating. 

D.  On September 10, 2014, Principal McCollum issued a written Reprimand 

F.  During the hearing, respondent did not necessarily deny the substance of 

 

 

 

 

22 

46.  A.  On September 17, 2014, Principal McCollum observed respondent teach 

 

her CAHSEE math class and completed an Informal Observation of Professional 
Performance Report. 
 
B.  Principal McCollum rated respondent as either “Unsatisfactory” or “Needs 
  
Improvement” in all six of the CSTP categories.  During Principal McCollum’s observation, 
she saw students engaging in side conversations during the lesson; and students appeared to 
be waiting for answers to be given to them instead of solving problems for themselves.   
 
  
Principal McCollum met with respondent to review the report on September 26, 2014. 
 

C.  Several recommendations for improvement were included in the report. 

 

47.  A.  On October 13, 2014, Principal McCollum received an e-mail from Maple 

 

 

B.  On October 14, 2014, Principal McCollum sent an e-mail to the District’s 

teacher Matthew Makowetski.  He described “an uncomfortable interaction I had with” 
respondent, in which he asked her if he could take photographs of her homeroom and 
students during the day.  Respondent replied, very vociferously, “‘Why?  I’m being fired.  
Why are you going to do it now?  I’m being fired.  Why are you doing it now after 5 years?’”  
Mr. Makowetski wrote that respondent repeated that phrase three or four times. 
 
  
new Director of Human Resources, Barry Schimmel, advising him of the complaint she 
received from Mr. Makowetski, and adding that during a staff meeting the previous day 
respondent “brought up concerns about the changes in her homeroom last year while she was 
out on administrative leave.”  (Respondent had been placed on administrative leave the prior 
spring related to either the Notice or May Reprimand.)  Principal McCollum expressed 
concern that respondent’s behavior was negatively impacting students and staff at Maple and 
she asked for direction from the District. 
 
  
Principal McCollum’s October 14, 2014 e-mail to Mr. Schimmel, respondent was placed on 
paid administrative leave by the District.  She never returned to the classroom.  In January 
2015, she received the Charges and Dismissal Notice referenced in Factual Findings 3-5 
above and this matter commenced.  She has remained on paid leave while this matter has 
been pending.2 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
                                                
2 The events described in Factual Findings 44 and 47 were not alleged in the Charges 
  
and will not be considered for purposes of cause for discipline, but they may be considered 
when evaluating the Morrison factors and ultimate disposition of this case as discussed in the 
Legal Conclusions below. 

C.  On a date in October 2014 not specifically established, but not long after 

 

23 

Applicable Board Policies 
 

48. 

Board Policy (BP) 4119.21 is the District’s statement of Professional 

Standards and it specifies the Board’s expectations for how employees are to behave.  The 
preamble of this policy states, “The Governing Board expects district employees to maintain 
the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, follow district policies and 
regulations, abide by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment when interacting 
with students and other members of the school community.  Employee conduct should 
enhance the integrity of the district, advance the goals of the district’s educational programs 
and contribute to a positive school climate. . . .” 
 

49. 

BP 4119.21 E is the District’s Code of Ethics of the Education Profession.  It 
includes a preamble in which it is stated that an educator “recognizes the magnitude of the 
responsibility inherent in the teaching process.  The desire for the respect and confidence of 
one’s colleagues, of students, of parents, and of the members of the community provides the 
incentive to attain and maintain the highest possible degree of ethical conduct.”  
 
Respondent’s Evidence 
 

50.  A.  No evidence was presented indicating that respondent had been subject to 

 

 

B.  Respondent testified that prior to teaching at Maple, she had received 

discipline at the District prior to the events involved in this case.   
 
  
mainly satisfactory evaluations from her other supervisors.  However, respondent presented 
no corroborating evidence, such as evaluations, prior to her time at Maple.   
 
  
under less than favorable circumstances.  For example, in notes she contemporaneously kept, 
respondent referred to being the victim of “secret meetings” and harassment by other 
teachers at Lompoc Valley Middle School.  (Ex. 119, p. 7.)  In her rebuttal to the Reprimand 
issued in May 2014, respondent accused Principal McCollum of using school personnel to 
make negative complaints about her, which respondent claimed had been done to her and 
others “at another campus.”  (Ex. 124, p. 4.)   
 

C.  The record indicates that respondent had transferred to the charter school 

51. 

Respondent called and questioned the following witnesses: 

 

A.  Daniel Jacobson was a fellow teacher with respondent at Maple.  Mr. 

 
  
Jacobson testified that respondent was cooperative and professional with him and that he did 
not witness her acting unprofessionally with any other teacher “first hand.”  However, Mr. 
Jacobson also testified that it should not take a few years to master student behavior at a 
continuation school like Maple, as respondent contended.  To the contrary, he testified that 
substitutes can do a “fabulous job” and that it took him about one year to master the 
environment.  He also did not remember teacher meetings being cancelled in spring 2014, as 
respondent contends, and that, in any event, such meetings were routinely cancelled for lack 

 

24 

 

 

 

D.  Vicki Murray was the PAR Consulting Teacher who replaced Ms. 

C.  Magdalena Flores was a bilingual instructional assistant, who helped 

B.  Petra Kohler is an attendance clerk at Maple.  She testified that respondent 

of agenda material.  Mr. Jacobson also denied being solicited by Principal McCollum for 
negative remarks or complaints made by respondent. 
 
  
was not rude to her or her colleagues.  Ms. Kohler heard other teachers make negative 
remarks about respondent, but she never heard respondent complain about her colleagues.  
Nor did Ms. Kohler hear Principal McCollum make any negative remark about respondent. 
 
  
various teachers at Maple, including respondent.  She testified that some Maple students had 
difficult behaviors, and that she had seen fights break out in class; but none ever in 
respondent’s classroom.  She also testified that some students developed a bond with 
respondent in her Parenting class.  But she never heard Principal McCollum say anything 
negative about respondent.  Principal McCollum simply asked Ms. Flores to tell her if she 
heard any teachers make negative comments about others because she wanted to maintain a 
good environment at Maple.  Ms. Flores had a hard time answering questions about whether 
respondent complained about other teachers or acted unprofessionally.  However, after long 
pauses following such questions, Ms. Flores ultimately conceded that on a regular basis 
respondent made negative comments about other teachers at Maple.   
 
  
Anderson at the beginning of the 2014-2015 school year.  Respondent indicated in her last 
rebuttals and in her testimony that Ms. Murray was a better PAR coach than Ms. Anderson 
and generally had a more favorable view of respondent’s performance.  However, it was 
clear from Ms. Murray’s testimony that she did not have a favorable opinion of respondent’s 
performance in the few months she worked with her before respondent was placed on 
administrative leave in October 2014.  Ms. Murray testified that she tried to support and 
encourage respondent and that sometimes respondent did well when she applied Ms. 
Murray’s recommendations.  However, Ms. Murray found that respondent was not consistent 
in doing so and overall her performance was not satisfactory.  She often observed students 
not engaged with respondent’s lessons and saw many of the same classroom management 
problems earlier seen by Ms. Anderson and Principal McCollum.  Respondent also failed to 
timely provide lesson plans.  Ms.  Murray recommended that respondent remain in the PAR 
program to remedy the problems she saw in the two months she worked with respondent. 
 
  
Executive Director Carol Arnerich did not agree with respondent’s complaints that the PAR 
process had been improperly or unfairly applied to her.  She did not believe Principal 
McCollum unfairly evaluated respondent.  She testified that respondent was not receptive to 
suggestions on how to improve her performance.  The area representative, Mr. Terman, 
simply testified that Principal McCollum should have taken a secondary role in the PAR 
process to Ms. Anderson, which happened as a result of a meeting convened not long after 
the PAR process began.  He denied ever telling respondent that the District should have 
provided a rubric for her to use in measuring or achieving improvement in the CSTP 
standards identified in her Action Plan. 

E.  The union staff members who testified did not support respondent.  LFT 

 

 

25 

 

F.  In sum, respondent’s witnesses did not corroborate her positions taken in 

  
this case.  None of those witnesses testified that respondent was a good teacher or 
satisfactorily performed her duties at Maple, including Ms. Murray.  While Mr. Jacobson and 
Ms. Kohler denied seeing respondent act rudely or unprofessionally with other Maple staff 
members, that testimony gives one pause in light of the number of documented instances 
where respondent had acted in such a way as to trigger complaints by other teachers.  In any 
event, it is not the position of the District that respondent acted unprofessionally to every 
teacher at Maple, nor would one expect the evidence to establish the same.  On the other 
hand, respondent’s witnesses did corroborate key parts of the District’s case.  For example, 
Ms. Murray was clear that respondent’s teaching performance remained unsatisfactory in 
September and October 2014; all the witnesses denied being solicited by Principal 
McCollum to complain about respondent; Ms. Flores conceded that respondent regularly 
complained about other teachers; and respondent’s union does not support her. 
 

52. 

Respondent contends that she was improperly and unfairly targeted by 

 

A.  No motive was established for Principal McCollum to behave in such a 

Principal McCollum.  She also contends that Principal McCollum solicited other teachers to 
make complaints about her.  Respondent’s contentions are not credible for the following 
reasons: 
 
  
way.  In her rebuttals, complaints and testimony, respondent theorized several motivations, 
none of which were credible or supported by the evidence.3  For example, respondent 
testified that Principal McCollum wanted to “push out” of Maple the former charter school 
teachers.  In some of her rebuttals, respondent next contended that Principal McCollum 
wanted to “get rid of” older teachers like her who earned more salary than newer teachers.  
Respondent later argued in rebuttals that Principal McCollum was upset that respondent had 
exercised her rights as a union member.  Finally, respondent argued in her closing brief that 
Principal McCollum wanted to remove respondent to make way for science teachers at 
Maple.  The fact that respondent ascribed so many different motivations to Principal 
McCollum undercut her credibility on this issue. 
 
 
/// 
                                                
  
of Sciences v. County of Fresno (1987) 192 Cal.App.3d 1436, 1442.)  The contention that 
conduct amounted to arbitrary unconstitutional discrimination in the application of school 
district rules and regulations amounts to new matter generally viewed as an affirmative 
defense.  (Feist v. Rowe (1970) 3 Cal.App.3d 404, 412.)  The same is true for claims of race, 
gender and age discrimination, or freedom of speech and association.  (Takahashi v. Board of 
Educ. (1988) 202 Cal.App.3d 1464, 1476-1477.)  In this case, respondent made no mention 
in her request for a hearing or prehearing documents that she was claiming the acts of 
Principal McCollum or the District were motivated by respondent’s gender, age or because 
she had exercised her rights as a union member.  She thereby waived the right to present 
them as a defense to her dismissal during the hearing.  

3 A party who fails to plead affirmative defenses waives them.  (California Academy 

 

26 

 

 

B.  In her interactions with respondent, Principal McCollum appeared 

C.  LFT President Martha Bauer received complaints about respondent from 

  
measured and patient.  None of the staff who testified had anything negative to say about 
Principal McCollum, who also seemed to have the esteem of the LFT officers who testified.  
Moreover, each staff member who testified, whether called by the District or respondent, 
denied being solicited by Principal McCollum to make complaints about respondent or 
having heard Principal McCollum make negative comments about respondent.  Since 
Principal McCollum retired from the District well before the hearing, there would have been 
no reason for any of those staff members to “hold their tongue” about her.  To the contrary, 
the Maple teachers and staff who complained to Principal McCollum about respondent did so 
on their own accord, after being subjected to complaints and “rants” that left them feeling 
uncomfortable in respondent’s presence. 
 
  
other teachers, who indicated respondent had interrupted their District duties.  Ms. Bauer 
believed those complaints were credible.  That fact corroborates Principal McCollum’s 
testimony about receiving several complaints from others about respondent, which in turn 
was corroborated by the persuasive testimony of the involved staff members who had 
complained to her.  In addition, LFT Executive Director Arnerich testified that Principal 
McCollum was not unfair to respondent in her evaluations or during the PAR process.  Mr. 
Terman offered no complaints or critiques about Principal McCollum, other than his desire 
that she take a secondary role during the PAR process (which she did).  If Principal 
McCollum had acted unfairly or improperly toward respondent, it is expected that members 
of respondent’s bargaining unit would indicate so when directly questioned.  They did not.  
 
  
complaints about respondent from Maple staff members.  Moreover, Principal McCollum’s 
observations and evaluations of respondent’s teaching performance were corroborated by the 
observations and evaluations made by Ms. Anderson and Ms. Murray.  That corroboration 
indicates that Principal McCollum’s evaluations of respondent’s performance were earnest 
and not motivated by a personal agenda. 
 

D.  Overall, it was established that Principal McCollum received bona fide 

 

53. 

Respondent also contends that she was improperly referred to, accepted by, 

and evaluated through, the PAR process.  However, LFT President Bauer and Executive 
Director Arnerich disagreed.  Both testified that respondent should have been referred to 
PAR, that she was properly accepted into the program and that the PAR process was fairly 
applied to her.  Ms. Bauer and Ms. Arnerich personally assisted respondent during various 
meetings with Principal McCollum and District staff before and during the PAR process.  As 
leaders of the LFT during the time in question, Ms. Bauer and Ms. Arnerich were responsible 
for ensuring the fairness of PAR and respondent’s treatment during the PAR process.  Under 
these circumstances, the fact that Ms. Bauer and Ms. Arnerich do not support respondent on 
this point is significant.  Finally, respondent never utilized the grievance resolution provision 
of the Trust Agreement governing the PAR process. 
 

54. 

Respondent contends that she was not given appropriate support or resources 
for her assignments at Maple.  Respondent’s argument is unpersuasive for several reasons. 

 

27 

 

 

 

B.  Respondent was provided access to Instructional Coach Carolina Allen, her 

A.  All the certificated staff who testified indicated that an assignment at a 
  
continuation high school is not in itself difficult, other than being able to deal with some 
behavior challenges that are not insurmountable.  Nobody testified that respondent needed 
the support and resources she complains that she was not provided. 
 
  
two PAR Consultants Ms. Anderson and Ms. Murray, and was allowed to observe other 
Maple teachers in action.  In addition, Ms. Anderson and Principal McCollum each modeled 
a lesson for respondent. 
 
  
CAHSEE materials so copious she needed a file cabinet moved into her classroom; SOAR 
Study Skills materials; an algebra webinar; WEST ED classroom management tools; access 
to the Santa Barbara County Education Office’s professional development catalogue; the 
Battling Boredom book (strategies to engage students); access to the Teacher Resource 
Center; and the Harry Wong lecture on discipline and procedures.  Respondent generally 
testified that these items were not useful; however, it was not established that she gave a 
good faith attempt to use them or even that she consulted them. 
 
  
complaints respondent made about not being provided appropriate support or resources. 
 

D.  Ms. Anderson and Ms. Murray did not agree with the comments and 

C.  Respondent was provided with various types of resources, including 

 

55.  During her time at Maple, and throughout the hearing, respondent has 

 

maintained that she had an unfettered right to express herself and her opinions as to her 
assignments and personnel issues at Maple to other staff members.  She argues that she 
cannot be subject to dismissal for doing something she has the right to do.  However, 
respondent’s argument is unpersuasive for a number of reasons: 
 
A1.  Respondent has cited no legal authority supporting her position.  
  
However, it has been held that a school teacher may be disciplined for sending to his 
supervising principal, in response to an evaluation of his performance, a letter that included a 
series of personal attacks upon the supervisor, published to persons having no direct interest in 
them, which were made by the teacher solely to vent his anger against his supervisor and not for 
any purpose relevant to the issues under discussion.  (Shimoyama v. Board of Education (1981) 
120 Cal.App.3d 517, 526-527.)   
 
  
A2.  A teacher at school does not have an unfettered constitutional right to do or 
say whatever she would like.  One significant consideration is whether the teacher’s criticism is 
“at a proper time and in an appropriate place and manner.”  (Adcock v. Board of Education 
(1973) 10 Cal.3d 60, 69.)  Significant state interests which must be considered are:  maintaining 
proper employer-employee relations; whether the person involved is in a direct working 
relationship with the person affected by the publications; the effect on efficiency and harmony; 
the need for loyalty and confidentiality; and the effect on discipline.  (Id.) 
 
   

 

 

28 

 

 

A3.  In the specific instance when the object of a teacher’s attacks is his 

A4.  Respondent is subject to even less protection, in that her complaints 

  
immediate superior, the threat to harmony and discipline is inevitable.  “If attacks upon a 
superior such as here were given constitutional protection, it would require a hardy administrator 
indeed to maintain a working relationship and to risk criticizing a subordinate’s performance, 
knowing that the subordinate was free with impunity to retaliate by broadcasting accusations 
implying that the administrator was a conspirator, a liar and a hypocrite.”  Such expressions do 
not enjoy constitutional protection from discipline.  (Shimoyama v. Board of Education, supra, 
120 Cal.App.3d at pp. 526-527.)     
 
  
sometimes involved her colleagues, and were made either directly to those colleagues or to other 
teachers.  Respondent’s venting of her anger resulted in complaints from several teachers and 
had the tendency to disrupt and depreciate the environment at Maple, so much so that some of 
those involved avoided respondent or flatly refused to be alone with her.  Under these 
circumstances, the overriding interests of the District maintaining proper employer-employee 
relations, the effect on the efficiency and harmony at Maple, and the effect on discipline, all 
point to respondent having no legal protection for behaving as she did. 
 
B.  BP 4119.21 and BP 4119.21 E each require teachers to act professionally 
  
and with integrity when interacting with District colleagues.  To the extent that respondent’s 
conduct violated those policies, she could be subject to discipline. 
 
  
C.  Respondent constantly told those she complained to, and in her rebuttals to 
the District, that the directives given to her to not make such complaints to colleagues during 
work-time “was a union issue.”  However, the union failed to take any action on her behalf, 
indicating that the union did not agree with respondent’s position.  One would expect that if 
respondent had received an illegal or inappropriate directive in this regard, the bargaining 
unit representing her would act on her behalf. 
 

 

 

56. 

Respondent’s performance during the hearing highlighted some of the 

problems noted above.  For example, respondent had to be reminded repeatedly of events 
occurring or advisements given to her just hours or minutes before.  During the hearing, she 
appeared unfocused, disorganized and unprepared.  She often asked for help from opposing 
counsel in organizing or understanding her own exhibits.  She was unable to follow simple 
directions, which were given to her frequently, including to not interrupt witnesses who were 
testifying, comment on their testimony or make visceral, physical reactions to the testimony.  
In making this finding, the ALJ recognizes that the proceeding had to be stressful for 
respondent, who is not an attorney, but with that thought in mind, the ALJ nonetheless 
concludes that respondent likely performed in a similar manner at school. 
 

57. 

Respondent’s defense is primarily supported by her testimony that her 

teaching was satisfactory during the time in question, and that her interactions with her 
colleagues were professional.  Respondent’s credibility therefore is an issue.  However, her 
credibility was under-cut by the following events which indicate that her perception of 
events, both in real-time and in retrospect, is and was suspect. 

 

29 

 

 

B.  Respondent insisted that Principal McCollum set up a “secret listening 

A.  Maple faculty often held CARE team meetings, in which student behavior 

  
and progress was discussed.  Respondent insisted that several CARE team meetings were 
intentionally cancelled but then held at secret locations so that she would be prevented from 
attending them.  No evidence supported her theory, other than her uncorroborated testimony 
that an unidentified janitor once told her he saw other teachers meeting without her.  On the 
other hand, the teachers who testified confirmed that CARE team meetings were routinely 
cancelled for lack of agenda material or lack of interest.  Principal McCollum was not 
involved in organizing or running those meetings, and no motive is apparent for other staff 
members to act as respondent contends.  Moreover, though respondent grumbled about such 
meetings being cancelled, she undertook no effort to provide issues that could be added to 
the agenda to insure that the meetings went forward or took any other action to organize and 
convene such meetings on her own. 
 
  
post” in an adjoining, vacant classroom.  Respondent has consistently maintained that, from 
this location, Principal McCollum and/or others secretly listened to what respondent was 
doing in her classroom.  In fact, Principal McCollum testified that respondent once told her 
she believed that the Superintendent and unspecified Board members were also listening to 
her from this location.  Every witness questioned about it denied the existence of such an 
installation.  Respondent provided no direct evidence supporting her theory, other than she 
once saw chairs arranged in a semi-circle in the adjoining classroom.  That happened after 
Principal McCollum advised respondent how she could get a key to open the adjoining 
classroom.  It is not clear why Principal McCollum would facilitate respondent getting a key 
in the midst of such a conspiracy and not beforehand remove or rearrange the chairs.  In any 
event, Maple’s Safe School Liaison, Brian Murphy, testified that on occasion the adjoining 
classroom was used for mediations or for sport activities when other classrooms were 
unavailable, which would explain why chairs were found in that arrangement. 
 
  
which several Maple teachers and their classes were identified and described.  (Ex. 115, pp. 
1-2.)  The author of that document was not identified.  Respondent testified that while other 
teachers were referred to by their last names in the summaries, respondent was only 
referenced by her first name, which she contends was disrespectful and demonstrated the low 
regard held for her at Maple.  However, that document is not exactly as respondent described 
in her testimony.  For example, Mr. Zivich was referred to as “Z” in three instances, which is 
his nickname.  Mr. Makowetski was also referred to as “Mako” twice, which is his 
nickname.  Deborah Flagg, a Resource Counselor, is not even referenced in the summary 
after her name and assignment are identified, unlike other staff members.  On the other hand, 
the minutes of a staff meeting held in August 2013 (ex. 65), presumably created at Principal 
McCollum’s direction, list all teachers, including respondent, by their last names, with the 
exception of Mr. Zivich (listed as “Mr. Z”) and Zak Claycamp (listed as “Claycamp”).  Thus, 
respondent’s perception of being treated disparately in the parent/student handbook was 
demonstrated to be unfounded. 
 
 

C.  Respondent submitted an excerpt from a parent/student handbook, in 

 

 

30 

 

D.  Finally, respondent has steadfastly maintained that her second PAR 

  
Consulting Teacher, Ms. Murray, had a favorable opinion of her teaching.  As discussed 
above, Ms. Murray did not. 
 

58. 

In her closing brief, respondent makes a number of miscellaneous arguments, 
including that she was only given elective courses to teach, which contained younger, more 
immature, and harder to control students; most of Principal McCollum’s observations and 
evaluations were incorrect and she did not include enough positive information; and that 
other teachers, such as Mr. Zivich and Ms. Darway, were treated more favorably by Principal 
McCollum, and given more time to prepare for their courses.  Respondent’s support for those 
arguments essentially was her self-serving and uncorroborated testimony.  As discussed 
above, respondent’s credibility was under-cut such that her testimony alone on these topics 
was insufficient to establish her contentions.  Moreover, her testimony was contrary to the 
concerted testimony of the other witnesses, including some of those she called. 
 

59.  A.  Respondent’s strongest argument is that testing data (ex. 101, p. 1) shows 

 

that there was a four percent increase in the number of tenth grade Maple students who 
passed the CAHSEE Math examination for each of the 2012/2013 and 2013/2014 school 
years.  Those are the two full school years in which respondent was the only teacher who 
taught that course at Maple.  Respondent uses that fact to argue that her performance could 
not have been objectively unsatisfactory if her students performed better on the CAHSEE 
Math examination than in the prior and subsequent years when others taught the CAHSEE 
Math course. 
 
B.  However, the presented data is vague and respondent’s interpretation of the 
  
raw results is not the only one available.  For example, the data shows that the same number 
of students passed the CAHSEE Math exam in respondent’s first year teaching the course as 
the prior year, and yet a four percent increase was still shown on the data.  In addition, the 
data shows that there were similar increases at the two other high schools and for the District 
overall during the same time period, which suggests there may have been another dynamic at 
play.  For example, Maple Counselor Laura Newbre testified that the data in question was 
not statistically significant and that one student having a higher score or fewer students 
taking the examination after respondent was placed on leave could explain the numbers.  
Principal McCollum similarly testified that CAHSEE scores can be affected by changes in 
the number and identity of students taking the exam from year-to-year.  She also pointed out 
that the data in question only covered tenth grade students, and that the missing results of 
students in the other grades taking the test would be a better reflection of overall student 
performance. 
 
  
ambiguous nature of the data and existence of other competing theories explaining it 
preclude a finding that respondent’s interpretation of the data is correct.  In any event, the 
testing data, standing alone, is insufficient to withstand the great weight of all the other 
evidence presented and explained above.  
 

C.  While it was not established that respondent’s argument is incorrect, the 

 

 

31 

60. 

In her rebuttals, complaints and testimony, respondent has accepted little 

responsibility for her actions.  She failed to demonstrate any recognition that her acts may 
have upset, offended, or at least put-off, her colleagues.  In her closing brief, it is clear that 
respondent believes she did nothing wrong, even after her lengthy opportunities to question 
and listen to witnesses who clearly and consistently testified that she had.  This dynamic is 
consistent with the observations that respondent was not receptive to suggestions for 
improvement made by Principal McCollum, Ms. Anderson and Ms. Arnerich.  Under these 
circumstances, there is no reason to believe that respondent’s performance or behavior at the 
District would change in any manner. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
 

1. 

In this case, the District has the burden of proving the allegations of the 

Charges by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.)  Preponderance of the evidence 
means that “the evidence on [the District’s] side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, 
the evidence on the other side.”  (Glage v. Hawes Firearms Co. (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 
325.) 
 
Cause for Dismissal 
 

2. 

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 

employee if one or more of the causes enumerated in section 44932, subdivision (a), are 
established.  In this case, the District seeks respondent’s dismissal based on subdivisions 
(a)(2) [unprofessional conduct], (a)(5) [unsatisfactory performance], (a)(6) [evident unfitness 
for service], and (a)(8) [persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 
or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state 
board or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her].  
 

3. 

A.  It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent 

 

B.  Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession has been defined as that 

engaged in unprofessional conduct within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). 
 
  
which violates the rules or ethical code of the profession or is unbecoming a member of the 
profession in good standing.  (Board of Ed. v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled in 
part, on another ground, in Bekiaris v. Board of Ed. (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) 
 
  
and had, significantly impacted the Maple staff and administration.  She was repeatedly 
disruptive, argumentative and hostile toward several colleagues at Maple in the course of 
their duties.  She often complained to fellow staff members about Principal McCollum and 
other teachers, so discourteously and vehemently, that her colleagues submitted written 

C.  Respondent engaged in an ongoing pattern of behavior that was likely to, 

 

 

32 

complaints to Principal McCollum.  Some of those involved were so uncomfortable with 
respondent that they asked to never be alone with her.  Despite repeated verbal and written 
warnings to not engage in such behavior, respondent continued to do so, even after receiving 
the Notice in April 2014, a Reprimand in May 2014 and another Reprimand in September 
2014.  Such conduct violated CSTP 6.7, a state standard, and District Board policies 4119.21 
and 4119.21 E, together which formulated professional standards requiring District teachers 
to act courteously and respectfully with other members of the District community.  
Respondent’s actions under-cut the mandates of those standards and created a disruptive and 
negative environment at Maple.  Under these circumstances, respondent’s behavior violated 
the rules and ethical codes of the State and District, and was unbecoming of a member of the 
teaching profession in good standing.  (Factual Findings 17-19, 24, 38-41, 43, 45, 48-49, 52, 
and 55.) 
 

 

  

4. 

B.  The term “unsatisfactory performance” is not specifically defined in the 

A.  It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent 
engaged in unsatisfactory performance within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(5). 
 
  
Education Code or case law.  Inasmuch as there is separate cause for dismissal for 
unprofessional conduct in section 44932, and it is not to be presumed that the Legislature 
intended to enact completely duplicative statutes (In re Maes (2010) 185 Cal.App.4th 1094, 
1110), unsatisfactory performance must mean something different from unprofessional 
conduct.  In fact, section 44938, subdivision (c), specifies that “unsatisfactory performance” 
does not include any other cause for dismissal specified in section 44932.  
 
C.  While unprofessional conduct can be determined by analyzing a teacher’s 
  
conduct relative to the broader educational community, unsatisfactory performance must be 
analyzed with an eye toward the teacher’s performance as evaluated by his or her employing 
school district.  Section 44938 supports this proposition as follows.  Section 44938 requires a 
charge of unsatisfactory performance to be preceded by a written notice of unsatisfactory 
performance.  Section 44938 refers to section 44660 et seq., which in turn establishes 
guidelines for how school districts should evaluate and assess the performance of their 
certificated employees.  Thus, cause for discipline may be established if a certificated 
employee performs in an unsatisfactory manner to her employing school district. 
  
  
to teachers is to insure an efficient permanent staff of teachers whose members are not 
dependent on caprice for their positions as long as they conduct themselves properly and 
perform their duties efficiently and well.  (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. 
Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1293, fn 20, citing 56 Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003) Schools, § 411, p. 757.)  Therefore, an employing school district cannot be arbitrary 
or capricious in making decisions regarding whether a certificated employee has performed 
in an unsatisfactory manner. 
 
 

D.  However, it has been observed that the purpose of the statute giving tenure 

 
  

 

33 

 

 

E1.  In this case, respondent’s conduct rose to the level of unsatisfactory 

  
performance.  Respondent’s primary supervisor, Principal McCollum, believed respondent 
was teaching in an unsatisfactory manner.  Respondent was referred to and accepted by the 
District’s PAR program.  The PAR program was substantially staffed by members of 
respondent’s bargaining unit, some of whom testified in this case that respondent’s referral to 
PAR was appropriate and demonstrated she had deficiencies in her performance as a teacher 
for the District.  The two PAR Consulting Teachers assigned to work with respondent 
uniformly concluded that respondent’s performance in the PAR program was unsatisfactory.  
It cannot be ignored that respondent presented no witness, other than herself, who testified 
that respondent taught in a satisfactory manner at Maple. 
 
  
meet District standards and apply appropriate classroom management strategies.  However, 
respondent continually failed to comply or meet the expectations articulated in her PAR plan.  
She also refused to follow multiple directives from her supervisor Principal McCollum to not 
complain to her colleagues in the course of their duties.  Respondent was finally given a 
Notice in April 2014 outlining her unsatisfactory performance in the classroom and 
interacting with her colleagues.  Respondent thereafter continued to engage in behavior and 
conduct reflecting a general lack of motivation to improve as a teacher. 
 
  
performance was unsatisfactory cannot be viewed as arbitrary or capricious.  (Factual 
Findings 13-49 [except 44 and 47], and 51.) 
 

F.  Under these circumstances, the District’s conclusion that respondent’s 

E2.  The District developed an assistance plan with respondent to help her 

 

5. 

A.  It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent is 

 

 

evidently unfit for service as a teacher, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 
 
B.  “Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
  
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.   
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  “’Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.”  (Id.)  
 
C.  In this case, respondent was given notice of the District’s concerns and 
  
repeated opportunities to correct and improve her performance.  She refused to do so and 
thereby continued to create an antagonistic work environment for her peers.  She continued 
to engage colleagues in a hostile and negative way after repeated verbal and written warnings 
to not do so.  Respondent was also advised how to improve her performance as a teacher on 
multiple occasions, through multiple venues, such as informal and formal observations, 
meetings, the PAR plan and in working with two PAR Consulting Teachers.  Many of the 
suggestions made by Principal McCollum and Ms. Anderson were made multiple times over 
the course of months and still generally ignored by respondent.  Although respondent 
sporadically followed some of the suggestions made to her, on balance she refused to carry 
them out and instead preferred to teach her own way.  It is clear from respondent’s written 

 

34 

rebuttals and testimony that she had no understanding of how she negatively impacted her 
colleagues and that she has no intention of acting toward them any differently.  It is also clear 
that she believes she is a good teacher and that her performance needs no improvement.  Her 
behavior during the hearing demonstrated that respondent at times has difficulty monitoring 
and controlling her behavior.  Under these circumstances, it was established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent’s problems connote a fixed character trait 
which is not remediable.  (Factual Findings 13-49 [except 44 and 47], 55, 56 and 60.) 
 

6. 

A.  It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent 

 

B.  Cause for discipline here may be based on the violation of school rules or 

persistently violated or refused to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by 
the Board, within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 
 
  
district policies.  (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-1181.)  However, there must be a “showing 
of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.”  (Id. at p. 1196.)  The violation must be 
persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.”  (Governing Board of 
the Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 
81-82.)  Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are 
generally not considered persistent.  (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 
   
  
C.  In this case, over the course of a few years, respondent persistently violated 
or refused to obey the rules governing her employment within the meaning of section 44932, 
i.e., directives to remain professional in her interactions with District staff, as well as BP 
4779.21 and BP 4119.21 E.  Respondent was given several verbal and written directives to 
not engage in such behavior, all of which she ignored because she believed she had an 
unfettered right to express herself to other staff members.  Thus, respondent persistently and 
willfully disregarded those policies and directives.  (Factual Findings 17-19, 24, 38-41, 43, 
45, 48-49, 52, 55 and 60.) 
 
Analysis of the Morrison Factors 
 

 

7. 

A.  In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists for the amorphous concepts 
of unprofessional conduct and evident unfitness for service, it also must be established that a 
teacher’s misconduct relates to her fitness to teach, within the meaning of Morrison v. State 
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230).  The Morrison analysis does not apply to 
cause for dismissal for unsatisfactory performance or persistent violation of school rules, 
laws or policies because such theories, by definition, have a direct nexus with teaching.  (Id., 
at pp. 227-230).  With regard to the two identified causes for dismissal that must be 
analyzed, all of the factors suggested by Morrison were considered and compared to the facts 
established above.  Not all “Morrison factors” need be present for the Morrison test to be 
satisfied.  (Governing Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.)  
Moreover, the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, 

 

35 

 

B.  As applied in this case, the applicable factors clearly demonstrate that 

but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively.  (Woodland Joint 
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 
1429, 1457.)   
 
  
respondent’s misconduct had a direct relationship with teaching and respondent’s unfitness 
to teach.  (Factual Findings 1-60.) 
 
  
1.  The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow 
teachers.  Respondent’s misconduct adversely affected several of her fellow teachers. 
Respondent consumed a great deal of her supervisor’s time trying to manage her.  Principal 
McCollum and Ms. Anderson documented that respondent’s poor teaching negatively 
impacted student learning in the classroom. 
 
  
moderate; some were greatly bothered by respondent’s conduct, some were annoyed.  
Overall, respondent’s behavior negatively impacted the Maple environment.   

2.  The degree of such adversity.  The adversity against fellow teachers was 

 

 

 
 

 

 

5.  The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

3.  The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.  The misconduct is 

6.  The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

4.  The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved.  This factor has 

  
proximate. 
 
 
 
no application. 
 
 
surrounding the conduct.  Neither aggravating nor extenuating circumstances were proven.   
 
 
conduct.  Respondent’s conduct is blameworthy.  She is a veteran teacher with several years 
of experience.  She knew or should have known that her interactions with fellow staff were 
inappropriate and unproductive.  She also refused to accept suggestions intended to improve 
her performance.  She essentially picked a fight with Principal McCollum and dared the 
District to fire her so she could contest it in a legal proceeding.    
 
 
that respondent would engage in the same activity if put back in a District classroom.  
Respondent has ignored directives from her supervisor and suggestions by those trying to 
help her.  She has accepted very little responsibility for her misconduct and demonstrated no 
remorse for her actions. 
 
 
8.  The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.  It is not foreseen that this will 
happen.  As discussed in Factual Finding 55 above, respondent did not have a constitutional 
right to complain, rant and vent her displeasure with her supervisor and some of her 
colleagues to fellow staff members. 

7.  The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. It is highly likely 

 

 

 

36 

Disposition 
 

8. 

“The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 

unfitness to teach . . ., and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.”  
(California Teachers Ass'n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.)  Thus, 
even where cause for dismissal has been established, a Commission (or an ALJ sitting alone) 
still has broad discretion to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted.  
(Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.) 
 

9. 

A.  In this case, respondent engaged in conduct which violated several 

 

B.  The District received consistent complaints about respondent’s 

provisions of the Education Code.  Respondent has engaged in a pattern of unprofessional 
conduct, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey Board policies and rules governing her employment.  Her conduct caused 
concern to staff, and the District has lost confidence in her abilities and judgment.  
Respondent repeatedly refused to maintain her professionalism with staff and to abide by 
clear directives from her supervisor. 
 
  
inappropriate treatment of fellow staff members.  Respondent also struggled with classroom 
management and control.  And, over a few years, respondent failed to meet the District’s 
fundamental expectations; failed to execute her job duties in a satisfactory manner; and failed 
to meet the State and District’s standards for the teaching profession.  Respondent’s job 
performance resulted in an assistance plan, which she failed to follow; numerous 
unsatisfactory performance reviews; placement in the District’s PAR program, which she 
failed to complete; and a Notice of Unsatisfactory Performance and Unprofessional Conduct 
as well as two reprimands.  Despite all of those efforts, respondent has been unwilling to 
remediate or improve.  Respondent showed little progress, if any, in her ability to effectively 
manage her classroom, engage her students, effectively teach her subject matter, and get 
along with her colleagues. 
 
  
performance and behavior issues. 
 

C.  Based on the above, it is clear that respondent is unable to remedy her 

 

10. 

The District established that respondent engaged in serious misconduct, which 
provides numerous legal grounds to discipline her.  Progressive discipline was used, but was 
not successful.  Respondent presented no mitigation, rehabilitation or remorse for her 
actions.  Under these circumstances, similar misconduct would be likely should respondent 
be placed back in a District classroom.  Dismissal is therefore warranted.  (Factual Findings 
1-60, Legal Conclusions 1-9.) 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

37 

 
The dismissal of respondent Marsha Maietta from employment with the Lompoc 

ORDER 

  
Unified School District is sustained. 
 
 
 
DATED: December 16, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

(ene 6S: av uy

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

38 

