BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Amended  Accusation 
and  Statement  of  Charges 

Against: 

OAH  No.  2015020642 

HSIAO  YUAN  WANG, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Los 

Angeles  on  November  2  -  3,  9  —  10,  and  12  —  13,  2015,  and  January  4  —  7,  2016,  under  the 
authority  of  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939.  The  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  was  comprised  of  the  following  members:  Kristi  Harabedian,  teacher,  Los 
Angeles  County  Office  of  Education;  Francine  Buschel-Gomez,  retired  teacher,  Los  Angeles 
Unified  School  District;  and  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings. 

Complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by  EHen  Wu, 

Attorney  at  Law,  and  Lynn  I.  Ibara,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondent  Hsiao  Yuan  Wang  was 
present  throughout  the  hearing  and  he  represented  himself  during  the  hearing  days  in 
November  2015  and  was  represented  by  Ronald  C.  Lapekas,  Attorney  at  Law,  during  the 
hearing  days  in  January  2016.' 

During  the  hearing,  complainant  presented  documentary  evidence  and  the  testimony 
of  several  administrators  and  staff.  Complainant  also  moved  to  amend  the  Accusation  and 
Statement  of  Charges  to  conform  to  the  proof  that  was  presented  during  the  hearing. 
Complainant’s  motion  was  granted.  However,  complainant’s  motion  to  add  a  new  cause  for 
discipline  for  dishonesty  was  denied  by  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  in  the  interests  of 
fairness  and  due  process.  Subsequently,  complainant  filed  the  Amended  Accusation  and 

1  Respondent’s  prior  counsel,  Peter  O.  Tong,  Attorney  at  Law,  withdrew  as  his 

counsel  of  record  on  the  first  day  of  the  hearing. 

 

Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent  testified  and  presented  documentary  evidence  and  the 
testimony  of  witnesses. 

On  his  own  motion,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  marks  the  Accusation, 
Amended  Accusation,  and  Notice  of  Defense,  collectively,  as  Exhibit  66  and  admits  the 
exhibit  into  evidence  for  purposes  of  jurisdiction  only. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  oral  argument  heard,  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  submitted  this  matter  for  decision  on  January  7, 
2016,  conducted  deliberations  on  January  8,  2016,  and  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  5,  2015,  the  Accusation,  Case  Number  2015020642,  was  made  and 

filed  by  Justo  H.  Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of 
complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  State  of  California  (District).  On  March 
17,  2015,  respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  requesting  a  hearing  on  the  allegations  of  the 
Accusation.  On  December  22,  2015,  the  Amended  Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by  Justo 
H.  Avila  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  District.  With 
administrative  offices  located  at  333  South  Beaudry  Avenue  in  Los  Angeles  and  schools 
throughout  the  Los  Angeles  area,  the  District  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  diverse 
comprehensive  school  districts  in  the  nation. 

2. 

(A)  At  all  times  relevant  herein,  respondent  has  been  employed  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  District.  Respondent  was  born  and  educated  in  China.  He 
attended  Teachers’  College  and  then  taught  for  eight  years  in  that  country.  In  1969,  during 
the  Cultural  Revolution,  he  was  required  by  the  Chinese  government  to  work  in  the 
countryside  for  five  years.  In  1982,  respondent  came  to  the  United  States  as  a  foreign 
student  and  attended  the  University  of  California  at  Davis  and  the  University  of  Houston.  He 
attained  a  master  of  art  degree  in  English  and/or  linguistics.  In  1990,  respondent  began 
working  for  the  District  and  taught  at  Garfield,  San  Fernando,  North  Hollywood,  and 
Monterey  High  Schools.  Respondent  holds  a  credential  or  credentials  which  allow  him  to 
teach  in  continuation  and  educational  option  schools  of  the  District. 

(B)  During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  respondent  was  recruited  by  Principal 
Janet  Seary  to  apply  for  the  job  of  technology  coordinator,  an  out-of-classroom  position,  at 
her  school  site,  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  At  that  time,  respondent  was  a  teacher  at 
Monterey  High  School,  which  is  a  continuation  high  school.  Seary  had  met  respondent  at 
meetings  of  the  Western  Association  of  Schools  and  Colleges  (WASC),  a  school 
accreditation  organization,  and  was  impressed  with  his  experience  in  teaching  at  a 
continuation  high  school  and  his  expertise  in  WASC  and  technology. 

(C)  On  February  28,  2008,  respondent  submitted  a  Teacher-Initiated  Transfer 

Application.  On  April  1,  2008,  respondent  was  allowed  to  transfer  to  Central  High  School    

In  the  fall  semester  of  the  2008-2009 

and  began  teaching  at  its  Pico  Union  classroom  site. 
school  year,  respondent  was  hired  as  the  technology  coordinator  or  advisor  for  Central  High 
School  and  Tri-C.  As  technology  coordinator,  respondent  was  responsible,  in  part,  for 
installing  and  replacing  computers  and  related  software  and  helping  teachers  to  use  the 
computers  and  software  in  their  classrooms.  He  attended  technology  meetings,  worked  on 
websites  and  at  the  computer  laboratory,  and  kept  inventory  of  the  school  computers. 
Respondent  was  hired  as  the  technology  coordinator  pursuant  to  a  one-year  contract  that  was 
renewable  for  up  to  five  years.  On  an  undetermined  date,  respondent  was  also  chosen  to  be 
the  testing  coordinator  for  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C. 

Central  High  School  and  Tri-C 

3. 

(A)  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  are  schools  within  the  District’s 

Educational  Options  Program.  Central  High  School  is  a  continuation  high  school  for 
students  in  grades  nine  through  12  who  have  not  earned  enough  credits  to  graduate  with  their 
class  and  are  at  risk  of  dropping  out  of  school.  The  students  range  in  age  from  16  to  22 
years.  Central  High  School  offers  educational  opportunities  to  its  students  in  self-contained 
classrooms  which  are  usually  taught  by  a  single  teacher  and  have  a  low  student-to-teacher 
ratio.  Students  at  Central  High  School  attend  class  for  four  periods  each  school  day  from 
8:00  a.m.  until  12:45  p.m.  Tri-C  is  a  community  day  school  for  younger  students  in  grades 
seven  through  12,  many  of  whom  have  serious  personal  and  family  problems  and  are  further 
behind  in  accumulating  graduation  credits.  Tri-C  also  has  self-contained  classes  with  small 
numbers  of  students.  Students  at  Tri-C  attend  class  for  six  periods  each  school  day  from 
8:00  a.m.  until  2:45  p.m. 

(B)  The  educational  programs  and  operations  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri- 
C  are  overseen  by  one  principal  and  two  assistant  principals  who  work  from  administrative 
offices  located  at  San  Pedro  Street  and  14th  Street  in  downtown  Los  Angeles.  The 
administrative  offices  are  comprised  of  a  main  two-story  building  and  a  one-story  bungalow. 
The  bungalow  has a  large,  open  area  that  was  used  as  a  classroom.  The  classes  at  Central 
High  School  and  Tri-C  are  held  at  27  different  sites  throughout  the  District  ranging  from  San 
Pedro  to  Pacoima.  The  classroom  sites  are  located  in  the  community  in  such  places  as 
shopping  centers,  a  church,  a  bank  building,  a  senior  citizen  center,  an  occupational  center, 
and  District  offices.  Because  they  are  located  in  the  community,  the  classroom  sites  do  not 
have  facilities  usually  found  in  schools,  such  as  areas  for  physical  education,  or  on-site 
administrators.  Instead,  the  principal  and  two  assistant  principals  share  responsibility  for 
visiting  the  classroom  sites  each  week  so  that  they  may  review  the  performance  and  needs  of 
teachers  and  students  and  to  manage  and  assist  teachers  in  handling  school  and  classroom 
issues,  including  student  discipline.  Within  the  27  classroom  sites,  Central  High  School  has 
24  teachers  and  Tri-C  has  16  teachers.  Each  classroom  site  has  no  more  than  one  to  three 
teachers  who  may  be  assisted  by  aides  and  resource  teachers.  The  teachers  come  to  the  main 
administrative  offices  to  pick  up  supplies  and  to  attend  professional  development  training 

and  faculty  and  staff  meetings.    

  

4. 

(A)  Central  High  School  has  an  enrollment  of  270  to  500  students  and  Tri-C 

has  an  enrollment  of  275  to  325  students.  The  students  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C 
present  with  a  different  set  of  challenges  than  students  found  at  traditional  or  comprehensive 
high  schools.  Many  of  the  students  are  long-time  English  language  learners,  need  special 
education  services  and  supports,  have  behavioral!  problems  or  disciplinary  histories,  and  have 
been  exposed  to  abuse  and  drug  and  alcohol  use.  Students  at  Tri-C  typically  have  been 
expelled  from  their  schools,  have  serious  disciplinary  or  attendance  problems,  live  in  foster 
or  group  homes,  or  have  been  referred  by  the  county  probation  department  due  to  contacts 
with  law  enforcement.  The  students  at  both  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  often  feel 
overwhelmed  or  out  of  place  in  traditional  school  settings  and  have  not  succeeded  there. 
They  tend  not  to  participate  in  class  and  miss  school  altogether.  Due  to  their  personal 
backgrounds  and  experiences,  the  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  students  are  considered  at 
tisk  for  dropping  out  of  school  and  may  be  emotionally  fragile.  They  require  redirection, 
smaller  learning  environments,  one-to-one  assistance  and  support,  and  more  resources  in 
order  to  stay  in  school  and  to  learn. 

(B)  Teachers  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  often  have  prior  experience  in 

teaching  at-risk  students  or  at  continuation  schools  and  have  an  interest  in  teaching  outside  of 
the  traditional  school  setting.  The  teachers  must  be  comfortable  teaching  by  themselves  in 
one-  to  three-classroom  sites  located  in  community  settings  and  must  be  willing  to  teach 
subjects  other  than  in  their  credentialed  subject  areas.  The  teachers  must  be  willing  to 
engage  and  help  the  students  to  learn,  be  successful,  and  earn  graduation  credits.  The 
teachers  are  expected  to  implement  District  educational  standards,  curriculum,  and 
disciplinary  guidelines  and  to  follow  the  rules,  regulations,  and  policies  of  both  the  school 
and  the  District.  Moreover,  despite  the  behavioral  and  disciplinary  problems  that  may  be 
presented  by  the  students,  the  teachers  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  are  nevertheless 
expected  to  create  classroom  environments  that  are  safe  and  conducive  to  learning  and  to 
maintain  professional  relationships  with  the  students  and  their  colleagues  and  administrators. 

(C)  As  part  of  their  classroom  duties,  teachers  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri- 

C  are  expected  to  manage  their  classrooms  and  maintain  order  and  discipline  among  the 
students  in  keeping  with  the  school  disciplinary  plan.  The  teachers  must  follow  the  steps 
outlined  in  the  school  disciplinary  plan,  including  the  development  and  posting  of  their  own 
progressive  disciplinary  plans  that  inform  their  students  of  the  classroom  rules,  a  system  of 
rewards,  and  the  consequences  for  violating  the  rules.  The  teachers  are  expected  to  enforce 
and  implement  their  disciplinary  plans  in  a  consistent  and  fair  manner.  In  recognition  of  not 
only  the  District's  policies  but  perhaps  also  the  fragile  psyches  of  the  students  at  Central 
High  School  and  Tri-C,  the  teachers  receive  training  in  professional  development  classes  and 
in  individual  counseling  sessions  with  the  administrators  and  school  advisor  about  the  proper 
way  to  maintain  discipline  in  their  classrooms. 

(D)  Teachers.are  trained  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  yell  at  or  to  argue  with  the 

students  or  to  confront  them  in  an  aggressive  manner.  The  students  are  often  defensive, 
sensitive,  and  easily  provoked.  They  do  not  react  well  to  teachers  belittling  or  criticizing 

them  in  front  of  their  peers.  The  teachers  must  inform  the  students  when  their  behavior  is    

inappropriate  or  disruptive  but  they  are  also  trained  to  take  students  aside  and  to  talk  to  them 
discreetly  or  after  class  to  offer  them  alternatives  and  suggestions.  If  the  students  do  not 
improve  their  behaviors,  the  teacher  may  then  have  conferences  with  the  students  and  their 
parents  and  refer  them  to  the  school  counselors  or  assistant  principals.  Central  High  School 
and  Tri-C  teachers  are  trained  in  the  importance  of  establishing  patterns  of  appropriate 
behavior,  remaining  calm,  talking  to  the  students  in  a  respectful  and  positive  tone,  and  setting 
rules,  consequences,  and  structure  in  the  classrooms.  The  teachers  must  recognize  cues 
exhibited  by  the  students,  avoid  confrontations  with  them,  prevent  altercations  among  the 
students,  and  maintain  a  proper  perspective.  If  the  students’  behaviors  are  not  disruptive  to 
instruction,  the  teachers  have  the  discretion  of  ignoring  the  conduct  and  speaking  to  the 
students  about  their  conduct  at  a  later  time. 

5. 

(A)  At  the  beginning  of  each  school  year,  and  early  in  the  fall  semester, 
Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  in  conjunction  with  the  District  provide  teachers  with 
mandatory  professional  development  training  on  District  policies  and  the  school  disciplinary 
plan. 
The  teachers  are  given  copies  of  the  District  policies.  In  addition,  District  policies  and 
disciplinary  issues  are  reviewed  with  the  teachers  at  monthly  faculty  meetings  and  in 
individual  advisory  sessions. 

(B)  As  a  certificated  employee  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C,  respondent 
attended  the  professional  development  training  sessions  and  received  copies  of  the  District 
policies.  The  District  policies,  which  respondent  is  expected  to  know  and  to  follow  in 
performing  his  daily  tasks  as  a  certificated  employee  and  teacher,  are  summarized  below. 

District  Policies 

6. 

In  September  1998,  the  District  adopted  an  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  The 

District  revised  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  in  December  2000  and  February  2003.  Under 
the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  the  District  is  committed  to  three  core  ethical  principles: 
commitment  to  excellence,  district  and  personal  integrity,  and  responsibility.  For  the  core 
ethical  principle  of  commitment  to  excellence,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  committed 
to  being  the  best  school  district  and  to  educating  students  to  their  maximum  potential.  The 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  provides  that  everything  employees  do  has  an  impact  in  the 
classroom.  Employees  must  be  committed  to  creating  an  environment  of  trust,  care,  and 
respect.  Discriminatory  or  harassing  behavior  of  students  or  colleagues  is  not  tolerated.  For 
the  core  ethical  principle  of  integrity,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  committed  to 
ensuring  that  employee-student  relationships  are  positive,  professional,  and  non-exploitative. 
For  the  core  ethical  principle  of  responsibility,  the  District  and  its  employees  are  responsible 
for  their  performance.  The  District  and  its  employees  must  ensure  that  power  and  authority 
are  used  in  an  appropriate  and  positive  manner  that  enhances  the  public  interest  and  trust. 
The  goal  of  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  is,  in  part,  to  create  a  culture  that  fosters  trust,  a 

commitment  to  excellence  and  responsibility,  and  personal  and  institutional  integrity.    

7. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  May  18,  2009,  entitled,  “Ethics  Policies”  (Ethics 

Policy  Statement),  the  District  stated  that  all  certificated  and  classified  employees  are  to  be 
knowledgeable  about  the  District’s  ethics  policies  and  must  take  an  active  role  in  promoting 
an  organizational  culture  that  encourages  ethical  conduct.  The  District  has  four  ethics 
policies  approved  by  the  Board  of  Education,  including  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  Each 
District  employee  is  responsible  for  setting  a  good  example  of  ethical  conduct  in  his  or  her 
work,  being  familiar  with  the  ethics  policies  and  participating  in  annual  training  activities, 
contributing  to  a  proactive  and  transparent  management  of  potential  ethics  concerns,  seeking 
guidance  from  a  supervisor  or  other  trustworthy  source  if  unsure  of  the  most  ethical  and 
responsible  course  of  action,  and  recognizing  that  he  or  she  is  a  role  mode!  to  peers  but, 
equally  important,  to  the  students  of  the  District. 

8. 

In  a  Resolution  adopted  on  October  10,  1988,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 
District  (Board)  adopted  a  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons. 
The  Board  reaffirmed  its  policy  that  students  and  adults  in  both  schools  and  offices  should 
treat  all  persons  equally  and  respectfully  and  should  refrain  from  the  willful  or  negligent  use 
of  slurs  against  any  person  on  the  basis  of  race,  language  spoken,  color,  sex,  religion, 
handicap,  national  origin,  immigration  status,  age,  sexual  orientation,  or  political  belief.  The 
Board  further  resolved  that  a  school-wide  code  of  discipline  regarding  name-calling  be 
developed  at  each  school  and  enforced  by  teachers,  administrators,  and  other  staff  members. 

9. 

(A)  On  July  15,  2008,  the  District  promulgated  a  Code  of  Conduct  with 

Students  in  which  the  District  resolved  that  the  most  important  responsibility  of  all  District 
employees  is  to  ensure  the  safety  of  its  students.  While  the  cultivation  of  positive 
relationships  with  students  is  encouraged,  employees,  and  all  individuals  who  work  with  or 
have  contact  with  students,  are  expected  to  use  good  judgment  and  are  cautioned  to  avoid 
situations,  including  engaging  in  any  behaviors  with  students  or  in  the  presence  of  students 
which  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitative.  District  employees  are 
also  cautioned  against  making  statements  or  comments  in  the  presence  of  students  which  are 
not  age-appropriate,  unprofessional,  or  sexual  in  nature,  harassing,  or  demeaning. 

(B)  On  July  1,  2010,  the  District  issued  Bulletin  Number  5167.0  entitled 

“Code  of  Conduct  with  Students—Distribution  and  Dissemination  Requirement,”  in  which 
the  District  emphasized  that  it  is  obligated  to  investigate  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct 
or  behavior  and,  if  warranted,  take  appropriate  administrative  and/or  disciplinary  action.  In 
this  bulletin,  the  District  also  delineated  responsibilities  of  administrators  to  provide  notice 
and  guidance  to  employees  and  individuals  who  work  with  or  have  contact  with  students 
regarding  the  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students.  For  example,  administrators  are  to  provide  the 
Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  to  each  individual  who  works  with  or  has  contact  with 
students  on  an  annual  basis  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  and  to  discuss  and  stress  the 
policy  at  a  meeting  of  employees. 

10. 

(A)  Ina  Policy  Bulletin  dated  March  27,  2007,  entitled  “Discipline  Foundation 
Policy,  School-Wide  Positive  Behavior  Support”  (Discipline  Foundation  Policy),  the  District 
established  a  framework  for  developing  and  implementing  a  culture  of  discipline  conducive 

 

to  learning  and  teaching  by  requiring  a  consistent  school-wide  positive  behavior  support  and 
discipline  plan.  School-wide  positive  behavior  support  is  based  on  research  that  indicates  the 
most  effective  discipline  system  uses  proactive  strategies  designed  to  prevent  discipline 
problems.  A  school-wide  positive  behavior  support  and  discipline  plan  is  to  include  teaching 
school  rules  and  social-emotional  skills,  reinforcing  appropriate  student  behavior,  and  using 
effective  classroom  management  and  positive  behavior  support  strategies  that  provide  for 
early  intervention  for  misconduct  and  appropriate  use  of  consequences. 

(B)  The  implementation  of  the  Discipline  Foundation  Policy  contemplates 

participation  by  every  person  in  the  District.  For  example,  students  are  expected  to  learn  and 
follow  all  school  and  classroom  rules  and  to  demonstrate  appropriate  social  skills  when 
interacting  with  both  adults  and  peers.  When  behavioral  expectations  are  not  met,  students 
are  expected  to  work  to  improve  behavior.  Students  are  also  encouraged  to  take  leadership 
roles  in  modeling  appropriate  behaviors  and  attitudes  for  peers.  Under  this  policy,  teachers 
have  a  fundamental  role  in  supporting  a  positive  classroom  and  school,  including  utilizing 
effective  classroom  management  strategies  to  create  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to 
learning  and  prevents  misconduct.  Teachers  are  required,  in  part,  to  acknowledge  and 
reinforce  appropriate  student  behavior,  provide  corrective  feedback  and  re-teaching  of 
behavioral  skills  when  misconduct  occurs,  and  report  behavior  to  the  schoo]  administrator  or 
person  responsible  for  disciplining  a  student  who  engages  in  ongoing  misconduct. 

11. 

In  a  Policy  Bulletin  dated  February  23,  2010,  entitled,  “Abolition  of  Corporal 
Punishment,”  the  District  reaffirmed  its  policy  prohibiting  the  use  of  corporal  punishment,  in 
any  form,  as  a  disciplinary  option  or  measure  at  any  grade  level  and  with  any  student. 
Corporal  punishment  is  defined  as  the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction 
of,  physical  pain  on  a  pupil.  Under  this  policy,  corporal  punishment  refers  to  the  intentional 
application  of  physical  pain  as  a  method  of  changing  behavior.  In  this  Policy  Bulletin,  the 
District  encourages  the  use  of  positive  approaches  to  discipline  and  classroom  management 
to  ensure  that  students  conform  to  proper  and  expected  standards  of  behavior  so  that  they 
may  derive  greater  benefits  from  the  educational  program. 

12. 

In a  Policy  Bulletin  Number  5798  dated  July16,  2012,  entitled,  “Workplace 

Violence,  Bullying  and  Threats  (Adult-to-Adult),”  the  District  affirmed  its  policy  prohibiting 
violence,  bullying,  and  threats  by  or  against  any  employee,  parent,  or  persons  doing  business 
with  or  for  the  District.  Under  this  policy,  the  District  further  affirmed  its  commitment  to 
providing  a  safe  and  civil  working  environment  and  to  ensure  that  all  employees  be  able  to 
work  in  an  environment  that  is  free  from  acts  of  intimidation,  threats  of  violence,  or  actual 
violence.  Under  this  policy,  any  individual  who  commits  acts  of  violence  or  threatening  or 
disruptive  behavior  in  the  workplace  may  be  subject  to  removal  from  the  premises, 
disciplinary  action,  and/or  criminal  penalties.  The  policy  defines  bullying,  in  part,  as  any 
severe  or  pervasive  physical  or  verbal  act  or  conduct,  including  electronic  communications, 
committed  by  an  individual  towards  another  adult,  and  which  has,  or  can  be  reasonably 
predicted  to  have,  the  effect  of  causing  reasonable  fear  of  harm,  substantial  detriment  to 

physical  or  mental  health,  or  substantial  interference  with  work  performance.    

13. 

(A)  On  December  24,  2009,  the  District  issued  Bulletin  Number  3630.1 

entitled,  “Drug,  Alcohol  and  Tobacco-Free  Workplace,”  which  states  that  it  is  the  policy  of 
the  District  to  maintain  a  drug-  and  alcohol-free  workplace.  The  District  prohibits  the 
unlawful  manufacture,  sale,  distribution  dispensing,  possession,  or  use  of  illicit  drugs  and 
alcohol  by  its  employees  in  all  District  workplaces. 

(B)  On  January  22,  2009,  the  District  issued  Bulletin  Number  3277.1  entitled, 
“Preventive  Measures  and  Mandatory  Procedures  for  Students  Who  Violate  Laws  Regarding 
Drugs,  Alcohol,  Tobacco,  and  Other  Intoxicants.”  The  bulletin  provides  school 
administrators  and  other  school  personnel  with  information  about  federal  and  state  laws 
requiring  schools  to  be  maintained  free  of  drugs,  alcohol,  and  tobacco,  and  information  about 
the  dangers  and  ease  of  access  to  intoxicants  by  school-aged  children.  The  bulletin  sets  forth 
a  policy  that  the  District  does  not  tolerate  the  use,  possession,  or  sale  of  drugs,  alcohol, 
tobacco,  or  any  other  intoxicants  by  students  on  school  campuses  or  at  school-sponsored 
activities.  Under  this  policy,  school  administrators  are  required  to  take  immediate  action  to 
prevent,  discourage,  and  eliminate  the  use  or  possession  of  drugs,  alcohol,  tobacco,  and  other 
intoxicants  on  campus  and  at  school  activities  by  such  measures  as  education,  intervention, 
and  discipline. 

14.  |  Under  the  “Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements”  (Bulletin  No. 

1347.2  dated  July  1,  2011),  it  is  the  policy  of  the  District  that  all  employees  shall  report 
instances  of  suspected  child  abuse  or  neglect  by  telephone  immediately,  or  as  soon  as 
practically  possible,  to  an  appropriate  child  protective  agency,  and  shall  prepare  and  send  a 
written  report  to  the  same  child  protective  agency  within  36  hours  of  receiving  information 
concerning  the  incidents  of  child  abuse  or  neglect.  This  policy  makes  clear  that  all  District 
employees  are  mandated  reporters  of  suspected  child  abuse  or  neglect  and  must  make  a 
telephone  and  written  report  when  they  have  actual  knowledge  or  reasonable  suspicion  of 
child  abuse  or  neglect.  The  failure  to  comply  with  the  mandated  suspected  child  abuse 
reporting  requirements  may  subject  a  District  employee  to  personal  civil  and  criminal 
liability  as  well  as  professional  discipline.  The  policy  defines  child  abuse,  in  part,  as  the 
infliction  of  willful  cruelty  or  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental  suffering  upon  a  child  and 
the  infliction  of  mental  suffering  or  endangerment  of  emotional  well-being  of  a  child. 

15. 

The  District’s  policies  and  bulletins,  summarized  in  Findings  6  —  14  above, 
constitute  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  District  for  the 
governance  of  its  schools.  As  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  respondent 
is  required  to  abide  by  these  policies  or  regulations  of  the  District.  As  established,  in  part,  by 
the  testimony  of  administrators  in  this  matter,  respondent  received  annual  training  in  these 
District  policies  and  is  expected  to  be  familiar  with  and  abide  by  these  District  policies  at  all 

times.    

  

2010-2011  School  Year 

16 

(A)  During  the  2010-2011  school  year,  respondent  volunteered  to  help 

Assistant  Principal  Janine  Antoine  with  the  graduation  ceremony  for  Central  High  School 
and  Tri-C.  On  June  16,  2011,  respondent  went  to  Garfield  High  School  to  pick  up  the 
graduation  programs  from  the  print  shop.  The  fee  for  printing  the  graduation  programs  was 
$400.  Respondent  called  Rosie  Achar,  a  senior  office  technician  at  the  administrative  offices 
of  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  He  told  Achar  that  the  print  shop  would  not  release  the 
graduation  programs  until  he  gave  them  a  check  for  $400  and  asked  if  there  was  enough 
money  in  the  school  account.  Achar  replied  that  there  was  enough  money  in  the  school 
account  but  that  the  principal  had  to  sign  the  check  and  that  the  principal  would  not  be  back 
to  sign  a  check  until  the  next  morning. 

(B)  On  June  16,  2011,  Achar  called  Principal  Seary  and  left  her  a  voice 
message  that  she  had  to  come  into  the  office  the  next  morning  to  sign  a  check  so  that 
respondent  could  bring  back  the  graduation  programs  from  the  print  shop.  Achar  repeated 
what  respondent  told  her,  namely  that  the  print  shop  would  not  release  the  graduation 
programs  to  him  until  he  gave  them  a  check.  The  graduation  ceremony  was  scheduled  for 
the  next  day. 

(C)  Later  that  same  day,  respondent  returned  to  the  administrative  offices  with 

the  graduation  programs.  He  went  to  see  Achar  and  asked  her  for  a  check  again.  Achar 
reminded  respondent  that  the  principal  had  to  sign  the  check  and  that  she  would  not  be  back 
in  the  main  office  until  the  next  day.  Achar  had  respondent  sign  a  purchase  order  for  the 
graduation  programs.  Respondent  did  not  tell  Achar,  or  make  clear  to  her,  that  he  had 
already  picked  up  the  graduation  programs  from  the  print  shop. 

(D)  The  next  morning  on  June  17,  2011,  Principal  Seary  came  into  the 

administrative  offices  to  sign  the  check  for  the  graduation  programs.  She  had  planned  to 
visit  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  classroom  sites  in  Gardena  and  East  Los  Angeles  that 
morning  but  changed  her  plans.  On  arrival  at  the  administrative  offices  that  morning, 
Principal  Seary  signed  the  check  but  then  she  learned  that  respondent  had  already  picked  up 
the  graduation  programs.  The  graduation  programs  were  in  the  assistant  principal’s  office. 
The  principal  was  not  happy  because  she  had  changed  her  plans  to  come  into  the  office  just 
to  sign  the  check  so  that  respondent  could  bring  the  graduation  programs  back  to  the  office. 

(E)  At  approximately  11:30  a.m.  on  June  17,  2011,  Principal  Seary  summoned 

respondent  to  her  office.  She  informed  respondent  that  she  had  come  into  the  office  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  signing  the  check  for  the  graduation  programs.  Principal  Seary  asked 
respondent  about  his  immediate  need  for  a  check  and  why  he  did  not  tell  Achar  that  he  had 
already  brought  the  graduation  programs  back  to  their  administrative  offices.  Respondent 
replied  that  Achar  was  a  “liar.”  He  said  that  he  had  walked  by  Achar’s  office  yesterday 
carrying  the  box  of  graduation  programs  and  that  he  had  told  Achar  that  he  had  the 
graduation  programs  when  he  asked  her  for  a  check.  Principal  Seary  said  she  was  not  happy 

that  she  had  to  come  into  the  office  and  that  Achar  did  not  know  that  respondent  had  already    

picked  up  the  graduation  programs.  Respondent  became  upset  and  angry.  He  said  to  the 
principal  that  she  had  “been  angry  with  [him]  the  last  three  days  and  [he]  did  not  know  why.” 
Principal  Seary  replied  that  she  was  not  angry  with  him.  Respondent  became  more  agitated 
and  yelled  at  her,  “You  are  the  principal  so  you  are  always  right  and  I  am  nothing.”  The 
principal  advised  respondent  to  calm  down.  Respondent  told  the  principal  that  she  needed  to 
calm  down.  The  principal  stated  that  respondent  was  becoming  rude  and  disrespectful. 
Respondent  replied  in  a  loud  voice,  “No,  you  are  being  rude  and  disrespectful.”  At  this 
point,  Principal  Seary  became  upset  and  told  respondent  to  leave  her  office.  When  he  did  not 
leave  right  away,  the  principal  opened  her  office  door  and  told  respondent  to  leave  and  go 
home  because  he  was  out  of  control.  Respondent  left  the  principal's  office. 

17. 

(A)  Several  minutes  later,  Principal  Seary  gave  a  signed  check  to  respondent 
and  asked  him  to  deliver  it  to  the  print  shop  at  Garfield  High  School.  Respondent  delivered 
the  signed  check  to  the  print  shop  and  then  returned  to  the  administrative  offices  to  attend  the 
graduation  ceremony.  At  12:30  p.m.,  during  the  lunch  break,  respondent  approached  Achar 
and  said  he  wanted  to  talk  to  her  about  their  conversation  from  the  day  before.  Achar  asked 
respondent  to  follow  her  to  the  conference  room  where  she  sat  down  to  eat  her  lunch. 

(B)  While  standing  at  the  door  of  the  conference  room,  respondent  accused 

Achar  of  lying  when  she  told  the  principal  that  the  print  shop  would  not  release  the 
graduation  programs  to  him  without  a  check.  He  asked  her  to  confirm  that  he  was  carrying  a 
box  of  graduation  programs  when  he  had  come  into  the  office  the  day  before  and  asked  her 
for  the  check.  Achar  replied  that  she  recalled  respondent  asking  for  a  check  but  she  did  not 
see  him  with  the  box  of  graduation  programs  and  did  not  recall  him  telling  her  that  he  had  the 
In  a  loud  voice,  respondent  called  Achar  “a  liar.” 
graduation  programs. 

(C)  Assistant  Principal  Antoine  heard  a  loud  voice  in  the  conference  room. 
She  went  to  the  conference  room  and  heard  respondent  yell  at  Achar  that  she  was  a  “liar.” 
He  was  visibly  upset  and  angry.  Achar  was  speaking  in  a  normal  conversational  tone. 
Antoine  intervened  and  told  respondent  that  his  conversation  was  inappropriate.  The 
assistant  principal  said  the  issue  was  over,  that  he  “should  leave  it  alone,”  and  that  he  should 
stop  talking.  Antoine  had  Achar  leave  the  conference  room  and  she  walked  away  as  well. 
As  Antoine  started  to  walk  away,  respondent  tried  to  explain  his  side  of  the  story.  Antoine 
replied,  “I  don’t  want  to  hear  it.”  Respondent  then  yelled  at  Antoine  in  a  loud  voice,  “You 
are  all  a  bunch of liars."*  Other  employees  heard  respondent's  yelling  and  came  out  of  their 
offices.  Antoine  reported  this  incident  to  the  principal. 

*  Roy  Smith,  a  technology  and  field  services  technician,  testified  and  wrote  a 

statement.  He  overheard  the  conversation  between  respondent  and  Assistant  Principal 
Antoine  on  June  17,  2011,  and  thought  that  Antoine  was  rude  to  respondent  and 
unprofessional  because  she  interrupted  respondent  and  did  not  let  him  explain.  Smith  stated 
that  he  heard  respondent  talking  in  a  calm  and  polite  manner  to  Antoine.  Smith  admitted, 
however,  did  not  observe  the  interaction  between  Antoine  and  respondent  and  he  offered  no 
testimony  or  statement  on  whether  he  heard  respondent  confronting  Achar  and  calling  her  a 
liar.  Accordingly,  less  probative  weight  was  assigned  to  Smith’s  testimony  and  statement. 

10    

18. 

(A)  Later,  after  the  graduation  ceremony,  on  June  23,  2011,  Principal  Seary 
held  a  conference  with  respondent  to  discuss  his  conduct  and  statements  to  her,  Achar,  and 
the  assistant  principal  with  regard  to  the  graduation  programs,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  16  — 
17  above.  Respondent  was  present  for  the  conference  along  with  Tony  Osumi,  the  chapter 
chair  of  the  teachers’  association.  Assistant  Principal  Antoine  was  also  present. 

(B)  During  the  conference,  Principal  Seary  reviewed  and  discussed 

respondent’s  conduct  and  statements.  Respondent  indicated  that  a  lot  of  the  things  that  the 
principal  mentioned  in  the  conference  were  not  true  and  he  would  respond  in  writing.  The 
principal  reviewed  two  prior  incidents  in  2010  when  respondent  had  become  stressed  and  an 
incident  when  he  became  angry  with  another  employee,  said  the  employee  was  the  most 
dishonest  person  he  had  known,  and  did  not  talk  to  the  employee  for  several  weeks. 
Regarding  the  latter  incident,  the  principal  had  advised  respondent  that  his  conduct  at  that 
time  had  been  unprofessional  and  would  not  be  tolerated  in  the  workplace. 

(C)  At  the  conference  on  June  23,  2011,  Principal  Seary  directed  respondent  to 

always  conduct  himself  in  a  professional  manner,  not  to  call  people  names,  treat  other 
persons  with  respect,  and  never  take  his  anger  and  stress  out  on  others  by  yelling  and  being 
disrespectful  to  them.  The  principal  also  directed  respondent  to  see  a  doctor  and  take  sick 
leave  days  if  he  becomes  too  stressed  to  work.  Following  the  conference,  Principal  Seary 
prepared  a  two-page  Conference  Memorandum  to  memorialize  the  discussion  at  the 
conference  and  sent  a  copy  to  respondent. 

19. 

On  July  14,  2011,  respondent  submitted  his  written  response  to  the  Conference 
Memorandum.  In  his  written  response,  which  was  11-pages  in  length,  respondent  recounted 
his  view  of  the  events  during  the  week  of  June  13,  2011,  and  characterized  Principal  Seary  as 
angry  and  hostile,  adding  that  her  “anger  erupted  uncontrollably”  on  June  14th.  He  did  not 
acknowledge  that  he  engaged  in  any  wrongdoing  or  made  any  inappropriate  statements.  He 
indicated  that  it  had  been  a  “morally  challenging  year  because  [the  principal  had]  gone  out  of 
[her]  way  to  thwart  productive  efforts  and  [to]  sabotage  progress.”  He  shared  “anonymous 
recommendations”  of  Principal  Seary,  which  were  actually  criticisms  of  her.  Respondent 
recalled  that  the  principal  had  yelled  at  him  two  and  one-half  years  ago  when  he  borrowed  a 
computer.  Respondent  accused  the  principal  of  having  a  vision  in  which  “lying  is  a  virtue 
and  telling  the  truth  becomes  taboo”  and  that  she  should  carry  out  her  duties  professionally 
and  stop  lying  to  the  staff.  Respondent  described  himself  as  a  “patient,  kind,  honest,  helpful 
and  calm  person”  and  suggested  that  the  principal  should  apologize  for  yelling  at  him. 

20. 

Tony  Osumi  accompanied  respondent  to  the  conference  on  June  23,  2013,  in 
his  capacity  as  chapter  chair  of  the  teachers’  association.  He  is  a  teacher  with  the  District. 
He  was  a  teacher  at  Central  High  School  from  2002  through  2013  and  the  chapter  chair  of 
the  teachers’  association  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  for  one  year  during  the  2010-2011 
school  year.  At  Central  High  School,  Osumi  observed  respondent  interact  with 
administrators  over  the  years  and  saw  him  teaching  in  the  classroom  on  a  few,  brief 

     

occasions  during  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Osumi  never  heard  any  complaints  about 
respondent  or  observed  respondent  to  have  any  negative  interactions  with  administrators  or 
students.  He  heard  Principal  Seary  praise  respondent  for  his  work  with  WASC  and  with 
students  during  the  2012-2013  school  year.  Osumi  noted  that  the  principal  became  agitated 
at  a  couple  of  faculty  meetings. 

21. 

Based  on  Findings  1,  2(A),  5  —  8,  and  15  —  19  above,  respondent  engaged  in 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  when,  in  June  2011,  he  yelled  at  the 
principal  and  called  her  “rude  and  disrespectful”,  called  the  senior  office  technician  a  “liar,” 
yelled  out  at  the  assistant  principal,  “You  are  all  a  bunch  of  liars,”  and  accused  the  principal, 
among  other  things,  of  having  a  vision  “where  lying  is  a  virtue,”  in  response  to  the  June  23, 
2011  conference.”  Respondent’s  conduct  constituted  violations  of  the  District’s  Employee 
Code  of  Ethics  and  Ethics  Policy  Statement  as  well  as  the  Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the 
Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons. 

2011-2012  School  Year 

22. 

(A)  During  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent  worked  with  Santos 

Robles,  a  classified  employee,  in  providing  computer  and  technology  services  for  Central 
High  School  and  Tri-C.  While  he  was  the  technology  coordinator,  respondent  did  not 
supervise  Robles.  Robles  was  supervised  by  Assistant  Principal  Gary  Martinez.  Both 
respondent  and  Robles  reported  to  the  assistant  principal. 

(B)  On  an  undetermined  date  during  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent 

and  Robles  had  a  disagreement  in  the  workplace.  Although  he  did  not  supervise  Robles, 
respondent  felt  that  he  was  responsible  for  tracking  the  classified  employee’s  attendance  and 
job  performance.  Their  relationship  became  strained.  As  a  result,  Robles  became  unhappy 
with  his  job  and  complained  to  Assistant  Principal  Martinez.  The  assistant  principal  met 
with  respondent  to  resolve  the  situation.  He  reminded  respondent  that  he  did  not  supervise 
Robles.  Respondent  became  agitated  and  angry.  Respondent  left  the  meeting,  saying  the 
principal  was  trying  to  get  rid  of  him.  Nevertheless,  after  the  meeting  with  the  assistant 
principal,  respondent  continued  to  work  with  Robles  for  the  remainder  of  the  school  year 
without  incident. 

23. 

During  the  2011-2012  school  year,  respondent  spoke  with  Assistant  Principal 

Martinez  in  informal  meetings  approximately  twice  a  week.  Respondent  confided  in  the 
assistant  principal.  He  spoke  about  his  job  as  technology  coordinator.  On  three  or  four 
occasions,  however,  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conversations  with  the  assistant 
principal  about  the  school  counselor  and  the  principal.  Respondent  said  that  the  counselor 
was  speaking  badly  about  the  assistant  principal.  Respondent  also  stated  that  the  principal 

*  For  purposes  of  this  Decision,  “inappropriate  conduct”  refers  to  conduct  that  is  not 

appropriate  in  the  working  environment  of  the  District's  schools.    

was  “power  hungry”  and  “trying  to  destroy”  respondent.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez 
listened  but  did  not  place  any  credence  or  weight  on  respondent’s  comments.  He  thought 
that  respondent  was  only  trying  to  befriend  or  ally  himself  with  the  assistant  principal.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  assistant  principal  did  not  stop  respondent  or  caution  him  about  talking 
inappropriately  about  fellow  administrators  either. 

2012-2013  School  Year 

24. 

(A)  At  the  end  of  the  2011-2012,  the  governing  council  of  Central  High 
School  and  Tri-C  determined  to  eliminate  the  position  of  technology  coordinator.  As  a 
result,  respondent’s  contract  was  not  renewed.  Beginning  in  the  fall  semester  of  the  2012- 
2013  school  year,  respondent  was  returned  to  a  teaching  position  and  he  was  placed  in  a 
classroom  site  at  the  East  Los  Angeles  Occupational  Center,  which  was  part  of  Central  High 
School  and  Tri-C,  to  teach  business  and  computer  skills.  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  had 
received  a  “Perkins  Grant”  and  was  able  to  offer  a  business  class  at  the  occupational  center. 
Respondent  was  familiar  with  the  occupational  center  because  he  had  installed  computers 
there. 

(B)  During  that  fall  semester,  the  District  learned  that  respondent’s  credential 
to  teach  vocational  business  had  expired.  Under  the  Perkins  Grant,  a  business  credential  was 
required  to  teach  the  business  class  at  the  occupational  center.  Principal  Seary  contacted 
respondent  and  encouraged  him  to  renew  his  credential.  The  credential  was  easily  renewed 
by  filing  a  renewal  application  with  payment  of  a  $60  fee.  Respondent  informed  Seary  that 
he  decided  not  to  renew  his  business  credential  because  he  planned  to  retire.  Seary  informed 
respondent  that  he  had  to  transfer  to  another  teaching  position.  She  provided  him  with 
options  at  different  classroom  sites  within  Central  High  School.  Respondent  chose  to  take 
the  teaching  position  for  a  new  orientation  class  which  was  to  be  started  in  the  spring 
semester  and  held  in  the  open  room  in  the  bungalow  at  the  administrative  offices  of  Central 
High  School  and  Tri-C. 

(C)  The  orientation  class  was  created  by  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  who 
envisioned  that  new  students  would  be  placed  in  the  class  for  a  short  time  in  order  to  be 
introduced  to  the  curriculum  and  resources  of  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  At  the  same 
time,  the  teacher  in  the  orientation  class  was  expected  to  evaluate  the  new  students’ 
aptitudes,  skills,  and  credits.  Based  on  its  original  purpose,  the  orientation  class  was  meant 
to  be  a  temporary  placement  and  the  students  would  stay  there  until  transferred  to  a 
permanent  classroom  within  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  However,  some  students  could 
remain  in  the  orientation  class  if  the  teacher  agreed  and  recommended  their  placement  there 
after  having  discussions  with  the  assistant  principal. 

(D)  During  the  fall  2012  semester,  respondent  looked  forward  to  teaching  the 
orientation  class.  He  went  to  a  District  warehouse,  found  student  chairs,  and  asked  that  the 
chairs  be  moved  to  the  classroom  in  the  bungalow.  The  classroom  had  desks  and  a 
whiteboard. 

School  equipment,  such  as  computers,  was  stored  there.  Respondent  organized 

13    

  

and  decorated  the  classroom,  which  was  an  open  space  and  not  a  self-contained  or  closed 
classroom. 

(E)  The  orientation  class  was  the  only  Central  High  School  or  Tri-C  class 

located  at  the  administrative  offices.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  and  other  administrative 
staff  had  offices  near  or  around  the  room  where  the  orientation  class  was  held  in  the 
bungalow.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  was  respondent’s  direct  supervisor. 
Seary’s  office  was  located  in  the  main,  two-story  building.  Administrators  and  school  staff 
members  had  to  walk  through  the  classroom  to  find  their  way  to  other  offices  in  the 
bungalow. 

Principal 

25. 

During  the  first  two  months  of  the  2013  spring  semester,  Assistant  Principal 

Martinez  received  reports  that  respondent  was  doing  a  good  job  as  the  teacher  of  the 
orientation  class.  For  the  first  three  weeks  of  the  semester,  there  were  only  three  students 
placed  in  the  orientation  class.  Respondent  was  able  to  provide  one-to-one  instruction  about 
computers  to  the  three  students.  He  took  an  interest  in  the  students  whom  he  found  were 
interested  in  learning  and  well-behaved.  He  counseled  them  about  their  academics,  career 
choices,  and  work  habits.  The  assistant  principal  observed  that  the  students  were  performing 
academic  work  in  the  class.  Respondent  was  pleased  with  the  students’  progress.  As  the 
spring  semester  proceeded,  respondent’s  orientation  class  also  became  known  as  an 
intervention  class. 

26. 

(A)  Early  that  spring  semester,  respondent  began  to  have  problems  in  his 

relationships  with  staff  members  at  the  administrative  offices  of  Central  High  School  and 
Tri-C.  On  February  5,  2013,  Counselor  Ileana  Battle  entered  respondent’s  classroom  during 
instructional  time  to  talk  with  a  student.  The  counselor  did  not  advise  respondent  of  the 
purpose  of  her  visit  or  ask  for  his  permission  to  talk  to  the  student.  The  counselor  asked  the 
student  for  his  name  several  times.  In  front  of  the  students  in  his  class,  and  in  a  loud  voice, 
respondent  questioned  the  counselor  why  she  had  to  ask  for  the  student’s  name.  He  stated 
that  she  had  already  spoken  with  the  student  a  number  of  times  before.  The  counselor 
became  embarrassed  and  upset  by  respondent’s  questioning.  She  said,  “Excuse  me,”  several 
times  to  respondent  before  she  left  the  classroom.  The  counselor  complained  to  the  assistant 
principal  that  respondent  had  spoken  to  her  in  a  disrespectful  and  inappropriate  manner  in 
front  of  his  students. 

(B)  Later  that  same  day,  February  5,  2013,  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  held  a 

conference  with  respondent  who  appeared  with  a  teachers’  association  representative.  A 
second  administrator  was  also  present.  The  assistant  principal  discussed  the  incident  that 
respondent  had  with  the  counselor  that  morning.  Respondent  responded  by  saying  that  he 
did  not  like  the  way  the  counselor  spoke  to  the  student.  Respondent  stated  that  the  counselor 
was  disrespectful  to  the  student  and  she  should  have  asked  for  his  permission  first  before 
talking  to  the  student.  The  assistant  principal  advised  and  directed  respondent  to  avoid 
correcting  another  employee’s  behavior,  especially  in  front  of  students,  and  to  inform  an 
administrator  if  he  had  any  concerns  about  an  employee’s  behavior.  Respondent  was 
directed  to  avoid  raising  his  voice  or  arguing  with  another  employee  in  front  of  students. 

14    

Respondent  was  further  advised  that  his  failure  to  follow  an  administrative  directive  could 
lead  to  disciplinary  action.  The  assistant  principal  prepared  a  conference  memorandum  and 
gave  a  copy  to  respondent. 
inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional. 

Respondent’s  conduct  and  comments  to  the  counselor  were 

27. 

(A)  Beginning  in  late  January  2013,  the  number  of  students  placed  in 

respondent’s  orientation  class  gradually  increased  until  there  were  approximately  11  students 
in  the  class  by  the  end  of  February.  A  few  of  the  students  were  from  other  schools  or 
classroom  sites  and  were  serving  “in-school  suspensions.”  Some  of  the  students  were 
disruptive  and  their  behaviors  became  problematic  for  respondent.  Respondent  found  it 
increasingly  difficult  to  acclimate  the  new  students  while  providing  instruction  to  the  class. 
There  arose  a  change  in  the  way  that  respondent  managed  the  dynamics  and  discipline  in  his 
class.  He  began  to  raise  his  voice  to  correct  the  students’  behaviors  and  to  argue  with  them. 
He  told  students  to  sit  down  in  a  loud  voice.  Respondent  questioned  students’  inappropriate 
behaviors  in  front  of  their  peers,  which  caused  the  students  to  react  in  an  aggressive  manner. 
The  assistant  principal  began  receiving  reports  about  the  behavior  of  students  in  respondent’s 
class.  The  students  were  talking  in  class  and  not  paying  attention  to  respondent’s  instruction. 
From  his  office  or  while  walking  by  respondent’s  classroom,  the  assistant  principal  heard 
respondent  arguing  with  his  students  during  instructional  time. 

(B)  At  the  end  of  February  2013,  respondent  went  to  Assistant  Principal 

Martinez  and  lamented  that  his  students  were  talking  in  his  class,  not  doing  school  work,  and 
not  following  his  directions.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  advised  respondent  to  develop  a 
disciplinary  plan  and  to  post  it  in  his  classroom.  He  told  respondent  the  classroom  rules  and 
consequences  for  violating  the  rules  that  should  be  placed  in  his  disciplinary  plan.  The 
assistant  principal  gave  materials  on  classroom  management  to  respondent  and  recommended 
that  he  read  the  literature.  During  two  or  three  meetings  after  school,  the  assistant  principal 
sat  down  with  respondent  and  helped  him  to  develop  a  disciplinary  plan. 
respondent  posted  the  disciplinary  plan  in  his  classroom  in  the  bungalow  of  the 
administrative  offices. 
However,  despite  instruction  from  the  assistant  principal  to 
implement  the  disciplinary  plan,  respondent  did  not  do  so  on  a  consistent basis.  He 
continued  to  argue  with  students.  He  begged  students  to  obey  him. 

Afterwards, 

(C)  In  February  and  March  2013,  respondent  also  asked  Hector  Martinez,  the 
school  advisor  or  dean  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C,  for  help  in  managing  the  students 
in  his  orientation  class.  Advisor  Martinez  enrolled  and  placed  students  in  respondent’s  class 
and assisted  teachers  in  dealing  with  disciplinary  issues. 
On  several  occasions,  respondent 
called  Advisor  Martinez  and  asked  him  to.come  to  his  class  to  talk  with  his  students.  On  one 
occasion,  Advisor  Martinez  walked  by  respondent’s  classroom  and  saw  students  arguing 
with  respondent  and  not  letting  him  have  the  last  word.  Advisor  Martinez  tried  to  defuse  the 
classroom  and  redirect  the  students.  He  took  respondent  aside  and  gave  him  advice  on  how 
to  manage  the  students. 

28. 

(A)  On  or  about  March  4,  2013,  respondent  was  having  difficulty  in 

redirecting  student  HMA.  to  follow  the  classroom  rules  outlined  in  his  disciplinary  plan. 

15 

   

  

EIBBBA.  refused  to  do  any  assignments  and  was  antagonizing  his  peers.  Respondent  called 
Advisor  Martinez  for  assistance.  The  advisor  came  to  respondent’s  classroom  and  saw  that 
respondent  was  continuing  to  argue  with  EA.  and  the  student  was  not  letting  up  or 
allowing  respondent  to  have  the  last  word.  The  other  students  in  the  class  were  amused  by 
the  argument.  Advisor  Martinez  told  respondent  to  handle  the  student  in  a  different  way.  In 
response,  respondent  said  in  a  loud  to  the  advisor,  ““You  should  try  to  be  in  this  classroom  tor 
a  change.”  Respondent  also  accused  Advisor  Martinez  of  not  supporting  him.  Students  in 
the  classroom  heard  respondent’s  comments  to  the  advisor.  Respondent  was  angry  and 
frustrated. 
unprofessional. 

His  comments  to  the  advisor  were  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and 
: 

29. 

 Onor  about  March  4,  2013,  respondent  “exchang[ed]  words”  with  student  ria 

A.  in  the  orientation  class.  Respondent  lost  his  patience  and  told 
classroom.  Respondent,  however,  apparently  did  not  want Haga.  to  have  the  last  word  and 
followed  the  student  out  of  the  bungalow.  Respondent  told  EA.  that  he  was  the  teacher. 
Hi.  responded  by  speaking  in  an  aggressive  manner.  Advisor  Martinez  came  to  the  area 
outside  of  the  bungalow.  He  tried  to  defuse  the  situation  by  telling  respondent  that  he  would 
handle  the  matter  with  the  student  and  suggested  that  respondent  return  to  his  classroom. 
The  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent  acted  in  a  negative  manner  towards  the  student 
and  put  himself  in  an  unsafe  position  by  following  and  continuing  to  confront  the  student. 

A.  to  leave  the 

30. 

(A)  In  March  2013,  respondent  had  difficulties  with  student  WIE.  who 

was  enrolled  in  his  classroom  for  approximately  two  weeks.  WHEEL.  was  known  as  a 
difficult  student  due  to  her  behaviors.  Her  parents  were  engaged  in  divorce  proceedings. 
She  had  been  referred  to  Central  High  School  because  she  was  serving  an  “in-school 
suspension.”  She  refused  to  sit  in  her  assigned  seat.  She  frequently  challenged  and 
undermined  respondent’s  authority  and  was  able  to  get  other  students,  particularly  the  boys, 
to  take  her  side  during  arguments with  respondent.  Boys  in  the  classroom  implored 
respondent  not  to  pick  on  wi.  and  to  leave  her  alone. 

(B)  From  his  nearby  office,  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  heard  respondent 

B.  and  spoke  to  respondent  about  his  conduct.  Respondent  confided  in 

arguing  with  W 
Assistant  Principal  Martinez  and  told  him  that  he  was  unable  to  convince 
anything  and  was  losing  control  of  his  classroom.  He  complained  that  the  student  would  not 
sit  in  her  assigned  seat.  The  assistant  principal  suggested  to  respondent  that  he  implement 
plan.  Respondent  spoke  to  Principal  Seary  about  the  student.  He  told  the 
his  disciplinary 
principal!  that 
directions.  She  walked  around  the  classroom  and  did  not  sit  in  her  assigned  seat.  She  told 
other  students  what  to  do. 

B.  was  uncooperative,  refusing  to  do  any  school  work  or  to  follow  his 

.  to  do 

(C)  Respondent’s  classroom  situation  with  student 

B.  came  to  a  head 
on  March  5,  2013.  On  that  date,  he  had  a  protracted  argument  with 
B.  about  her 
seating  assignment.  The  argument  took  place  during  instructional  time  in  front  of  other 
students.  Respondent  wanted wi.  to  sit  in  the  front  row  because  she  had  talked  too 
much  when  she  sat  in  the  back  the  day  before.  Respondent  called  Assistant  Principal 

   

16 

  

  

   

Antoine  for  assistance.  The  assistant  principal  talked  with  wis.  and  told  respondent  to 
let  her  sit  in  any  one  of  three  seats.  The  student  still  refused  to  sit  down.  Rather  than 
ignoring  where 
.  was  Sitting  or  standing  and  working  instead  with  the  other  students 
in  his  classroom,  respondent  chose  to  continue  to  argue  with  the  student  for  over  10  minutes. 
Respondent  told wie.  that  she  should  learn  to  follow  his  instructions  because  he  was  the 
teacher.  W 
to  talk  to  her  mother. 
stopped  him. WH.  left  the  classroom  and  went  outside.  Respondent  then  called  the 
student’s  mother  and  the  administrative  office.  The 
told  respondent  to  call  the  District  police  about  W 
classroom  and  school  site. 

B.  became  upset,  called  her  mother  on  her  telephone,  and  asked  respondent 
.  asked  another  student  to  get  up  from  his  seat  but  respondent 

principal  came  to  respondent’s  class  and 
.  unauthorized  departure  from  the 

   

(D)  Two  days  later,  on  March  7,  2013,  WA.  returned  to  school.  She 

arrived  late  and  refused  to  sit  in  her  assigned  seat  or  do  any  academic  work.  A  male  student 
arrived  late  and  gave WH.  a  hug.  Respondent  told  the  male  student  to  sit  down  and 
said,  “This  is  a  classroom  and  not  a  place  to  socialize.”  The  male  student  started  arguing 
_  with  respondent  and WH.  joined  him.  Respondent  realized  that  he  had  lost  control  of 

his  classroom  and  called  the  administrative  office  and  requested  assistance.  Shortly 
thereafter, wi.  was  suspended  and  removed  from  respondent’s  class.  As  was  his 
custom,  respondent  wrote  an  email  memo  to  the  principal  and  assistant  principal  to  document 
his  difficulties  with  student  WA. 

31. 

At  the  end  of  the  school  day  on  March  13,  2013,  respondent  became  embroiled 

in  a  dispute  about  bus  tokens  with  student REIN.  and  another  student.  Students  received 
tokens  from  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  so  that  they  could  transport  themselves  to  and 
On  this  date,  respondent  did  not  want  to  give  bus  tokens  to  RMN.  and  the 
from  school. 
other  student  because  he  believed  that  they  both  had  Transit  Access  Pass  (TAP)  cards  and 
did  not  need  any  bus  tokens.  He  asked  the  students  to  accompany  him  to  the  office  to  check 
if  they  had  received  TAP  cards. 
Assistant  Principal  Antoine  heard  the  argument  when  she  walked  into  the  bungalow.  A 
teacher  came  out  of  an  office.  REN.  paced  around  and  hit  a  wall  with  his  fist. 
It  appeared 
to  the  assistant  principal  that  the  student  wanted  to  physically  attack  or  hit  respondent.  The 
assistant  principal  tried  to  caim  REBBIN.  who  stated  that  respondent  was  not  treating  him 
fairly.  Respondent  kept  talking  to  the  student  in  a  loud  voice,  saying  he  was  the  teacher  and 
that REIN.  was  the  student.  Respondent’s  comments  only  served  to  further  antagonize  the 
student.  Assistant  Principal  Antoine  directed  respondent  to  leave  and  told  a  staff  member  to 
call  Advisor  Martinez.  Respondent  left  the  scene.  The  advisor  come  down  to  the  bungalow 
and  walked  the  student  out  to  the  street  to  calm  him  down. 

.  became  furious  and  started  yelling  at  respondent. 

32. 

The  next  day,  March  14,  2013,  respondent  had  a  particularly  bad  day.  He 

became  upset  when  three  or  four  students  did  not  listen  to  him  or  follow  his  directions.  He 
yelled  at  them  in  a  loud  voice  and  pointed  his  finger  at  them.  He  told  them  to  sit  down  and 
shut  up.  The  students  ignored  respondent  or  laughed  at  him.  Principal  Seary  happened  to  be 
walking  by  respondent’s  class.  As  observed  by  Principal  Seary,  respondent’s  face  became 
‘red  and  he  was  breathing  hard.  He  said  something  about  his  heart  and  appeared  dizzy  and 

17 

  

   

short  of  breath.  Believing  respondent  was  having  a  heart  attack,  the  principal  escorted 
respondent  from  his  classroom  and  down  the  hallway.  She  told  staff  to  call  911.  Respondent 
refused  medical  attention.  The  principal  directed  respondent  to  go  home  and  said  she  would 
take  care  of  his  class.  She  offered  to  drive  him  home but  respondent  left  school  on  his 
accord.  He  drove  off  in  his  car  but  then  stopped  on  the  street.  He  sat  in  his  car  for  two  hours 
in  order  to  calm  down.  Respondent  then  drove  home.  He  went  to  a  physical  therapy 
appointment  and  called  his  doctor. 

33. 

Inthe  evening  of  March  14,  2013,  respondent  sent  an  email  to  Principal  Seary 

and  thanked  her  for  “‘taking  care  of  [his]  class.”  He  informed  the  principal  that  he  had  two 
medical  appointments  the  next  day.  He  also  asked  the  principal  if  he  could  attend  a  meeting 
of  WASC  that  was  scheduled  for  four  days  in  the  next  week  at  a  high  school  in  Orange 
County.  Principal  Seary  sent  an  email  reply  to  respondent  and  stated  that-she  was  glad  that 
respondent  was  “taking  care  of  [him]self”  and  suggested  that  they  talk  when  he  returned  to 
school. 
indicated  that  the  meeting  would  give  respondent  the  opportunity  to  “get  some  distance  from 
the  classroom”  and  “to  think  things  through.” 

The  principal  approved  respondent’s  request  to  attend  the  WASC  meeting.  She 

| 

34, 

(A)  The  next  week,  respondent  went  to  the  WASC  meeting  in  Orange  County. 

Shortly  thereafter,  he  took  leave  and  went  to  China  for  three  weeks  to  visit  his  ill  father. 
While  respondent  was  on  leave,  Principal  Seary  assigned  Jesse  Williams,  a  substitute  teacher 
to  teach  respondent’s  class.  Williams  had  assisted  respondent  earlier  in  the  semester. 
Williams  had  good  rapport  with  the  students  who  listened  and  were  receptive_to  him. 
Williams  was  able  to  deal  with  students  who  tried  to  disrupt  the  class,  like 
speaking  to  them  privately.  He  tended  to  speak  to  the  students  in  a  quiet  but  firm  manner. 

.,  by 

(B)  When  respondent  returned  to  school  on  April  15,  2013,  after  his  overseas 

trip,  Principal  Seary  permanently  assigned  Williams  to  be  a  co-teacher  in  respondent’s 
orientation  or  intervention  class.  Williams  had been  able  to  teach  the  class  by  himself 
without  asking  the  administrators  for  help  while  respondent  was  away.  Respondent  was  not 
happy  with  Williams’  presence  in  his  classroom:  On  one  occasion,  respondent  told  Williams 
to  leave  and  complained  to  the  principal  that  Williams  should  not  be  in  his  classroom. 

35. 

(A)  On  or  about  May  7,  2013,  student  Raul  N.  arrived  late  to  class. 

Respondent  thought  he  detected  the  odor  of  marijuana  emanating  from REN.’s  clothing 
and  asked  the  student  why  his  clothing  smelled  of  marijuana.  RMBBN.  replied  that,  when  he 
was  getting  on  the  bus,  a  man  at  the  bus  stop  was  smoking  marijuana.  Respondent  was 
skeptical  of REN.’s  explanation. 

(B)  Later  in  the  school  day, REN.  became  upset  because  his  friend  was 

expelled.  Respondent  was  aware  of 
the  juvenile  justice  system.  Nevertheless,  at  the  end  of  the  school  day  when al.  asked 
respondent  for  bus  tokens,  respondent  refused  to  give  any  bus  token  to  REBBN.  He  told  the 
student  that  he  would  not  get  any  bus  tokens  because  he  had  a  TAP  card.  Respondent 
believed  that REN.  was  Selling  or  trading  the  bus  tokens  for  marijuana  or  other  contraband. 

s  mood  and  that  the  student  was  on 

probation  to 

18 

   

  

  

As  he  testified  in  the  hearing,  respondent  professed  that  it  was  against  his  beliefs  and  moral 
standards  to  give  any  bus  tokens  to  the  student.  REN.  became  angry  and  upset  when 
respondent  did  not  give  him  any  bus  tokens.  The  student  began  yelling  at  respondent  and 
respondent  spoke  to  the  student  in  a  loud  voice. 

(C)  From  his  nearby  office,  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  heard  loud  voices  and 
arguing  coming  from  respondent’s  classroom.  He  found  respondent  and REIN.  standing  six 
or  seven  feet  apart  near  the  teacher’s  desk  and  arguing  in  loud  voices.  The  assistant  principal 
intervened  and  told  respondent  that  he  wanted  to  talk  to REN.  separately.  The  assistant 
principal  led  the  student  to  the  conference  room  and  had  the  student  sit  down. 
explained  that  respondent  would  not  give  him  any  bus  tokens.  After  five  minutes,  REN. 
calmed  down  and  was  able  to  speak  in  a  normal  tone  of  voice. 

. 

D)  Unexpectedly,  respondent  came  into  the  conference  room.  He  began 

NS  who  became  agitated  and  angry.  REBN.  stood  up,  clenched  his  fists, 

talking  with 
and  leaned  towards  respondent.  Respondent’s  posture  became  rigid  and  his  face  became 
flushed.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  feared  that  the  student  might  physically  attack 
respondent  and  told  respondent  to  “just  step  outside”  of  the  conference  room  and  to  let  him 
talk  to  the  student.  Respondent  left  the  conference  room. 

(E)  In  the  view  of  Assistant  Principal  Martinez,  respondent  had  not  conducted 
himself  in  a  professional  manner  with  respect  to  this  incident  with  RIBBIN._  First,  respondent 
did  not  act  appropriately  when  he  refused  to  give  bus  tokens  to  student  REBEN.  The  bus 
tokens  are  given  to  students  at  no  cost  so  that  they  can  come  to  school  and  go  home.  A 
teacher  is  responsible  to  obtain  bus  tokens  from  the  office  and  to give  them  to  students. 
Second,  respondent  should  have  terminated  the  argument  with 
became  angry  and  upset.  Instead,  respondent  escalated  a  volatile  situation  by  entering  the 
conference  room  and  continuing  to  confront  the  student,  thereby  endangering  himself  and  the 
student. 

.  when  the  student 

36. 

(A)  During  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent 

continued  his  custom  of  talking  on  a  weekly  basis  with  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  in  the 
latter’s  office  after  the  school  day  was  over  at  2:45  p.m.  Respondent  used  these  informal 
sessions  with  the  assistant  principal  to  talk  about  his  students  or  events  that  had  occurred  in 
his  classroom.  On  May  10,  2013,  while  meeting  with  the  assistant  principal,  and  for 
undetermined  reasons,  respondent  told  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  that,  on  two  occasions, 
Principal  Seary  had  sent  “people”  to  his  house  to  “kill”  him.  Respondent  told  the  assistant 
principal  that  he  and  his  wife  were  so  afraid  that  they  hid  under  their  bed  all  day  or  all  night 
long. 

(B)  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  became  concerned  by  respondent's 
accusation  that  the  principal  had  sent  people  to  his  house  to  kill  him.  Respondent’s 
accusation  caused  Martinez  to  begin  to  question  respondent’s  mental  health  or  stability.  The 
assistant  principal  reported  respondent’s  comment  to  the  principal  who  was  shocked.  The 
principal  thought  that  respondent’s  comment  was  “too  crazy”  and  made  respondent  appear 

19 

   

that  he  “had  lost  his  mind.”  The  principal  became  concerned  about  the  safety  of  the  school 
site.  She  had  not  sent  anybody  to  respondent’s  house  to  kill  him.  Principal  Seary 
immediately  called  the  District’s  Operations  Coordinator  for  the  Educational  Options 
Division,  who  advised  the  principal  not  to  do  anything  and  that  he  would  come  to  the 
administrative  offices  of  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  on  Monday  after  the  ensuing 
weekend. 

(C)  On  Monday,  May  13,  2013,  Dr.  Vincent  Carbino,  Operations  Coordinator, 
came  to  the  administrative  offices  and  met  with  Principal  Seary.  The  principal  explained  that 
she  had  sent  two  administrative  staff  members  to  respondent’s  home  to  pick  up  documents 
and  had  not  sent  people  there  to  kill  respondent.  Carbino  asked  why  there  was  another 
teacher  in  respondent’s  classroom.  The  principal  explained  that,  although  he  had  been  given 
directives  and  advice  on  how  to  manage  his  classroom,  respondent  tended  to  escalate 
arguments  with  students  and  to  lose  control  of  his  classroom.  The  principal  said  that  the 
second  teacher,  Williams,  was  able  to  manage  the  students’  behaviors  and  could  handle  any 
situations  in  the  classroom. 

(D)  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  next  met  with  respondent  in  a  small  room 

while  Williams  was  left  in  charge  of  respondent’s  classroom.  There  were  five  students  in 
respondent’s  class  that  day.  Carbino  informed  respondent  that  teachers  and  staff  were 
concerned  by  his  comment.  Respondent  reiterated  that  the  principal  had  sent  people  to  his 
house  and  that  he  had  hid  under  the  bed  for  several  hours.  Respondent  expressed  his  belief 
that  Principal  Seary  was  “out  to  get  him”  and  trying  to  kill  him.  He  stated  that  the  principal 
had  put  spies  in  his  classroom,  namely  the  co-teacher  Williams.  Carbino  asked  respondent 
what  strategies  or  techniques  he  used  to  manage  the  students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent 
blamed  the  principal,  adding  that  the  principal  had  placed  students  in  his  classroom  who  did 
not  belong  in  school  with  the  intention  of  making  sure  that  he  would  fail  as  a  teacher.  He 
blamed  the  students,  saying  the  students  were  the  worst  pupils  in  the  District,  belonged  to 
gangs,  and  used  drugs. 

(E)  On  May  13,  2013,  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  found  that  respondent 

had  no  insight  into  what  strategies  or  skills  he  could  use  to  manage  his  classroom  and  de- 
escalate  potentially  volatile  situations  with  students.  He  did  not  take  any  responsibility  for 
his  actions  that  caused  students  to  get  upset  at  him  and  did  not  acknowledge  that  he  could 
have  handled  situations  better.  Instead,  respondent  blamed  the  students  and  the  principal. 
He  told  the  Operations  Coordinator  that  he  had  a  good  career  with  the  District  until  the 
principal  interfered  with  his  job.  On  a  personal  note,  respondent  acknowledged  having  a 
He  indicated  that  his  father’s 
high  level  of  stress  and  taking  medication  to  get  to  sleep. 
illness  was  a  contributing  factor  to  his  stress.  On  May  13,  2013,  respondent  talked  with 
Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  for  60  to  90  minutes.  Carbino  was  surprised  by 
respondent’s  candor. 

37. 

 Ashort  time  later,  respondent  learned  that  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  had 

reported  his  statement  about  the  principal  sending  people  to  his  house  to  kill  him. 
Respondent  confronted  the  assistant  principal  and  told  him,  “I  hope  you’re  happy.  You  have 

20    

  

achieved  your  goal  of  destroying  my  career.”  Respondent  was  upset  and  trembling  when  he 
spoke  to  the  assistant  principal.  In  response,  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  told  respondent 
that  he  was  not  trying  to  destroy  his  career.  Respondent’s  comment  to  the  assistant  principal 
was  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional. 

38. 

B.  for  10  minutes,  causing  the  student  to  leave  the  classroom 

Based  on  Findings  1,  2(A),  5  —  10,  15,  and  27  —  35  above,  respondent  engaged 
in  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  with  three  students.  Respondent 
followed  and  continued  to  argue  with  student Ha.  until  the  student  became  aggressive. 
He  argued  with  student 
site.  Twice,  he  argued  with  student  HN.  about  bus  tokens  in  a  loud  voice  and,  on  the 
second  occasion,  antagonized  student  RAMEN.  until  he  became  so  angry  that  it  appeared  that 
he  was  about  to  physically  attack  respondent.  Respondent’s  conduct  constituted  violations  of 
the  Districts  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Ethics  Policy  Statement,  Board  Resolution  for  the 
Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons,  and  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students.  In  addition, 
respondent’s  manner  of  trying  to  discipline  the  three  students  was  not  positive  or  conducive 
to  learning  inasmuch  as  he  failed  to  employ  effective  classroom  management  and  positive 
behavioral  support  strategies,  in  violation  of  District’s  Discipline  Foundation  Policy 

39. 

Based  on  Findings  1,  2(A),  5  -  10,  12,  15,  28,  and  36  above,  respondent 

engaged  in  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  when  he  loudly 
questioned  Counselor  Battle  in  front  of  his  classroom,  told  Advisor  Martinez  in  a  loud  and 
angry  manner  that  the  advisor  should  try  being  in  his  classroom  and  was  not  being 
supportive,  falsely  accused  Principal  Seary  of  sending  people  to  his  house  to  kill  him,  and 
accused  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  of  trying  to  destroy  his  career.  Respondent’s  conduct 
constituted  violations  of  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Ethics  Policy  Statement, 
and  the  Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons.  In  addition, 
respondent’s  statements  to  the  counselor  and  advisor  constituted  threatening  or  disruptive 
behavior  that  had,  or  can  be  reasonably  predicted  to  have,  a  substantial  detrimental  effect  on 
those  employees’-mental  health  or  work  performance,  in  violation  of  the  District’s 
Workplace  Violence,  Bullying,  and  Threats  Policy. 

40. 

It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  2013  spring  semester,  respondent  failed 
to  properly  supervise  students  or  allowed  the  students  to  smoke  marijuana  while  respondent 
and  the  students  took  walks  around  the  school  as  a  physical  education  activity.  No  probative 
evidence  was  presented  to  demonstrate  that  students  smoked  marijuana  or  that  respondent 
allowed  students  to  smoke  marijuana  during  the  physical  education  walks.  Nor  was  it 
established  that  respondent  ignored  students  who  smoked  marijuana  during  the  physical 
education  walks.  The  District’s  evidence  largely  consisted  of  the  uncorroborated  hearsay 
statements  of  students  which  did  not  constitute  probative  evidence  of  these  allegations. 

41. 

(A)  After  meeting  with  respondent  on  May  13,  2013,  Operations  Coordinator 

Carbino  directed  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  and  others  to  submit  statements  describing 

Temporary  Housed  Status 

21 

   

other  recent  incidents  involving  respondent  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  Carbino 
returned  to  the  District  offices  and  conferred  with  the  Executive  Director  of  Educational 
Options.  On  May  15,  2013,  Carbino  received  statements  from  Assistant  Principal  Martinez, 
Administrative  Assistant  Courtney  Ramsay,  and  Advisor  Martinez. 

(B)  On  May  15,  2013,  the  Executive  Director  of  Educational  Options  for  the 

District,  removed  respondent  from  the  classroom  at  Central  High  School  and  reassigned  him 
to  “Employee  Temporary  Housed  Status”  pending  investigation  of  an  allegation  of 
misconduct.  Respondent  was  directed  to  meet  with  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  at  the 
District  offices  on  South  Beaudry  Avenue. 

7 

(C)  On  May  15,  2013,  respondent  met  with  Carbino  who  provided  an 

orientation  for  his  Temporary  Housed  Status.  Respondent  was  directed  to  report  every 
“contract  day”  to  work  at  a  designated  area  of  a  cubicle  behind  a  network  printer  on  the  11th 
floor  of  the  District  offices  on  South  Beaudry  Avenue.  Carbino  was  named  as  respondent’s 
immediate  supervisor.  Respondent’s  assigned  hours  were  8:00  a.m.  until  2:30  p.m.  daily. 
He  was  barred  from  contacting  any  students  or  their  families  and  from  working  in  any 
capacity  for  the  District. 

: 

42. 

(A)  Subsequently,  Carbino  scheduled  an  appointment  for  respondent  to  meet 

with  the  District’s  Medical  Director  in  the  Employment  Assistance  department.  The 
appointment  was  scheduled  for  June  3,  2013.  Carbino  asked  respondent  to  attend  the 
appointment  so  he  could  receive  help  with  his  stress  and  anxiety  and  be  able  to  better  manage 
students  and  reduce  arguments  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  declined  to  attend  the 
appointment  with  the  Medical  Director. 

| 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that,  on  or  about  June  3,  2013,  respondent  twice 

failed  to  meet  with  the  District’s  Medical  Director  after  being  directed  to  do  so. 
probative  evidence  was  presented  to  demonstrate  that  the  Operations  Coordinator  or  any 
other  District  administrator  directed  respondent,  or  issued  a  formal  or  written  directive  to 
respondent,  to  attend  an  appointment  or  meeting  with  the  Medical  Director. 

No 

43. 

(A)  On  June  10,  2013,  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  scheduled  a 

conference  to  be  held  in  his  office  at  the  District  and  gave  notice  of  the  conference  to 
respondent.  Carbino  planned  to  discuss  with  respondent  the  following  incidents  during  the 
2013  spring  semester:  on  March  4  when  he  told  Advisor  Martinez  that  he  should  teach 
respondent’s  class;  on  March  5  when he  had  a  prolonged  argument  with  student  Wendy  B. 
who  left  the  school;  on  March  14  when  he  became  red-faced  and  complained  about  his  heart 
and  had  to  leave  school  after  arguing  with  students;  on  May  7  when  he  had  a  “shouting 
altercation”  with  student  RN  :: 
to  his  house  to  kill  him;  and  on  June  3  when  he  failed  to  attend  the  appointment  with  the 
Medical  Director.  The  Operations  Coordinator  also  wanted  to  discuss  with  respondent  the 
many  occasions  when  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  counseled  him  about  his  “loud  and 
contentious  interactions  with  students  and  [his]  inability  to  follow  the  Central  High 

on  May  9  when  he  claimed  that  the  principal  sent  people 

22 

 

School/Tri-C  behavior  plan.”  Respondent  failed  to  appear  for  the  June  10,  2013  conference 
with  Carbino,  claiming  that  he  was  ill. 

(B)  On  June  10,  2013,  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  prepared  a  Conference 

Memorandum  in  which  he  offered  assistance  and  guidance  to  respondent.  Carbino  advised 
respondent  that  it  is  inappropriate  and  dangerous  to  escalate  interactions  with  students;  he 
had  a  professional  responsibility  to  use  appropriate  disciplinary  techniques  and  to  follow  the 
disciplinary  policy  of  Central  High  School;  he  was  required  to  follow  the  District’s  policies 
regarding  corporal  punishment,  the  respectful  treatment  of  others,  and  ethics.  Carbino 
advised  respondent  that  he  may  contact  his  health  care  provider  for  assistance  with  any  anger 
management  issues. 
with  students  into  loud  and  contentious  interactions;  to  use  appropriate  disciplinary 
techniques  and  follow  the  disciplinary  policy  of  the  high  school;  to  follow  the  District 
policies;  to  seek  administrative  assistance;  to  meet  with  the  Medical  Director  on  June  17;  and 
not  to  retaliate  against  students,  parents,  or  staff  members  who  may  have  provided 
information  about  the  District’s  investigation. 

In  addition,  Carbino  directed  respondent  not  to  escalate  interactions 

(C)  In  the  June  10,  2013  Conference  Memorandum,  Carbino  further  advised 

respondent  that  his  failure  to  follow  the  directives  could  lead  to  disciplinary  action.  Carbino 
indicated  that  he  was  continuing  to  conduct  an  investigation  and  that  the  results  of  the 
investigation  could  lead  to  disciplinary  action.  Carbino  sent  a  copy  of  the  Conference 
Memorandum  to  respondent.  He  did  not  receive  a  response  from  respondent. 

2013-2014  School  Year 

44. 

(A)  For  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent  remained  on  Temporary 

Housed  Siatus  at  the  District  offices  on  South  Beaudry  Avenue.  His  supervisor  was  changed 
to  Robert  Eiseman,  Director  of  Educational  Options.  At  the  beginning  of  this  school  year, 
Eiseman  directed  respondent  to  stay  on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District  offices.  Respondent 
signed  a  form  acknowledging  the  rules  of  his  Temporary  Housed  Status. 

(B)  On  or  about  October  7,  2013,  Eiseman  received  a  report  that  respondent 

had  been  in  the  copy  room  on  the  18th  floor  of  the  District  offices.  On  October  7,  2013, 
Eiseman  wrote  a  letter  to  respondent  and  directed  respondent  “to  stay  on  the  11th  floor 
during  [his]  assigned  time.”  Eiseman  directed  respondent  “not  to  wander  around  the  building 
during  [his]  duty-free  time  except  to  areas  previously  discussed  (i.e.  cafeteria).”  Respondent 
was  further  directed  to  use  the  restrooms  on  the  11th  floor. 

(C)  Subsequently,  in  October  2013,  respondent  disobeyed  the  directive  to  stay 
on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District  offices.  He  went  to  the  18th  floor  on  several  occasions.  He 
was  seen  on  the  18th  floor  in  the  copy  room  and  in  the  company  of  another  employee.  On 
one  of  those  occasions,  respondent  left  some  materials  that  he  had  copied  on  the  desk 

belonging  to  Director  Eiseman.    

45. 

Based  on  Finding  1,  2(A),  5  —  7,  and  44  above,  respondent’s  conduct  in 

October  2013,  while  he  was  on  Temporary  Housed  Status,  in  failing  to  abide  by  the 
administrator’s  directive  to  remain  on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District’s  offices  and  in  going  up 
to  the  18th  floor  on  more  than  one  occasion,  where  District  administrators  have  offices, 
constituted  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct. 
disregard  of  the  administrator’s  directive  likewise  constituted  violations  of  the  District's 
Ethics  Policy  and  Ethics  Policy  Statement,  which  require  employees  to  be  respectful  and 
responsible,  and  have  personal  integrity. 

Respondent’s  flagrant 

46.  —  In  October  2013,  Director  of  Educational  Options  Eiseman  met  with 
respondent  and  a  teachers’  association  representative  to  discuss  the  information  and 
documentation  that  the  District  had  obtained  in  its  investigation  of  respondent’s  alleged 
conduct  at  Central  High  Schoo!.  Respondent  complained  that  the  investigation  was  unfair 
and  that  administrators  were  not  telling  the  truth.  Respondent  stated  that  he  would  reply  in 
writing  to  the  allegations  but  it  was  not  established  that  he  submitted  a  response  to  the 
District  or  that  the  District  received  a  written  reply  from  him. 

47. 

(A}  On  or  about  November  14,  2013,  Director  of  Educational  Options 

Eiseman  directed  respondent  to  attend  an  appointment  with  a  psychologist  for  a  fitness  for 
duty  evaluation.  The  psychologist’s  office  was  located  in  Torrance.  The  written  directive 
contained  a  typographical  error  in  that  respondent  was  told  to  report  to  the  psychologist’s 
office  on  a  certain  date  at  “11:30  p.m.”  Respondent  went  to  the  psychologist’s  office  at 
11:30  p.m.  and  found  the  office  was  closed. 

(B)  On  December  4,  2013,  after  respondent  underwent  a  psychological 

evaluation,  the  psychologist  issued  an  Employee/Patient  Mental  Health  Clearance  in  which 
the  psychologist  found  respondent  was  fit  for  duty  and  did  not  need  any  work  restrictions  or 
accommodations.  The  psychologist  also  found  that  respondent  did  not  present  a  danger  to 
himself  or  to  others  in  an  occupational  or  work  setting.  The  mental  health  clearance  was 
forwarded  to  the  District. 

48. 

On  November  22,  2013,  the  District  reassigned  respondent  to  the  Educational 
Service  Center  (ESC)  East  effective  on  December  2nd  and  provided  him  with  written  notice 
of  the  rules  and  directives  of  his  temporary  reassignment.  Respondent’s  supervisor  at  ESC 
East  was  Davie  Devereaux,  Operations  Coordinator.  Respondent  was  directed  to  report  to 
ESC  East  for  work  in  the  afternoons  from  12  noon  until  3:00  p.m.  and  to  remain  in  an 
assigned  work  area.  Respondent  was  informed  that  he  was  relieved  from  duty  of  his  regular 
assignment  at  Central  High  School  and  was  directed,  in  part,  to  refrain  from  going  to  the  high 
school  without  prior  written  administrative  approval  and  to  refrain  from  contacting  any 
students  at  Central  High  School.  At  ESC  East,  respondent  was  informed  that  he  could  be 
assigned  work  at  the  discretion  of  the  District  and  was  directed  to  bring  appropriate  work 
with  him  such  as  designing  lesson  plans  and  reviewing  training  materials.  In  the  mornings, 
respondent  was  directed  to  stay  at  home.  The  District  advised  respondent  that  his  failure  to 
follow  the  rules  and  directives  of  his  temporary  reassignment  could  result  in  disciplinary 

action,    

49, 

(A)  On  January  28,  2014,  Director  of  Educational  Options  Eiseman  held  a 
conference  with  respondent.  A  second  District  administrator  and  a  teachers’  association 
representative  were  also  present.  During  this  conference,  Eiseman  gave  respondent  a  Notice 
of  Unsatisfactory  Act  of  Certificated  Employee  (Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act)  and  a  Notice 
of  Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  (Notice  of  Suspension)  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44938.  Under  the  Notice  of  Suspension,  the  District  suspended  respondent  for  15 
days  without  pay.  Both  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension 
contained  the  same  causes  for  discipline,  charges,  and  assistance  and  guidance.  Respondent 
acknowledged  receipt  of  the  notices. 

(B)  The  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  alleged 

that  respondent  committed  11  charges  or  violations  as  a  teacher  at  Central  High  School  and 
Tri-C  from  November  29,  2010,  through  May  13,  2013.  The  notices  alleged  that  the  charges 
constituted  causes  for  discipline  as  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  and  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusals  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  District.*  Specifically,  the  notices  alleged  that  respondent's  conduct  violated  seven 
District  policies.  As-assistance  and  guidance,  Eiseman  attached,  in  part,  copies  of  three 
conference  memoranda  and  four  District  policies.  The  specific  language  of  the  charges, 
causes  for  discipline,  and  assistance  and  guidance  are  set  forth  in  the  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  (Exhs.  32  and  33),  which  are  incorporated 
into  and  made  a  part  of  this  Decision  by  this  reference.” 

50. 

(A)  On  March  14,  2014,  Eiseman  in  his  capacity  as  the  Director  of 

Educational  Options  held  another  conference  with  respondent  and  a  representative  from  the 
teachers’  association  to  discuss  statements  filed  by  students.  The  students  had  alleged  that 
respondent  had  permitted  students  to  smoke  marijuana  during  physical  education  walks  and 
in  class  and  committed  other  misconduct.®  Respondent’s  supervisor  at  ESC  East,  Operations 
Coordinator  Devereaux;  was  also  present.  During  the  conference,  respondent  denied  the  new 
charges  and  stated,  in  part,  “This  is  the  way  they  treat  people  in  China  and  Korea.  They 
fabricate  false  stories.”  Respondent  also  complained  that  he  had  gone  to  see  the  psychologist 
“at  midnight”,  was  cleared  to  return  to  work,  and  was  not  paid  for  his  time  and  mileage.  On 
March  17,  2014,  Eiseman  prepared  a  Conference  Memorandum  in  which  the  director 
summarized  the  discussion  at  the  conference,  including  the  assistance,  guidance,  and 
directives  given  to  respondent.  Eiseman  advised  and  directed  respondent,  in  part,  to  read, 

“The  Amended  Accusation  does  not  allege  immoral  conduct  as  a  cause  for  dismissal 

in  this  matter. 

°  The  charges  and  causes  for  discipline  contained  in  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act 
and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  are  different  than  the  charges  and  causes  for  discipline  set  forth 
in  the  Amended  Accusation,  which  is  the  governing  pleading  in  this  matter. 

®  Tt  was  not  established  that  respondent  allowed  students  under  his  supervision  to 

smoke  marijuana  during  physical  education  walks,  in  class,  or  otherwise. 

25    

review,  and  adhere  to  a  number  of  District  policies  that  had  been  provided  to  all  teachers  at 
Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  Respondent  received  a  copy  of  the  Conference 
Memorandum. 

(B)  As  set  forth  in  Finding  40  above,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent 

permitted  students  to  smoke  marijuana,  or  failed  to  properly  supervise  students  during 
physical  education  walks. 

51. 

(A)  During  the  conference  on  March  14,  2014,  in  response  to  the  new  charges, 

respondent  proffered  a  new  allegation  of  his  own.  On  March  15,  2014,  respondent  sent  an 
email  to  so  that  he  could  make  a  written  record  of  his  allegation. 

(B)  On  March  14  and  15,  2014,  respondent  reported  to  Eiseman  that,  back  on 

May  7,  2013,  in  the  preceding  school  year,  he  witnessed  a  suspected  child  abuse  incident 
involving  Assistant  Principal  Martinez.  Respondent  claimed  that,  while  he  was  teaching,  he 
heard  a  “loud  commotion”  in  the  conference  room  next  to  his  classroom  in  the  bungalow  at 
the  administrative  offices  of  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C.  He  reported  that  he  saw  a 
student  run  out  of  the  conference  room  and  then  saw  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  running 
after  the  student  while  “screaming”  at  him.  Respondent  asserted  that  the  student  appeared 
“very  scared”  and  sought  ‘refuge”  from  the  assistant  principal  in  his  classroom.  Respondent 
claimed  that  the  students  in  his  class  were  “shocked  and  scared”  by  the  assistant  principal’s 
action.  Respondent  stated  that  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  stopped  chasing  the  student 
when  he  saw  that  respondent  and  the  students  were  watching  him,  and  he  returned  to  the 
conference  room. 

52. 

(A)  After  the  March  14,  2014  conference,  Director  Eiseman  assigned 

Operations  Coordinator  Devereaux  to  check  whether  respondent  had  properly  filed  a  child 
abuse  report  in  accordance  with  District  policy.  As  summarized  in  Finding  14  above,  the 
District’s  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  requires  that  a  District 
employee,  each  of  whom  is  considered  a  mandated  child  abuse  reporter,  call  the  appropriate 
law  enforcement  department  serving  the  school  or  the  Department  of  Children  and  Family 
Services  (DCFS)  immediately,  or  as  soon  as  practically  possible,  after  the  employee  has 
actual  knowledge  or  a  reasonable  suspicion  of  child  abuse.  The  District  employee  is  also 
required  to  file  a  written  report  entitled  “Suspected  Child  Abuse  Report”  to  the  law 
enforcement  agency  within  36  hours  of  receiving  such  knowledge  of  suspected  child  abuse. 

(B)  More  specifically,  the  District’s  child  abuse  reporting  policy  provides  that 

an  employee,  who  has  a  question  or  is  unsure  about  whether  or  not  certain  conduct  or 
incident  should  be  reported  as  suspected  child  abuse,  may  call  a  child  protective  agency,  such 
as  DCFS  or  LAPD,  or a  local  law  enforcement  agency  serving  the  employee’s  school. 
However,  the  policy  further  provides  that,  regardless  of  any  discussion  with  a  child 
protective  agency  representative,  the  employee  who  reasonably  suspects  child  abuse,  must 
make  the  telephone  call  and  submit  a  written  report  of  suspected  child  abuse.  Under  the 
policy,  reasonable  suspicion  means  that  it  is  objectively  reasonable  for  a  person  to 
contemplate  a  suspicion,  based  upon  facts  that  could  cause  a  reasonable  person  in  a  like 

26    

position,  drawing  when  appropriate  on  his  or  her  training  and  experience,  to  suspect  child 
abuse  or  neglect.  Reasonable  suspicion  does  not  require  proof  or  investigation  by  the 
reporting  party  or  employee. 

(C)  As  established  by  the  testimony  of  Director  of  Educational  Options 

Eiseman,  the  District  provides  training  to  all  employees  on  the  District’s  Child  Abuse  and 
Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  two  times  per  year,  including  on-line  training  through  a 
video  entitled,  “Child  Abuse  Awareness  Training.”  Employees  must  certify  that  they  have 
knowledge  of  the  reporting  requirements  and  procedures  and  will  comply  with  the 
requirements.  Employees  are  given  a  certificate  for  completing  the  training.  In  addition,  the 
District  provides  its  employees  with  a  list  and  telephone  numbers  of  local  law  enforcement 
agencies  that  serve  the  District  schools  as  well  as  access  to  an  on-line  form  that  can  be  used 
to  electronically  report  actual  or  suspected  child  abuse  to  the  law  enforcement  agencies  and 
DCES. 

(D)  Operations  Coordinator  Devereaux  learned  that,  on  July  19,  2012, 

respondent  completed  the  2012-2013  Child  Abuse  Awareness  Training  offered  by  the 
District  and  received  a  certificate  of  completion.  Devereaux  called  the  Los  Angeles  Police 
Department,  the  law  enforcement  agency  serving  Central  High  School,  and  neither  found  nor 
was  he  given  any  information  that  respondent  had  filed  a  child  abuse  report  with  the  law 
enforcement  agency  at  any  time  on  or  after  May  7,  2013,  when  respondent  claimed  that  he 
saw  the  assistant  principal  commit  suspected  child  abuse.  Devereaux  and/or  Eiseman  also 
checked  the  District’s  I-Star  system  and  found  no  evidence  that  respondent  had  used  the 
system  to  report  suspected  child  abuse. 

53. 

(A)  Since  2008,  respondent  has  received  twice  yearly  training  on  the  District’s 
Child  Abuse  and  Reporting  Requirements.  Respondent  confirmed  his  receipt  of  the  training. 
During  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent  received  training  each  semester  at  faculty 
meetings  as  well  as  on-line  training  on  child  abuse  reporting.  Respondent  also 
acknowledged  that  he  is  a  mandated  child  abuse  reporter  and  that  he  knew  the  requirements 
for  reporting  child  abuse  and  suspected  child  abuse  under  the  District’s  policy.  In  fact, 
respondent  filed  a  written  report  of  suspected  child  abuse  with  respect  to  a  different  incident 
on  March  1,  2013,  which  demonstrated  that  he  knew  the  procedure  for  properly  reporting 
child  abuse. 

(B)  Following  the  alleged  incident  on  May  7,  2013,  between  the  assistant 

principal  and  the  student,  respondent  testified  that  he  called  DCFS  to  report  an  incident  of 
suspected  child  abuse.  He  acknowledged  that  he  did  not  file  a  written  report  with  DCFS. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  file  a  written  report  because  DCFS  told  him  that  the 
incident  did  not  constitute  child  abuse  and  that  he  did  not  have  to  file  a  report.  He  stated  that 
he  called  DCFS  again  later  and  obtained  a  reference  number  that  confirms  that  he  made  an 
oral  report  of  suspected  child  abuse.  However,  respondent  never  gave  the  reference  number 
to  the  District.  Respondent  also  claimed  that  he  told  Principal  Seary  of  the  incident  of 
suspected  child  abuse  involving  the  assistant  principal  and  that  he  had  called  DCFS.  The 
principal  did  not  recall  any  such  conversation  with  respondent. 

27 

   

  

(C)  Respondent  admitted  that  he  did  not  consult  the  District’s  policy  on  Child 

Abuse  Reporting  Requirements  before  or  after  calling  DCFS.  Respondent  further  testified 
that  he  was  not  aware  of  the  District’s  requirement  that  an  employee  must  still  complete  and 
submit  a  written  report  to  the  agency  even  if  the  agency  advised  the  employee  that  there  will 
be  no  investigation  and  that  the  school  should  handle  the  matter  administratively. 

(D)  After  meeting  with  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  on  May 13,  2013, 

respondent  sent  a  number  of  complaints  by  email  to  the  District’s  Superintendent. 
August  19,  2014,  respondent  sent  an  email  entitled  “Report  Suspected  Child  Abuse”  to  the 
Superintendent.  In  this  email,  respondent  advised  the  Superintendent  of  the  suspected  child 
abuse  that  he  saw  committed  by  the  assistant  principal  at  Central  High  School  on  May  7, 
2013.  In  response,  the  Superintendent  asked  respondent  whether  he  had  filed  a  written 
report,  as  required  by  state  law.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  that  he  had  filed  a  written 
report  of  suspected  child  abuse  with  DCFS  or  another  agency. 

On 

54. 

Based  on  Findings  1,  2(A),  5,  14,  and  51  —  53  above,  on  May  7,  2013, 

respondent  violated  the  District’s  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  by 
failing  to  submit  a  written  report  to  DCFS or  to  the  LAPD  within  36  hours  of  having 
purportedly  observed  an  incident  of  suspected  child  abuse  committed  by  an  assistant 
principal  at  Central  High  School.  On  or  about  March  14,  2014,  after  reporting  the  suspected 
incident  of  child  abuse  to  the  District,  respondent  failed  to  file  a  written  report  with  DCFS  or 
the  LAPD.  Respondent  claimed  that  he  called  DCFS  but  admitted  that  he  did  not  submit  a 
written  report  to  DCFS  on  May  7,  2013,  or  on  any  date  thereafter.’  Respondent’s  conduct 
violated  the  District’s  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  and  also  constituted 
unprofessional  conduct. 

55. 

(A)  Subsequently,  Director  of  Educational  Options  Eiseman  scheduled  a 

conference  with  respondent  for  March  19,  2014,  to  discuss  his  allegation  that  he  witnessed 
suspected  child  abuse  committed  by  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  and  respondent’s  failure  to 
file  a  report  of  suspected  child  abuse.  On  March  19,  2014,  respondent  was  present  at  his 
temporary  assignment  at  ESC  East  but  he  failed  to  appear  for  the  conference.  Eiseman  re- 
scheduled  the  conference  for  April  2,  2014.  However,  respondent  was  out  of  the  country  in 
China  and  did  not  appear  at  the  re-scheduled  conference  either. 

(B)  On  April  2,  2014,  Eiseman  prepared  a  Conference  Memorandum  in  which 

he  wrote  that,  if  respondent  had  been  present  for  the  conference  that  day,  Eiseman  would 
have  discussed  the  following:  respondent’s  allegation  of  suspected  child  abuse  that  he  made 
at  the  March  14,  2014  conference;  respondent’s  failure  to  make  a  suspected  child  abuse 
report  within  36  hours  of  witnessing  the  incident  on  May  7,  2013;  and  respondent’s  failure  to 

?  The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  does  not  find  that  the  assistant 

principal  committed  child  abuse  on  a  student  on  May  7,  2013.  Because  respondent  told 
District  administrators  on  March  14,  2014,  that  he  saw  and  had  a  reasonable  suspicion  of 
child  abuse,  respondent  was  required  under  the  District’s  policy  to  make  an  immediate 
telephone  call  to  an  agency  and  submit  a  written  report  within  36  hours. 

28 

 

  

file  a  suspected  child  abuse  report  after  making  his  written  report  of  suspected  child  abuse  in 
his  March  15,  2014  email.  Eiseman  informed  respondent  that,  if  he  had  been  present  for  the 
conference,  he  would  have  been  able  to  respond  and  that  he  could  still  file  a  written  response 
within  five  days  of  receipt  of  the  Conference  Memorandum. 

(C)  In  the  April  2,  2014  Conference  Memorandum,  Eiseman  gave  respondent 
the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  report  suspected  child  abuse  immediately  because  it 
was  his  professional  responsibility  and  read,  review,  and  adhere  to  the  District’s  Child  Abuse 
and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  and  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  Eiseman  directed 
respondent  to  follow  the  terms  of  the  assistance  and  guidance. 

56. 

(A)  On  April  2,  2014,  Director  of  Educational  Options  Eiseman  issued  a 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  to  respondent  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  section  44938.  Under  the  Notice  of  Suspension,  respondent  was  suspended  for  15  days 
without  pay.  Both  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  contained 
the  same  causes  for  discipline,  charges,  and  assistance  and  guidance.  Eiseman  indicated  on 
the  notices  that  respondent  was  not  present  for  a  conference  to  receive  the  notices  and  that 
the  notices  would  be  mailed  to  him  by  certified  mail  with  return  receipt.  Respondent 
received  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  at  home  after  he 
returned  from  China. 

(B)  The  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of  Suspension  set  forth 

four  charges,  including  the  charge  that  respondent  failed  to  file  a  suspected  child  abuse  report 
within  36  hours  of  having  knowledge  of  suspected  child  abuse  on  May  7,  2013,  and  that 
respondent  failed  to  file  a  suspected  child  abuse  report  after  making  a  report  of  suspected 
child  abuse  in  his  email  on  March  15,  2014.  The  two  notices  alleged  that  the  charges 
constituted  causes  for  discipline  as  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  dereliction  of 
duty,  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusals  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  District.  The  notices  alleged  that  respondent's  conduct  violated  eight 
District  policies.  As  for  assistance  and  guidance,  Eiseman  attached,  in  pertinent  part,  copies 
of  his  March  14,  2014,  and  April  2,  2014  Conference  Memoranda. 

57. 

On  or  about  May  9,  2014,  respondent  filed  a  written  response  to  the  April  2, 

2014  Conference  Memorandum  and  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of 
Suspension.  He  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  Conference  Memorandum  and  notices  after 
returning  on  May  4,  2014,  from  a  family  emergency  abroad.  In  the  written  response  that  he 
sent  to  Eiseman,  respondent  addressed  various  issues  raised  by  the  District  in  Conference 
Memorandum  and  notices. 

58. 

On  March  5,  2015,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation.  Thereafter,  respondent 

filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  requested  an  administrative  hearing  on  the  charges  contained  in 
the  Accusation.  This  matter  ensued.  On  December  22,  2015,  the  District  filed  the  Amended 

Accusation.    

  

Respondent’s  Contentions  and  Evidence 

59. 

In  his  May  9,  2014  response  to  the  April  2,  2014  Conference  Memorandum 
and  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  Notice  of  Suspension,  respondent  contended,  in  part, 
that  his  classroom  in  the  bungalow  at  the  administrative  offices  of  Central  High  School  and 
Tri-C  was  appalling  and  nothing  more  than  “some  space  in  the  hallway,  surrounded  by 
abandoned  furniture  and  electronic  equipment  with  several  passes  and  doors  for  people  to 
come  and  go  that  [made]  learning  near  impossible.”  Respondent  stated  that  his  students’ 
needs  were  “neglected”  by  the  school  and  District  administrators  but  that,  nevertheless,  he 
students  to  improve  their  behaviors  and  academic  achievement, 
managed  to  teach  and  help 
including  student wis  Respondent  complained  that  school  and  District  administrators 
had  told  lies  about  him,  were  “dubious”  moral  leaders,  and  had  committed  “crimes,”  such  as 
eating  lunches  meant  for  students  under  a  federal  lunch  program. 

    

60. 

With  regard  to  his  alleged  failure  to  file  a  written  report  of  suspected  child 
abuse,  respondent  insisted  that  he  had  timely  filed  a  child  abuse  report  about  the  incident 
involving  the  assistant  principal  and  that  he  had  always  followed  the  District’s  rules  and 
policies.  He  argued  that  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  told  lies  and  that  the  assistant  principal, 
Principal  Seary,  and  Operations  Coordinator  Carbino  had  conspired  to  cover  up  an  incident 
of  child  abuse  and  to  remove  him  from  the  classroom  after  he  made  a  suspected  child  abuse 
report.»  Respondent  contended  that  Eiseman  as  the  Director  of  Educational  Options  had 
predetermined  to  dismiss  him  from  the  District  when  he  was  removed  from  the  classroom 
and  that  Eiseman  only  needed  time  to  “fabricate  and  forge  stories”  to  achieve  his  goal  of 
dismissing  respondent.  Respondent  stated  that  he  had  been  a  successful  teacher  for  the 
District  for  24  years  and  that  the  District  needed  to  examine  the  administrators’  motives  to 
determine  the  basis  of  “their  atrocious  accusations.”  Respondent  did  not  present  any 
evidence  to  corroborate  his  claims  or  contentions. 
child  abuse  report  with  the  proper  agency. 

He  admitted  that  he  did  not  file  a  written 

61. 

(A)  In  addition  to  the  testimony  of  Osumi  and  Smith,  respondent  presented 
several  other  witnesses.  David  Keith  Wiseman  has  been  an  employee  of  the  District  since 
2001  and  has  known  respondent  for  several  years.  He  was  a  special  education  coordinator 
for  Central  High  School  from  2001  through  2015  and  had  an  office  in  the  main  building  next 
to  the  bungalow  where  respondent’s  classroom  was  located  during  the  spring  semester  of  the 
2012-2013  school  year.  While  he  never  formally  observed  respondent  teaching,  Wiseman 
walked  by  respondent’s  classroom  a  number  of  times  and  saw  respondent  relating  well  to 
students.  He  never  saw  respondent  act  inappropriately  with  students.  Wiseman  did  not  see 
respondent  interact  with  school  administrators  but  noted  that  respondent  did  not  argue  or 
raise  his  voice  at  faculty  meetings. 

(B)  Camere  Solis  is  a  former  teacher  at  Central  High  School.  Respondent 

came  to  her  school  site  in  performing  his  duties  as  technology  coordinator.  Solis  also  saw 

  

®  It  was  not  established  which  suspected  child  abuse  report  respondent  was  referring 

to  in  his  May  9,  2014  response. 

30 

  

   

respondent  in  his  classroom  when  she  went  to  the  main  administrative  offices  for  meetings 
and  other  business.  Solis  testified  that  respondent  is  mild-mannered  and  that  he  interacted 
well  with  students  and  never  disrupted  a  faculty  meeting.  Solis  added  that  she  thought 
respondent  and  Principal  Seary  got  along  well  together  before  the  2013  spring  semester. 

(C)  ARM.  is  a  former  student  at  Central  High  School  where  he  was 

assigned  to  respondent’s  classroom  in  the  2013  spring  semester.  He  found  respondent  was 
understanding,  helpful,  and  a  good  teacher.  Respondent  sat  next  to  him,  answered  his 
questions,  and  showed  him  how  to  build  a  computer.  On  one  occasion,  respondent  stopped  a 
fight  from  starting  between  ABM.  and  another  student.  On  another  occasion,  respondent 
stated  in  class  that,  before  he  retired,  he  wanted  to  go  to  China  to  visit  his  family. 
Respondent  also  told ARM.  that  he  did  not  retire  because  he  was  removed  from  the 
classroom.  Since  leaving  Central  High  School,  Ao.  has  become  good  friends  with 
respondent  and  he  wrote  a  letter  in  support  of  respondent. 

62. 

With  respect  to  his  management  of  the  orientation  or  intervention  class  at 

Central  High  School  during  the  2013  spring  semester,  respondent  posted  his  disciplinary  plan 
in  his  classroom.  He  stated  that  his  classroom  rules  included  no  talking  during  class,  and  that 
he  listed  consequences  for  misbehavior,  such  as  calling  parents  and  making  referrals  for 
suspension. 
Respondent  claimed  that  he  had  no  difficulty  with  his  students  and  that  the 
students  followed  his  classroom  rules. 
asserted  that  he  took  the  students  aside  and  counseled  them  about  their  behaviors. 
Respondent  claimed  that  the  students  usually  stopped  their  disruptive  behaviors  after  one  or 
two  warnings  and  thus  “changed  right  away.”  He  further  claimed  that  no  student,  including 
Wendy  B.,  was  ever  out  of  control  in  his  class.  Respondent’s  testimony  was  not 
corroborated  by  other  staff  members  and  did  not  comport  with  his  own reports  to  the 
assistant  principal  and  the  testimony  and  reports  of  the  principal,  assistant  principals,  and 
advisor.  Accordingly,  respondent’s  claims  that  he  had  no  difficulty  with  students  and  that 
none  of  his  students  were  ever  out  of  control  in  his  classroom  were  not  credible. 

If  students  did  not  abide  by  a  rule,  respondent 

63. 

Respondent  denied  telling  Assistant  Principal  Martinez  on  May  14,  2013,  that 
the  principal  had  twice  sent  “hit  men”  to  his  house  to  kill  him.  Assistant  Principal  Martinez 
testified  and  reported  that  respondent  stated  to  him  that,  on  two  occasions,  the  principal  sent 
“people  “to  his  house  to  kill  him.  The  testimony  and  report  of  the  assistant  principal  were 
consistent  and  credible.  Greater  probative  weight  was  assigned  to  the  assistant  principal’s 
testimony  and  report  than  to  the  denial  by  respondent  of  his  own  statement. 

64. 

Respondent  confirmed  that  he  went  to  the  psychologist’s  office  in  Torrance  at 

11:30  at  night.  When  asked  why  he  did  that,  respondent  stated  that  he  thought  it  was 
possible  that  the  psychologist  would  be  present  in  his  office  at  that  late  hour..  Respondent 
added  that  he  went  to  the  appointment  at  night  to  show  the  District  that  he  could  obey  its 
directives.  Respondent  emphasized  that  the  psychologist  examined  him  at  a  subsequent 
appointment  and  found  him  to  be  fit  for  duty. 

: 

31 

   

  

65. 

Respondent  wants  to  continue  teaching  but,  as  he  testified,  he  does  not  want  to 

return  to  the  District  or  be  a  teacher  for  the  District.  He  enjoys  relating  to  students  and 
helping  and  encouraging  them  to  go  to  college.  Respondent  believes  that  he  has  been  a  good 
teacher  for  the  District,  the  disciplinary  process  is  unfair,  and  he  wanted  to  tell  his  side  of  the 
story  and  vindicate  himself.  Respondent  was  adamant  that  he  did  nothing  wrong.  He  did  not 
express  or  demonstrate  any  remorse  for  any  of  his  conduct. 

66. 

It  was  not  established  that  respondent  violated  the  District’s  policy  for  the 

Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  or  the  District’s  policy  for  Preventive  Measures  and 
Mandatory  Procedures  for  Students  Who  Violate  Laws  Regarding  Drugs,  Alcohol,  Tobacco, 
and  other  Intoxicants. 

67. 

Allegations  contained  in  the  Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges 

or  raised  during  the  hearing  for  which  there  are  no  specific  findings  in  this  Decision  were 
deemed  unproven  or  considered  irrelevant  or  surplussage  upon  consideration  of  all  of  the 
evidence. 

*  ok 

*e 

#  ok 

K 

* 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  makes  the  following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  the  District  is 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  as a  certificated  employee.  The  standard 
of  proof  is  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than, 
the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314, 
325.)  Complainant  has  met  its  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  for  his  persistent  violations  of 
or  refusals  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  governance  of  the  schools  of  the 
District  by  its  governing  board,  based  on  Findings  1  —  15,  21,  38  —  39,  45  and  54  above. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  the  violation  must  be 
persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of 
the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events 
or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered 

32    

persistent.  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 
317.)  Cause  for  discipline  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules.  (San  Dieguito 
Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal-App.3d 
1176,  1180-1181.) 

In  this  matter,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  respondent 

persistently  violated  several  of  the  District’s  policies.  In  the  2011  spring  semester, 
respondent  yelled  at  the  senior  office  technician,  principal,  and  assistant  principal  in  the 
aftermath  of  respondent’s  handling  of  the  graduation  programs.  Respondent’s  conduct  was 
inappropriate  and  disrespectful,  and  was  not  conducive  to  creating  a  workplace  environment 
of  trust,  care,  and  respect,  in  violation  of  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Ethics  Policy 
Statement,  and  the  Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons.  At 
a  conference  following  the  incident,  the  principal  directed  respondent  to  treat  other  persons 
with  respect  and  not  to  yell  at  them. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent 

inappropriately  questioned  a  counselor  in  a  loud  voice  in  front  of  his  class  which 
embarrassed  and  upset  her.  Respondent  also  told  the  school  advisor,  who  was  trying  to  help 
respondent,  that  he  should  try  to  be  in  his  class  and  accused  the  advisor  of  not  supporting 
him.  Later  in  the  semester,  respondent  accused  the  principal  of  sending  people  to  his  house 
to  kill  him  when,  in  fact,  she  had  dispatched  two  employees  to  respondent’s  house  only  to 
pick  up  documents  from  him.  When  the  assistant  principal  reported  his  accusation, 
respondent  said  to  the  assistant  principal,  “I  hope  you’re  happy.  You  have  achieved  your 
goal  of  destroying  my  career.”  The  aforementioned  conduct  violated  the  District's  Employee 
Code  of  Ethics,  Ethics  Policy  Statement,  and  the  Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful 
Treatment  of  all  Persons,  which  require  respect  among  employees  and  prohibit  harassing 
behavior  in  the  workplace.  Respondent’s  statements  to  the  counselor  and  advisor  also 
violated  the  District’s  anti-bullying  policy. 

During  the  2013-2014  semester,  after  he  was  placed  on  Temporary  Housed 
Status  at  the  District  offices,  respondent  violated  the  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  and  Ethics 
Policy  Statement  when  he  repeatedly  and  flagrantly  disobeyed  an  administrator’s  directive  to 
stay  on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District  offices.  In  March  2014,  respondent  reported  that  he  had 
witnessed  an  incident  of  suspected  child  abuse  involving  the  assistant  principal  and  a  student 
that  purportedly  occurred  in  May  2013.  However,  respondent  failed  to  file  a  written  report 
of  suspected  child  abuse  with  DCFS  or  LAPD  and  thus  violated  the  District’s  policy  for 
Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements.  His  failure  to  abide  by  this  policy  is 
considered  a  very  serious  violation,  for  teachers  are  mandated  reporters  of  child  abuse  and 
receive  yearly  training  on  the  policy. 

Moreover,  on  four  occasions  during  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013 

school  year,  while  he  was  the  teacher  of  the  orientation  class  at  the  main  offices  of  the 
Central  High  School  and  Tri-C,  respondent  violated  the  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics, 
Ethics  Policy  Statement,  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  Discipline  Foundation  Policy,  and 
the  Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  all  Persons  in  connection  with 

33    

The  student  became  upset  and  left  the  school  grounds. 

his  interactions  and  attempts  to  discipline  or  direct  three  students.  Respondent  continued  to 
argue  with  student Ha.  and  followed  the  student  outside.  The  student  became  angry  and 
the  advisor  had  to  intervene.  Respondent  had  a  protracted  argument  with  student  WH. 
about  her  seating  assignment. 
Respondent  twice  upset  student  REN.  by  refusing  to  give  him  bus  tokens  and  arguing  with 
the  student.  The  second  incident  nearly  led  to  a  physical  altercation  when  respondent 
followed  the  student  and  an  administrator  into  a  conference  room  and  resumed  his  argument 
with  the  student.  The  student  became  enraged.  Respondent’s  conduct  with  these  three 
students  endangered  the  safety  of  the  students  and  respondent,  did  not  constitute  positive 
behavior  support  and  discipline,  and  was  not  conducive  to  creating an  environment  of  trust 
and  learning. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  respondent  violated  the 

District’s  policy  against  corporal  punishment  or  policy  for  a  drug-free  and  alcohol-free 
workplace  or  school  environment.  No  probative  evidence  was  presented  to  show  that 
respondent  violated  these  two  policies. 

Respondent’s  violations  of  the  aforementioned  policies  and  regulations  of  the 
District  were  persistent  in  that  he  committed  violations  of  policies  over  the  course  of  several 
school  semesters.  He  continued  to  disregard  and  violate  these  policies  despite  having 
received  annual  training  and  professional  development  on  the  policies.  For  his  part, 
respondent  did  not  admit  that  he  committed  any  violations  of  the  District’s  policies  and  did 
not  show  any  remorse  or  present  any  evidence  of  his  rehabilitation  from  his  persistent 
violations. 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  unprofessional  conduct, 
based  on  Findings  1  —  15,  21,  38  —  39,  45,  and  54  and  Conclusions  of  Law  2  above. 

_  Here,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent  engaged  in 

unprofessional  conduct  by  persistently  violating  various  policies  and  regulations  of  the 
District,  as  set  forth  in  Conclusion  of  Law  2  above,  and  by  confronting  and  arguing  with  the 
three  students  in  his  orientation  class.  In  addition,  respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional 
conduct  when  he  failed  to  comply  with  directives  of  administrators.  On  June  23,  2011,  the 
principal  directed  respondent  to  treat  other  persons  with  respect  and  not  to  take  his  stress  out 
on  others  by  yelling  at  them.  Respondent  failed  to  abide  by  the  principal’s  directive. 
February  5,  2013,  he  questioned  the  counselor  in  a  loud  voice  in  front  of  his  class  and 
embarrassed  and  upset  the  counselor.  After  this  incident,  the  assistant  principal  counseled 
and  directed  respondent  to  avoid  questioning  the  professional  conduct  of  another  employee 
and  to  avoid  raising  his  voice  or  arguing  with  another  employee  in  front  of  students.  Yet,  on 
March  4,  2013,  respondent  violated  the  aforementioned  directives  to  be  respectful  and  not  to 
yell  at  other  employees  when  he  told  an  advisor  in  a  loud  voice  that  the  advisor  should  try  to 
be  in  respondent’s  classroom  and  accused  the  advisor of not  supporting  him.  In  October 
2013,  respondent  disobeyed  the  principal’s  directive  to  be  respectful  to  others  when  he 
-  flagrantly  disregarded  the  administrator’s  order  to  stay  on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District 

On 

34 

   

offices.  Respondent’s  conduct  as  described  hereinabove  was  insubordinate  and  constituted 
unprofessional  conduct. 

4. 

As  one  of  the  specific  grounds  for  which  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
may  be  dismissed  from  employment  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  unprofessional 
conduct  has  a  broad  import,  for  it  refers  generally  to  conduct  demonstrating  unfitness. 
However,  a  particular  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  not  only 
unprofessional  conduct  but  also  evident  unfitness  for  service  and  a  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  prescribed  rules  and  regulations.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174-1175;  Board  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953) 
41  Cal.2d  546,  551.)  Unprofessional  conduct  may  be  viewed  as a  lesser  included  form  of 
proscribed  behavior  within  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Conduct  constituting  evident 
unfitness  for  service  will  often  constitute  unprofessional  conduct,  but  the  converse  is  not 
true.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  Cal.  App.4th  1429,  1445.) 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  in  that 
respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  which  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit  to  be  a 
teacher  due  to  a  defect  in  temperament  that  cannot  be  remedied,  based  on  Findings  1  —  15, 
21,  38  —  39,  45,  54  and  Conclusions  of  Law  2  and  3  above. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1444- 
1445.)  Unlike  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  not  remedial  upon  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

(/d.  at  p.  1444.) 

In  general,  the  determination  of  evident  unfitness  requires  an  analysis  based  on 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  to  decide 
whether,  as  a  threshold  matter,  the  questioned  conduct  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee 
indicates  unfitness  for  Service.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  696.) 
If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  unfitness  is 
evident,  i.ec.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.) 

In  the  Morrison  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 

immorality  or  unprofessional  conduct  are  raised  in  a  teacher  dismissal  case,  the  applicable 
standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education,  supra, 
{1  Cal.3d.  at  p.  229.)  The  terms  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  have  been  held  too  vague, 
standing  alone,  and  must  be  applied  to  a  specific  occupation  and  given  context  by  reference 
to  fitness  for  the  performance  of  that  occupation.  (Basset  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1988)  201  CalApp.3d  1444,  1453.) 
Morrison  case  requires  that  the  determination  of  whether  a  person  is  fit  to  teach  be  based  on 

The 

35 

 

an  objective  and  analytical  approach  consisting  of  a  review  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  an 
assessment  of  a  variety  of  specific  criteria  which  include:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if 
any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7) 
the  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher.  These  factors  assist  a  board  of  education  in  determining  a  teacher's 
fitness  to  teach,  and  whether  the  teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and  overall  impact 
on  his  or  her  students 
State  Board  of  Education,  sitpra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp.  229-  230.) 

are  likely  to  meet  the  standards  of  the  board  of  education.  (Morrison  v. 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  has  broad  discretion  in  matters  of 

teacher  discipline  and  dismissal.  The  role  of  a  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine 
whether  the  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as 
measured  against  the  Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  a  teacher’s  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220.) 

6. 

Discussion—The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  in  this  matter  showed  that,  in 

the  spring  semester  of  the  2010-2011  school  year  when  he  was  the  technology  coordinator 
for  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C,  during  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-  2013  school  year 
when  he  was  a  teacher  of  the  orientation  or  intervention  class  at  the  administrative  offices, 
and  during  the  2013-2014  school  year,  when  he  was  placed  on  Temporary  Housed  Status  at 
the  District,  respondent  engaged  in  repeated  acts  of  inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and 
unprofessional  conduct,  which  also  violated  the  District’s  policies  and  regulations  that 
require,  in  part,  the  ethical  and  respectful  conduct  towards  others. 

In  June  2011,  respondent  yelled  at  the  principal  and  the  senior  office 

technician.  He  said  that  the  senior  office  technician  and  the  assistant  principal  were  “liars.” 
Afterwards,  the  principal  counseled  and  directed  respondent  not  to  yell  at  or  call  people 
names  and  to  treat  others  with  respect.  In  his  written  response,  respondent  questioned,  in 
part,  the  principal’s  morals  and  integrity. 

During  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  when  he  was 

assigned  to  be  a  teacher  at  the  administrative  offices  of  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C, 
respondent  had  difficulty  managing  his  classroom  and  engaging  his  students  to  learn.  He  did 
not  effectively  enforce  his  class  disciplinary  plan  or  follow  a  positive  behavioral  support  plan 
or  values.  Respondent  lost  his  patience  with  student Hi.  told  the  student  to  leave,  and 
followed  the  student  out  of  the  bungalow  to  continue  his  argument  with  the  student. 
Respondent  had  a  protracted  argument  with  student 
leave  the  school  grounds.  Respondent  escalated  arguments  over  bus  tokens  with  student 
REN.  by  continuing  to  confront  the  student  and  putting  himself  and  the  student  in 
dangerous  Situations.  Respondent  frequently  called  the  administrative  office  for  help  in 
managing  his  students. 

.,  which  caused  the  student  to 

36 

   

Moreover,  during  the  2013  spring  semester,  respondent  continued  to  engage  in 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  towards  his  colleagues  and 
administrators.  He  questioned  the  authority  of  a  counselor  in  a  loud  voice  and  in  front  of  his 
class  while  the  counselor  was  trying  to  talk  to  a  student.  The  principal  held  a  conference  and 
advised  respondent  not  to  correct  the  behavior  of  another  employee  or  to  raise  his  voice  or 
argue  with  another  employee  in  the  presence  of  students.  On  another  occasion,  when  an 
advisor  tried  to  help  respondent  with  his  class,  respondent  suggested  in  a  loud  voice  and  in — 
an  angry  and  frustrated  tone  that  the  advisor  should  try  being  a  teacher  in  his  class.  At  the 
end  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent  accused  the  principal  of  sending  people  to  his 
house  to  kill  him,  which  precipitated  his  removal  from  the  classroom  due  to  concerns  about 
his  mental  state  and  school  safety.  Before  he  was  transferred  to  the  District  offices, 
respondent  accused  the  assistant  principal  who  reported  his  accusation  of  trying  to  destroy 
his  teaching  career.  In  the  201-2014  school  year,  respondent  disobeyed  the  directive  of  the 
District’s  Director  of  Educational  to  stay  on  the  11th  floor  of  the  District  offices  while  he 
was  on  Temporary  Housed  Status.  Finally,  respondent  accused  the  same  assistant  principal 
of  having  engaged  in  suspected  child  abuse  even  though  respondent  had  not  submitted  a 

'  written  report  of  suspected  child  abuse  to  an  agency.  Respondent  engaged  in  his 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  conduct  on  multiple  occasions  after  he  was 
given  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  by  the  principal  and  assistant  principal  not  to  _ 
engage  in  disrespectful  conduct. 

Under  the  Morrison  factors,  respondent’s  conduct  was  not  only  unprofessional 

but  also  demonstrated  that  he  is  not  fit  for  service  as  a  teacher  with  the  District.  First, 
respondent’s  conduct  adversely  affected  students  and  schooLemployees  to  a  significant 
degree.  For  example,  he  continued  to  argue  with  student  E 
   
react  aggressively.  He  argued  for  10  minutes  with 
become  upset  and  leave  the  school.  On  two  occasions,  respondent  escalated  arguments  with 
student 
respondent  caused  the  student  to  hit  a  wall  in  anger  on  one  occasion  and  to  become  so  angry 
and  upset  on  a  second  occasion  that  an  administrator  feared  that  the  student  might  physically 
attack  respondent. 

.  over  the  provision  of  bus  tokens.  By  continuing  to  argue  with  the  student, 

.  and  caused  the  student  to 
   
B.,  which  caused  the  student  to 

Second,  respondent’s  conduct  is  relatively  recent.  He  engaged  in  his 

inappropriate,  disrespectful,  and  unprofessional  acts  beginning  in  June  2011,  continuing  into 
the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  and  ending  in  March  2014  when  he 
claimed  that  he  witnessed  suspected  child  abuse  but  failed  to  file  a  written  report.  Third, 
respondent  holds  a  credential  or  credentials  that  allow  him  to  teach  students  at  Central  High 
School  and  Tri-C,  which  are  schools  for  at-risk  students  within  the  District’s  Educational 
Options  Division. 

Fourth,  there  were  aggravating  factors  to  respondent’s  conduct.  In  June  2011, 

after  he  yelled  at  the  principal  and  assistant  principal  and  called  an  office  technician  a  liar 
over  an  incident  involving  graduation  programs,  respondent  was  counseled  by  the  principal 
not  to  take  his  anger  and  stress  out  on  others  by  yelling  and  being  disrespectful  to  them. 
Despite  being  counseled,  respondent  responded  by  criticizing  the  principal,  in  part,  for 

37 

   

having  low  morals,  promoting  falsehoods,  and  being  unprofessional.  Three  semesters  later, 
respondent  repeated  his  disrespectful  conduct  towards  administrators  at  the  administrative 
office.  During  the  spring  semester  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  respondent  embarrassed  a 
counselor  by  loudly  questioning  her  in  front  of  the  students  in  his  class.  He  denigrated  an 
advisor,  who  was  trying  to  help  him  in  his  class,  by  loudly  saying  that  the  advisor  should  try 
being  a  teacher  in  his  class  and  accused  the  advisor  of  not  supporting  him.  Respondent 
refused  to  give  bus  tokens  to  student  REN.  because  respondent  speculated  that  the  student 
was  selling  the  bus  tokens  to  obtain  marijuana.  Bus  tokens  were  freely  given  to  students  so 
that  they  could  get  to  school  and  return  home.  Respondent  accused  the  principal  of  sending 
people  to  his  house  to  kill  him  which,  in  turn,  caused  the  principal  to  worry  and  fear  about 
the  safety  of  the  school.  Respondent  was  unable  to  manage  his  students  and  frequently  asked 
for  help,  resulting  in  administrators  and  staff  frequently  taking  time  from  their  regular  duties 
In  May  2013,  the  principal  assigned  a  second  teacher  to 
to  come  to  his  class  and  assist  him. 
respondent’s  class. 

Fifth,  respondent’s  motives  for  engaging  in  his  unprofessional  conduct  were 

He  loudly 

Respondent  was  insubordinate  and  caustic  to  his 

blameworthy  and  not  praiseworthy.  In  his  relations  with  school  staff,  respondent  was 
arrogant  and  overbearing.  He  called  a  senior  office  technician  a  liar  when  she  did  not  agree 
that  he  had  told  her  that  he  had  already  picked  up  the  graduation  programs. 
questioned  a  counselor  while  she  was  trying  to  speak  to  one  of  his  students,  embarrassing  the 
counselor.  Respondent  apparently  believed  that  the  counselor  should  have  asked  him  for 
permission  to  talk  to  the  student. 
Supervisors  and  administrators.  He  yelled  at  the  principal,  accused  the  advisor  of  not 
supporting  him,  and  blatantly  disobeyed  a  directive  to  stay  on  the  11th  floor  while  he  was  on 
Temporary  Housed  Status  at  the  District  offices.  He  flaunted  the  administrator’s  directive  by 
leaving  papers  on  the  administrator’s  desk  on  the  18th  floor.  Respondent  became  frustrated 
and  upset  when  he  was  unable  to  manage  his  classroom  and  instruct  his  students.  His 
apparent  solution  was  to  begin  arguing  with  some  of  them.  He  kept  trying  to  tell  students 
that  he  was  the  teacher,  which  only  served  to  further  antagonize  them.  When  asked  about  his 
strategies  for  managing  his  classroom,  respondent  accused  the  principal  of  purposefully 
sabotaging  him.  He  characterized  the  students  as  the  worst  students  in  the  District  and 
accused  them  of  being  gang  members  and  drug  users.  When  confronted  with  a  second - 
Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  Notice  of  Suspension  in  April  2014,  respondent 
complained  that  administrators  were  neglecting  the  students  and  making  up  lies  about  him. 
Thus,  respondent’s  motives  or  reasons  for  his  misconduct  seemingly  arose  from  frustration 
with  staff  members  and  students  and  self-centered  indignation  at  the  criticisms  or  counsel  of 
others.  He  lacked  respect  for  staff  members,  did  not  recognize  the  authority  of 
| 
administrators,  did  not  care  for  some  of  the  students,  and  allowed  himself  to  become 
frustrated  and  upset  with  certain  students. 

Sixth,  the  evidence  has  a  strong  tendency  in  reason  to  prove  that  respondent  is 

very  likely  to  repeat  his  disrespectful  and  unethical  conduct  if  he  were  to  be  retained  by  the 
District  and  provided  additional  guidance,  training,  and  professional  development. 
Respondent  has  made  it  clear  that  he  does  not  want  to  work  for  the  District  or  to  teach  in  the 
District.  He  believes  that  he  has  been  an  excellent  teacher  and  employee  and  that  the 

38 

   

disciplinary  and  dismissal  process  has  been  based  on  fabrications  and  is  unfair  and  biased. 
What  is  especially  troubling  is  respondent’s  tendency  to  criticize  or  to  make  allegations 
against  administrators  after  he  has  been  counseled  or  found  to  have  engaged  in  inappropriate 
conduct.  For  example,  in  June  2011,  after  being  counseled  by  the  principal  for  yelling  and 
saying  that  other  employees  were  liars,  respondent  wrote  that  the  principal  was  angry 
hostile,  and  immoral.  In  May  2013,  soon  after  his  second  incident  with  the  student  R 
respondent  falsely  accused  the  principal  of  sending  people  to  his  house  to  kill  him.  In  March 
2014,  after  he  had  been  served  with  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act  and  the  Notice  of 
Suspension,  respondent  claimed  that  he  saw  the  assistant  principal  at  Central  High  School 
commit  an  act  of  suspected  child  abuse  almost  a  year  earlier.  Respondent  asserted  that  he 
had  made  a  report  of  the  incident  to  DCFS 
required  by  the  District’s  child  abuse  reporting  policy.  In  responding  to  the  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  and  Notice  of  Suspension,  respondent  averred  that  the  Director  of  Educational 
Options  had  predetermined  to  dismiss  him  and  had  fabricated  allegations. 

but  admitted  that  he  did  not  file  a  written  report  as 

. 

It  was  not  entirely  clear  why  respondent  reacts  in  this  manner.  Perhaps 

respondent  believes  he  must  exaggerate  or raise  criticisms  in  order  to  divert  attention  from 
his  own  conduct  or  to  simply  put  the  administrators  in  a  negative  light  as  a  defensive  ploy. 
What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  respondent  is  unable  to  acknowledge  any  wrongdoing  on  his 
part  or  to  demonstrate  any  understanding  of  the  impact  that  his  inappropriate  conduct  has  on 
Others.  His  loud  questioning  of  the  student  counselor  in  front  of  his  class  caused  the 
counselor  to  become  embarrassed  and  upset.  During  the  conference  with  the  assistant 
principal,  respondent  asserted  that  the  counselor  was  disrespectful  and  should  have  asked 
him  for  permission  to  talk  to  the  student.  His  accusation  that  the  principal  sent  people  to  his 
house  to  kill  him  caused  the  principal  to  fear  for  the  safety  of  the  school.  Respondent,  in 
turn,  accused  the  assistant  principal  of  trying  to  destroy  his  teaching  career.  His  failure  to 
cease  arguments  with  student AAR 
antagonizing  the  student,  caused 
his  fist  on  the  first  occasion  and  appeared  ready  to  physically  attack  respondent  on  the 
second  occasion. 

ove  bus  tokens,  or  to  recognize  that  he  was 
N.  to  become  so  upset  that  the  student  hit  a  wall  with 

   

Furthermore,  respondent  did  not  acknowledge  that  he  understood  that  the 

students  enrolled  at  Central  High  School  and  Tri-C  are  at  risk  of  dropping  out,  had  histories 
of  failure  in  the  academic  setting,  and  were  emotionally  fragile.  He  did  not  admit  that  his 
conduct  caused  the  students  to  have  additional  distress  and  emotional  dissonance  that  would 
interfere  with  their  ability  to  learn  and  lessen  any  desire  to  stay  in  school.  Respondent’s 
persistent  failures  to  abide  by  the  District’s  policies  and  his  non-compliance  with 
administrators’  directives,  combined  with  his  unwillingness  to  admit  any  wrongdoing  or 
shortcomings,  provide  ample  reason  to  conclude  that  respondent  is  not  amenable  or 
agreeable  to  reform  his  professional  conduct  and  would  not  benefit  from  further  training  or 
professional  development  so  that  he  could  become  a  responsible  employee  and  effective 
teacher. 

7 

| 

| 

Seventh,  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  disciplinary  action  would  have  an 
adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  on  respondent’s  constitutional  rights.  Respondent  was 

39 

   

  

afforded  his  due  process  rights  in  this  administrative  hearing  and  given  the  opportunity  to  tell 
his  side  of  the  story  as  he  wanted. 

Based  on  Findings  1  —  67  above  and  the  foregoing  analysis  under  the  factors 
set  forth  in  the  Morrison  case,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  showed  that  respondent’s 
unprofessional  conduct  is  indicative  or  a  product  of  a  defect  in  his  temperament.  Respondent 
has  shown  that  he  is  incapable  of  complying  with  directives  of  administrators  and  District 
policies,  lacks  understanding  and  insight  into  how  his  conduct  affects  others,  and  harbors  a 
personal  sense  of  morality  that  makes  him  judgmental,  intolerant,  and  confrontational. 
Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to  serve  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

   

WHEREFORE,  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence sybee  makes  the 

following  Order: 

vo 

ORDER 

Amended  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  Case  Number  2015020642,  filed 

against  respondent  Hsiao  Yuan  Wang,  a  permanent  certificated  employee,  is  sustained,  based 
on  Conclusions  of  Law  1  —  6  above,  jointly  and  for  all.  Respondent  Hsiao  Yuan  Wang  is 
hereby  dismissed  or  terminated  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles 
Unified  School  District. 

IT  IS  SO  ORDERED. 

pater  pr)  I) 

20 

~Pfsuocha)-Gbemey 

  

tancine  Buschel-Gomez,  Cadumission  Member 

Retired  Teacher 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

ruwlepxe 

dy, 

KVtead—— 2 

Kristi  Harabedian,  Commission  Member 
Teacher,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education 

f 

8 

Dated:  Opal 

((,  Ail 

U  /  A/S 

Vincent  Nafarrete} 
Administrative  Ldw  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Commission  Member 

41

