BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
ERIC BURKE (EN 751285),  
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 

 
 
 

Respondent. 
 
  

DECISION 

 

OAH No.  2015070081 
 
 
 

The Los Angeles Unified School District (the District) and was represented by 

Eric Burke (respondent) appeared and was represented by Daniel J. Kolodziej of 

This matter was heard on November 30, December 1, 2, 4, 7-11, 14, 16-17, 2015, in 

 
 
Los Angeles, California, before the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission).  
The Commission consisted of John L. Davis, Kristi Harabedian and Eileen Cohn, 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of 
California.   
 
 
Jonathan M. Lebe of Bergman Dacey Goldsmith.   
 
 
Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad.   
 
 
members and, as reflected in the record, over respondent’s objections, the ALJ determined 
the panel members were qualified.  The parties also made several motions in limine.  The 
ALJ considered and ruled on those motions in limine, as reflected in the record.  Oral and 
documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard.  Prior to the conclusion of the 
hearing, the ALJ served the parties with a protective order sealing the exhibits and transcript 
of the proceedings.  The matter was submitted for Decision on December 18, 2015.1  The 
Commission on Professional Competence considered the matter in executive session on 
                                                
 
closing argument powerpoint (ALJ 2).  The record was re-opened for the joint submission of 
portions of respondent’s deposition testimony which was referenced by counsel during 
respondent’s examination at hearing.  The deposition testimony was marked for 
identification only (ALJ 3) as an aid to reviewing the hearing testimony.   

1  The ALJ marked for identification only complainant’s hearing brief (ALJ 1) and 

Prior to presentation of the evidence, the parties conducted voir dire of the panel 

December 18, and 23, 2015 and March 24, 2016.  After due consideration of the entire record 
herein, the Commission makes the following Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions, and 
Order.   
 
 

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

The District seeks to terminate respondent for conduct which it contends 

The District charges respondent with inappropriate conduct when he carelessly 

 
 
demonstrates that he is unfit to teach middle school students.  The District charges 
respondent with inappropriate physical contact with female students characterized by 
touching their shoulders, sides and in one incident, sliding his hand from a student’s shoulder 
down her arm and side to her hip and thigh area.  The District charges respondent’s 
inappropriate physical contact with female students included grabbing a student’s face under 
her chin, touching her cheek, remarking on the softness of her skin and exclaiming she was 
so cute.   
 
 
The District charges respondent with making inappropriate sexual remarks to students 
beyond what was necessary to communicate health and science instruction; e.g., “flowers are 
nature’s pornography,” “when bees climax they explode,” when both parents have brown 
eyes, the children have brown eyes, “unless the mailman was involved,” among other 
statements.   
 
 
projected pornographic images from his computer at the start of class instruction.   
 
 
and student when he accompanied one female student and her friend after school hours to the 
school boundaries, and took a photograph of another female student singing in a private 
music school’s chorale group and e-mailed it to her.   
 
 
charges respondent with failing to do so when he threatened a student by saying “I would 
slap you if I could.”   
 
 
a Halloween costume after the school banned students from wearing costumes.   
 
 
its Accusation including: immoral conduct, including egregious conduct; unprofessional 
conduct; dishonesty; unsatisfactory performance; evident unfitness for service; persistent 
violation or failure to abide by school rules or policies; and willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the 
employing district.  The District requested that the Commission dismiss respondent from 
employment as its permanent certificated employee.   
 

Contrary to respondent’s obligation to treat his students respectfully, the District 

The District charges respondent with failing to abide by school policies when he wore 

The District contends that it has met its burden of proof on all charges and causes in 

The District charges respondent with failing to respect boundaries between teacher 

 

2 

In his closing argument, respondent moved to dismiss the cause for unprofessional 

Respondent disagreed with the District’s characterization of his conduct.  Respondent 
 
maintained that he was a hardworking and dedicated teacher with a long-standing exemplary 
teaching record whose conduct was either misrepresented, exaggerated or misinterpreted by a 
small cadre of his seventh grade students who, by their age and nature, were prone to gossip 
and hyperbole.  According to respondent, the gossip surrounding the misrepresentations 
destroyed his reputation and resulted in his dismissal.  Respondent claimed he was not aware 
of his students’ reactions to his remarks or conduct, but when the Principal advised him of 
objectionable behavior during the 2013-2014 school year he corrected his behavior.   
 
 
conduct.  The District met its burden of proof on the cause for unprofessional conduct.  
Nevertheless, the motion was granted because the evidence established that the District failed 
to meet its procedural obligations and provide respondent an opportunity to remediate his 
conduct when it did not allow him to return to the classroom at any time after it issued its 
Notice of Unsatisfactory Conduct in September 2014.  Complainant did not meet its burden 
for the cause for unsatisfactory performance.  That cause was also dismissed because it 
required the same fidelity to the procedures set forth in Education Code section 44939 for the 
cause for unprofessional conduct.   
 
 
causes 3 and 5 for unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance, on procedural 
grounds.  The Commission finds that the District did not meet its burden of proof on cause 4, 
dishonesty, and cause 8, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause.  The Commission sustains the Accusation and grants District’s request to terminate 
respondent on causes 1 and 2, for immoral conduct, but not egregious conduct, cause 6, 
evident unfitness for service, and cause 7, persistent violation or failure to abide by school 
rules or policies.   
 
 

Based upon the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions, the Commission dismisses 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.  He last 

The Statement of Charges and Accusation were brought by Justo H. Avila, Chief 

 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
 
 
Human Resources Officer for the District (complainant).   
 
 
served as a certified employee at Paul Revere Middle School (Revere) during the 2013-2014 
and 2014-2015 school years.  Respondent taught middle school science and health.   
 
 
was removed from Revere and was re-assigned to Educational Service Center (ESC) West.  
(Exhibit 56.)  As part of his reassignment he was directed to remain at home during the 
school day.  Respondent was ordered to report to District Administrator, Janice Davis, and to 
refrain from entering any District campus, contacting District employees or students, or 

On September 24, 2014, after the District initiated its investigation, respondent 

3. 

 

3 

4. 

On January 20, 2015, Revere’s Principal Christopher Perdigao met with 

performing any District work, except work that might be assigned to him by Janice Davis.  
There was no evidence that respondent performed any work on behalf of the District during 
his assignment to ESC.  There is no evidence that respondent returned to Revere or any 
District classroom after September 24, 2014.   
 
 
respondent and served him with a Notice of Suspension (15 days) and Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Acts which contained the charges set forth herein.  On February 23, 2015, 
respondent with his union representative met with the complainant to appeal the Notices.  
The complainant sustained the actions and denied the appeal.   
 
 
meeting with respondent and his union representative, complainant provided respondent with 
written notice that he was immediately suspended without pay and would be dismissed 
unless he timely demanded a hearing.  Respondent submitted a timely demand for a hearing.   

On March 11, 2015, two days after complainant’s administrative review 

5. 

6. 

The Statement of Charges, dated May 22, 2014, and the Accusation, dated July 

 
10, 2015, recommended respondent’s dismissal from the District for the following legal 
causes under Education Code sections 44932 and 44939:  (1) immoral conduct, including 
egregious conduct; (2) immoral conduct; (3) unprofessional conduct; (4) dishonesty; (5) 
unsatisfactory performance; (6) evident unfitness for service; (7) persistent violation of or 
refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board 
of the school employing Respondent; and (8) willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as described by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district.   

8. 

7. 

The parties have met pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements to proceed to 

The 2013-2014 school year was respondent’s first year at Revere.  Respondent 

 
hearing and jurisdiction exists for these proceedings.   
 
Respondent’s background  
 
 
has a total of 14 years of teaching experience.  Between 2010 and 2013  respondent taught 
taught science at another District middle school where he received positive reviews for his 
teaching skills and his establishment of a competitive after-school running team.   
 
 
credentials.  Respondent obtained a Bachelor of Arts in environmental science, a Master of 
Arts in educational leadership, and credentials authorizing him to teach middle school 
science.  He possesses a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and Administrative 
Services Credential, and National Board Certification for Science and Early Adolescence.  
During his tenure at Revere, respondent was also enrolled in a doctoral program in 
educational leadership at the University of Southern California (USC) where he excelled.  In 
addition to his formal undergraduate and graduate education, respondent was awarded 

Respondent came to Revere with impressive academic and teaching 

9. 

 

4 

fellowships from the Earthwatch Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and 
jointly from the University of Southern California (USC) and Mattel for science, technology, 
engineering and math (STEM) curriculum.   
 
 
10.  During the 2013-2014 school year at Revere, respondent was assigned to a 
homeroom period, three honors science classes, (first, second and sixth period), and two 
regular general education science classes, (fourth and fifth period).  During the first semester 
of the 2013-2014 school year respondent also taught health, which included topics 
concerning human sexuality.  Respondent excelled in technology and during the roll-out of 
the District’s I-Pad program took a leadership role in training the teachers.  Respondent also 
initiated a science fair which was scheduled during open house.   
 
2013-2014 Reported Incidents and Conferences  
 

November 7, 2013 informational conference 

12.  On November 7, 2013, Principal Samoza convened an “informational 

11.  On October 31, 2013, early in the school year, Revere’s Principal Fern 

 
 
Samoza observed respondent greeting his students wearing a Halloween “Frankenstein” 
costume which he accessorized with face paint (charge 26).  The previous day, October 30, 
2013, Revere issued an administrative directive barring students from wearing Halloween 
costumes and broadcast the costume ban during the fifth and sixth period.  The goal of the 
policy was to avoid excessive distraction from school work which Principal Samoza 
observed began with costume planning and continued through the day of Halloween.  
Principal Samoza presented as a credible and candid witness and with little exception her 
testimony was given considerable weight in determining whether complainant met its burden 
of proof, and more weight than respondent’s testimony, which was generally not credible.   
 
 
conference” with respondent, a Revere Assistant Principal and respondent’s union 
representative, to discuss Revere’s Halloween costume policy.  (Exhibit 27.)  The policy did 
not expressly bar teachers from wearing costumes.  According to Principal Samoza, although 
teachers were not formally restricted from wearing costumes, the policy clearly applied to 
teachers because they are role models.  Revere’s policy was in place for many years and the 
teachers, with few exceptions, understood the policy to apply to them.  Principal Samoza 
considered it common sense for “adults” to be aware of a policy that pertained to everyone, 
especially since it was developed jointly by teachers, administrators and parents to ensure 
that Halloween did not interrupt the school day.  Principal Samoza considered respondent’s 
conduct insubordination and poor judgment.  She directed respondent to review District 
policies, “Respectful Treatment for all Persons” and the “Code of Conduct with Students.”   
 
 
policies, like the cell phone policy, were clearly directed to teachers and administrators, in 
addition to students.  (Exhibit 27.)  Respondent was accustomed to dressing for Halloween at 
his previous school.  He also planned Halloween-themed science projects for Halloween that 
engaged his Revere students.  In determining that respondent did not violate Revere’s 

Respondent thought the policy was restricted to students because other 

13. 

 

5 

14. 

Halloween administrative directive, the Commission gave great weight to the language of 
Revere’s policy, respondent’s status as a new teacher, his lack of previous experience with 
Revere’s policy, and his development and implementation of engaging Halloween-themed 
curriculum.   
 
 
that he was not taking school directives seriously.  District policies and school directives 
were available on the teacher web-portal.  Although the Commission did not fault respondent 
for violating school policy by wearing a Halloween costume, the Commission considered 
respondent’s narrow construction of the language of the policy directive as further evidence 
of his fixed personality trait.   
 

Principal Samoza was concerned from respondent’s attitude at the conference 

March 3, 2014 investigative conference  

16(B). At hearing, witnesses elaborated on incident one.  SD was walking to the 

15.  On March 3, 2014, Principal Samoza held an “investigative conference” with 

 
 
respondent, Kim Uchida, respondent’s union representative and Justin Koretz, Assistant 
Principal, to discuss respondent’s inappropriate behavior and remarks to students on 
February 21, and during the week of February 24-28, 2014.  (Exhibit 39.)  The investigative 
conference addressed three incidents.  About the time the incidents were reported, February 
28, 2014, and during the time of her investigation, Principal Samoza suspended respondent 
with pay for a few days.  Each incident was referenced in the charges.   
 
16(A). Charge 19, incident one, concerned respondent’s inappropriate touching of the 
 
face of female student, SD2 prior to the seventh grade assembly, while remarking how cute 
she appeared.  During the conference, respondent admitted to touching SD’s face in the foyer 
of the auditorium surrounded by a small group of students.  He admitted to pinching SD’s 
cheeks, “like the other girl did.”  (Exhibit 39.)  He did not recall remarking that SD was cute.   
 
 
auditorium with two other female classmates.  One friend, SH, after accidentally touching 
SD’s face, commented on the softness of SD’s skin.  The female students were not walking 
or conversing with respondent, but walking near him with the entire seventh grade, toward 
the auditorium.  Respondent, upon hearing SH’s remark about SD’s skin, cupped his hand 
under her chin, touched her cheek, and repeated SH’s remark that SD’s skin was so soft.  He 
also exclaimed that SD was so “cute.”  The students thought respondent’s conduct was “very 
weird.” Respondent made SD and her classmates uncomfortable.  After entering the 
auditorium, SD and her classmates made sure to sit away from respondent.  SH, not SD, 
made the initial report to Revere’s administration.  Principal Samoza removed SD from 
respondent’s class to terminate an uncomfortable student-teacher situation that could 
potentially escalate.   
 
                                                
 
protect their privacy.   
 

2  In this Decision, all names of students and their relatives are referenced as initials to 

 

6 

17(B). At hearing, student witnesses WA and CA, who participated in the experiment, 

17(A). Charge 20, incident two, occurred during the week of February 24-28, 2013 
 
and concerned respondent’s reaction to the conduct of JA and his classmate, WA, during a 
science experiment involving worms.  Respondent was upset with JA and WA because he 
thought they were harming the worms by burning them with a magnifying glass. Respondent 
kept JA and WA after class and told JA he would “slap [JA] in the face if he could.”  During 
the conference, respondent denied making the statement.3   
 
 
clarified the incident and confirmed respondent’s statement.  WA denied he or JA 
intentionally abused the worms, initially remembering only that they picked them up with a 
stick.  At hearing WA was unsure whether JA used a magnifying glass, but CA, their partner, 
was clear that JA was using a magnifying glass to burn the worms.  WA sympathized with 
respondent, confirming that he was right to be upset if the worms were injured because he 
was a scientist and cared about animals.  Nevertheless, he and JA were surprised by the 
vehemence of respondent’s reaction and agreed to report respondent’s statements.  The 
reports of JA and WA contemporaneous with the incident corroborated the conference memo 
and WA’s and CA’s hearing testimony.  WA generally liked respondent and appreciated him 
as a teacher who helped him improve his grade from an F to a B.  He did not think 
respondent was wrong to reprimand students for inappropriate use of the worms.  CA 
credibly described her classmates’ wrongful use of a magnifying glass to burn the worms.  
CA clearly recalled respondent saying he would “slap you if I could” and she heard it as a 
threat.  Neither WA or CA had reason to protect JA; they only knew him as a classmate, and 
were not friends.  
 

17(C). At hearing, respondent claimed that his students mischaracterized his 
response.  Respondent testified that he said what the students did was “ a slap in the face to 
me,” a statement his father made when respondent did something inappropriate in his youth.  
The Commission did not find respondent’s testimony credible.   
 
 
18(A). Charge 12, incident three, concerned student KM, a female student enrolled in 
respondent’s homeroom and fourth period class, who reported on multiple occasions during 
period four respondent had inappropriately touched her hair, touched and rubbed her 
shoulders and back and would bring his hand down her body “near my bottom.”  (Exhibits 
25 and 39.)   
 
 
police for criminal investigation. Principal Samoza had also transferred KM from 
respondent’s homeroom and science class and KM  had no further contact with respondent.  
Principal Samoza transferred KM to prevent further problems occurring as a result of a 
damaged teacher-student relationship.   
                                                
 
Revere’s administration the day it was made, the District withdrew the, “kick him in the 
butt” and another quote from the charge.   
 

3  Although JA and another student, WA, reported respondent’s complete statement to 

18(B). Prior to the March 3 conference, Principal Samoza referred KM’s claims to the 

 

7 

18(C).  Principal Samoza informed respondent of her referral and also told him that 

KM “recanted and declared her entire statement was untrue.”  (Exhibit 39).  During the 
conference, respondent denied touching KM’s hair, shoulder, rubbing or touching her back, 
allowing his hand to drift below her waist, or touching KM inappropriate in any manner.   
 

18(D). Principal Samoza’s claim that KM recanted her report of respondent’s 

misconduct was not supported by the evidence.  KM met with Principal Samoza 
approximately 10 times to discuss incident three, twice privately.  KM felt intimidated by 
Principal Samoza, who pointedly told KM she was lying.  Principal Samoza disputed calling 
KM a liar, but Principal Samoza’s otherwise credible testimony, was not persuasive with 
regard to her dealings with KM.   
 

18(E).  Principal Samoza’s statement in the March 3, 2013 conference memo that KM 

later declared that respondent only touched her “slightly” on the upper back was not 
supported by KM’s amended written statement or her later report to District investigator, 
Sandra Lopez-Magdaleno on October 24, 2014.  (Exhibit 63.)  KM’s hearing testimony was 
materially consistent with her February 28 amended written statement and her later statement 
to Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno.  KM admitted to Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno that she clarified to the 
police officers that respondent touched her back and shoulders and not her buttocks, but she 
also informed Principal Samoza of respondent’s more extensive inappropriate touching.   
 
18(F).  KM told Ms. Lopez- Magdaleno, that respondent would approach her at her 
 
desk if she had a question, touch her side arm, near her breast, and then move his hands to 
her lower back and near her buttocks.  (Exhibit 63.)  In her last statement to the District she 
broke down his pattern of touching various parts of her body: her arm at least seven times; 
her inner arm near her breast, two times; running his hand down her arm to her upper thigh 
while sitting, approximately five times. (Exhibit 63.)  Respondent only touched KM once on 
the lower back while she was standing.  Respondent also would stand behind her with his 
hands on her shoulder looking at her work.  He touched her on the top of her head a few 
times.  About a month before her mother reported respondent’s conduct to Principal Samoza, 
while respondent was touching her, KM asked him what he was doing and he told her he was 
helping her with her work.  (Exhibit 63.)   
 
 
unwavering and assured testimony, sincere demeanor, the absence of bias or motive against 
respondent, and evidence showing respondent’s consistent pattern of inappropriate behavior, 
KM’s version of the incident was given great weight.  The Commission found KM’s 
testimony to be more persuasive than conflicting testimony from respondent, Principal 
Samoza and Assistant Principal Justin Koretz.  During her initial statement she estimated 
respondent had touched her upwards of 10 times. At hearing, two years later, her best 
recollection was that he touched her 18 times, including touching the top of her head a few 
times.   
 

18(G). At hearing, KM was steadfast in her version of events and based upon her 

18(H). At hearing, both Principal Samoza and Assistant Principal Koretz maintained 
that KM did not demonstrate to them or to the police officers that respondent touched more 

 

8 

than her shoulders and upper back.  Principal Samosa considered it important whether 
respondent touched KM’s buttocks directly. When the police interviewed KM she did not 
show them that he touched her buttocks.  Whether respondent touched KM’s buttocks was 
important to Principal Samoza and the police investigating the matter.  No evidence was 
introduced from the investigating officer or from a police report as to what the police 
considered criminal misconduct, but sections of the Penal Code expressly refer to the 
buttocks as an intimate part of the body supporting prosecution for sexual assault of a child.4   
 
18(I).  Principal Samoza was understandably concerned with the magnitude of KM’s 
 
accusation against respondent.  Principal Samoza was especially suspicious of the validity of 
KM’s report after KM’s classmate, NS, admitted she never observed respondent touching 
KM’s buttocks.   
 
18(J).  NS had urged KM to report the incident and KM assumed NS had observed it.  
NS, without being asked, wrote the statement to support KM, but recanted it during Principal 
Samoza’s investigation.  NS testified about her poor judgment, mainly because she did not 
want respondent to lose his job due to her statement.  NS was no longer friends with KM, but 
was firm in her expression of respect for KM as an outstanding student, and as a trustworthy 
and honest person.   

19. 

Respondent’s inappropriate touching was not limited to the incidents set forth 

20(A). Principal Samoza referred respondent to several District policies pertaining to 

 
18(K). At hearing, Principal Samoza, explained that she considered KM’s report 
“shakey” and determined removing KM from the class would be an adequate response.   
 
 
in the charges.  When KM gave him a Christmas present, as she did all the other teachers, 
respondent gave her an extra tight hug, lifting her off the ground.  Respondent’s tight hug is 
relevant to the analysis of the Morrison factors below, and whether respondent has a 
temperamental defect which supports cause 6, evident unfitness for service.   
 
 
appropriate student-teacher conduct and she and his union representative, Kim Uchida, 
reviewed and read the relevant portions of the policies with him.  Respondent’s actions 
violated District policies.  (charge 28(b),(c) and (f).)   
 
 
and the District’s Code of Conduct.  She referred respondent to the Code of Conduct with 
Students, BUL 5157.0, Section II, subsections, 3, 4, and 6 which expressly prohibits teachers 
from engaging in any behavior, directly or indirectly with students or in their presence which 
                                                
 
"sexual assault" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: (4) The intentional 
touching of the genitals or intimate parts, including the […]buttocks, or the clothing covering 
them, of a child,[…] for purposes of sexual arousal or gratification...” This Decision is 
governed by the preponderance of the evidence, the standard applying to proceedings of this 
type.  The standard of proof in criminal cases is beyond a reasonable doubt.   

4  Penal Code section 11165.1, subdivision (b) provides:  Conduct described as 

20(B). Principal Samoza referred respondent to Respectful Treatment for all Persons 

 

9 

20(C). Principal Samoza reviewed with respondent the District’s Sexual Harassment 

is unprofessional, unethical, illegal, immoral or exploitative; touching or having physical 
contact with students that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of the employee’s 
individual responsibilities or duties.  This policy was first adopted in 1988.   
 
 
Bulletin 3349.0, Section III, which defines sexual harassment as either (1) verbal conduct, 
defined as using suggestive, derogatory or vulgar comments, sexual innuendo or slurs, 
unwanted sexual advances, invitations or comments, or (2) physical conduct, defined as 
unwanted touching, pinching, kissing, patting, or hugging, the blocking of normal 
movement; stalking; assault; and /or (3) physical interference with work or study directed at 
an individual because of the individual’s sex, sexual orientation or gender.  This policy was 
adopted in 2006.   
 
21.  At the time of this conference, Principal Samoza questioned respondent’s 
 
judgment.  She was concerned that respondent did not fully appreciate the District’s policies, 
which were easily accessible on the District’s teacher web-portal.  She was especially 
concerned because this conference addressed multiple incidents, and at least one confirmed 
incident, involved his admission that he touched a female student’s cheeks and called her 
“cute.”  She was surprised given all the District policies and directives that he would conduct 
himself in that manor.  She considered his conduct contrary to a teacher’s duty as a role 
model, and to have a substantial adverse impact on the community, because the conduct and 
the rumors of the conduct, upset parents and students.   
 
 
memo, she also reminded respondent that failure to follow her advice and directives could 
lead to a disciplinary conference, a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service/Acts, suspension 
without pay, and possible dismissal from the District.   
 
 
 
 
styled an “informational conference” to discuss student concerns regarding his statements in 
class which were reported by student SU’s parent GK, to a Revere administrator on April 29, 
and May 6, 2014.  Principal Samoza prepared a memorandum that day summarizing the 
conference.  (Exhibit 40.)  The incidents set forth in the memo, with the exception of an 
incident regarding the room temperature, were directly relevant to the charges.  The incidents 
were corroborated by credible and persuasive student, teacher and parent testimony, and in 
certain instances, respondent.   
 

23.  On May 8, 2014, Principal Samoza met with respondent alone in what she 

Principal Samoza made her concerns known to respondent.  In her conference 

May 2014 informational conference  

22. 

24(A). Parent GK reported from her daughter, SU, the following statements made by 

24(B).  Charge 7(d), (Informational Conference, Statement 1(b)), “A flower is 

respondent during the school year:   
 
 
nature’s pornography”; 
 

 

10 

25. 

24(C). Charge 17, (Informational Conference Statement 2), at the end of the lesson on 

SU attended respondent’s second period honors class and witnessed statements 

24(E).  Charge 18(b)), (Informational Conference, Statement 1(d)), “When bees 

24(F).   Charge 18(c), (Informational Conference Statement 1(e)), “When romantic 

24(D). Charge 18(a), (Informational Conference, Statement 1(c)), “If your mother and 

 
plant anatomy taught by science teacher, Lisa Asahina, stated in front of the students “Oh, I 
wish the story ended in sex”;   
 
 
father have brown eyes, you will have brown eyes unless the mailman is involved”;   
 
 
climax they explode”; 
 
 
time happens, she has her legs in the air and is like, ah, ah;” and  
 
 
24(G). Charge 18(d)), (Informational Conference Statement 1(f)), referring to a 
female student’s nickname, Huggy Bear, “Oh, I thought they called her that because it is the 
name of a prostitute.”  
 
 
24(B) through 24(G).  At hearing she provided straightforward testimony about what she 
heard and showed great care to provide her best recollection about the statements.  SU was 
11 years of age when she entered seventh grade and GK was concerned about the extent to 
which respondent referred to sex in the classroom, which did not appear to be necessary or, 
at times, connected to the lessons, despite health and sexuality being part of the fall 
curriculum.  GK listened to her daughter’s reports throughout the year, but did not report 
them earlier because GK had always been very supportive of teachers and was hesitant to 
attack respondent.  SU assured GK that respondent had not touched her and she would not be 
alone with him.  When SU told GK about “romantic time” GK felt compelled to report it to 
Revere’s administrators.  GK is a lawyer and reviewed SU’s testimony with her before the 
hearing, but there was no evidence that SU modified or changed her testimony at the advice 
of GK.  On the contrary, it was evident to the Commission that SU was sincere and truthful 
about her observations, GK was an accurate reporter of her daughter’s concerns, and GK’s 
singular motivation in making her report was her well-considered opinion that respondent 
should not be teaching children.  GK had a younger child who would attend Revere and she 
did not want him, or any other child, to be taught by respondent.   
 
 
particularly the statement regarding the mailman.  The statements about the flowers and bees 
occurred around or before January 2014.  The remaining statements were made after January, 
with the “romantic time” statement made closest to GK’s report in late April and early May 
2014.   
 
 
when it was suggested her age had something to do with her reaction to respondent’s 
statements.  Respondent referred to sex excessively throughout the school year (charge 
7(e).).  SU described her reaction to his various statements, as “scared” or “uncomfortable.”  

SU had sex education in fifth grade.  At the hearing she strongly protested 

Respondent’s inappropriate statements started early in the school year, 

26. 

27. 

 

11 

28. 

29. 

The phrase “ah, ah” used in the District’s memos and charges relating to 

SU was disturbed and angered by respondent’s comments regarding her 

30.  SU was not the only student who heard respondent’s sexual references.  Many 

SU could not recall every circumstance with precision, but she confirmed the statements and 
clearly remembered that respondent’s statements were not necessary to the curriculum even 
though he taught health during the fall semester.   
 
 
romantic time understated the loud moaning sounds SU made at the hearing when she was 
asked to repeat respondent’s statement made to the class.  SU found respondent’s 
exaggerated vocalizations “gross.”   
 
 
classmate EH’s nickname, Huggy Bear.   
 
 
students who were interviewed or made reports recalled respondent’s sexual references.  SK, 
a first period student reported hearing respondent make his bees’ climax statement; AC and 
RB, (first period students), SD and HI, (second period students), and SH, (a sixth period 
student) heard respondent refer to flowers as nature’s pornography.  HI was shocked by 
respondent’s reference to pornography.  SD also heard respondent’s reference to EH’s 
nickname.   
 
 
statements.   
 
 
31(B). With regard to charge 7(d), (Informational Conference Statement 1(b)), 
respondent’s statement that “flowers were nature's pornography," respondent admitted 
making the statement but insisted he was repeating and responding to a student who shared 
his brother’s quote.  He considered random statements like this to offer “teachable 
moments.”  The more persuasive testimony of student witnesses established that respondent 
initiated the statement.  The lesson concerned the disbursement of pollen from the opening in 
the flower, the reproductive part of the plant.  Even if respondent repeated the student’s 
phrase, there was no credible evidence that this statement was necessary or appropriate to the 
curriculum.   
 
 
31(C). With regard to charge 17, (Informational Conference Statement 2), respondent 
denied making a statement in response to Ms. Asahini’s story that he wished the story ended 
in sex.  He also maintained that if he made any statement he would have used the word 
reproduction instead of sex.  SU’s recollection was more persuasive.   
 

 
31(A). Respondent either denied outright or disagreed with the context of his 

31(D). Ms. Asahina, an experienced and credentialed teacher with 19 years of 
teaching experience in science and health, was responsible for the lesson regarding the parts 
of the plant.  Ms. Asahina’s lesson was not about sexual or asexual reproduction.  The day of 
her lesson, she had exchanged classes with respondent to teach his students the parts of the 
plant.  Respondent was teaching her students about plant reproduction.  Ms. Asahina had 
developed a story to make it easier for students to remember the parts of plants.  The story 
involved communications between a high school boy and girl which ended with a phone call.  

 

12 

31(F).  With regard to charge 18 (b), (Informational Conference Statement 1(d)), 

The story ended without resolving their relationship.  Ms Asahina had an unclear recollection 
as to whether respondent said “reproduction” or “sex.”  The students appeared disappointed 
with the abrupt ending to the story, but Ms. Asahina could not tell whether they were 
grumbling because of respondent’s comments.  Respondent’s comment at the end of the 
lesson was irrelevant to Ms. Asahina’s lesson on plant parts.   
 
 
31(E).  With regard to charge 18(a), (Informational Conference Statement 1(c)), in the 
conference respondent did not recall making the statement about eye color and the mailman.  
At hearing, respondent explained the eye color was wrong so he would never make that 
statement; however, respondent was contradicted by the more credible testimony of SU and 
persuasive evidence of his consistent pattern of sexual innuendo.   
 
 
respondent explained the phrase “when bees climax, they explode” was taken from a video 
produced by Bill Nye.  There was no evidence that respondent showed the video, or that the 
statement was material to the curriculum.  In addition to SU, SK in respondent’s first period 
class reported the statement.   
 
 
31(G). With regard to charge 18(c), (Informational Conference Statement 1(e)), 
respondent denied making the statement, but admitted he used “romantic time” instead of sex 
because some students were “disturbed with the word sex.”  (Exhibit 40.)  There was no 
evidence that the statement was material to the curriculum, and SU’s recollection was made 
more persuasive by respondent’s admitted practice of referring to “romantic time.”  
 
 
respondent admitted to initiating a discussion about EH’s nickname “Huggy Bear” which 
was printed on her sweatshirt.  He claimed he was responding to student questions after they 
“googled” the name, where they found it used as the name of a pimp in an old TV show.  
After being asked what a pimp was, he also explained the word prostitute.  At hearing, it was 
clear from respondent’s testimony that he initiated the discussion and invited the students to 
research the name.  SU’s understanding of respondent’s statement was consistent with his 
initiation of a discussion about Huggy Bear based on his recollection that it was the name of 
a prostitute.   
 
 
health curriculum.  Ms. Uchida, respondent’s union representative at the meeting, taught 
health and science for 26 years, and was a union representative for 10 years.  She was 
extremely cautious and exacting in her testimony.  It was clear by her demeanor she was 
taking great care to be accurate, and as a union representative, she did not want to damage a 
fellow teacher.  Despite her apparent concern for respondent, and her written character 
reference in support of respondent’s retention, she provided persuasive testimony that 
respondent’s statements were not appropriate to, or part of, the health or science curriculum, 
and were counterproductive to the goal of effectively teaching middle school students.   
 

32(A). Respondent’s sexual references were not relevant or material to the science or 

31(H). With regard to charge 18(d), (Informational Conference Statement 1(f)), 

 

13 

32(B)).  Ms. Uchida spoke of the need to carefully traverse the health and science 

32(D). Respondent’s comments about the mailman were consistent with student 

 
curriculum in order to keep students focused on important health and science subjects, and 
not sidetrack their concentration by references to salacious and sexual matters.  Ms. Uchida 
considered it important to avoid sexual references because in her experience young students 
would start thinking about sex, and stop thinking about the subject matter.  Ms. Uchida 
capably testified about the science and health teacher’s practice of discerning between 
curriculum and age-appropriate questions and personal questions best referred to students’ 
parents.   
 
32(C). Ms. Uchida did not find any of respondent’s statements necessary or 
 
appropriate to the 20-week health curriculum, or the year-long science curriculum.  
Respondent’s statement regarding eye color was not only inappropriate because it reminded 
students of their parents’ sexual relations, and introduced a possible “third person,” but it was 
wrong, because the genetics of eye color are more complicated than what respondent 
presented.   
 
 
reports of his “birthday project,” where students were to project back in time to their 
conception, and a related project where students used data from the Internet to isolate the 
most popular months for birth and conception.  Respondent’s project made students 
uncomfortable.  The purpose of the assignment was unclear and confusing as it did not seem 
to provide practical or appropriate information to the students.  Ms. Uchida considered it 
inappropriate to use teaching methods which required students to think about their parents’ 
sexual relationships.  Ms. Uchida offered that as an adult she did not want to think about her 
parents’ sexuality.  Ms. Uchida referred all personal questions students raised to their 
parents.   
 
 
exploding or climaxing, or using any language that was overly sexual, or unduly 
personalized the female anatomy.   
 
33.  At the time of this third meeting with respondent, Principal Samoza was 
 
becoming increasingly concerned, frustrated and worried, because of the number of incidents 
and warned respondent of her concerns.  Principal Samoza had not received complaints about 
any other teacher making inappropriate sexual statements during health or science class.   
 
 
which would require respondent to circulate to different classrooms to assist teachers and 
students with the I-Pad rollout.  She considered this position ideal for respondent and a 
solution to his student conduct problems.  Revere was a technology magnet and the position 
of technology coordinator was important to advance the school’s mandate.  The position had 
to be funded by Revere and as such, it was not known until after the 2013-2014 school year 
ended whether respondent could be promoted, but his name was circulated to the teachers for 
consideration.   
 

32(E).  Ms. Uchida considered it inappropriate to make references to orgasms, bees 

Principal Samoza knew a technology coordinator position was being created 

34. 

 

14 

35 

Principal Samoza would have considered stronger action, if that is what was 

 
needed to address respondent’s conduct.  She did not start the formal suspension or 
termination process at the time of the May meeting because she was about to retire and 
handed the information about the investigation to her successor, Principal Christopher 
Pertigao.   
 
Respondent’s reputation as a teacher and peer 
 
 
36.  During the 2013-2014 school year respondent received positive reports from 
his peers and other adults.  Principal Samoza did not conduct an instructional evaluation of 
respondent during the 2013-2014 school year.  No teachers or administrators reported seeing 
respondent conduct himself inappropriately with any students.  Although one administrator 
was disturbed by his sarcastic attitude, he did not observe anything inappropriate in 
respondent’s class.  Respondent was observed by his peers and adult one-on-one aides to 
have a structured classroom, where he engaged the students.  Without knowing the details of 
the charges, his peers considered him a good teacher, and from testimony and character 
letters, respondent was well liked by his peers for his help with technology and his 
innovative use of technology in the curriculum.  Respondent’s colleague Lisa Asahina found 
him to be a kind and collaborative colleague.  She considered him helpful with technology 
and an enthusiastic team member.  Other colleagues provided character letters attesting to his 
collaborative spirit and contributions as a leader in technology innovation at Revere.   
 
 
37.  At the end of the 2013-2014 school year respondent was selected by his peers 
to be the technology coordinator for the 2014-2015 school year, a position he held until his 
suspension without pay pending this hearing.   
 
 
Some students considered him a good and engaging teacher, a teacher who tries new and 
interesting things.  Other students considered him average, or the class too easy, in part due 
to respondent’s open book exams.  Some students were annoyed with respondent’s habit of 
keeping them longer than the class period and causing them to be late to their next class, or 
his projecting their problematic work to the class during instruction.  Another student 
considered him strong in technology, but weak in science.  One student reported he was “not 
a bad teacher” but he was “very” different than other science teachers and “his actions 
towards others were weird.”  (Exhibit 53.)  Certain students did not observe the complained-
of incidents or were not bothered by respondent’s conduct.  (E.g., Exhibit 66.)  Some 
students who considered his conduct inappropriate still learned in his class and obtained 
good grades.  JB thought respondent was a good teacher, into technology, but “still kind of 
sexual.”  (Exhibit 45.)  HI stated “when on topic” he was a good teacher.  (Exhibit 50.)  
Despite their varying views of his teaching skills, from his words and actions, respondent 
gained a reputation among students of being creepy, weird, or at the extreme, perverted.   
// 
// 
// 
// 

Students reported respondent’s overall teaching skills as average to excellent.  

38. 

 

15 

 

40. 

39. 

42. 

Principal Perdigao, the new principal, initiated the investigation and after 

The technology coordinator position was funded for the 2014-2015 school 

Principal Samoza’s investigation of respondent during the 2013-2014 was 

41.  On September 15, 2014, student KP, respondent’s former seventh-grade 

2014-2015 reported incidents and conferences   
 
 
year and respondent filled this roving position instead of teaching health or science.   
 
 
limited and did not completely address respondent’s conduct during that year.   
 
 
second period honors student, reported an incident which triggered a District-level 
investigation of respondent’s 2013-2014 conduct.  That day respondent made KP 
uncomfortable when he passed her in the hall and “winked, smiled and said hello.”  (Charge 
6; Exhibit 79A.)  KP clarified at hearing that after respondent passed her by she went to the 
restroom to cry.  She thought she had moved on from last year, but when she saw respondent 
it brought back her experiences and observations from the previous year, which she did not 
report.  That day KP filed a report with her counselor citing several incidents, including two 
from the previous 2013-2014 school year, which she recalled reporting to her counselor.  
However, there were no records of her earlier report. Her earlier report was never brought to 
the attention of Principal Samoza.   
 
 
consulting with District personnel referred the investigation to them.  Assistant Principals 
Blakely Coe and Justin Koretz and conducted student interviews.  Assistant Principal Coe 
interviewed KP.  Coe had also received reports from some students that respondent asked the 
female students how many holes they had in their body.  During Assistant Principal Koretz’s 
interviews students reported respondent projected pornography from his I-Pad or laptop 
computer.   
 
 
respondent and the additional reports of respondent’s misconduct.  Based upon the additional 
reports, the District assigned Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno to direct a thorough investigation of 
respondent’s conduct at Revere.  Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno had substantial experience in human 
resource investigations, including many years as a union representative.  She also had been a 
teacher and at one time taught health.  She was familiar with the subject matter and could 
discern typical discomfort with the subject matter from atypical discomfort.  During her 31 
years with the District Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno had worked with middle school students and 
was confident from their demeanor, body language, expression and spontaneity that the 
students she interviewed were credible.  Many honor students were interviewed and there 
were no “frequent flyers,” students who repeatedly complained about teachers.  From the 
number of students and incidents, Ms. Lopez-Magdeleno and the District found a widespread 
pattern of inappropriate conduct.  In addition to the students who reported misconduct during 
the previous school year, Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno conducted systematic and randomized 
interviews of respondent’s classes, and based upon these interviews, she was confident that 
her investigation accurately depicted respondent’s conduct.  She readily pointed out that not 

Principal Pertigao consulted with the District about Revere’s investigation of 

43. 

 

16 

44.  Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno retired in January 1, 2015, shortly after the 

45.  On December 9, 2014, Principal Perdigao convened a conference with 

all students complain about incidents they observe, but their lack of complaint does not 
signify the conduct did not occur or that it was not significant.   
 
 
investigation. Although she took great pride in her investigative skills, her demeanor did not 
suggest any personal bias against respondent.  Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno provided credible 
testimony of her investigation, displaying a candor and sincere demeanor at hearing through 
her straightforward and direct answers, and clear recollection of the investigation.  The 
evidence presented at trial corroborated the scope and fairness of the District’s investigation.  
Respondent was given an opportunity to respond to the charges in an investigatory interview 
with Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno held on November 20, 2014.  Respondent denied ever touching 
students inappropriately, using sexual innuendos during class, or projecting pornographic 
material.   
 
 
respondent to address several incidents raised by students against respondent which were 
made part of the charges in the Accusation.  Brenda Olortegui, Staff Relation Field Director, 
also attended on behalf of the District, and United Teachers of Los Angeles (UTLA) 
Representative Michael Kaplan appeared on behalf of respondent.  Respondent was directed 
to, among other things, cease and desist from touching students, making inappropriate 
comments, displaying pornographic images, and to adhere to District policies regarding 
ethics, respectful treatment, code of conduct with students, sexual harassment, and 
acceptable use.   
 
 
passing KP in the hallway), occurred when respondent was with his wife and daughter.  KP 
and respondent’s daughter participated in the extracurricular program at the Colburn School 
(Colburn), a private music school not connected with Revere.  They were not in the same 
choral group.  Respondent’s wife and daughter spoke with KP about Colburn.   
 

The September 15, 2014 incident with KP (charge 6, respondent’s actions 

46. 

47(A). Although one incident of winking, smiling and saying hello, may not have 

seemed significant by itself, KP had two additional incidents with respondent the previous 
year which upset her and triggered her emotional reaction to see respondent in fall 2014.  
(Exhibit 41.)   
 
47(B). KP claimed respondent winked at her during the 2013-2014 school year 
(Charge 4(c)). She was disturbed by respondent’s winking.  At hearing, KP could not clearly 
recall when respondent winked at her.  Respondent made her feel uncomfortable.  As her 
teacher, KP thought respondent was paying an abnormal about of attention to her.  (Exhibit 
62.)  KP was unaware whether respondent winked at anyone else.  (Ibid.)  HI observed 
respondent winking at KP.  (Exhibit 60.)   
 
 
year she performed in the Colburn choral recital held in December 2013, and respondent sent 
a picture of her with her choral group to her school e-mail account (Charge 3).  Respondent 

48(A). During District’s 2014 investigation, KP reported during the previous school 

 

17 

was there with his wife to watch his daughter, who was singing with a different choral group.  
Respondent’s daughter was not in the picture.  KP thought it odd that he took a picture of her 
since his daughter was not in her group.  He used his school-issued I-Pad to take the 
photograph and e-mail KP.  With her photograph respondent also e-mailed a short note 
complimenting KP on her performance.   
 

48(B). Respondent was surprised by KP’s reaction because he thought he was being 

nice by sending a picture and did not understand why KP would be uncomfortable.  
Respondent maintained he was meeting his responsibilities as a teacher by encouraging 
extracurricular activities.  After he was informed about KP’s report, respondent reviewed the 
Facebook and Internet postings from Colburn and saw KP in other pictures which in his view 
confirmed that KP’s reaction was unreasonable.  Although he denied it at hearing, 
respondent’s explanation to the District at the time he was notified of KP’s report suggested 
that he also searched KP on the Internet to confirm she posted pictures of herself to 
demonstrate KP’s reaction to his e-mail was unreasonable.  According to Principal Pertigao, 
as KP’s teacher it was inappropriate to use District e-mail for non-school purposes (charge 
28).  It was inappropriate to send a student a personal e-mail communication about a private 
event.  Any comment about the event should have been made within the confines of the 
school setting.  Respondent insisted he was unaware of the District’s technology protocols, 
but given his expertise in technology, and his long tenure with the District, his position was 
not credible.   
 
 
 
49(A). KP reported an incident which occurred during sexual harassment training.  
The training was conducted over a two-week period in respondent’s class by two guest 
lecturers, not affiliated with Revere (charge 1).  As part of the curriculum students were 
required to create a poster exemplifying sexual harassment.  KP drew a picture of a men 
leering at a large breasted woman’s cleavage where KP had drawn a large “X.”  Respondent 
held the picture close to his face as if leering down the cleavage, and exclaimed he would 
look down her shirt too.  KP and her tablemates, including HI, were shocked by respondent’s 
remark.  All agreed respondent held the picture close.  But the students differed in their 
description of what close meant, describing him holding the picture two inches to one foot 
from his face.  There was disagreement about whether respondent laughed when he made the 
statement, or whether other students were laughing which was why respondent came to KP’s 
table.  When she made her report in eighth grade about what occurred a year previous, KP 
recalled respondent laughing “hysterically,” but at hearing she clearly recalled him laughing.  
CA, sitting across the room, recalled students laughing, but the Commission gave greater 
weight to KP’s testimony and to students who sat closest to her.  HI, another student at KP’s 
table, did not recall respondent or student laughter.  Based on evidence of respondent’s 
general pattern of familiar behavior with students, the majority of the Commission 
determined respondent laughed out loud while looking at the picture, although whether the 
respondent laughed or did not was not determinative of the appropriateness of his behavior.   
 
49(B). Respondent denied leering at the picture, laughing, or making the statement.  
 
Respondent had informed students not to laugh at the presentations.  Respondent had been 
circulating throughout the classroom and maintained he intervened when he observed 

 

18 

50(B). Respondent maintained that he intercepted and escorted the students to the 

students laughing.  Based on the more persuasive and credible testimony of KP and other 
students, the Commission determined that respondent leered and laughed at KP’s picture.  
 
50(A). KP had another incident with respondent which occurred about an hour after 
 
the school day ended while she was waiting on school grounds with her friend, GM, for her 
mother to pick them up (Charge 2).  As respondent approached KP had just received a phone 
call from her mother to meet her off campus at a local market.  Respondent asked whether he 
could survey them about the use of technology in physical education.   
 
 
edge of campus after school hours because they were not in a location sanctioned for student 
pickup, and he wanted to escort them safely off campus past a labyrinth of campus 
driveways.  Respondent did not travel off campus with KP and GM, but it seemed to KP that 
he did because he walked a long way with them to the edge of the campus, and in KP’s 
recollection it seemed that they had passed school boundaries.  KP was frightened of 
respondent.  She was so concerned respondent was going to follow them to the local market 
she asked him if he intended to accompany them.  Respondent did not exchange any words 
with KP or GM which suggested they were in violation of school rules and should leave, nor 
did he refer them to the administrative office.  Based upon the more persuasive testimony of 
KP, respondent’s purpose for approaching and walking with KP and GM, was to obtain 
answers to a survey about the use of technology in physical education for his graduate school 
class paper.  KP was uncomfortable answering questions and did so because she felt 
pressured, but her friend, GM, was a willing participant.  There was no evidence that Revere 
authorized respondent to conduct a survey, or respondent had administered the survey to 
other students at Revere.   
 
 
inappropriate student comments and touching which were included in the charges.   
 
 
51(B). Respondent remarked to female student HI that she looked beautiful and 
looked inappropriately at HI (charges 4(a) and (b)).  There was persuasive evidence that 
respondent told HI she looked beautiful and that he looked at her intently, from her shoes up, 
or “up and down.”  Respondent made student HI uncomfortable when during open house, 
accompanied by her parents, respondent looked at HI and remarked to her parents that she 
looked beautiful.  HI wore higher-heeled shoes and a dress to the open house, a departure 
from her more casual school day outfit.  Respondent denied looking at HI inappropriately 
and maintained he was being kind by making the statement to her parents; however, the 
Commission determined that HI’s reaction was reasonable and respondent’s conduct was not.   
 
 
51(C). The Commission found persuasive the evidence from credible student 
witnesses, who had opportunities to observe respondent, which substantiated the charges that 
respondent inappropriately touched students.5  Respondent was observed to favor female 
students and unnecessarily and inappropriately touched their arms, shoulders and backs, 
                                                
 

51(A). Ms. Lopez-Magdaleno’s investigation uncovered a wide range of additional 

5  The Commission did not find persuasive evidence of charge 9 regarding GM who did not testify.   

 

19 

51(E).  RB observed respondent touching girls a few times throughout the year with 

“tasered” them by grabbing them at their waists (charges 9, 12, 24, 25), touched rubbed their 
shoulders like a massage (charges (12(b), 22), stood in too close proximity to them as they 
sat at their desks (charge 14(a)), or stared at their breasts (charge 14(b)).  Respondent was 
also stood too close to all students and got in their personal space (charges 9 and 23).   
 
 
51(D). Respondent’s behavior of touching, rubbing and massaging students’ 
 
shoulders and upper back, (charges 9, 12(b), 22), was observed in his first period class by 
SK, who at first did not think much of it, but came to realize respondent’s overly-friendly 
and familiar conduct was “weird.”  SU, observed respondent touching students, back, 
rubbing their shoulders and back.  Respondent also touched SU on the back and shoulders, 
and rubbed her shoulders.  She estimated the duration of his touch averaged three seconds 
each incident.  Students in first, second and fourth period observed reported respondent’s 
conduct.   
 
 
“side-hugs,” which he thought was weird, and by wrapping his arm around their waists.  
(Charges 9, 12(a).)  RB was not disturbed about what he saw, mainly because it did not 
happen to him.  NS in fourth period as well as KM reported respondent’s hugs. Other student 
observers, SD and KM, reported respondent touching the sides of their waists with his hands 
or “tasering” their waists with his fingers.  One student described the tasering as tickling.  
Respondent did not taser male students in this manner.  
 
 
SU observed respondent stare at girls, not boys, on average twice a week.  (Charge 14.)  SU 
considered respondent’s staring inappropriate and “scary.”  Respondent maintained he was 
looking across the room to check on students, or when at their table was looking over their 
shoulder and down at their work, which could have been mistaken for inappropriate staring.  
Persuasive reports from students confirmed respondent stared at his female students’ chests 
intentionally and inappropriately, not inadvertently.  KM, his homeroom and fourth period 
student, observed respondent staring at her chest when he was at his desk or helping other 
students.  Respondent would look up to her face from her chest area when he noticed she was 
watching.  Other times she observed him staring at her chest when she was speaking with 
him at her desk.  ZA, another homeroom student, corroborated KM’s testimony.  She 
observed respondent place his hand on KM’s shoulder and stare at her breasts between five 
and 10 times.  Assistant Principal Koretz suggested it was respondent’s responsibility to 
check for dress code violations, but there was no evidence of dress code violations. 
 
 
51(G). Respondent had a practice of guiding students into his classroom by placing 
his hands on their middle or lower back, primarily to avoid their backpacks.  In addition to 
other students, male and female, respondent guided KM about six times in this manner 
during the 20-week semester she attended his class.  Respondent admitted he greeted 
students at the door and often guided students into the class after collecting their assignments 
in order to prevent them blocking the entrance.  Respondent’s objectionable behavior was not 
focused on his general practice of greeting students at the door; it was his habit of touching 

51(F).  Respondent stared at female students and the chests of certain female students.  

 

20 

52(B).  Respondent stated, "[It] was fun to make babies."  (Charge 7(a).)  

51(H). Respondent inappropriately breached his students’ personal space (charge 22).  

52(A). Ms. Magdaleno-Lopez’s investigation also uncovered additional incidents that 

them while greeting them, a habit which was consistent with his excessive physical and close 
contact with students.   
 
 
Respondent maintained he was forced to squeeze through a tight aisle of student desks and 
students to circulate around the room, and any touching while he passed students was 
unintentional and appropriate considering the tight quarters.  Student testimony established 
that respondent’s class was typical in size to other classes, but respondent’s behavior was 
atypical of other teachers who did not touch students or close their personal space.  One 
student described his closeness as “breathing on you close.”  (Exhibit 66.)  When students 
touched other students their peers called it “doing a Burke.”   
 
 
were not disclosed during the 2013-2014 school year pertaining to respondent’s pattern and 
practice of oversexualizing class curriculum and excessively referring to sex.   
 
 
Respondent denied making the statement.  The majority of the Commission determined that 
respondent made the statement.  Persuasive testimony from KM, who was only in 
respondent’s class one semester, established that he made the statement during health class.  
Respondent had assigned a “birthday project” where he required students to count back from 
their birthday to estimate their day of conception.  Consistent with that statement, JB quoted 
respondent as saying when someone loses their virginity “they get happy.”   SH reported 
respondent also compared a vagina to chocolate, specifically a Snicker’s bar, which gets 
spread around.  There was no evidence that these statements were necessary or appropriate to 
the curriculum.  Respondent made students uncomfortable with his statements.  
 
 
body]?", and then requested that they indicate the answer on their fingers.  (Charge 7(c).)  
Respondent acknowledged asking his female students to count their “openings,” not holes, 
because it was apparent that students were confused about the structure of the female 
reproductive system.  Persuasive evidence was presented that respondent use the 
colloquialism “holes,” not “openings.”  Respondent denied requesting only female students 
to raise their hand but the weight of the evidence confirmed reports that respondent made his 
request only to female students.  The request disturbed his female students.  There was no 
evidence that respondent’s demand was necessary or appropriate to the curriculum.   
 
 
nipple."  (Charge 7(b).)  Respondent admitted making this statement during an exercise 
comparing form and function of animal cells.  He stated he was addressing a statement made 
by a student; however, the weight of the evidence from student reports and testimony is that 
respondent initiated the statement.  There was no credible evidence that his statement was 
necessary or appropriate to the curriculum.   
 

52(D). After showing the class a picture of a cell, he said, that it looked “like a 

52(C). Respondent asked female students, "How many holes [they had on their 

 

21 

53(A). Ms. Magdaleno-Lopez’s investigation confirmed reports to Assistant Principal 

 
53(B). Respondent denied projecting pornography from a laptop and questioned the 

 
52(E). Respondent used the word "sex" excessively.  (Charge 7(e).)  Students 
consistently reported respondent’s excessive and random references to sexual matters which 
were not directly related or necessary to the teaching of reproduction or science.  
Respondent’s statements had the effect of encouraging students to think about sex either 
directly or by innuendo.  HI estimated respondent used the term sex unrelated to any topic at 
least once every two weeks.  Students had not experienced any other teachers referring to sex 
in the manner respondent referred to sex, and respondent’s references made them 
uncomfortable.    
 
 
Koretz that respondent had briefly projected an image of a naked gyrating woman from a 
pornographic web-site, www.bigblackbooties.com.  (Charge 10.)  Student witnesses AC and 
RB, in respondent’s first period honor class, observed the image for about two seconds 
before respondent remarked “Let me get out of this.”  (Exhibit 67.)  AC and RB clearly saw 
the reference to the web-site and saw the naked image.  The image and the web-site were 
projected on a large whiteboard.  Other students in respondent’s first period honors class 
corroborated the AC and RB report of seeing pornography projected from respondent’s 
computers for a few seconds, but recalled different images.  MB recalled a picture of a “tan” 
male on top of a female with a play button.  (Exhibit 65.)  The students had never seen 
pornographic material before seeing it projected from respondent’s laptop.  There was no 
dispute that the web-site existed.   
 
 
veracity of the students, mainly because it was suspicious that only a few male students 
noticed it in a room of over 30 students, and accessing a pornographic web-site would have 
been blocked by the LAUSD Internet.  Student witnesses AC and RB were credible and 
persuasive.  With over two years’ time from the incident their recollection of the offending 
web-site was clear in their mind because they had never seen pornography before, even 
though their recollection of other incidents faded.  The students reported the offending image 
was projected during “transition” when respondent was setting up the lesson and most 
students were reading.  The veracity of the AC and RB observations were supported by other 
students.  One student observed seeing two “tanned” people, one on top of the other, with an 
arrow over them to be pushed.  Students observed respondent using different computer 
laptops.  Respondent had access to many laptops assigned to his classroom, including an I-
Pad, and computer laptops respondent personally upgraded. RB insisted respondent used a 
personal laptop that he removed from a bag.  There were a variety of ways, respondent, an 
experienced computer technologist could have accessed the web-site.  Respondent’s 
insistence that the District’s Internet access filters would block the web-site is not persuasive.  
It is unknown whether the pornography was pre-loaded on the computer, or whether 
respondent had alternative means of accessing the Internet other than using the District’s 
Internet.  In view of the persuasive testimony of students respondent clearly did access the 
pornographic web-site www.bigblackbooties.com at some point prior or during class, load 
images from the web-site onto his computer and projected the images during classroom 
instruction.   
 

 

22 

54. 

In the December 9, 2014 conference, the District also presented a student 

55(B). Respondent’s conduct violated District Board Resolution on Respectful 

 
report that respondent projected violent images of South Africa on the day of Nelson 
Mandela’s death.  (Charge 11.)  Respondent googled the word “apartheid” for his homeroom 
class in response to a school-wide recommendation to discuss Mr. Mandela’s life.  He did 
not screen the results from his Internet search before projecting them to the students.  From 
the Internet search, images of extremely bloody violence against black South African 
civilians were projected to the students.  Respondent was not a history teacher and his 
unfiltered display of extremely violent images demonstrated a lack of judgment because 
students were shocked and disturbed by the images.  There was evidence that respondent 
displayed only static, not moving, pictures of violent images of apartheid in South Africa.  
The Commission did not find respondent’s misguided attempt to respond to the school-wide 
commemoration of Nelson Mandela to violate any school policy or provide grounds for the 
other causes in the Accusation.   
 
55(A). In the December 9, 2014 conference, respondent was notified again to adhere 
 
to several District policies, which were referred to in his previous conferences with Principal 
Samoza, or were in existence at the time of the incidents.  Respondent’s conduct violated 
District policies which were in effect during his tenure at Revere (charge 28).   
 
 
Treatment “Commitment to the Respectful Treatment of All Persons.” This District policy 
provided that students and adults be treated equally and respectfully by refraining from 
willful and negligent use of slurs against any person on the basis of sex, among other bases.  
This policy was initially adopted in 1988.   
 
55(C). Respondent’s conduct violated District Code of Conduct with Students, Bul 
 
5167.0, sections 3, 5, 6 and 10, which prohibits (3) engaging in behavior that is directly or 
indirectly unprofessional or immoral; (5) making statements or comments either directly or 
in the presence of students which are not age appropriate, professional, or which may be 
considered sexual in nature, harassing, or demeaning; (6) touching or having physical contact 
with a student that is not age-appropriate or within the employee’s responsibilities or duties; 
and (10) communicating with students in writing by phone/email/electronically, via internet, 
for any purposes not school-related.  This policy was adopted in 2008.   
 
55(D). Respondent’s conduct violated District Employee Code of Ethics which 
 
provides for creating an environment of trust and avoiding harassing behavior; maintaining 
appropriate relationship with students which are positive and professional; and following 
District policies, procedures and rules.  This policy was last revised in 2003.   
 
 
Section II and III which prohibits unwelcome verbal and physical conduct, such as 
suggestive derogatory or vulgar comments, use of sexual innuendo or slurs, touching, 
pinching, kissing patting or hugging, e.g., display of sexually suggestive objects, pictures, 
computer-generated images of a sexual nature; leering.  This policy was adopted in 2006.   
 

55(E). Respondent’s conduct violated District’s Sexual Harassment Bulletin 3349.0, 

 

23 

56(A). On January 20, 2015, the District supervisory personnel, including Ms. 

55(G). In addition to these policies, charge 28 alleges that respondent violated the 

55(F).  Respondent’s conduct violated District Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) Bul-
 
999.7, for District Computer and Network Systems which bars employees from using the 
computer network or Internet to access or transmit pornography of any kind.  This policy was 
adopted on June 18, 2013.  The policy was also reviewed on August 14, 2014, during a 
school-wide meeting.   
 
 
Child Abuse Policy.  The weight of the evidence established that respondent did not violate 
the Child Abuse Policy.   
 
 
Olortegui and Roger Scott, held a conference with respondent, where they discussed the 
allegations against respondent and served him with a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service and 
Notice of Suspension (15 days).  The Notice contained the charges in the Accusation, and 
referenced the December 9, 2015 conference.   
 
56(B). Principal Perdigao, relied upon the District’s investigation.  Although he was 
 
not familiar with respondent because he was not present during the 2013-2014 school year, 
Principal Perdigao read all the conference memos and interviews.  Principal Perdigao 
concurred with the District that respondent should be terminated.  His decision was 
influenced by the number of the complaints, the variety of complaints, the occurrence of the 
complaints throughout the school day, and the veracity of the complainants.  After 
thoroughly reviewing the documentation about respondent’s conduct, Principal Perdiagao 
concluded respondent was not a good role model, lacked judgment and would not change.  
Principal Perdigao would not place his own daughter in respondent’s class.  Principal 
Perdigao was a credible witness, who provided direct, unequivocal, and sincere testimony. 
 
 
2015, an administrative review meeting was held to discuss respondent’s possible dismissal 
and immediate suspension.  District Administrator of Operations Jan Davis, District Staff 
Relations Field Director Brenda Olortegui, UTLA representative Kim McLaughlin and 
respondent were in attendance.   
 

57(A). Respondent was provided an opportunity to appeal the Notice and on March 9, 

57(B). Respondent’s additional information was not sufficient to reverse the District’s 

decision.  The District rejected respondent’s appeal and restated its intention to terminate 
respondent.  Based on respondent’s timely request for a hearing, he was not terminated, but 
suspended without pay pending the hearing.   

 

58. 

Respondent’s problematic conduct as a teacher was fully discussed in memos 

Witness credibility  
 
 
and meetings during the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school years.  The Commission 
determined the majority of the charges were supported by the credible and persuasive 
testimony and reports of student witnesses, and evidence contrary to their testimony and 
reports, was given less weight.   

 

24 

59(A). Respondent appeared to be incapable of understanding the problems with his 
 
physical or verbal behavior, or students’ perceptions of his conduct.  With the exception of 
one instance, where respondent admitted touching SD’s face in front of multiple witnesses 
before entering a school assembly room, respondent either denied the incident took place, the 
statement was made, or blamed others, including Bill Nye, for inappropriate statements 
which he was compelled to repeat as “teachable moments.”   
 

59(B). Respondent’s trial demeanor and veracity were questionable, given his 

selective memory, and conflicting deposition testimony.  With the exception of the 
Halloween costume rules, respondent’s professed ignorance of certain District policies was 
disingenuous given the policies were posted on the web-portal, his pride in being technology 
savvy, and his tenure with the District.  Respondent’s reaction to KM’s complaint of his 
inappropriate touching was to have her investigated, and his response to students’ general 
discomfort, was to have a suggestion box so that he would be advised when and if they were 
offended by his conduct.  He would have offered an apology to SD for touching her face if 
given the opportunity, but no one else.   
 
 
Student witness PK supported respondent position because of his positive experience in 
respondent’s class, and PK’s general belief that respondent was not capable of the conduct 
alleged.  PK’s testimony did not invalidate the testimony of other student witnesses who had 
the opposite experience and who corroborated the charges under oath.  PK began in 
respondent’s fifth period class and with respondent’s encouragement switched to second 
period honors the second semester.  He respected respondent as a teacher and thought 
respondent’s class was well organized and fun.  He did not witness the charges and he 
doubted they were true.   
 

60(A). Respondent offered the testimony of a few student witnesses in his defense.  

60(B). PK’s steadfast refusal to believe respondent made the statements in the charges 

was based primarily on his assumption that a teacher would not behave in the manner 
alleged.  PK refused to accept that respondent would use the word pornography, talk about 
“romantic time,” refer to a woman’s feet in the air, or state that a female student’s nickname, 
Huggy Bear, was the name of a prostitute or pimp.  The only rumor PK heard was “chatter” 
about respondent’s comments about KP’s picture of a woman’s breasts during sexual 
harassment training.  He did not have any reason to doubt KP’s veracity, but he did not 
believe any teacher would make that statement.  He had no reason to doubt SD, but he did 
not believe respondent would touch any student’s face.   

 
60(C). PK distrusted three peers, especially SU, but also AC and RB, who observed 
respondent’s pornography image.  He considered SU a “Drama Queen.”  He considered the 
other witnesses boastful.  More recently, in high school he had a personal experience with 
SU where he thought she had lied.   

 
60(D). Despite PK’s disdain for certain peers on a personal level, the Commission 

found his peers’ testimony honest, persuasive and unbiased.  PK admitted he was not always 
in a position to hear and view everything that occurred in the classroom, and his assumption 

 

25 

that SU exaggerated respondent’s statements, was not supported by the weight of the 
evidence.   
 
60(E).  Student witness WA, who was JA’s worm partner, was in respondent’s 
 
homeroom and fifth period.  He appreciated his upbeat demeanor in the morning, learned a 
lot from respondent’s science class, and would have respondent again as a teacher despite 
respondent’s confrontation with him.  He appreciated respondent’s habit of shaking hands 
with students.  He noted respondent’s habit of touching students, mostly with pats on the 
back, guiding them into the room by touching their lower backs, and “high fives.”  He 
acknowledged respondent’s reputation as being touchy.  When students got touchy with each 
other, they were accused of “doing a Mr. Burke.”  WA observed only one incident and his 
testimony did not contradict reports of inappropriate touching.  He did not remember 
students other than JA, his partner in the worm experiment.   
 
60(F).  Student witness NS described herself as an affectionate person who was not 
 
personally disturbed by respondent’s touching students on the back as a way to say “good 
job.”  She thought she learned in respondent’s class and considered respondent a good 
teacher.  She regretted confirming KM’s account of respondent’s conduct because she did 
not witness it.  She testified at hearing to make sure her previous statement did not affect the 
outcome of the hearing.  Nevertheless she considered KM hones and did not dispute the 
veracity KM’s report of respondent’s inappropriate touching.  When KM told NS what 
happened, NS urged KM to report respondent’s conduct.  At the end of the 2013-2014 school 
year NS went to hug respondent to say goodbye.  Respondent told her he was not allowed to 
hug her, but decided to give her a side-hug anyway.   
 
 
Respondent’s previous administrator, Principal Calderone credibly and candidly testified on 
respondent’s behalf, enthusiastically proclaiming that he would welcome respondent back to 
his school without hesitation.  However, Principal Calderone became more reticent after he 
was told respondent admitted to touching a female student’s face and saying she was cute.  
Principal Calderone conceded respondent’s admitted conduct demonstrated bad judgment.   
 
61(B). Assistant Principal Koretz spoke positively of respondent’s contribution to 
 
Revere, particularly in the area of technology education.  Assistant Principal Koretz also 
testified about his suspicions about the veracity and seriousness of the student charges.  
Assistant Principal Koretz witnessed KM clarify her original statements regarding 
respondent’s touching and, as a result, considered her allegations groundless, as did Principal 
Samoza.  The Commission determined that KM’s testimony was direct, honest and 
persuasive, and consistent with her previous written statements.   
 

61(A). Respondent offered the testimony of two District administrators in his defense.  

61(C). Assistant Principal Koretz’s attempt to minimize the seriousness of 

respondent’s conduct overall was not well considered.   Assistant Principal Koretz’s 
testimony conflicted with District policies.  He was not familiar with science and health 
teaching standards.  Ms. Uchida who was more familiar with respondent’s teaching 
assignments.  For example, Assistant Principal surmised that a teacher might be staring at a 

 

26 

62(A). The testimony of two adult student one-on-one aides did not tarnish the 

61(D). Ms. Asahina spoke favorably of respondent, but at hearing she admitted she 

student’s chest to make sure they were not violating the dress code.  He claimed that teachers 
stare or stand close to students to manage their behaviors.  He asserted that it was permissible 
to touch students in a friendly manner as long as they had an understanding of their students’ 
comfort level.  There was no evidence that respondent’s conduct was related to appropriate 
teaching methods.  There was no evidence of dress code violations.  There was no evidence 
that District policies allow teachers the discretion to touch students based on the teacher’s 
assumptions about their students’ comfort levels.   
 
 
was not in a position to know the circumstances or scope of the charges and was upset about 
being drawn into the dispute.  She had limited involvement with respondent, mainly the 
lesson where respondent stated his disappointment that it did not end in sex.  Ms. Asahina 
did not have a clear recollection of what respondent said, but acknowledged that some 
students appeared to be upset.  Ms. Asahina testified with confidence about respondent’s 
positive peer-to-peer relationships and enthusiasm, his understanding of technology, the 
science fair he initiated, and her observations of his lesson on plant reproduction.   
 
 
District’s evidence, because the student aides did not have an opportunity to observe the 
incidents.  They respected respondent and his ability to effectively teach their special needs 
students who were doing well in his classes.  However, they were primarily responsible for 
individual students. The two adult one-on-one student aides were admittedly busy attending 
to their assigned students.  Other than opining about some of the negative personality traits of 
middle school students, they did not offer any testimony which materially contradicted the 
specific charges.  Further they provided no grounds for questioning the veracity of the 
individual students.   
 
62(B). Debbie Hoskins was a one-on-one aide in respondent’s second period honors 
 
class.  She was responsible for taking notes on behalf of her student and making sure he was 
on task.  She thought respondent was an excellent teacher and did not observe anything 
inappropriate.  Ms. Hoskins knew witness HI from another class and considered HI honest 
and trustworthy; she had no reason to distrust HI’s credibility.  Ms. Hoskins did not know 
student witnesses AC and RB in his second period class, who witnessed pornography 
projected on the screen, and could not attest to their credibility.  She expressed surprise when 
told respondent admitted to touching SD’s face and calling her cute.  She doubted respondent 
would project pornography, stare at female students’ breasts, inappropriately touch them, 
make inappropriate sexual comments to the class, or otherwise behave inappropriately, but 
admitted the conduct or comments, if true, were inappropriate.   
 
 
She did not observe any misconduct and was impressed with respondent’s work with her 
special needs student, who was having trouble managing the I-Pad.  The fifth period students 
tended to be louder because it was the end of the day.  Ms. Sheen noticed that CA, a student 
witness had problems, but did not observe her problems to be related to the charge CA 
witnessed concerning respondent’s statement to JA that “he would slap him if he could.”  

62(C). Lesley Sheen, a fifth period one-on-one aide, was also focused on her student.  

 

27 

Ms. Sheen conceded that the students, not her, were in a better position to testify about 
respondent’s statements to them.  Ms. Sheen did hear respondent speak about the genetics of 
eye color, but she did not hear him make a statement about the mailman being part of the 
student’s genetic mix.  Ms. Sheen would be concerned if respondent did touch a female 
student’s face and say she was cute.  She thought respondent was a good teacher and did not 
think respondent should be fired, but she admitted that given her focus on one student, she 
might not have seen or heard everything.    
 
Specific charges in the Accusation6  
 

63.  District established charge 1 by a preponderance of the evidence: 
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

2013 and ending on about June 5, 2014, respondent, in the 
presence of students in 2nd period Science/Health class, did the 
following to student KP., when she turned in an assignment 
addressing sexual harassment which included a drawing of boys 
leering at a woman's cleavage, which KP had marked with a big 
cross over it: 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Said, "Oh, I would look down her shirt too." 
Laughed aloud. 
Held the homework paper close to his face as if he were 
leering down the cleavage. 

 
 
64.  District established charge 2 by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
respondent approached KP and GM after school and asked them where they were going and 
whether they would participate in a technology survey.  Although respondent followed them 
to the edge of the campus, District did not establish by the preponderance of the evidence that 
respondent walked them off campus, or continued to walk with them off the campus.   

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent did the 
following to 8th grade student KP and 7th grade student GM., 
when he approached them after school and asked them if they 
would participate in a PE/technology survey: 

a. 

b. 
c. 

Asked, "Which way are you going?" when they stood up 
to leave campus. 
followed them off campus. 
Continued to walk and ask them questions while outside 
of the school campus.   

                                                
 

6  District amended charges 3 and 4 and withdrew charges 15 and 16.   

 

28 

 

 

 

 

 

65.  District established charge 3, as amended to conform to proof, by a 

 
preponderance of the evidence.   

 

 

 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on about June 5, 2014, respondent did the 
following to student KP: 

a. 

b. 

Took a photograph of her while she was singing 
at a school's choir concert. 
Sent the photograph to her [District e-mail]. 

 

66. 

The District established charge 4, (a) and (b) as amended to conform to 

 
 
proof, by a preponderance of the evidence.  The District did not establish charge 4(c) by a 
preponderance of the evidence.  
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

Said, "You look beautiful" [or “gorgeous”] to student 

2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent: 
 
a. 
[HI]. 
b. 
c.  Winked and smiled at [HI].  
 

Looked at female student [HI] up and down 

67.  District established charge 5 by a preponderance of the evidence.   
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent: 

a. 
b. 

Looked at female student HI up and down. 
Discussed unrelated and inappropriate topics during 
instruction that made HI feel uncomfortable. 

 
68. 

The District established charge 6 by a preponderance of the evidence.  

During the period commencing on or about August 11, 
2014 and ending on or about September 15, 2014, respondent 
winked, smiled, and said, "Hello" to student KP, causing her 
to feel "uncomfortable."  This was witnessed by students, 
including HI and GM. 

69.  The District established charge 7 by a preponderance of the evidence. 
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 
 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent did the 

29 

 

 
 
 

 

 

following during instructional time and in the presence of his 
students, which made them feel uncomfortable: 

a. 
b. 

Stated, "[It] was fun to make babies." 
After showing the class a picture of a cell, he said, "[that 
it looked] like a nipple." 
Asked  the  female  students  in  the  class,  "How  many 
holes  [they  had  on  their  body]?",  and  then  requested 
that they indicate the answer on their fingers. 
d.  While discussing plant reproduction, he stated, "that 

c. 

flowers were nature's pornography."   
He used the word "sex" excessively. 

e. 
 
The District failed to establish the factual allegations in charge 8 by a 

70. 

 
preponderance of the evidence.  GM did not testify. 
 

 
During the period commencing on or about August 13, 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent touched 
GM, on her back, winked and smiled at GM., and stood within 
close proximity of GM., all of which made her feel 
uncomfortable. 

71.  The District established charge 9 by a preponderance of the evidence.   
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent touched 
students on their backs and stood within close proximity of 
students, which made them feel uncomfortable.   

 
72. 

The District established charge 10 by a preponderance of the evidence.   

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, during first period 
class, respondent projected a sexually explicit, pornographic, 
image that came from a laptop that was connected to the 
classroom projector. 

73. 

The District failed to establish charge 11, that respondent “googled a video,” 

 
 
by preponderance of the evidence, but did establish charge 11, that respondent googled 
apartheid and projected graphic images of people being “burned” and “hung,” by a 
preponderance of the evidence   
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent, upon 
mentioning the death of Nelson Mandela, "googled a video" on 

 

 
 

 

30 

apartheid that contained graphic images of people being 
"burned" and "hung." 

74. 

The District established charge 12 by a preponderance of the evidence.  The 

 
 
allegations in 12(a) were referred to as tasering, not grabbing, but respondent’s conduct was 
the same.   
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, on several occasions, 
respondent did the following to his female students: 
 
 
 
 
The District established charge 13 by a preponderance of the evidence.   
 

Tickled and grabbed them by the waist. 
Touched their arms and shoulders. 

a. 
b. 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent, on at 
least one occasion during 4th period: 
 
 

Touched 7th grade student KM. on the inside of 

a. 
the arm close to her breast. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

Moved his hand to KM.'s lower back. 
Placed his hand on KM.'s shoulder. 
Ran his hand down KM.'s arm then touched her 
thigh. 
Said, "I'm trying to help you with your 
work" when KM questioned his touching. 

 
 

The District established charge 14 by a preponderance of the evidence.   

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent. 
 

Stood within close proximity of female students 
as they sat at their desks. 
Looked down toward their chest area as he stood 
over them. 

e. 
 

a. 

b. 

77. 

The District established the factual allegations of charge 17 by a 
preponderance of the evidence.  District did not establish by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the statement happened on May 6, 2014, but the District did establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the statement was made in Spring 2014 and the report 
was made on May 6, 2014.   

31 

75. 

 
76. 
 

 

 

 

 

On or about Tuesday, May 6, 2014, respondent said, "Oh 

 
I wish this story ended with sex," in the presence of students 
after teacher, Ms. Asahina, taught a science lesson addressing 
different parts of a flower.   
 
The District established the factual allegations of charge 18 by a 

78. 

 
preponderance of the evidence.  The District did not establish that all the statements were 
made on or about April 29, 2014, by a preponderance of the evidence.   
 

On or about April 29, 2014, respondent said to students, 

 
during instructional time: 
 

   

 

a. 

b. 
c. 

d. 

“If your mother and father have brown eyes, you 
will have brown eyes unless the mailman is 
involved." 
"When bees climax they explode." 
“When romantic time happens, she has her legs 
in the air and is like ah, ah." 
"Oh, I thought they called her that because it's the 
name of a prostitute," referencing a student's 
nickname. 

 
The District established the factual allegations of charge 19 by a 

On or about Friday, February 21, 2014, respondent did 

 
the following to 7th grade student SD as she entered the 
auditorium for a 7th grade assembly: 

 
Approached her from behind then touched and 
squeezed her cheeks with both of his hands. 
Said, "Your face is so soft" and "how cute." 

a. 

b. 

79. 

 
preponderance of the evidence.   
 

 
80. 

preponderance of the evidence.   
 

The District established charge 20, as amended to conform to proof, by a 

 

During the period commencing on or about February 24, 

2014 and ending on or about February 28, 2014, In the presence of 
students, during a class science project with worms, respondent did 
the following to 7th grade student JA. 

 
Said, "I would slap you if I could." 
Asked JA to stay behind […] after class and said that: 

 
a. 
b. 
He (respondent) was going to "slap [JA's] face." 

 

 

32 

81. 

The District established charge 21 by a preponderance of the evidence.   

From the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, on at least one 
occasion, respondent opened up his projector and there were 
pornographic videos on the screen, which displayed a naked 
female shaking her buttocks and a URL address 
www.bigblackbooties.com.   

82. 

The District established charge 22 by a preponderance of the evidence. 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 2013 
 
and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent rubbed girls' 
shoulders in class, like a massage.   

 
83. 

The District established charge 23 by a preponderance of the evidence.   

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 2013 
and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent got physically close 
to students and got in their "personal space." 

84. 

 
The District failed to established charge 24 by a preponderance of the 
 
evidence.  The evidence established that respondent’s touched 7th grade students.   
 

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 

 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, an 8th grade student 
stated that respondent would "touch like the higher part of [her] 
arm."   

85. 

The District failed to establish charge 25 by a preponderance of the evidence.   

During the period commencing on or about August 13, 
2013 and ending on or about June 5, 2014, respondent put his 
hand on student ZA's shoulder. 

86. 

The District established charge 26, that respondent wore a Frankenstein 

 
 
costume and face paint as he greeted his students at the classroom door, by a preponderance 
of the evidence, but failed to establish charge 26, that he violated school announcements, by 
a preponderance of the evidence.   
 

. 
On or about October 30, 2013, in violation of school 
announcements made to the entire school that costumes, face 
paint, masks, or any other type of Halloween garb was not 
allowed on campus, respondent dressed in a Frankenstein 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

33 

costume, wearing face paint and standing at his classroom door 
greeting students. 

The District established charge 27, that respondent received annual training 

and was aware of the District’s reasonable rules and regulations (by his tenure with the 
District and the availability of the rules and regulations on the web-portal), by the 
preponderance of the evidence.  Based upon charge 27, the Commission determined that the 
District failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence charge 27 that respondent’s 
conduct supported (cause 8), a willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the employing district.   

 
87. 

 

Respondent  has  received  training  annually  regarding 
the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District  including  those  with 
respect to the proper treatment of students.   When respondent 
engaged  in  the  conduct  described  above,  respondent  was 
aware  of  the  District's  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  and 
that  his  conduct  violated 
these  rules  and  regulations. 
Accordingly,  respondent  conduct  constitutes  a  willful  refusal 
to  perform  regular  assignments  without  cause,  as  prescribed 
by the rules and regulations of the employing district. 

88. 

The District established charge 28a, 28b, 28c, 28d and 28f, by a preponderance 

 
 
of the evidence, but did not establish the factual allegations of charge 28e and 28g, by a 
preponderance of the evidence.   
 

The above conduct violated the reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District including, but not limited to: 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 

g. 

Acceptable Use Policy  
Code of Conduct with Students  
Sexual Harassment Policy  
Code of Ethics  
Child Abuse Policy   
Board Resolution To Enforce the Respectful 
Treatment of all Persons  
California Science Content Standards and 
Frameworks.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Absent a statute to the contrary, the burden of proof in disciplinary 

administrative proceedings rests upon the party making the charges.  (Parker v. City of 
Fountain Valley (1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113; Evid. Code, § 115.)  The “burden of proof” 

34 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 

4. 

means the obligation of a party, if he or she is to prevail on a particular fact, to establish by 
evidence a requisite degree of belief or conviction concerning such fact.  (Redevelopment 
Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.)  The burden of proof in this 
proceeding is thus on District to prove the charging allegations.   

The standard of proof in this proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence.  
(Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-
1040; Evid. Code, § 115.)  “The phrase ‘preponderance of evidence’ is usually defined in 
terms of probability of truth, e.g., ‘such evidence as, when weighed with that opposed to it, 
has more convincing force and the greater probability of truth.’  (BAJI (8th ed.), No. 2.60.)”  
(1 Witkin, Evidence, Burden of Proof and Presumptions § 35 (4th ed. 2000).)   

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 
employee if one or more of the causes enumerated in Education Code (Code)section 44932, 
subdivision (a),7 are established.  In this case, the district seeks respondent’s dismissal based 
on subdivision (a)(1) immoral, including egregious conduct, (a)(2) unprofessional conduct,  
(a)(4) dishonesty; (a)(5) unsatisfactory performance(a)(6) evident unfitness for service, and 
(a)(8) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the 
governing board of the school district employing him or her.  Complainant also seeks 
dismissal based upon immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district pursuant to Code section 44939.   

Witness credibility 
 

It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness 

and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens v. 
Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 
testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions 
with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a 
cloth of truth out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell 
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)  Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a 
witness, even an expert, although not contradicted.  (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon 
(1971) 3 Cal.3d  875, 890.)  And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute 
substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality 
Assurance (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, at 1052.) 
 
 
deemed untrustworthy.  That is, disbelief does not create affirmative evidence to the contrary 
of that which is discarded.  That the trier of fact may disbelieve the testimony of a witness 
                                                
7 Code section 44932 was also amended effective January 1, 2015. While there were 
  
no substantive changes to any of the subdivisions relied upon by the District for discipline, 
many of the subdivisions were renumbered and thus vary from the operative pleading. 

The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to that which is 

5. 

 

35 

who testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself furnish any evidence in support of 
the affirmative of that issue, and does not warrant a finding in the affirmative thereof unless 
there is other evidence in the case to support such affirmative.  (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ 
State License Bd. (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. Central 
California Traction Co. (1923) 191 Cal.295, 304.) 
 
The third cause for unprofessional conduct and fifth cause for unsatisfactory performance 
are dismissed.  
 
6. 

Respondent’s motion to dismiss the District’s third cause for unprofessional 

 
conduct pursuant to Education Code (Code) sections 44932, subdivision (a)(2), and 44933 is 
granted.  Respondent moved to dismiss the third cause for unprofessional conduct in his 
closing argument and did not refer to the fifth cause for unsatisfactory performance in Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).  However, the District does not have jurisdiction to 
proceed with either cause unless it can demonstrate fidelity to the procedural requirements 
set forth in Code section 44938.  Because the District failed to follow Code section 44938, 
subdivision (a), the third cause for unprofessional conduct and the fifth cause for 
unsatisfactory performance are dismissed.   
 
 
The District and the Commission lack jurisdiction to proceed on the charges of 
unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance because respondent was deprived of 
the notice and opportunity to remediate any unprofessional or unsatisfactory conduct on his 
part after receipt of the 45-day notice in Code section 44938, subdivision (a), along with a 
“Stull” evaluation.  Code section 44938, subdivision (a) provides: 
 

7. 

The governing board of any school district shall not act upon any 
charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 calendar days prior 
to the date of the filing, the board or its authorized representative has 
given the employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice of 
the unprofessional conduct, specifying the nature thereof with such 
specific instances of behavior and with such particularity as to furnish 
the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome 
the grounds for the charge. The written notice shall include the 
evaluation made pursuant to Article 11 (commencing with Section 
44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee. 

8. 

In Tarquin v. Commission on Professional Competence (Tarquin) (1978) 84 

 
 
Cal.App.3d 251, the court interpreting a prior version of section 44938, concluded that 
service of the notice and evaluation were jurisdictional, and that the claim could not be 
pursued before a Commission on Professional Competence if the notice and evaluation were 
not timely served.  (Tarquin, supra, 84 Cal.App.3d at 259.)  According to Woodland Joint 
Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
at 1446 (Woodland), “where a school district seeking the dismissal of a permanent 
certificated employee on charges of unprofessional conduct fails to comply with the notice 
provision of section 44938, subdivision (a), it lacks jurisdiction to proceed.   

 

36 

 

 

9. 

The District provided respondent the appropriate written notification and held 

a meeting as required.  Nevertheless, the District failed to satisfy the notice requirements 
when it failed to provide respondent an opportunity to remediate any defects in his 
performance.  District’s technical adherence to the notice requirements by providing a 
written document setting forth the causes and charges was made meaningless by the 
District’s actions.  By failing to provide respondent an opportunity to exercise his rights 
under Code section 44938, subdivision (a), it was as if no notice had been served.  Put 
another way, the District did not “furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her 
faults and overcome the grounds for the charge.”  (Ed. Code § 44938, subd. (a).)  To allow 
the notice that was served in 2015 to suffice would be to place form over substance, which is 
disfavored in the law.  (Civ. Code, § 3528; Hicks v. Board of Supervisors (1977) 69 
Cal.App.3d 228, 237 [purported budget plan deemed a reorganization plan, and voided on 
constitutional grounds].)  Further, the District’s previous conference memos to respondent, 
although inclusive of many of the same charges, were not Notices of Unsatisfactory Acts 
within the meaning of Code section 44938.   

 
10.  District maintains that respondent should be discharged for unprofessional 
conduct for charges 1-14, and 17-28.  Assuming District was entitled to proceed with the 
Cause for unprofessional conduct for the charges, it would prevail after the application of the 
Morrison factors.  “Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(l), 
may be defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such 
conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of 
Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)  District met its burden of proof that 
respondent’s conduct failed to meet the standards of the profession on the basis of charges 
which reference his display of pornography, verbal threat, and general pattern and practice of 
inappropriate physical contact and sexual innuendo, which were not necessary to the 
curriculum or appropriate to teaching middle school students.    

 
11. 

The District also alleges that charges 1-14, and 17-28, support dismissal for 

unsatisfactory performance.  Assuming District met its procedural obligations and could 
proceed with the cause for unprofessional conduct, it would not prevail after the application 
of the Morrison factors below.  Unsatisfactory performance is not specifically defined in the 
Education Code or case law, but it is distinct from unprofessional conduct.  Code section 
44938, subdivision (c), specifies that unsatisfactory performance does not include any other 
cause for dismissal specified in section 44932.  Whereas unprofessional conduct can be 
determined by analyzing a teacher’s conduct relative to the broader educational community, 
unsatisfactory performance must be analyzed with an eye toward the teacher’s performance 
as evaluated by his or her employing school district as required by Code section 44600, et 
seq, which is referenced in Code section 44938.  Code section 44600, et seq., establishes 
guidelines for how school districts should evaluate and assess the performance of their 
certificated employees.  Thus, cause for unsatisfactory performance may be established if the 
District meets its burden of proof and shows that certificated employee performs 
unsatisfactorily to his employing school district based on standard evaluations and other 
objective measures which were not administered for respondent.   Respondent’s last formal 

37 

District evaluation was prepared at his previous school, and there were no formal 
observations or evaluations prepared at Revere.  On the contrary, he was observed 
occasionally, informally, and his peers’ and administrators’ complimented his skills and 
classroom structure based upon their sporadic observations of him and their appreciation of 
his computer savvy.  Respondent’s students gave him mixed teaching reviews, but generally 
agreed he taught the curriculum, albeit with unnecessary sexual references and innuendo 
which was offensive, made them uncomfortable, and as Ms. Uchida confirmed, distracted 
them from the curriculum.   

 
12. 

The Tarquin case makes clear that where a school district does not comply 

with section 44938, subdivision (a), it is not barred from pursuing other statutory grounds for 
termination.  That analysis is supported by other cases, such as Woodland, supra.  A pleading 
is sufficient and comports with due process when it provides the respondent with enough 
notice of the charge to enable him or her to prepare a defense. (Dyment v. Board of Medical 
Examiners of State of Cal. (1922) 57 Cal.App. 260, 265.)  No prejudice will be found if it 
appears from the record that the respondent was in fact able to prepare a defense. (Jaramillo 
v. State Bd. for Geologists and Geophysicists (2006) 136 Cal.App.4th 880.).  Accordingly,  
the causes against respondent for unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory conduct are 
dismissed.   
 
The first and second causes for immoral conduct 
 

13. 

The District’s first and second causes for dismissal are for respondent’s 

alleged immoral conduct, including but not limited to, “egregious conduct” pursuant to Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).  In its second cause it asserts that respondent should be 
terminated for immoral conduct pursuant to Code section 44939, which provides for the 
immediate suspension of a permanent employee for charges of immoral conduct.   
 

14. 

Code section 44932 subdivision (a)(1) states:  

(a) A permanent employee shall not be dismissed except for one or 
more of the following causes: 
 
(1) Immoral conduct including, but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct.  For the purposes of this chapter, “egregious misconduct” 
is defined exclusively as immoral conduct that is the basis for an 
offense described in Section 44010 or 44011 of this code, or in 
Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive, of the Penal Code. 

15. 

 
 
Penal Code section 11165.6, by referencing Penal Code section 11165.1, 
brings that latter statute into consideration in cases of this type, even though it was not 
directly referenced in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).  Penal Code section 11165.1, 
subdivision (b)(4), defines sexual abuse, as follows: 
 

 

 

38 

The intentional touching of the genitals or intimate parts, including the 
breasts, genital area, groin, inner thighs, and buttocks, or the clothing 
covering them, of a child, or of the perpetrator by a child, for purposes 
of sexual arousal or gratification, except that it does not include acts 
which may reasonably be construed to be normal caretaker 
responsibilities; interactions with, or demonstrations of affection for, 
the child; or acts performed for a valid medical purpose. 

17. 

16. 

The District met its burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that 

 
 
The District did not meet its burden of proof by a preponderance of the 
evidence that respondent has committed egregious misconduct within the meaning of 
sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44010, subdivision (a).  The District asserts that 
charges 13, 21 and 22 support respondent’s termination for cause one, immoral “egregious 
conduct.”  The District failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that charge 13, 
respondent’s inappropriate physical conduct with KM, and charge 22, rubbing his female 
students’ shoulders like a massage, supported the cause for immoral egregious conduct, 
because respondent’s conduct did not constitute touching intimate parts as defined by the 
Penal Code.  The District failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that charge 21, 
respondent’s unintentional projection of pornography in the classroom, supported 
termination for moral egregious conduct under any applicable provision of the Penal Code.   
 
 
the charges support respondent’s dismissal for immoral conduct within the meaning of Code 
sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1),and 44939.  The District asserted that the following 
charges supported immoral conduct:  charge 1 (KP’s sexual harassment drawing); charge 2 
(approaching KP after school and having her participate in a survey); charge 3 (taking a 
photograph of KP and sending it to her); charge 7 (making sexual innuendos and talking 
about sex); charge 12 (tickling and grabbing female students by the waist and touching their 
arms and shoulders); charge 13 (touching KM inappropriately); charge 19 (squeezing SD’s 
cheeks and saying her skin is soft and she is cute); charge 20 (telling JA he would slap him if 
he could); charge 21 (projecting pornography from www.bigblackbooties.com; charge 22 
(rubbing/massaging female shoulders); charge 23 (invading students’ personal physical 
space); charge 24 (touching the higher part of a student’s arm) (which it failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence) and charge 25 (which it failed to prove by a preponderance 
of the evidence).   
 
18(A). The term “immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent 
 
with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 
public welfare.  (Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland).)  It is sometimes used as synonymous with “dishonesty” or a 
high degree of unfairness.   (Ibid.)  Immoral conduct can be construed according to common 
usage.  “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined 
to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 

 

39 

corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde Unified 
School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972 (Hensey).)   
 
 
students, as noted by several courts:   
 

18(B). A teacher is held to a high standard of morality.  A teacher is a role model for 

 
(Weiland, supra, 179 Cal. App. 2d at p.811-812, citing Goldsmith v. Board of Education 
(1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 168.)   

The calling (of a teacher) is so intimate, its duties so 

 
delicate, the things in which a teacher might prove unworthy or 
would fail are so numerous that they are incapable of 
enumeration in any legislative enactment.  His habits, his 
speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and 
propriety of his unofficial utterances, his associations, all are 
involved.  His ability to inspire children and to govern them, his 
power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands are 
matters of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.   

There are certain professions which impose upon persons 

 
 
attracted to them responsibilities and limitations on freedom of 
action which do not exist in regard to other callings.  Public 
officials such as judges, policemen and schoolteachers fall into 
such a category.   
 
As between a teacher and his student, “(a)n important part of the 
education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for authority 
and obedience to necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from 
example as well as from precept.” (Johnson v. Taft School Dist., 
19 Cal.App.2d 405, 408, 65 P.2d 912.) And as our Supreme 
Court said in Board of Education v. Swan, 41 Cal.2d 546, at 
552, 261 P.2d 261, at 265, “A teacher . . . in the public school 
system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light of an 
examplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by 
the (students) coming under [his] care and protection.” 

 
(Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824-825; see also San Diego 
Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 
1454, 1463-1464.)   
 

19. 

The factual scenario in Hensey is also helpful in understanding the types of 

actions that can constitute “immoral conduct” and “evident unfitness for service” as bases to 
dismiss a teacher.  In Hensey dismissal was justified for a junior college teacher who used 

 

40 

vulgar language and engaged in questionable acts in his classes.  It was not necessarily each 
individual act or comment but, rather, the totality.  The teacher in Hensey tore out a 
loudspeaker in his classroom.  He referred to the school’s bell system as sounding like a 
worn-out phonograph in a whorehouse and made numerous references throughout the year to 
whores and whorehouses.  He warned Mexican-American students of super-syphilis in a 
town on the Mexican border.  He stated that the district superintendent spent too much time 
licking up the board and simulated licking the classroom wall with his tongue.  Although he 
explained that he meant “face licking,” the expression “means in common parlance licking 
an entirely different portion of the anatomy” and was obviously so intended.  He also 
referred to the school walls looking as though someone had peed on them and then smeared 
them with baby crap.  The court stated “while it could be assumed that both male and female 
students of that age were familiar with the words used, a classroom, even on a junior college 
level, is not the time or the place for the use of such language.”  (Hensey, supra, 9 
Cal.App.3d at 974, 975.)  The different actions and statements were described as creating a 
dangerous situation (loudspeaker), bearing on his fitness to teach (whorehouse), humiliating 
and embarrassing to the Mexican-American students and showing a lack of restraint and a 
tendency to vulgarity and bad taste (super-syphilis), and disruptive conduct, an impairment 
of the teaching process, and not an example of the responsible dissent which should be 
fostered in the classroom (licking).  “All of the incidents taken in the aggregate serve as a 
substantial basis for the trial court’s determination that the charges of ‘immoral conduct’ and 
‘evident unfitness for service’ were true and constituted cause for dismissal.”  (Ibid.)    

 
20. 

The District referred the Commission to Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28 

Cal. App. 4th 369 (Haar) as guidance.  In Haar, the middle school teacher was dismissed for 
immoral conduct based upon inappropriate touching and sexual innuendo.  The Commission 
in that case determined that there was not sufficient evidence to support dismissal for 
immoral conduct.  The Court of Appeal confirmed the Los Angeles Superior Court’s reversal 
of the Commission’s Decision.  The teacher’s conduct in the Haar case is not identical to 
respondent’s conduct because the teacher in Haar had more instances where the teacher 
invited sexual contact and the invited contact was more intimate.  Nevertheless there are 
substantial similarities between the situations that support respondent’s termination for 
immoral conduct.  The teacher in Haar dressed up as Santa Claus and in exchange for a 
raffle, invited female students to sit on his lap, and give him hugs and kisses, reached out and 
held the hand of a female student until she pulled away, rubbed a female student’s thighs in 
circles with his hand, and told a female student she was “cute” and his “favorite.”  (Id., at pp. 
378-385.)  Here, respondent engaged in a pattern of inappropriate touching, paying too much 
attention to particular female students like KM, HI, KP and SD.  Respondent complimented 
HI in front of her parents, and regardless of her parents’ presence, looked at HI in a sexual 
manner which disturbed her.  He inappropriately touched his female students, touching KM 
close to her breast down the side of her body to her thighs, pinched SD’s cheeks, while 
complimenting her soft skin and remarking she is so cute.  Respondent massaged and rubbed 
the shoulders of his female students, and hugged female students.  Respondent’s pattern and 
practice of referring to sex either overtly or by innuendo was well established in the factual 
findings.  Respondent’s immoral character was confirmed when he projected pornography of 
a gyrating naked woman from the web-site bigblackbooties.com.  Although not every student 

 

41 

21. 

22. 

The fourth Cause for dismissal for dishonesty was not established by a 

was uncomfortable or disturbed by respondent’s conduct toward the females in his class, his 
conduct did disturb many students, and caused great distress to certain female students who 
were the subject of his attention.   
 
Dishonesty 
 
 
preponderance of the evidence within the meaning of Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).  
“Public service provides no hiding place for the dishonest and those lacking integrity.”  
(Brewer v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1979) 93 Cal.App.3d 358, 364.)  Dishonesty also 
suggests a deceitful disposition.  (Gee v. California State Personnel Bd. (1970) 5 Cal.App.3d 
713, 718-19.)  The definitions of “dishonest” and “dishonesty” (Webster’s Seventh New 
Collegiate Dict. (1969) p. 239), include references to willfulness, intent and fraud such that it 
may be reasonably concluded that there can be no dishonesty where there is no intent to 
deceive.   
 
 
The District failed to identify any charges in support of the fourth cause for 
dishonesty.  The Commission found respondent’s testimony less credible than that of his 
students due to a variety of factors, including the straightforward demeanor and clear 
testimony of the students, which starkly contrasted with respondent’s demeanor, selective 
memory and conflicting deposition responses.  Overall, the Commission’s consideration of 
respondent’s credibility affected the evidentiary findings related to the charges and causes, 
and is an aggravating factor under the Morrison factors below.  However, the charges did not 
contain allegations that respondent committed dishonest acts as a teacher, and for this reason 
the fourth cause is dismissed.   
 
Evident unfitness for service 
 
The District established by a preponderance of the evidence the sixth cause for 
 
evident unfitness for service within the meaning of Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6).   
 
 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.  
(Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1444.)  “‘Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a 
fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.”  (Ibid.)   
 

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

23. 

24. 

25. 

In this case, it was established that respondent possesses a fixed character trait 

rendering him unfit for service as a teacher of middle school students.  The Commission’s 
determination of respondent’s fixed character remains unchanged after the application of the 
Morrison factors below.   

 
26. 

Respondent’s inability to discern between acceptable conduct and invasive 

conduct was clear.  His well-established references to sex and sexual innuendos were 
unrestrained, unnecessary to the curriculum, and wholly inappropriate.  His failure to 

 

42 

acknowledge he made certain statements is reflective of a fixed character that is incompatible 
with teaching young adults.  When he admitted to a sexual reference, as for example, with 
the “flowers are nature’s pornography,” or when “bees climax they explode,” or EH’s Huggy 
Bear nickname, he explained the statements were either repeated from a student’s sibling, 
borrowed from a popular television personality, or provided teachable moments.  He did not 
understand the inappropriateness of taking KP’s picture during a private extracurricular 
activity without her permission and sending it directly to her e-mail account.  He did not 
have any respect for his young female students’ or fully appreciate their reactions to his 
comments or actions; e.g., when he grabbed SD’s face; when he touched KM 
inappropriately; when he followed KP through the school campus after the school day ended; 
when he asked his female students to count the number of holes, or when he made a point of 
talking about EH’s Huggy Bear nickname.  He distrusted his female student’s complaints.  
He questioned the veracity of KP’s reaction to his e-mail by searching social media for 
photographs of KP to discredit her.  Respondent’s fixation with sex was confirmed by his 
ready access to pornographic images on his computer and his careless projection of them in 
the classroom.  His fixation was further confirmed by his offensive sound effects of a woman 
going “ah, ah” during “romantic time.”  His fixation with sexual analogies in science was 
exhibited by his comparing a cell to a nipple and with his statements about bees exploding.  
His inflexible thinking and judgment was further demonstrated by his wearing a Halloween 
costume because the rules did not technically apply to him, and his unfiltered projection of 
violent images of apartheid to middle school students.   

 
27.  His fixed character was not remediated by the removal of two students from 

28. 

The District proved by a preponderance of the evidence the seventh cause for 

his class and his many conferences with administrators.  His only concession to Principal 
Samoza was giving side-hugs instead of full-frontal hugs.   
 
Persistent violation of laws or reasonable regulations  
 
 
dismissal for violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 
Education or the District pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).  The 
District asserts that charges 1-14 and 17-28, support this cause.  As set forth above not every 
charge, including charge 26 (Halloween costume), was proven by a preponderance of the 
evidence.  Nevertheless, the charges that were proven by a preponderance of the evidence 
establish that respondent violated the reasonable rules and regulations of the District set forth 
in charge 28 a, b, c, d, and f.  The Commission determined that the District failed to establish 
by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent violated the rules or regulations set forth 
in charge 28e (child abuse), and 28g (California content standards).   
 

29. 

Cause for discipline may be based on the violation of school rules. (San 

Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 
Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-1181.)  In order for a teacher to be terminated under Education Code 
section 44932(a)(7), for violations of law or school rules, the violations must be either 
“persistent” or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.”  (Governing Board 

 

43 

 
30. 

 
31. 

of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81 (Seaman).)  “The 
word ‘persistent’ is defined by lexicographers as ‘refusing to relent; continuing, especially in 
the face of opposition … stubborn; persevering … constantly repeated.’  And, in the judicial 
decisions of this, as well as other states, the word has been interpreted to mean ‘continuing or 
constant.’”  (Id. at p. 82.)  The subdivision pertains to unintentional as well as intentional 
transgressions, and hence the legislature, apparently to allow opportunity for correction, has 
decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal.  (Id. at p. 84.)  It is the 
persistent disregard of school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate.”  (Id.)   

The District met its burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that, 

respondent’s inappropriate conduct established a persistent violation of school rules.  
Principal Samoza’s concern that respondent did not fully appreciate school rules was well-
founded.  Before respondent arrived at Revere, respondent had been a teacher within the 
District, and as a District teacher was on notice of District policies governing teachers’ 
conduct.  The District policies were also available on the District web-portal, and were 
reviewed in teacher conferences.  Respondent’s various statements that he was unaware of 
the policies, or hadn’t seen them until much later, were not credible.  As referenced in the 
factual findings, respondent’s conduct violated several District policies, including the code of 
conduct with students, sexual harassment, the code of ethics, and respectful treatment of all 
persons.  In addition, respondent violated the acceptable use policy when he projected 
pornography, and when he distributed KP’s photograph from a private after-school event to 
her school e-mail using his school-issued I-Pad.   

The commission found that respondent did not violate school policy when he 
wore a Halloween costume.  The Commission found that respondent did not violate school 
policies by projecting images of apartheid.  Nevertheless, his conduct in these instances 
demonstrated a fixed character trait for disregard for others and a lack of appreciation for 
age-appropriate instruction.   
 
Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause 
 

32. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

respondent willfully refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district within the 
meaning of Code section 44939, subdivision (b).  The credible and persuasive testimony of 
Ms. Uchida established that respondent inappropriately sexualized his health and science 
lessons and that his approach was counterproductive to teaching middle school students. .  
Students had varying views of his teaching skills, and were unduly distracted and disturbed 
by his comments and the classroom environment.  However, there was insufficient evidence 
that in conducting himself inappropriately, respondent also failed to teach the required health 
and science curriculum.   
// 
// 
// 
// 

 

44 

33. 

(a). 

The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow teachers.  

The Commission finds that respondent’s misconduct relates to his fitness to 

Analysis of the Morrison Factors 
 
 
teach, within the meaning of Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  The 
Morrison analysis applies to causes for discipline involving unprofessional or immoral 
conduct, as well as evident unfitness to teach.  (Id. at p. 227-230.)  Not all “Morrison factors” 
need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. (Haar, supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 369.)  
Moreover, the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, 
but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland Joint 
Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1457.) In this case, the Commission finds as follows: 
 
  
There was ample evidence of adverse effects, on students and on the administrators.  
Respondent’s misconduct adversely affected his students.  Although students learned and 
some, including PK and respondent’s two special education students, benefited from 
respondent’s instruction despite his conduct, respondent’s conduct negatively affected his 
students, particularly his female students, and distracted them from the curriculum.  
Respondent was a poor role model and created a strained learning environment for many 
students.  He exposed his classrooms to inappropriate physical and verbal behavior.  He 
made certain female students and their witnesses extremely uncomfortable and his behavior 
compelled the administration to transfer two female students from his class.  His pattern and 
practice of referencing sex was inappropriate to the curriculum, offensive and a distraction to 
his students.   
 
 
recently, during the 2013-2014 school year and the fall 2015 school year.   
 

(b).  The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.  The conduct occurred 

(c). 

The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved.  Respondent’s 

credentials allow him to work with middle school students, but the evidence established that 
respondent is not temperamentally suited to work with students of that age.   
 
 
(d).  The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding 
the conduct.  Respondent presented no mitigating facts that explained or justified his actions.  
Aggravating circumstances were established, namely, that respondent made other statements 
not contained in the charges, including referring to a vagina as a snicker’s bar, hugging KM 
tightly, lifting her off the floor.  There were numerous incidents establishing a pattern and 
practice of inappropriate physical and verbal conduct.  Respondent demonstrated little insight 
into his behavior and, with the exception of SD, little responsibility.  Respondent was not 
convinced his female students’ reactions were reasonable, and recommended a suggestion 
box for their concerns.  Respondent’s credibility is considered an aggravating factor.  The 
Commission found respondent to lack credibility in his responses to the District’s 
investigation, and his testimony, where he had selective recall and his responses conflicted 
with his deposition testimony.   
 

 

45 

(f). 

(e). 

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

 
conduct.  There was nothing praiseworthy in respondent’s conduct.  Respondent elected to 
teach health and science using imagery that was inappropriate and unsettling to his students, 
and distracted them from the curriculum.  Respondent elected to be physical with his 
students, showing particularly poor judgment with his female students.  The Commission did 
not find respondent’s photograph of KP at a private after-school event praiseworthy nor was 
his complimentary note.  Respondent was KP’s teacher, not family friend, and taking her 
photograph without her permission to her school e-mail was not appropriate.  Respondent’s 
motives were blameworthy.  His physical and verbal conduct, notably, his careless projection 
of pornography, established he was motivated by sexual content not necessary or appropriate 
to the curriculum.   
 
 
the recurrence of the questioned conduct is high.  Respondent demonstrated little insight into 
his behavior.  Despite numerous conferences, memos, suggestions by administrators and 
respondent of actions that can be taken to reduce improper interactions and induce proper 
interactions, respondent’s conduct persisted.  The District removed SD after respondent 
grabbed her chin, stroked her skin and said it was soft and she was so cute.  Principal Samoza 
removed KM from respondent’s classroom and returned respondent to the classroom after 
her investigation of that incident due to her mistaken belief that respondent’s poor judgment 
and conduct with students would not continue.  She was wrong.  Principal Samoza was 
concerned about his attitude.  As set forth in the factual findings, respondent engaged in 
multiple incidents of misconduct that demonstrated a pattern and practice of inappropriate 
physical conduct, and unrestrained reference to sex or sexual innuendo not necessary to 
teaching seventh graders health or science.   
 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. The likelihood of 

(g).  The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified 
persons.  There was no credible evidence offered to establish that any constitutional right 
will be impacted adversely by this matter.  
 
(h).  The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.  Respondent’s touching and 
 
physical proximity to students was observed by his students.  Respondent elected to touch 
SD’s face and make inappropriate comments in front of her friends, respondent’s students, 
and many others waiting for a school-wide assembly to begin.  Respondents conduct was 
observed and otherwise noted, including the removal of two female students from 
respondent’s class.  Respondent made inappropriate sexual comments in the classroom.  
Given respondent’s conduct, some notoriety among students in his class is inferred, but 
otherwise there was no substantial evidence that his conduct received schoolwide attention or 
notoriety.   
 
Disposition 
 
 
discipline is actually warranted even where cause for dismissal has been established.  

The Commission still has broad discretion to determine whether such 

34. 

 

46 

(Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)  The Commission 
finds that dismissal is warranted.   
 

35.  As described above, the District established by a preponderance of the 

evidence cause 6, evident unfitness for service, and after consideration of the Morrison 
factors, the Commission does not consider respondent temperamentally suited to be in the 
classroom with middle school students.  Respondent demonstrated he possessed a fixed 
personality unsuited to teaching middle school students.  Respondent demonstrated neither 
remorse nor contrition.  He has not shown that he learned from these events.  He had not 
benefitted from counseling or progressive discipline by the District, as he demonstrated his 
inability to refrain from sexual innuendo and inappropriate physical or personal contact with 
his students, particularly his female students.  Overall, respondent did not show that he is 
willing to put the interests of his students over his own.  Respondent gave the Commission 
no reason to put him back in the classroom.   

 
36.  

The Commission dismisses cause 3 (unprofessional conduct) and cause 5 

37. 

The Commission dismisses causes 4 (dishonesty), and 5 (willful refusal to 

(unsatisfactory performance) on the grounds set forth in the above legal conclusions.   
 
 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause) on the grounds set forth in the above 
legal conclusions.   
 
 
employment with the District.  The District established that cause exists to dismiss 
respondent’s employment for causes 1 and 2 (immoral conduct, but not egregious conduct), 
cause 6 (evident unfitness for service) and cause 7 (persistent violation of school laws).   

The Commission affirms the Board’s decision to terminate respondent’s 

38. 

 

47 

ORDER 

The Board of the District’s decision to terminate respondent’s employment 

Respondent Eric Burke is dismissed as a permanent certified employee of the 

 
1. 

 
with the District is affirmed.   
 
 
2. 
District.   
 
 
 

Dated:  March 24, 2016 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
Dated:  March 24, 2016 
 

 

 

 

Dated:  March 24, 2016 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

DocuSigned  by: 

(  Iplun  L.  Yous 
____________________________   
 
 
JOHN L. DAVIS 
 
Member 
 
 
 
Commission on Professional  
Competence 

 
 

Pen 

DocuSigned  by: 

____________________________   
KRISTI HARABEDIAN 
Member  
 
 
Commission on Professional  
Competence 

 

 

DocuSigned  by: 

( Eileun,  (olan

___________________________ 
 
EILEEN COHN 
Administrative Law Judge 
 
Commission on Professional  
Competence 

 

 
 
 
 

 
  

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

48 

