BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Immediate Suspension 
and Dismissal of:

NEAL IVAN LEE (EN 989994), a permanent
certificated employee of the Los Angeles 
Unified School District,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2015091103

DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, on November 6, November 20, and 
December 10-11, 2015, in Los Angeles. The case was submitted for decision upon conclusion 
of the hearing on December 11, 2015.

My T. Huynh, Associate General Counsel, represented complainant Los Angeles 

Unified School District (District).

Rosty G. Gore, Esq., represented Neal Ivan Lee (respondent), who was present.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Board of Education (Board) is the duly elected, qualified and acting 

governing board of the District, organized, existing and operating pursuant to the provisions 
of the California Education Code and other laws of the State of California.

2.

3.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.

Justo H. Avila, in his official capacity as the District’s Chief Human 

Resources Officer, verified on information and belief a Statement of Charges against 
respondent, alleging factual and legal grounds for respondent’s immediate suspension 
without pay and termination of his employment as a result of separate incidents involving 
two students.

4.

By a letter dated September 2, 2015, respondent was advised that the 

Statement of Charges had been filed with the Board, and that during a closed session of a 
Board meeting held on September 1, 2015, the Board decided to suspend respondent without 
pay and dismiss him from employment. The dismissal would become effective within 30 
days, unless he demanded a hearing.  Respondent timely requested a hearing.

5.

On September 29, 2015, the District filed an Accusation and Statement of 

Charges with OAH, as well as respondent’s aforementioned request for a hearing.

Respondent’s Background Information

6.

Credentials. Respondent has a clear single subject teaching credential in 

mathematics, chemistry and physics. Respondent also possesses a cross-cultural, language 
and academic development (CLAD) certificate.

7.

Employment with the District. Since being hired by the District in 2008, 
respondent has been assigned as a high school teacher at City of Angels Options Virtual
Academy (City of Angels).

8.

A. City of Angels is an on-line independent study program allowing students 
to continue their education outside the confines of a traditional, comprehensive high school. 
Instruction is designed to accommodate a variety of students, including teen mothers, 
working students, full-time caregivers, students with special medical needs, students with 
social and anxiety disorders, and those whose parents want to educate their children at home.
Students generally come to campus once per week to drop off completed assignments and 
pick-up new ones, which they do at home.  They get credit for completing the assignments,
not for going to campus.

B. City of Angels has many campuses spread throughout the City of Los 

Angeles.  Respondent taught at several different such campuses, including Charo, El Sereno 
Middle School, Barrio Action in El Sereno and Hollenbeck Middle School.

C.  During the spring and fall semesters in 2013, respondent was assigned to 

the City of Angels’ Legacy LA campus, along with one other District teacher, Carolina
Saucedo.  The Legacy LA campus was part of a community center open to the public, which 
housed programs operated by the City of Los Angeles.

Student A

1

9.

A

enrolled at City of Angels, Legacy LA campus, for the fall 2013

semester. He was 16 years old at the time and in the ninth grade.  He had been referred to an
independent study program as a result of counseling he had received after the traumatic death 
of his brother three years earlier.

1 Last names are omitted to protect the privacy of the involved students.

2

10.

During the fall of 2013, respondent was A

’s assigned teacher at City of

 was in the Legacy LA multipurpose room helping respondent move tables. Only the

Angels.  On a date not established, but in either late October or early November 2013, 
A
two of them were in the multipurpose room at that time.  While there, respondent asked
A
A
he could see. When A
stomach and chest with his hand. A
uncomfortable, but he did not tell anyone about it at the time.

 if he “worked out,” and whether he had seen any improvement in his body. When
 told him he had noticed improvement in his chest and stomach, respondent asked if 

 lifted up his shirt to show him, respondent rubbed A

 thought the interaction was weird and he felt 

’s

11.

On another day in November 2013, when A

 was at the Legacy LA

campus, he went to the restroom during class.  Respondent later entered the restroom.
Respondent talked to A
and then respondent asked A
restroom at the time.  A
restroom to return to the classroom.  A
campus.  He did not tell anyone about the incident with respondent at the time.

 if he still worked out. The two were alone in the 
 again felt uncomfortable with this interaction and left the 

 about his class assignments while A

 finished his work without incident and left the 

 washed his hands 

12.

On another day in November 2013, A

 reported to respondent’s

 

 at the time. A

 were alone in the classroom, respondent got up and closed the 

 asked respondent for help on his assignment.

classroom to submit assignments.  It was not his regularly scheduled day to do so.  Only a
female student was in the classroom with respondent and A
helped the female student put up some posters in respondent’s classroom.  She left the 
classroom after that task was done.  A
While respondent and A
door from the main hallway into the classroom.  Respondent sat next to A
him with his assignment.  A
he was keeping up with his workouts and if his muscles were going away. A
something about not keeping up with his workouts.  Respondent slipped a hand under 
A
still on A
student walked into the classroom, at which time respondent pulled his hand out from
 was confused over this series of 
A
uncomfortable interactions with respondent.  He quickly left the classroom.

’s stomach and chest area, skin to skin.  With his hand 
’s chest and stomach area, respondent said, “You are sweating.” A female 

 and helped
 began to get ready to leave, but respondent asked him if 

’s shirt and told him he could leave. A

’s shirt and rubbed A

 said 

13.

Later that day, A

’s mother asked him about a letter(s) she had received 
 was not doing his assignments and that if he did not 

’s mother was upset with her son.  A

from respondent indicating that A
complete the assignments on time he would be immediately dropped from City of Angels.
A
 explained that he was reluctant to go to 
City of Angels because he was uncomfortable with respondent.  A
about the three uncomfortable incidents he had with respondent, including the one that 
happened earlier that day.  A
A
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD).  A
respondent later that day.

 not to go back to City of Angels, and she made a complaint about respondent to the 
 was interviewed by LAPD officers about 

’s mother became upset with respondent.  She told

 told his mother 

3

14.

On December 12, 2013, the principal of City of Angels, Vince Carbino, 
received a phone call from a counselor with Aztecs Rising Counseling Center (Aztecs 
Rising).  The counselor wanted to schedule a meeting with Principal Carbino to discuss a 
complaint A
A
Carbino the three uncomfortable interactions he had with respondent described above.  This 
was the first time that Principal Carbino had heard any complaint about respondent.

 had against respondent.  The next day, Principal Carbino met with 

, his mother and the counselor, during which time A

 explained to Principal 

15.

After the meeting, Principal Carbino made a report to the LAPD concerning 

respondent.  He was advised that a complaint had already been made and the matter was 
being investigated.  Principal Carbino was asked to hold off any investigation until the police 
concluded their own.  Principal Carbino reported these events to District personnel.

16.

On December 13, 2013, Principal Carbino met with respondent and told him 
 about respondent.  At that time, respondent was 
he had received a complaint from A
removed from his classroom and temporarily reassigned to the Educational Service Center 
East Office, while an investigation was conducted on A

’s complaint.

17.

A

 never returned to City of Angels.  He is now 18 years old and attends 

a home study program in another county.  His goal is to take and pass the GED.

Student M

18. M

 enrolled at City of Angels, Legacy LA campus, for the fall 2013 

semester.  He was 16 years old at the time and in the tenth grade.  By his own admission, he 
was referred to an independent studies program because he was doing poorly in regular high 
school. Respondent was M

’s assigned teacher at City of Angels.

19.

On a date not established, but probably in late September 2013, M

 went
to the restroom at the Legacy LA campus during class time.  Respondent shortly later came 
into the restroom.  While M
worked out because he [M
to 300 pounds.  M
uncomfortable by the interaction because he thought it was weird for a teacher to discuss his 
fitness while both were in the restroom.

] needed to lose weight. At the time, M
 went back into the classroom, followed by respondent.  M

 was washing his hands, respondent asked M

 weighed close
 felt 

 if he 

 went to the restroom of the Legacy LA campus during class time.

In October 2013, and approximately two weeks after the first incident 

 emerged from a stall, he saw respondent washing his hands at the sink. 

20.
discussed above, M
When M
Respondent asked M
weight.  Respondent asked M
for a few seconds to feel.  M
was weird for a teacher to discuss his fitness and touch him while both were in the restroom.
M

 if he was working out and that he thought M
 to flex for him and he held M
’s right arm or shoulder 
 felt uncomfortable by this interaction because he thought it 

did not tell anyone about this incident at the time.

 needed to lose 

4

21.

On a date not established but probably in October 2013, M

 stayed after 

.  Respondent asked M

class to catch up on assignments and was alone with respondent.  It was approximately 12:30
p.m.  At some point, respondent closed the door from the hallway into the classroom and sat
close to M
[respondent] could feel M
respondent placed a hand under M
Respondent held his hand there for a few seconds and then removed it.  M
respondent because he had not consented to being touched and he did not like it.  He 
momentarily considered hitting respondent but decided against it and simply left in a hurry.

either if his family had heart trouble or if he 

’s shirt (but over a t-shirt) and on his chest.

 said anything in response, 

’s heartbeat.  Before M

 was angry at

 had a regularly scheduled counseling session that day with a counselor 
 told his counselor what had happened that day with respondent 

22. M
from Aztecs Rising.  M
and the two incidents before.  The counselor reported it to LAPD.  M
mother about respondent.  She also contacted LAPD.  M
Angels at this time.

 also told his 
stopped attending City of

23.

’s complaint in January 2014.  During 

LAPD began an investigation of M
that time, LAPD officers contacted Principal Carbino about M
’s complaint.  This was 
’s complaint.  By this time, respondent had 
the first time Principal Carbino heard of M
been reassigned and was not in the classroom.  Since Principal Carbino had been asked by
 or his family at this time.
the LAPD to stay his own investigation, he did not contact M
 or his family.  He learned the particulars of 
In fact, Principal Carbino never met with M
M
’s complaint in September 2014 when he received a written report from the District’s 
Student Safety Investigation Team (SSI Team), which contained a summary of an interview 
of M

.

24. M

 never returned to City of Angels. He attended a District continuation

high school for a short time, but left because he feared for his safety after he learned 
members of a gang he did not get along with were also in attendance.  At the time, M
was in a tagging crew (graffiti) affiliated with a rival gang.  In January 2014, M
shot twice by a member of the gang he feared, but he survived.  After he recovered, M
promised his girlfriend he would “straighten up” and no longer be associated with gang 
activity.  M
graduate from high school.

 is now enrolled in the twelfth grade at another school district.  His goal is to 

 was 

 

 

Credibility Findings Regarding the Students

25.

A. Both A

 were credible and believable.  Their narrations
of events and details have been generally consistent over time.  As pointed out by Principal
Carbino, their complaints contained very specific details rendering them more believable
than the usual broad complaints he receives from students.

 and M

B. Both students appeared credible when they testified.  Their demeanor 
appeared even and calm when describing the events in question, even when challenged 
extensively on cross-examination.  For instance, A

freely admitted that he may have

5

mixed up the dates of some of the events in question and he candidly admitted small 
inconsistencies between what he told police and Principal Carbino.  He was also candid in 
discussing personal issues.  At no time did he become hostile or defensive.  The same is true 
.  He was very candid when discussing his personal life, and when he admitted that 
of M
he had lied to his mother about ditching respondent’s class and hiding from her letters 
respondent had sent home about his not completing assignments.  It appeared at all times that 
both students were trying their best to testify honestly and completely.

C1.  Respondent’s attack on the two students’ character was unconvincing.  He 

 had been a member of a tagging crew, which is a gateway to gang activity, it 

contends both were members of street gangs and therefore unbelievable.  It was not 
established by a preponderance of the evidence that A
While M
was not established that M
after he was shot by a gang member, M
completely.  In any event, even if both students had been involved in gang activity, such 
would not necessarily make them unbelievable as witnesses.

 ever joined a gang.  More importantly, the evidence indicates 

has consciously stayed away from gangs 

 had any gang involvement.

C2.  Respondent also contends because both students admitted lying to their 

parents (and to an extent respondent) about ditching class and failing to do assignments, they
cannot be believed in this case.  As discussed above, both students candidly admitted those 
lies in a way making them more believable.

C3.  Finally, respondent contends some discrepancies between their testimony

and what they had previously reported to the LAPD or the District, combined with their
attempts to downplay the fact that they were in the process of being dropped from 
respondent’s class, shows they cannot be trusted.  However, the cited discrepancies were not 
significant, and would be assumed given the number of interactions in question with 
respondent and the amount of time passed since those events.  No truthful witness can be 
expected to recount with precision every word, sentence, date or fact from the past.  It is true 
both students downplayed the fact respondent either had dropped them from class or was on 
the verge of doing so.  But that attitude more tends to show they did not take being dropped 
from class as seriously as respondent contends, as opposed to showing a motive to concoct a 
false story about respondent.

26.

A.  The students’ credibility is bolstered by the fact they independently 

 and M

reported similar accounts of respondent’s acts which occurred at roughly the same time.
A
 did not know each other during the events in question or thereafter,
which renders their description of events even more reliable. In fact, they met for the first 
time during the hearing. Such was established by their convincing testimony. In addition, 
their testimony was corroborated by the interviews of eight students in respondent’s classes
at City of Angels randomly selected by the District’s SSI Team, all of whom denied knowing 
either A
only came to the classroom once per week.  There was usually a handful or less of students 
in respondent’s classroom at any given time.  Thus, the mere fact that A
 
were in respondent’s class does not mean they knew each other or would have interacted.

.  By design, the City of Angels’ classes were small and students 

 and M

 or M

6

B.  Respondent argues A

 and M

 knew each other and therefore 

colluded to come up with false complaints about him. This is based on respondent’s 
testimony the two were in the same study group, took some of the same courses and he saw 
them together at school.  Respondent’s testimony was unconvincing, as it conflicts with the 
more persuasive evidence described above indicating the two students did not know each 
other.  Moreover, respondent presented no corroborating evidence on this point.  For 
example, his fellow teacher at Legacy LA, Ms. Saucedo, did not know either student.
 and M
Finally, respondent argues the fact A
Rising shows they knew each other and could have concocted their complaints through that 
connection.  However, respondent’s argument is supposition. No evidence indicates the two 
students interacted with each other at Aztecs Rising.  In fact, A
received counseling at Aztecs Rising when he was in respondent’s class.

 had received counseling at Aztecs 

 testified he no longer 

District’s Investigation and Actions Against Respondent

27.

On May 15, 2014, the LAPD advised the District that it could proceed with an
administrative investigation of the matter.  On June 11, 2014, the LAPD submitted cases for 
both students to the Los Angeles City Attorney’s Office for filing.  Both cases were rejected 
due to insufficient evidence and no criminal charges were ever filed against respondent.

28.

On May 16, 2014, the District’s SSI Team opened an investigation into both 

students’ complaints against respondent.

29.

The SSI Team completed the investigation by September 17, 2014.  The SSI

Team interviewed various individuals, including M
respondent, Principal Carbino and the aforementioned eight randomly selected students in 
respondent’s classes.  A forensic scan of respondent’s District-issued lap-top computer 
revealed no evidence of any inappropriate material.  The SSI Team was unable to establish a 
relationship between A
their complaints.  Respondent categorically denied all allegations made against him.

, but could find no other witnesses to corroborate

 could not be located), 

 and M

(A

30.

A. Principal Carbino received the SSI Team’s report in September 2014.  He 

began the disciplinary process against respondent at that time.

B. On October 10, 2014, Principal Carbino conducted a conference with 
respondent (who was represented) to discuss the two students’ complaints.  Respondent 
categorically denied all aspects of the complaints, stating that he never interacted with either 
student in the restroom, never touched them, and never made to them the statements 
attributed to him.  Respondent told Principal Carbino that both students knew each other and 
he suspected they fabricated their complaints because respondent was in the process of 
dropping them from his class.  Principal Carbino reminded respondent of the training and
professional development he had previously received related to the appropriate and
respectful treatment of students, including the prohibition of sexual abuse, making 
inappropriate comments, or touching or having inappropriate physical contact.

7

C.  On or about October 20, 2014, respondent sent a written response to 

Principal Carbino concerning their discussion during the conference of October 10th.  He 
reiterated that he categorically denied all aspects of the two students’ complaints.

31.

Principal Carbino again met with respondent and his representatives on 

December 1, 2014. After that meeting, the District issued to respondent a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Acts concerning the events underlying the complaints of A
as well as a Notice of Suspension for 15 Days.

 and M

, 

32.

On February 4, 2015, respondent and his representative met with District 

Operations Coordinator Ruben Hernandez to appeal the District’s Notice of Unsatisfactory
Acts and Notice of Suspension for 15 Days.  Respondent denied the students’ complaints, 
stated A
 knew each other and opined the students had a motive to make 
false claims against him because they were in the process of being removed from 
respondent’s class.  On February 5, 2015, Mr. Hernandez wrote a letter to respondent’s 
representative, advising her that he denied respondent’s appeal.

 and M

Findings Regarding Respondent’s Defenses

33.

A.  Respondent argues A

 and M

 had a motive to make false claims 

about him because they were in the process of being removed from his class. A
missed some appointments and failed to turn in assignments in November.  Respondent had 
sent a letter home warning his parents that A
 was on probation and could be dropped 
from City of Angels.  M
assignments, and secreted letters sent home to his parents warning that he could be dropped 
from the program.  Respondent finally sent M
removed from City of Angels for that reason.  Respondent took those actions in October and 
November, before the two students made their complaints.

had frequently missed appointments, failed to turn in 

 a letter advising him that he was being 

had

B.  Respondent’s argument is not convincing. As discussed above, in their 

 and M

 tended to downplay the importance of those events; it did not 

testimony A
seem from the content of their testimony or their demeanor in delivering it that their
impending removal from respondent’s class was a source of much concern for them. Both
were poor students who undoubtedly had been removed from other schools, so this was not a 
unique experience for them.  No evidence suggests they had lodged complaints at those 
times.  If they had intended to lodge false complaints of a sexual nature against respondent, it 
would be odd for them to not have embellished their complaints with more direct and 
salacious sexual comments or touching by respondent.

C1.  Respondent’s argument is not convincing for another reason.  By

respondent’s own admission, he had students every semester who ended up being removed 
from his class and/or City of Angels for similar reasons; none of those students lodged a 
complaint against him.

8

C2. Respondent’s colleague at Legacy LA, Ms. Saucedo, testified similarly.

Sylvia Juarez, a TSP advisor at City of Angels and a character witness presented by
respondent, testified the rate of students removed from City of Angels has been high; she had 
issued many letters similar to those sent by respondent to the two students’ parents; and she 
never received a complaint in return.

C3. Finally, Principal Carbino persuasively testified that the type of letters

respondent sent to the homes of A
City of Angels commonly received them. Principal Carbino also testified he has yet to see a 
student removal from City of Angels trigger a complaint like those made by A
M
from a program is the reason.

 and 
, and he surmised the right to a Due Process appeal hearing before being removed

 were not “a big deal” and students of 

 and M

D.  The above evidence indicates being removed from respondent’s class 

would not alone cause A

 or M

 to make a false claim against respondent.

A.  Respondent argues he would not have acted as claimed by A

34.
 because he was visible at all times on the Legacy LA campus and would have been 

M
seen if he had done so.  Respondent testified that the doors to his classroom were always
open to the hallway, the door to Ms. Saucedo’s classroom was always open, the restroom 
door was always open, Ms. Saucedo was mostly present in her classroom when respondent 
was in his, and his classroom was visible to the public through its large windows facing a 
public walkway.  Respondent also testified Legacy LA was in a public building and there
were always people from the city or the public around in the hallway near his classroom door 
and the restroom in question.

 and 

B.  Respondent’s argument is not convincing. Respondent admitted on cross-

 and M l’s testimony that respondent 

examination the restroom door was not always open and sometimes Ms. Saucedo was not
present when he was in his classroom. Arturo S., one of the randomly chosen students 
interviewed by the SSI Team, corroborated A
had shut the door when he was in the classroom with them, to the extent Arturo stated
sometimes respondent did so with him during lunch. No evidence presented suggests Ms. 
Saucedo heard or saw everything respondent was doing in his classroom.  Even if she had a 
constant sight-line into his classroom from her own, it is unreasonable to assume she saw 
everything happening in respondent’s classroom at all times or that she was always present 
when respondent was in his classroom.  Ms. Saucedo did not testify to that effect. Moreover,
respondent’s actions in question were rapid and discrete enough to be done without attracting 
attention even if Ms. Saucedo was in her classroom.  The events in the restroom were 
similarly rapid and discrete enough to not garner attention, whether or not the doors were 
open.

A.  Respondent also testified none of the events described by A

35.
 and 
 occurred.  However, his testimony was not persuasive, mainly for the following 

M
reasons.

9

B.  In his statements to the SSI Team and Principal Carbino, as well as when 

he testified during the hearing, respondent made a number of extreme statements later proven 
to be untrue. This dynamic undercut respondent’s credibility. For example, he testified on 
direct examination that it would have been “ridiculous” for him to be in his classroom during 
the lunch hour, in an attempt to show M
 could not have been in his classroom during the 
noon hour.  However, he told the SSI Team that M
during the noon hour.  He also admitted on cross-examination that on occasion students 
would sit on the couch in his classroom while he ate his lunch in his classroom during the 
noon hour.  Respondent initially testified he was never alone with students in the classroom 
and he never engaged in 1:1 teaching with them; however, some of the eight randomly
chosen students corroborated A
them alone in the classroom.  Respondent later admitted a few of his more senior students 
would have been taught 1:1 by him, but he quickly added that Ms. Saucedo or others would 
have been nearby. Respondent initially testified M
’s mother always came to school 
with him and she sat in the back of the classroom; later he testified that she came to class 
most of the time; later he testified she sometimes dropped him off and did not come in.

’s testimony that respondent had been with 

’s appointment time with him was

 and M

C.  In his testimony, respondent (sometimes grudgingly) admitted some facts 

’s complaint.  For example, respondent admitted he told his class 
 had mentioned respondent told him about that during 

of A
’s and M
about an upcoming 5K run.  M
one of the three interactions in question.  Respondent also told the SSI Team that perhaps he 
 
had been in the restroom alone with a student, though he denied ever doing so with A
or M
.  As discussed above, respondent admitted, to various extents, that he had been in 
his classroom alone with a student, he was in his classroom during the lunch hour on 
occasion, and at times the classroom and restroom doors in question had been closed.

36.

’s or M

Respondent argues that no part of A

’s complaint involved 
overtly sexual comments, touching of intimate parts of their bodies or evidenced a quid pro 
quo proposition.  Respondent’s counsel also argues that some of respondent’s conduct 
described by the two students is better explained by respondent’s social awkwardness rather 
than sexual desire or intention.  However, respondent’s extreme and categorical denial of all 
’s complaints undercuts that argument, as it is untenable and 
aspects of A
unconvincing for respondent to testify he did none of those things, but on the other hand 
argue, if he did, he had innocent intentions in mind.  Instead, respondent’s categorical and 
extreme denial of his two students’ complaints indicates his knowledge that his actions were
improper and motivated by physical interest in the two students. 

’s and M

Other Relevant Facts

37.

Respondent has no other record of discipline by the District.  He received a 

“meets standards” performance evaluation by the District in 2009.  Principal Carbino 
recalled receiving no complaints about respondent from a student or parent, other than those 
. Principal Carbino also testified that respondent had a good 
concerning A
record with the District before A

’s complaints.

 and M

 and M

10

38.

Respondent presented two character witnesses, Sylvia Juarez and Ms. 

Saucedo, who are fellow employees of the District.  Both testified respondent is a good 
teacher, honest and works well with high school students.  Neither believed the validity of
A
any student. Both would entrust their own children with respondent.

’s claim because they have never seen respondent behave similarly with

’s or M

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District has the burden of proving cause for discipline in this matter by a

preponderance of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) Preponderance of the evidence means that “the
evidence on [the District’s] side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence 
on the other side.” (Glage v. Hawes Firearms Co. (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 325.)

Egregious Misconduct Generally

2.

Complainant asserts respondent was properly placed on an immediate 
suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939.12 and should be 
terminated for “egregious misconduct” pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), which 
states in pertinent part:

(a) A permanent employee shall not be dismissed except for one 
or more of the following causes:

(1) Immoral conduct including, but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct. For the purposes of this chapter, “egregious 
misconduct” is defined exclusively as immoral conduct that is 
the basis for an offense described in Section 44010 or 44011 of 
this code, or in Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive, of the 
Penal Code.

3.

A.  As shown above, two Education Code sections are used to partially define
“egregious misconduct.” But, they do so by themselves referring to other statutory schemes.
Section 44011 refers generally to controlled substance offenses, listing various sections of 
the Health and Safety Code which proscribe the use of controlled substances.  None of the 
charges in this case refer to use of controlled substances, so section 44011 is irrelevant.

///

///

2 Further unspecified statutory references are to the Education Code.

11

B.  Section 44010 refers to many sections of the Penal Code that pertain to sex 
offenses, including Penal Code section 647.6.  In this case, the District contends this is one of 
two Penal Code statutes that apply to respondent’s conduct in question. Respondent does not 
contest Penal Code section 647.6 can be used to define egregious misconduct.

4.

A. Another statute used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) to define 

egregious misconduct is Penal Code section 11165.6, which provides:

As used in this article, the term “child abuse or neglect” 
includes physical injury or death inflicted by other than 
accidental means upon a child by another person, sexual abuse 
as defined in Section 11165.1, neglect as defined in Section 
11165.2, the willful harming or injuring of a child or the 
endangering of the person or health of a child, as defined in 
Section 11165.3, and unlawful corporal punishment or injury as
defined in Section 11165.4.  “Child abuse or neglect” does not 
include a mutual affray between minors.  “Child abuse or 
neglect” does not include an injury caused by reasonable and 
necessary force used by a peace officer acting within the course 
and scope of his or her employment as a peace officer.
(Emphasis added.)

B.  Penal Code section 11165.6, by referencing Penal Code section 11165.1, 

brings that latter statute into consideration in cases of this type, even though it was not 
directly referenced in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).

C. In this case, the District contends Penal Code section 11165.1 applies to 

respondent’s conduct in question.  Respondent does not contest Penal Code section 11165.1 
can be used to define egregious misconduct.

Egregious Misconduct as Defined by Penal Code section 647.6

5.

A.  Penal Code section 647.6, subdivision (a)(1), states:  “Every person

who annoys or molests a child under 18 years of age shall be punished by a fine not 
exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000), by imprisonment in a county jail not 
exceeding one year, or by both the fine and the punishment.”

B.  In the case of In re D.G. (2012) 208 Cal.App.4th 1562, 1571, the court

defined the term “annoys or molests a child” as used in Penal Code section 647.6, 
subdivision (a)(1):

The words “annoy” and “molest” are synonymous and “refer to 
conduct designed ‘to disturb or irritate, esp[ecially] by continued or 
repeated acts’ or ‘to offend’ [citation]; and as used in this statute, they
ordinarily relate to ‘offenses against children, [with] a connotation of 

12

abnormal sexual motivation on the part of the offender.’  [Citation.]
Ordinarily, the annoyance or molestation which is forbidden is ‘not 
concerned with the state of mind of the child’ but it is ‘the 
objectionable acts of the defendant which constitute the offense,’ and if
his conduct is ‘so lewd or obscene that the normal person would 
unhesitatingly be irritated by it, such conduct would “annoy or molest” 
within the purview of’ the statute.  [Citation.]” (People v. Carskaddon
(1957) 49 Cal.2d 423, 426.) The primary purpose of section 647.6 “is
the ‘protection of children from interference by sexual offenders. . . .’
[Citations.]” (Id. at p. 425.) “The deciding factor for purposes of a 
Penal Code 647.6 charge is that the defendant has engaged in offensive 
or annoying sexually motivated conduct which invades a child’s 
privacy and security, conduct which the government has a substantial 
interest in preventing. . . .” (People v. Kongs (1994) 30 Cal.App.4th 
1741, 1752.) “[T]here can be no normal sexual interest in any child
and it is the sexual interest in the child that is the focus of the statute’s 
intent.” (People v. Shaw (2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 92, 103, italics
omitted.)

C.  The court went on to state that the actual touching of a child is not 

necessary to constitute a violation of Penal Code section 647.6, subdivision (a)(1); words 
alone can suffice.  (In re D.G., supra, 204 Cal.App.4th at 1572.)

6.

In this case, it was established by a preponderance of the evidence that 

 and M

 constituting annoyance or 

respondent engaged in acts with A
molestation of a child as defined by Penal Code section 647.6, subdivision (a)(1).  At 
the time of the events in question, both students were under the age of 18 and thus 
children for purposes of this statute. On three occasions, respondent spoke to and 
touched both students in ways that were “weird,” “uncomfortable,” and thus annoying
to them.  By engaging in intimate discussions about the students’ physiques alone in a 
restroom and/or classroom, respondent invaded the students’ privacy, security and
sense of space. Respondent did the same by actually touching them in ways that were 
uncomfortable and unwelcome.  Those acts together annoyed and irritated the 
students, feelings that would be shared by a reasonable person.  The preponderance of 
the evidence established that respondent was sexually motivated to act as he did.
Moreover, respondent denied the students’ versions of events in a way that was not 
credible and indicated the only motivation he had was improper and sexual. As
articulated by the In re D.G. court, the sheer act of annoying and/or molesting a child 
for sexual purposes is, by definition, abnormal, and thus must be deemed immoral.

7.

Based on the above, it was established by a preponderance of the

evidence that respondent engaged in egregious misconduct, within the meaning of 
sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44010, subdivision (a), by annoying or 
molesting two students under the age of 18 within the meaning of Penal Code section 
647.6. (Factual Findings 9-36.)

13

Egregious Misconduct as Defined by Penal Code section 11165.1

8.

Penal Code section 11165.1 makes it a crime to sexually abuse or 

exploit another person, and it lists a variety of different ways that such a crime can be 
committed.  Subdivision (b)(4) of that statute defines sexual abuse of a child as 
including:

The intentional touching of the genitals or intimate parts,
including the breasts, genital area, groin, inner thighs, and 
buttocks, or the clothing covering them, of a child, or of the 
perpetrator by a child, for purposes of sexual arousal or 
gratification, except that it does not include acts which may 
reasonably be construed to be normal caretaker responsibilities; 
interactions with, or demonstrations of affection for, the child;
or acts performed for a valid medical purpose.

9.

 or M

In this case, it was not established that respondent engaged in sexual 
 as defined by Penal Code section 11165.1.  Respondent 
abuse of A
touched both students in the general chest area, but not necessarily in the breast area.
Even if he had, it cannot be concluded that touching a male child in the general breast 
area is necessarily equivalent to touching a female child in the same area.  A male’s 
breast area is not considered to be genitalia or an intimate part, as is a female’s breast.
For example, a male exposing that part of his body would not be considered an 
indecent act, while a female doing the same would be.  And while touching a female 
anywhere in the breast area necessarily would be considered provocative and 
inappropriate, doing the same to a male would not be.

10.

Under these circumstances, it was not established that respondent 

committed egregious misconduct by engaging in acts constituting sexual abuse of a 
child within the meaning of Penal Code section 11165.1.  (Factual Findings 9-24.)

Analysis of the Morrison Factors

11.

Since the definition of egregious misconduct includes acts that are 

deemed to be immoral, it is necessary to analyze respondent’s misconduct as it relates
to his fitness to teach within the meaning of Morrison v. State Board of Education
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230. The factors suggested by Morrison are compared to 
the facts established in this case. Not all Morrison factors need be present for the 
Morrison test to be satisfied.  (Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.)
Moreover, the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact 
established, but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established 
collectively. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.) In this case, the Morrison factors
demonstrate respondent is unfit to teach as follows (Factual Findings 6-38):

14

(A) The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow 

teachers. Respondent’s misconduct adversely affected two students.  They stopped going to 
respondent’s class due to his misconduct and later left the District.

(B) The degree of such adversity. There was a moderate level of adversity.
The two students described respondent’s conduct as uncomfortable and weird, but neither 
described any actual injury.

(C) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The events in

question were proximate to each other, which show a pattern of related misconduct.

(D) The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. This factor is 

not applicable.

(E) The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any,

surrounding the conduct. Respondent presented no mitigating facts that justified his actions. 
Aggravating circumstances were established, namely that respondent has not demonstrated 
any remorse or contrition.

(F) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct. There is only blame for the way respondent acted.

(G) The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. As respondent 
has demonstrated no recognition of his misconduct and has taken no steps to address it, it 
must be concluded it is more likely than not respondent would engage in similar misconduct.

(H) The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 

constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. This is not foreseen.

Disposition

12.

A. “[An ALJ] has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 

unfitness to teach . . ., and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate 
sanction.”  (California Teachers Ass'n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 
343-344.) Even where cause for dismissal has been established, an ALJ still has 
broad discretion to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted. (Fontana
Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)

B. Since it was established that respondent engaged in egregious misconduct,
the District had cause to immediately suspend him without pay pursuant to section 44939.1.
(Factual Findings 1-38; Legal Conclusions 1-11.)

C. Respondent engaged in egregious misconduct with two students.  His 

actions ultimately caused those two students to leave the City of Angels and the District, as 
well as interrupted their education.  It is concerning that instead of showing remorse, 

15

respondent attacked the character of the two students involved.  Respondent presented no 
evidence of rehabilitation or actions taken to address his misconduct. He put the District at 
risk of civil liability. Terminating his employment is the only available course of action.
(Factual Findings 1-38; Legal Conclusions 1-11.)

ORDER

The immediate suspension without pay of respondent Neal Ivan Lee is affirmed.

Respondent Neal Ivan Lee is terminated from employment with the Los Angeles Unified 
School District.

DATED: January 21, 2016

DocuSigned  by: 

Lb,

_____________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

16

