BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 
 

 
OAH No. 2015040618 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
 
TROY SMITH (EN 597977), 
a permanent certificated employee, 
 
                                       Respondent. 
 
 

DECISION 

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter on 

September 21, 22, 24, and 28 through 30, 2015, in Los Angeles, California. Howard W. 
Cohen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 
California, Gordon Brown, and Robin Scott constituted the Commission. ALJ Cohen 
presided. 

Susan Hyman, Assistant General Counsel, represented complainant Justo H. Avila, 

Chief Human Resource Officer for the Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 
Richard J. Schwab, Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented respondent Troy Smith.  

Prior to the presentation of evidence, respondent brought a pre-trial motion. The ALJ 

considered and ruled on that motion as well as on motions made during the course of the 
hearing, as reflected on the record. During the hearing, complainant moved for leave to 
amend the Amended Accusation by striking charges 2 through 4 on page 2 and by striking 
charge 10 on page 4. There was no opposition, and the motion was granted. 

The ALJ ordered that any testimonial reference to the names of minor students be 

replaced in the hearing transcript by each student’s first name or first name and last initial. 
Counsel for the parties represented that they had redacted students’ names in all exhibits so 
that students are identified only by first name and last initial. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received and argument was heard. The record 
was held open until October 16, 2015, to allow the parties to file post-hearing briefs. The 
District’s post-hearing brief was marked for identification as Exhibit 54, and respondent’s 
post-hearing brief was marked for identification as Exhibit AAA.  

The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on October 16, 

2015. The Commission considered the record in executive session. 

Jurisdiction and Parties 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 11, 2015, complainant filed and served on respondent a Notice of 
Board of Education Intention to Dismiss and Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension, 
with a Statement of Charges. On April 6, 2015, respondent timely requested a hearing. 

Acting in his official capacity, complainant filed an Amended Accusation on 

respondent on April 30, 2015. Respondent timely served a Notice of Defense.  

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District on unpaid 

leave status. He has taught fifth grade at the same school, Ritter Elementary School, in the 
District from 1988 to the present. Respondent holds a clear multi-subject credential and a 
Cross-cultural, Language, and Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate. 

2. 

3. 

Complainant’s Charges Against Respondent 

4. 

In the Amended Accusation against respondent, as amended at hearing, in nine 

separate charging allegations, complainant alleges that cause exists to dismiss respondent 
from his employment as a permanent certificated employee of the District for: 

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1);1 

Immoral conduct, including but not limited to egregious misconduct, 

Unprofessional conduct, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1); 

Unsatisfactory performance, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(4); 

Evident unfitness for service, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); 

e. 

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by the State Board of 
Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him, under section 
44932, subdivision (a)(7); and 

f. 

Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 

cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, 
under section 44939.  

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

// 

// 

                                                

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 

 

2 

Complainant’s Charging Allegation 1(2012/2013 School Year)

5.

Complainant alleges at Charge 1 that, on January 14, 2013, respondent 

’s arms; b. [p]ulled B

committed the following acts toward student B
B
pushed B
over a chair and threw it at B
causing B

 G.: “a. Grabbed B
 out of his chair forcing him to stand; c. [o]nce standing, 
’s jacket that was hanging 
’s face and head and 

, causing the jacket to cover B

 to stumble and fall as he left the classroom.” (Ex. 8, p. 2.)

 towards the classroom door; and d. [t]ook B

 from under both 

6.

The evidence supported Charge 1, in part. Testimony and corroborative 

G.’s arms and applied upward pressure, 

G. up from his chair. Evidence, including B
 G. towards the door and threw the jacket at B

documentary evidence established that respondent did not grab B
admission, respondent put his arms under B
lifting B
pushed B
was contradicted and ultimately unpersuasive. Most of the student statements offered in 
support of the charge represented that respondent tossed, passed, or gave B
him, not that respondent threw the jacket at B
allegation that the toss of his jacket caused B
not testify that it caused him to fall, and respondent denied that he caused B

G. None of the evidence confirmed the

 G. to stumble and fall; even B

G.’s testimony, that respondent 
 G. to fall,

 G. did
G. to fall.

G. Rather, by his own 

G.’s jacket to

G., causing B

Complainant’s Charging Allegation 5 (2011/2012 School Year)

7.

Complainant alleges at Charge 5 that, on October 21, 2011, respondent 

 H. by the arm, digging his fingernails into T

’s arm and 

“grabbed fifth grade student T
causing the skin to break.” (Ex. 8, p. 2.)

8.

The evidence established that, on the date alleged, respondent grabbed T

H.

by the arm, but not that respondent dug his fingernails into T

H.’s arm or broke the skin.

Complainant’s Charging Allegations 6 through 9 and 13 (2010/2011 School Year)

9.

These charges pertain to events that are alleged to have occurred in January or 

Spring 2010 through the end of the 2010/2011 school year.

10.

Complainant alleges in Charge  6 that respondent “regularly intimidated his 

5th grade students through his actions including, but not limited to, the following:

Slammed a ruler and/or a clipboard on students’ desks;

Slammed his hand on students’ desks;

Threatened the students with paddling.

a.

b.

c.

d.

Threatened to “Tell your parents to put the belt to your rear end.”

Said, “One day, I’m gonna come to your house and ask your momma if 

e.
I can give you a tune up (whooping.)”

3

Screamed and yelled at students. 

Threw markers at students. 

Told students that if they reported him, “no one will believe you.” 

Numerous students reported being afraid of [respondent].” (Ex. 8, pp. 

f. 

g. 

h. 

i. 
2-3.) 

11. 

The evidence, including the testimony of students and, in some aspects, of 

respondent himself, established charging allegations 6.a, b, d, f, and i: respondent caused his 
students to fear him by, on many occasions, slamming a ruler, clipboard, or his hand on 
students’ desks, threatening to tell students’ parents to hit them with a belt or threatening to 
ask parents to let respondent hit their children, and screaming and yelling at students. The 
evidence, including student testimony and written statements, as well as the testimony of 
respondent, did not support charging allegations 6.c, e, g, and h. 

12. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 7 that respondent “regularly made demeaning 

remarks to his 5th grade students including, but not limited to, the following: 

“Some of you are not going to graduate.” 

“You’re not going to amount to anything.” 

a. 

b. 

c. 

“Shut up.” 

[Respondent] regularly addressed male students as “boy” instead of 

d. 
their names.” (Ex. 8, p. 3.) 

13. 

The evidence, including but not limited to respondent’s admissions, 

established that, as alleged in Charge 7.c, respondent often told students to “shut up,” a 
demeaning remark. The statement in Charge 7.a is taken out of context; it was established 
that respondent told students that they would not culminate unless they finished their 
classwork or extra-credit work; this was not a demeaning statement. The other charges were 
not supported by the evidence. 

14. 

Complainant alleges in Charge 8 that respondent “regularly engaged in 

corporal punishment of his 5th grade students including, but not limited to, the following: 

Regularly sent students to sit at a table outside the classroom without 

a. 
supervision. 

c. 
extra laps. 

b. 

Made students write standards. 

Made students run laps and singled out misbehaving students to run 

 

4 

Made students stand with their noses against the chalkboard or in the 

d.
corner.” (Ex. 8, p. 3.)

15.

The evidence established that respondent regularly sent students to sit at a 

table outside the classroom; the table could not be seen from most areas of the classroom, but 
respondent provided periodic supervision by visiting or observing the table. The evidence 
also established that respondent made students write standards. The evidence was insufficient 
to establish that respondent singled out misbehaving students to run extra laps, and there was 
no evidence to support the allegation that he made students stand with their noses against the 
chalkboard or in the corner. None of these findings support the gravamen of this charge, that 
respondent regularly engaged in corporal punishment.2

16.

Complainant alleges in Charge 9 that respondent “singled out students for 

corporal punishment as follows:

a.

Pulled F

 S. by the hood of his sweatshirt and choked him;

Put his hand on the back of F

b.
saying, ‘shut up, be quiet, stop.’

 S.’s neck and squeezed it while 

c.
and/or arm:  T

Grabbed the following students by the back of the neck in a ‘C clamp’

 K., M  B., F

 S., R

d, and L

 D.

d.

Pulled students by their ears.

Grabbed student, T

, by the legs and dragged him several feet across 

e.
the room.

f.
Picked up student, T
the auditorium.” (Ex. 8, pp. 3-4.)

, from a seated position and pulled him from 

17.

The evidence, including student testimony and corroborating written 

statements, supported the allegations in Charge 9.a, b, and c; respondent’s denials were not 
persuasive. With respect to Charge 9.c, the evidence supported a finding that, to enforce 
compliance with his instructions, respondent deliberately and frequently grabbed students by 

2 “Corporal punishment” is defined by District policy as “willful infliction of, or 
willfully causing the infliction of, physical pain on a pupil. Corporal punishment refers to the 
intentional application of physical pain as a method of changing behavior. . . . Corporal 
punishment does not include the amount of force that is reasonable and necessary for a 
person employed by or engaged in a public school to quell a disturbance threatening physical 
injury to persons or damage to property, for purposes of self-defense, or to obtain possession 
of weapons or other dangerous objects within the control of the pupil.” (Ex. 17.) Those of 
respondent’s acts that are raised in this particular charge do not satisfy that definition.

5

the sweatshirt and pulled back, and grabbed and squeezed students by the back of the neck 
 S.; there was insufficient evidence to 
and by the arm. Among those students was F
identify that among those students were T
, and L
alleged in Charge 9.a, b, and c and established by the evidence constitute corporal 
punishment, as defined by District policy. (See Factual Finding 15, fn. 2.) There was 
insufficient evidence to establish the truth of the allegations in Charge 9.d, e, or f.

 K., M  B., R

D. The acts 

18.
as follows:

Complainant alleges in Charge 11 that respondent “singled out student, T

, 

a.

[Respondent] yelled to T

, ‘Shut the hell up!’

[Respondent] took T

b.
him up against the wall, pinched him, poked him, and got in his face and 
yelled at him on a daily basis;

 into a closet located in the classroom, pushed 

[Respondent] yelled to T

, ‘Get your ass up!’ and pushed him against 

c.
the wall.

d.
times.

e.
mother.

[Respondent] made T

 run extra laps as punishment four or five 

[Respondent] came to T

’s house several times to talk with T

’s 

[Respondent] grabbed T

f.
said, ‘Stop playing around!’” (Ex. 8, p. 4.)

 by his shirt or wrist with a tight grip and 

19.

The evidence supported the allegations in Charge 11.f, establishing that
roughly by the arm or collar and pulled him.3 The evidence 
respondent grabbed T
supported the allegation in Charge 11.b, in part, in that it established that respondent 
frequently yelled at T
was insufficient evidence to establish the truth of the allegations in Charge 11.a, c, d, and e.

, but not that respondent engaged in the other alleged conduct. There 

20.

Complainant alleges in Charge 12 that Charges 1 through 11 identify conduct 
that violates District rules and regulations, specifically the Code of Conduct with Students, 
the Employee Code of Ethics, the Abolition of Corporal Punishment, the Prohibition of Child 
Abuse and Neglect, the Anti-Bullying and Hazing Policy, the Prohibition of Sexual 
Harassment, and the Board Resolution on the Respectful Treatment of All Others.

//

3 One student wrote, in a statement corroborating admissible evidence, that 

respondent grabbed T

 “like a rat.” (Ex. 26.)

6

21. 

The evidence supports the allegations in Charge 12 that respondent violated 

the following District policies: 

a. 

Employee Code of Ethics, which provides, among other things, that 
District employees are expected to be “committed to creating an environment of trust, care 
and respect” and to “not tolerate discriminatory or harassing behavior of students or 
colleagues” (Ex. 16, paragraph A.2), and to be “committed to following our Code of Ethics, 
laws, and District rules, regulations, bulletins, policies and procedures, recommending 
changes required to make them better, and will not tolerate improper conduct (Ex. 16, 
paragraph A.5). 

District policy bulletin on the Abolition of Corporal Punishment (see 

Factual Finding 15, fn. 2.) 

b. 

c. 

Prohibition of Child Abuse and Neglect, which defines “child abuse” as 

including “where any person willfully causes, inflicts or permits unjustifiable physical pain 
or mental suffering . . . .” (Ex. 14, section VII.E.) The policy excludes from the definition of 
“child abuse” any use of force “that is reasonable and necessary . . . to quell a disturbance 
threatening physical injury to a person(s) or damage to property, for purposes of self-defense, 
or to obtain possession of weapons or other dangerous objects within the control of the 
pupil.” (Ex. 14, section VIII.A.) The evidence did not support a finding that any of the policy 
exclusions apply to respondent’s conduct. 

d. 

Anti-Bullying and Hazing Policy, which prohibits “bullying, hazing, or 

any behavior that infringes on the safety or well-being of students . . . .” The policy defines 
“bullying” as “any severe or pervasive physical or verbal act(s) or conduct . . . that has, or 
can be reasonably predicted to have, the effect of . . . [r]easonable fear of harm to person or 
property. (Ex. 12, section I.A.1.) The policy requires staff to “[s]hare responsibility for 
modeling appropriate behavior and creating an environment where mutual respect, tolerance, 
civility, and acceptance among students and staff are promoted, and students understand that 
bullying and hazing are inappropriate, harmful and are taken seriously.” (Ex. 12, section 
V.A).  

The evidence was insufficient to establish violations of the other policies as alleged. 

22. 

Charging allegation 13 recites the legal conclusion that the previous charging 

allegations support respondent’s dismissal.4 Charging allegation 13 is addressed in the 
discussion of causes for dismissal at Legal Conclusions 13 through 23, post. 

// 

                                                

4 Complainant offered no evidence that respondent willfully refused to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

 

7 

Notices and Warnings Issued to Respondent 

23. 

Complainant offered conference memoranda dated prior to Spring 2011 to 

show that claimant was on notice that the District would find certain conduct objectionable.5 
Among the conference memoranda that administrators issued to respondent were the 
following, which included, among other things, assistance and guidance and, on occasion, 
directives: 

An October 1995 memorandum cautioning respondent to follow “an 

a. 
administrative directive not to have students run laps as a means of enforcing 
discipline.” (Ex. 40.) 

A January 1996 memorandum directing respondent “[n]ever to place or 

b. 
stand students outside on the balcony.” (Ex. 41.) 

A May 2007 memorandum encouraging respondent “to utilize a more 
c. 
progressive type of discipline plan that is more respectful of the student,” and 
cautioning respondent to avoid discipline “in [a] manner that is considered 
borderline corporal punishment.” (Ex. 45.) 

d. 
An October 2007 memorandum notifying respondent that he is not to 
discipline students by grabbing their sweatshirt, that he is not to use corporal 
punishment as a form of discipline, that he is to use a progressive discipline 
plan, that he may “not touch any student unless he is endangering himself or 
others; for their safety,” and that he must “[c]omply with all District policies 
and procedures, including those prohibiting the use of corporal punishment, 
bullying, and disrespectful treatment of students.” (Ex. 46.) 

24.  During the 2010/2011 and the 2013/2014 school years, respondent received 

conference memoranda from, variously, Charlene Green, then the principal, and Alfredo 
Montes, operations coordinator, regarding classroom discipline. The memoranda contained 
certain assistance and guidance for respondent, directives issued to him, and a warning that 
disciplinary action might follow. 

25.  On May 27, 2011, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and a 

Notice of Suspension (for 15 days) that recited charges related to respondent’s alleged 
discipline of students between October 2010 and April 2011. (Those charges are included in 
charges described at Factual Findings 7, 9, 10, & 16.) 

                                                

5 The memoranda were not, however, offered to show that respondent actually 

engaged in the conduct the memoranda described, nor were they offered as independent 
grounds for discipline. Respondent provided the school administration with written responses 
to most of the conference memoranda. 

 

8 

26.  On May 19, 2011, respondent received a performance evaluation that noted 

that, with respect to classroom performance, respondent met applicable standards and that he 
“established and maintained standards for student behavior and created a climate that 
promoted fairness and respect. He was observed to consistently provide a[n] effective 
classroom environment.” The evaluation noted that, with respect to developing as a 
professional educator, respondent performed adjunct duties effectively and “collaborated 
with his 5th grade colleagues to improve the school science program.” (Ex. EE.) The school 
principal who wrote the evaluation, Charlene Green, is deceased and cannot explain apparent 
discrepancies between her favorable notations in the evaluation and the nearly simultaneous 
Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and Notice of Suspension she issued to respondent on May 24, 
2011. The Commission has given appropriate weight to respondent’s evaluation while 
considering it in the context of all admissible evidence. 

27.  On April 29, 2014, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and a 

Notice of Suspension (for 15 days) reciting new charges concerning respondent’s alleged 
discipline of students and stating that respondent had not corrected deficiencies identified in 
the 2011 Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts. (The new charges are included in charges described 
at Factual Finding 5.) 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction 

44944. (Factual Findings 1 through 3.) 

Burden of Proof 

1. 

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter under section 

2. 

The District has the burden of proof in this matter, since it is seeking to 

dismiss respondent from employment as a certificated employee. The District must prove its 
case by a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardiner v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040.) 

Statutory Grounds for Dismissal 

3. 

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 

employee if one or more of the causes enumerated in section 44932, subdivision (a), or 
44939 is established. In the Amended Accusation, as further amended at hearing, the District 
alleged six of those causes: immoral conduct (including, but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct), unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for 
service, persistent violation of school laws or regulations, and willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause. (Factual Finding 4.) Some of those terms have 
been further elucidated by the courts and by the legislature. 

// 

 

9 

IMMORAL CONDUCT AND EGREGIOUS MISCONDUCT 

4. 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness, or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 
public welfare. (Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) Immoral conduct includes “egregious misconduct,” which in turn is 
defined in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), as immoral conduct “that is the basis for” an 
offense described in certain Penal Code sections. Implicated by the allegations in this case 
are Penal Code sections 11165.3 and 11165.4, in Part 4 of the Penal Code, Title 1, Chapter 2, 
Article 2.5, which concerns child abuse and neglect. The District must prove, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that respondent engaged in conduct that would provide the 
basis for such an offense.6 

5. 

Penal Code section 11165.3 prohibits the “willful harming or injuring of a 

child or the endangering of the person or health of a child,” defined to mean “a situation in 
which any person willfully causes or permits any child to suffer, or inflicts thereon, 
unjustifiable physical pain or mental suffering, or having the care or custody of any child, 
willfully causes or permits the person or health of the child to be placed in a situation in 
which his or her person or health is endangered.” 

6. 

Penal Code section 11165.4 prohibits “unlawful corporal punishment or 

injury,” defined, in pertinent part, to mean: 

a situation where any person willfully inflicts upon any child any cruel or 
inhuman corporal punishment or injury resulting in a traumatic condition. It 
does not include an amount of force that is reasonable and necessary for a 
person employed by or engaged in a public school to quell a disturbance 
threatening physical injury to person or damage to property, for purposes of 
self-defense, or to obtain possession of weapons or other dangerous objects 
within the control of the pupil, as authorized by Section 49001 of the 

                                                

6 The ALJ considered argument as to whether the standard of proof for establishing 

immoral conduct “that is the basis for” an offense under the Penal Code should be proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no authority to support that standard. Applying that 
standard would be contrary to the rules governing proceedings in administrative hearings, 
both under the Education Code and the Administrative Procedures Act, and would be 
contrary to the express purposes of the amendment to the Education Code and to section 
44932, subdivision (a)(1), in particular, effective January 1, 2015, which are to increase 
protections for children and to establish a “streamlined process for cases in which an 
employee is accused of egregious misconduct.” (Concurrence In Senate Amendments, AB 
215 As Amended May 20, 2014, p. 7, Staff Comments by Legislative Intent Service.) 

 

10 

Education Code. It also does not include the exercise of the degree of physical 
control authorized by Section 44807 of the Education Code. 

7. 

A finding that respondent engaged in conduct that is the basis for an offense 

described in Penal Code sections 11165.3 or 11165.4 satisfies the definition of egregious 
misconduct under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

8. 

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), is 

conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or that is unbecoming a member 
of a profession in good standing. (Board of Ed. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 
Cal.2d 546, 553 overruled on other grounds by Bekiaris v. Board of Ed. (1972) 6 Cal.3d 
575.) The conduct in question, to amount to unprofessional conduct, must demonstrate 
unfitness to teach. (Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 
Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE 

9. 

“Unsatisfactory performance” is not defined in section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(4), but  the term is not intended to encompass any of the other causes for dismissal 
specified in section 44932. (§ 44938, subd. (c).) “Unsatisfactory performance” generally 
denotes a failure to meet reasonable teaching standards. School districts establish 
requirements for all teachers concerning fundamental duties such as attendance, adherence to 
adopted curriculum and methodology, presentation of classroom instruction, engagement of 
students, and professional development. These requirements serve as the standards by which 
teaching performance is measured. (See Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence 
(1983) 149 Cal. App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

10. 

Evident unfitness for service is established by conduct demonstrating that the 

teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) 
“‘Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 
merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 
school district.” (Id.)  

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF SCHOOL LAWS OR REGULATIONS 

11. 

To establish cause for discipline based on the violation of school rules, there 
must be a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.” (San Dieguito Union 
High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 
1196.) The violation must be persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous 

 

11 

insubordination.” (Governing Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.) Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a 
period of time are generally not considered persistent. (Bourland v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317 (Bourland).) 

The Morrison Factors 

12. 

To establish cause for discipline under section 44932, subdivision (a), based 
on unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct (including egregious misconduct), or evident 
unfitness for service, courts require an evaluation of whether a teacher’s alleged misconduct 
demonstrates the teacher’s unfitness for service using criteria that the Supreme Court 
enunciated in Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230 
(Morrison): the likelihood that the conduct had or may have an adverse effect on students or 
fellow teachers; the degree of the adverse effect; the proximity or remoteness in time of the 
conduct; the type of teaching certificate held by the party involved; extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of recurrence of the 
questioned conduct; and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact 
or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 
These criteria are commonly referred to as “the Morrison factors.”7 The Morrison court held 
that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that 
his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school 
employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.” (Id., at p. 235; see 
also Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208 (Fontana); Woodland, 
supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1444-1445; Bourland, supra, 174 Cal.App.3d at p. 321.) 

13.  Not all Morrison factors need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. 

(Governing Bd. v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Nor must the Morrison analysis be 
conducted on each individual fact established; it may be applied to the accumulated facts 
established collectively. (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.) 

Analysis 

14. 

The District’s Amended Accusation charged respondent with various acts to 

support the six statutory grounds for dismissal. The Commission examined each charged act 
to determine whether it was proven. For each charged act proven, the Commission 
considered whether the act violated one or more of the statutory bases for dismissal, as 
alleged, and applied the Morrison factors where appropriate. 

                                                

7 There is no reason to apply the Morrison factors to analyze causes for dismissal for 

unsatisfactory performance or for persistent violation of laws and regulations (Morrison, 
supra, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 227-230), or for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause; it may be presumed that such conduct is related to fitness to teach. 

 

12 

15.

The District established that the acts alleged in the following charges occurred:

Charge 1 (in part): Respondent physically forced B

 G. up from his chair in

January 2013. (Factual Findings 5-6.) 

Charge 5 (in part): Respondent grabbed T

 H. by the arm in October 2011. 

(Factual Findings 7-8.) 

Charge 6.a, b, d, f, and i: Respondent caused his students to fear him by 

frequently slamming a ruler, clipboard, or his hand on students’ desks, threatening to tell 
students’ parents to hit them with a belt or threatening to ask parents to let respondent hit 
their children, and screaming and yelling at students. (Factual Findings 10-11.) 

Charge 7.c: Respondent often demeaned students by telling them to “shut up.”

(Factual Findings 12-13.) 

Charge 9.a, b, and c: To enforce compliance with his instructions, respondent 
deliberately and frequently grabbed students by the sweatshirt and pulled back, and grabbed 
and squeezed students by the back of the neck and by the arm. Among those students was 
 S. These acts constitute corporal punishment. (Factual Findings 16-17.) 
F

grabbed T

Charge 11.b (in part) and f: Respondent frequently yelled at T
 H., and 
 H. roughly by the arm or collar and pulled him. (Factual Findings 18-19.) 

Charge 12: In engaging in the conduct described above, respondent violated 

various school and District policies and rules. (Factual Findings 20-21.) 

Charge 13: The Commission finds that respondent’s acts provide cause for 

dismissal. (See Legal Conclusions 15-21, post.)8

16.

Respondent’s acts constituted immoral conduct (including egregious

misconduct), unprofessional conduct, and evident unfitness for service. Applying the 
Morrison factors, respondent’s immoral conduct, his unprofessional conduct, and his evident 
unfitness for service relate to his fitness to teach. (Factual Findings 1-27.) Among other 
things, respondent’s conduct has had and would likely have a severe adverse effect on 
students and their parents, causing fear through his verbal and physical actions and pain 
through his application of physical force. Respondent has engaged in the objectionable 
conduct relatively recently. Respondent’s continued and repeated violation of assistance, 
guidance, and directives from school administrators, and of District policies, is an 
aggravating circumstance; a mitigating circumstance is that respondent appears to be an 
effective instructor engaged in school activities. (See Factual Finding 26.) Respondent 

8 The District did not establish that the other charged acts occurred as alleged. The 

Commission agreed unanimously on the findings of fact; a majority found cause to dismiss. 

13

persistently violated or refused to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by 
the governing board of the school district employing him, including the Employee Code of 
Ethics, the Abolition of Corporal Punishment, the Prohibition of Child Abuse and Neglect, 
and the Anti-Bullying and Hazing Policy. The evidence presented did not establish that 
respondent acted out of malice; nevertheless, in imposing discipline that violated the 
guidance and directives he received and the District’s policies, respondent repeatedly 
behaved insensitively, stubbornly, and willfully. It is likely that his impermissible conduct 
will recur. 

17. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(1), based on immoral and egregious misconduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 5 
through 8, 10 through 13, and 16 through 21, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16.  

18. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(1), based on unprofessional conduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 5 through 8, 10 
through 13, and 16 through 21, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16. 

19. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent does not exist under section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(4), based on unsatisfactory performance, as set forth in Factual Findings 5 
through 27 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16.  

20. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(5), based on evident unfitness for service, as set forth in Factual Findings 5 through 8, 10 
through 13, and 16 through 21, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16. 

21. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent exists under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(7), based on persistent violation of or refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed 
for the government of the public schools by the governing board of the school district 
employing him, as set forth in Factual Findings 5 through 8, 10 through 13, and 16 through 
21, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16. 

22. 

Cause for dismissal of respondent does not exist under section 44939, based 
on willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as set forth in 
Factual Findings 5 through 27 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 16. 

23. 

Even where, as here, a school district has established cause for dismissal, the 

Commission has broad discretion to determine whether dismissal is warranted. (Fontana, 
supra, 45 Cal.3d at pp. 220-222.) “The Commission has broad discretion in determining 
what constitutes unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the 
appropriate sanction. [Citing Fontana.] ‘[A] disciplinary discharge often involves complex 
facts and may require a sensitive evaluation of the nature and seriousness of the misconduct 
and whether it warrants the grave sanction of dismissal.’ [Citation].” (California. Teachers 
Assn. v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.) 

// 

 

14 

24.  Dismissal is warranted in this case in view of the serious nature of 

respondent’s misconduct and in order to protect students and others from the likelihood that 
respondent will engage in similar conduct in the future. 

ORDER  

The Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges against respondent Troy Smith 
are affirmed. Respondent Troy Smith’s employment with the Los Angeles Unified School 
District is terminated. 

JJanuary 7, 2016

DATED:  
 

Docu Signed  by: 

(  ow  avd  W  Cohen 

________________________________ 
HOWARD W. COHEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 

 
 

I concur with the Decision and Order set forth above: 

January 8, 2016

DATED:  
 

DocuSigned  by: 

Robi.  Scott 

________________________________ 
 
ROBIN SCOTT 
Commission Member 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

January 8, 2016

DATED:  
 

DocuSigned  by: 

bovdov.  Brown

_________________________________ 
GORDON BROWN   
Commission Member 

 
 

 
 

 

15 

I concur with the factual findings in the Decision and Order set forth above, but 
respectfully dissent from Legal Conclusions 16 (in part) through 18, 20, 21, and 24, and from 
the Order dismissing respondent: 

