BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

NICHOLAS  CAMONTE  (EN  772915), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2015040360 

DECISION 

On  May  18  through  22,  2015,  Michael  A.  Scarlett,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ), 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  sitting  alone,  heard  this  matter  on  behalf  of  the 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  in  Los  Angeles,  California.' 

Michelle  K.  Meek,  Attorney  at  Law,  Liebert  Cassidy  Whitmore,  A  Professional 
Corporation,  represented  Justo  H.  Avila  (complainant),  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District  (LAUSD  or  District). 

Daniel  Kolodziej,  Attorney  at  Law,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented 

Nicholas  Camonte  (respondent),  a  permanent  certified  employee  of  the  District,  who  was 
present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  closed  on  May  22, 

2015.  The  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  February  20,  2015,  complainant  made  and  filed  the  Statement  of  Charges 
alleging  that  respondent  committed  immoral  conduct,  including  egregious  misconduct  based 
upon  conduct  allegedly  to  have  been  committed  by  respondent  between  January  to  June 

*  Education  Code  section  44944.1,  subdivision  (c),  provides  that  effective  January  1, 

2015,  dismissal  or  suspension  proceedings  based  on  charges  of  egregious  misconduct  may  be 
heard  by  an  ALJ  sitting  alone  who  shall  have  all  of  the  powers  granted  to  an  agency  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44934.1.

2006,  as  listed  in  Factual  Finding  2  below.”  On  March  11,  2015,  respondent  was  served  with 
the  District’s  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss.  On  April  13,  2015,  complainant  filed  the 
Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  alleging  said  charges,  and  on  April  7,  2015,  respondent 
submitted  a  request  for  hearing  to  the  District,  and  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

2. 

Complainant’s  Accusation  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  District,  for  immoral  conduct,  including  egregious  misconduct, 
in  violation  of  Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939.1,*  based  on 
the  following  allegations: 

(1)  During  the  period  from  on  or  about  January  1,  2006  through  on  or  about  June  5, 
2006,  respondent  while  a  Sth  grade  teacher  at  Vermont  Elementary  School, 
touched  the  buttocks  of  female  student Ki 

: 

(2)  During  the  period  from  on  or  about  January  2006  through  on  or  about  June  2006, 

respondent  touched  the  hips  and  massaged  the  neck  of  female  student  C 
V5 

(3)  During  the  period  from  on  or  about  January  2006  through  on  or  about  June  2006, 

respondent  touched  the  buttocks  of  female  student  P 

a 

(4)  During  the  period  from  on  or  about  January  2006  through  on  or  about  June  2006, 
respondent  invited  Pe.  to  his  classroom  during  recess  or  lunch  on  no  fewer 
than  two  occasions  and  committed  the  following  acts: 

a. 

Placed  a  blindfold  on  her; 

  

*  On  April  16,  2013,  the  District  issued  respondent  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service 

or  Acts  and  Notice  of  Suspension  in  relation  to  conduct  alleged  to  have  occurred  between 
January  and  June  2006.  The  District  asserted  respondent’s  conduct  constituted  immoral 
conduct,  unprofessional  conduct  and  persistent  violations  of  and/or  refusal  to  obey  policies, 
regulations  and/or  laws  governing  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

*  All  further  statutory  references  shall  be  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

specified. 

*  On  May  13,  2015,  respondent  filed  a  Motion  to  Strike  or  Dismiss  Charge  Nos.  1 
through  3.  Respondent  argued  that  these  charges  were  barred  by  the  four-year  statute  of 
limitations  in  former  section  44944  because  the  alleged  conduct  occurred  in  2006,  and  the 
District’s  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  was  not  issued  until  March  11,  2015,  almost  nine  years 
later.  Section  44944  was  amended  effective  January  1,  2015,  to  provide  an  exception  to  the 
four-year  rule  and  extend  the  limitations  period  for  sexual  misconduct  which  violated 
specified  provisions  of  the  Penal  Code.  (Educ.  Code  44944,  subdivision  (b)(2)(B).)  At 
hearing,  the  ALJ  denied  respondent’s  motion  ruling  that  section  44944,  subdivision 
(b)(2)(B),  applied  to  this  proceeding  and  the  alleged  sexual  misconduct  in  Charges  Nos.  1 
through  3,  fell  under  its  exception  to  the  four-year  rule. 

Z

b. 

Placed  a  “taffy-like”  object  into  her  mouth  while  she  was  blindfolded; 

Put  an  object  into  her  mouth  while  she  was  blindfolded,  which  she  believed  to 
have  been  his  penis  and  told  her  “not  to  bite”  but  to  “suck  on  it; 

Pulled  down  her  pants  after  he  blindfolded  her  and  told  her  to  get  on  her 
knees; 

After  pulling  down  her  pants,  digitally  penetrated  her  vagina  for  | 
approximately  five  minutes;  and 

f. 

Told  her  that  “she  better  not  tell  anyone.” 

3, 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  to  proceed  to  hearing  before  the 

c. 

d. 

e. 

Commission. 

Background 

4, 

In  July  2003,  respondent  was  hired  as  a  5th  grade  elementary  school  teacher  at 

Vermont  Elementary  School  (Vermont)  within  the  District.  Major  DeBerry  (DeBerry)  was 
respondent’s  principal  at  Vermont  during  the  2005-2006  school  year.  On  August  31,  2006, 
after  respondent  voluntarily  transferred  from  Vermont,  he  was  assigned  to  Lillian  Elementary 
School  (Lillian).  Susan  Ahern  (Ahern)  was  the  principal  at  Lillian  and  she  hired  respondent 
to  teach  4th  and  Sth  grade.  Ahern  supervised  respondent  at  Lillian  for  almost  six  years  from 
August  2006  until  March  2012. 

B. 

As  part  of  respondent’s  duties  as  a  5th  grade  teacher  at  Vermont,  respondent 

was  required  to  perform  physical  education  (PE)  assessment  tests  for  his  students.  These  PE 
tests  included  having  the  students  perform  certain  exercises  including  “push-ups”  and  stress 
tests.  Respondent  sometimes  had  physical  contact  or  “prompting”  with  the  students  to  assist 
them  in  performing  the  exercises  properly.  For  example  when  the  students  performed  “push- 
ups,”  sometimes  respondent  was  required  to  adjust  their  hands  and  knees  to  physically 
prompt  proper  form  for  the  exercise.  He  also  would  tap  student’s  shoulders  to  prompt  proper 
positions.  Respondent  also  testified  that  at  times  he  would  give  students  a  “high  five”  or  pat 
them  on  their  “backs”  to  encourage  or  reward  good  performance  in  performing  the  exercises. 

6. 

In  June  2006, Ki.  a  student  in  respondent’s  Sth  grade  class  at 

Vermont  during  the  2005-2006  school  year,  claimed  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched 
her  at  least  three  times  in  his  classroom.  Subsequently,  after  learning  of  an.  S 
allegations,  several  other  female  students in  respondent’s  Sth  grade  class,  including  PRP. 
and  iy.  came  forward  and  asserted  that  respondent  had  also  touched  them 
inappropriately.  After  an  investigation  by  the  Los  Angeles  Police  Department  (LAPD),  no: 
criminal  charges  were  brought  against  respondent  and  the  District  returned  respondent  to 
work  in  August  2006,  without  imposition  of  discipline.  Thereafter,  in  March  2012,  almost 
six  years  later,  Pir.  again  claimed  that  respondent  had  inappropriately  touched  her  in 
2006,  but  additionally  alleged  that  on  at  least  four  different  occasions  in  2006,  respondent 

3

also  sexually  assaulted  her  by  rubbing  or  fingering  her  vagina  (skin-to-skin),  and 
blindfolding  her  and  putting  an  object  believed  to  be  his  penis  into  PHP .’s  mouth. 
Consequently,  in  April  2013,  the  District  brought  a  Statement  of  Charges  and  Accusation 
against  respondent  alleging  immoral  conduct  and  egregious  misconduct  based  upon  both  the 
original  2006  allegations  by  ii.  PrZ:.  and  iy ..  and  the  more 
egregious  allegations  of  sexual  assault  made  by  Pe.  for  the  first  time  in  March  2012. 

7. 

At  all  times  relevant  to  the  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges,  the 

following  District  policies  or  guidelines  were  in  effect:  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with 
Students  (effective  July  15,  2008);  the  LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting 
Requirements  Policy  Bulletin  (Bul-1347.2,  dated  July  1,  2011);  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics  (adopted  September  1998;  Revised  December  2000  and  February  2003);  and  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  Bulletin  (Bul-3349.0,  dated  November  29,  2006). 
Respondent  was  familiar  with,  and  received  annual  training  on  these  policies  and  guidelines. 

mi.  Allegation  —  Charge  No.  1 

8. 

On  June  5,  2006,  KAMA.  filed  a  report  with  the  LAPD  alleging  that 
respondent  inappropriately  touched  her  in  a  sexual  manner  on  three  different  occasions. 
LAPD  Officers  J.  Wells  (Ofc.  Wells)  and  W.  Young  (Ofc.  Young)  interviewed 
and  her 
parents  and  prepared  an  investigative  report  dated  June  6,  2006.  (Exh.  25.) 
x ON  stated  that  on  January  12,  2006,  respondent  took  her  behind  a  bookshelf  in  the 
classroom  out  of  the  view  of  the  other  students,  and  told  her  to  do  push-ups  for  a  PE  test. 
She  stated  respondent  placed  his  hands  on  her  buttocks  and  vagina  to  guide  her  body  up  and 
down  to  perform  the  push-ups.  The  next  day,  January  13,  2006,  during  lunch  break  with  no 
other  students  in  the  classroom,  KJ A.  claimed  that  respondent,  while  lifting  her  up  to 
place  alphabet  letters  on  the  wall,  put  his  hands  on  her  buttocks  and  her  vagina,  squeezing 
her  private  parts  hard.  Finally,  in  2006  (dates  uncertain  but  after  the  first  two  incidents), 
KA.  claimed  that  respondent  placed  a  blindfold  over  her  and  MEBB.’s  eyes  and 
told  them  to  crawl  around  the  classroom  on  their  hands  and  knees  to  play  a  game.  She  stated 
that  respondent  told  them  to  stand  up  and  touch  their  toes,  and  then  touched  both  girls  on 
their  buttocks. 

9. 

On  June  7,  2006,  Liset  Diaz  Covarrubias’,  a  one-to-one  aide  and  teacher 

assistant  in  respondent’s  5th  grade  class,  was  directed  by  principal  DeBerry 
statements  from  the  female  students  in  respondent’s  class,  including  K 
of  the  other  female  students  claimed  that  respondent  either  touched  them,  or  that  they 
witnessed  respondent  touching  other  students,  on  the  buttocks,  lower  back,  stomach,  breast, 

to  obtain  written 
A.°  Several 

  

>  Liset  A.  Diaz  testified  that  her  former  name  was  “Liset  Diaz  Covarrubias.”  Because 

she  currently  uses  the  name  “Liset  A.  Diaz,”  she  will  be  referred  to  as  “Diaz”  in  this 
proposed  decision. 

°  The  female  students’  written  statements  were  not  offered  into  evidence.  The  content 

of  the  written  statements  was  derived  from  the  LAPD  investigation  reports.

thigh  or  leg  during  PE  exercises.  One  student  claimed  respondent  touched  her  buttocks 
during  a  school  photography  session. 

10. 

In  June  2006,  the  District  placed  respondent  gn  administrative  leave  pending 

the  LAPD  investigation  of  the  allegations  made  by 
students  in  his  class. 

   

.  and  the  other  female 

11. 

In  June  2006,  LAPD  officer  C.  Schlund  (Ofc.  Schlund)  investigated  Ki 
A.’s  allegations  and  prepared  an  investigation  report  and  a  follow-up  investigation  report  on 
June  20,  2006,  and  July  7,  2006,  respectively.  (Exh.  25,  pp.  6-18.) 
ten  female  students  in  respondent’s  5th  grade  class,  including  a  and Pa. 

Ofc.  Schlund  interviewed 

   

.  provided  a  description  of  the  three  incidents  that  was  consistent  with  the 

statement  she  previously  provided  to  Ofcs.  Wells  and  Young.  She  additionally  stated  that 
respondent  was  a  mean  teacher  and  that  she  became  upset  when  respondent  told  her 
she  had  a  boyfriend.  Piz.  told  Ofc.  Schlund  that  she  saw  respondent  “pat”  . 
on  the  buttocks  one  time,  and  that  he  “patted”  her 
well.  However,  Pe.  stated  that  respondent  never  touched  her  leg,  thigh  or  genitals,  and 
that  in  June  2006,  when  respondent  asked  her  to  help  him  clean  the  classroom  during  recess, 
respondent  did  not  inappropriately  touch  her  at  that  time.  MIB.  told  Ofc.  Schlund  that 
respondent  massaged  her  shoulders  on  one  occasion  and  once  tried  to  touch  her  buttocks  but 
she  avoided  the  contact.  vi.  also  stated  that  respondent  blindfolded  her  and  Ka 
A.  and  made  them  crawl  around  the  classroom  on  their  knees,  but  she  denied  respondent 
touched  their  buttocks.  Mia.  stated  that  respondent  touched  several  female  students  on 
their  lower  backs  during  PE  tests,  but  that  she  never  saw  him  touch  any  student’s  genitals. 

on  the  buttocks  one  time  as 

parents 
ON 

qo 

12. 

Ofc.  Schlund  interviewed  seven  other  female  students  in  respondent’s  5th 

gerade  class.  Six  of  the  students  recanted  their  allegations  that  respondent  had  inappropriately 
touched  them.  Most  of  the  students  stated  that  respondent  touched  them  when  performing 
push-up  exercises  in  in  PE  class,  but  they  did  not  think  the  touching  was  inappropriate.  One 
student  continued  to  claim  that  respondent  touched  her  buttocks  during  a  school  photography 
session,  but  she  did  not  think  anything  of  the  contact. 

IS. 

Ofc.  Schlund  interviewed  Ms.  Diaz  who  stated  that  she  had  never  seen 

respondent  doing  anything  “suspicious  or  inappropriate”  with  his  students.  She  stated  that 
respondent  assisted  female  students  in  performing  push-ups  during  PE  tests  by  adjusting  their 
arms  and  posture,  which  sometimes  required  touching  their  backs,  but  that  this  touching  was 
not  inappropriate. 

14. 

On  June  27,  2006,  Ofc.  Schlund  interviewed  respondent,  who  admitted  that  he 

touched  his  students’  backs  and  arms  to  adjust  their  body  positions  while  doing  push-ups 
during  PE  tests.  However,  he  denied  ever  touching  a  student’s  buttocks,  vagina,  lower  back 
or  stomach  area  during  these  exercises.  He  admitted  giving  student’s  an  occasional  “pat  on 
the  back”  as  a  reward  for  a  job  well  done,  but  denied  having  any  intimate  contact  with  his 
students.  Respondent  stated  that  he  tutored  students  after  school,  but  denied  having  students 
in  his  classroom  during  lunch  break.  Respondent  denied  ever  making  Via.  and 

‘iim.  crawl  on  their  knees  blindfolded  in  his  classroom  during  lunch  break. 

>

  

  

15. 

 OnJuly  6,  2006,  the  LAPD  submitted  the  case  against  respondent  to  the 
Deputy  District  Attorney’s  office  for  prosecution,  but  the  case  was  rejected  for  lack  of 
evidence.  Subsequently,  in  August  2006,  the  District  returned  respondent  to  work  without 
imposing  any  discipline.  Thereafter,  in  August  2006,  respondent  requested,  and  the  District 
granted,  a  voluntary  transfer  from  Vermont  to  Lillian  Elementary. 

16. 

In  May  2012,  in  connection  with  the  LAPD  investigation  into Pi.’  new 
   

allegations  against  respondent,  Detective  Curtis  Morton  (Det.  Morton)  interviewed 
A.  and  six  other  female  students  from  respondent’s  5th  grade  class  at  Vermont.  K 
A.’s  statement  to  Det.  Morton  in  2012  was  significantly  different  from  the  statements  she 
again  claimed  that  respondent  touched  her 
gave  to  investigators  in  2006.  x 
buttocks  in  2006,  but  she  denied  that  he  touched  her  vagina  and  stated  that  respondent 
touched  her  when  she  did  push-ups  exercises  in  PE  class.  Significantly,  _  A.  omitted 
any  reference  to  two  incidents  she  reported  in  2006,  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched 
her  buttocks  and  vagina  while  lifting  her  to  place  alphabets  on  the  classroom  wall,  and  that 
respondent  made  Ki.  and  Mi.  crawl  around  the  classroom  blindfolded. 
=.  denied  that  she  was  aware  respondent  told  her  parents  she  had  a  boyfriend  in 
2006,  even  though  Ofc.  Schlund’s  investigative  report  indicates  she  became  mad  and  angry 
when  respondent  told  her  parents  about  her  boyfriend. 

Det.  Morton  interviewed  five  female  students  from  respondent’s  5th  grade 
oe  YERES..  MEL...  NE.  and  KAP.  They  all  denied 

class, 
respondent inappropriately  touched  them in  a  sexual  manner.  The  students  recanted  their 
allegations  against  respondent,  stating  that  although  he  touched  them  while  they  performed 
PE  exercises,  they  did  not  believe  the  touching  was  inappropriate  or  sexual.  The  students 
generally  stated  that  they  were  immature  when  they  made  the  allegations  in  2006,  and  could 
not  distinguish  between  inappropriate  and  appropriate  touching  at  that  time.  The  five 
students  Det.  Morton  interviewed  all  said  that  respondent  was  a  good  teacher  who  they  liked. 
Dav  .  and  NE.  also  os  lied  about  her  allegations  against 
respondent  because  respondent  told 

.s  parents  that  she  had  a  boyfriend. 

18. 

Pe.  testified  that  she  saw  respondent  “grab”  Ki.  buttocks  and 

pull  her  next  to  his  desk  in  the  classroom.  She  also  stated  she  witnessed  respondent  take 
KRBBA.  up  to  his  classroom  and  close  the  classroom  door,  and  thereafter,  saw  KI 
A.  come  out of  the  classroom  visibly 
that  she  saw  respondent “pat”  an  buttocks  one  time,  but  she  never  told 
investigators  respondent  “grabbed” 
hearing  or  that  respondent  took  her  to  his  classroom  and  closed  the  door. 

upset.  In  2006  and  2012,  PHP.  told  investigators 

.’s  buttocks  in  the  manner  she  described  at 

19. 

In  October  2012,  Detective  Ray  Jordan  (Det.  Jordan),  Employee  Relations 

Investigation’s  Unit,  LAUSD  School  Police  Department,  initiated  an  investigation  into  the 
allegations  made  by Ki.  and  PAP.  against  respondent.  Det.  Jordan  did  not 
.  because  she  could  not  be  located.  He  doubted  the  truthfulness  of 
interview  Necricalt 
ih  ’s 
her  vagina,  but  in  2012  she  told  Det.  Morton  respondent  did  not  touch  her  vagina  at  all.  Det. 

allegations  because  she  originally  claimed  in  2006  that  respondent  touched 

6

  

  

  

Jordan  investigation  report  noted  that  all  of  the  female  students  in  respondent’s  Sth  grade 
class,  except  yO  .  and  P 
lead  him  to  believe  that 

.,  recanted  their  allegations  against  respondent,  which 

.  §  allegation  was  not  credible. 

    

   

A.’s  parents  about 

.  told  Det.  Jordan  that  respondent  never  touched  her  in  an  inappropriate 

A.  made  up  the  allegations  —  respondent  because  she  was  mad 

Det.  Jordan  interviewed  Mi.  who  was  friends  with  KAMA.  and 

20. 
Pa: 
manner  and  that  she  had  never  seen  respondent  touch  any  other  student inappropriately.  She 
stated  that 
respondent  told 
also  stated  that  P 
P.  inappropriately. 
.  never  told  her  that  respondent  touched  P 
MUS ..’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  her  statement  to  Det.  Jordan.  She  testified  that 
A.’s  eyes  and  never  made  them 
respondent  never  placed  a  blindfold  over  her  and 
crawl  around  the  classroom  or  touch  their  buttocks.  She  denied  respondent  ever  touched  her 
inappropriately  and  testified  that  she  never  saw  respondent  touch  any  other  student 
inappropriately.  MIB.  also  testified  that  respondent  was  a  good  teacher  and  she  liked 
his  class.  She  was  disappointed  when  respondent  did  not  attend  Vermont’s  Sth  grade  class 
graduation  in  2006.  Finally,  MIB.  stated  that  Ki.  was  mad  at  respondent 
because  he  told  KR.’  s  parents  she  had  a  boyfriend. 

.  having  a  boyfriend.  M 

PR 

Allegations  —  Charges  No.  3and  4 

Als 

In  June  2006,  Ofc.  Schlund  interviewed  yi  in  connection  with  the 

.  investigation.  At  that  time, PRP.  stated  that  respondent  “patted”  her  on  the 

buttocks  one  time,  and  that  he  did  not  touch  her  thighs,  legs,  or  genitals  at  any  time.  She 
stated  that  in  June  2006,  respondent  asked  her  to  help  clean  the  classroom  during  recess  on 
one  occasion,  but  that  he  did  not  touch  her  inappropriately  at  that  time. 

ce 

In  2012,  however,  for  the  first  time  PZ.  alleged  respondent  had  sexually 

.  told  one  of  her  high  school  teachers  that 
assaulted  her  in  2006.  In  March  2012, 
respondent  sexually  assaulted  her  in  2006,  and  that  she  was  fearful  and  distrustful  of  male 
teachers  because  of  this  experience.  She  testified  that  she  became  withdrawn  and  stopped 
associating  with  other  students  after  2006,  and  that  her  academic  performance  was  negatively 
impacted  as  a  result  of  respondent  sexually  assault.  PP.  testified  that  she  was 
frequently  referred  to  the  school  dean  and  removed  from  classes  taught  by  male  teachers 
because  she  would  not  participate  in  class. 
that  respondent  sexually  assaulted  her  in  2006,  and  the  foster  parent  reported  the  incident  to 
the  Department  of  Children  and  Family  Services  (DCFS),  which  resulted  in  a  Suspected 
Child  Abuse  Report  (SCAR)  being  filed  in  March  2012  with  the  LAPD,  and  a  new 
investigation  being  initiated  regarding  the  2006  allegations  against  respondent.  She  claimed 
that  in  2006,  on  multiple  occasions,  respondent  called  her  into  his  classroom  during  lunch 
break  or  recess  and  inappropriately  touched  her  in  a  sexual  manner  by  fingering  and  fondling 
her  vagina,  skin-to-skin,  and  placing  a  blindfold  over  her  eyes  and  putting  what  P 
believed  was  respondent’s  penis  into  her  mouth  and  telling  her  to  suck  on  it.’ 

In  2012,  she  also  told  one  of  her  foster  parents 

  

’  ME.  also  originally  alleged  that  respondent  placed  a  blindfold  over  her  eyes. 

However,  M§BB.  later  recanted  her  allegations  and  stated  that  she  was  never 

7

  

  

  

  

  
  

23. 

OnMarch  14,  2012,  officer  Yesenia  Avalos  of  the  LAPD  (Ofc.  Avalos)  was - 

assigned  to  investigate  a  SCAR  that  indicated  PH.  had  been  “raped”  by  her  teacher  five 
years  earlier  in  2006.  As  part  of  her  investigation,  Ofc.  Avalos  reviewed  the  June  20,  2006 
and  July  7,  2006,  police  reports  prepared  by  Ofc.  Schlund  in  connection  with  the 
A.  allegations,  and  interviewed  P 
an  investigative  report  dated  March  23,  2012.  (Exh.  25,  pp.  19-22.) 

.  and  MiL.  (PEE. s  mother).  She  prepared 

24. 

OnMarch  14,  2012,  Paz.  told  Ofc.  Avalos  that  she  had  not  been  raped  by 

respondent,  but  she  stated  that  in  2006  respondent  would  call  her  into  his  classroom  durin 
lunch  break  or  recess  to  count  money  that  had  been  collected  for  a  class  field  trip. 
stated  that  respondent  closed  the  classroom  door,  covered  the  windows  with  paper,  placed  a 
blindfold  over  her  eyes,  and  rubbed  her  vaginal  area,  making  skin-to-skin  contact,  and  placed 
an  object  into  her  mouth  that  she  believed  was  respondent’s  penis  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the 
“blindfold  incident”),  She  abruptly  terminated  the  interview  with  Ofc.  Avalos  because 
school  was  ending  and  she  wanted  to  go  home.  Piz.  told  Ofc.  Avalos  that  it  was  an 
inconvenient  time  for  her  to  speak  with  the  officer  and  that  she  was  not  interested  in 
continuing  the  interview. 

P 

25. 

On  March  15,  2012,  Ofc.  Avalos  completed  her  interview  with  PRP.  In 
describing  the  blindfold  incident,  P 
P.  stated  that  while  she  was  counting  the  field  trip 
money,  respondent  approached  her  from  behind  and  placed  a  blindfold  on  over  her  eyes  and 
told  her  he  was  going  to  do  an  experiment.  He  sat  her  down  on  a  chair  then  placed 
something  in  her  mouth,  which  P 
not  the  taste.”  (Exh.  25,  p.  21.)  While  standing  over  her,  P 
told  her  to  open  her  mouth  and  he  then  placed  a  “soft  item  with  the  texture  of  a  sponge  in  her 
mouth.”  She  told  Ofc.  Avalos  “I  thought  it  was  his  penis  but  can’t  say  for  sure  because  I  was 
blindfolded.  It  had  that  guy  smell.  I  think  it  was.  I  just  didn’t  see  it.  He  told  me  not  to  bite 
on  it,  just  suck  on  it,”  which  she  did.  (Exh.  25,  p.  21.)  Pi.  stated  respondent  called  her 
into  his  classroom  and  did  the  exact  same  thing  (blindfold  incident)  five  or  six  times, 

the  texture  of  taffy  candy,  but 
P.  stated  that  respondent 

.  described  as  “having 

26. 

On  April  17,  2012,  Det.  Morton  interviewed  Pa.  regarding  the  blindfold 

?.  also  told  Det.  Morton  that  respondent  blindfolded  her,  told  her  to  get  down 

incident.  She  generally  described  the  incident  as  she  had  in  her  earlier  interview  with  Ofc. 
Avalos,  except  that  she  did  not  tell  Det.  Morton  that  respondent  rubbed  or  touched  her 
vagina.  P 
on  her  knees  on  the  floor,  and  then  placed  objects  into  her  mouth.  In  contrast,  she  told  Ofc. 
Avalos,  that  respondent  blindfolded  her,  sat  her  down  in  a  chair,  and  then  placed  objects  into 
her  mouth.  P 
.  also  told  Ofc.  Avalos  that  respondent  committed  the  blindfold  incident 
five  to  six  times,  but  only  disclosed  one  such  incident  to  Det.  Morton.  Det.  Morton 
interviewed  seven  of  the  13  female  students  in  respondent’s  Sth  grade  class  in  2006  at 
Vermont,  including  PZ.  and  KJA.  With  the  exception  of  iim.  and 

  

inappropriately  touched  or  blindfolded  by  respondent. PHP.  and  MIB.  were  friends 
in  2006,  and  PHP.’s  allegation  that  respondent  blindfolded  her  may  have  been  influenced 
by  MEBB..’s  original  false  allegation.

  

Pa 
them  inappropriately  or  in  a  sexual  manner  in  2006. 

..  all  the  female  students  recanted  their  prior  allegations  that  respondent  had  touched 

27. 

On  October  26,  2012,  Det.  Jordan  interviewed  PHP.  in  connection  with 
LAUSD’s  investigation  into  the  allegations  against  respondent.  She  told  Det.  Jordan  that 
respondent  inappropriately  touched  her  in  a  sexual  manner  in  his  classroom  five  times.  She 
stated  that  on  two  occasions  respondent  placed  a  blindfold  over  her  eyes  and  put  an  object 
into  her  mouth  that  she  believed  was  his  penis.  In  describing  the  “blindfold  incident”  ri” 
P.  stated  respondent  called  her  into  the  classroom  to  count  money  for  a  field  trip  to  Knott’s 
Berry  Farm,  *  closed  the  classroom  door,  and  covered  the  windows.  Contrary  to  her 
statements  to  Ofc.  Avalos  and  Det.  Morton,  however,  y 
being  blindfolded,  respondent  “put  his  finger  inside  of  her  vagina,”  and  continued 
“fingering”  her  for  approximately  five  to  seven  minutes.  Her  previous  statements  to  both 
Ofc.  Avalos  and  Det.  Morton  indicated  that  respondent  placed  a  blindfold  over  her  eyes  prior 
to  committing  any  sexual  act.  PRP.  also  told  Det.  Jordon  that  respondent  called  her  into 
his  classroom  on  three  different  occasions  separate  from  the  blindfold  incidents,  and  put  his 
hand  into  her  pants  or  pulled  her  pants  down  and  touched  or  fondled  her  vagina  making  skin- 
to-skin  contact.  She  was  not  blindfolded  during  these  three  incidents.  y 
previously  told  Ofc.  Avalos  or  Det.  Morton  about  these  three  incidents. 

6OCog  told  Det.  Jordan  that  prior  to 

had  not 

28. 

Det.  Jordan  interviewed  four  female  students  from  respondent’s  5th  grade 

class,  DIR...  K.,  JIC.  and  ME.  who  had  not  been  interviewed  by  Det. 
Morton  in  2012.  All  four  students  stated  that  they  were  never  touched  inappropriately  by 
respondent  and  that  they  had  never  seen  respondent  touch  any  other  student  inappropriately. 
The  four  students  recanted  their  2006  statements  that  respondent  had  touched  them 
inappropriately,  generally  stating  that  they  were  young  and  immature  2006  and  did  not 
understand  the  difference  between  appropriate  touching  and  inappropriate  sexual  touching. 
All  four  students  stated  respondent  was  a  good  teacher  that  was  liked  by  all  of  his  students. 

29. 

At  hearing,  mm.  testified  that  respondent  touched  her  in  an  inappropriate 
sexual  manner  on  four  different  occasions  in  2006.  She  again  asserted  that  respondent  called 
her  into  his  classroom  to  count  money  for  a  field  trip  to  Knott’s  Berry  Farm  each  time,  closed 
the  door  and  covered  the  windows.  She  testified  that  during  the  first  three  incidents, 
respondent  did  not  place  a  blindfold  over  her  eyes  and  put  his  hand  inside  of  her  pants  and 
rubbed  her  vagina  making  skin-to-skin  contact.  In  describing  the  fourth  incident  (blindfold 
incident)  she  testified  that  respondent  blindfolded  her,  sat  her  down  in  a  chair,  and  put  an 
object  into  her  mouth  that  she  believed  was  candy  and  told  her  to  suck  on  it.  She  stated 
respondent  then  told  her  to  take  the  candy  out  and  put  an  object  into  her  mouth  she  believed 
was  his  penis.  Although  she  could  not  clearly  see  the  object,  she  testified  that  the  object  was 
“round,  pink,  and  squishy.”  Piedad  P.  recalled  hearing  respondent  zip  his  pants  up  just 
before  he  removed  the  blindfold  and  told  her  that  she  could  leave  the  classroom.  She 
testified  that  respondent  blindfolded  incident  occurred  just  one  time. 

  

*  Both  respondent  and  Ms.  Diaz  testified  that  respondent’s  2006  fifth  grade  class  did 

not  take  a  field  trip  to  Knott’s  Berry  Farm.

30. 

PHP.  also  testified  that  respondent  was  “creepy”  because  he  stared  at  her 

in  class,  “looking  her  up  and  down  from  head  to  toe,”  which  made  her  feel  very 
uncomfortable.  She  testified  that  respondent  stared  at  her  when  she  went  to  his  desk  to  turn 
in  school  work,  which  prompted  her  to  ask  classmates  to  turn  in  her  school  work  to  avoid 
respondent’s  stares.  PAP.  also  claimed  that  respondent  touched  her  on  her  butt  or  waist 
approximately  seven  times  when  she  went  to  the  blackboard  to  do  school  work  or  when  she 
went  to  his  desk  to  turn  in  school  work.  She  stated  that  on  a  few  occasions  respondent  stood 
very  close  behind  or  next  to  her  and  took  her  hand  and  wrote  on  the  blackboard,  which  made 
her  feel  very  uncomfortable.  PEEP.’  testimony  that  respondent  touched  her  buttocks 
seven  times  contradicted  her  2006  statement  that  respondent  patted  her  on  the  buttocks  only 
one  time,  and  in  2012  she  never  reported  these  incidents  to  Ofc.  Avalos,  Det.  Morton  or  Det. 
Jordan. 

51 

PEEP.  claimed  that  in  June  2006,  she  told  her  mother,  Mi...  Ms.  Diaz 

  

  

L.  stated  that  in  2006 

.  only  told  her  that  respondent  touched  her 

and  principal  DeBerry  about  the  “blindfold  incident”  and  respondent  touching  her  vagina. 
However,  M 
buttocks  on  one  occasion.  MeL.  did  not  become  aware  of  that  PHP.  claimed 
respondent  touched  her  in  the  manner  disclosed  in  2012,  until  the  incidents  were  discussed  at 
the  DCFS  meeting  by  P&EBP.’s  foster  parents  in  2012.  ML.  stated  that  in  2012, 
PRP.  falsely  accused 
inappropriately  touching  P 
allegations  were  false.  M 
against  her  (MIL.)  to  DCFS.  Mi.  testified  that 
exaggerate,  and  M 
MBB.  believed  P 
touched  her  buttocks  one  time. 

also  made  false  allegations  of  child  abuse 
has  a  tendency  to  lie  and 
.  made  in  2012  were  true. 

’s  brother,  PAP.’s  uncle,  and  MIBL.’s  boyfriend  of 
a ete  that  P 

P.  was  telling  the  truth  in  2006  when  she  reported  respondent 

.  did  not  believe  the  allegations  P 

   

P.  later  admitted  the 

    

.  stated  P 

    

-_ 

32.  va.  stated  that  PP.  had  been  diagnosed  with  depression  and  that 

she  was  hospitalized  in  February  2012,  after  attempting  suicide  by  overdosing  on  pills.  The 
mother  believes  that  PP.  is  mentally  disturbed.  At  hearing, Pre.  confirmed  that 
she  had  been  seeing  a  therapist,  but  testified  that  she  never  told  the  therapist  that  respondent 
had  inappropriately  touched  her  the  sexual  manner  as  alleged in  the  Accusation. 

33. 

Ms.  Diaz  did  not  become  aware  of  any  allegations  against  respondent  until 
June  7,  2006,  when  the  female  students  in  respondent’s  class  submitted  written  statements 
regarding  respondent’s  Sth  grade  class.  She  credibly  testified  that  prior  to  the  written 
statements  no  student,  including  yf  had  ever  complained  that  respondent  touched 
them  in  an  inappropriate  or  sexual  manner.  PRP.  also  claimed  she  told  principal 
DeBerry  about  the  “blindfold  incident”  within  two  days  after  the  incident  occurred. 
However,  there is  no  evidence  that Pr.  reported  the  “blindfold  incident”  to  principal 
DeBerry.  To  the  contrary,  the  evidence  showed  that  Pp.  did  not 
prepare  a  written 
ne  left  the  campus 
statement  with  the  other  female  students  on  June  7,  2006,  because 
before  she  could  prepare  her  written  statement  when  the  school  bell  rang  for  class  dismissal. 
Consequently,  PAP.  did  not  discuss  her  allegations  against  respondent  with  principal 
DeBerry  or  Ms.  Diaz  in  2006. 

   

  

  

  

10

  

34. 

PP.  also  never  told  LAPD  investigators  in  2006  that  respondent  touched 
her  in  the  sexually  inappropriate  manner  she  disclosed  in  March  2012.  Ofc.  Schlund’s  2006 
investigation  report  indicated  that Pa.  only  stated  respondent  touched  her  on  the 
buttocks  one  time  and  there  is  no  mention  of  the  “blindfold  incident.”  Ofc.  Avalos  asked 
PH.  why  she  did  not  disclose  the  “blindfold  incident”  in  2006,  and  she  stated  that  she 
was  never  interviewed  by  police  officers  or  detectives  in  2006.  Ofc.  Avalos  testified  that 
PHP.  denied  any  knowledge  that  LAPD  had  investigated  allegations  against  respondent 
in  2006.  Det.  Morton  also  asked  Pe.  why  she  did  not  report  the  “blindfold  incident”  in 
2006,  and  in  contrast  to  her  statement  to  Ofc.  Avalos,  she  told  Det.  Morton  that  she  had 
spoken  to  several  police  officers  about  the  incident  in  2006,  but  could  not  recall  who  they 
were  or  the  content  of  her  statements.  When  asked  by 
Det.  Jordan  why  she  had  not  told 
anyone  about  the  “blindfold  incident”  in  2006,  .  3  only  stated  she  told  her  mother 
(MEL .)  and  Ms.  Diaz. 

35. 

Ofc.  Avalos,  Det.  Morton  and  Det.  Jordan  all  expressed  concerns  that  im” 

P.’s  statements  were  inconsistent  and  contradictory.  Det.  Jordan  testified  that  he  did  not 
believe  PHP .’s  statements  and  noted  that  P 
daughter  had  a  tendency  to  lie  and  exaggerate.  Det.  Jordan  believed  P 

.s  mother,  M 

P.’s  mother. 

   

,  also  believed  her 

mi 

V.  Allegation  —  Charge  No.  2 

The  District  alleged  that  between  January 

2006  and  June  2006,  respondent 
'V.s  hips  and  massaged  her  neck.  cay  was  a  female  student  in 

36.___ 
touched  C 
respondent’s  2006  fifth  grade  class,  and  this  allegation  is  apparently  based  on  a  written 
statement  prepared  by  CAV.  on  June  7,  2006.  However,  Ofc.  Schlund  was  unable  to 
.  during  her  investigation  in  June  and  July  2006,  and  the  student  was 
interview 
not  interviewed  in  2012  by  Ofc.  Avalos,  Det.  Morton,  or  Det  Jordan.  CHEV.  was  not 
called  as  a  witness  by  the  District  in  this  proceeding,  and  there  was  no  evidence  offered  by 
the  District  to  substantiate  this  allegation. 

  

Credibility  Determinations 

37. 

Respondent  consistently  and  credibly  denied  the  allegations  in  the  District’s 
Accusation.  His  statements  to  investigators  in  2006  and  2012  were  consistent  in  asserting 
that  he  never  touched  any  student  in  an  inappropriate  or  sexual  manner.  At  hearing, 
respondent  presented  as  a  credible  witness,  exhibiting  an  open  and  forthright  demeanor  when 
testifying.  He  appeared  genuinely  sincere  in  denying  the  allegations  and  was  emotionall 
distraught  when  discussing  the  misconduct  attributed  to  him  by  5 
and  x On 
Respondent  admitted  that  during  PE  tests,  he  touched  students’  arms  or  knees  to  properly 
position  them  to  do  push-ups,  but  he  denied  ever  touching  a  student’s  buttocks,  hips  or  waist. 
Respondent  denied  ever  being  alone  with  any  student  in  his  classroom  during  recess  or 
lunch,  except  on  a  few  occasions  that  he  used  small  groups  of  students  to  help  him  file  or 
shelve  books.  He  denied  asking PRP.  to  help  him  count  money  for  a  field  trip  and  stated 
that  his  2006  fifth  grade  class  never  took  a  field  trip  to  Knott’s  Berry  Farm  in  2006. 
Respondent’s  statements  and  testimony  that  he  had  never  inappropriately  touched  any  female 
student  were  corroborated  at  hearing  by  Ms.  Diaz  and  Martha  B.  Ms.  Diaz  and  Det.  Jordan 

1]

    

  

also  confirmed  that  respondent’s  fifth_grade  class  never  planned  or  took a field  trip  to  Knott’s 
Berry  Farm  in  2006,  contradicting  P 
classroom  to  count  money  collected  for  a  fieldtrip  to  Knott’s  Berry  Farm. 

P.’s  claim  that  respondent  called  her  into  his 

38. 

At  hearing,  PP.  appeared  mature  and  confident  in  her  testimony.  She  did 

recess  and  specifically 
.  gave  inconsistent 

not  appear  distraught,  flustered  or  anguished  and  showed  little  or  no  emotion  when 
testifying.  PHEE?.’s  testimony,  however,  was  inconsistent  and  contradictory  to  prior 
statements  she  had  given  to  investigators  in  2006  and  2012.  In  2006,  PHP.  initially  told 
investigators  that  respondent  had  touched  her  buttocks  one  time,  and  she  described  another 
incident  in  which  she  help  respondent  clean  his  classroom  during 
stated  that  he  did  not  inappropriately  touch  her  at  that  time.  P 
versions  of  the  blindfold  incident  to  investigators  in  2012,  and  at  hearing  her  description  of 
the  number  of  times  the  blindfold  incident  occurred  changed  yet  again.  PH.  also 
disclosed  new  allegations  that  respondent  had  touched  her  buttocks  seven  times  in  the 
classroom  during  class  that  had  not  been  previously  disclosed  to  investigators.  At  hearing, 
Ofc.  Avalos,  Det.  Morton  and  Det.  Jordan  identified  multiple  inconsistencies  and 
contradictions  in 
not  convinced  y 
she  disclosed  the  more  serious  sexual  misconduct  allegations  against  respondent  in  2006,  and 
gave  conflicting  explanations  for  why  she  had  not  told  investigations  about  these  allegations 
before  2012.  PAP.’s  extended  delay  in  asserting  the  2012  allegations,  and  her 
dishonesty  in  claiming  that  she  reported  the  allegations  in  2006  diminished  the  credibility  of 
her  claims. 
the  2012  allegations.  P 
investigation  and  hearing  raise  serious  concerns  regarding  her  credibility  and  the  truthfulness 
and  validity  of  her  allegations. 

.’s  mother  also  did  not  believe  PHP.  was  being  truthful  regarding 
.’s  inconsistent  and  contradictory  statements  throughout  the 

.’s  statements  during  the  investigation  which  suggested  they  were 
’s  allegations  were  truthful.  =.  was  untruthful  in  stating  that 

   

  

Other  Factors 

39. 

Prior  to  the  allegations  and  charges  in  this  matter,  there  is  no  prior  history  of 

discipline  by  the  District  against  respondent.  Respondent’s  performance  evaluations  in  May 
2004,  June  2005,  and  May  2006,  all  while  at  Vermont,  indicated  that  respondent  met  the 
standard  of  performance  required  and  expected  by  the  District.  After  September  2006,  when 
respondent  transferred  to  Lillian,  respondent’s  performance  evaluations  continued  to  indicate 
that  he  met  the  standard  of  performance  required  by  the  District  though  May  2011. 

40. 

Susan  Ahern,  the  principal  at  Lillian  who  hired  respondent  in  2006,  testified 

that  she  worked  closely  with  respondent  at  Lillian  from  August  2006  until  March  2012.  Ms. 
Ahern  became  aware  of  the  allegations  against  respondent  in  March  2012.  She  was  very 
surprised  and  believed  the  allegations  were  out  of  character  based  on  her  six  years 
supervising  respondent.  She  stated  that  respondent  was  very  active  and  engaged  as  a  teacher 
at  Lillian,  serving  on  multiple  committees  and  acting  as  chairperson  for  several.  Respondent 
served  on  committees  to  promote  school  safety  at  Lillian  and  assisted  in  writing  the  School 
Safety  Plan,  which  included  policies  and  procedures  to  protect  against  sexual  abuse  of 
students.  Respondent  was  involved  on  Schoolwide  Positive  Student  Discipline  committee, 
which  implemented  guidelines  for  positive  student  discipline  training  for  teachers  at  Lillian. 

2

Ms.  Ahern  testified  that  respondent  was  among  the  top  five  percent  of  teachers  at  Lillian. 
She  described  respondent  as  a  strong  teacher  who  was  respected  by  his  colleagues  and 
students.  He  cared  deeply  and  had  an  excellent  rapport  with  his  students  and  developed 
students  emotionally  and  motivated  them  academically.  Respondent  always  fostered  a 
positive  and  safe  environment  in  his  classroom  and  his  students’  “academic  outcome”  was 
the  highest  of  all  the  teachers  at  Lillian.  Ms.  Ahern  expressed  that  she  did  not  regret  hiring 
respondent  even  after  becoming  aware  of  the  allegations  in  this  matter. 

41. 

Three  of  respondent’s  former  colleagues  at  Vermont  also  offered  character 

references  in  respondent’s  behalf.  Cynthia  Baker,  a  5th  grade  teacher  at  Vermont  from  2003 
to  2006,  Sandra  Vallecillo,  a  Sth  grade  teacher  at  Vermont  during  the  2005-2006  school  year, 
and  Ms.  Diaz,  who  worked  as  a  one-to-one  aide  and  teacher  assistant  in  respondent’s  5th 
grade  class  during  the  2005-2006  school  year,  all  provided  declarations  attesting  to 
respondent’s  good  character  and  professionalism  as  a  teacher.  Based  on  their  observations 
and  interactions  with  respondent  at  Vermont,  all  three  expressed  that  respondent  was  an 
excellent  teacher  whose  students  respected  him  as  a  teacher.  All  three  stated  that  they  were 
aware  of  the  allegations  against  respondent  and  expressed  that  they  had  never  seen 
respondent  engage  in  any  inappropriate  conduct  with  any  of  his  students. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

1, 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof  in 
a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.)  Proof  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  requires  a  showing  that  it  is  more  likely  than  not  to  be  true. 
In  other  words,  the  evidence  is  more  convincing  than  that  which  is  offered  in  opposition. 
(People  ex  rel.  Brown  y.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

2 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.)  When a  school  board  recommends 
dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the 
Commission  may  not  dispose of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an 
alternative  sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).)  The  Commission’s  decision  is 
deemed  to  be  the  final  decision  of  the  District’s  governing  board.  (California  Teachers 
Ass'n  v,  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  331.)  A  Commission  has  broad  discretion 
to  determine  the  issues  before  it,  including  whether  dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction. 
(Ibid.,  at  p.  343.) 

Applicable  Law 

3. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  provides  that:  A  permanent  employee  shall 

not  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the  following  causes: 

13

(1)  Immoral  conduct  including,  but  not  limited  to,  egregious  misconduct.  For 
purposes  of  this  chapter,  “egregious  misconduct”  is  defined  exclusively  as 
immoral  conduct  that  is  the  basis  for  an  offense  described  in  Section  44010  or 
4401  L of  this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6,  inclusive  of  the  Penal 
Code. 

4. 

“Immoral  conduct,”  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939, 

has  been  defined  to  mean  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  is  sometimes  used  as 
synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of Education  of the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 
Immoral  conduct  can  be  construed  according  to  common  usage.  “The  term  ‘immoral’  has 
been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and 
contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes 
conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of Riverside  v. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

3; 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  including 
egregious  misconduct,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  by  reason  of  Factual 
Findings  4  through  41. 

Determination  of  Charges 

mi.  -  Charge  No.  1 

6. 

There  is  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the  District’s  allegation  that 

respondent  inappropriately  touched Kis  buttocks  between  January  and  June  2006. 
a,  did  not  testify  at  hearing  and  her  statements  to  investigators  in  2006  and  2012 
contained  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  that  raise  serious  concerns  about  the  validity  of 
her  allegations.  Significantly  in  2012,  K) 
.  denied  that  respondent  touched  her 
vagina,  although  in  2006  she  stated  that  respondent  touched  her  vagina  on  two  different 
occasions.  K 
incidents  that  she  had  reported  in  2006.  When  questioned  by  Det.  Morton  in  2012, 
A.  did  not  mention  that  respondent  had  inappropriately  touched  her  vagina  and  buttocks 

A.  also  failed  to  tell  investigators  in  2012  about  two  of  the  three 

  

*  Section  44010  defines  “sex  offense”  to  include  specified  offenses  under  the  Penal 

Code,  including  in  relevant  part,  section  288  (lewd  or  lascivious  acts  involving  children); 
section  647.6  (annoying  or  molesting  children  under  the  age  of  18);  section  243.4(e)(sexual 
battery,  i.e.,  touching  an  intimate  part  of  another  person  for  the  purpose  of  sexual  arousal, 
sexual  gratification,  or  sexual  battery);  section  647  (disorderly  conduct);  section  11165.3 
(willful  harming  or  injuring  of a  child);  and  section  272  (contributing  to  the  delinquency  of  a 
minor). 

14

    

when  he  lifted  her  to  place  alphabets  on  the  classroom  wall  or  that  he  had  touched  her 
buttocks  when  he  made  she  and  Mi.  crawl  around  the  classroom  blindfolded.  In  2012, 
iim.  also  told  investigators  that  respondent  only  touched  her  buttocks  while  she  was 
doing  push-ups  in  PE  class.  The  evidence,  however,  established  that  respondent  assisted  his 
students  in  performing  push-ups  by  positioning  their  arms  and  lower  backs  to  achieve  proper 
exercise  form,  but  this  touching  was  not  inappropriate  or  of  a  sexual  nature.  Several  of 
respondent’s  female  students  who  initially  claimed  in  2006  that  respondent  touched  them 
inappropriately  during  PE  exercises,  recanted  their  allegations  in  2006  and  2012,  stating  that 
they  misinterpreted  respondent  touching  them  while  performing  PE  exercises  because  of 
their  immaturity. 

The  evidence  also  established  that Ka.  had  an  ulterior  motive  for 

di 
her  allegations  against  respondent.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  believed 
ON  harbored  ill  will  towards  him  because  he  told  her  parents  she  had_a  boyfriend  at 

making 
x 
school  and  that  he  thought  this  was  inappropriate  for  a  fifth  grade  student.  x ON 
made  conflicting 
statements  about  her  recollection  of  respondent  telling  her  parents  she  had  a 
boyfriend.  =.  after  initially  admitting in  2006  that  respondent  notified  her  parents 
that  she  had  a  boyfriend  angered  her,  denied  in  2012  that  she  was  aware  respondent 
discussed  a  boyfriend  with  her  parents.  Several  of Ki.  female  classmates  stated 
that 
parents  about Kis  boyfriend. 

a.  made  the  allegations  against  respondent  because  she  was  angry  he  told  her 

At  hearing  the  District  primarily  relied  on  PH.  s  statements  and 

to  support  the  ii.  allegation.  However,  PHP.’  s  testimony  conflicted 
A.’s  statements  to  investigators  and  with  Pe.  Ss  own  statement  to 

8. 
testimony 
with  KJ 
investigators  in  2006.  Finally,  Det.  Jordan,  the  District’s  investigator,  doubted  the 
truthfulness  of  Kis.  s  allegations.  He  noted  that 
and  2012  were  inconsistent  and  contradictory,  specifically  her  initial  assertion  that 
respondent  touched  her  vagina  and  her  subsequent  denial  that  he  ever  touched  her  genitals. 
Det.  Jordan  also  believed  the  female  students’  statements  made  in  2012  recanting  their 
allegations  against  respondent  were  truthful  and  credible,  which  further  convinced  him  that 
a;  allegations  were  untruthful. 

ON  s  statements  in  2006 

0. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  inappropriately  touched  KA .’s  buttocks  in  a  sexual  manner. 

ZZ:  -  Charge  Nos.  3  and  4 

10. 

There  is  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the  District’s  allegations  that 

in  a  sexual  manner  between  January 

respondent  inappropriately  touched  y 
2006.  The  evidence  also  did  not  establish  that  respondent  sexually  assaulted  P 
manner  she  alleged  in  Charge  Nos.  3  and  4.  There  are  multiple  inconsistencies  and 
contradictions  in  P 
first  stated  in  2006  that  respondent  touched  her  buttocks  one  time,  but  inconsistently  testified 
at  hearing  that  respondent  touched  her  buttocks  at  least  seven  times  in  the  classroom  during 
the  class  period. 

.’s  statements  to  investigators  and  her  testimony  at  hearing.  She 

and  June 

.  in  the 

Is

  

ie 

In  2012,  iii.  disclosed  new  and  more  egregious  allegations  against 

respondent  that  she  did  not  report  to  investigators  in  2006  even  though  she  was  interviewed 
by  investigators  at  the  time  these  incidents  were  allegedly  occurring  in  June  2006.  However, 
PEEP .’s  description  of  these  new  allegations  changed  significantly  each  time  she  was 
interviewed  by  investigators  in  2012,  and  when  she  testified  in  this  proceeding.  She  told 
Ofc.  Avalos  that  the  blindfold  incident  occurred  five  to  six  times,  but  later  told  Det.  Morton 
the  incident  occurred  just  one  time. Pa.  told  Det.  Jordan  that  the  blindfold  incident 
occurred  two  times,  and  at  hearing  she  testified  that  “blindfold  incident”  occurred  just  one 
time.  In  describing  the  “blindfold  incident,”  PIP.  told  Ofc.  Avalos  respondent  touched 
her  vagina  but  she  failed  to  tell  Det.  Morton  that  respondent  touched  her  vagina  at  all.  She 
told  Ofc.  Avalos  and  Det.  Morton  that  respondent  placed  the  blindfold  over  her  eyes  before 
committing  any  sexual  act,  but  she  told  Det.  Jordan  that,  before  she  was  blindfolded, 
respondent.touched  her  vagina  in  a  manner  that  had  not  been  disclosed  to  Ofc.  Avalos  or  Det. 
Morton.  P 
her  down  in  a  chair  before  placing  his  penis  into  her  mouth,  but  she  told  Det.  Morton  that 
respondent  placed  the  blindfold  over  her  eyes  and  made  her  get  down  on  her  knees  before 
placing  his  penis  in  her  mouth.  Finally, 
.  described  three  incidents  Det.  Jordan  and 
in  her  testimony  at  hearing,  other  than  the  blindfold  incidents,  in  which  respondent  touched 
her  vagina  in  his  classroom  that  she  did  not  disclose  to  Ofc.  Avalos  or  Det.  Morton. 

P.  told  Ofc.  Avalos  and  Det.  Jordan  that  respondent  blindfolded  her  and  sat 

12.  PP.  also  made  multiple  inconsistent  and  contradictory  statements  to 

investigators  regarding  the  reason  she  failed  to  disclose  her  new  allegations  against 
respondent  until  2012. Pa.  testified  that  she  told  her  mother,  Ms.  Diaz,  and  principal 
DeBerry  in  2006  about  the  “blindfold  incident”  and  that  respondent  touched  in  the  sexual 
manner  she  described  in  2012.  However,  both  Via.  and  Ms.  Diaz  denied  PHP.  told 
them  about  these  allegations  in  2006,  and  the  evidence  established  that  PEEP.  did  not 
prepare  a  written  statement  in  June  2006,  which  suggest  she  was  not  interviewed  by  Ms. 
Diaz  or  principal  DeBerry.  The  evidence  also  established  that  PHP.  failed  to  disclose  the 
“blindfold  incident”  to  investigators  in  2006.  To  the  contrary,  she  told  Ofc.  Schlund  that 
respondent  had  touched  her  buttocks  one  time,  and  specifically  stated  that  respondent  did  not 
touch  her  inappropriately  at  any  other  time.  When  asked  by  Ofc.  Avalos  why  she  did  not 
disclose  the  incidents  to  Ofc.  Schlund  in  2006, Pre.  stated  she  was  never  interviewed  by 
police  officers  in  2006.  In  contrast,  she  told  Det.  Morton  that  she  was  interviewed  by  police 
officers  in  2006  but  could  not  recall  what  the  content  of  those  interviews.  When  asked  by 
Det.  Jordon  why  she  did  not  report  the  2012  allegations  to  investigators  in  2006,  PrP. 
claimed  she  told  her  mother  and  Ms.  Diaz,  but  did  not  state  she  had  told  police  investigators 
in  2006. 

13. 

The  District  offered  no  credible  explanation  for  why  PP.  did  not  disclose 
the  more  egregious  allegations  in  2006.  It  is  particularly  troubling  that  even  though  she  was 
interviewed  by  officer  Schlund  in  June  2006  about  respondent’s  class  and  respondent’s 
conduct  with  his  students,  she  still  did  not  disclose  that  she  had  been  sexually  assaulted  by 
respondent.  PHP.  testified  that  all  of  the  incidents  in  which  respondent  allegedly 
touched  her  in  a  sexual  manner  occurred  within  a  four  to  five  week  period  in  or  about  June 
2006.  She  stated  that  the  incidents  occurred  during  the  same  period  the 

16

  

incidents  occurred  in  June  2006.  Thus,  the  ii.  investigation  was  ongoing  during 
the  same  time  that  PHP.  alleges  that  respondent  committed  the  “blindfold  incident”  and 
the  more  egregious  sexual  acts,  and  she  was  interviewed  by  LAPD  investigators  during  the 
course  of  that  investigation.  It  is  inexplicable  why  PIP.  failed  to  disclose  in  2006  that 
respondent  had  sexually  assaulted  as  she  described  six  years  later  in  2012. 

14. 

The  District  did  not  offer  an  expert  opinion  regarding  PHP.’  state  of  mind 

which  might  explain  why  she  repressed  or  failed  to  disclose  the  “blindfold  incident”  and  the 
sexual  assault  allegations  she  disclosed  six  years  later  in  March  2012.  PHP.’s  only 
explanation  for  why  she  did  not  disclose  the  incidents  in  2006  was  that  she  was  afraid,  and 
that  she  did  disclose  the  incidents  to  her  mother  and  Ms.  Diaz,  which  was  not  true. 
credibly  testified  that  her  daughter  had  a  tendency  to  exaggerate  and  lie  and  that  she  did  cat 
believe  the  allegations  P 
and  Det.  Morton,  who  were  called  as  witnesses  by  respondent  at  hearing,  both  admitted  that 
PEEP .’s  statements  in  2006  and  2012  were  contradictory  and  inconsistent.  Det.  Jordon, 
the  District’s  investigator,  also  admitted  that  7, 
oe  statements  were  inconsistent  and 
that  he  did  not  believe  she  was  being  truthful  when  he  interviewed  her  in  2012.  The  District 
primarily  relied  on  PREP .’s  statements  and  testimony 
respondent  sexually  assaulted  this  student.  However,  P 
were  shown  to  be  inconsistent  and  contradictory,  and  thus,  not  sufficiently  credible  to 
support  a  determination  that  respondent  committed  the  sexual  misconduct  alleged. 

P.  disclosed in  2012.  The  LAPD  investigators,  Ofc.  Avalos 

.  §  statements  and  testimony 

prove  its  allegations  that 

to 

15. 

_Incontrast,  respondent  consistently  maintained  that  he  did  not  commit  the 

conduct  alleged  by  the  District.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  he  did  not  inappropriately 
touch  any  of  his  students  in  a  sexual  manner.  He  admitted  that  he  assisted  his  students  in 
performing  PE  exercises,  but  denied  this  physical  contact  was  inappropriate.  The  evidence 
showed  that  respondent  frequently  assisted  his  students  in  performing  push-ups  by  adjusting 
their  arms  and  touching  their  lower  backs  and  shoulders  to  achieve  proper  form  in  doing  the 
exercise.  Several  students  recanted  their  statements  that  respondent  had  touched  them 
inappropriately  and  admitted  that  they  misinterpreted  respondent’s  touching  during  the  PE 
exercises  as  inappropriate  touching.  All  of  respondent’s  students  in  his  2006  fifth  grade 
class,  with  the  exception  of 
thought  respondent  was  a  good  teacher,  and  that  they  had  not  been  touched  in  a  sexual 
manner  by  respondent.  Ms.  Diaz  believed  that  respondent  was  a  very  good  teacher,  had 
never  seen  respondent  inappropriately  touch  any  student,  and  did  not  believe  respondent  was 
capable  of  such  conduct. 

.,  ultimately  told  investigators  that  they 

a.  and  P 

16. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  inappropriately  touched  or  sexually  assaulted  PZ.  as  alleged  in  Charge  Nos. 
3  and  4. 

eo 

6hUOU 

Charge  No.  2. 

17. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  inappropriately  touched 

CHEV.’ s  buttocks  as  alleged  in  the  Accusation.  The  District  offered  no  direct  evidence 
to  support  this  allegation. 

17

  

Morrison  Factors 

18. 

After  consideration  of  the  totality  of  the  evidence  presented,  it  is  determined 

that  the  District  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 
committed  the  immoral  conduct,  including  egregious  misconduct,  alleged  in  the  Accusation. 
Consequently,  the  ALJ  need  not  consider  whether  such  conduct  rendered  respondent  unfit  to 
teach  as  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214. 

ORDER 

The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

seeking  to  dismiss  respondent  Nicholas  Camonte  (EN  722915)  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939.1  is  not  upheld.  Accordingly,  the  Accusation 
is  dismissed.  Respondent  shall  be  reinstated  as  a  certificated  employee of  the  District. 

DATED:  October  20,  2015 

Lief  —— 

MICHAEL  AJS  ARLETT 
Administrative Be  w  Judge, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

18

