BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

ERIC  TUREAUD  (EN  627796), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  2015040235 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Erlinda  G.  Shrenger,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office 
of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  on  May  26-28,  2015,  and  June  16-18 
and  23-25,  2015,  in  Los  Angeles. 

Pilar  Morin,  Liebert  Cassidy  Whitmore,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District  (District). 

(Respondent). 

Rosty  G.  Gore,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  Eric  Tureaud 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  and  argument  was  heard.  The 

record  was  closed.  Subsequently,  on  July  1,  8,  and  10,  2015,  the  District  lodged  the 
transcripts  of  the  hearing  with  OAH,  after  serving  Respondent  with  notice  of  the  lodging  of 
the  transcripts  and  the  opportunity  to  file  a  written  objection  within  10  days.  No  objection 
was  made  by  Respondent. 

   

The  ALJ  issued  an  Order  Re-Opening  Record  for  Lodging  of  Hearing  Transcripts 
on  July  21,  2015,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  29,  and  accepted  the  Notices  of  Lodging  and 
Volumes  I  through  VIII  of  the  hearing  transcript.  The  Notice  of  Lodging  dated  July  1,  2015, 
was  marked  as  Exhibit  18.  Volumes  I  through  V  of  the  transcript  were  marked  as  Exhibits 
19  through  23,  respectively.  The  Notice  of  Lodging  dated  July  8,  2015,  was  marked  as 
Exhibit  24.  Volumes  VI  and  VII  of  the  transcript  were  marked  as  Exhibits  25  and  26, 
respectively.  The  Notice  of  Lodging  dated  July  10,  2015,  was  marked  as  Exhibit  27. 
Volume  VIII  of  the  transcript  was  marked  as  Exhibit  28.  The  record  was  closed  and  the 
matter  submitted  for  decision  on  July  21,  2015. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

A  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed  with  the  District's  governing  board,  which 

requested  that  the  District's  governing  board  give  notice  to  Respondent  of  its  intent  to 
dismiss  him  within  30  days  unless  he  demanded  a  hearing. 

On  April  1,  2015,  Respondent  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of 

Defense.  On  April  9,  2015,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  and  other 
required  documents.  On  May  7,  2015,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  an  Amended 
Accusation.  The  Amended  Accusation  contains  one  cause  for  dismissal  for  egregious 
misconduict,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

Respondent's  Background 

4. 

Respondent  is  47  years  old.  He  graduated  from  California  State  University, 

Dominguez  Hills  (CSUDH)  in  1991  with  a  degree  in  liberal  studies.  He  stayed  one 
additional  year  and  earned  a  master's  degree  in  special  education.  He  completed  the  dual 
credential  program  at  CSUDH  and  received  a  combined  special  education  and  regular 
education  credential.  In  2007,  Respondent  completed  a  program  through  U.C.  San  Diego 
and  earned  a  CLAD  credential.  Respondent's  mother  and  grandmother  worked  for  the 
District  for  a  total  of  60  years  combined.  They  encouraged  Respondent  to  pursue  a  teaching 
career.  His  grandmother  earned  a  doctorate  degree  and  became  a  school  psychologist. 

5.°. 

Respondent's  first  job  with  the  District  was  as  a  teacher's  assistant  at  Annalee 
Elementary  School  in  Carson,  which  he  did  for  six  months,  He  next  worked  as  a  substitute 
teacher  for  the  Compton  Unified  School  District.  After  that,  Respondent  worked  for  13 
months  at  Rainbow  Bridge,  which  is  a  nonpublic  private  school  for  special  education 
students.  Rainbow  Bridge  contracted  with  various  school  districts  to  educate  the  students 
that  the  school  districts  were  not  able  accommodate,  such  as  students  with  emotional 
disturbance.  Respondent  next  worked  for  two  years  at  Compton  Unified  School  District  as  a 
special  education  teacher  for  learning  handicapped  students.  He  then  worked  at  Zinsmeyer 
Academy  in  Long  Beach  for  13  months.  After  that,  he  was  hired  by  the  District  to  work  at 
Meyler  Elementary  School  (Meyler).-  Respondent  worked  at  Meyler  from  1997  until  January 
2012,  when  he  was  removed  from  his  classroom. 

Respondent's  Classroom 

6. 

At  Meyler,  Respondent  taught  a  special  day  class  for  students  in  grades 

kindergarten  through  second  grade.  Students  from  all  three  grades  were  combined  in  the 
class.  According  to  Respondent,  the  students  were  eligible  for  special  education  services  on 

 

  

the  basis  of  autism,  emotional  disturbance,  other  health  impairment,  and/or  learning 
disability.  Some  students  were  quiet  while  other  students,  who  were  verbal,  could  be 
disruptive  and  have  outbursts  during  class.  Testimony  by  Respondent  and  Sandra  Loeb,  who 
was  a  special  education  assistant  at  Meyler  in  the  classroom  next  door  to  Respondent's 
classroom,  established  that  placing  students  with  behavioral  issues  in  the  same  classroom 
with  autistic  students  without  behaviors  may  affect  the  dynamic  in  the  classroom.  In  such  a 
setting,  autistic  children  tend  to  be  impressionable  and  may  pick-up  on  the  misbehavior  the 
other  students. 

7. 

Respondent  had  a  disciplinary  policy  in  his  classroom.  He  did  not  yell!  at  his 

students.  He  had  a  system  of  progressive  discipline  using  colored  clothespins,  time-outs,  and 
verbal  warnings.  The  colored  clothespins  were  red,  yellow,  and  green.  Each  child  started 
the  day  with  a  green  clothespin.  A  yellow  clothespin  was  given  to  warn  a  child  about  their 
behavior,  such  as  being  off  task  or  disobedient. 
call  or  letter  to  the  child's  parent.  Respondent  did  not  get  frustrated  or  angry  when  his 
students  acted  out  or  misbehaved,  as  he  was  experienced  in  working  with  children  with 
emotional  disturbance  and  behavioral  issues.  In  addition,  if  Respondent  saw  a  mark  or  injury 
on  a  student,  his  practice  was  to  call  the  nurse  and  the  student's  parent,  even  if  the  child  was 
not  hurt,  to  let  the  parent  know  about  the  situation. 

A  red  clothespin  would  result  in  a  telephone 

8. 

9. 

Loeb's  testimony  established  that  one  part  of  the  Meyler  campus  had  a  row  of 

Sandra  Loeb  was  employed  by  the  District  as  a  special  education  assistant  at 
Meyler  from  January  1992  until  she  retired  in  June  2015.  From  2007  to  2012,  Loeb  was  the 
special  education  assistant  in  the  classroom  next  door  to  Respondent's  classroom.  She  had 
previously  worked  with  Respondent  at  Meyler  during  a  summer  session  in  2000.  At  this 
hearing,  Loeb  testified  credibly  regarding  all  matters.  Her  demeanor  was  professional,  and 
the  substance  of  her  testimony  was  clear  and  straightforward.  She  appeared  cooperative  and 
used  her  best  efforts  when  answering  questions  from  both  parties. 

   

bungalows,  with  each  bungalow  containing  two  classrooms  separated  by  a  wall  with  an 
intersecting  door.  Respondent's  class  was  in  room  41.  Loeb  worked  in  classroom  40,  which 
was  in  the  same  bungalow  as  Respondent's  class.  The  wall  separating  the  two  classrooms 
was  so  thin  that  one  classroom  could  hear  what  was  happening  in  the  classroom  next  door. 
Loeb  testified  that  she  could  hear  Respondent  and  his  special  education  assistant,  Miss  Lucy, 
when  they  spoke  to  their  students.  Loeb  and  the  teacher  of  her  class  had  to  sometimes  ask 
Respondent  to  quiet  down  his  class.  Similarly,  Respondent  had  to  ask  Loeb's  class  to  be 
quieter,  for  example,  when  his  students  were  testing.  Loeb  testified  that  she  would  open  the 
door  between  the  two  classrooms  if  she  heard  a  child  crying  or  anything  raising  a  safety 
concern  to  see  what  was  going  on  in  Respondent's  classroom. 
District,  Loeb  is  a  mandated  reporter,  which  means  that  if  she  suspects  there  is  abuse  of  any 
child,  she  is  required  to  report  it  to  the  proper  authorities.  Loeb  testified  she  would  report 
any  abuse  of  a  child  "in  a  heartbeat."  During  the  time  she  worked  next  door  to  Respondent's 
classroom,  Loeb  never  heard  or  saw  anything  she  felt  she  had  to  report  as  a  mandated 
reporter. 

As  an  employee  of  the 

10. 

Fromm  2007  to  2012,  the  special  education  assistant  for  Respondent's  class  was 
Miss  Lucy.  Since  they  were  both  special  education  assistants,  Loeb  and  Miss  Lucy  saw  each 
other  when  they  were  getting  children  off  the  school  buses in  the  morning,  and  periodically 
during  other  parts  of  the  day.  They  had  Opportunities  to  interact.  Miss  Lucy  told  Loeb  that 
she  enjoyed  working  i in  Respondent! s  classroom.  Loeb's  opinion  is  that  Miss  Lucy,  who  is  a 
born-again  Christian,  is  a  person  of  integrity  and  high  moral  and  ethical  standards.  Loeb 
believes  that  Miss  Lucy,  like  herself,  would  report  any  child  abuse  or  misconduct  "in  a 
heartbeat."  Loeb  and  Miss  Lucy  were  members  of  the  same  employees’  union,  and  Loeb  was 
a  site  representative  for  the  union,  Loeb  testified  that  Miss  Lucy  never  came  to  her  regarding 
any  concems  she  had  about Respondent.  a 

_

 

2011. -2012  School  Year 

U.  AL the  start of  the  2011-  2012  school  year,  three  of 

the  students  j in  Respondent's 

special  day  ¢ class were ARE..  ARR.  (no  relation  to ARR. ),  and  Kn 
Each  of  these  students  ended up  transferring  to.  Halidale  Elementary  School in  the  second 
part  of  the  school  year.  The  parents  of  these  students reported  or  raised  concems  regarding 
Respondent  t to  Meyler’ S  principal,  Louis.  Carrillo. 

a 

r

e

 

12. 

On  the  morning  of October  15,  2011,  a. s mother  brought  her  son  to 

and  his 

   

in  the  office.  The  mother  reported  that  she 

principal!  Carrillo's  office  and  had  her  repeat  what  she  told  him.  The  mother  had 
the  marks  to  principal  Carrillo  and  Respondent.  Afterwards,  principal 

the  school  office:  Respondent  happened  to be 
found  marks  on ‘a:  body  the  previous  night.  Respondent  brought 
mother  to 
AEE  io 
Carrillo  had  Respondent return  to  his  classroom.  Respondent  testified  that, two  weeks  later, 
Miss  Lucy  reported  to  him  that: 
and  asked  about  children  being harmed i in  Respondent’ s  classroom:. Miss  Lucy  told  them  that 
no  children  were  being  harmed.  In  November  2011, Respondent  attended  an  IEP  meeting  for 
ABBR. where  his  mother  reported  : that she heard  students in  Respondent! s  class  were 
getting hurt.  Res  ondent  denied  the  allegation.  In  December  2011; the  mother.  of  Ki 
reported  that 
hit  his  hand. In  January  2012, 
and  hip  when  he  was 
parent  of  student 
lesson  and  made  him  cry. 

LI] 
ear  and 
had  i injuries  to  his  lip 
picked up  from  school in  December  2011.  Also in  January  2012,  the 
report | that  Respondent  grabbed  a: arm n 
| 

did  not want  to  go  to  school  because  Respondent r  ulled  KE 
R.'s ‘mother  reported  that. 

.'s  mother  and  KEP  mother  approached  her 

. made  a a 

during  a 

  

  

13. 

-  On  or  about  yi anuary  18,  2012;  Respondent  was  removed  from  his  classroom 
and  reassigned  to  ESC  South  on  paid  administrative  leave.  Respondent  was  interviewed  by 
law  enforcement  officers in  March  2012 and  June  2012.  He was  questioned  about  students 
R.,  ABR.,  KGPHE  and  LIN.  Following  his  interviews  with  the  officers, 
Respondent  was  never  arrested  or  charged  with  any  criminal  offense.  Respondent  remained 
assigned  at  ESC  South. 

| 

7 

7 

 

  

  

  

  

  

The  District's  Investigation 

14. 

On  September  4,  2013,  a  conference  was  held  at  the  ESC  South  offices  with 

principal  Carrillo,  Respondent,  and  Respondent's  union  representative.  Principal  Carrillo 
prepared  a  conference  memorandum  which  summarized  the  meeting.  The  September  4, 
2013  memorandum  summarized  the  complaints  made  by  the 
students,  including ARR. ARR... Kare  and 
written  response  dated  September  18,  2013. 

parents  of  Respondent's 

.  Respondent  provided  a 

15. 

Following  the  September  4,  2013  conference,  principal  Carrillo  contacted  the 

parents  of  several  of  Respondent's  former  students  and  obtained  written  statements  regarding  | 
incidents  occurring  in  Respondent's  classroom  in  2011.  A  written  statement  dated  October  2, 
2013  was  obtained  from  LJH.'s  mother.  A  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2013 
was  obtained  from  ANMBR.'s  mother.  A  written  statement  dated  October  3,  2013  was 
obtained  from Am.  ‘smother.  A  written  statement  dated  September  6,  2013  was 
obtained  from  K§JPMMs  mother.  (Exh.  1,  pp.  13-27A.) 

| 

16. 

On  October  17,  2013,  the  District  issued  a  notice  of  unsatisfactory 

performance  and  a  notice  of  suspension  to  Respondent,  notifying  him of  its  recommendation 
to  suspend  him  for  15  days  without  pay  and  to  dismiss  him  from  employment.  On  October 
18,  2013,  Respondent  filed  an  appeal  of  the  notice  of  suspension.  In  December  2013,  a 
Skelly  meeting  was  held,  which  resulted  in  a  recommendation  to  the  District's  governing 
board  that  Respondent  should  be  dismissed  from  employment.  During  the  ensuing  two 
years,  Respondent  remained  assigned  at  ESC  South. 

The  District  filed  and  served  Respondent  with  an  Accusation  dated  April  9, 

17. 
Subsequently,  the  District  filed  and  served  an  Amended  Accusation  dated  May  5, 

2015. 
2015. 

Charge  1  —  Student Ta. 

- 

18. 

{t  was  not  established  that,  during 

the  period  July  1,  2008,  to  June  30,  2009, 

__  Respondent,  at least  once, struck  student  S 

_  on  his  arm. 

19.  Si.  was  a  kindergarten  student  in  Respondent's  class  who  had  limited 

speaking  ability.  The  District  presented  only  hearsay  evidence,  no  direct  evidence,  in 
support  of  Charge  1.  The  District  relied  on  the  September  4,  2013  conference  memorandum 
by  principal  Carrillo,  in  which  he  wrote  that  re  's  parents  had  reported  to  him in 
August  2013  that  their  son  came  home  from  school in  February  2009  with  a  two  to  three  inch 
parents  claimed  that  Respondent  caused  the injury.  The  District  also 
scape  on  his  elbow;  the 
presented  a  letter  by  S 
.'s  parents.  (Exh.  8.)  Neither  principal  Carrillo  nor  SIN.’ 
parents  nor  any  other  witness  to  the  reported  injury  to  Steven's  elbow,  testified  at  the  hearing. 
The  District's  documentary  evidence,  without  more  direct  evidence,  is  insufficient. 
Respondent  denied  the  allegation  of  Charge  1.  His  unrefuted  testimony  established  that  he 
never  received  a  complaint  from  SHIN.  or  his  parents,  and  that  he  first  learned  of  the 

 

  

    

  

  

parents’  allegations  from  the  September  4,  2013  conference  memorandum  by  principal 
Carrillo. 

Charge  2- -Suudent a 

20. 

‘Student  Mia 

period  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30,  2010. 
Respondent’ s  class  with v—_ 

was  a  student  i in  Respondent's  class  at  Meyler  during  the 

Students  _  and  =.  were also 1  in 

a 

|

|

_

 a1.  -  ~  Respondent  testified 

would  frequently  drop  himself  to  the 

that  students Ac.  and  i.  «

 were  autistic  and 
  MEE  vas: in  special  education  on the  basis  of other  health impairment  (OHD). -MiEhad 
behavioral i  issues.  ‘Respondent  testified  that  ME 
floor  and  cry. “When MEGid  not comply  with  Respondent's  request to stand up,  he  told 
MMEbe  would  call  his  father.  ME  would  stay  on  the  floor  and  reach  up  to.  Respondent 
  with  his  arms,  pleading  that  Respondent  not  call  his  father.  Respondent  testified  that 
G: tended  to 
the  class,  A 
Respondent  believes. that mixing, autistic students  with  students who  are  OHI  or  have 
behavioral/emotional i issues'is not conducive  to  learning.  Respondent  - feels  that  autistic 
students  may  not understand  the behaviors  of  OH  students  or  the  interventions  used  by 
 
:
teachers  to  address  their  behaviors. 

pick-up  on  ME  misbehavior.  Respondent  testified  that,  before Ma  joined 

did  not  have  history  of  misbehavior  or  copying what  M 

was  doing. 

 

,

:

 

22. 

“Loeb  testified t  that  she  knows si  She  was  asked  to  observe  him  when rhe 

was  having  a  hard  time  in  his  regular  education  classroom.  Loeb  saw  that 
outbursts  during i instructional,  time,  such  as  talking  at  inappropriate  times,  Or  Saying  things 
that were  irrelevant  and  not pertaining  to  the  lesson  being  presented  by  the  teacher.  Loeb 
also  saw  wi 
crawl  under a  table,  and  burst  out  crying  for  no  apparent  reason.  Loeb  believes  that  Mii 
behaviors  continued  after  he  moved  to  Respondent’ s  class,  based  on  what  she heard  coming 
having  an  outburst  and  saying 

display  fits  of  rage  or  anger.  She  also : saw  Miihrow  himself  on  the  floor, 

  from  Respondent’ s  classroom,  For  example,  she  heard  Mi 

would  have 

_

~

 

something  inappropriate, after  which  she  heard  Respondent  direct  him  to  stop  talking,  and 
then she  heard  what  sounded like  a  chair  moving  and  a body  going  to  the  floor.  Loeb  also 
heard  MIiicrying in  Respondent's classroom,  which was  generally  after  Mffhad  an 
outburst.  Loeb  testified  she  only  heard  Miesying  she  never  heard any  ¢ other  students 
crying  1  in  Respondent  S  classroom. - 

_ 

23.  -  Loeb  testified  that,  on  one  occasion,  she  was in  her  classroom  when  she  heard 
ME  naving  an  outburst in  Respondent's  classroom  and  Respondent  asking  several  times  — 
that  he  stop.  Loeb  then  heard  Respondent  telling  Miihat  he  needed  to  put  down  the 
chair.  When  she  heard  that,  Loeb  opened  the  connecting  door  between  her  classroom  and 
Respondent's  room.  Loeb  stood in  the  doorway  and  saw  M@iiiswinging  the  chair  as  if  he 
was  getting  ready  to  throw  it.  There  were  other  students in  the  classroom.  Respondent  went 
grabbed  the  chair,  and  told Minot  to  throw  it.  Miiiicontinued  to  wrestle 
over  to  M 
the  chair  away.  Respondent was  able  to  take  the  chair  away  without  touching  MI  Mi 
then  fell  to  the  floor  and  began  crying  and  screaming.  Loeb  assisted  Respondent in  taking 

 

  

  

the  other  students  out  of  the  room.  Loeb  and  Respondent  watched  Miunti  he  calmed 
down. 

| 

| 

24. 

Loeb  testified  that,  on  another  occasion,  she  saw  Respondent  use  a  District- 
MEwas  upset  and  yelling  profanities  at 

approved  technique  in  order  to  restrain  Mie 
Respondent.  MJsaid  he  was  going  to  leave  the  classroom.  As  Mffmoved  towards  the 
-door,  Respondent  grabbed  hold  of  the  boy  to  keep  him  from 
testified  that  Respondent  took  his  one  arm  and  placed  it  at 
he  placed  his  other  arm  around  Mi 
preventing  him  from  going  out  the  door.  It  was  almost  like  a  hug.  MBB eventually  calmed 
down.  Loeb  testified  that  the  physical  restraint  used  by  Respondent  on  Mfjwas  a  District- 
approved  technique.  Loeb  has  attended  District  trainings  where  the  technique  was  taught. 
Loeb  testified  she  has  seen  other  teachers,  besides  Respondent,  use  this  technique.  Loeb 
testified  this  was  the  only  time  she  saw  Respondent  use  the  technique  to  restrain  a  student. 

out  the  door.  Loeb 
waist  from  the  front,  and 

waist  from  the  back,  thereby  encircling  him  and 

going 

25. 

Student AR.  testified  at  this  hearing.  AR;  presently  12  years  old 
and  in  the  sixth  grade. Am  is  a  special  education  student.  He  was  in  Respondent's  class 
for  first  grade,  second  grade,  and  third  grade.  Student  J  a.  testified  at  this  hearing. 

is  presently  13  years  old  and  in  the  seventh  grade.  He  was  in  Respondent's  class  for 

second  grade  and  third  grade. 

26. 

«(Alt  was  not  established  that,  during 

the  period  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30, 
|  J.  with  a  ruler  or  a  belt.  Respondent 

27. 

2010,  Respondent,  at  least  once,  struck  student  M 
denied  these  allegations. 

(B)  Student  ANNBEEBG.  testified  that  Respondent  hit  M[and  three  other 

boys  in  the  class  on  their  hands  with  a  ruler.  He  also  testified  that  Respondent  hit  him  on  the 
back  of  his  hand  with  a  ruler  at  least  once  a  month.  ABB  testified  that  he  saw  Respondent 
He  also  testified  that  Miss  Lucy  was 
take  off  his  belt  and  hit ME  with  it,  and MEE  cried. 
present  in  the  classroom  all  day,  every  day.  The  scenario  described  by  A:  tesumony 
was  not  credible,  given  Miss  Lucy's  presence  in  the  classroom,  that  Respondent's  classroom 
and  Loeb's  classroom  next  door  could  hear  each  other,  and  the  status  of  all  teachers  and 
assistants  as  mandated  reporters. 

   

acts  against 
that  he  hit  M 
presence  in  the  classroom,  that  Respondent's  classroom  and  Loeb's  classroom  next  door 
could  hear  each  other,  and  the  status  of  all  teachers  and  assistants  as  mandated  reporters. 
Furthermore,  Respondent's  testimony  sufficiently  refuted  the  testimonies  of 
and 
J  a  Respondent  was  continually  addressing  Me  behaviors  in  the  classroom.  Those 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30, 
J.  down  to  the  ground,  into  a  chair,  or  against  a 

2010,  Respondent  pushed  student 
wall.  Respondent  denied  these  allegations. 

7  Student AR.  testified  that  he  saw  Respondent  commit  these  alleged 

Student  JAB.  testified  that  Respondent  hit  and  pushed  MBB  and 

a  lot.  The  students'  narratives  were  not  credible,  given  Miss  Lucy's 

  

7 

| 

  

behaviors  included  dropping  himself  to  the  floor  while  crying  and  screaming,  sometimes  for 
no  apparent  reason.  Respondent  was  familiar  with  MQM  behaviors.  Respondent  credibly 
were  misreading  or  misconstruing  the  situation  and/or_ 
explained  that  J and ABB 
Respondent  interventions  to  address  the  situation.  For  example,  when  the  boys  saw  M 
on  the  round,  they  mistakenly  thought Respondent  put  him  on  the  ground  when,  in  fact, 
dropped  himself  to  the  floor  and  cried  for  no  reason,  which  he  was  prone  to )

  do. 

28. 

  Tt  was  not  established  that, ‘during  the  period  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30,  2010, 

|

Respondent  threw  student  ME. s  shoes  into the  trash can.  Respondent  denied  this 
allegation.  The  testimony  of  student  A.  regarding  this  incident was.  not  clear  as  to 
how  MEE shoes  ended  up  in  the trash  can, whether Respondent  put  them in the  trash  can  or 
the  shoes  fell  into  the trash  can after  Respondent |  had  placed  the  shoes  on a  cabinet.  Student 
i.  testified  that Respondent  threw  ME  shoes  in  the  trash can.  Respondent's S 
testimony  was  the  more  persuasive  evidence  regarding’ this  charge.  Respondent  had  put 

in  time-out.  M 

began  repeatedly  kicking one spot  in  the  wall.  Respondent  was 
not  aware  of  what  MEwas  doing  because  he  did  it  without  making a  lot  of noise.  A  hole 
began  to  develop in  the  wall  where MEE  was  kicking.  “When  Respondent  saw  what 
would  not 
happened,  he  asked MEto  take  off  his  shoe.  Respondent  thought  ME 
continue  to  kick  the  wall with  his  bare  toes.  M 
threw  his  shoe  into  the  trash  can.  ‘Respondent  retrieved  the  shoe  from  the  trash can  and 
placed  it  on  top  ofa cabinet,  out of  ME  reach.  ‘Respondent  returned  the  shoe  to  Mat 
lunchtime. 

took  off  his  shoe;  became  upset,  and  then 

a 

| 

Charge  3 3- Student v 

29. 

“Its was  ‘not  established  that,  during  the  period  July  1,  2010,  to  June  30,  2011, 
C.  Respondent 
violently  grabbed  the  back  of  the  shirt ‘collar  of  student 

Respond 
denied  this:  allegation.  The  testimony  of  Mi. Ss  father  regarding  this  incident  was 
refuted  by  the  credible  testimonies  of  Respondent  and  Loeb  regarding  the morning  routine  at 
Meyles  and  the  layout  of  campus,  which  would  have  made it  difficult  to  see. 

- 

|  30.  During  the  2010- 2011  school  5  year, MEIC.  was  a  Six- -year- r-old  first  erader  i in 
Respondent's  class.  Mi  was  diagnosed  with  autism  and  was  not  verbal.  Respondent  was 
aaa  teacher  for  one  year.  Respondent  found  MEE 

be  a  sweet  boy. 

31.  ME 

father,  ‘ak.  testified  about  an  incident  he  observed.  MiB ana 

father  was  standing  outside  of  the  school  gate  at  223rd  Street.  He  saw MEE  walk 
froze  when  he  saw  Respondent.  Mis  father 
by  the  collar  of  his  shirt  and  he  pushed  and 

his  father  arrived  at  the  school  gate  between  7:30  and  8.a.m.  School  started  at  8  a.m. 
ME 
inside  the  school  gate  but  then  he  suddenly 
testified  that  he  saw  Respondent  grab  M 
dragged  MEto  walk  towards  his  classroom.  M{fs  father  testified  that  he  saw 
Respondent  take  six  to  eight  steps  while  grabbing  MBBS  shirt  collar.  ME 
estimated  that  he  was  standing  25  to  30  feet  from  Respondent  and  Mia 
  
assumed  that  Respondent  grabbed 
only  saw  a  few  seconds  of  Respondent  and  M 

s  father 
s  collar  all  the  way  to  the  classroom,  although  he 
  

s  father  testified  he  was 

   

together. 

father 

  

 

  

     

  

  

  

  

  

  

anything.  Mis  father  testified  that  a  janitor  prevented 

's  father  spoke  to  an  assistant  principal.  He  did  not  make  any  written  statement.  He 
afterschool  that  same  day.  He  saw 

too  far  away  to  hear  if  MB  sai 
him  from  entering  the  campus  through  the  gate,  and  directed  him  to  go  to  the  main  office. 
   
did  not  call  the  police.  ME 
father  picked  up  via 
Respondent  but  did  not  speak  to  him  about  seeing  him  grab  vi  by  the  shirt  collar. 
vi 
   
Respondent. 

father  did  not  mention  the  incident  during  subsequent  times  that  he  saw 

   

Respondent  testified  credibly  that  it  was  impossible  for  ME 

32. 
and  Respondent  walking  to  the  classroom  from  outside  the  school  gate  at  223rd 

father  to  see 

33. 

Street.  The  morning  routine  at  Meyler  Elementary  School  was  that  the  teacher's  aides 
received  the  children  off  the  school  bus  starting  at  7:30  a.m.  Pursuant  to  the  principal's 
order,  the  teachers'  work  day  started  at  7:40  a.m.  and  the  teacher  aides’  work  day  started  at 
7:30  a.m.  Respondent  stayed  in  his  classroom  until  8  a.m.  When  the  children  arrived  at 
school,  they  lined  up  on  the  playground  according to  the  room  numbers  painted  on  the 
asphalt.  At  8  a.m.,  Respondent  and  the  other  teachers  went  to  the  playground  to  meet  their 
students  and  walk  them  to  the  classroom.  All  of  the  students  and  teachers  used  one  of  two 
paths  to  walk  from  the  playground  to  their  classrooms  in  the  bungalows.  Respondent 
estimated  that  the  distance  from  the  gate  at  223rd  Street,  where  MEBs  father  was  standing, 
to  the  bungalows  where  Respondent's  classroom  was  located  was  250  to  500  feet.  A  person 
standing  outside  of  the  gate  must  look  across  a  busy 
Respondent  contends  that  it  was  impossible  for  M 
happening  when  Respondent's  students  walked  from  the  playground  to  the  classroom.  Many 
adults  and  teachers  are  present  for  the  morning  routine  of  walking  the  students  from  the 
was  in 
playground  to  their  respective  classrooms.  Respondent  testified  that,  when  ME 
front  of  him  and  began  to  wander,  Respondent  would  sometimes  drape  his  arm  over ME 
shoulder  to  keep  the  boy  walking  in a  straight  line  with  the  rest  of  the  class. 

s  father  to  clearly  see  what  was 

parking  lot  to  see  the  bungalows. 

Loeb  testified  regarding  the  morning  routine.  All  students  are  received  by 

   

their  teachers  at  8  a.m.  at  the  playground in  the  back  of  the  campus.  From  223rd  Street,  there 
are  five  buildings  of  bungalows  between  the  playground  and  the  gate  at  223rd  Street.  Loeb 
and  Miss  Lucy  had  the  same  morning  routine.  They  would  meet  students  coming  off  the 
school  bus,  and  escort  the  students  through  the  main  office  and  out  to  the  playground,  where 
they  would  line  up  by  classrooms.  Loeb  testified  she  would  meet  her  students  at  the  223rd 
Street  gate.  If  Miss  Lucy  was  not  there,  Loeb  would  meet  the  students  from  her  class  and 
Respondent's  class.  The  teachers  would  never  meet  students  at  the  223rd  Street  gate.  All 
teachers  stayed  in  their  classrooms  until  the  school  bell  rang  at  8  a.m.  Loeb  testified  that  a 
person  standing  outside  of  the  gate  at  223rd  Street  would  be  unable  to  see  Respondent 
collecting  his  students  from  the  playground  in  the  morning.  There  was a  set  route  and 
routine  of  how  the  students  and  their  teachers  walked  from  the  playground  to  their 
classrooms.  There  is  also  a  parking  lot  at  the  223rd  Street  gate,  which  was  typically  busy 
with  teachers  and  staff  arriving  between  7:30  a.m.  and  8  a.m.  Loeb  estimated  the  distance 
from  the  gate  at  223rd  Street  io  the  bungalow  with  Respondent's  classroom  was  at  least  150 
feet. 

  

Charges  4  -  7,  13,  and  14—Student ABBR. 

34. 

Student  A  R.  was  a  six  year  old 

start  of  the  2011-2012  school  year..  He  has  a  diagnosis  ofa autism.  Respondent  was 
teacher  for kindergarten  during the  prior  school  year. 

first  grader in  Respondent's  class  at  the 
   5 

35. 

(A) AM:  mother,  RIIN.,  testified  at  this  hearing.  ‘She  testified 

expressed  1 fear  about  going  to  school.  When  she  woke him  up  to  go  to 

had  limited  speaking  ability  and  only  said  a  few  words.  ARs mother  noticed  that 
behavior  started  to  change in  the  early  part  of  the  2011-2012  school year. The  mother 
testified  that  Af 
   
indicated  he  did  not want  to  go  by  sayin  “mommy,  please  no."  On  other 
school,  A 
occasions  while  at  home,  ABsaia,  "no  school.” A  mother  testified  that  when  she 
brought  AB  io  school,  he  would  hide  behind  her  and  say,  "mommy home."  ARs 
mother  took  her  son's  words, and  his  fearful body  language,  tom mean ‘that  he  was  atraid  to  go 
to  school.” 

— 

| 

| 

, 

: 

, 

: 

S 

A 

©) b) 

mother  testified  that  , 

Bi  completed  the  fall  semester  of  the 
Ss  mother  testified  that  the last  day  of 
afterschool  that  day,  she  saw 

2011-2012  school  ‘year  in  Respondent’ s  class. 
school  was  December  15,  2011.  When  she  picked  up 
that  ABwas  crying  and  he  had  a  ted  bump  on  his  lower  lip..  She took a  picture  of  As 
face  at  that  time. ‘as  mother  contends  that  Respondent  struck  ABB  and  caused  the 
bump  on  his  lip.  There  was  no  bump  on  his  lip  when  she  _  him  off  at  school  that - 
s  mother  also testified  that, 
the  doctor 
s  mother  did  not  take  AT 
morning. 
s  thigh.  She  testified  she 
on  the  morning  ¢ of  December  14,  2011,  she  saw  a  bruise  on 
did  not  see  the bruise  the previous  night  when  she  got  him  ready  for  bed.  ARs  mother  — 
asked  him  about  the: bruise.  ‘The  mother  testified  that  ABB  tried to  explain,  but  since  he  has 
no  well-defined  language,  she  was  unable to  understand  him.  In  January  2012,  ABs 
mother  met  with  the  principal  and  requested  that  he  transfer AB  to  another  school. 
Subsequently, i in  OF  about ‘February  4 2012, 2,  Alves  transferred t to )  Halldale Elementary 
School. 

/ 

36. 

°  Respondent  denied  the  charges  i in  the  Amended: ‘Accusation  regarding  student 

*  Respondent  found  ‘Angel to  be  a  good- -natured  boy  who  enjoyed  school in  first 

grade  the  same  as  he  did in  kindergarten.  Respondent  felt  his  relationship with AB  was 
speech  and  the  tonality  of  speech.  Thus,  for 
fine.  Respondent  found  that  MBB  incite 
example,  if  Am  attempted  to  say  three  sentences,  the  listener  would  only  be  able  to  make 
out  one  or two  words  he  \ was s 

trying  to  say  or  the  sound  he  was  attempting  | to  make. 

37. 

.  It  was  not t  established  that, during  1  the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  January 

31,  2012,  Respondent  hit  student ARR.  on  at  least  two  occasions. 
no  direct  evidence  to  support  this  charge. 

The  District  presented 

 

  

     

    

10 

38. 

It  was  not  established  that,  during 

the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  January 
R.  that  he  would  call  the  police  on  him.’ 

31,  2012,  Respondent  threatened  student 
Respondent  denied  threatening  to  call  the  police  on  ARR.  or  any  of  this  other  students. 

did  not  have  the  verbal  ability  to  state  that  Respondent  threatened  to  call  the  police  on 
him.  At  the  IEP  meeting  held  in  November  2011, ARs  mother  did  not  raise  any  concern 
about  Respondent  threatening  to  call  the  police  on  her  son.  The  mother  never  mentioned  this 
concern  until  two  years  later,  in  her  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2013.  This  charge 
was  not  supported  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

39. 

It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  December 
R.  that,  when  he  was  to  return  to 

13,  2011,  Respondent  caused  so  much  fear  in  student  A 
dia  not  want  to  go  to  school,  each  day  crying  and  resisting 
school  in  January  2012,  AM 
more  and  more,  causing  his  parents  to  pull  him  out  of  school.  The  preponderance  of  the 
s  mother  that  Respondent 
evidence  did  not  support  this  charge.  The  testimony  of 
caused AB  to  fear  going  to  school  was  speculative. 

40. 

It  was  not  established  that  on  December  14,  2011,  Respondent  struck Am 

R.,  causing  a  bruise  on  his  hip.  The  District  failed  to  present  sufficient  evidence  to  establish 
this  charge.  The  testimony  of  As  mother  that  Respondent  caused  the  bruise  was 
speculative. 

| 

41. 

It  was  not  established  that  on  December  15,  2011,  Respondent  struck Am 
R.,  causing  a  red  bump  on  his  lower  lip.  The  District  failed  to  present  sufficient  evidence  to 
establish  this  charge.  The  testimony  of  Ajjjs  mother  that  Respondent  caused  a  red  bump 
on  As  lower  lip  was  speculative.  No  discernible  bump  or  injury  to ARs  lower  lip  is 
shown  on  the  photograph  taken  by ARs  mother. 

| 

Charges  §  and  12  ~  Student A: 

42. 

Student AR:  was  a  first  grade  student  in  Respondent's  class  during  the 

   
period  September  7,  2011,  to  October  14,  2011. AR;  diagnosed  with  autism. 
Respondent  found ABE  «2s  the  quietest  student  _he  has  ever  taught. 
S 

(mee  oe  cabulary was  very  limited  and  he  rarely  spoke.  AB 

gic  not  know  how  to  hold  a 

pencil  or  write  letters.  Respondent  had  him  trace  along  dotted  lines  to  form  his  {etters. 

43, 

(A)  ARs  mother,  HIM.  testified  that,  while  giving  ARM 

bath  on  October  14,  2011,  she  found  red  marks  on  his  body  that  looked  to  her  like  A 
   
had  been  struck.  The  mother  testified  that  when  she  asked ABB  how  he  got  the  marks,  — 
he  started  to  cry  and  did  not  want  to  tell  her. 
to  tell  her,  The  mother  testified  that 

s  hands  started  to  shake  and  he  said  that  he 

s  mother  continued  to  try  to  get  him 

    

  

'  Charges  5  and  7  both  allege  that  Respondent  threatened  to  call  the  police  on  student 
.  The  relevant  time  period  for  both  charges  starts  on  September  7,  2011.  However, 

the  relevant  period  for  Charge  5  ends  on  January  31,  2012,  and  the  relevant  period  for 
| 
Charge  7  ends  on  December  16,  2011.  Charge  7  is  duplicative  of  Charge  5. 

11 

 

  

    

  

did  not  want  to  go  to  jail,  and  that  Respondent  had  said  that  if  he  said  something,  Respondent 
was  going  to  send  him  to  jail.  The  mother  further  testified  that 
   
A 
Respondent  grabbed. him  with  his  hands  and  pulled  him. 
police.  Police  officers came  to  the  home  and  interviewed A 
next  day (October  15,  2011), 
and  showed  them  the  markings  on A 
Respondent had  smacked  him.  She  also  told. them  that  she  had  called  the  police  and  made  a 
© 
report.  ARB 
transferred  him  to  Halldale  Blementary  School. 

cic  not  return  to  school  at  Meyler after  October  15,  2011.  His  parents 

told  her  that 
's  mother  called  the 
and  his  mother.  The 

S  mother  met  with  principal  Carrillo  and  Respondent 

S  body  and  reported  that 

said  that 

    

(BY  Ont cross- ‘examination,  —_-  mother  admitted  she  did  not see 
B  cet  the  marks  on  his  body.  She  believes  Respondent  caused  the  marks  because 
oc: her.. When  asked  how  Respondent  caused  the  marks,  the  mother 
that's  what ABB 
responded,  "Tm  sure  he  grabbed  him  real  hard to  cause  the  marks."  (Transcript,  Vol.  IL,  p. 
294.)  The  mother  testified  that she  asked  Miss  Lucy 
she  was  not  in  classroom at  the time.  However, 
told  her  that  Miss Lucy  was  present i in the  classroom. 

told  her 
about  the marks,  but  Miss  Luc 
el  mother  admitted  that  a 
ae 

en 

     

44.  -  Respondent  denied  that  he  caused  any  marks  on  A:  body,  or  that  he 
if he  said  anything..  Respondent  testified  that  he 
The  boy  was  obedient  and quiet.  ABE  played 

threatened  to  call  the  police  on 
hada  good  relationship  with 
in  the  classroom,  he  was  never  afraid,  and  he  smiled.  Respondent  points « out  that  the  first 
time 
son-was  in  her  letter  dated  October  3,  2013,  which principal  Carrillo  obtained  after  the 
September 4, 2013  conference.  The  mother  did  not  mention any  allegation  about  threatening 
to  call  the  police  when  she came  to  the  school  on  October  15,  2011  and  reported  finding ~ 
marks  on 

's  mother  mentioned  an  allegation  about  threatening to  call  the  police on  her 

s s  body  the  night  before.  a 

| 

|  45. 

Tt was  not  established  that,  during  the  petiod  Sey  tember  1, 

2011,  to  October  14, 

2011,  Respondent,  on.at  least  one  occasion,  threatened  od sepa  with  calling  the  police 
and  that  the  police would  take  him  to jail  if ‘ARE 
AT:  mother  regarding  this  charge  i is  not  sufficient  to  éstablish  this  charge.  A 
limited  verbal  abilities  undercut  the  credibility  of  his  mother's  testimony  that  he  told  her 
Respondent  threatened  him  with  calling  the police.  Also  significant is  that  ARs 
mother  never  mentioned  this  allegation in  October  2011,  but first mentioned  it  two  years 
later in |  the  letter  she wrote at {  principal  Carrillo’ 8  request. 

ic  something.  The  testimony 

of 

a 

   

: 

| 

46.  ‘It  was.  not  established  that,  on  or about  October  14;  2011,  Respondent  caused 
first  grade student  AR:.  multiple  bruises  to  his  neck,  arm,  and  back.  The  testimony 
of “a  mother  that  Respondent  caused  the  marks  she  found  on  As  body  was 
speculative  and,  therefore,  insufficient  to  establish  this  charge. 

 

  

  

  

    

  

  

  
    

    

12 

Charges  9,  10,  and  11  —  Student K@-i 

47, 

Student KEE s  nine  years  old  and  will  be  entering  the  fifth  grade.  iia 

was  six  years  old  when  he  was  a  student  in  Respondent's  class  at  i   
diagnosed  with  autism.  Both  Respondent  and  Loeb  testified  that 
Respondent's  class  for  both  kindergarten  and  first  grade. 
testified  that  Respondent  was  her  son's  teacher  only  for  first  grade. 

is 

     
B was  in 

s  mother,  Ci 

Pill 

48.  Km  PMiestified  that,  on  one  occasion,  Respondent  grabbed  and  slapped  the 

back  of  his  left  hand.  K@itestified  he  started  crying,  and  that  his  hand  started  to  look  | 
reddish.  KP  testified  that,  on  a  second  occasion,  Respondent  hit  him  on  both  of  his 
hands, KG  testified  he  was  sitting  at  his  table  when  Respondent  grabbed  his  hand  and 
slapped  it.  KP Mi  testified  that  Miss  Lucy  was  present  in  the  classroom  on  the  two 
occasions  Respondent  hit  his  hands.  K{jdid  not  go  to  the  principal  to  complain  that 
Respondent  hit  his  hands.  His  mother  did  not  take  him  to  the  doctor. 

, 

49.  CEPR testitica  that  when  Kfwas  in  first  grade  during  the  2011-2012 
school  year,  his  speech  ability  was  very  limited.  The  mother  testified  that  Kfused  very 
few  words  and  he  would  express  himself  using  signals.  During  the  fall  of  2011, 
expressed  that  he  did  not  want  to  go  to  school,  first  to  his  siblings  and  then  to  his  mother. 
KBs  mother  testified  that  K§would  hold  her  hand,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  and  he 
told  his  mother  not  to  take  him  to  school.  In  or  about  November  2011,  during  an  IEP 
meeting,  CM Pfreported  that  Khad  told  his  sister  that  Respondent  was  hitting  him, 
and  that  Respondent  also  said  he  loved  to  see  blood.  She  did  not  mention  any  concern  about 
Respondent  threatening KE  with  calling  the  police  on  him.  The  week  prior  to  this  IEP 
meeting,  C 
protected.  During  that  week  in  Respondent's  classroom, 
to  anyone  at  the  school  that 
had  said  the  teacher  was  hitting  him  or  the  teacher  made 
comments  about  seeing  blood.  The  mother  testified  that,  on  the  day  of  the  IEP  meeting,  the 
police  came  to  her  house  and  interviewed  her  and  then 
Principal  Carrillo  had  called 
the  police,  not Kis  mother.  In  or  about  January  2012, 
to  Halidale  Elementary  School. 

Hispent  a  few  days  observing  Respondent's  classroom  to  help  Kfee! 
s  mother  did  not  mention 

Pitransferred  from  Meyler 

   

50. 

It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  December 

16,  2011,  Respondent  pulled  first  grade  student  KPIs  car  not  less  than  two  times, 
go  to  his  classroom  anymore.  Respondent 
causing  K{Jto  not  want  to  go  to  school  or 
denied  this  allegation.  The  testimony  of  KP:  mother  was  insufficient  to  establish  this 
charge.  The  mother  testified  that  she  saw  an  injury  to Kis  ear  but  offered  no  further 
details  about  the  nature  of  the  injury  or  even  which  ear  was  involved. 

51. 

It  was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  December 

16,  2011,  Respondent  hit  student  Ke  on  his  hand  not  less  than  two  times,  causing: 
KEto  not  want  to  go  to  school  or  go  to  his  classroom  anymore.  Respondent  denied  this 
allegation.  The  scenario  described  by  K§JP[J  was  not  credible,  given  Miss  Lucy's 

 

    

13 

  
  
  

presence  in  the  classroom,  that  Respondent's  classroom  and  Loeb's  classroom  next  door 
could  hear  each  other,  and  the  status  of  all  teachers  and  assistants  as  mandated  reporters. 

52. 

It  was  not  established  that,  durin 

the  period  September  7,  2011,  to  December 
|  that  he  would  call  the  police  on  the 

16,  2011,  Respondent  threatened  student 
student,  causing KEEP  to  fear  Respondent  and  not  want  to  go  to  school.  The  testimony 
of KEP a s  mother is  insufficient  to  establish  this  charge.  KUM  limited  verbal 
abilities  during  the  relevant  time period  makes  it  less  credible  that,  in  2011,  he  complained  of 
Respondent  threatening  | to  call the police  on him.  Notably,  x  i  mother  never  raised 
this  allegation  with anyone  at  Meyler during  « 2011,  and  only  first  mentioned  this  allegation in 
the letter  she  wrote  al  principal  Carrillo’ 5  request  | two  years  | later  i in ‘September  2013. 

Charge  15  -

 5  Se 

|  (A)  It  was  not  established  that, t,  during  the period  July  1,  2011,  to  June  30,  2012, 
Respondent  grabbed  second  grade  student  ote  Ss  arm,  causing  Lo cry  while  he  was 
doing  math  at  his  desk.  The  District's  evidence  for  this  charge  was a  letter dated  October  2, 
H.'s  mother  wrote  that  the 
2013,  by  Us.  s  mother.  (Exh.  1,  p.  13.)  In  the  letter,  L 
incident  that is the  basis  for  this  charge  occurred in  September  2011.  Li. s  mother  did 
not  testify  at this  hearing.  The.  District's  evidence  also  included the  conference  memorandum 
dated  September  4,  2013,  b 
that  Respondent  rabbed 
and  caused 
hearing.  The  District's  documentary  « evidence  i is uncorroborated  hearsay  and  insufficient  to 
establish  ¢ this. charge. 

O  cry.  Neither  principal  Carrillo  nor  LH.  s  father  testified  at  this 

rincipa!  Carrillo,  which  states.that Uy .'S  father reported 

arm  during a  math  lesson  because  the  boy’ was  not  listening, 

ee 

: 

| 

H.  in  the classroom.’  L 

(B) Respondent ¢ denied  this  alles  ation.  Respondent's. testim ony established 
was  having 

that  he was s  working  on  math  lessons  with - 
difficulty  with  math,  so  Respondent  had  him  come  to  the  board  to  work  through  some 
problems.  UBB  finally  got the  problems  correct,  UB  as  happy  and  agreed  to 
g0  back  to 
his  desk  and  finish  working  at  his  desk.  A few minutes  later,  Respondent  saw  L 
as  just 
staring  at  his  workbook.  ‘When  Respondent  asked  him  what  was  wron  ,  EE shrugged  his 
shoulders  and  started  to  cry.  Respondent  told  him  to  take  a  break.  L 
minutes  later  and  finished  his  math  homework at  his  desk.  Respondent  had  never  seen 
cry  before.  Loeb  testified  that,  while in  her  classroom  next  door,  she  heard  Respondent 
teaching  a  math  lesson  to  7  Loeb  testified  that  it  sounded  like  Lfwas  having 
time  with  the  lesson,  as  Respondent  kept  going  back  over the  lesson  and  asking  L 
understood.  Loeb  testified  that  Respondent's §  voice  did  not  sound  angry.  Finally, 
times,  Respondent  asked 
When  Respondent  asked  him  why,  L 
’  because  she  was  alone in  her  classroom  doing  paperwork  and  she  could  hear  everything in 

did  not  respond.  Loeb  recalled  this  incident 

to  the  board  and  do  a  problem. 

after  several 
said  no, 

ame  back  five 

a  hard 
if  he 

to  come  up 

   

Respondent’ S  classroom: 

1,  2011,  to  June  30,  2012, 
Respondent  hit  student  Lie.  on  the  fingers  with  a  large  ruler.  Respondent  denied  this 

It  was  not established  that,  during  the  veriod  J uly 

54. 

14 

 

  

       

       

  

allegation.  Respondent  testified  that  the  first  time  he  heard  of  this  allegation  was  from  the 
Amended  Accusation  in  May  2015.  The  letter  by  UH.  's  mother  does  not  mention  this 
allegation.  Nor  does  the  September  4,  2013  conference  memorandum  by  principal  Carrillo. 
No  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  this  charge. 

Charge  16-—S judent  Mc. 

55. 

(A)  It  was  not  established  that  during 

the 

period  from  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30, 

2011,  Respondent,  at  least  once,  struck  student 
large  ruler.  Respondent  denies  the  charge.  Respondent  testified  that  he  has  never  used  a 
ruler  to  strike  a  child  or  tap  a  child. 

AG.  on  his  arm  and/or  hands  with  a 

(B) AM 

estitica  that  Respondent  used  two  rulers  during  class,  a  small  one 

students  on  their  hands  with  a  ruler: Kia 

and  another  that  was  approximately  36  inches  long  with  a  metal  tip  on  one  end. 
testified  that  Respondent  hit  the  following 
ABBE 
1  ee  SE 
   
left  hand  with  a  ruler,  at  least  once  a  month.  The  incident  described  by 
credible.  Miss  Lucy,  the  teacher's  assistant,  was  present  in  the  classroom  and  a  mandated 
reporter.  Also,  the  classroom  next  door  could  hear  what  was  going  on  in  Respondent's 
classroom.  If,  as 
it  could  reasonably  be  expected  that  some  other  adult  (such  as  Miss  Lucy  or  Loeb)  would 
have  heard  something  to  draw  their  attention  to  the  situation. 

claimed,  Respondent  was  using  a  ruler  to  hit  students  in  the  class, 

Iso  testified  that  Respondent  hit  the  back  of  his 

is  not 

— 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  grabbed  and  forcibly  squeezed  student . 

6. 
G.'s  arm  and/or  hands.  But  it  was  established  that  Respondent  used  a  District- 

ZZ 

approved  technique  to  restrain 
classroom,  such  as  a  chair  of  book.  Student 
him  by  his  left  wrist  and  “squished”  his  hand.  AQ 
squeeze  any  other  student.  Student  i.  testified  that,  one  time,  he  saw  Respondent  grab 

G.  testified  that  Respondent  grabbed 
did  not  see  Respondent  grab  or 

o  prevent  him  from  throwing  things  in  the 

  

, 

arms.  The  evidence  tends  to  show  that  what 

erceived  was  Respondent 

using  a  District-approved  behavioral  intervention.  Respondent  testified AB 
was  his 
student  for  two  years.  He  had  to  physically  restrain  x  6  to  8  occasions  because 

was  throwing  things  or  getting  ready  to  throw  things  (such  as  a  chair,  book,  or 

supply  box).  Respondent  needed  to  restrain 
Respondent  used  the  same  restraint  technique  he  used  on  wl  |  For  example,  when 
ABE 
something  else. 

ecabbed  a  chair,  Respondent  restrained  him  in  order  to  prevent  him  from  grabbing 

for  the  safety  of  others  in  the  classroom. 

57. 

It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  threw AR.  's  shoes  into  the 

to  wade  through  the  garbage  to  retrieve  them.  Respondent 
garbage  can,  forcing 
denies  the  charge. 
testified  that  Respondent  never  put  his  shoes  in  the  trash  can.  He 
testified  that  Respondent  put  the  shoes  on  a  cabinet,  from  where  they  afterwards  fell  into  the 
trash  can. 

. 

 

  

  

  
  

         

  

15 

  

Charge  17  -S tudent  Kira 

58.  _ 

It  was  not  established that,  during  the  period  July 1, 2009,  to  June  30,  2011, 
Respondent  pulled  out  a  chair  from  underneath  student  Kal  and  caused  him  to  fall. 
Respondent  denied  this  allegation.  The  District  presented  the  testimony  of  student 
G.  in  support  of  this  charge.  A:  testimony,  however,  did  not  establish  that  Respondent 
chair from  underneath  him  and  caused  him  to  fall.  According  to  A 
pulled  out  Ki 
testimony,  Kliiwas in  his  chair  and  trying to  get  his  pencil  back  from  Respondent,  when 
chair  fell  back  by 
his  chair  fell  back  and.  Kibo  his  head.  Andrew  testified that KE 
itself,  and  that  Respondent  tried  to stop  the  chair  but  then  let  it  go.  ‘Charge  17  ‘was  not 
established  by  the  evidence. 

: 

Charge  1 8- -  Student  a  7  a 

: 

| 

| 

S 

   

a 

— 

The 

  

  

n his  fingers. 

59.  .  Itv was  not  established  that,  during  the  period  July  1,  2009,  to  June  30,  2011, 
L.  on  the  fingers.  Respondent  denies  this  charge.  The first 

.  testified  that  Respondent hit  BEE 

|  “LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  | 

section aang  and  Factual  Findings  1- 3.  2 

did  not testify  about  Respondent. hittin: 
   

-  Le  ~ Jurisdiction  to proceed  i in  iis  matter  is  established  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

Iso  testified  that  BEE  was  unable  to speak.  Student  J. 
but  only  that  BEEE-ould  barely  talk  and  would  only  talk  to  certain 

Respondent hit  student. 
time  Respondent | heard  about  this  alles  ation  was  when  he read  the  Amended  Accusation 
the  hands 
dated  May  5,  2015.  Student  A 
with  a  ruler. 
testified  about  BE 
people. 
  
n  his  hands  with  a  ruler is  not — 
testimony  of  ANEEEG.,  that  Respondent  hit  B 
sufficient  to  establish this  charge.  Given  Miss  Lucy's presence  in  the  classroom,  that 
Respondent's classroom  and  Loeb's classroom  next  door  could  hear  each  other,  and  the  Status 
of  all  teachers  and  assistants  as  mandated  reporters,  the  scenario »  described  by  Al 
7 
testimony  was  not  credible, 

Education  Code  section  44932.  In  this case,  the  District  seeks  dismissal  solely  on  the  basis 
of  egregious  misconduct  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a1). 

   

misconduct  as  follows:  "For  purposes  of  this  chapter,  ‘egregious  misconduct! is  defined 
exclusively  as  immoral  conduct  that is  the  basis  for  an  offense  described in  Section  44010  or 
44011  of  this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the  Penal  Code. 
Education  Code  section  44010  defines  "sex  offense"  according  to  certain  specified 

The  grounds  for  the dismissal  of  a  teacher in  this  state  are  enumerated in 

*  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  defines  egregious 

  

indicated. 

a 

  

16 

2. 

3. 

™ 

  

provisions  of  the  Penal  Code,  including  but  not  limited  to  Penal  Code  sections  288  (lewd  or 
lascivious  act),  647.6  (annoying  or  molesting  a  child),  and  243.4  (sexual  battery).  Penal 
Code  sections  11165.2  to  111165.6  define  the  following  offenses  against  children:  section 
11165.2  (child  neglect),  section  11165.3  (willful  harming  or  endangering  a  child),  section 
11165.4  (unlawful  corporal  punishment  or  injury),  section  11165.5  (abuse  or  neglect  in  out- 
of-home  care),  and  section  11165.6  (child  abuse  or  neglect). 

4, 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can 
be  conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School 
District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811  (Weiland).) 

5. 

7. 

6. 

The  ALJ  considered  the  factors  enumerated  in  Evidence  Code  section  780  in 
determining  the  credibility  of  witness  testimony.  Those  factors  are:  (a)  his  demeanor  while 
testifying  and  the  manner  in  which  he  testifies;  (b)  the  character  of  his  testimony;  (c)  the 
extent  of  his  capacity  to  perceive,  to  recollect,  or  to  communicate  any  matter  about  which  he 
testifies;  (d)  the  extent  of  his  opportunity  to  perceive  any  matter  about  which  he  testifies;  (e) 
his  character  for  honesty  or  veracity  or  their  opposites;  (f)  the  existence  or  nonexistence  of  a 
bias,  interest,  or  other  motive;  (g)  a  statement  previously  made  by  him  that  is  consistent  with 
his  testimony  at  the  hearing;  (h)  a  statement  made  by  him  that  is  inconsistent  with  any  part  of 
his  testimony  at  the  hearing;  (i)  the  existence  or  nonexistence  of  any  fact  testified  to  by  him; 
(j)  his  attitude  toward  the  action  in  which  he  testifies  or  toward  the  giving  of  testimony;  and 
(k)  his  admission  of  untruthfulness.  (Evid.  Code,  §780,  subds.  (a)-(k).) 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  and  the  standard  of  proof  is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
engaged  in  egregious  misconduct,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1).  (Factual  Findings  1-59.) 

   

In  this  case,  the  charges  in  the  Amended  Accusation  were  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Respondent  had  been  working  as  a  special  education  teacher 
at  Meyler  for  about  14  years  when  parents  of  some  students  reported  complaints  to  the 
school  in  the  2011-2012  school  year.  Those  reports  were  the  primary  basis  for  the  charges  in 
the  Amended  Accusation.  The  District  presented  documentary  evidence  and  testimony  by 
students  and  parents  that  was  either  not  sufficient  and/or  not  persuasive  to  establish  the 
charges.  The  student  witnesses,  who  were  in  special  education,  testified  to  matters  that 
occurred  when  they  were  in  kindergarten  or  first  grade  and  approximately  six  years  old.  The 
students’  testimonies  described  scenarios  that  could  not  have  plausibly  occurred  in  the  school 
setting  at  Meyler,  especially  with  the  presence  of  a  special  education  assistant  in 

8. 

17 

Respondent’ s  classroom  and  the  room  next  door,  where  each  room  could  hear  sounds  from 
the  other  room,  and  the  teachers  and  assistants  being  mandated  reporters  obligated  to  report 
actual  or  ‘suspect  abuse  or  misconduct with  children.  Additionally,  Respondent testified 
persuasively  that  the  students  misconstrued  or  misunderstood  when  he  used  proper  or 
appropriate  behavior  intervention  techniques  to  address. behaviors by  M 
to  throwing  himself  to  the  floor  and  crying for  no  reason)  or  ABE 
throw  chairs.  and  books).  Respondent  used  District-approved  techniques  1  in  managing  the 
students in  his  class.  The  charges  against  Respondent  involved some  students  who  were 
non-verbal  or  had  limited  speaking  abilities  at the  time  they  were  in  Respondent’ s  class.  The 
testimony  of  parents  regarding  their  belief  that. Respondent. harmed  their  child  was 
pes 
speculative  and  uncorroborated  by  other  valid,  objective  ¢ evidence. 

who  was  prone 
who  had  a  tendency  to 

9. 

Based  on 1

  the  foregoing,  cause é

  does  not  exist t
 

to  dismiss  Respondent  from 

employment with  the  District,  on  the  basis of egregious  misconduct,  Pursuant  to section  — 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  OD,  44934,  1,  and  44944.  1. 

ORDER 

‘The  Amended  ‘Accusation  against  Respondent  Eric Tureaud  i is hereby  dismissed 

| 
he  shall remain  employed with  the  | Los s  Angeles  Unitied  School  District. 

and 

DATED:  August  21,2015 

     
| 

--ERLINDAG: 
i  Administrative  Law  Judge - 
»  Office o of Administrative  Hearings  7 

 

  

  

18 

