BEFORE THE 
 OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

 
OAH No. 2015090802 

 

 
In the Matter of the Disciplinary Proceeding 
to Dismiss: 
 
REED LEIFERMAN,  
 
 
 
 

Respondent. 

 
 

 

 

 
DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Kirk E. Miller, State of California, Office of 

James D. Allen, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Reed Leiferman. 

Patrick C. Wilson, School and College Legal Services, represented complainant, 

 
 
Administrative Hearings heard this matter on January 25-28, 2016, in Clearlake, California.1  
 
 
Konocti Unified School District.  
 
 
  
 
briefs.  The briefs were timely received.  Complainant’s brief was marked for identification 
as Exhibit 32, and Respondent’s brief was marked for identification as Exhibit AA.  
 
 
 
 

The record was left open until March 14, 2016, to permit the parties to file written 

The matter was submitted on March 14, 2016. 

 

 

 

ISSUES 

1. 

2. 

Is respondent evidently unfit for service as a teacher? 

Did respondent commit acts of dishonesty? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
teacher in the Konocti Unified School District?  
 
                                                 
 
as provided in Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1).  

3. 

If so, should respondent be dismissed from his position as a high school 

1 The parties stipulated that the matter would be heard by an administrative law judge, 

SUMMARY OF THE CASE 
 

Respondent is a high school teacher in the Konocti Unified School District in Lake 

 
County.  Respondent has a long history of medical problems with his left eardrum.  On 
October 10, 2014, the school fire alarm unexpectedly sounded, and respondent claims this 
loud noise further damaged his eardrum and caused it to bleed.  The school district asserts 
respondent was not injured, but took advantage of the alarm incident as a pretext to feign an 
ear injury.  Respondent denies any misconduct.  Based on its investigation, the district 
determined that respondent was not truthful about the incident and terminated respondent for 
dishonesty and evident unfitness for service.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

1. 

Respondent Reed Leiferman is a certificated employee of the Konocti Unified 

Procedural Background 
 
 
School District (KUSD or district).  He was hired in 1986 and continued his employment 
until 1990, when he resigned his position for personal reasons.  Respondent was rehired in 
1996 to teach high school social sciences, history and economics, and he coached football 
and baseball.  All of his employment was at Lower Lake High School in Clear Lake.  He 
continued to teach until 2014.   
 
On October 21, 2015, KUSD’s Superintendent of Schools, Donna Becnel, 
 
served respondent with a First Amended Statement of Charges, seeking his dismissal as a 
KUSD teacher.  Respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense and Request for Hearing, and 
this hearing followed. 
 

2. 

3. 

The Accusation seeks respondent’s dismissal based upon dishonesty and 
evident unfitness for service.  The Accusation arises out of the events that occurred in 
connection with a fire alarm that unexpectedly sounded on the afternoon of October 10, 
2014, while respondent was teaching a class at Lower Lake High School.  Respondent claims 
the alarm damaged his eardrum.  Following an investigation, KUSD concluded that 
respondent secretly placed “fake blood” on a towel and held it against his ear, to give the 
appearance of an injury, when in fact he was not injured.  Respondent told the KUSD 
investigator that he intended by his conduct for the district to falsely accuse him of feigning 
an injury, when the injury was in fact real, and based on the anticipated false accusation, he 
intended to sue the district.  Notwithstanding respondent’s intended ruse, he told the 
investigator that the blood on the towel was his own blood.  The termination is based upon 
this conduct.  
 
4. 

 Since the time he was a teenager, Respondent has suffered from various ear 

injuries, and he has twice had surgery on his left ear.  Respondent asserts that the October 10, 
2014 incident caused one more in this series of ear injuries, and that the real reason for his 
termination was because he had previously made factually correct, but critical statements 

 

2 

about the district.  Respondent asserts this criticism resulted in unwarranted animus toward 
him, but that he was truthful with the district regarding this ear injury. 

THE OCTOBER 10, 2014 FIRE ALARM 

KUSD’s Evidence 
 
 
 
 
High School during the sixth period of the day.  Respondent was teaching a class during this 
time.  When the alarm sounded, in accordance with the school’s procedures, he and his 
students left the classroom to assemble in their designated place on the school football field.  
All of the school’s student’s evacuated to that area. 

On October 10, 2015, the fire alarm unexpectedly sounded at Lower Lake 

5. 

 After respondent and all of respondent’s students had vacated the classroom, 

he stepped back inside by himself for at least one minute, and possibly up to several minutes.  
While respondent was alone in the classroom, he still retained the responsibility for 
supervising his students.  During this time, his students were not specifically supervised by 
any other teacher.  

Respondent was in possession of a bottle labeled “fake blood” that he 

apparently kept in his teacher’s desk.  After re-entering his classroom, respondent took some 
of the fake blood and placed it on the outside of his ear.  Prior to leaving the classroom, he 
left the desk drawer containing the fake blood open.  Respondent then proceeded to the 
football field and joined his sixth period class until the “all clear” sign was given, indicating 
that it was safe to return to the classrooms.  While respondent was on the field others 
observed that his ear appeared to be bleeding. 

Kris Tyner is a teacher whose classroom is located next to respondent’s, in the 

same two-classroom building.  Tyner testified that it was five to ten minutes between the 
time the alarm sounded and the time he next saw respondent on the field.  Tyner observed 
that respondent’s ear appeared to be bleeding and he walked over to him to look more 
closely.  At this point, Tyner touched the substance appearing to come from respondent’s ear.  
Upon doing so, he concluded the substance was not blood.  He described the substance as 
“gelatiny, [sic] and not fluid like blood.  It was an orangey [color] versus reddish in color.” 

Jessica Taliaferro is the principal at Lower Lake High School, and during the 

time respondent was on the field with his students, she observed that he appeared to be 
bleeding.  Once the alarm was cleared, she went to respondent’s classroom to check on him, 
and asked him to meet her in the staff room so that she could check his ear more closely.   

Connie Spriet is the school’s secretary and is also responsible for providing 

first-aid to the students, because she had previously received emergency medical technician 
training.  One of her children is also a hemophiliac, and as a result of the totality of her 
experience, she is “very familiar with what blood looks like.”   

 

 
6. 

 
7. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 
10. 

 

 

3 

11. 

Taliaferro requested Spriet to look after respondent when he came into the 

staff room following the October 10, 2014 fire alarm incident.  Spriet noted that respondent 
was holding a blue towel against his ear at that time.  Spriet also observed that respondent’s 
fingers were discolored from holding the towel, but she did not believe that they were 
discolored by blood.  She was not able to determine what the substance causing the 
discoloration was, but she testified: “It wasn’t blood… It was orange-ish.”2  

 
12. 

 
13. 

Taliaferro had trained as a nurse in United States Navy and had worked for 
four years in a Navy hospital’s emergency and obstetrics departments.  As a result of her 
training and experience she was very familiar with the appearance of blood and its 
characteristics; based on this experience, she was qualified at hearing as an expert in 
recognizing blood.  Based on her medical training, Taliaferro also had experience examining 
human ears, and once she and respondent were together in the staff room, she looked inside 
of his ear with a flashlight.  She was unable to determine the source for the apparent blood.  
She found the liquid was pooled on the outside of the earlobe, but the ear canal was clean.  
She did not think the substance that she observed on respondent’s ear and fingers looked like 
blood because it had a shiny color and it had no odor. 

Taliaferro asked respondent if he wanted her to call an ambulance for him, and 

he declined.  Respondent advised that he was not in pain and told her that his ear did not 
“pop like last time” and he was not dizzy.3  Nonetheless, Taliaferro requested another 
teacher, Joe Parker, to drive respondent home. 

 
14.  Melissa Lampert is the school’s vice principal, and she covered respondent’s 
last period class, because of respondent’s apparent injury.  While in respondent’s classroom, 
she noticed that the bottom desk drawer of his desk was open by about six inches, permitting 
her to see its contents.  She recalled the drawer was open this far because it presented an 
“obstacle” she had to walk around.  She looked inside of the drawer and noticed it contained 
a bottle labeled “fake blood.”  She did not initially think anything of this. 

 
15.  After the school day ended, Lampert “debriefed” with Taliaferro regarding the 

sixth period fire alarm and the school evacuation.  Taliaferro mentioned that the substance 
she observed on respondent’s ear did not appear to her to be blood.  Lampert was startled 
because of the bottle of fake blood she had just seen in respondent’s desk drawer and she told 
Taliaferro about her observation.  The two returned to respondent’s classroom together and 
took a picture of the bottle marked “fake blood.”  Taliaferro contacted Donna Becnel, and 
Becnel instructed her to take possession of the bottle.  It did not appear to Taliaferro that the 
bottle had been recently opened. 
                                                 
 
claims.  She credibly testified that she did nothing to discourage respondent from filing a 
claim for the October 2014 incident. 
 
 

2  Spriet provides employees with the forms required to file workers’ compensation 

3 Respondent’s ear had previously been injured in 2010 and in April 2014. 

 

4 

16. 

Respondent returned to Lower Lake High School the following day to pick up 
his motor scooter and he drove it back home.  Respondent did not seek medical attention for 
his ear.  He later told the district’s investigator he did not go to the local hospital following 
the incident, because he did not trust the quality of care he would receive, stating: “I’d rather 
bleed to death than go over there at the ER.”  However, respondent was aware his grandchild 
had been seen there for a serious emergency and had received excellent care.   

 
KUSD’S INVESTIGATION OF THE OCTOBER 14, 2014 INCIDENT 
 
17. 

The district hired an investigator, Chris Reynolds, to interview respondent 
regarding the events of October 10, 2014.  The interview took place and was recorded on 
October 23, 2014, at Lower Lake High School. 

Respondent told the investigator about prior fire alarm incidents and the 

problems they posed for his ear during the years he worked at Lower Lake High School.  He 
also described the events of the October 10, 2014 fire alarm in detail, and provided the 
investigator with what he said was the towel that he held against his ear once he realized that 
it was “bleeding.”  He told the investigator that if the towel were tested it would show the 
blood on the towel was his blood type and that the DNA on the towel would match his own 
DNA. 

Respondent told the investigator, and testified at hearing, that he had been 

upset for some time because of events that occurred while he had been on medical leave at 
the end of the prior school year; someone had taken from his classroom his district-issued 
laptop computer and a leather notebook he maintained containing confidential union 
information in anticipation of collective bargaining.  He believed someone from 
administration or the district office had taken the items.  In order to find out who had done 
so, he conceived a plan to identify the person responsible.   

 
20.   Respondent’s plan was to “plant” the fake blood in his desk, anticipating that it 

would be found.  In turn, the presence of the bottle would cause the district to conclude that 
he was “faking” his ear injury.  Respondent told the investigator that he wanted the district to 
think he was faking his injury, because he “wanted to take [his] employer to court.”  
Respondent anticipated the district would improperly take adverse action against him, and 
this would in turn create a basis for respondent to sue the district.  

Respondent explained to the investigator that the other part of his plan was to 
discover who had taken his laptop computer, or as respondent stated, to “set a trap for a rat.”  
He did this by leaving the desk drawer open so that the fake blood would be discovered.  The 
investigator asked respondent if he left the blood in his desk so someone would think that he 
was faking an injury, and respondent stated: “absolutely, like I said, the bait…”  

Respondent later testified at a deposition in connection with these proceedings, 

in which he reconfirmed the statements he made to the investigator.  In his deposition 
respondent testified that even though his left ear was actually bleeding as a result of the fire 

 
18. 

 
19. 

 
21. 

 
22. 

 

5 

alarm sounding, he wanted Becnel to think he was faking his injuries; he wanted her to 
believe that the blood was fake.  When asked if he wanted someone to make a false 
accusation against him, he responded “Yes.”  And when asked why, he stated “To prove the 
harassment.” 
 
23.  On July 1, 2015, respondent filed a complaint for damages against KUSD in 

25. 

24. 

26. 

BACKGROUND 

Respondent is a 1981 graduate of Morehead State College in Minnesota, 

the Superior Court of California, County of Lake, in which he alleged KUSD failed to 
provide him reasonable accommodation in light of his ear problems. 
 
Respondent’s Evidence 
 
 
 
 
where he earned a degree in political science.  In 1996, he received a Master’s degree from 
St. Mary’s College in health, physical education and recreation, with a concentration in 
sports administration.  
 
 
Respondent was first hired to teach at Lower Lake High School in 1986, and 
he worked there until 1990, when he went back to Minnesota to help care for his father.  He 
returned to Lower Lake High School in 1996 or 1997, first as the athletic director and later as 
a full-time teacher. 
 
 
Respondent began having problems with his left ear as a teenager, when he 
experienced ear infections, drainage, vertigo, dizziness, and loss of balance.  Ultimately a 
hole in his eardrum was discovered and he had surgery to repair it, but he still suffers from 
these conditions.  In the years preceding the October incident, respondent had received 
treatment for his ear at the University of California, San Francisco Medical Center, and from 
different local physicians. 
 
Respondent’s first workplace ear injury occurred on April 10, 2010, when a 
 
fire alarm sounded while respondent was in his classroom at Lower Lake High School.  He 
filed a workers’ compensation claim in connection with this injury.  Respondent was 
awarded a 12 percent permanent disability and the right to ongoing medical treatment.   
 
 
that occurred on April 15, 2014.  His treating physician provided a letter to the district stating 
that respondent should not return to work until he received further medical treatment.  Upon 
receipt of the physician’s letter, respondent was placed on leave by the school principal.  
Respondent described this as an “involuntary leave of absence.”  Respondent did not return 
to work until the start of the next school year, in the fall of 2014. 
 
 
meeting with the district to discuss workplace accommodations to prevent future ear injuries.  
The first meeting was held on August 1, 2014, at which time respondent requested to be 

Respondent was treated for ear issues following an unannounced fire alarm 

 Following the April 2014 incident, respondent requested an interactive 

27. 

28. 

29. 

 

6 

 

 
31. 

THE OCTOBER 10, 2014 FIRE ALARM  

It was during the summer of 2014, that respondent found the bottle of fake 

advised in advance of future fire drills; for the alarm volume to be turned down to the lowest 
permissible level; and for respondent to be assigned to an area to teach where the alarm does 
not sound.  The district agreed to provide respondent prior notification of scheduled alarms 
and the alarm volume was lowered; there is no part of any school that is free from alarm 
noise. 
  
 
30.  During the summer break, in July 2014, respondent returned to his classroom 
to begin preparing for the next semester, and discovered that a confidential leather notebook 
he maintained, and his district issued laptop computer, were both missing.  He kept the 
notebook in connection with his work on behalf of the teachers union, and it contained 
information he had collected about the incoming superintendent, Becnel.  School personnel 
ultimately located and returned the computer, but the notebook was not found.  He was never 
given an explanation about why someone had the computer or where it was found.  
Respondent felt the fact that the items were taken was evidence that he was being targeted by 
the district. 
 
 
blood, which had been kept in a shared storage closet near his classroom.  Respondent 
believed it was used in connection with the driver training course.   
 
 
 
 
When the alarm sounded, respondent followed the appropriate procedure.  He put in the 
earplugs he kept ready for an alarm, and picked up other items required by the alarm 
procedure, including the “red bag,” a flashlight, a clipboard with procedures, a sign saying 
“I’m OK,” and the advisory role sheet.5  When the alarm sounded, he also thought to himself, 
“now is the time to set the trap.”  Respondent left the room with his students, but after taking 
three strides toward the field, he returned to the classroom. 
 
 
back in the room “to set the trap” by opening his bottom desk drawer containing the fake 
blood.  Respondent testified he opened the drawer only an inch or inch and a half, and he did 
so to learn if someone was “going through [his] personal belongings.”  By this time he had 
his earplugs in, so that the sound of the alarm no longer created a problem for him.  He 
                                                 
 
visiting the school caused the alarm unexpectedly.  
 
 
morning advisory class.  The role sheet is used to be sure everyone is there. 
 
 
current role sheet; he only made reference to setting the “trap.” 

6 When respondent spoke to the investigator, he did not mention the need to pick up a 

5  After the students and teachers reach the football field, they regroup with their 

Respondent testified he returned to get an “updated role sheet.”6  He also came 

4 The evidence established that this was not a scheduled alarm.  A young child 

Respondent did not receive advance notice of the October 10, 2014 fire alarm.4  

32. 

33. 

 

7 

35.  After all of the students and teachers had gathered on the field, and the  

testified that he did not open the bottle of fake blood while he was in the classroom.  
Respondent testified he was in the room somewhere between 30 seconds and a minute.   
 
34.  While respondent was alone in the classroom, all of the elements of the 
 
scenario were running through his head.  He hoped by “setting the trap” to accomplish two 
things: (1) to learn who had taken his notebook and computer, and (2) to cause the district to 
falsely accuse him of faking an injury, when in fact his injury was real.  Respondent testified 
he did not know, at this point, if his ear was bleeding.  Nor did he explain why anyone would 
choose this moment to search is desk, and if this occurred, how that reveal the “rat” he was 
seeking.   
 
 
all-clear notice was given, respondent returned to his classroom.  There he pulled the left 
earplug out and covered his ear with a small towel he kept to clean the whiteboard.  Shortly 
thereafter, Taliaferro came in to check on him.  She asked him to go to the office because his 
ear appeared to be bleeding.  Respondent went to the faculty room, where he recalled that 
Taliaferro used a flashlight to examine his ear, but he denies that she ever touched it or that 
she was any closer than four feet away from him. 
 
36.  One of respondent’s colleagues took him home.  Respondent’s wife was not 
 
yet home and he felt nauseous, so he lay down on the sofa.  He later threw the towel he was 
using for his ear “under the utility sink in [the] laundry room,” where he keeps similar items 
before they are washed.  His wife later took a picture of the towel; he states it was never 
washed.   
 
 
the family on a scheduled outing with their grandchildren.  By 11:00 a.m. he was feeling 
better and he drove his truck back to school in order to pick up the motor scooter and ride it 
home.  He left the truck at school.  April Leiferman, respondent’s wife, stated that the ear 
continued to issue a small amount of blood over the weekend.  Respondent felt able to return 
to work on the Monday following the incident. 
 
 
willingness to do so to the fact that he has become familiar with the course of similar ear 
injuries and his dedication to his work.  Respondent did not seek medical attention over the 
weekend, and he did not file a workers’ compensation claim.  Spriet maintains the required 
workers’ compensation forms.  Respondent asserts she told him claims must be filed on the 
date of the injury, and he had not done this.  He testified that based on her purported 
statement, he felt he was precluded from filing a claim.  
 
 
district’s human resources director and told to meet with an investigator the district had hired 
to review the incident.  Respondent did not wish to do so because his lawyer was out of the 
country, but he received a letter dated October 21, 2016, that stated if he failed to attend the 
meeting the “District may draw an adverse conclusion and your conduct will constitute 

Respondent returned to work the Monday, October 13, 2014.  He attributes his 

 The next morning, Saturday, Respondent did not feel well, so he did not join 

Following the October 2014 incident, respondent was contacted by the 

39. 

37. 

38. 

 

8 

  

43. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE OF DISTRICT HARASSMENT 

Respondent expressed his anger and frustration regarding his missing  

Respondent acknowledged he was frustrated with his job and that during the 

Respondent felt that he was “targeted” by the district.  He felt that he was 

insubordination.”  Respondent felt obliged to give the interview; he appeared on the 
designated date and with a union representative rather than with his lawyer.  
 
Respondent answered the questions posed by the investigator, and he gave the 
 
investigator the towel he said he held over his ear during the event, along with what he said 
was a pillowslip from home containing a blood stain.  It was during this interview that 
respondent described the “trap” he planned and executed.  
 
 
 
 
improperly placed on involuntary leave in April 2014 by his former principal, Jeff Dickson.  
Dickson’s decision to place respondent on leave was based on a letter from respondent’s 
physician, stating respondent should not return to work until after his next otolaryngology 
appointment.  Dickson instructed respondent to leave the school in front of his students, 
which respondent felt demonstrated a lack of respect. 
 
 
district-issued laptop computer and his personal notebook, and his feeling that they were 
improperly taken by the District or school administrators while he was on leave.  
 
 
school year, he was not reluctant to share his frustrations with other teachers and 
administrators.  He had seen many changes in administration, including nine different 
principals during the time he taught at Lower Lake High School, and he believed these 
changes contributed to a deterioration of faculty morale.  At one point he left a voicemail 
message at the district office in which he referred to the district as a “shithole,” and he wrote 
words such as “mole,” “narc” and “Judas” on a white board in the faculty room.  A 
photograph of his writings was taken and retained, without his knowledge.  Respondent felt 
the photo was taken by a district or school administrator, and that retaining the photo without 
his knowledge violated state law. 
 
  
and understood he had done an excellent job teaching the students.  However, his class 
schedule was changed and he was assigned to teach other classes, without any prior 
notification to him or input from him. 
 
 
Becnel.  Papers associated with a project April Leiferman was working on were removed 
from her office without explanation.  She believes they were taken by Becnel.  April 
Leiferman also testified that Becnel told her that respondent was compromising April 
Leiferman’s position as a district employee.   
 
 
46.  April Leiferman was present during the interactive meetings between 
respondent and the district, when respondent’s request for accommodation was discussed.  

 April Leiferman was an assistant district superintendent and felt threatened by 

Respondent had taught government and economics to seniors for many years 

44. 

45. 

 

 

9 

47. 

LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF RESPONDENT’S TOWEL 

She felt the district’s legal counsel was unnecessarily aggressive and rude during the 
meetings. 
 
 
 
 
Respondent arranged for the towel he maintains he held against his ear during 
the October incident to be sent to a laboratory for DNA testing.  The testing was arranged by 
Dr. Mersedeh Eghdama, who is a chiropractor and certified professional collector technician.  
Dr. Eghdama described how she collected the evidence that was tested to determine the 
presence of respondent’s DNA on the towel. 
 
 
48.  Dr. Eghdama used Q-tips and sterile water to take samples from six areas of 
the towel at issue.  She also took saliva samples from respondent’s mouth.  Separately, she 
swabbed samples of the fake blood.  The items were then separately packed and marked.  All 
of these items were sent to the reference lab for DNA testing.   
 
 
as she understood them that were received from the laboratory.  The testing confirmed that 
respondent’s DNA was found on the towel she labeled as the one he used on October 10, 
2014.  Respondent asserted that the presence of his DNA on the towel was proof that his ear 
was bleeding during the October 10, 2014 incident.  The lab did not test to determine if 
human blood was on the towel.   
 
 
 
Respondent’s performance evaluations for 2010 and 2011 showed that he “met 
 
or exceeded” the performance standards in all categories that were rated.  In 2011 the school 
principal, Jeff Dickson, commented in the evaluation: 
 

49.  Dr. Eghdama is not herself an expert in DNA testing, but described the results 

RESPONDENT’S PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 

50. 

[Respondent] connects students’ prior knowledge with learning 
goals, uses a variety of instructional techniques and gives his 
students “voice and choice” in the learning process.  His 
students are fully engaged on a consistent basis and he 
emphasizes problem solving and the development of critical 
thinking skills. 
 
[Respondent] has created a very pleasant learning environment 
that is conducive to both teaching and learning.  He and his 
students display a mutual level of respect and fairness and his 
activities foster group responsibility.  His students are well 
behaved due to his organization, engagement and use of routine 
and procedures.  Instructional time is used very effectively.   
 

51.  William Macdougall preceded Becnel as the district superintendent and 

testified on respondent’s behalf.  He credibly testified that respondent is a good teacher.  

 

10 

Credibility 

 

54. 

53. 

52. 

THE DISTRICT’S DISHONESTY ALLEGATION 

Education Code section 44933, subdivision (a)(3), provides a permanent 

Respondent’s testimony regarding blood coming from his ear lacked 

 
 
credibility as compared with the testimony of Taliaferro, Spriet and Tyner, who each 
independently came to the same conclusion that the substance they saw on respondent’s ear 
was not blood.  Neither was respondent as credible as Spriet with regard to the procedure for 
filing a workers’ compensation claim; the evidence did not support respondent’s assertion 
that Spriet advised him the claim must be made on the same day the injury occurs.   
 
Respondent’s credibility was further undermined by his own admission that he 
 
intended from the start of the incident to mislead the district in order to create an opportunity 
for litigation, which he subsequently filed.  The most positive inference that can be drawn 
from respondent’s statements to the investigator and his testimony at hearing is that he was 
telling the truth about his intention to deceive and mislead.   
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
 
employee of a school district may be dismissed for dishonesty. 
 
 
required ongoing medical attention.  However, this case is not about respondent’s 
complicated medical history, but about his conduct on October 10, 2014, and his own 
explanation regarding his conduct once it was called into question by KUSD.   
 
 
Three witnesses, Tyner, Spriet and Taliaferro, closely observed the substance 
in and around respondent’s left ear on October 10, 2014, and each separately concluded that 
it was not blood.  One of the witnesses, Taliaferro, had by her training and experience 
expertise in working with and recognizing the characteristics of human blood.  Her expertise 
also qualified her to examine respondent’s ear for a blood source, which she did.  Her 
conclusion was that the ear was not bleeding.  The testimony offered by these witnesses was 
persuasive. 
 
Respondent offered a laboratory report which demonstrated that his DNA was 
 
present on the blue towel he says he held over his ear on October 10, 2014.  This is, however, 
all that the DNA evidence demonstrated.  The report did not state blood, in addition to the 
DNA, was present on the towel, and even if it had, the report could not have demonstrated 
when the blood was placed on the towel.  The laboratory report did not establish that 
respondent’s injury was genuine. 
 
Respondent maintains that the unplanned fire alarm damaged his eardrum, 
 
causing it to bleed and requiring him to cover his left ear with a small towel to collect the 
blood.  He told the district’s investigator, however, that by having the fake blood in his desk, 

Respondent has for decades struggled with inner ear problems that have 

55. 

56. 

57. 

 

11 

58. 

THE DISTRICT’S EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE ALLEGATION  

Based on respondent’s dishonesty, the district asserts that he is evidently unfit 

he intended to create the appearance that he was faking the ear injury, in order to cause the 
district to falsely accuse him of misconduct, setting up the opportunity for respondent to in 
turn bring legal action against the district.  It is difficult to reconcile respondent’s statements 
with his actions.  On the one hand, he claims that when the alarm went off he immediately 
thought “now is the time to set the trap,” but as he was first making this calculation, he 
acknowledged his ear was not then bleeding.  Whether respondent had planted the blood over 
the summer of 2014 and planned for months to mislead the district, or if he thought of this 
ruse immediately upon hearing the fire alarm is irrelevant: under either scenario, it was 
respondent’s intention to mislead the district.  Moreover, he was then untruthful about the 
injury.  The evidence established that respondent was dishonest, and that he attempted to use 
this dishonesty to his advantage.  
 
 
 
 
to work as a teacher.  When considering whether a teacher’s conduct constitutes evident 
unfitness for service, a determination must be made as to whether the conduct at issue, here 
dishonesty, demonstrates that the teacher is unfit to teach under the eight factors established 
by the California Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 
214, 229-230.  These factors are: (1)  The likelihood that respondent’s conduct may have 
adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of any expected adversity; (3) 
the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held 
by respondent; (5) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 
conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 
(7) the likelihood of recurrence of the conduct; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action 
may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights of respondent or 
other teachers.  Not all of the Morrison factors must be considered, only the more pertinent 
ones.  (West Valley-Mission Community College District (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.)  
Here, the relevant factors are: the potential adverse effect on students and teachers; the 
conduct’s proximity in time; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives; and the 
likelihood of the conduct reoccurring.   
 
 
 
 
behalf of the school district, as well as the emotional cost and loss of trust associated with 
disciplining a colleague for obvious dishonesty.  This conduct has an ongoing disruptive 
effect at every level of the academic community – the district office, the school’s 
administration, the school’s staff, and other members of the faculty.  Respondent has 
steadfastly questioned the integrity of employees at each level, while insisting on the truth of 
his own scenario, which he admitted was built as a deception.  Respondent’s conduct had 
serious adverse effects on the school and district personnel. 
 
 
 

Respondent’s “trap to catch a rat” resulted in loss of time and expense on 

Adverse Effects 

59. 

 

 

12 

 

 

 

61. 

63. 

60. 

Proximity in Time 

Likelihood of Reoccurrence 

Blameworthiness of the Motives 

There are no mitigating circumstances and there is no basis to justify 

The term “evident unfitness for service” has been discussed in numerous 

Respondent’s conduct was recent and it arose within and as part of the 

 
 
 
school’s day-to-day operations.  
 
 
 
 
respondent’s scheme or conduct.   
 
 
 
62.  While this particular set of facts is hardly likely to be repeated, respondent’s 
 
willingness to engage in such an ongoing, far reaching and dishonest plot, without a hint of 
remorse, makes the possibility of future dishonest conduct reasonably probable.  This 
criterion was established. 
 
 
cases, but has generally come to mean a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 
merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 
school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429.)  The next issue then, is whether respondent’s 
dishonesty is a character trait that makes him evidently unfit to teach.   
 
 
intentionally wanted to mislead the district into taking an adverse action against him.  He 
reconfirmed this intention in a deposition given on December 2, 2015, and then again at the 
hearing in this case.  Having achieved one of the outcomes he was seeking -- the district took 
an adverse action when it issued a statement of charges based on respondent’s dishonesty -- 
respondent now wishes to unwind the consequences he seems to have expected to flow from 
his plan.  Respondent now asserts that the adverse action taken by the district was the result 
of unwarranted animus, not his misconduct, and apparently not his ruse.  Respondent’s own 
evidence established that he was difficult to work with, but the district did not assert 
respondent’s sometimes difficult demeanor as a basis for termination.  Respondent did not 
establish that the district had any improper pretext for his termination; however, respondent’s 
own testimony described a stream of dishonest acts.  These included forming a scheme with 
the intention to mislead the district, feigning an injury, and then repeating the 
misrepresentation about the “injury” to the investigator, in a deposition, and at the hearing. 
The dishonesty here is not a single, isolated incident of bad judgment.  This compilation of 
repeated dishonest acts established dishonesty as a character trait that makes respondent 
evidently unfit for service.  
 
 
 
 

  
Shortly after the October 10, 2014 incident, respondent told the investigator that he 

 

13 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

The causes for dismissal alleged in this matter are dishonesty and evident 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(3) provides a teacher can be 

 Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(3) provides a teacher can be 

 
 
unfitness for service.  The standard of proof applied in this proceeding is preponderance of 
the evidence.  (Gardner v. The Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 
(164 Cal. App. 1035, 1039-1040.) 
 
Dishonesty 
 
 
dismissed for dishonesty.  By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 3, 6-16, 18-23, 
32-34, 40, 55 and 57, cause was established to dismiss respondent for dishonesty.   
 
Evident Unfitness 
 
   
dismissed for “[e]vident unfitness for service.”  By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 
3, 6-16, 18-23, 32-34, 40, 55, and 57-63, it was established that respondent is unfit for 
service pursuant to Education Code section 4493, subdivision (k) (3), as that term is 
interpreted by the Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d 
214, and the Court of Appeal in Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 
Professional Competence, supra, 2 Cal.App 4th 1429.   
 
Notwithstanding respondent’s positive evaluations and long-time commitment to 
    
teaching, respondent is unfit for service for two reasons:  First, he was dishonest when he 
created the impression he had incurred a workplace injury when he was not in fact injured. 
Second, this misrepresentation was then compounded by insisting the injury was real when  
he repeated the story during the investigation, in his subsequent deposition, and in the 
hearing.   
 
 
involved his teaching colleagues, his immediate supervisors at the high school, and the 
district superintendent.  In constructing his scheme he has explicitly called into question both 
his colleagues and his supervisors’ integrity, without any reasonable basis to do so.  To 
continue respondent’s employment as a teacher would be to extend on an ongoing basis a 
relationship where respondent’s trust has been lost, the working environment has been 
compromised, and students would be learning from the same individual who created a 
misrepresentation for the purpose of causing these events to occur.  The evidence established 
that respondent should be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent’s complex scheme of misrepresentation and deception ultimately 

 

14 

Respondent Reed Leiferman is dismissed from his positon as a permanent certificated 

ORDER 

 
 
employee of the Konicti Unified School District.                                      
 
 
DATED: April 15, 2016 
 

a  DocuSigned  by: 

Pou 

oa 

would

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

                                                  
 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
KIRK E. MILLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

15 

