BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FRESNO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of: 

OLIVIA ECHEVERRIA-BIS,

OAH No. 2015070290

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence (CPC) of 
the Fresno Unified School District in Fresno, California, on December 7 through 11, 2015.
The CPC members were Jacqueline S. Tuttle, Andrew Bolls, and Karen J. Brandt, 
Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings. 

David A. Moreno, Attorney at Law, represented Fresno Unified School District 

(District or FUSD).

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented Olivia Echeverria-Bis (respondent),

who was present for the entire hearing.

This matter was submitted for decision when the CPC concluded its deliberations on 

December 28, 2015.

Respondent is an elementary school teacher.  The District seeks to terminate her 
employment due to unsatisfactory performance.  The District established that, after observing
and evaluating respondent and giving her adequate assistance and opportunity to improve 
and address the charges against her, she failed to bring her performance up to a satisfactory
level.  The District’s dismissal of respondent is therefore sustained.

Respondent.

DECISION

SUMMARY

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee in the District.  She has a 

multiple subject teaching credential that authorizes her to teach grades kindergarten through 
eight. She also has a master’s degree in Education and a Reading Specialist credential. She
has been employed by the District for about 11 years. In the past, she worked as a
certificated tutor and an elementary school teacher in the fourth and fifth grades.  In the 
2013/2014 and 2014/2015 school years, she was a third grade teacher at Winchell
Elementary School (Winchell).

2.

The District seeks to terminate respondent’s employment for unsatisfactory

performance, based upon allegations that she failed to: (1) check for student understanding
throughout each lesson and adapt her teaching to reflect the assessed academic and 
behavioral needs of all students; (2) plan lessons that utilized a variety of strategies and 
resources to meet her students’ diverse learning needs; (3) assign students to work with 
partners or in groups to ensure that students were actively listening and participating; (4) 
create an environment in which students demonstrated positive behavior and consistent 
participation; (5) make adjustments to instructional time so that all students remained
engaged and challenged; (6) use sufficient subject matter knowledge and modeling to support 
student learning and consistently require students to explain their thinking and justify their
responses; (7) implement strategies to facilitate discussion, and extend students’ thinking; (8) 
ensure that each instructional strategy was related to learning goals and objectives articulated 
to students; (9) include all four elements of Classroom Foundations in each lesson, including 
a closure that required students to summarize their learning and reflect on criteria for 
success; and (10) develop lesson plans that included various levels of English proficiency
and accommodations for special needs and English learner (EL or ELD) students. 

Standards and Evaluations

3.

The Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the District and the 

Fresno Teachers Association (FTA) for the period from July 1, 2013, through June 30, 2016, 
sets forth the evaluation and professional standards for the District’s certificated employees.
In relevant part, the CBA states:

The parties endorse a high level of professional preparation and 
competence for all members of the bargaining unit.  Attaining 
and maintaining high professional standards requires a joint 
commitment to provide the assistance, support, and proper 
teaching environment needed for the success of the bargaining 
unit member.  Standards shall be clear and consistent. The
parties shall use the California Standards for the Teaching 
Profession (CSTP); and the jointly developed Continuum of 
Standards for the Teaching Profession, which includes the CSTP 
Indicators (CSTP Continuum), will serve as the guide for 
reflective practice, continuous improvement, and evaluation.

2

4.

The six CSTPs relevant in this matter are:1

Standard 1

Engaging and supporting all students in learning.

Standard 2

Creating and maintaining effective environments for 
student learning.

Standard 3

Understanding and organizing subject matter for student
learning.

Standard 4

Planning instruction and designing learning experiences 
for all students.

Standard 5

Assessing students for learning.

Standard 6

Developing as a professional educator.

5.

For each of these six CSTPs, the District has developed a continuum of 

professional standards upon which teachers are evaluated, which include multiple elements
for each of the CSTPs.

6.

For the observations and evaluations performed during the 2013/2014 school 

year, the District used the following ratings:  Not Observed, Meets Standards – Proficient,
Meets Standards – Minimally, and Does Not Meet Standards. 

7.

For the observations and evaluations performed during the 2014/2015 school 
year, the District used the following ratings: Not Observed, Demonstrates Expertise, Meets 
Standards, Growth Expected, and Not Meeting Standards.

8.

As set forth in the District’s Continuum of Standards for the Teaching

Profession, the District has four Classroom Foundations that must be present in each lesson a
certificated employee teaches: (1) objective (what students should know, understand, and be 
able to do); (2) instruction aligned to the objective (how the instructional activities line up 
with the objective); (3) assessment (how the teacher determines if the students are “getting 
it,” and monitors and adjusts the lesson accordingly); and (4) closure (how the teacher sums
up and closes the lesson).

Lesson Observations, Performance Evaluations, and Teacher Development Plans for the 
2013/2014 School Year

9.

Sandra Aguayo began working as the principal at Winchell in the 2013/2014 
school year.  Prior to becoming Winchell’s principal, Ms. Aguayo was a vice principal at a 

1 In its forms and documents, the District used both Roman and Arabic numerals to

number the CSTP Standards. This decision will use Arabic numerals.

3

different District elementary school.  Before that, Ms. Aguayo worked as a District 
instructional coach for two years.  Beginning in the fall 1999, Ms. Aguayo worked as a third 
and fifth grade teacher at a charter school.

10.

The 2013/2014 school year was the first year the District began implementing 

the Common Core standards.  During this first year of Common Core, the District did not 
evaluate teachers who had been rated as meeting all standards proficiently during previous
school years.  Teachers who had been rated as not meeting standards the previous year were 
required to be evaluated during the 2013/2014 school year. 2 Principals had discretion to
evaluate teachers who had been rated as meeting standards minimally the previous year.
There were no evaluations of respondent offered into evidence for any school years prior to 
the 2013/2014 school year.  But there was testimony that respondent had received ratings of 
Meets Standards - Minimally before the 2013/2014 school year. Ms. Aguayo decided to 
evaluate respondent during the 2013/2014 school year.

11.

First Semester Lesson Observations. Ms. Aguayo observed respondent’s 
third-grade class during the first semester of the 2013/2014 school year.  On October 27,
2013, Ms. Aguayo conducted a formal observation of respondent’s classroom. Ms. Aguayo
also observed respondent’s classroom formally on November 19, 2013. Respondent
requested that the November 19, 2013 observation be thrown out and redone.  A redo
observation was conducted on December 16, 2013. Vice Principal Christina Preas joined
Ms. Aguayo for the observation on December 16, 2013.  Respondent was notified before the 
formal observations.  She provided lesson plans for Ms. Aguayo to review before observing 
the class.

12. Ms. Aguayo and Ms. Preas took literal notes of their observations when they

were in respondent’s classroom.  After the lessons, Ms. Aguayo typed her observations in
formats that addressed each of the CSTPs, and included detailed data of Ms. Aguayo’s
findings and her conclusions as to whether respondent met each of the CSTP elements.  Ms. 
Aguayo met with respondent after the lesson observations to review her findings and 
conclusions.

13.

For the October 27, 2013 lesson observation, Ms. Aguayo rated respondent as 

either Meets Standards – Proficient or Meets Standards – Minimally on all the observed 
CSTP elements. For the December 16, 2013 lesson observation, Ms. Aguayo rated 
respondent as either Meets Standards – Minimally or Does Not Meet Standards on all the 
observed CSTP elements other than CSTP 6.6, managing professional responsibilities to
maintain motivation and commitment to all students, on which Ms. Aguayo rated respondent 
as Meets Standards - Proficient.

14.

The CSTP elements on which respondent was rated as not meeting standards

for the December 16, 2013 lesson observation were:

2 Probationary and temporary teachers were also evaluated during the 2013/2014 

school year.

4

Promoting critical thinking through inquiry, problem

1.5
solving, and reflection.

1.6 Monitoring student learning and adjusting instruction 
while teaching.

Creating physical or virtual learning environments that 

2.2
promote student learning, reflect diversity, and encourage
constructive and productive interactions among students.

Creating a rigorous learning environment with high 

2.4
expectations and appropriate support for all students.

2.7

Using instructional time to optimize learning.

Demonstrating knowledge of subject matter, academic 

3.1
content standards, and curriculum frameworks,

Utilizing instructional strategies that are appropriate to 

3.4
the subject matter.

Addressing the needs of English Learners and students 

3.6
with special needs to provide equitable access to the content.

Planning instruction that incorporates appropriate 

4.4
strategies to meet the learning needs of all students.

Applying knowledge to the purposes, characteristics, and 

5.1
uses of different types of assessment.

Reflecting on teaching practice in support of student 

6.1
learning.

15.

For the December 16, 2013 lesson observation, Ms. Aguayo raised particular 

concerns with respondent’s failure to effectively monitor students’ learning during the lesson 
and adjust her instruction while teaching to meet the needs of all students.  Ms. Aguayo also 
raised concerns that respondent asked students mainly yes/no questions with no follow-up
questions about how the students had arrived at their responses in order to check for student
understanding. Ms. Aguayo was further concerned that respondent had not planned activities 
and did not prompt students to interact with each other during instruction to optimize 
instructional time to meet student needs.

16.

Preliminary Evaluation. On December 23, 2013, respondent received a 
Preliminary Evaluation dated December 19, 2013. She was rated as Meets Standards –
Minimally on CSTPs 1, 5, and 6, and as Does Not Meet Standards on CSTPs 2, 3, and 4.

5

The Preliminary Evaluation included a summary of Ms. Aguayo’s classroom observations.
Ms. Aguayo set forth her findings and conclusions with regard to each of the CSTPs.

With regard to CSTP 1, Ms. Aguayo noted that respondent “struggled to engage 
students in critical thinking, problem solving, and reflection.”  As a result, students “had 
minimal opportunities to engage in learning experiences that would support their 
development in problem solving, reflections, autonomy, interaction, and choice.”

With regard to CSTP 2, Ms. Aguayo noted that respondent “struggled to maintain

high standards for individual and group behavior.”  As a result, “students were not immersed
in a learning environment that supported and fostered positive student behavior for all 
students.”  Ms. Aguayo noted further that, during the observations, respondent “did not use 
instructional time to optimize learning.”  As a result, “students spent instructional time 
waiting for work to be checked or focused on activities not align[ed] to grade level concepts 
and/or skills.”

With regard to CSTP 3, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “struggled to organize 
curriculum to facilitate student understanding of subject matter.”  As a result, “all students
were not provided the necessary opportunities, supports, and instructional strategies to 
master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 4, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “did not consistently
develop short term instructional plans to support student learning.”  As a result, “all students
were not provided the necessary opportunities to master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 5, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “has been able to use 

assessment information to share timely and comprehensible feedback with students and their 
families, but struggled to use data to plan, differentiate, and modify instruction consistently.”
As a result, “students’ assessed and individual needs did not inform instructional decisions
consistently.”

With regard to CSTP 6, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “struggles to reflect on 
teaching practice in support of student learning and engaging in continuous and purposeful
professional growth and development.”  As a result, “students have not benefitted from
consistent delivery of content and improved instructional practices based on reflection and 
feedback.”

17.

First Teacher Development Plan. On January 31, 2014, respondent received a 

Teacher Development Plan (First TDP) for the second semester of the 2013/2014 school 
year. The purpose of the First TDP was to identify the teaching standards that required 
improvement and to set forth strategies to help respondent improve her performance.  The 
First TDP identified CSTPs 2, 3, and 4 as the standards as to which respondent required 
improvement. Specifically, the First TDP identified the following elements within these 
three CSTPs: 

6

Establishing and maintaining learning environments that 

2.3
are physically, intellectually, and emotionally safe.

Developing, communicating, and maintaining high 

2.5
standards for individual and group behavior.

2.7

Using instructional time to optimize learning.

Demonstrating knowledge of subject matter, academic 

3.1
content standards, and curriculum frameworks.

Organizing curriculum to facilitate student understanding 

3.3
of the subject matter.

Planning instruction that incorporates appropriate 

4.4
strategies to meet the learning needs of all students.

Adapting instructional plans and curricular materials to 

4.5
meet the assessed learning needs of all students.

The First TDP included SMART goals for each of the identified CSTP elements.  For 

example, for CSTP 2.3, the First TDP stated that respondent would “facilitate positive and 
productive interactions by creating and maintaining partnership and group roles, structures,
procedures and/or norms.”  For CSTP 2.5, the First TDP stated that respondent would “create 
an environment in which students demonstrate positive behavior and consistent 
participation.”

The First TDP also included strategies and activities to implement the SMART goals 

for each CSTP element.  For example, with regard to CSTP 2.3, the First TDP stated:  “1.
Assign students a partner (Partner A/B). Practice active listening skills by having 
partnerships paraphrase and/or repeat partner responses.  2.  Establish team 
roles/responsibilities and teach and practice team roles.”  For CSTP 2.5, the strategies and
activities included: “1. Implement a system in which students are called on randomly (pose
the question first and then call on a student).  2. Provide students think time when they are
asked questions.  3. Maintain a 3:1 ratio of positive to negative interactions. 4. Implement a 
group/table points system and recognize and foster collaboration and participation.  5. 
Establish classroom norms for independent, partner, and group work.”

The First TDP also identified support structures and resources for respondent. For

example, for CSTP 2.5, the First TDP set forth the following support structures and 
resources:

Provide [respondent] suggestions such as: Write student 

1.
names on popsicle sticks, deck of cards, or any system that 
provides calling on students randomly.

7

Principal provide literature resources about student think 

2.
time.

Provide feedback by tallying positive to negative 

3.
interactions during formal and informal observations.

Provide ideas and suggestions on how to leverage 

4.
team/group point to foster student collaboration and provide 
peer observations to observe best practices.

5.

Provide CHAMPS strategies.

In addition, the First TDP included a timeline for completion, including benchmark

dates to monitor progress.

18.

Second Semester Lesson Observations. During the second semester of the 

2013/2014 school year, Ms. Aguayo observed respondent’s class on February 14, 2014, and 
April 2, 2014, and wrote up her findings and conclusions on lesson observation forms. After
each observation, Ms. Aguayo met with respondent to discuss Ms. Aguayo’s lesson 
observations.

19.

For the February 14, 2014 lesson observation, Ms. Aguayo rated respondent as 

either Meeting Standards – Minimally or Does Not Meet Standards for all the observed 
CSTP elements, except CSTPs 6.6 (managing professional responsibilities to maintain 
motivation and commitment to all students) and 6.7 (demonstrating professional
responsibility, integrity, and ethical conduct), on which Ms. Aguayo rated respondent as 
Meets Standards – Proficient. The same was true for Ms. Aguayo’s April 2, 2014 lesson
observation, except that Ms. Aguayo also rated respondent as Meets Standards – Proficient
on CSTP 6.3 (collaborating with colleagues and the broader professional community to
support teacher and student learning). Specifically, for the April 2, 2014 lesson observation, 
Ms. Aguayo rated respondent as not meeting standards on the following CSTP elements:

Connecting learning to students’ prior knowledge, 

1.2
backgrounds, life experiences, and interests.

Connecting subject matter to meaningful, real-life

1.3
contexts.

Promoting critical thinking through inquiry, problem 

1.5
solving, and reflection.

1.6 Monitoring student learning and adjusting instruction 
while teaching. 

8

Creating a rigorous learning environment with high 

2.4
expectations and appropriate support for all students.

2.7

Using instructional time to optimize learning.

Utilizing instructional strategies that are appropriate to 

3.4
the subject matter.

Using and adopting resources, technologies, and 

3.5
standards-aligned instructional materials, including adopted 
materials, to make subject matter accessible to all students.

3.6
Addressing the needs of English Learners and students
with special needs to provide equitable access to the content.

Planning instruction that incorporates appropriate 

4.4
strategies to meet the learning needs of all students.

Adapting instructional plans and curricular materials to 

4.5
meet the assessed learning needs of all students.

Using assessment data to establish learning goals and to 

5.4
plan, differentiate, and modify instruction.

20.

Summary Evaluation. On May 8, 2014, respondent received her Summary

Evaluation for the 2013/2014 school year, dated May 2, 2014. In the Summary Evaluation,
respondent was rated as Meets Standards – Minimally on CSTPs 3, 5, and 6.  She was rated 
as Does Not Meet Standards on CSTPs 1, 2, and 4.  In the Summary Evaluation, Ms. Aguayo
summarized her lesson observations. She set forth her findings and conclusions with regard 
to each of the CSTPs.

With regard to CSTP 1, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “rarely provided students 
opportunities to engage in critical thinking, problem solving, and reflection and rarely made
instructional adjustments based on student responses, thinking, or understanding of concepts 
and skills.”  As a result, students “were not immersed in an engaging learning environment 
with the support of appropriate instructional strategies and/or supports.”

With regard to CSTP 2, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “rarely provided a 
rigorous learning environment with high expectations and appropriate support for all students 
and frequently did not use instructional time to optimize learning.” As a result, “students 
were not immersed in a learning environment that supported and fostered positive student
behavior for all students and productive student interactions.” Ms. Aguayo also found that 
“instructional time was not used to optimize learning.”  As a result, students “spent 
instructional time waiting for work to be checked or focused on activities not align[ed] to 
grade level concepts and/or skills.”

9

With regard to CSTP 3, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to organize 
curriculum to facilitate student understanding of subject matter.”  As a result, “all students
were minimally provided the necessary opportunities, supports, and instructional strategies to 
master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 4, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “did not consistently 
develop short term instructional plans to support student learning.”  As a result, “all students 
were not provided opportunities to master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 5, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “has been able to use 

assessment information to share timely and comprehensible feedback with students and their 
families, but struggled to use data to plan, differentiate, and modify instruction consistently.”
As a result, “students’ assessed and individual needs often did not lead to instructional 
adjustments for follow up lesson or modifications.”

With regard to CSTP 6, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “inconsistently reflected

on teaching practice in support of student learning and engaging in continuous and 
purposeful professional growth and development.”  As a result, “students have not benefitted 
from consistent delivery of content and improved instructional practices based on reflections 
and feedback.”

21.

Second TDP. On June 3, 2014, respondent received a TDP (Second TDP) for
the fall semester of the 2014/2015 school year. In the Second TDP, Ms. Aguayo identified 
CSTPs 1, 2, and 4 as the ones on which respondent required improvement.  Specifically, the 
Second TDP identified the following elements within these three CSTPs: 

1.1

Using knowledge of students to engage them in learning.

Using a variety of instructional strategies, resources, and 

1.4
technologies to meet students’ diverse learning needs.

Promoting critical thinking through inquiry, problem

1.5
solving, and reflection.

1.6 Monitoring student learning and adjusting instruction 
while teaching.

Establishing and maintaining learning environments that 

2.3
are physically, intellectually, and emotionally safe.

2.6
Employing classroom routines, procedures, norms, and 
supports for positive behavior to ensure a climate in which all 
students can learn.

2.7

Using instructional time to optimize learning.

10

4.2

Establishing and articulating goals for student learning.

Planning instruction that incorporates appropriate 

4.4
strategies to meet the learning needs of all students.

Adapting instructional plans and curricular materials to 

4.5
meet the assessed learning needs of all students.

The Second TDP included SMART goals for each of the identified CSTP elements.

For example, for CSTPs 1.1 and 4.5, the Second TDP stated that respondent “will adapt her 
teaching to reflect the assessed academic and behavioral needs of her students.”  For CSTP 
1.4, the Second TDP stated that respondent “will plan lessons that utilize a variety of 
strategies and resources to meet the students’ diverse learning needs.”

The Second TDP also included strategies and activities to implement the SMART

goals for each CSTP element. For example, with regard to CSTPs 1.1 and 4.5, the Second 
TDP stated: 

 Check for student understanding and learning throughout 

lessons

 Provide opportunities for reteach and challenge 

depending on student need

 Coach to video lessons for reflection with teacher a 

minimum of one time per month.

For CSTP 1.4, the strategies and activities stated:

 Lesson plans will designate differentiated instruction 



opportunities
Implement a variety of engagement strategies that meet 
the needs of all students

The Second TDP described support structures and resources for each of the identified 

CSTPs as follows:

For CSTPs 1.1 and 4.5:  “Release time provided for 
observations of classrooms both on and off site.”

For CSTP 1.4:  “Administration to provide resources on a 
variety of engagement strategies” and “Site coach to model 
differentiation as coach calendar is available.”

11

For CSTP 1.5:  “Administration & site coach will provide 
question stems, talk moves resources, and teaching channel 
videos.”

For CSTP 1.6:  “Peer coach to model and co-teach lessons” and 
“Administration will provide time with coach to support AC in 
creating common assessments.”3

For CSTPs 2.3 and 4.2: “Administration to provide written 
and/or verbal feedback to all observations.”

For CSTPs 2.6 and 2.7:  “Site and veteran support coach for 
support as available and requested.”

For CSTP 4.4:  “Administration will provide resources and 
suggestions for delivery of Classroom Foundations.”

For CSTP 4.5: “Release time provided for observation of
classrooms both on and off site.”

The Second TDP also included a timeline for completion, including benchmark dates

to monitor progress. 

Lesson Observations and Preliminary Performance Evaluation for the 2014/2015 School 
Year

22.

First Semester Formal Lesson Observations. During the first semester of the 
2014/2015 school year, Ms. Aguayo conducted two formal observations:  on September 30 
and December 3, 2014. Ms. Aguayo wrote up her findings and conclusions for these lesson 
observations, and shared them with respondent in debriefings within a few days after the 
observations.

23.

For both the September 30 and December 3, 2014 lesson observations, Ms. 
Aguayo rated respondent as either Growth Expected or Does Not Meet Standards on all of 
the CSTP elements that were observed.  In the lesson observations, Ms. Aguayo continued to 
note her concerns with respondent’s providing students with “minimal opportunities” to 
“engage in the content or processing” of the information respondent provided, to ask or 
respond to clarifying questions, or to “build on content through collaboration.” Ms. Aguayo
also noted her continuing concerns with respondent’s struggle to “create a learning 
environment that encouraged constructive and productive interactions among students,” and 

3 “AC” means stands for Accountable Community, and refers to all the Winchell 

teachers teaching at the same grade level.

12

respondent’s failure to “effectively utilize instructional strategies” to address the needs of 
English Learners and students not yet reading at grade level.

24.

Preliminary Evaluation. Ms. Aguayo gave respondent a Preliminary 

Evaluation on December 17, 2014.  In the Preliminary Evaluation, Ms. Aguayo rated 
respondent as Growth Expected on CSTPs 3, 5, and 6.  She rated respondent as Not Meeting 
Standards on CSTPs 1, 2, and 4.  In the Preliminary Evaluation, Ms. Aguayo summarized the 
lesson observations she had conducted during the first semester.  She set forth her findings
and conclusions with regard to each of the CSTPs.

With regard to CSTP 1, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “did not provide students
opportunities to engage in critical thinking, problem solving, and refection, and rarely made
instructional adjustments based on student responses, thinking, or understanding of concepts 
and skills.”  As a result “students were not immersed in an engaging learning environment 
with the support of appropriate instructional strategies.”

With regard to CSTP 2, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “did not provide a
rigorous learning environment and struggled to provide opportunities for students to examine 
and evaluate their own work or learn from the work of their peers.” As a result, “students
were not immersed in a learning environment that supported and fostered positive student 
behavior.”

With regard to CSTP 3, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to organize 
curriculum to facilitate student understanding of subject matter.”  As a result, “all students 
were minimally provided the necessary opportunities, supports, and instructional strategies to 
master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 4, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “did not consistently 
develop short and long term instructional plans to support student learning.”  As a result, “all 
students were not provided opportunities to master grade level standards and skills.”

With regard to CSTP 5, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to use data to 

plan, differentiate, and modify instruction consistently.”  As a result, “student assessed 
learning needs were not consistently met.”

With regard to CSTP 6, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to maintain 

professional responsibilities in timely ways and maintain required commitments to 
colleagues and students.”  As a result, “instructional time and AC collaboration efforts were 
negatively impacted.”

//

13

90-Day Notice 

25.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44938 and 44932,4 on January 29, 2015,
the District served respondent with a 90-Day Notice of Unsatisfactory Performance (90-Day
Notice).  The 90-Day Notice stated that it was “designed to provide [respondent] with 
sufficient information to understand the nature of [her] unsatisfactory performance and to 
illustrate specific instances of such behavior with such particularity as to provide [her] with
an opportunity to correct these faults and overcome the grounds for potential dismissal
charges.”  Attached to the 90-Day Notice were all of the Lesson Observations, Preliminary
Evaluations and Summary Evaluations noted above.  In an effort to assist respondent in 
overcoming her performance deficiencies, the 90-Day Notice stated that respondent was 
expected to comply with the following directives:

1.
Adapt your teaching to reflect the assessed academic and 
behavioral needs of all students.  Specifically, check for student 
understanding throughout each lesson.

Plan lessons that utilize a variety of strategies and 
2.
resources to meet students’ diverse learning needs.  Each lesson 
must designate differentiated instruction opportunities and
engagement strategies to meet the needs of all students.

Use formative assessments to systematically check for 

3.
student understanding by observing their work to direct and 
adjust instruction accordingly. In particular, check for student 
understanding by observing their work to direct and adjust 
instruction.

Facilitate positive and productive interactions by creating

4.
and maintaining partnership and group roles, structures,
procedures and norms.  In particular, assign partner activities
and make sure students are actively listening and participating.

5.
Create an environment in which students demonstrate 
positive behavior and consistent participation.  For example, 
maintain a 3:1 ratio of positive to negative interactions and 
utilize points on a consistent basis to foster collaboration and 
good behavior.

4 The relevant portions of these statutory provisions are quoted in the Legal 

Conclusions below.

14

Make adjustments to instructional time so that all 

6.
students remain engaged and challenged.  For instance, use 
whiteboards to monitor student understanding.

7.
Use sufficient subject matter knowledge to support 
student learning.  Model the use of content and academic 
language during instruction and check for understanding 
questions and tasks.  Consistently require students to explain 
their thinking and/or justify their responses.

Implement strategies such as think time, think/pair/share, 

8.
consensus and presentation procedures to facilitate discussion, 
and extend students’ thinking.

Ensure that each instructional strategy is related to 
9.
learning goals and objectives articulated to students.  At the end 
of each lesson, ask students to articulate the objective.  If 
students are unable to do so, clarify their misunderstandings and 
explain concepts causing confusion.

Include all four elements of Classroom Foundations in 

10.
each lesson.  Include closure that requires students to summarize
their learning and reflect on criteria for success.  Make sure your 
actual objective aligns with the objective included in your lesson 
plans.

Develop lesson plans that include various levels of

11.
English proficiency and accommodations for students with 
special needs and EL students.  For example, use visuals and/or 
graphic organizers, sentence frames and sufficient wait time to 
support EL students and students with special needs.

Provide students with language frames to support and 

12.
engage them in demonstration of their understanding of 
concepts and skills.

The 90-Day Notice notified respondent that she was expected to correct her 
unsatisfactory performance within 90 days, and that if her deficiencies were not corrected 
within this time period, the District may institute disciplinary action against her, up to and 
including possible dismissal.

Observations and Evaluation During 90-Day Notice Period

26.

Lesson Observations. During the 90-Day Notice period, Ms. Aguayo

observed respondent’s class 10 times (February 6, 11, and 24, March 5, 13, 19, 20, and 26, 

15

and April 9 and 13, 2015).  Ms. Preas observed respondent’s class on February 20, 2015.
Ms. Aguayo and Ms. Preas described their observations in written lesson observations.  They
conducted debriefing meetings with respondent within a few days after each observation.  At 
the debriefing meetings, respondent was given a hardcopy of the written lesson observations.
She was also given access to the written lesson observations on “I Achieve,” an online 
computerized system.  She had the opportunity to respond to the written lesson observations 
orally at the debriefing meetings, and in writing.5

27.

In the written lesson observations during the 90-Day Notice period, respondent 

was rated as either Growth Expected or Not Meeting Standards on all the observed CSTP 
elements.6 In these written lesson observations, Ms. Aguayo and Ms. Preas noted most of 
the same concerns raised in earlier lesson observations: (1) respondent did not effectively
engage all students when checking for understanding or in tasks to build student 
understanding, and consequently, respondent did not adjust her instruction to address 
students’ lack of understanding or misconceptions; (2) there were minimal collaborative
structures to support students in explaining their thinking to each other or the whole class; (3) 
respondent did not model or scaffold instructional strategies to support student 
understanding; and (4) respondent failed to close lessons to determine student learning or 
surface misconceptions.

28.

Summary Evaluation. On May 4, 2015, Ms. Aguayo completed a Summary

Evaluation which rated respondent as Growth Expected on CSTPs 2 and 6, and as Not 
Meeting Standards on CSTPs 1, 3, 4, and 5. In the Summary Evaluation, Ms. Aguayo
summarized the lesson observations on which the evaluation was based and explained the 
reasons for the ratings for each of the CSTPs. 

With regard to CSTP 1, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “did not consistently build
on student responses, adjust instruction, check for understanding, ask questions to clarify and
extend students’ thinking and did not engage students in critical thinking, problem solving, 
and reflection to support student learning.”  As a result, “students were not immersed in a 
learning environment that built their understanding of complex subject matter and 
instructional adjustments were not based on their understanding of content.”

5 Because of issues with I Achieve, respondent did not initially have access to Ms. 

Aguayo’s written lesson observations online.  Because respondent’s access to Ms. Aguayo’s
online written lesson observations was initially delayed, respondent’s online responses were 
delayed as well. 

6 For the March 19, 2015 written lesson observation, respondent was given ratings of 

either Minimally Meets or Does Not Meet standards. Ms. Aguayo did not know why the
system reverted back to the earlier terminology for this lesson observation, but explained that 
the Minimally Meets standard corresponded to Growth Expected, and the Does Not Meet 
standard corresponded to Not Meeting Standards.

16

With regard to CSTP 2, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “did not consistently
provide a rigorous learning environment and opportunities for students to examine and 
evaluate their own work or learn from the work of their peers.”  As a result, students were 
“immersed in a learning environment that inconsistently supported and fostered positive
student behavior.”

With regard to CSTP 3, Ms. Aguayo stated that respondent “struggled to organize

curriculum and deliver instructional strategies to facilitate student understanding of subject 
matter.”  As a result, “all students were not immersed in a learning environment that 
supported their learning of ELA and mathematics content, standards, and skills.”7

With regard to CSTP 4, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “did not consistently 
develop short and long term instructional plans to support student learning.”  As a result, 
“students were not provided opportunity to master grade level standards and skills with the 
support of well-designed and planned instruction.”

With regard to CSTP 5, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to use data to 

plan, differentiate, and modify instruction consistently.”  As a result, “all student assessed 
and differentiated learning needs were not met.”

With regard to CSTP 6, Ms. Aguayo found that respondent “struggled to maintain

professional responsibilities in timely ways and maintain required commitments to 
colleagues and students.”  As a result, “all students were not able to benefit from effective 
instructional strategies to support with content and increase student engagement.”

Veteran Support Provided to Respondent During the 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 School Years

29.

During the 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 school years, respondent received 

veteran support coaching from Instructional Coaches Janelle Solorio, Deanna Buchanan, and
Lisa Thompkins. These coaches testified at the hearing.

30.

Janelle Solorio. Ms. Solorio was an elementary school teacher for about 18 

years, teaching in the fifth and second grades.  During the 2012/2013 and 2013/2014 school 
years, she was a veteran support coach, helping struggling teachers implement the CSTPs.
From January through June 2014, she provided 34.25 hours of veteran support coaching to
respondent.  This support included:  (1) meeting with respondent to discuss her “needs, wants 
[and] concerns”; (2) meeting with respondent and Ms. Aguayo to discuss the First TDP and 
its implementation; (3) observing respondent’s classroom twice; (4) observing another
teacher’s classroom with respondent; (5) meeting with respondent to provide lesson support 
and review information from observations; (6) email correspondence to provide feedback on 
lesson plans and to plan support and help; and (7) meeting with respondent and Ms. Aguayo
to discuss the Second TDP.

7 “ELA” stands for English Language Arts.

17

31. Ms. Solorio testified that when she observed respondent’s class, it seemed

“unorganized” and some students were “not engaged.”

32. With regard to the meetings Ms. Solorio attended with respondent and Ms. 

Aguayo, Ms. Solorio conceded that she once described them as “rough” and “not sunshine 
and rainbows.” But she described Ms. Aguayo’s conduct during these meetings as 
“business-like” and “professional.”  She did not observe that Ms. Aguayo had any bias
against respondent.  Based upon her observations of respondent’s teaching, Ms. Solorio 
agreed with the feedback Ms. Aguayo provided to respondent during the meetings.  Ms. 
Solorio described respondent’s demeanor at the meetings as “defensive” at times.

33.

Deanna Buchanan. Ms. Buchanan has worked for the District since 2006.  She 
has taught both second and fourth grade.  She was an instructional coach for about two years.
She provided veteran support to respondent from September through December 2014.
During this period, she spent 19.25 hours working with respondent.  During this time, she: 
(1) met with respondent to go over the Second TDP; (2) met with respondent and Ms. 
Aguayo twice to go over the Second TDP; (3) observed a math lesson respondent taught and 
debriefed with respondent; (4) observed three language arts lessons respondent taught and 
emailed notes with suggestions, opportunities for growth and reflective questions; (5) visited 
other classrooms and watched videos with respondent; and (6) reviewed lesson plans with 
respondent to help her increase “student voice and engagement.”

34. Ms. Buchanan testified that she provided support to respondent in 

implementing the Second TDP.  She offered respondent strategies to increase student voice 
in her classroom and put more cognitive demand on the students, instead of respondent doing 
so much of the talking.  Ms. Buchanan believed that, based upon her observations in 
respondent’s class, respondent needed support in helping students become more critical 
thinkers and problem solvers. Ms. Buchanan, while she was in respondent’s class, observed 
that students were not engaged a “lot” of the time.  She believed that the lessons she 
observed were not rigorous enough for third graders.  She provided respondent with
reflective questions to ask students.

35. Ms. Buchanan described her purpose as a veteran support coach as helping to 

support a teacher, not to evaluate or criticize her.  She conceded that the meetings she
attended with respondent and Ms. Aguayo were not “pleasant” because respondent was being 
told she needed to improve.  But Ms. Buchanan testified that Ms. Aguayo treated respondent 
professionally, and did not exhibit any bias.  Ms. Buchanan believed that respondent worked 
hard to try to improve her teaching.

36.

Lisa Thompkins. Ms. Thompkins has been employed by the District since

1999.  For the past one and one-half years, she has worked as a special assistant in the 
Teacher Development Office.  She was previously an Instructional Coach for one and one-
half years. Before that, she was a teacher at the high school level.

18

37.

From February through May 2015, Ms. Thompkins provided 15.5 hours of 

veteran coaching support to respondent.  This coaching included:  (1) meeting with
respondent to discuss her evaluations and her needs regarding coaching; (2) observing 
respondent and discussing teaching strategies; (3) meeting with Ms. Aguayo and respondent 
to go over the TDP and discuss observations; (4) sitting in debriefing meetings with 
respondent and Ms. Aguayo; (5) visiting respondent’s classroom; and (6) discussing 
evaluations and next steps with respondent.

38. Ms. Thompkins observed respondent in her classroom four times, and 
discussed classroom management and student engagement strategies with her.  Ms. 
Thompkins testified that, during these classroom visits she observed that some students were
on target, but a “lot” of students seemed “off track.” These students were “messing” in their 
desks, not following respondent’s instruction, and not doing what was being asked. Ms.
Thompkins stated that the students were not out of control; instead, there was just a “lot of 
non-engagement” with what was going on in class.  Ms. Thompkins spoke to respondent 
about student engagement and checking for understanding strategies.

39. Ms. Thompkins observed a lesson that respondent taught in which respondent 

intended to use a video she had gotten on YouTube.  Ms. Thompkins believed that 
respondent had not fully planned that lesson, and that the video she had chosen was not a 
good one for the lesson.  Ms. Thompkins commented upon a math lesson that respondent 
taught that also appeared to lack adequate planning. Ms. Thompkins observed some of the 
same deficiencies in respondent’s teaching that were noted in the TDP.

40.

Respondent told Ms. Thompkins that she could support respondent most by

attending the meetings with Ms. Aguayo so respondent would not be alone.  Ms. Thompkins 
recognized that respondent’s meeting with Ms. Aguayo were “stressful” for respondent 
because it was difficult to be told that she was not meeting standards, and the evaluation 
process was “exhausting.” Although respondent expressed frustration with all the questions 
Ms. Aguayo asked her during the meetings, Ms. Thompkins believed that Ms. Aguayo’s
questions were appropriate, and she understood Ms. Aguayo’s objective in asking them.

41.

Janet Morello. Since August 2015, Ms. Morello has been employed by the 
District as an Instructional Coach in the Early Learning Department.  For two years before 
that, she was a site-based coach at Winchell.  Ms. Morello has been an instructional coach
for about 10 to 15 years. She has been employed by the District since 1984 and has worked 
as an elementary school teacher.

42. When Ms. Morello was a site-based coach at Winchell, she assisted grade
levels and teachers with lesson planning, resources and support as requested.  While she was 
located at Winchell, Ms. Morello’s room was next door to respondent’s. Ms. Morello taught 
respondent’s class “several times” when respondent met with Ms. Aguayo. In the 2013/2014
school year, respondent asked Ms. Morello for assistance teaching EL students. Respondent,
on occasion, also asked Ms. Morello for assistance with lesson planning. In March 2015, 
Ms. Morello was asked to work with respondent on a five-day coaching cycle.  Ms. Morello 

19

modeled new techniques for teaching writing on the first two days of the cycle.  Ms. Morello 
was not available to complete the cycle on the remaining days, and those days were not 
rescheduled.

43. Ms. Morello was “thrilled” that the District decided not to evaluate teachers 
who were rated as proficient when the District first implemented Common Core during the 
2013/2014 school year.  According to Ms. Morello, this “empowered” teachers to “try new 
things” that “might flop” when teaching their students.

Respondent’s Responses to Evaluations and Lesson Observations 

44.

Respondent was given the opportunity to respond in writing to her preliminary

and summary evaluations during the 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 school years.  Respondent 
provided written responses to these evaluations.

45.

2013/2014 Preliminary Evaluation. In respondent’s response to her 2013/2014 

Preliminary Evaluation, respondent stated that the following factors were not taken into 
consideration: (1) 2013/2014 was the first year she taught the third grade; (2) she had not 
been trained to teach the Common Core standards; (3) the conclusions were “based on 
observations of 1% of” respondent’s instructional time; (4) students had “no foundational 
support for Common Core standards”; (5) 30 percent of her class did not read at grade level; 
(6) 30 percent of her class were EL students; and (7) the District had “not trained teachers in 
the strategies to provide the necessary opportunities, supports, and instructional strategies to 
master Common Core standards and skills to grade-level students let alone low readers and 
ELD students.” Respondent also gave a point-by-point response to the observations set forth 
in the 2013/2014 Summary Evaluation. Respondent stated that because she was 
“uncomfortable” with the “professional style of Ms. Aguayo’s debriefings,” she asked that
Gloria Ruiz, an FTA representative, be present at all her meetings and debriefings with Ms. 
Aguayo.

46.

2013/2104 Summary Evaluation. Respondent prepared a written response to 

her 2013/2104 Summary Evaluation.  In her response, respondent asked: “In a year that 
most teachers were not evaluated because of the new Common Core Standard-based
curriculum, and considerations were made so that teachers could learn and adapt to the new 
standards, I would like to know why I was selected to be evaluated from all of the teachers at
Winchell who also had similar evaluations last year.”  She raised the same concerns that she 
raised in her response to the 2013/2104 Preliminary Evaluation.  She asserted that she was a 
“highly qualified teacher” with a master’s degree in Education and a Reading Specialist 
credential, she had taught evening classes in Developmental English at Fresno City College
for 11 years, and she had published a children’s book that was sold in online bookstores.

47.

2014/2015 Preliminary Evaluation. In her response to the 2014/2015 

Preliminary Evaluation, respondent criticized Ms. Aguayo for not reviewing her students’ 
work and test scores when conducting the evaluations.  As respondent stated, “Ms. Aguayo,
at no time during the evaluation process, has requested any student work or outcomes….”

20

As a result, “Ms. Aguayo has no concept of what my students have learned or are learning.”
According to respondent, “Since student learning is the most important component of the 
evaluation process, it has become clear to me that her continued rating of my performance of 
CSTP Standards 1, 2, and 4 at DMS [sic] may be based not on my professional performance 
but on her bias against me personally.”

Respondent asserted further that Ms. Aguayo “claims to give support, but my
experience with her ‘support’ over the past year and a half has yielded such negative 
feedback that I now have chosen to work only with my FUSD veteran coach.”

Respondent concluded with, “It is my opinion that Ms. Aguayo is determined not to

pass me on these standards no matter what I do.”

48.

2014/2015 Summary Evaluation. In her response to the 2014/2015 Summary

Evaluation, respondent stated, in relevant part,

… Most of Ms. Aguayo’s assumptions are from the random 
informal observations that she evaluated.  Many of those 
observations took place when I was not direct teaching.  Ms. 
Aguayo has evaluated my performance while students were 
taking tests, when I was BAS testing and students were doing 
independent work or after my direct teaching.  She has 
evaluated my performance based on the standards that don’t 
apply while I’m not teaching.  It is unreasonable to expect 
teachers to be direct teaching 100% of the day.  Students in my 
class were always given the opportunity, when applicable to the
lesson being taught, to explain and justify their responses or to 
share their previous knowledge and understanding with partners.
Students have dramatically improved in engaging in discussions
about the text or responding upon being asked.  Last year was 
the first year of Common Core and teachers as well as FUSD 
coaches struggled to figure out how to teach to the new 
standards, so students are still learning the skills needed to be 
successful under this program.  My grade level team and I have 
dedicated our own time as well as our paid time to come up with 
the strategies to facilitate group sharing and critical thinking.

Respondent questioned Ms. Aguayo’s experience, asserting that Ms. Aguayo “had no 
experience in teaching primary grades and has shown no interest in trying to understand the 
strategies needed to teach primary grades.”  Respondent stated that she teaches to the “Zone 
of Proximal Development,” and that her “lessons are meant to make sure [her students] 
master the foundational skills of an objective or standard and then gradually introduce rigor.”
She asserted that she “rarely struggle[d] to do anything” in her classroom, and that “[o]ne of 
[her] strong points is to organize curriculum.” She noted that she had created PowerPoint 
presentations and worksheets that she sold to other teachers through the website 

21

teacherspayteachers.com.  She asserted further that, “I absolutely DO provide my students
with modeling or instruction of effective instructional strategies that align to a learning goal,
objective, purpose, or outcome.” (Capitalization in original.) According to respondent, 
“Since Ms. Aguayo chose not to look at the resulting work of my students, I find her 
conclusion flawed.” Respondent also stated that she “hesitated to be candid with [Ms. 
Aguayo] since [respondent’s] first debriefing with her in 2013 when she misquoted and 
misinterpreted comments [respondent] made.”  Respondent felt that “it was deliberate to put 
[respondent] in a bad light.”

Respondent “strongly disagree[d]” with Ms. Aguayo’s opinion that respondent had 

“not developed as a professional educator.” Respondent asserted that she had worked 
collaboratively with Ms. Morello and her colleagues and coaches.

49.

Responses to Written Lesson Observations.  Respondent was also given an 

opportunity to respond in writing to the comments Ms. Aguayo and Ms. Preas made in their 
written lesson observations.  Respondent submitted written responses to these observations.
For example, in her response to the February 14, 2014 lesson observation, respondent stated
that Ms. Aguayo “seemed supportive” during the formal debriefing, but her supportive 
comments during the debriefing were not reflected in her written lesson observations.
Respondent stated further that, “it seems there is no pleasing Ms. Aguayo on paper, as her 
DNMs seem to increase with each observation.” According to respondent, “Ms. Aguayo, by
the nature of her observations, has discouraged rather than supported” respondent.
Respondent provided detailed responses to Ms. Aguayo’s observations.  She attached
samples of her students’ work from the lesson.  Respondent “strongly disagree[d]” with Ms. 
Aguayo’s statement that respondent’s negative comments to students outweighed her 
positive comments.  She asserted that Ms. Aguayo’s comments were “subjective.”  She 
concluded by saying, “it is my opinion that the reasons for the DNM ratings have little or no
merit and I am concerned that Ms. Aguayo’s intent is not to pass me on these standards no 
matter how well I perform, as this seems to be a pattern in her past evaluations.”

50.

Respondent included similar comments in her other responses to written lesson 
observations.  In addition, she raised concerns about Ms. Aguayo’s insistence that respondent
read the written lesson observations during the debriefings, and provide immediate oral
responses.  As respondent stated in her response to the February 6, 2015 observation:

What Ms. Aguayo doesn’t state is that I prefer to take the 
document home and read it as they are lengthy and skewed to
the negative.  Her comments have not changed as she continues 
to not pass me on CSTP 1 and others.  Nothing has changed in 
her observations in the last year and a half.  My experience with
Ms. Aguayo is that she continually makes me repeat answers 
and clarify and it is time-consuming and frustrating because she
simply doesn’t understand my explanations. Conversations with
her usually do not have a positive outcome.

22

Respondent stated further that, “Generally, I don’t agree with the evaluator’s
conclusions because my students are thriving in my classroom.  All one has to do is look at 
my classroom environment and work with my students to see that they are engaged and 
learning.” Respondent also commented that Ms. Aguayo’s presence in the classroom made
her students “nervous.”

Testimony from Respondent and Respondent’s Witnesses at Hearing

51.

Respondent’s testimony. At the hearing, respondent testified that after

respondent obtained her Multiple Subject teaching credential in 2001, she began working as
a substitute teacher.  In 2003, she became a certificated tutor for the District.  In the 
2012/2013 school year, she taught fourth grade at Winchell.  She began teaching third grade 
in the 2013/2014 school year.  Ms. Aguayo told her that she would be evaluated at the end of 
the first or the beginning of the second week of that school year.  Ms. Aguayo conducted 
four formal evaluations during the school year.  Ms. Aguayo also randomly visited 
respondent’s class every week.  Respondent complained that Ms. Aguayo would interrupt
respondent’s lessons to correct her, instead of waiting until afterwards at the debriefings. 
Respondent also complained that the number of observations and debriefings were
“excessive,” and that the debriefings were “not productive.”  According to respondent, at 
times, Ms. Aguayo was supportive during the debriefings, but her written comments in her
lesson observations were “99 percent negative.” Respondent described these negative 
comments as “discouraging.” She believed that she worked “as hard as” she could, but there 
was no way that she could please Ms. Aguayo.

52.

Respondent raised concerns about the ratings Ms. Aguayo gave her.

Respondent was particularly concerned that Ms. Aguayo did not look at her students’ work 
product in reaching her ratings. Respondent asserted that she worked with her students to 
check for understanding and to clarify any misconceptions. Respondent included examples 
of her students’ work in her exhibits.  Respondent also offered charts showing her students’
scores on the DRP reading assessments during the 2014/2015 school year.8 The charts show 
that the performance of respondent’s students on these assessments was consistent with the 
averages achieved by students in the same grade at Winchell and in the District.

53.

Respondent asserted that she was not adequately trained in Common Core 

standards.  She admitted that she attended Common Core training for six hours on September 
19, 2013, for seven hours on December 5, 2013, for seven hours on November 3, 2014, and 
for six and one-half hours on January 28, 2015.  She testified that she worked with her AC to 
plan curriculum that met the Common Core standards, and that Ms. Morello helped her.  But 
she asserted that all the teachers in her AC were “struggling” to find resources to meet these 
standards, and the training offered by the District was not sufficient.

8 “DRP” stands for Degrees of Reading Power.

23

54.

During her testimony, respondent showed a PowerPoint presentation she gave 

to her students during one of the lessons Ms. Aguayo observed.  She submitted a book she 
had written, which was illustrated by her sister and sold through online book stores.  She also 
offered a listing of her work product she sells or gives away on the website called 
teacherspayteachers.com.  Her work product includes documents entitled, “Common Core 
Third Grade Up Mighty Metaphors, Super Similes Interactive PPT,” “Common Core Third –
Featured,” “Common Core Third Grade Homograph (Multiple Meaning Words) Practice,”
Common Core Third Grade Prefix (un-) Practice Packet,” and “Common Core Third Grade 
Verb Riddles – Featured.” She showed videos of her classroom, including students’ work 
posted on her walls.  She asserted that her classroom was “very active” and that her students 
were “engaged.”  She believed that her teaching met the District’s standards during both the 
2013/2014 and 2014/2015 school years.

55.

Gloria Ruiz. Gloria Ruiz has been a teacher at Winchell for 24 years.  She 
currently teaches transitional kindergarten.  In the 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 school years,
she taught kindergarten.  Ms. Ruiz noted that the Houghton-Mifflin school books that 
Winchell had during the 2013/2014 school year were not rigorous enough to meet the 
Common Core standards.  Teachers had to find their own resources and develop their own 
curriculum to comply with the Common Core standards that school year.

56. Ms. Ruiz went into respondent’s classroom about five to six times during the 

2013/2014 school year, and a “lot” more during the 2014/2015 school year to drop off books 
or ask questions.  During these times, respondent’s students appeared to be engaged and on 
task. Ms. Ruiz estimated that she stayed about two to three minutes in respondent’s 
classroom when she visited while students were in attendance.  Ms. Ruiz did not observe 
respondent teaching during these visits.

57. Ms. Ruiz has been the FTA site representative for four to five years.  In this 

position, she accompanied respondent to debriefing meetings with Ms. Aguayo and,
sometimes, Ms. Preas.  Ms. Ruiz was not aware that respondent had any problems regarding
her teaching before Ms. Aguayo became Winchell’s principal.  During the debriefings, Ms. 
Ruiz believed that Ms. Aguayo asked the same questions of respondent “over and over 
again,” and that respondent would answer to the “best of her ability.” Although Ms. Aguayo
was “very polite” and professional, Ms. Ruiz believed that some of her questions were “very
petty.”  Ms. Ruiz believed that Ms. Aguayo did not convey “anything positive” during the 
debriefings.

58.

Teresa Taylor.  Teresa Taylor has been a teacher at Winchell for 20 years.  For 
the past 14 to 15 years, she has taught second grade.  Ms. Taylor’s classroom was across the 
hall from respondent’s.  Ms. Taylor would visit respondent’s classroom in the morning 
before school, at recess, during lunch, and after school.  She “admired” the neatness of 
respondent’s room.  When Ms. Taylor would “stick” her head in briefly during the day, she 
never saw respondent’s students not paying attention.  Ms. Taylor estimated that she would 
be in respondent’s classroom about one to two minutes on these occasions.

24

59. Ms. Taylor testified that, before Common Core was implemented, the teaching 
model was more “teacher-driven,” with direct instruction implemented through the “I do, we 
do, you do” format, with the teacher: (1) stating the objective; (2) modeling a problem; (3) 
doing a problem together with the students; (4) releasing the students to work on problems 
independently in groups or in pairs; (5) checking for understanding during the “we do” and 
“you do” stages; and (5) closing the lesson. Ms. Taylor believed that Common Core has
changed the way teachers are supposed to check for understanding by incorporating deeper
depths of knowledge, but Ms. Taylor stated that it was “cloudy” and “vague,” and teachers
were “muddling through” it.  Ms. Taylor also stated that she had to search for resources to 
teach her students, because the District’s existing Houghton-Mifflin curriculum did not meet 
the rigor required by Common Core. According to Ms. Taylor, the District had not provided 
adequate training to teachers to teach to the Common Core standards.  Ms. Taylor agreed that 
the “I do, we do, you do” format was still being used in teaching to the Common Core 
standards.

60. Ms. Taylor met with Ms. Aguayo, Ms. Preas and respondent during one of 

their three-way conferences during the 2014/2015 school year when respondent’s evaluation 
was discussed.  According to Ms. Taylor, the “tone” during this meeting was “professional,” 
but Ms. Aguayo seemed to ask the same questions rephrased many times.  Respondent stated 
that she preferred to take the evaluation home with her and read it before getting back to Ms. 
Aguayo.

Discussion

61.

Evaluating Respondent during the First Year of Common Core.  Respondent 

raised a number of defenses to her dismissal.  Her primary defense was that it was not 
appropriate for the District to evaluate her during the 2013/2014 school year because it was 
the first year of Common Core implementation, when no teachers who had previously been
rated as meeting standards proficiently were evaluated.  According to respondent, during the 
2013/2014 school year, the District did not provide math or ELA curriculum to its teachers 
that was rigorous enough to meet the Common Core standards.  Consequently, teachers were 
struggling to develop their own more rigorous curriculum.  Respondent argued that under 
these circumstances, it was not appropriate for the District to evaluate her during the 
2013/2014 school year. 

62.

Respondent’s arguments were not persuasive. While the implementation of

Common Core may have made the jobs of the District’s teachers more challenging, 
principals were required to evaluate teachers who had received Does Not Meet ratings and 
temporary and probationary teachers.  It was within the discretion of principals to evaluate
teachers who had received Meets Standards - Minimally ratings the prior year. Four of the 
approximately 30 teachers at Winchell were evaluated in the 2013/2014 school year, 
including two veteran teachers who had previously received ratings of Meets Standards –
Minimally in one or two areas.

25

63.

Although Common Core may have required changes in the curriculum that 

was taught, the CSTPs were not changed and the four Classroom Foundations that were 
required to be present in every lesson remained the same. The concerns that Ms. Aguayo
raised in her lesson observations and evaluations did not criticize respondent for how she 
implemented the Common Core standards.  Instead, Ms. Aguayo observed and evaluated 
respondent on the CSTP standards and Classroom Foundations that were put in place well
before Common Core was implemented.

64.

The concerns Ms. Aguayo raised related to basic, fundamental teaching 

principles that transcended the implementation of Common Core.  Throughout the lesson
observations and evaluations, Ms. Aguayo focused on respondent’s classroom management 
and delivery of instruction.  Ms. Aguayo repeatedly noted respondent’s failures to thoroughly
prepare her lessons, to state clear objectives, to align her teaching to stated objectives, to
model the lesson content during direct instruction, to check for student understanding, to
adjust her teaching to address students’ difficulties, to ask probing questions to engage
students in critical thinking, to provide a range of difficulty and depth of knowledge instead 
of remaining at an introductory level, to differentiate instruction for students who were at 
varying levels of learning to ensure that all students were challenged, to invite all students to 
participate and become fully involved in the learning process, and to plan structured learning
opportunities for students who finished assigned tasks early. Ms. Aguayo’s efforts were 
concentrated on encouraging respondent to create a rigorous learning environment in which 
all students were expected to think critically and independently. Given the focus of Ms. 
Aguayo’s observations and evaluations, respondent did not establish that the District abused 
its discretion by choosing to evaluate her in the 2013/2014 school year when Common Core 
standards were first being implemented.

65.

Lack of Assessment Data. Respondent argued that the District improperly

failed to consider in its evaluations of her the results of standardized tests given to her 
students. According to respondent’s evidence, respondent’s students performed as well on 
standardized tests as other District students at their grade level. Respondent argued that the 
District’s failure to support her dismissal with standardized test results demonstrates that her 
negative evaluations were based on the subjective judgment of Ms. Aguayo and not 
supported by objective student assessment data.

66.

Respondent’s argument in this regard was not persuasive.  Although no

statewide student assessments were conducted during 2013/2014 school year in light of 
implementation of Common Core, Ms. Aguayo, during her observations, assessed student
understanding of the lessons respondent delivered.  Ms. Aguayo included in her written
observations the data she collected from students about their understanding of respondent’s 
instruction.  Ms. Aguayo’s assessments of student understanding were consistent with the 
assessments made by Ms. Preas and the veteran support teachers.  The lack of standardized
student test results in the District’s evaluations of respondent does not undermine the validity
of those evaluations and the concerns raised by the District about respondent’s teaching.

26

67. Winchell Students. Respondent argued that the District’s evaluations of her 

teaching did not take into adequate account the facts that Winchell was in program 
improvement, and many of her students were English learners and/or not reading at grade 
level.

68.

This argument was also not persuasive. There was no evidence that the mix of 
students in respondent’s class was different from the mix in other classes.  While teaching to
students who were not fluent in English or could not read at grade level might make a 
teacher’s job more challenging, these factors do not undermine the District’s evaluations of
respondent.  The District repeatedly raised concerns with respondent’s failure to differentiate
among her students and provide instruction at varying levels to ensure that all students were
challenged and engaged.  Respondent’s arguments regarding the learning levels of certain of 
her students do not address the District’s concern with the lack of rigor in respondent’s 
instruction to ensure that all students were adequately encouraged to think critically to reach
their maximum potential.

69. Ms. Aguayo’s Experience and Negative Tone. Respondent questioned both 

Ms. Aguayo’s experience in conducting the lesson observations and evaluations, and the 
negativity of her observations and evaluations.

70.

At the hearing, Ms. Aguayo demonstrated her knowledge and understanding of 

the third-grade curriculum, the hallmarks of good teaching, and the evaluation process.  It 
was evident from her testimony and the written documentation she prepared that she was 
well-trained and skillful in her position as a principal.  Any arguments regarding her
experience and competence to conduct the observations and evaluations were without merit.

71.

Respondent’s arguments about the negative tone of Ms. Aguayo’s

observations, evaluations and debriefings raise some concerns.  As respondent correctly
asserted, the purpose of the evaluation process is to offer teachers guidance and support to 
help them improve their teaching.  Respondent felt frustrated by Ms. Aguayo’s criticism.
Ms. Aguayo may have been more effective in getting respondent to better understand and 
address Ms. Aguayo’s concerns if they had been presented in a less critical, more 
constructive and empathetic fashion.

72.

But while Ms. Aguayo’s concerns may have been better received and more 
effective if she had presented them in a more compassionate, engaging tone, there was no 
evidence to establish that Ms. Aguayo harbored any bias against respondent.  There was no 
reason or motive offered or proven to support that Ms. Aguayo negatively evaluated 
respondent due to any prejudice or preconceived notions about her.  Instead, the evidence 
showed that Ms. Aguayo’s purpose in criticizing respondent was to bring to respondent’s 
attention the District’s teaching standards to ensure that respondent taught her students in a 
manner that would allow them to reach their highest potential.

73.

Number of Observations. Respondent complained that the number of 

observations conducted by Ms. Aguayo was excessive and violated the terms of the CBA.

27

Issues relating to CBA compliance are beyond the scope of this proceeding and are better 
addressed through the grievance process.

74.

There was not sufficient evidence to establish that the number of observations 

adversely affected the students in respondent’s class, or resulted in skewed or inaccurate 
observations by Ms. Aguayo.  Consequently, this argument must be rejected.

75.

Testimony of Coaches. Respondent raised concerns about veteran support 

coaches testifying in this proceeding and questioned the truthfulness of some of their 
testimony.  The coaches presented as dedicated teachers who were trying to help respondent 
improve her teaching skills. Although that help may not have been consistently effective,
respondent’s criticisms of the veteran support coaches were not persuasive.

76. When all the evidence is considered, the District established that respondent’s
performance was unsatisfactory.  The District provided respondent with adequate guidance,
support and assistance to meet the District’s standards.  She was given a sufficient
opportunity both before and during the 90-Day Notice period to correct her deficiencies.  She 
had support from three veteran support coaches (Ms. Solorio, Ms. Buchanan and Ms.
Thompkins) and a site-based coach (Ms. Morello).  Ms. Aguayo and Ms. Preas observed her 
classroom on numerous occasions, and gave her detailed and specific feedback and guidance.
Notwithstanding all this feedback and assistance, respondent did not demonstrate sufficient 
improvement to bring her performance up to a satisfactory level.

77.

In her responses to the written lesson observations and evaluations, and during

her testimony, respondent did not demonstrate insight into the concerns the District 
repeatedly raised about her teaching. She was not sufficiently receptive to the feedback she 
received from her principal, vice principal, or instructional coaches, and did not take
adequate steps to implement the strategies she was shown, make the adjustments that were 
suggested, or address the District’s concerns, despite the numerous opportunities she was 
offered.  Given respondent’s lack of improvement and insight, it would be contrary to the 
best interests of the District’s students to return respondent to her teaching position.  The 
District established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that respondent’s performance was
unsatisfactory.  Its dismissal of respondent must therefore be sustained.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), a school 
district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for unsatisfactory performance.
When reviewing a school district’s dismissal action against a certificated employee based 
solely upon unsatisfactory performance under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(5), there is no need to apply the standards of fitness to teach set forth in Morrison v. 
State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  (Perez v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1175-1176.)

28

2.

Education Code sections 44660 through 44665 set forth the requirements with 

which a school district must comply when evaluating certificated employees.  Education 
Code section 44662, in relevant part provides:

(b) The governing board of each school district shall evaluate 
and assess certificated employee performance as it reasonably
relates to:

(1) The progress of pupils toward the standards established
pursuant to subdivision (a) and, if applicable, the state adopted
academic content standards as measured by state adopted 
criterion referenced assessments.

(2) The instructional techniques and strategies used by the

employee.

(3) The employee’s adherence to curricular objectives.

(4) The establishment and maintenance of a suitable learning
environment, within the scope of the employee’s responsibilities.

3.

Education Code section 44664, in relevant part, provides:

(b) The evaluation shall include recommendations, if necessary,
as to areas of improvement in the performance of the employee.
If an employee is not performing his or her duties in a 
satisfactory manner according to the standards prescribed by the
governing board, the employing authority shall notify the
employee in writing of that fact and describe the unsatisfactory 
performance. The employing authority shall thereafter confer 
with the employee making specific recommendations as to areas 
of improvement in the employee’s performance and endeavor to 
assist the employee in his or her performance. If any permanent
certificated employee has received an unsatisfactory evaluation,
the employing authority shall annually evaluate the employee
until the employee achieves a positive evaluation or is separated 
from the district.

4.

Before a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

unsatisfactory performance, it must comply with Education Code section 44938, subdivision
(b), which, in relevant part, provides:

(1) At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the
board or its authorized representative has given the employee
against whom the charge is filed, written notice of the

29

unsatisfactory performance, specifying the nature thereof with 
such specific instances of behavior and with such particularity
as to furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her 
faults and overcome the grounds for the charge.  The written 
notice shall include the evaluation made pursuant to Article 11 
(commencing with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to 
the employee.

5.

The District evaluated respondent in accordance with Education Code 

sections 44660 through 44665.  Its evaluations included recommendations as to areas of 
improvement in respondent’s performance.  It notified respondent that she was not 
performing her teaching duties in a satisfactory manner according to the District’s standards 
and described her unsatisfactory performance. The District thereafter conferred with 
respondent and made specific recommendations as to areas of improvement in her 
performance.  It endeavored to assist respondent in her performance.  (Ed. Code, § 44664, 
subd. (b).  Findings 9 through 43.)

6.

At least 90 days before it served a notice of intent to dismiss, the District gave 

respondent written notice of her unsatisfactory performance, specifying its nature with 
specific instances of behavior and particularity as to furnish her with an adequate opportunity
to correct her faults and overcome the grounds for the charges.  (Findings 25 through 28.)

7.

When all the evidence is considered, the District established by a 

preponderance of the evidence that, notwithstanding the assistance and opportunity it
provided to respondent to correct her faults and address the grounds for the unsatisfactory
performance charges against her, respondent did not improve her performance to a 
satisfactory level.  Respondent did not demonstrate at the hearing that she had adequate
insight into the District’s concerns about the quality of her teaching to provide sufficient 
assurances that, if she were returned to the classroom, her teaching would improve to a 
satisfactory level.  As a result, the District established that respondent should be dismissed 
from her employment as a teacher with the District for unsatisfactory performance pursuant 
to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

//

//

//

30

ORDER

Respondent Olivia Echeverria-Bis is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated 

employee of the Fresno Unified School District.

DATED: __________________

February 19, 2016

DocuSigned  by: 

Qenquaine  Suit 

_________________________________
JACQUELINE S. TUTTLE, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

DocuSigned  by: 

ludrw  |,  Rolls 

_________________________________
ANDREW BOLLS, Member
Commission on Professional Competence

DocuSigned  by: 

Karen  Brandt

________________________________
KAREN J. BRANDT, Chairperson
Commission on Professional Competence

31

