BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

MELINDA  CALLAHAN  (EN  684977), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

  

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2015030018 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 
in  Los  Angeles,  California  on  February  1,  2,  4,  5,  8,  9,  10,  11,  29,  March  1,  2,  3,  April  11,  12, 
13  and  18,  May,  26,  August  1,  2,  3,  4,  22,  23,  24,  and  September  22,  2016.  The  Commission 
consists  of  the  following  members:  Luciano  Ortiz,  teacher,  Mary  Bennett,  retired  teacher 
and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who 
presided. 

~—~—~-~Fhe Los  Angeles  Unified School District (District  oF Complainant) 
was represented by 
Michele  M.  Goldsmith,  attorney  at  law.  Respondent  Melinda  Callahan  (Respondent)  was 
represented  by  Rosemary  O.  Ward,  attorney  at  law,  and  Deborah  Eshaghian,  attorney  at  law. 
Rulings  on  motions  were  made  on  the  record  during  the  proceedings.  A  confidential  names  list 
was  sealed  to  protect  the  privacy  of  the  students. 

The  record  remained  open  until  October  13,  2016  for  the  submission  of  closing  briefs. 
The  briefs  were  received  and  marked  as  Exhibits  AAAA  and  345,  respectively  and  the  record 
was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  October  13,  2016. 

SUMMARY  OF  DECISION 

The  issue  before  the  Commission  is  whether  to  uphold  District's  decision  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  her  permanent  position  as  a  certificated  employee. 

Complainant  contends  that  Respondent  was  a  poorly  performing  teacher,  abusive  to 

students  and  generally  disruptive  to  the  school  environment.  Complainant  also  contends  that 
despite  assistance  and  guidance,  Respondent  failed  to  improve  her  performance. 

i 
| 
i i

  

Respondent  contends  that  she  was  a  good  teacher  and  was  retaliated  against  by  principals  and 
administrators. 

The  Commission  considered  the  matter  in  executive  session.  After  due  consideration 

of  the  record,  the  Commission  determined  that  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  Melinda 
Callahan  should  be  sustained.  Accordingly,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  factual 
findings,  conclusions  of  law,  and  order  sustaining  the  Accusation  and  Charges  and 
dismissing  Respondent. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  were  brought  by  Justo  H.  Avila,  Chief 

Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District. 

2. 

On  February  11,  2015,  Respondent  was  given  written  notice  of  the  District's 
intention  to  dismiss  Respondent  unless  she  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  submitted  a 
timely  demand  for  a  hearing. 

3. 

The  Statement  of  Charges,  dated  January  23,  2015,  and  the  Accusation,  dated 

March  4,  2015,  recommended  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  from  District  for  the  following 
legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1)  unprofessional  conduct; 
(2)  immoral  conduct  including  egregious  misconduct;  (3)  immoral  conduct;  (4) 
unsatisfactory  performance;  (5)  evident  unfitness  for  service;  (6)  persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board 
_of  the school  employing Respondent;  and  (7)  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments 
without  reasonable  cause,  as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing 
district. 

4, 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  and 

jurisdiction  exists  for  these  proceedings. 

Background  Information 

5. 

Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  with  the  District  for  18  years.  Respondent's 

teaching  experience  included  teaching  third  through  seventh  grades,  Respondent  received  a 
Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  nutrition  from  California  State  University,  Los  Angeles.  She 
holds  a  multiple  subject  K-12  teaching  credential,  and  the  required  Cross-cultural  Language 
and  Development  (CLAD)  certificate.  Immediately  prior  to  the  time  frame  at  issue  in  this 
matter,  Respondent  had  been  on  assignment  as  a  middle  school  teacher  at  Carver  Middle 
School.  As  a  result  of  a  threat  made  against  her  at  Carver  Middle  School,  Claimant  asked  for 
a  transfer  to  a  different  school  as  an  accommodation.  When  Respondent  made  this  request 
she  was  deemed  to  be  a  “must  place”  by  the  District.  The  term  “must  place”  has  a  negative

connotation  to  administrators  because  teachers  who  have  been  designated  as  “must  place” 
are  not  interviewed  and  hired  by  the  school  principal.  Instead,  they  are  placed  at  a  particular 
school  by  the  District  administration. 
Los  Feliz  Elementary  School  2012-2013 

6. 

Respondent  was  assigned  to  Los  Feliz  Elementary  school  (Los  Feliz)  for  the 

2012-2013  school  year.  Katherine  Pilkington  (Pilkington)  was  the  principal  at  Los  Feliz. 
Pilkington  earned  her  Bachelors  and  Masters  of  Arts  degrees  from  California  State 
University,  Northridge  and  a  teaching  credential  from  National  University.  At  the  time  of 
the  administrative  hearing,  Pilkington  was  a  doctoral  student  at  the  University  of  Southern 
California.  Pilkington  has  28  years  of  experience  with  the  District,  including  11  years  at  Los 
Feliz.  Pilkington  had  12  years  of  experience  in  elementary  school,  including  four  years  as 
the  Assistant  Principal  and  seven  years  as  the  Principal  of  Los  Feliz. 

7. 

In  early  August  of  2012,  Rowena  La  Grossa,  the  administrator  in  charge  of 
operation  for  the  local  school  district,  called  Pilkington  and  informed  her  that  Respondent 
would  be  placed  at  Los  Feliz  as  an  accommodation  and  on  a  “must  place”  basis.  At  the  time, 
Los  Feliz  had  an  opening  for  a  sixth  grade  teacher  because  a  teacher  had  been  laid  off  as  part 
of  the  prior  spring  reduction  in  force.  Pilkington  had  hoped  to  hire  the  teacher  back  for  the 
position.  Pilkington  contacted  the  principal  at  Carver  Middle  School,  Respondent's  previous 
school,  to  inquire  about  Respondent's  accommodations  and  the  reason  for  her  change  of 
schools.  At  that  time,  she  learned  that  a  threat  had  been  made  against  Respondent  at  Carver 
and  ascertained  from  the  conversation  that  Respondent  had  a  classroom  management 
problem. 

8. 

Respondent  and  Pilkington  had  a  rocky  relationship  from  the  start.  On  or 

  about August  8, 2012,  Pilkington  called  Respondent  and  invited  her  to  attend  the  two  teacher 
“buy  back”  days  on  August  9  and  10,  2012  and  a  pupil-free  day  on  August  12,  2012.  During 
the  conversation,  Pilkington  asked  Respondent  what  her  discipline  style  was,  to  which 
Respondent  answered  that  her  style  was  a  blend  of  “strict”  and  “compassionate.”  Pilkington 
responded  ,  “you  are  scaring  me”  and  expressed  concerns  about  Respondent's  discipline 
style.  She  told  Respondent  all  of  the  teachers  at  Los  Feliz  were  “nothing  but  loving  and 
kind.”  Pilkington  explained  to  Respondent  Los  Feliz  uses  a  school-wide  positive  discipline 
program  because  it  is  an  elementary  school.  She  notified  Respondent  that  Respondent  would 
be  teaching  a  sixth  grade  class.  The  tone  of  the  conversation  made  Respondent  apprehensive 
and  concerned. 

9. 

Miriam  Kupalian  (Kupalian)  is  currently  the  Assistant  Principal  of  Los  Feliz. 

Af the  time  that  Respondent  was  at  Los  Feliz,  Kupalian  was  the English-Language 
Development  (ELD)  Coordinator  and  Title  I  Contract  Administrator,  and  functioned  as  the 
administrator  in  charge  or  administrative  designee  when  Pilkington  was  not  on  campus  and 
otherwise  as  a  resource  for  parents,  students  and  teachers.

10, 

At  the  August  9  and  10,  2012  sessions,  both  Pilkington  and  Kupalian 

presented  information  concerning  the  school-wide  discipline  policies  and  the  “Caught  Being 
Good”  program’,  the  homework  policy.  During  the  August  10,  2012  session,  Pilkington 
noticed  that  Respondent  had  been  taking  copious  notes  but  did  not  orally  participate  in  the 
session.  She  walked  up  behind  Respondent,  looked  over  her  shoulder,  read Respondent's 
notes  and  demanded  the  notes.  In  an  effort  to  get  along  with  her  principal,  Respondent  gave 
Pilkington  the  notes.  Pilkington  took  the  notes  from  Respondent  and  photocopied  them. 
Pilkington  was  somewhat  surprised  to  find  out  that  Respondent  was  making  notes  about 
Pilkington's  conduct  and  the  telephone  conversation  that  the  two  had  on  August  8. 

11. 

Respondent  was  not  present  for  the  pupil-free  day  and  professional 

development  seminar  on  August  13.  Pilkington  met  with  Respondent  privately  to  cover  the 
information  that  was  provided  to  the  staff  on  those  days. 

. 

12. 

The  day  before  school  started,  Pilkington  changed  Respondent's  sixth grade 

class  and  room  assignment  to  a  fourth  grade  assignment  in a  different  classroom.  Pilkington 
made  the  change  right  after  she  learned  that  she  would  be  able  to-rehire  Ms.  Vo,  her  prior 
sixth  grade  teacher.  There  was  only  one  sixth  grade  class,  but  there  were  three  fourth  grade 
classes.  Respondent  had  never  taught  fourth  grade  and  had  to  familiarize  herself  with  the 
curriculum  as  well  as  set  up  her  classroom.  Since  she  had  only  found  out  about  the  change  in 
assignment  the  day  before  school  started,  Respondent  busied  herself  reviewing  fourth  grade 
curriculum  and  lesson  planning.  She  did  not  have  time  to  work  on  bulletin  boards  because 
she  only  had  a  few  hours  to  prepare. 

13. 

Respondent  was  overwhelmed  with  the  change  of  classroom,  change  of  grade, 
and  new  school.  At  Pilkington’s  direction,  Kupalian  ensured  that  Respondent  had  the  proper 

oe“ fourth grade textbooks.  Kupalian  also  set  up  some  of  the  bulletin  boards  in  Respondent's 

class  and  gave  Respondent  a  general  explanation  of  the  Title  I  and English-language 
development  (ELD)  requirements  as  well  as  the  requirements  for  the  use  of  Envision  and 
Treasures  which  were  the  District  mandated  curriculum  for  English-language  arts  and  math. 
At  the  request  of  Pilkington  and  Respondent,  Kupalian  also  provided  some  classroom 
instruction  and  management  advice  and  educational  materials  to  Respondent.  Kupalian 
made  arrangements  for  and  accompanied  Respondent  on  visits  to  other  fourth-grade 
classrooms  to  observe  colleagues. 

14. 

The  relationship  between  Respondent  and  Kupalian  quickly  deteriorated. 
Initially,  Respondent  seemed  to  welcome  Kupalian's  assistance.  But  Respondent  later 
became  suspicious  that  Kupalian  was  working  in  conjunction  with  Pilkington  to  terminate 
her.  Respondent  expressed  to  both  Pilkington  and  Kupalian  that  she  no  longer  wanted  any 

' 
good  behavior.

A  positive  discipline  program  emphasizing  rewards  and  encouragement  for 

: 
: 

‘ 

  

classroom  management  or  instructional  assistance  from  Kupalian  other  than  what  Kupalian 
would  normally  provide  to  ELD  students.  Kupalian  was  concerned  about  Respondent's 
ertactic  behavior.  For  that  reason,  she  wrote  a  memorandum  to  Pilkington  with  a  copy  to  Al 
Vega,  the  District  operations  coordinator,  advising  that  she  would  no  longer  be  willing  to 
assist  Respondent  without  another  adult  present  during  during  her  interactions  with 
Respondent. 

15. 

Respondent's  relationship  with  Pilkington  continued  to  deteriorate  throughout 

the  school  year.  Pilkington  left  notes  in  Respondent's  box  on  a  regular  basis  about 
deficiencies  that  she  saw  in  Respondent's  performance  and  issued  directives  to Respondent 
on  a  routine  basis.  Pilkington  perceived  Respondent  as  lazy.  Pilkington  instructed 
Respondent  to  provide  weekly  lesson  plans  and  place  them  in  Pilkington's  mail  box. 
Pilkington  also  instructed  Respondent  on  what  should  be  displayed  on  the  classroom  bulletin 
boards  and  how  the  student  seating  should  be  arranged  in  her  classroom.  Pilkington  was 
frustrated  by  Respondent's  failure  to  turn  in  lesson  plans  and  complete  required  training  and 
certifications.  She  was  alarmed  by  her  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  management 
and  the  complaints  from  parents  and  students  about  Respondent. 

16. 

Pilkington  was  very  rigid  in  her  approach  to  teaching  and  expected  the 

teachers  to  strictly  adhere  to  the  curriculum,  assess  students  on  a  strict  schedule  and  provide 
homework  to  students  on  a  daily  basis.  Pilkington  had  a  practice  of  regularly  visiting 
classrooms  to  observe  teachers  and  students.  Because  Respondent  was  new  to  the  school  and 
was  due  to  be  evaluated  in  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Pilkington  made  frequent  visits to  her 
classroom.  Duting  one  of  the  visits  Pilkington  took  stickers  and  a  journal  away  from 
V  a  student  in  the  classroom,  Although  there  was  no  confirmation, 
claimed  that 
Pilkington  had  slapped  her  hand  when  taking  the  journal.  Pilkington  described  her  actionas 

was  writing  a  memo  about 

attempted  to  hide.  According  to 

~~“snatching”  the  stickers  and,  later,  the  journal  that 
Pilkington, 
Pilkington  and  she  found  that  to  be 
inappropriate.  She  took  the  journal  from 
and  left  the  classroom.  Respondent  did  not 
see  the  interaction,  but  learned  of  it  when  students  told  her  e..  crying  and  Pilkington 
had  taken  the  journal.  Respondent  interviewed  a  few  of  the  children  to  determine  what  had 
happened.  Consistent  with  her  duty  as  a  mandated  child  abuse  reporter,  Respondent  reported 
the  incident  to  the  police.  She  also  told 
entaged  by  Pilkington's  actions  and  confronted  her  in  the  school  office. 
ington  called  the 
police  to  the  parents  and  wrote  a  letter  to  them  setting  forth  restrictions  on  their  access  to  the 
campus.  Pilkington  was  removed  from  the  school  for  two  days  while  the  operations  director, 
Al  Vega  (Vega),  conducted  an  investigation  of  the  incident.  Vega  did  not  find  a  basis  to 
substantiate  any  child  abuse  claim  about  by  Pilkington  and  she  was  returned  to  the 
classroom.  At  hearing,  Pilkington  testified  that  she 
the  complaint  against  her  and  that  she  had  assumed  «:  parents  filed  the  report. 
Nevertheless,  Respondent  remained  suspicious  of  Pilkington  and  very  uncomfortable  around 
her. 

S  parents  of  the  incident.  =  parents  were 

ot  aware  that  Respondent  had  filed 

Pi 

i 
i 
i 
V
  

17. 

Respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom  and  required  to  report  to  the 
October  19  to  October  29 

local  district  office  also  known  as  “ESC”  during  the  period  of 
while  investigations  were  conducted  about  the  incident  with  oe 
not  allowed  to  communicate  with  personnel  at  the  school  and  was  not  aware  of  what 
documents  were  due,  She  had  a  meeting  with  Pilkington  on  October  29,  2012,  at  which  time 
she  was  notified  that  she  would  be  going  back  to  Los  Feliz,  Respondent  returned  to  the 
campus  on  October  30,  2012  at  which  time  there  was  a  substitute  in  her  classroom.  She  used 
the  day  to  catch  up  on  her  paperwork  as  much  as  possible.  She  did  not  have  access  to 
assessments,  schoo!  bulletins  or  any  other  materials  during  the  time  she  was  at  ESC. 

During  this  time,  she  was 

18. 

Pilkington  made  a  number  of  observations  in  Respondent's  class  some  of 

   

    

hich  focused  on  i  Student  &..  new  to  Los  Feliz,  Respondent 
at  a  kidney-shaped  table  to 
Respondent  also  gave 

which  some 
had  placed 
be  bullying 
were  misbehaving  and  writing  their  names  on  the  board,  as  well  as  grading 
classwork  of  other  students.  Pilkington  instructed  Respondent  to  reseat  Ss  the  other 
students  and  cease  allowing  her  special  privileges.  Pilkington  told  Respondent  that 
was 
“fooling  her.”  <i 
complied  with  Pilkington's  directives.  By  mid-October, 
Pilkington  moved 
to  another  class  over  her  parents'  objections  because  she  believed 
that  Idaly  needed  a 

separate  her  from  students  that  she  perceived  to 
responsibility  for  determining  which  students 

some  of  the 

different  environment. 

   

~~  complained 

19. 

Pilkington  received  written  and  verbal  complaints  from  a  few  parents  about 
the  lack  of  homework  and  lack  of  order  in  Respondent's  class.  Several  parents  asked  for 
their  children  to  be  moved  to  other  teachers.  Parents  also  complained  to  Kupalian,  but  she 
referred  them  to  Pilkington.  Two  students  were  moved  from  the  class,  but  Pilkington  refused 
to  move  any  other  students  because  of  the  contractual  limits  on  class  size.  A  few  teachers 

to  Pilkington  about  Respondent's  strange  behavior,  inappropriate  comments  and 

shouting.  In  one  incident,  upon  meeting  Michelle  Bruno  (Bruno),  a  young,  relatively  new 
teacher,  she  asked  how  old  she  was  and  “whose  butt  did  you  kiss  to  get  the  job?”  She  also 
commented  to  Bruno  that  Ms.  Vo,  a  colleague,  was  a  “witch  hunter.”  Fora  time, 
Respondent  was  seen  walking  around  campus  and  in  the  teacher's  lounge  with  a  tape 
recorder  and  a  microphone  hanging  around  her  neck,  appearing  to  record  the  conversations 
of  other  teachers,  until  Pilkington  directed  her  not  to  wear  the  microphone  or  tape  students  or 
colleagues  without  permission. 

20. 

Respondent’s  usual  classroom  routine  started  with  a  warm-up  activity,  and 

then  moved  to  academics  which,  depending  on  the  day,  included  reading  and  language  arts, 
recess,  math,  social  science,  history  and  health.  Respondent  ended  each  class  day  with  30 
minutes  of  physical  education  instruction.  The  students  generally  liked  having  physical 
education  each  day. 

21. 

On  December  12,  2012,  Pilkington  was  in  the  administrative  office  with  the 

door  closed  when  Respondent  walked  by  with  her  class  enroute  to  the  cafeteria, 
Respondent's  class  was  unruly  and  did  not  follow  her  directions  to  walk  quietly  in  two  lines. 

6 

1 
i 
'
  

As  she  passed  the  administrative  buildings,  Respondent’s  class  grew  noisy.  In  response, 
Respondent  yelled  at  them  to  be  quiet  and  get  in  straight  lines.  Pilkington  heard  the 
commotion,  exited  her  office  and  in  front  of  the  students  instructed  Respondent  to  lower  her 
voice. 

22. 

advised  her  of  reports  from  students  about  the  incident.  On  F ebruary  5,  2013, 

S.  spilled  juice  on  her  desk.  She  got  up  and  went  to  the  sink  in  the  back  of 
use  her  sleeve  to  clean  up 

Pilkington  also  became  aware  of  a  situation  involving  student 
|  S.  in 
Respondent's  class.  Pilkington  learned  of  the  incident  when  police  came  to  investigate  and 
Kupalian 
student 
the  classroom  to  obtain  paper  towels 
the  mess.  Respondent  instructed. 
had  spilled  juice,  b 
of  sitting  down, 
threaten 
threw 
classroom. 
head  on  the  desk  and  cried.  Other  classmates  attempted  to  console  aes. 

to  sit  down.  :  oe  to  explain  that  she 
her  of  “talking  back.”  Instead 

backpack  outside,  grabbed  her  by  the  arm  and  ordered  her  out  of  the  ” 

then  told  her  she  was  suspended,  opened  the  classroom  door, 

ined  paper  towels  and  returned  to  her  seat.  Respondent 

“shrugged  off”  Respondent's  grasp,  sat  back  down 

spondent  interrupted  her  and  accused 

in  her  chair  with  her 

because  she  did  not 

     

suspen 

23. 

When  Pilkington  learned  of  the  incident  with  Hes.  and  after  the  school 

police  department  advised  her  that  she  could  handle  the  matter  administratively,  she 
interviewed  students,  advised  Vega  and  prepared  an  incident  report  on  the  District's 
computerized  incident  recording  system  known  as  ISTAR.  Vega  determined  that 
Respondent  should  be  removed  from  the  classroom.  Respondent  was  removed  from  Los 
Feliz  and  did  not  return. 

24, 

On  February  7,  2013,  Pilkington  wrote  to  the  parents  of  all  of  the  students  in 
~~  the  class and  notified  them  that  Respondent  had  been  removed  from  the  classroom  because 

of  an  incident  that  occurred  on  February  5,  2013  and  the  ensuing  investigation.  On  February 
5,  2013,  at  the  direction  of  the  operations  director,  Pilkington  completed  a  confidential  report 
to  the  District's  Office  of  General  Counsel  detailing  the  information  she  had  obtained  from 
witnesses. 

25. 

Respondent  was  scheduled  for  her  evaluation  in  the  2012-2013  schoolyear, 
On  April  26,  2013,  Pilkington  prepared  Respondent's  Siull  evaluation.  According  to  the 
April  26,  2013  evaluation,  Pilkington’'s  evaluation  was  based  upon  observations  made  on 
September  6,  2012,  September  10,  2012,  October  4,  2012,  October  1  1,  2012,  November  14, 
2012,  December  11,  2012  and  January  9, 2013  and  conferences  dated  September  7,  2012, 
September  12,2  0212,  October  5,  2012,  October  25,  2012,  November  30,  2012,  December - 
14,  2012  and  January  22,  2012  reflected  an  overall  “Below  Standard”  rating.  Pilkington 
rated  Respondent  as  meeting  standards  only  in  the  category  of  “Regularly  arrives  on  time, 
starts  class  on  time,  starts  class  on  schedule.”  According  to  the  evaluation,  Respondent  was 
absent  on  nine  days  and  never  tardy.  Respondent  was  rated  as  needing  improvement  in  eight 
areas  and  not  meeting  standards  in  18  areas.

Specific  Allegations  from  Los  Feliz 

26. 

Complainant  made  specific  allegations  relative  to  Respondent's  behavior  and 

performance  at  Los  Feliz.  The  Commission  considered  the  evidence  and  determined  that 
Complainant  failed  to  prove  the  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraphs  10  and  23  of  the 
Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  With  respect  to  the  remaining  allegations 
asserted  about  Respondent's  conduct  during  her  time  at  Los  Feliz,  the  Commission  made 
findings  of  fact  with  respect  to  those  allegations  as  follows. 

: 

27, 

In  Paragraph  1  of  the  Accusation,  District  alleges: 

On  or  about  November  8,  2012,  CALLAHAN,  fourth  Grade 
teacher  at  Los  Feliz  Elementary  School,  called  the  parent  of 
—_ 
G.,  a  former  student,  and  told  the  parent  that  she 
intended 
to  cali  LAPD  to  file  a  report  against  Principal 
Katherine  Pilkington.  She  alleged  that  the  principal  was  going 
to  take  the  student  out  of  the  home  and  away  from  the  parents. 
The  parent  later  requested  that  her  daughter  be  removed  from 
the  teacher's  classroom  because  the  phone  call  frightened  her, 

28. 

District  failed  to  establish  the  allegations  set  forth  in  Paragraph  1  of  the 
Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  District  established  that Respondent 
contacted  the  mother  of  re  G.  whoo: 
   
Spanish. 
k 
had  been  a  teacher,  translate  for  her.  It  was  established  that  there  was a  lot  of  confusion 

oke  Spanish,  Respondent  did  not  speak 
She  had  called  the  mother  of aa G,  from  home.  When  she  discovered  that 
G's  mother  spoke  only  Spanish,  she 

    

had  one  of  her  neighbors  who  is  bilingual  and 

   

a  Gring-the-telephone  xf 

ee  things  that  are alleged in  paragraph 

  

i 

It  was  established  that  I 
asked  for  her  daughter  to 

   

G's  mother  was  confused  and  frightened  by  the  call  and 

be  moved  to  a  different  classroom. 

   

29. 

District  proved  the  allegations  of  paragraph  2  of  the  Accusation  bya 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that:  “On  or  about  November  13,  2012,  CALLAHAN  turned 
in  Quarter  1  progress  Reports,  which  were  due  on  November  8,  2012.” 

30(A).  District  proved  the  allegations  paragraphs  3a,  c,  d,  e  and  f  of  the  Accusation  by 
a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that:  “On  or  about  December  11,  2012,  CALLAHAN  failed 
to  turn  in  the  following  documents  on  their  due  dates:  the  Treasures  On-line  Completion 
Certificate  due  on  November  2,  2012;  Quarter  1  Periodic  Writing  Assessments  due  on 
November  9,  2012;  Assessment  administered  throughout  Reporting  Period  1  due  on 
November  14,  2014;  Grade  Book  due  on  November  14,  2014;  Annotated  RFEP  Rosters  due 
on  November  29,  2012  and  Letters  re:  notice  of  Annual  Progress  of  Reclassified  Students 
due  on  November  29,  2012.” 

  

  

  

  

 

31(B).  District  failed  to  prove  the  allegations  of  paragraph  3b.  Instead,  it  was 
established  that  Pilkington  refused  to  accept  the  Parent  Title  I  compacts  that  Respondent  had 
collected,  she  insisted  that  all  compacts  be  turned  in  at  the  same  time  and  Respondent  was 
unabie  to  obtain  all  of  them  from  the  parents. 

32. 

District  proved  the  allegations  of  paragraph  4  of  the  Accusation  that:  “Ton  or 

about  December  12,  2012,  CALLAHAN  screamed  at  her  students,  ‘Get  in  a  straight  line,’ 
using  a  harsh  manner  and  with  an  enraged,  angry  red  face.” 

33(A).  District  proved  the  allegations  of  paragraph  5a,  d,  e,  f,  g,  and h  of  the 
Accusation  that  Respondent  “failed  to  notify  the  office  of  her  absences,  not  later  than  30 
minutes  before  the  schedule  began  the  day  of  the  absence,  and  at  least  one  hour  before  the 
end  of  the  day  to  inform  the  office  is  she  was  returning”  on  October  8  and  30,  2012, 
November  27,  2012  and  December  5,  13  and  14,  2012. 

34(B).  District  failed  to  establish  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraphs  5b  and  5c  of 

the  Accusation,  Instead  it  was  established  that  while  Respondent  was  not  in  class  on  October 
19,  2012  and  October  26,  2012,  she  was  “housed”  at  the  District's  East  office  and  was  not 
absent.  It  was  also  established  that  Respondent  had  been  instructed  by  District 
administrators  not  to  contact  the  school  or  any  staff  at  the  school  on  those  days. 

35. 

District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  as  alleged  in  aragraph  6  of 

the  Accusation  “[o]n  or  about  January  31,  2013,  CALLAHAN  failed  to  submit  her  on-line 
child  abuse  certification  as  previously  directed  to  do  by  January  18,  2013.” 

36. 

District  proved  the  allegations  of  paragraph  7a,  b  and c  of  the  Accusation: 

- 

On  or  about  February  5,  2013,  CALLAHAN  jn  the  presence of 
students,  did  the  following  to  student 
S.  when  she  got 
out  of  her  seat  without  permission: 

a, 

creamed.  at  as  "You're  suspended!"  causing 
S.  to  become  fearful  and  cry. 

b. 
CALLAHAN: 

When  EC  S.  refused  to  leave  the  classroom 

iL 
it  in  the  hallway. 

Grabbed  a  S.'s  backpack  and  threw 

li. 

iii. 

Pulled  E 

|  S.  by  her  arm. 

Yelled  at  her,  ‘Get  out  of  my  room!’ 

Continued  to  yell  at 

c, 
suspend  you,  sit  down  and  shut  your  mouth.’

|  S.,  ‘If  you  don't  want  me  to 

37, 

District  failed  to  prove  the  factual  allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  7d  of  the 
Accusation  that  Respondent  “[s]cteamed,  ‘You  should  be  happy.  You  should  be  partying 
because  I'm  never  coming  back.  You  got  your  wish!’”  and  did  not  provide  any  direct 
evidence  to  support  the  allegation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

38. 

District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  the  factual  allegations  of 

paragraphs  9,  11,  12,  13,  16,  17,  18,  19,  and  20  of  the  Accusation,  as  follows: 

9, 
On  or  about  September  10,  2012,  during  the  period 
beginning  at  10:15  am.,  CALLAHAN  was  ineffective  in 
responding  to  and  monitoring  student  behavior  when  she  did  not 
respond  to  the  following  off  task  student  behaviors: 

b. 

Bs:  out  of  his  seat; 

ABB  ves  out  of  [her]  seat; 

RRB  ws  out  of  her  seat; 

f. 

a. 

b. 

g.  DEE  vas  throwing  paper  at  a and im 
and 

h, 
  
(para.9) 

   

and  HB  were  running  in  the  classroom. 

On  or  about  September  10,  2012,  during  the  period 

11. 
beginning  at  10:15  a.m.,  which  was  designated  as  Language  . 
Arts  time,  CALLAHAN  did  not  teach  an  English  lesson  because 
she  assigned  students  to  independently  complete  pages  48  and 
49  in  the  math  book. 

On  or  about  September  10,  2012,  during  the  period 

12. 
beginning  at  1:20  p.m,  CALLAHAN  was  ineffective  in. 
responding  to  and  monitoring  student  behavior  when  she  did  not 
respond  to  the  following  off  task  student  behaviors: 

RB»:  playing  with  items  in  her  desk; 

BEB  vs  talking  to  @ 

c.  az  was  playing  with  paper; 

10

        

  

d.  Bhs  playing  with  a  paper  folding  game; 

.  c 

was  passing  papers  to  another  student! 

Af 

naa  his  head  down  on  the  desk;  and 

Be:  out  of his  seat. 

e, 

f 

g. 

On  or  about  September  10,  2012,  during  the  period 
disrespectful  to 

13. 
beginning  at  1:20  a.m.,  CALLAHAN  was 
students  when  she  said  to  ee:  —_ 
mouth  shut!" 

"Keep  your 

14, 
Onor  about  November  14,  2012,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
present  a  teacher  directed,  planned  lesson  when,  for  the  entire 
science  period,  she  assigned  students  to  copy-the  definitions  for 
10  words  from  the  glossary  in  the  book  and  said  to  students,  ‘I 
know  you  did  this  before,  but  we  are  going  to  do  it  again...Does 
it  help  to  copy  the  definition  again?  And  again?  Yes,  each  time 
you  copy  them,  it  helps  you  to  learn.’  She  did  not  discuss  or 
teacher  [sic]  the  meaning  of  the  terms. 

15. 
Onor  about  November  14,  2012,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
present  a  teacher  directed,  planned  lesson,  when,  for  the  entire 
math  period,  she  had  four  multiplication  and  four  division 
problems  on  the  board  and  asked  students  to  tell  her  what  to 
multiply  or  divide  and  where  to  put  the  answer. 

~  16>  On  or  about  November  1472012, 

CALLAHAN  didnot 

use  academic  language  when  she  did  not  refer  to  place  values  as 
hundreds,  tens  and  ones. 

When  she  asked  students  where  to  write  each  part 

a. 
of  the  answer  to  math  problems,  she  accepted  answers 
such  as  "Under  the  four"  rather  than,  "In  the  hundred 
column. 

When  a  multiplication  yielded  30,  she  asked, 

b. 
"Where  do  I  put  the  zero  and  where  do  I  put  the  three?" 
She  accepted  ‘above  the  five’,  as  opposed  to  encouraging 
and  modeling  language  such  as  ‘above  the  tens  column.’ 

17. 
On  or  about  November  14,  2012,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
establish  and  maintain  standards  for  student  behavior.  During 
the  math  lesson,  there  were  no  consequences  for  off  task 
behaviors: 

11

a. 

b, 

c.. 

Mi 

was  reading  a  book. 

BB  vas  playing  with  a  map. 

az was  looking  at  his  library  book. 

lo 

not  paying  attention. 

    were  chatting  with  each  other  and 

e. 
the  left  side  at  the  front  did  not  participate  at  all. 

Two  students  at  the  back  of  the  room  and  two  on 

f- 
Although  the  teacher  called  on  students 
individually,  many  students  yelled  out  answers. 

7 

- 

.18. 
On  or  about  November  14,  2012,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
use  a  variety  of  instructional  strategies  and  resources  when  she 
called  students  up  one  at  a  time  to  work  out  problems  on  the 
board,  leaving  all  of  the  other  students  to  sit  idly,  chat  or  read 
books. 

19. 
show  evidence  of  planning  when: 

On  or  about  January  11,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 

a. 
She  wrote  in  her  plan  book,  ‘Mini-lesson  page 
367,’  but  then  told  students  to  take  out  their  Treasures 
book  and  read  page  370. 

b. 
Upon  hearing,  students  say  that  they  had  read  that 
page,  she  then  assigned  vocabulary  words  from  a  pocket 
chart. 

c. 
She  informed  students  that  they  would  take  a 
spelling  test,  but  after  students  questioned  how  they 
could  be  prepped  for a  test,  she  responded,  ‘Good 
Do  you  want  to  look  the  works  up  in  the  dictionary?’ 

point! 

20. 
On  or  about  January  11,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
present  any  lesson  when  she  assigned  students  to  copy  words 
from  a  glossary  for  20  minutes,  and  then  told  students,  who 
finished,  to  look  up  those  words  in  a  dictionary. 

39. 

District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  did  not 

check  for  understanding  and  sat  at  the  side  of  the  room  without  circulating  or  checking 
students  as  they  worked  on  January  11,  2013  as  alleged  in  paragraph  20  of  the  Accusation, 

12

  

However,  District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  her  conduct  was 
improper.  At  the  time  the  students  were  taking  a  test  and  Respondent  was  monitoring  the 
testing. 

40. 

District  proved  the  factual  allegations  of paragraphs  22,  24,  and  26  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  except  that,  as  stipulated  by  the  parties,  the 
lesson  was  presented  on  January  9,  2013,  not  January  22,  2013. 

22, 
On  or  about  January  22,  2013  [January  9,  2013], 
CALLAHAN  did  not  effectively  present  a  lesson  on  context 
clues  when,  while  reading  the  selection  aloud  with  the  students, 
she  had  them  use  context  clues  to  determine  the  meaning  of  only 
one  word,  ‘skyscraper,’  although  the  Teacher's  Edition  indicated 
that  six  highlighted  words  were  to  be  understood  using  context 
clues  in  preparation  for  the  subsequent  story  in  the  anthology. 

24. 
On  or  about  January  22,  2013[January  9,  2013], 
CALLAHAN  did  not  adequately  prepare  or  preview  materials 
when: 

. 

a. 
She  assigned  students  to  copy  a  chart  from  the 
text,  and  then,  after  students  noticed  a  similar  chart  in 
their  workbooks,  allowed  them  to  use  that  chart  instead. 
The  chart  in  the  workbook  was  actually  meant  to  be  used 
on  a  different  selection  from  the  anthology. 

b. 

She  asked  students  to  copy  the  definition  of  the 

and  the  dictionary  and  did  not  use  the  page  in  the 
Practice  Book  (pg.  181)  that  supports  the  vocabulary 
lesson  for  the  story. 

25. 
On  or  about  January  22,  2013  [January  9,  2013] 
CALLAHAN  read  the  book  Ronald  Reagan  with  (ELD) 
students,  but  only  had  students  take  turns  reading  and  did  not 
participate  in  any  activities  in  the  English  Language 
Development  (ELD)  Teacher's  Edition. 

26. 
On  or  about  January  22,  2013  [January  9,  2013], 
CALLAHAN  did  not  have  current  student  work  posted.  The 
ELD  board  had  been  posted  by  the  coordinator  three  months 
ago.  There  was  no  student  writing  displayed. 

Hu 
if 
i 

13 

    words  highlighted  in  the  selection  from  both  the  glossary 

i 
i 
i i 
  
E

City  Terrace  Elementary  2013-2014 

41, 

For  the  2013-2014  school  year,  Respondent  was  moved  to  City  Terrace 

Elementary  School  where  Elaine  Fujiu  (Fujiu)  was  the  principal.  Fujiu  holds  an  elementary 
teaching  credential,  a  reading  specialist  credential,  and  an  administrative  credential,  When 
Fujiu  was  advised  by  the  District  that  Respondent  would  be  placed  at  City  Terrace  as  a  “must 
place,”  she  asked  that  Respondent  be  placed  somewhere  else.  Fujiu  runs  a  community  based 
school  where  parents  and  teachers  sit  on  the  committee  with  Fujiu  when  interviewing  new 
teachers.  Fujiu  liked  to  pick  her  own  teachers  to  ensure  that  a  new  teacher  would  be  the  ri ght 
fit  for  the  school.  Nevertheless,  she  welcomed  Respondent  and  never  asked  her  why  she  was 
a  “must  place.” 

42. 

On  September  12,  2013,  Marsha  Oh-Bilodeau,  Coordinator  for  the  Peer 

Assistance  and  Review  Program  (PAR)  wrote  to  Fujiu  advising  her  that  Respondent  would 
be  participating  in  the  PAR  program.  She  included  reference  information  from  the  PAR 
program  and  identified  the  PAR  teacher.  (Exhibit  76.) 

43. 

Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  third  grade.  There  were  two  other  third 
grade  teachers:  Luz  Baltazar  and  Erin  Roberts.  These  two  teachers  had  spent  a  significant 
amount  of  time  preparing  curriculum  and  pacing  plans  for  the  third  grade  during  the  summer 
recess  and  invited  Respondent  to  collaborate  with  them.  During  the  first  quarter,  Nancy 
Guardardo  replaced  Luz  Baltazar  as  a  third  grade  teacher  because  Ms.  Baltazar  received  a 
promotion  to  a  coordinator  position  and  assigned  responsibility  for  implementation  of  a  new 
computer  based  teacher  evaluation  system.  At  grade  level  meetings,  the  teachers  discussed 
the  third  grade  pacing  plan,  homework  and  graded  each  other's  assessments  to  ensure 
uniformity  in  grading  across  all  third  grade  classes.  Respondent  did  not  participate.  When 
she did  attend  meetings,  she  took  notes in her  journal  and  did  not  contribute  to  the 
discussion.  Ms.  Roberts  and  Ms.  Guardardo  resented  Respondent  because  she  created  more 
work  for  them  and  did  not  maintain  an  orderly  classroom.  On  one  occasion,  the  two  reported 
to  administration  that  Respondent  had  been  sending  text  messages  on  her  cellphone  during  a 
joint  third  grade  music  rehearsal  for  a  holiday  assembly  and  left  the  auditorium  during  the 
rehearsal  leaving 
her  students  behind  and  unattended.  Respondent  had  been  sending  text 
messages  to : 
colleagues  were  annoyed  that  she  left  without  telling  them,  her  students  were  not  prepared 
for  the  rehearsal  and  were  not  well  behaved. 

father  about  his  behavior  during  the  rehearsal.  Respondent's 

44,  —  Respondent  did  not  align  her  homework  assignments  or  class  instruction  with 
that  of  the  other  third  grade  teachers.  Respondents'  students  spent  an  inordinate  amount  of 
time  in  recess  or  physical  education  in  comparison  to  the  other  classes  and  she  rarely 
assigned  homework.  As a result,  her  students  fell  behind  and  her  instruction  was  disjointed 
and  confusing.  The  poor  instruction  was  seen  by  Ms.  Fujiu  when  she  conducted  classroom 
observations  and  reported  by  parents.  During  parent-teacher  conferences,  Respondent  did 
not  have  appropriate  materials  available  to  support  the  grades  she  gave  students  and  did  not 
have  report  cards  available.  Respondent  yelled  at  students  and  threatened  to  leave  the 

14

  ~47-~Clara  Garcia  had  also  become  weary  from  coping  with  Respondent.  Ms. 

classroom  and  never  come  back  and  on  at  least  one  occasion  called  a  student  a  moron. 
Parents  at  City  Terrace  had  become  accustomed  to  structure  and  were  instructed  on  the 
importance  of  homework  and  parent  participation.  Respondent's  approach  to  teaching  was 
not  consistent  with  what  the  parents  had  seen  in  other  classrooms  and  concerned  them. 
Within  the  first  few  weeks  of  school  starting,  parents  began  complaining  to  Principal  Fujiu 
that  Respondent  was  strange,  did  not  assign  homework  and  the  students  were  confused  by 
her  instruction.  Several  parents  asked  for  their  students  to  be  removed  from  Respondent's 
classroom.  By  mid-year,  the  students  and  staff  were  consumed  with  gossip  about  whether 
Respondent  would  be  fired.  Respondent  aggravated  the  situation  by  telling  students  that  she 
might  get  fired  because  of  certain  parents  and  expressing  her  opinion  that  the  principal  was  a 
liar. 

45, 

Principal  Fujui  spent  a  considerable  amount  of  time  interviewing  students 

about  their  experiences  in  Respondent's  classroom  and  documenting  incidents  and 
observations  involving  Respondent's  classroom. 

. 

46. 

 Fujiu  conducted  observations  of  Respondent's  classroom  both  in  preparation 

for  her  Stull  evaluation  and  out  of  concern  based  upon  the  comments  she  received  from 
parents  about  the  classroom  dynamics  and  instruction  on  September  23,  2013,  October  10, 
2013,  October  14,  2013,  October  25,  2013,  November  7,  2013,  January  7,  2014  and 
documented  her  observations.  She  was  concerned  about  the  lack  of  rigor  and  planning  in 
Respondent's  instruction  and  the  Respondent's  grading  policies.  She  was  also  concerned 
about  Respondent's  failure  to  follow  school  rules  and  what  she  believed  to  be Respondent's 
poor  judgment  in  allowing  students  to  use  her  personal  cellular  phone  during  class  time  and 
allowing  students  to  stay  in  her  classroom  during  recess  and  after  school. 

Garcia  was  the  instructional  coach  and  categorical  program  coordinator  at  City  Terrace 
during  the  2013-2014  school  year.  She  has  14  years  of  experience  with  the  District  and 
holds  an  Administrative  Credential,  a  teaching  credential  and  a  Bilingual  Cross-Cultural 
Language  Arts  Development  (BCLAD)  certification.  During  the  2013-2014  school  year  she 
served  as  the  intervention  and  instruction  coach.  In  that  role,  she  provided  assistance  to 
teachers  regarding  instruction  of  English  language  learners.  Ms.  Garcia  was  a  credible 
witness,  without  bias  or  ill  motive.  Her  concern  was  clearly  for  the  instruction,  safety  and 
dignity  of  children.  She  presented  as  a  dedicated  and  compassionate  educator.  Ms.  Garcia 
tried  many  times  to  provide  Respondent  with  support  to  deal  with 
speaking  student  with  behavioral  challenges  and  a  complicated  family  dynamic. 

an  English 

  

48. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Garcia  credibly  explained  that 

needed  structure, 

His  attention  wandered,  but  he  was  good  natured  and  wanted  to  please,  Ms. 

=  and  support  and  she  had  attempted  to  assist  Respondent  in  designing  supports  for 
G    
   
Student 

:  a  small  resource  specialist  class  (RSP)  and 
in  the  small  group  setting.  At  the  time, 

Study  Team  (SST)  and  an  SST  plan  had  been  developed  for  him  that  required 

was  being  evaluated  by  the 

no  problems  redirecting 

had 

im 

   

15

  

    

Respondent  to  keep  a  behavioral  chart  and  walk 
afterschool  with  the  chart.  Respondent  rarely  followed  the  behavioral  chart  component  of 
the  SST  and  was  often  disrespectful  to 
sent 
   
him  out  of  the  classroom  on  errands,  to  the  principal's  office,  and  to  Ms.  Garcia's  RSP 
classroom  whenever  possible. 

to  the  principal's  office 

Respondent  yelled  at 

49. 

On  one  occasion,  Respondent  called  Ms.  Garcia's  classroom  and  insisted  that 

  

she  come  to  her  classroom  and  deal  with 
she 
called  Ms.  Garcia's  classroom  during  instructional  time  to  ascertain  whether 
had 
stolen  an  eraser.  Respondent  made  efforts  to  deal  with  a:  behavior  by  calling  his 
father  who  was  in  the  military  and  stationed  on  the  east  coast 
sometimes  talking  to  his 
mother  who  lived  locally,  but  was  ill  equipped  to  deal  with  a.  challenges  and 
showed  her  frustration  in  her  dealings  with  him. 

s  behavior.  On  another  occasion, 

    

   

    

50. 

Facing  overwhelming  opposition  from  the  parents,  Ms.  Fujin  contacted 

District  administration  for  assistance.  In  December  of  2013,  Francisco  Gonzales,  the  District 
Instructional  Director  came  to  the  campus  to  meet  with  some  of  the  complaining  parents  to 
discuss  their  concerns  about  Respondent  who  was  not  present  and  had  not  been  invited  to  the 
meeting.  Based  upon  his  brief  observations  of  Respondent's  classroom  and  the  reports  from 
Ms.  Fujiu,  Mr.  Gonzales  had  concerns  similar  to  those  of  the  parents.  At  hearing,  he 
described  Respondent  as  providing  poor  quality  instruction  and  creating  a  “toxic 
environment.”  Respondent  resisted  assistance  from  her  peers  and  ignored  instructions 
Principal  Fujiu's  directives.  As  the  situation  became  more  intense,  Respondent  became  more 
agitated  and  her  temper  flared  with  students. 

51. 

Respondent  often  raised  her  voice,  yelled  at  students  and  showed  a  lack  of 
classroom  management  skills.  On  April  9,  2014,  Respondent  attempted  to  deal  with  two 
students  that  were  playing  with  the  water  in  the  sink  in  her  classroom.  She  became angry, 
yelled  at  the  students  in  a  voice  loud  enough  to  be  heard  outside  of  the  classroom  and 
threatened  to  leave  the  classroom.  Principal  Fujui  was  walking  by  Respondent's  classroom 
and  heard  her  yelling  at  the  students  and  threatening  to  leave.  Principal  Fujui  walked  into  the 
classroom  in  the  midst  of  the  situation  and  witnessed  Respondent's  demeanor  as  she 
continued  to  yell  at  the  students  about  their  use  of  the  sink  and  the  water. 

52. 

Principal  Fujui  became  concerned  for  the  students  after  witnessing 

Respondent's  demeanor.  Respondent  was  subsequently  relieved  of  her  classroom  duties  and 
reassigned  to  the  local  District  Office.  She  was  not  permitted  to  return  to  a  District 
classroom  after  the  April  9,  2014  iricident.  In  May  of  2014,  Respondent  received  a  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Act  and  a  Suspension  as a  result  of  the  April  9,  2014  incident.  She  also 
received  a  below  standard  Stull  evaluation  for  the  2013-2014  school  year  in  May  of  2014. 

if 
a 
H

Specific  Allegations  from  City  Terrace 

53.  |  Complainant  also  made  specific  allegations  relative  to  Respondent's  behavior 
and  performance  at  City  Terrace,  The  Commission  considered  the  evidence  and  determined 
that  Complainant  failed  to  prove  the  allegations  set  forth in  paragraphs  29,  40a,  40c,  42,  and 
49  of  the  Accusation,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  With  respect  to  the  remaining 
allegations  asserted  about  Respondent's  conduct  during  her  time  at  City  Terrace,  the 
Commission  made  findings  of  fact  with  respect  to  those  allegations  as  follows. 

54.  |  Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  the  allegations 

contained in  paragraph  27,30-34,  36,  39,  40a, 40b,  40d,  41,43-  47,  and  51- 5  5  of  the 
Accusation  as  follows: 

~ 

On  or  about  October  8,  2013,  CALLAHAN,  when 

27, 
introducing  Unit  2 
provided  a  low  level  introduction  to  the  words. 

Week  1  Let's  Trade  vocabulary  words, 

The  teacher  did  almost  all  of  the  talking  during 

a, 
the  lesson  activity. 

b. 
or  few  word  answers. 

Student  participation  was  at  a  minimum,  with  one 

The  students  were  only  required  to  copy  what  the 

c 
teacher  wrote  on  the  board  onto  their  papers. 

There  were  no  illustrations  provided  for  a 
d. 
connection  to  the  word  as  provided  in  Treasures  on  the 
CD  or  hard  copies. 

. 

On  or  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 

30. 
identify  or  review  with  the  students  the  learning  objective  on 
page  72A  or  the  envision  Math  Teacher  edition,  which  stated 
that  students  would  ‘solve  problems  by  subtraction  with  mental 
math,’  resulting  in  the  following  response  from  students  to  the 
question,  ‘What  are  you  learning  and  why?’ 

Student  me.  said,  ‘Mental  Math.”  When  the 

a. 
principal  asked  him  why  he  said,  ‘I  can  learn  about 
mental  math.’ 

b. 
Student  _  responded,  ‘"To  learn  Mental 
math.’  When  asked  why  she  responded,  ‘To  learn  new 
math.’ 

Student  Ke.  said,  ‘Mental  Math.’  Her 

c 
response  to  why  was,  “That  is  a  hard  question.’ 

17 

| 

 

Student  a  responded,  ‘Subtracting  74-18.’ 

d. 
‘The  response  to  why  was,  ‘It  is  the  right  price  (referring 
to  problem  number  nine).’ 

On  or  about  September  23,  2012,  CALLAHAN  failed  to 

31. 
provide  evidence  of  lesson  planning  (i.e.  plan  book  or  other 
documentation). 

Onor  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 

32. 
follow  the  plan in  the  envision  Math  Teacher  Edition  (pages 
72A,  72B,  72,  73)  which  indicated  the  following: 

‘a. 
which  the  teacher is  to: 

Develop  the  Concept  via  an  interactive  activity  i in 

i. 
real  life. 

Set  the  Purpose  and  make  a  connection  to 

ii. 
collaboratively  to  solve  the  problem. 

Pose  a  problem  and  allow  students  to  work 

Create  a  link  to  prior  learning  using  the 

iii. 
problem  that  was  just  solved. 

Instruct  in  small  steps  by  showing  them 

Have  the  students  work  in  pairs  to  solve  a 

iv. 
another  strategy. 

v. 
given-problem- 

_b. 

develop  the  Concepts  via  the  Visual  Learning 
in  the  T.E.  and 

Bridge  at  the  top  of  pages  712  and 73 
student  textbook. 

i. 
error  intervention  and  reteaching. 

Provide  guided  Practice  with  ideas  for 

ii. 

Provide  independent  practice. 

c. 

Instead  she: 

i 
72#1-35  fold  it  4x.’ 

Had  written  on  the  board  ‘Math  page 

ii. 
Asked  for  a  volunteer  to-read  the  title  of 
the  lesson  and  then  asked  for  a  volunteer  to  find 
the  lesson  on  mental  math  in  Chapter  3. 

18

  

  

Copied  problems  from  the  textbook  onto 

iii. 
the  board  vertically  rather  than  horizontally  as 
they  were  in  the  book. 

Asked  students,  ‘What  should  I  write 

iv, 
under  (number)’  and  solved  problems  1-6  in  this 
manner, 

Told  the  students  to  write  problems  1-2 

Vv. 
again  and  explained  a  different  estimation 
strategy  where  one  changes  both  numbers  in  the 
same  way  and.then  subtracts. 

- 

-- 

On  or  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 

33. 
teach  a  directed  lesson  that  followed  the  Gradual  Release 
‘Responsibility  Model  (I  do,  we  do,  you  do  approach),  Asa 
result,  the  delivery  of  the  content  was  not  effective. 

CALLAHAN  did  almost  all  of  the  talking  during 

a. 
the  lesson  activity.  The  students  were  only  required  to 
copy  what  the  teacher  wrote  on  the  board  onto  their 
papers. 

b. 
Instead  of  teaching  the  students  how  to  solve  a 
problem  in  their  head  by  rounding  (mental  math),  she 
wrote  the  problems  on  the  board  and  showed  them  how 
to  solve  via  paper/pencil. 

the  students  and  instead  moved  straight  to  the  guided 
practice. 

34, 
On  or  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 
clearly  communicate  directions,  procedures,  and  information  to 
the  students  which  resulted  in  the  students  being  confused. 

a. 
She  told  the  student  to,  ‘Copy  new  number  one, 
two  and  three  instead  of  doing  number  nine  (referring  to 
problem  number  nine  in  the  textbook).’ 

b. 
the  students  did  not  understand  what  she,  so 
CALLAHAN  said,  ‘Where  you  would  be  doing  number 
nine  do  number  one.  Where  number  nine  should  have 
been  (on  the  students’  paper)  do  this  one  (pointed  to 
problem  on  the  board).  Number  10  this  one  (points  to 
another  problem  on  the  board),’ 

19

  Cc. 

She  did  not  teach  or  reteach  a  concept  or  skill  to 

i 

| 

C 
She  said,  ‘Maybe  you  should  copy  number  four 
the  right  way.  Ob  well,  just  leave  it  like  this.  Number 
six,  this  is  actually  number  four  but  I  made  a  mistake. 
Life  goes  on.’ 

d. 
When  a student  said,  ‘I’m  confused,’  she 
responded,  ‘You  got  unconfused.  You  didn't  know  what 
I  was  asking  now  you  do.’ 

36. 
Onor  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not  . 
monitor  student  learning  in  order  to  inform  her  instruction  and 
advance  student  learning. 

during  the  35-minute  observation,  she  circulated 

a. 
the  perimeter  of  the  classroom  only  one  time. 

b. 

She  did  not  look  at  the  students  work. 

c, 
check  for  understanding. 

She  did  not  ask  questions  of  individual  students  to 

d. 
table  in  the  front  of  the  room. 

She  stood  at  the  front  of  the  room  or  sat  at  the 

e. 
mental  math. 

She  did  not  model  how  to  solve  a  problem  using 

She  did  not  have  students  come  up  the  board  to 

f 
solve  the  problems;  she  solved  them  at  the  board. 

She  did  not  have  the  students  share  one  of  the 

2g. 
mental  math  strategies  used  to  solve  a  problem 
(rounding,  changing  both  numbers  in  the  same  way). 

On  or  about  October  10,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not  use 

39. 
instructional  time  effectively. 

She  sent  student AR  10  the  office  at  8:25  a.m.  to 

a. 
turn  in  the  attendance  note  envelope;  even  though  she 
had  previously  been  told  that  the  attendance  notes  are  to 
be  kept  in  her  room  until  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

20

  

b. 

tear  off. 

he  sent  students 
down  to  the  office 

to  turn  in  the  PTA  movie 

and 

: 

i, 
|  informed  the  administrator  that  at 
least  five  students  told  the  teacher  the  tickets  were 
to  be  given  to  the  PTA  when  entering  the  movie 
on  Friday.  This  was  also  indicated  on  the  flyer. 

ii 
The  administrator  walked  to  CALLAN's 
class  with  the  student  to  clarify  the  procedures  to 
follow  regarding  attendance  notes-and-the  PTA 
movie  ticket.  CALLAHAN  stated  to  the 
administrator,  ‘I  knew  the  PTA  ticket  was  turned 
in  at  the  movie,  but  I  just  wanted  to  verify.  I-don't 
know  how  to  mark  an  absence  online.  I  didn't 
have  to  do  it  last  school  year.’ 

- 

TS 

40... 

a. 
On  or  about  the  week  of  October  7,  2013, 
CALLAHAN  was  ineffective  in  monitoring  and 
responding  to  student  behavior  when  she  constantly 
interruptedthe  Resource  Program  with  her  questions 
regarding  student  behavior  and  with  demands  for  the 
Resource Teacher to_come_up  to.  her-room-to-discipline——-—————________--.__.-.-. 
her  students. 

b. 
RSP  aide,  had  given  a  student  a  sharpener/eraser. 

She  called  the  RSP  room  to  ask  if  S.  Zermeno, 

d, 
On  October  10,  2013,  at  approximately  10:00 
ag 
CALLAHAN  called  the  RSP  room  to  say  that 
| os 
was  screaming,  and  then  asked  if  T. 
Moren, 
RST,  could  come  and  watch  her  students  for  an 
hour  or  so  because  she  was  having  an  ‘emergency.’  Ms. 
Moren  informed  CALLAHAN  that  she  was  teaching 
students,  and  that  she  need  to  inform  the  principal  of  her 
emergency. 

On  or  about  October  10,  2013,  CALLAHAN  was 

41. 
ineffective  in  monitoring  and  responding  to  student  behavior 
when  she: 

21

' 
| 

    

Did  not  walk  student 

a. 
Y.  down  to  the 
office  at  2:30  p.m.  With  is  Daily  Behavior  Chart  (as  the 
administrator  had  requested  her  to  do  on  several 
occasions)  so  that  the  administrator  could  support 
CALLAHAN  with  the  monitoring  of 
s 
behavior.  Instead  CALLAHAN  sent  a  note 
stating 
thatthe  administrator  should  look  for  —  YDP. 

       

Failed  to  document  on  the  Daily  Behavior  Chart 

b. 
for  student 
and  very  few,  if  any,  positive  actions. 

V.  the  negative  student  actions 

   
43 
On  or  about November  1,  > ill 
did  not  use  good 
judgment  when  she  allowed  student 
O,  to  use  her  (CALLAHAN'S) 
personal  cell  phone  to  call  home  because  she  was  not  feeling  well.  Because 
the  mother  did  not  recognize  the  phone  number,  she  did  not  answer  the  call. 
:  |  then  called  her  sister,  who  took  the  call  and  informed  the  mother. 

On  or  about  November  4,  nt  Vf  BM  6  io  ws 

44. 
judgment  when  she  allowed  student 
(CALLAHAN 'S)  cell  phone  to  call  her  older  sister  while  the  sister  was  also  in 
school  to  ask  if  she  could  go  to  a  friend's  house  after  school. 

O,  to  use  her  personal 

did  not  use  good 

On  or  about  the  period  from  October  24,  2013  to  November 4,  2 

45. 
CALLAHAN  failed  to  provide  parent  communications  regardin 
V.  when  she  did  not  give  Daily  Behavior  Chart  to  his  sister 
October  24,  25,  28,  29  and  November  4,  2013. 

V.on 

  46. 

On  or  about  November  7,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not  demonstrate 

evidence  of  having  designed  instruction  that  engaged  students  in  cognitively 
challenging  work  that  was  aligned  to  grade  level  content  standards. 

The  Treasure’s  Reading  Language  Arts  Teacher 

a. 
Edition  lesson  plan  (pages 
275C  and  275D)  for  the  day 
of  the  observation  indicated  that  the  focus  of  the  writing 
was  on  strong  verbs  and  that  the  teacher  should  do  the 
following: 

Use  the  example  from  the  story  A  Castle 

i. 
on  Viola  Street  to  show  the  author's  skilled  use  of 
strong  verbs. 

Read a  paragraph  about  Jell-o  and  discuss 

ii. 
how  the  author  used  strong  verbs  to  help  the 
student  imagine  the  moment. 

22

iti. 
|  Ask  focus  questions  to  explore  the 
students’  reactions  to  particular  passages  in  the 
reading  and  to  deepen  their  connection  to  the  text 
thus  improving  their  own  writing. 

Write  the  following  journal  prompt  on  the 

iv. 
board,  ‘Imagine  you're  fixing  up  a  house  for 
someone.  Select  one  moment.  Write  a  short 
paragraph  about  that  moment.’ 

v. 
Tell  the  students  that  the  teacher  would  be 
reading  and  commenting  on  their  writing.during 
Writing  Conference  time. 

- 

Model  liow  to  use  the  Writer's  Checklist  to 

vi. 
write  and  revise  their  work.  | 

There  was  no  evidence  (i.e.  Writer's  Checklist, 

b. 
teacher  model,  list  of  strong  verbs)  to  reflect  that 
CALLAHAN  did  any  of  this.  Instead  the  (sic)  she  did 
the  following: 

Wrote  the  writing  prompt  on  the  board: 

i 
‘Suppose  you  are  a  parent  in  Castle  on  Viola 
Street.  Write  about  why  you  want  a  house.’ 

Circulated  around  the  classroom 
ii. 
periodically  writing  words  on  the  board  that  the 
students  asked  her  to  spell.  She  said,  ‘Raise  your 
hand  if  you  have  finished.’ 

iti, 
|  Grouped  the  students  and  told  them  to  read 
their  stories  to  each  other,  but  she  did  not  give  the 
students  a  purpose  for  sharing  (i.e,  listen  for  the 
strong  verbs). 

process  that  focused  on  a 

The  Teacher's  Edition  also  indicated  that  this  was 

C 
part  of  asix  week  writing 
different  skill  each  week  in  order  to  help  the  students  get 
a  solid  foundation  on  the  various  aspects  of 
Expository/Description  and  thus  write  an  independent 
piece  at  the  end  of  week  six.  These  skills  were  the 
following: 

Week  1-Strong  Sentences:  Showing 

Week  2-Strong  Paragraphs:  Showing 

23 

i 

 

Week  3-Expository/Description  (Guided  Writing) 

Week  4-Strong  Sentences:  Strong Verbs 

Week  5-Strong  Paragraphs:  Strong  Verbs 

Week  6-Expositiory/Description  (Independent  Writing) 

There  was  no  evidence  (i.¢.  charts,  student  work  samples,  teacher  models)  anywhere 

in  the  classroom  to  reflect  that  the  teacher  had  done  any  of  the  suggested  activities  for  Weeks 
1-3  which  would  have  prepared  the  students  for  the  Week  4  assignment. 

Otror  about  November  7,  2013,  CALLAHAN  didnot 

47. 
state  or  review  the  language  and  content  objectives  for  the 
writing  lesson  nor  were  they  posted  anywhere  in  the  classroom. 

oe 

~ 

51. 
During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  13, 
2014,  and  ending  on  or  about  February  24,  2014,  CALLAHAN 
told  her  students  to  tell  their  parents  not  to  complain  to  the 
principal  about  her  because  if  parents  complained,  she  would  be 
fired. 

52. 
During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  13, 
2014,  and  ending  on  or  about  February  24,  2014,  CALLAHAN 
made  the  following  statements  to  students  regarding  Principal, 
Elaine  Fujiu: 

a. 

‘Ms.  Fujiu  is  a  liar.’ 

b. 
not  teach  the  students.’ 

‘Ms.  Fujiu  said  that  I  write  on  the  board  and  do 

‘The  principal  is  using  He  get  me 

Cc. 
fired.’ 

d. 

‘Ms.  Fujiu  tells  lies  about  me.’ 

‘I  do  not  give  homework  some  days  because  the 

e 
copy  machine  is  not  working.’ 

‘Tam  better  than  the  principal  and  kids  like  me 

f. 
better.’ 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  13, 
gn  or  about  February  24,  2014,  CALLAHAN 

53. 
2014,  and  ending 
called  student  A  a  ‘moron’  in  response  to  A:  off-task 
behavior. 

24 

 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  January  13, 

54. 
2014,  and  ending  on  or  about  February  24,  2014,  in  the  presence 
of  her  clas 
student 

ents,  CALLAHAN  did  the  following  to 
: 

a. 

Told  a.  ‘shut  up.’ 

Told  the  class  that  HIB  ses 

b. 
the  class  will  not  get  a  cupcake  and  will  be  in  trouble.’ 

listen  and 

Told  the  class  that.she  was  going  to  be  gone  for 

c. 
20  days  and  that it was : 

fault. 

-  oe 

Onor  about  April  9,  2014,  CALLAHAN,  3rd  grade 

55. 
teacher  at  City  Terrace  Elementary  School,  failed  to  follow  an 
administrative  directive  when  she  scteamed  the  following  at  her 
class  of  students,  loudly  enough  to  be  heard  through  a  closed 
door  by  the  principal: 

a. 
walk  out  of  this  room  right  now!’ 

‘If  you  don't  leave  the  water  alone,  I  am  going  to 

b. 

‘Quit  touching  the  sink!’ 

c. 
don't  quit  touching  the  sink!’ 

‘Tam  going  to  have  them  turn  off  the  water  if  you 

d. 

‘Stop  turning  on  the  water!’ 

‘If  you  go  to  the  water  fountain,  I'm  going  to  go 

e. 
out,  and  I'm  never  coming  back!’ 

SSA. 

In  paragraph  28  of  the  Accusation,  the  District  alleged: 

On  or  about  the  period  from  September  to  October  2013, 
CALLAHAN  assigned  daily  student  journal  writing  which  was 
ineffective  and  not  aligned  to  instructional  standards  for  third 
grade. 

.  She  assigned  students  to  copy  sentences  that  she  wrote  on  the 

a. 
board  about  the  date,  where  we  live,  names  of  other  United  States 
cities,  the  seven  continents,  names  of  the  colors  and  the  names  of  the 
months. 

b. 
many  weeks. 

Most  of  the  journal  entries  were  repeated  over  and  over  for 

25 

: it 
i 
t 
t 

| 
fl i 
{ i 
i 

 

SSB. 

District  established  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  28a  and  28b  of 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  However,  District  generally  failed  to  prove 
that  the  student  journal  writing  was  ineffective  and  not  aligned  to  instructional  standards  for 
third  grade.  District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  copying  of  the 
names  of  the  colors  and  the  names  of  the  months  was  not  aligned  with  state-standards. 

56A. 

In  paragraph  35  of  the  Accusation,  the  District  alleged: 

On  or  about  September  23,  2013,  CALLAHAN  did  not 

identify  or  define  vocabulary  terms  that  were  relevant  to  the 
lesson  such  as:  mental  math,  rounding,  estimation,  subtract. 

56B. 

District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  did 

not  identify  or  define  the  vocabulary  terms  “mental  math”,  “rounding”  and  “estimation”  that 
were  relevant  to  the  lesson.  The  term  “subtract”  was  not  new  to  the  class  and  therefore 
Respondent  was  not  required  to  identify  or  define  “subtract.” 

57A. 

In  paragraph  37  of  the  Accusation  District  alleged 

On  or  about  September  23,  2012,  CALLAHAN 
interacted  with  some  students  negatively  or  inappropriately. 

a, 

he  teacher  constantly  called  attention  to  student 

as  for  behaviors  that  other  students  were 

exhibiting.  She  asked  him  three  times  if  he  bad  written 
his  name  on  the  paper  and  did  not  ask  any  other  students 
ifthey  had  written  their  names  on  their  papers,  despite  _ 
the  fact  that  at  least  wo  other  students  did  not  have  their 
names  on  their  papers. 

The  teacher  told Ra.  to,  ‘Turn  around  and 

b. 
face  your  desk,’  when  there  were  two  girls  in  the  back 
foo  the  classroom  that  were  turned  in  their  seats  and  not 
facing  the  from  and  the  teacher  did  not  address  them. 

The 

c. 
student 
chair  alone  and 
you  how  many  levels  of  bad  that  is.’ 

tone  in  the  teacher's  voice  when  addressing 
N.  was  that  of  irritation,  ‘Leave  that 
get  your  name  on  the  paper?’  ‘I  can't  tell 

Student  ™  H.  wanted  to  say  something  but 

her  a  stern  look  and  she  responded, 

d. 
the  teacher  gave 
‘Never  mind.’ 

At  approximately  1:20  p.m.  student  fi Vv. 

e 
brought  his  behavior  chart  up  to  the  teacher  and  she 

26

responded,  ‘I  can't  finish  that  until  2:30  p.m.’  followed 
by,  ‘All  right,  I'm  sorry ]  was  interrupted,’ 

57B. 

District  proved  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  37a,  b,  and  d  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  It  was  also  established  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  the  statements  alleged  in  paragraph  37c.  However, 
District  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  ‘tone’  of  the  teacher's 
instruction  to  the  students  was  ‘that  of  irritation.’  District  failed  to  prove  the  factual 
allegations  set  forth  in  paragraph  37  e  of  the  Accusation.  Furthermore,  District  failed  to 
prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  allegations  that  were  proven  were  either 
negative  or  inappropriate. 

S8A. 

In  paragraph  38  of  the  Accusation,  District  alleged: 

October  25-at  1:30  to  1:45  p.m.,  CALLAHAN  spent  15 

minutes  of  instructional  time  reviewing  the  directions  for 
homework.  The  homework  assignment  directions  were  repeated 
consistently  weekly  for  the  third  grade  such  as:  ‘Draw  a  picture 
to  represent  the  word.  Write  each  work  in  a  sentence.  Practice 
fluency  and  record  it  daily.  Practice  the  times  tables.’  Also  the 
directions  were  written  on  each  assignment  and  the  assignment 
sheet.  There  were  no  questions  on  the  homework  assignment 
from  the  students  as  CALLAHAN  reviewed  them  for  fifteen 
minutes, 

S8B. 

District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  made  the 

statements  attributed  to  her  in  paragraph  38  of  the  Accusation.  However,  District  failed  to 
prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  statements  and  conduct  were 
inappropriate. 

S9A, 

In  paragraph  48  of  the  Accusation,  Complainant  alleged: 

On  or  about  November  7,  2013,  did  not  monitor  and 
respond  to  student  behavior  effectively  as  she  did  not  respond  to 
the  following  off  task  behaviors: 

a. 

Students Ag and VE  O.  passed 

notes  back  and  forth. 

b. 

Student 

|  turned  in  her  seat  to  talk  to 

Student  m7  BF, 

c. 
talking  to  student 

Studgnt  fic.  was  up  out  of  his  seat 

M. 

27

59B. 

District  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  facts  alleged  in 

paragraph  48a,  b  and  c  occurred,  but  failed  to  prove  that  these  behaviors  were  off  task  or  that 
a  response  was  required  to  the  behaviors. 

60A. 

In  Paragraph  50  of  Accusation,  Complainant  alleged: 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  Tuesday,  January 
21,  2014,  and  ending  on  or  about  January  28,  2014, 
CALLAHAN  failed  to  follow  an  administrative  directive  not  to 
retaliate  against  anyone  who  had  filed  or  was  participating  in  the 
investigation  of  a  complaint  when  she  stated  the he following, i  in 
the  presence  of  her.class.of.students:  .  - 

~- 

cen 

‘I  might  be  fired 

a. 
did  not  want  me  to  let 
complained  to  the  principa. 

use  of 
use  my  cell  phone..  She 

smother.  She 

‘I  might  get  fired  and I  will  miss  you a  lot  and 

b. 
you'll  have  another  teacher  for  the  rest  of  the  year.’ 

c. 

‘T  hope  I  don't  get  fired,’ 

60B. 

District  proved  the  factual  allegations  of  paragraph  50a,  b  and c  of  the 

Accusation  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  but  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  such  facts  constituted  failure  to  follow  an  administrative  directive  or 
retaliation. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

In  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  allegations  of  the 
Charges  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  y.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than, 
the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314, 
325.)  The “preponderance  of  the  evidence”  standard  requires  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  that 
the  existence  of  a  fact is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence.  (in  re  Michael  G.  (1998)  63 
Cal.App.4th  700,  709.) 

- 

i 
if 
if 

28

Cause  for  Dismissal 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Education  Code’  section  44932  and 
44939  are  established.  In  this  case,  the  District  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal  based  on  (1) 
unprofessional  conduct,  (2)  immoral  conduct,  (3)  egregious  misconduct,  (4)  unsatisfactory 
performance,  (5)  evident  unfitness  for  service,  (6)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 
the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing 
him  or  her  and  (7)  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 
as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations 

of the employing  school  district. 

3. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2). 
Unprofessional  conduct  in  the  teaching  profession  has  been  defined  as  that  which  violates  the 
tules  or  ethical  code  of  the  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a  member  of  the  profession  in  good 
standing.  (Board  of Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  overruled  in  part,  on  another 
ground,  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  588,  fn.  7.)  Respondent's  conduct 
was  inconsistent  with  the  rules  of  the  profession  and  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the 
profession  in  good  standing.  Specifically,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated 
that  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  administrative  directives,  yelled  at  students,  demeaned 
students,  failed  to  provide  students  with  appropriate  instruction  and  allowed  them  to  use  her 
cellular  telephone  during  class  time. 

4, 

Complainant  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1).  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  is  not  confined  to  sexual  matters,  Immoral  conduct  has 
been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

5. 

Complainant  also  failed  to  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  egregious  misconduct  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1).  While  Respondent’s  handling  of  Barbara  and  her  overall  demeanor  were 
unprofessional,  they  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of  egregious  misconduct. 

6. 

Complainant  established  Respondent's  unsatisfactory  performance  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5).  The 

>  All  further  references  to  Code  shall  mean  the  Education  Code. 

29

term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the  Code  or  case  law. 
Inasmuch  as  there  is  a  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct  in  section 
44932,  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  the  Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative 
statutes  and  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something  different  from  unprofessional 
conduct.  (in  re  Maes  (2010)  185  Cal.  App.4th  1094,  1110.)  In  fact,  section  44938, 
subdivision  (c),  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory  performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause 
for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory 
performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance.  Section 
44660  et  seq.,  referenced  in  section  44938,  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school  districts 
should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  An  employing 
school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or  capricious in  making decisions regarding whether  a 
certificated  employee  has  performed in  an  unsatisfactory  manner.  It  has  been  observed  that 
the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving  tenure  to  teachers is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of 
teachers  whose  members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they 
conduct  themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield 
Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v,  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist,  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260, 
1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Thus,  cause  for  discipline 
may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  in  an  unsatisfactory  manner  to  her 
employing  school  district. 

7. 

Respondent  displayed  a  lack  of  planning  and  instruction,  a  lack  of  classroom 

environment  and  management  and  a  failure  to  engage  in  professional  development  and 
growth.  Respondent  was  given  numerous  warnings,  directives  and  appropriate  support  and 
guidance  to  improve  her  performance  including  the  services  of  a  PAR  teacher.  After 
Respondent  was  removed  from  Los  Feliz  under  unfavorable  circumstances,  she  was  given  a 
second  opportunity  to  teach  at  City  Terrace. Despite  provided  meaningful  opportunity  to 
improve  her  performance,  Respondent  failed  to  improve.  Importantly,  her  performance 
deteriorated  as  time  passed. 

8. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 

is  evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 
“Bvident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for 
teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429, 
1444.)  “’Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not 
remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of 
the  employing  school  district.”  (d.)  In  this  case,  Respondent  demonstrated  demeanor  and 
fixed  personality  traits  that  were  immutable  and  inconsistent  with  the  teaching  profession. 
The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Respondent  lacks  the  demeanor, 
patience,  skill  and  organization  to  perform  as  teacher.  Moreover,  she  has  displayed  an 
inability  to  take  direction  and  to  collaborate  with  administrators,  parents  and/or  colleagues  in 
the  delivery  of  education  to  students,  Despite  opportunities  for  professional  development 
and  collaboration,  Respondent  failed  to  show  improvement. 

30

! 
i 
: 

  

9. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 
the  Board,  within  the  meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8).  Cause  for  discipline  here 
may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules  or  district  policies.  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1180- 
1181.)  However,  there  must  be  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to 
cooperate.”  Ud.  at  p.  1196.)  The  violation  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of 
continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of the  Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale 
Onion  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents 
involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period of  time  are  generally not considered  persistent. _ 
~  (Bourland  y.  Commission on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal. App.3d  317,  322.)  In 

this  case,  Respondent  demonstrated  a  persistent  refusal  to  turn in  documents  including 
certifications,  documents,  grades  and  assessments  as  instructed  and  abide  by  prescribed... 
deadlines  to  complete  tasks  and  instruction.  Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  abide  by 
school  policies  regarding  instruction,  grades,  pacing,  and  her  interactions  with  student,  staff 
and  administrators. 

—_ 

10. 

Complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent 
willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district  within  the  meaning  of  Code 
section  44939,  subdivision  (b)  when  she  refused  to  turn  in  documents,  grades,  assessments, 
and  certifications  in  a  timely  manner  as  required  by  school  and  District  policies. 

11. 

Generally,  in  deciding  whether  cause  for  dismissal  on  the  grounds  of 

unprofessional  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service,  it  also  must  be  established  that  a 
teacher’s  misconduct  relates  to  her  fitness  to  teach,  within  the  meaning  of  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of Education  (Morrison)  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  227-230).  The  Morrison  analysis  does 
not  apply  to  cause  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance  or  persistent  violation  of 
school  rules,  laws  or  policies  because  such  theories,  by  definition,  have  a  direct  nexus  with 
teaching.  (d.,  at  pp.  227-230).  With  regard  to  the  remaining  identified  causes  for  dismissal 
that  must  be  analyzed,  all  of  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  were  considered  and 
compared  to  the  facts  established  above.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the 
Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28 
Cal.App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each 
individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established 
collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.)  As  applied  in  this  case,  the  applicable 
factors  support  a  nexus  between  Respondent's  conduct  and  respondent’s  fitness  to  teach. 

12. 

In  Morrison,  the  California  Supreme  Court  reviewed  the  teacher’s  conduct.and 

determined  that  a  school  board  may  consider  such  specific  criteria  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity; 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 

31

held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a ‘chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

13. 

In  Morrison,  the  California  Supreme  Court  noted  that  legislation  authorizing 
disciplinary  action  against  the  holders  of  a  variety  of  certificates,  licenses  and  government 
jobs,  other  than  teaching,  contain  general  terms.  The  Court  had  not  attempted  to  formulate 
explicit  definitions  of  those  terms,  but  had  given  those  terms  more  precise  meaning  by 
referring  to  the  particular  profession  or  specific  governmental  position  to  which  they  were 
applicable.  (Morrison,  supra, 1 Cal.3d  at  p.  220). 
With  tégard to  sich  general  terms  ~~ 
“¢mmoral”  or  unprofessional  conduct”  and  “moral  turpitude,”  those  terms  had  to  be 
interpreted in  a  manner  bearing  upon-the  teacher’s fitness  to  teach.  “Without  such  a 
reasonable  interpretation,  the  terms  would:be  susceptible  to  so  broad  an  application  as 
possibly  to  subject  to  discipline  virtually  every  teacher in  the  state.”  (/bid.,  at  p.  225.) 
Analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  indicates  that  the  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in 
disciplinary  matters.  The  role  of  the  Commission  is  not  merely  to  determine  whether  the 
charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  to  decide  whether  the  conduct,  as  measured  against  the 
Morrison  criteria,  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v. 
Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.  3d,  209,  220.)  The  Morrison  factors  are  analyzed  with  regard  to 
Respondent’s  conduct  as  follows: 

(A)  Morrison  Factor:  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or 

fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of such  adversity.  Respondents  conduct  adversely  affected 
students  and  fellow  teachers  in  a  profound  way.  Respondent  created  a  chaotic  and  negative 
environment  for  her  students.  Respondent  refused  to  cooperate  and  collaborate  with 
colleagues  creating  a  toxic  work  environment  for  herself  and  those  around  her. 

(B)  Morrison  Factor;  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of the  conduct. 

Respondent's  conduct  was  recent. 

(C)  Morrison  Factor:  The  type  of teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher. 
Respondent  held  a  K-12  teaching  credential  which  was  the  appropriate  credential  for  her 
teaching  assignments. 

(D)  Morrison  Factor:  The  existence  of extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances 

In  aggravation,  Respondent  engaged  in 

and publicity,  if any,  surrounding  the  conduct. 
bizarre  behavior  such  as  having  a  tape  recorder  around  her  neck  in  the  teacher's  lounge  and 
about  school  premises,  taking  copious  notes  of  the  comments  made  by  colleagues  and 
administrators  and  writing  in  her  journal  and  making  rude  comments  to  and  about  other  staff 
members.  In  extenuation,  Respondent  was  under  a  considerable  amount  of  stress 
professionally  having  been  at  three  schools  in  three  academic  years  and  being  deemed  a 
“must  place.”  Additionally,  Respondent  had  to  familiarize  herself  with  new  administrators 

32

and  procedures  at  each  school.  Respondent  was  under  personal  stress  due  to  a  serious  family 
illness. 

(E)  Morrison  Factor:  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct,  Respondent's  motives  were  neither  praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy. 

(F)  Morrison  Factor:  Likelihood  of Recurrence:  Respondent's  conduct  is  likely  to 

recur. 

(G)  Morrison  Factor:  The  extent  that  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a 
chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of the  teacher.  There  is  no  constitutional  right 
involved. 

14. 

As  described  above,  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

..  evidence,  after  consideration  of  the  Morrison  factors,  the  Commission  does  not  consider 

respondent  temperamentally  suited  to  be  in  the  classroom  with  school  students  and  finds  that 
her  conduct  was  unprofessional  and  related  to  her  performance  as  a  public  school  teacher. 

15.  .  The  Commission  affirms  the  Board’s  decision  to  terminate  respondent’s 

employment  with  the  District.  The  District  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 
respondent’s  employment  for  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service, 
unsatisfactory  performance,  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  and  persistent 
violation  of  school  laws  and  regulations. 

16. 

The  Commission  unanimously  determined  that  dismissal  of  Respondent  was 
necessary  and  appropriate.  Respondent  was  given  numerous  opportunities  to  improve  her 
behavior  and  teaching  at  two  different  schools  and  failed  to  make  any  substantial 
improvement.  On  the  contrary,  Respondent's  conduct  and  her  ability  to  manage  her  students’ 
behaviors  and  her  classroom  continued  to  erode  until  she  was  removed  from  the  classroom. 
Respondent  does  not  have  the  appropriate  demeanor  and  disposition  to  work  with  children  or 
in  an  environment  that  requires  adherence  to  deadlines,  intellectual curiosity,  flexibility  and 
collaboration  with  colleagues  and  administrators. 

17.  _  Respondent's  claim  that  she  was  dismissed  as  a  retaliatory  measure  is  rejected. 

Respondent  failed  to  establish  that  she  was  the  subject  of  retaliation  or  that  she  engaged  in 
any  protected  activity  that  resulted  in  retaliation  against  her. 

1. 

The  Board  of  the  District’s  decision  to  terminate  respondent’s  employment 

with  the  District  is  affirmed. 

if 
Hf 

ORDER 

33

2. 
of  the  District. 

Respondent  Melinda  Callahan  is  dismissed  as.a  permanent  certified  employee 

DATED: 

January  6,  2017 

[Wary Eat by: 

DATED: 

January  6;  2017 

DATED: 

January  6,  2017 

‘60D087BA3CE3476... 

Mary  Bennett 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence 

DoguSlgned  "a 

USI  ALO 

SDD2NF9164EC4C2.., 

Luciano  Ortiz 
Member 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

[ 

da  DB. Comey 

“BB367A214FAG483.., 

Glynda  B.  Gomez 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Commission  on  Professional 
Competence

34 

