BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
FOR THE GOVERNING BOARD OF
THE TEMECULA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Proposed Dismissal 
Concerning:

LORI SOLA,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2016070122

STIPULATION TO HEARING BY A SINGLE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE

On July 26, 2016, as required by Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1), 

the parties submitted to the Office of Administrative Hearings, a statement in writing, waiving
their rights to convene a Commission on Professional Conduct, and stipulating to having the 
hearing conducted by a single Administrative Law Judge.1

DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Roy W. Hewitt, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

California, heard this matter in Temecula, California on September 13, 2016.

Mark W. Thompson, Esq., of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the

Temecula Valley Unified School District.

Jon Cadieux, Esq., of Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, APC, represented respondent, 

Lori Sola.  Respondent was present throughout the hearing.

The matter was submitted on September 13, 2016.

1 The Stipulation was marked by the Administrative Law Judge as Exhibit 18 and 

received in evidence. 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

4.

5.

Respondent is employed by the Temecula Valley Unified School District in a 

teaching position that requires a permanent certificated employee.

On August 28, 2015, the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC) 

revoked respondent’s educator’s credentials, the revocations were stayed and respondent was 
placed on probation.

3.

On December 22, 2015, respondent was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol in violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (a) (DUI), and for driving with a 
blood-alcohol content of .08 percent or higher in violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, 
subdivision (b) (DUI).  Additionally she was charged with the special allegation that she had 
previously been convicted of driving under the influence.  That criminal matter is still pending.

Effective February 26, 2016, respondent’s credentials were revoked by the CCTC 

because respondent violated one of the conditions of her August 28, 2015, probation.

On April 25, 2016, the Temecula Valley Unified School District Assistant 

Superintendent, Human Resources Development, filed a Notice of Recommendation for Dismissal 
and Statement of Charges.  The Assistant Superintendent filed the Notice of Recommendation for 
Dismissal and Statement of Charges while acting in his official capacity.  The Notice of 
Recommendation for Dismissal and Statement of Charges set forth the following causes for 
dismissal:

1.  Your Education Specialist Instruction Credential (No. 
150173717) was revoked by the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (CCTC) pursuant to Education Code section 44421, 
effective February 26, 2016.  This revocation was due to violation of 
CCTC-imposed probation due to misconduct.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

2.  Your Education Specialist Instruction Credential (No. 
110218779) was revoked by the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (CCTC) pursuant to Education Code section 44421, 
effective February 26, 2016.  This revocation was due to violation of 
CCTC-imposed probation due to misconduct.

3.  The District has determined that there is no evidence that your
teaching credential(s) will be restored in the foreseeable future.

2

Therefore, as of February 26, 2016, you are not authorized to teach 
in any public school in California.

4.  In addition to being precluded from teaching in any of the public 
schools of California, your failure to renew and maintain a valid 
teaching credential is a persistent violation of District policies.
4112 . . . . 
Specifically, Administrative Regulation (“AR”) 

[¶] . . . [¶]

6.  Your continued employment as a certificated employee with the 
District is precluded by several Education Code statutes . . . . (Exh.
2, DID 227-228.)

unpaid leave.

6.

7.

Currently, respondent, who was employed as a Special Education teacher, is on 

Respondent’s attorney argued that respondent should be allowed to remain on 

unpaid leave status until the Driving Under the Influence charges are fully litigated.  Additionally,
he argued that it would be unfair to terminate respondent based on “unproved conduct” – the DUI 
allegations.

8.

E. Joe Mueller’s, the Director of the Temecula Valley Unified School District’s 
Human Resources Development Department, testimony is summarized as follows: The District 
cannot continue holding respondent’s former position open; the District has had difficulty filling
respondent’s special education position with qualified part-time teachers because the teachers have 
no guarantee of a full-time position; the District needs a highly-qualified teacher to teach special 
education full-time; he does not believe respondent’s credentials will be reinstated and without a 
valid credential, respondent is prohibited from teaching; and the District risks being fined if 
respondent teaches without a credential.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Education Code section 44065, subdivision (a) provides, in part:

[A]ny person employed on or after July 1, 1963, by a school district . 
. . shall hold a valid teaching or service credential as appropriate . . . 
authorizing the particular service.

The work of instructors and the instructional program for pupils is a “particular service” 

within the meaning of Education Code section 44065, subdivision (a).

3

2.

Education Code section 44830, subdivision (a) provides, in part:

The governing board of a school district shall employ for positions 
requiring certification qualifications, only persons who possess the 
qualifications for those positions prescribed by law. . .

3.

Education Code section 45037, subdivision (a) provides, in part:

Except as provided in Section 45036, for the fiscal year 2001-02
and for any fiscal year thereafter in which a person renders service 
as a teacher in kindergarten or any of grades 1 to 12, inclusive, who 
does not have a valid certification document, the school district or 
county office of education in which the person is employed shall be 
assessed a penalty. . . .

4.

The CCTC’s revocation of respondent’s credentials are not subject to collateral 

attack in the present proceedings for the reasons and rationale set forth in Arneson v. Fox (1980)
28 Cal.3d 440, 449.

5.

Respondent no longer has a valid certification to teach; therefore, she is unfit for 

service within the meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6).  Accordingly
cause for dismissal exists.

6.

A second cause for dismissal exists because with no valid certification to teach, 

respondent is in violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8) (persistent violation 
of the laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed . . . by the State Board of Education or 
by the Governing Board of the school district).2

7.

The statutes and administrative regulations governing the certification of 

employees mandate respondent’s dismissal.  Retention of respondent, even on unpaid leave, is
not in the best interests of the district or the students it serves.

Analysis

//

2 Temecula Valley Unified School District Administrative Regulations, numbers AR 

4112, subdivision (a) and 4112.2, subdivision (a) require individuals appointed to the 
certificated staff to “possess the appropriate certification . . . and register the certification 
document in accordance with law and Board policy.”

4

ORDER

Respondent, Lori Sola, is dismissed from her employment with the Temecula Valley

Unified School District.

DATED:  October 7, 2016

DocuSigned  by:

_______________________________
ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

