BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

DENNIS JENKINS (EN 572600),
a permanent certificated employee,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2016060348

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in Los
Angeles, California, on November 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9, 2016. The Commission consisted of
Lacey Lemus, designated by the Los Angeles Unified School District (District or 
Complainant), John Colombo, designated by Respondent Dennis Jenkins (Respondent), and
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Carla L. Garrett, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 
of California, who presided.

Reginald Roberts, Attorney at Law, represented the District. Richard J. Schwab and

Rosty Gore, Attorneys at Law, represented Respondent. Respondent appeared on all days of 
the hearing.

The parties submitted the matter for decision on November 9, 2016.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District assigned as a fifth grade 

teacher at 15th Street Elementary School. District alleged that Respondent demonstrated 
unprofessional conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(2)),1 immoral conduct (§§ 44932, subd. (a)(1) and
44949), evident unfitness for service (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6)), persistent violation of or refusal to 
obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the 
public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him (§ 44932, subd. (a) (8)), and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district (§ 44939). District seeks Respondent’s dismissal.

1

All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.

As set forth in detail below, the Commission has determined that District has failed to 

meet its burden of establishing that Respondent warrants dismissal.

Jurisdictional and Background Information

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On June 10, 2016, District served Respondent with an Accusation executed by

Justo H. Avila, Chief Human Resources Officer, acting in his official capacity. On June 1, 
2016, Respondent served his Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense.

2.

Respondent has been a teacher at 15th Street Elementary School (15th Street

School) since 1998, which is a school comprised of children of Hispanic heritage,
predominantly, and a small percentage of African-American students. Prior, he served as an 
outdoor educational assistant for the District in 1986, and a substitute teacher for the District 
in 1995, 1996, and 1998. Respondent earned a bachelor’s degree in history from the 
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1989, a master’s degree in history from
California State University at Long Beach (CSULB) in 1994, and earned his teaching 
credential from California State University at Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) in 1998. Over the 
years at 15th Street School, Respondent has taught every grade from first through fifth.
During the 2011-2012, 2012-2013, 2013-2014, and 2014-2015 school years, Respondent 
taught fifth grade at 15th Street School.

Annual Teacher In-Service

3.

At the beginning of each school year, all teachers at 15th Street School were 

required to participate in an in-service meeting led by Principal Jennifer Mak (Principal 
Mak). Principal Mak, who testified at hearing, has served as 15th Street School’s principal 
since the beginning of the 2008-2009 school year.  One of her primary duties requires her to 
ensure student safety.

4.

During these annual teacher in-service meetings, Principal Mak always

provided the teachers with standards, codes, and policies, among other things.  Specifically,
Principal Mak provided teachers with the California Standards for the Teaching Profession 
(the Standards), the Code of Conduct with Students (Code of Conduct), the Employee Code 
of Ethics (Code of Ethics), child abuse reporting policies, and Opening School Bulletins.

5.

The Standards covered seven areas, the second of which, Standard 2, 

addressed creating and maintaining effective environments for student learning.  In that 
regard, Standard 2 listed, in pertinent part, the following:

2.1

Promoting social development and responsibility within
a caring community where each student is treated fairly
and respectfully[;]

2

Creating physical or virtual learning environments that
promote student learning, reflect diversity, and encourage 
constructive and productive interactions among students[;]

Establishing and maintaining learning environments
that are physically, intellectually, and emotionally safe[;]

2.2

2.3

[¶]

2.5

2.6

Developing, communicating, and maintaining high
standards for individual and group behavior[;]

Employing classroom routines, procedures, norms, 
and supports for positive behavior to ensure a climate
in which all students can learn[;]

2.7

Using instructional time to optimize learning[.]

(Exhibit 6.)

6.

The Code of Conduct provided the following in its preamble:

The most important responsibility of the [District] is the
safety of our students.  All employees, as well as all 
individuals who work with or have contact with students,
are reminded that they must be mindful of the fine line
drawn between being sensitive to and supportive of 
students and a possible or perceived breach of 
responsible, ethical behavior.

(Exhibit 7.)

7.

The Code of Conduct also provided:

While the District encourages the cultivation of positive 
relationships with students, employees and all individuals 
who work with or have contact with students are expected 
to use good judgment and are cautioned to avoid situations 
including, but not limited to, the following:

[¶] … [¶]

3. Engaging in any behaviors, either directly or indirectly
with a student(s) or in the presence of a student(s), that are 
unprofessional, unethical, illegal, immoral, or exploitative.

3

[¶]… [¶]

6.  Touching or having physical contact with a student(s) 
that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of the 
employee’s/individual’s responsibilities and/or duties.

(Exhibit 7.)

8.

At hearing, Principal Mak explained that she interpreted Item 6 of the Code of 
Conduct as “all touching [being] inappropriate.”  As such, Principal Mak verbally warned the
teachers at the annual in-service meetings of what she described as her “no-touch policy,”
that “touching students was unacceptable and unprofessional and violated district policy.”
Principal Mak explained she expected teachers not to touch students at any time, except in
emergency situations.

9.

The Code of Conduct closed by stating the following:

Even though the intent of the employee/individual may
be purely professional, those who engage in any of the 
above behavior(s), either directly or indirectly with a 
student(s) or in the presence of a student(s), are 
subjecting themselves to all possible perceptions of 
impropriety.  Employees/individuals are advised that, 
when allegations of inappropriate conduct or behavior 
are made, the District is obligated to investigate the 
allegations and, if warranted, take appropriate 
administrative and/or disciplinary action.

10.

The Code of Ethics provided that employees must keep policies, procedures, 

and rules.  Specifically, it stated the following:

Our rules, policies and procedures are the foundation 
of trust and how our District conducts everyday business.
They define our expectations and evaluation criteria. We
are committed to following our Code of Ethics, laws, and 
District rules, regulations, bulletins, policies and procedures, 
recommending changes required to make them better, and 
will not tolerate improper conduct.

(Exhibit 7.)

(Exhibit 8.)

11.

Principal Mak also distributed to teachers an “Opening School Bulletin” which 

discussed District and school policies and procedures.  The Opening School Bulletin 

4

discussed in detail opening day procedures, enrollment norms, attendance, home-school
communications, work hours, absences, pupil hours, field trip guidelines, student attendance 
policy, supervision of students, student records procedures, school-wide discipline plan, 
classroom environment, lesson plans, textbooks and instructional materials, supplies, and 
equipment and furniture, safety and security, among other things.  The Opening School 
Bulletin did not address physical contact between teachers and students, and mentioned 
nothing about no-touch policies, age-appropriate touching, or any other permissible or 
impermissible touching.

12.

Principal Mak also reminded her teachers in the in-service meetings that they

were required to complete annual child abuse awareness training. Respondent completed 
such training on September 16, 2013, September 3, 2014, and August 24, 2015. 

Principal Mak’s Observations

13.

During every school year in which Principal Mak has served as 15th Street 

School’s principal, she has made it her custom and practice to visit multiple times per month 
the classroom of each of her teachers, most times unannounced, and observe her teachers 
delivering instruction and managing classroom activities.  During the times she visited 
Respondent’s classroom, she witnessed him satisfactorily conducting lectures, assisting
students one-on-one, and supervising classroom activities.

14.

At no time during her classroom observations of Respondent did she witness 

him engage in conduct that she deemed warranting of an issuance of conference memoranda 
or the commencement of disciplinary actions.

2011-2012 and 2012-2013 School Years

15.

On May 14, 2012, at the end of the 2011-2012 school year, and again on May

21, 2013, at the end of the 2012-2013 school year, Respondent received a performance 
evaluation from Principal Mak.  In both evaluations, Principal Mak concluded Respondent 
met all expectations in the area of classroom performance.  She also commented in both 
evaluations that Respondent was “aware of and sensitive to the norms of the students’ social, 
cultural, and emotional development,” and “model[ed] and promot[ed] fairness, caring,
equity, and respect in his classroom.”  (Exhibit G.)

16.

The 2013-2014 school year commenced on August 13, 2013 and ended on 
June 4, 2014. Respondent’s fifth grade class was comprised of approximately 25 students.

2013-2014 School Year

/ / /

/ / /

5

A.

M.R.2

17. M.R. was a student in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2013-2014
school year. M.R., who testified at hearing, explained she felt frustrated for most of the 
school year, because Respondent made her feel uncomfortable.  Specifically, M.R. explained
that during classroom instruction and/or classroom activities, Respondent hugged her from 
behind while she either sat at her desk or stood, and stated Respondent engaged in this 
unsolicited activity approximately 10 times per week. M.R. testified that when Respondent 
hugged her as she sat at her desk, he would wrap both of his arms around her and rest his 
hands on her stomach.  During cross-examination, M.R. explained that when Respondent 
hugged her from behind at her desk, she would be working on a classroom assignment as
Respondent commented on her work.  She also explained the hug would be brief.

18. M.R. also testified Respondent rubbed her shoulders or biceps during class

time, and engaged in this unsolicited conduct approximately twice per week. However,
during cross-examination, M.R. stated Respondent would “touch” (as oppose to “rub”) her
shoulder or bicep for a few seconds, while she worked at her desk.  During these instances in 
which Respondent touched her shoulders and/or biceps, it would be when Respondent 
commenting on her work.

19. M.R. stated she had had male teachers in the past, but Respondent “was much 

more physical than [her] other male teachers.”

20.

During the period in which M.R. was a student in Respondent’s class, M.R.

never reported to another teacher, Principal Mak, or to her parents that Respondent touched 
her inappropriately or in a way that made her feel uncomfortable.

B.

I.G. and C.R.

21.

I.G. and C.R. were students in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2013-
2014 school year.  Although neither student testified at hearing, Respondent acknowledged 
that during classroom instruction, he gave I.G., C.R., and other students, male and female, 
one-armed hugs, also known as “side-hugs,” as a gesture of encouragement or praise. 3
These side-hugs entailed Respondent standing parallel to the student and Respondent 
extending his arm to grasp the opposite shoulder or upper arm of the student.  Respondent’s
custom of hugging (i.e., side-hugs) did not include frontal hugging.

/ / /

/ / /

Respondent.

2 Students’ initials, in lieu of their names, are used in order to protect their privacy.

3 The Accusation did not specify what kind of hug I.G. and C.R. received from 

6

22. With respect to I.G., the Accusation alleged that she felt uncomfortable when 
Respondent hugged her; however, District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to 
establish this, as I.G. did not testify at hearing.  The Accusation also alleged I.G. felt
uncomfortable on an occasion(s) when Respondent placed his hand on top of I.G.’s hand as
she wrote; however, District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to establish this.

2014-2015 School Year

A.

M.M.

23.

Respondent’s fifth grade class for the 2014-2015 school year consisted of 

approximately 26 students, 15 males and 11 females.

24. M.M. was a student in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2014-2015

school year. M.M., who testified at hearing, explained that she felt uncomfortable and 
unsafe in Respondent’s class, because Respondent would touch her and other female
students. M.M. described the incidents of touching as Respondent touching her neck, 
shoulders, lower back, hands, arms, and hugging her from behind.4

25. With respect to her neck, M.M. testified that during class time, Respondent 
would rub her neck in a circular motion, using both of his hands, which lasted two to three 
minutes each time, while she sat at her desk.  During these episodes, Respondent would be 
helping M.M. with her classroom assignments. M.M. explained that Respondent would 
engage in this conduct approximately twice per week.

26. With respect to her shoulders, M.M. testified that during class time, 

Respondent would use both of his hands to rub her shoulders, which last two or three 
minutes each time, while she sat at her desk.  During these episodes, Respondent would be 
helping her with her classroom assignments. M.M. explained that Respondent would engage 
in this conduct approximately three times per week. Additionally, Respondent would 
sometimes hug her from the side when she stood next to Respondent, and M.M. witnessed
Respondent doing the same with other girls in the classroom.

/ / /

/ / /

4 The Accusation did not allege that Respondent had touched M.M.’s neck, arms, or 

had hugged her from behind. As such, the Commission neither considered nor assigned 
culpability to Respondent regarding those specific allegations in reference to M.M..
However, the Commission did consider M.M.’s overall testimony, including her claims 
concerning Respondent’s touching of her neck and arms, and his alleged incidents of 
hugging M.M. from behind, when assessing M.M.’s overall credibility, the credibility of
other charges and allegations, and/or the potential application of aggravating factors under 
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.

7

27. With respect to her lower back, M.M. testified that during class time, 
Respondent would stand next to or behind her and move his hand down from her upper back 
to her lower back.  She also testified Respondent would sometimes hug her and then allow 
his hand to travel down to the small of her back. M.M. explained that Respondent engaged 
in this conduct once or twice per week, and that each such encounter lasted one or two 
minutes.

28. With respect to her hands and arms, M.M. testified that during class time, 
Respondent would come by her desk and touch or rub the top of her hand and then would rub 
her arm up to her shoulder. During these episodes, Respondent would be helping her with 
her classroom assignments. M.M. explained that Respondent would engage in this conduct 
two or three times per week.

29. With respect to hugging her from behind, M.M. testified that Respondent 

sometimes did this as she stood.

30. M.M. further testified that Respondent would rub or touch the other girls in the 
classroom the same way in which he rubbed or touched her, and for the same amount of time 
(i.e., lasting anywhere from one to three minutes each time).  She also stated that Respondent 
would place his hand on the thighs of female students when they sat next to him.  She stated 
Respondent never touched her or any of the other girls in the class when other adults were 
present in the classroom, and she was never alone with Respondent. M.M. also explained 
that Respondent would position his face close in proximity to students’ faces.

31.

The Accusation alleged Respondent “interlocked his hand with M.M.’s when 
she raised her hand in class.”  Although M.M. did not offer any specific testimony regarding
this allegation, Respondent acknowledged during his testimony5 that during classroom time, 
when students, both boys and girls, worked on classwork and raised their hands, he would 
sometimes give the students “high-fives,” handshakes, or he would interlace his fingers in 
the hand of a student and give the student’s hand a short grip.  Respondent explained the 
contact lasted a second or two, and the contact would often be accompanied by words of 
encouragement, like “good job,” “great,” or “keep working.”

32.

The Accusation also alleged that Respondent rubbed his hands across the top 
of M.M.’s head; however, District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address
or prove this allegation.

/ / /

/ / /

/ / /

5 Respondent’s testimony is discussed in more detail below.

8

33. M.M. explained that although she felt scared about going to 
Respondent’s classroom and felt unsafe overall, she did not tell Respondent or any
other adult how she felt initially.  However, she did later tell a campus aide, Jaime 
Gutierrez, accompanied by her classmate, A.O., about her discomfort in Respondent’s 
class.  The circumstances underlying her disclosure to Mr. Gutierrez occurred on
November 6, 2014 during recess,6 when he overheard her talking to A.O. about
Respondent, prompting Mr. Gutierrez to inquire further of her and A.O. about
Respondent’s touching behavior.

B.

A.O.

34.

A.O. was a student in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2014-2015

school year. A.O., who testified at hearing, explained that she felt uncomfortable in 
Respondent’s class, because Respondent was “really weird and awkward.”  Specifically,
A.O. felt uncomfortable on those occasions when she raised her hand and Respondent 
interlocked his fingers with hers. Each such encounter would last approximately three
seconds, but A.O. could not recall the frequency in which those incidents occurred. A.O.
also witnessed Respondent engage in this sort of contact with other female students in the 
classroom.

35.

Additionally, A.O. felt uncomfortable on those occasions when she needed 

help on her work, and Respondent would come to her desk and put his arm around her while 
he helped her with her work.  These incidents lasted approximately one or two seconds.
A.O. also witnessed Respondent engage in this sort of contact with other female students in 
the classroom.

36.

Finally, A.O. felt uncomfortable on those occasions when Respondent put his 
hands on her shoulders.  Sometimes Respondent used one hand and sometimes he used two.
Each incident lasted approximately a second. A.O. also witnessed Respondent engage in this 
sort of contact with other female students in the classroom.

37.

A.O. also witnessed Respondent hold V.J.’s face by the cheeks, and put his 

forehead against hers for approximately three or four seconds. A.O. did not offer any
testimony describing what precipitated this incident, but did testify that Respondent and V.J.
were at the front of the class when it occurred.

38.

A.O. testified Respondent never touched her or any of the other girls in the 

class when other adults were present in the classroom.

/ / /

/ / /

period.

6 Testimony from Mr. Gutierrez indicated the disclosure occurred during the lunch 

9

39.

A.O. claimed to have witnessed Respondent look down the shirt of and stare at 

the breasts of her classmate, A.S., as Respondent stood next to A.S. sitting at her desk. A.O.
explained that A.S.’s breasts were large, and when she witnessed Respondent looking down
A.S.’s shirt, he did so for a few seconds. A.O. testified she was approximately 30 feet away
when she witnessed Respondent engage in this conduct.

40.

A.O. also testified that on one occasion, Respondent told her that if she wanted 

to be a model, she couldn’t be messy. According to A.O., Respondent’s reference to her
becoming a model stemmed from her past experience performing television work.
Respondent then adjusted A.O.’s shirt by buttoning it, and in doing so, his index finger 
grazed her chest.  The incident occurred after Respondent received a call on the classroom 
telephone indicating that the principal wished for A.O. to come to the office, prompting 
Respondent to adjust her clothing before A.O. exited the room. A.O. explained that when 
this incident occurred, she backed away from Respondent.

41.

The Accusation alleged Respondent hugged A.O., ran his hand down A.O.’s
back, inappropriately touched A.O.’s cheek with his fingers, attempted to pull A.O.’s bra 
strap from the outside of her clothing, and appeared to favor A.O.; however, District failed to 
proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove these allegations.

42.

A.O. testified she never told Respondent how she felt, because she was scared.
She also never told her parents because she feared her parents would create a big scene.  She 
did not tell any other adult until the campus aide, Mr. Gutierrez, overheard her and her 
friends on the school yard talking about Respondent.7 Mr. Gutierrez collectively questioned
her and her friends about what he had overheard.

C.

J.G.

43.

J.G. was a student in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2014-2015

school year. J.G., who testified at hearing, explained that she felt uncomfortable in 
Respondent’s class, because sometimes when she raised her hand in class, Respondent would 
interlock his fingers with hers. Each such encounter would last seconds, and Respondent
would do it two or three times per class. J.G. also witnessed Respondent engage in this sort 
of contact with other female students in the classroom.

7 The number and identity of the students present during the discussion with Mr.

Gutierrez differed between the student witnesses. While M.M. testified that only she and
A.O. were present during the discussion, while A.O. testified that other girls were present as 
well, including A.S., J.G., and V.J..  Contrary to A.O.’s testimony, J.G. testified she was not 
present during the conversation between Mr. Gutierrez and some of the girls in her class.
Additionally, as set forth in Factual Finding 52 below, S.R. testified she was present during 
the discussion with Mr. Gutierrez, but neither M.M. nor A.O. mentioned S.R.’s presence 
during their respective testimonies.

10

44.

J.G. also felt uncomfortable on those occasions when Respondent touched or 
rubbed her shoulders. 8 Respondent used one hand to rub her shoulder “just for seconds,” 
while J.G. sat at her desk.  Respondent engaged in this rubbing or touching approximately
four times per week. J.G. also witnessed Respondent engage in this sort of contact with 
other female students in the classroom.

45.

J.G. never told Respondent that she felt uncomfortable by his actions.

46.

J.G. testified Respondent never touched her or any of the other girls in the 

class when other adults were present in the classroom.

47.

The Accusation alleged Respondent hugged J.G.; however, District failed to 

proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove this allegation.

48.

J.G. testified that she witnessed Respondent button up the top two buttons of 

A.O.’s shirt when A.O. “went to ask [Respondent] a question.”

D.

S.R.

49.

S.R. was a student in Respondent’s fifth grade class during the 2014-2015

school year. S.R., who testified at hearing, explained that she felt uncomfortable in 
Respondent’s class, because sometimes when she raised her hand in class to ask a question, 
Respondent would interlock his fingers with hers.  Consequently, S.R. disliked asking 
questions in class.  Each such encounter would last seconds, and Respondent would interlock
his fingers with hers two or three times per class. S.R. witnessed Respondent engaging in 
this sort of contact with other female students in the classroom.

50.

S.R. also felt uncomfortable on those occasions when Respondent touched or 

massaged her shoulders.   Respondent used both hands to rub her shoulders “for about a 
couple of seconds,” two or three times per week.  During her testimony, S.R. became very
upset and cried as she recounted the discomfort she felt in Respondent’s class.

51.

S.R. testified Respondent never touched her or any of the other girls in the 

class when other adults were present in the classroom.

/ / /

8 The Accusation did not allege that Respondent had touched or rubbed J.G.’s 

shoulders.  As such, the Commission neither considered nor assigned culpability to
Respondent regarding those specific allegations in reference to J.G..  However, the 
Commission did consider J.G.’s overall testimony, including her claims concerning 
Respondent’s touching or rubbing of her shoulders, when assessing J.G.’s overall credibility,
the credibility of other charges and allegations, and/or the potential application of 
aggravating factors under Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.

11

52.

S.R. never told Respondent that she felt uncomfortable by his actions, because 

she was scared. S.R. testified she was present with other female students, including M.M.
and A.O., when they described Respondent’s conduct to Mr. Gutierrez.

53.

The Accusation alleged Respondent “inappropriately touched S.R.’s face”; 
however, District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove this 
allegation.

E.

V.J., A.S., J.L., C.J., and M.C.

54.

V.J., A.S., J.L., C.J., and M.C. were students in Respondent’s fifth grade class 

during the 2014-2015 school year. Neither V.J., A.S., J.L., C.J., nor M.C. testified at
hearing.

55. With respect to V.J., the Accusation alleged Respondent interlocked his 
fingers with V.J.’s when she raised her hand in class, which Respondent admitted during his 
testimony. The Accusation also alleged Respondent held V.J.’s head with his hands and 
tapped her forehead against his, which A.O. addressed during her testimony. The
Accusation, as a separate allegation, additionally stated that Respondent “inappropriately
touched V.J.’s face with his hand,” presumably in a wholly separate incident, but District 
failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove this allegation.

56. With respect to A.S., the Accusation alleged Respondent stared at “[A.S.’s]

breasts on numerous occasions which made her feel uncomfortable.”  District failed to 
proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove that Respondent stared at A.S.’s
breasts “on numerous occasions” or that A.S. felt uncomfortable.

57. With respect to J.L., the Accusation alleged Respondent interlocked his fingers 

with J.L.’s when she raised her hand in class, which Respondent admitted during his 
testimony.  The Accusation also alleged Respondent “inappropriately touched J.L.’s cheeks 
with both hands, but District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address or
prove this allegation.

58. With respect to C.J., the Accusation alleged Respondent bumped his forehead 

with C.J.’s forehead when she was standing in line outside of the classroom.  However, 
District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove this allegation.

59. With respect to M.C., the Accusation alleged Respondent stared at M.C.’s

breasts and rubbed the middle section of M.C.’s back.  However, District failed to proffer 
any competent direct evidence to address or prove these allegations.

/ / /

/ / /

12

F.

Jaime Gutierrez

60.

Jaime Gutierrez, who testified at hearing, has been employed as a campus aide 
at 15th Street School for three years.  His job duties include, among other things, supervising
children during recess and lunch periods.

61.

On November 6, 2014,9 several female students from Respondent’s class, 

including M.M., A.O., and J.G., disclosed to him during the lunch period that Respondent 
had been touching them in ways that made them feel uncomfortable.  Mr. Gutierrez had not 
heard any negative information about Respondent before the students’ disclosure to him, and 
was unaware of any negative reputation concerning Respondent.

62. Mr. Gutierrez did not know whether the students were being truthful or not 

when they made the disclosure to him, but he believed it was his duty to report the students’ 
disclosure to the administration.  In that regard, Mr. Gutierrez reported to Principal Mak that 
some female students from Respondent’s class had just disclosed to him that they felt
uncomfortable in Respondent’s class, as a result of Respondent’s physical interactions with 
them.10 Principal Mak immediately called law enforcement and had Mr. Gutierrez report to
them the information the female students had shared with him.

63.

At no time prior to Mr. Gutierrez’s report had Principal Mak received any

complaints or reports from any parent or student advising of students’ feelings of discomfort 
concerning Respondent. Additionally, Philip Earl, a volunteer aide11 who, during the 2013-
2014 and 2014-2015 school years, worked in Respondent’s classroom once per week,
reported no concerns to her. Mr. Earl did not testify at hearing.

Police Investigation

64.

On November 13, 2014, Detectives Rachel Saavedra and Maria Valdovinos of

the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) commenced investigation into allegations of 
possible sexual abuse leveled against Respondent.  The detectives first spoke with Principal 
Mak and advised her to “remove the accused perpetrator” (i.e., Respondent) from the campus
until the conclusion of the investigation. As such, Respondent was removed from his 
classroom on November 13, 2014, and has not been permitted to return.

9 Mr. Gutierrez could not recall the exact date of his discussion with the female 
students, but other evidence established the date of disclosure was November 6, 2014.

10 Mr. Gutierrez testified that “a group of kids” approached him, but could not recall 
the exact number of students.  Principal Mak testified that Mr. Gutierrez reported to her that 
two students had approached him.

11 As a volunteer aide, Mr. Earl helped the students with math or reading.

13

65.

The police investigation consisted of interviews of the children alleging the 

abuse, individual interviews of all the students in Respondent’s 2014-2015 class, and 
individual interviews of students in Respondent’s 2013-2014 class. The investigation 
occurred over a series of approximately six months and required one or both detectives to 
visit the school approximately seven times to interview the students. Neither detective 
interviewed Respondent. Detective Valdovinos found no prior criminal complaints filed 
against Respondent.

66.

After the completion of the police investigation, the detectives forwarded the 
matter to the District Attorney’s office.  The District Attorney rejected the case and elected
not to pursue any criminal charges against Respondent.  Instead, the District Attorney’s
office forwarded the matter to the City Attorney’s office. Like the District Attorney, the City
Attorney rejected the case and elected not to pursue any criminal charges against 
Respondent.

District Action

67.

After the LAPD concluded its investigation, it provided the District’s Student 

Safety Investigation Team (SSIT) with its report. The SSIT was tasked with investigating 
the allegations leveled against Respondent and preparing a report. In that regard, SSIT 
interviewed Principal Mak, Mr. Gutierrez, and Mr. Earl.  SSIT also interviewed Respondent,
who denied engaging in any inappropriate touching.  SSIT did not interview any students.
SSIT prepared a report dated November 10, 2015, which summarized LAPD’s report, and 
summarized its interviews of Principal Mak, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Earl, and Respondent. SSIT
submitted its report to the District’s Administrator of Operations, Dr. James Noble, and to 
Principal Mak.

68.

On December 14, 2015, Principal Mak held a conference with Respondent to 
“address allegations of inappropriate behavior” during the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school 
years, and issued a conference memorandum memorializing the discussions raised during the 
conference. During the conference, Principal Mak raised allegations that essentially
mirrored the information she reviewed in the SSIT report.  Specifically, Principal Mak 
alleged that Respondent engaged in physical contact with students, namely M.M., A.O., J.G.,
V.J., S.R., J.L., and M.R., that made them feel uncomfortable.12 This physical contact 
included Respondent touching students’ shoulders, placing his arms around students’ 
shoulders, hugging students, interlocking his fingers with students, and/or massaging the 
shoulders of students.  Additionally, the conference memorandum stated Respondent ran his 
hand down the small of M.M.’s back, touched the top of A.O.’s chest with his index finger as 
he manipulated the top of her shirt, told A.O. that she was messy, and stared at A.S.’s
breasts.

12 While the conference memorandum referenced other students in addition to M.M., 

A.O., J.G., V.J., S.R., J.L., M.R., and A.S., the parties presented direct evidence regarding 
M.M., A.O., J.G., V.J., S.R., J.L., M.R., and A.S. only.  As such, this Decision references 
those students only.

14

69.

Principal Mak’s conference memorandum did not include allegations that 

Respondent had hugged M.M. from behind, rubbed M.M.’s neck for two or three minutes at 
a time, rubbed M.M.’s shoulders for two or three minutes at a time, and rub or touch other 
girls in the classroom for one to three minutes at a time.

70.

During the conference, Principal Mak provided Respondent with three areas of 

assistance, guidance, and directives:  (1) Respondent was “not to touch, handle, or grab 
students, unless [such contact was necessary for a student’s] immediate safety;” (2) 
Respondent was to “maintain appropriate and professional relationships with students at all 
times;” and (3) Respondent was to “adhere to . . . District policies at all times,” including the
Code of Conduct, the Standards, the Code of Ethics, the District’s “Sexual Harassment 
Policy,” and the District’s “Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Requirements.”

71. Ms. Mak’s conference memorandum stated that should Respondent fail to 

follow her administrative directives, he could be subjected to disciplinary action, including, 
but not limited to, a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act(s)/Service, suspension, and/or dismissal 
from the District. However, District did not permit Respondent to return to his teaching 
assignment to follow Ms. Mak’s administrative directives.  Instead, on January 21, 2016, 
Principal Mak issued Respondent a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts, pursuant to Education 
Code section 44938,13 charging, among other things, that Respondent engaged in conduct
that made his students feel uncomfortable.  Specifically, the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts
repeated the allegations set forth in Ms. Mak’s December 14, 2015 conference memorandum,
regarding M.M., A.O., J.G., V.J., S.R., J.L., M.R., and A.S.. 14 However, District never
permitted Respondent an opportunity to remediate the alleged deficiencies.

/ / /

13 Education Code section 44938, subdivision (a), provides:

The governing board of any school district shall not act upon 
any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 calendar 
days prior to the date of the filing, the board or its authorized 
representative has given the employee against whom the charge 
is filed, written notice of the unprofessional conduct, specifying
the nature thereof with such specific instances of behavior and 
with such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity
to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. 
The written notice shall include the evaluation made pursuant to 
Article 11 (commencing with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if 
applicable to the employee.

14 While the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts referenced other students in addition to 

M.M., A.O., J.G., V.J., S.R., J.L., M.R., and A.S., the parties presented direct evidence 
regarding M.M., A.O., J.G., V.J., S.R., J.L., M.R., and A.S. only.  As such, this Decision 
references those students only.

15

72.

At hearing, Principal Mak testified she knew and understood Education Code 

section 44938, which appeared on the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts she issued to 
Respondent;15 but when asked to state her understanding of the statute, Principal Mak could 
not. However, she did state that she expected Respondent to rely on Education Code section 
44938, because it appeared in the Notice.

73.

At hearing, Principal Mak explained that despite learning the police 

investigation yielded no evidence of Respondent engaging in sexual abuse or making any
comments of a sexual nature, she believed Respondent’s termination was necessary, as 
Respondent failed to adhere to her verbal “no-touch policy” she conveyed to the teachers at
the annual teacher in-service meetings, which resulted in some of Respondent’s students
experiencing discomfort. As such, she recommended to Dr. James Noble that Respondent be 
terminated.

74.

Dr. Noble, who testified at hearing, is responsible for the safety and welfare of 

children in the District’s schools.  Dr. Noble reviewed the SSIT report concerning
Respondent, as well as the District’s discipline policy.  He also reviewed the Standards, the
Code of Conduct, and the Code of Ethics.  Additionally, Dr. Noble considered the absence of 
prior complaints and the lack of a disciplinary record concerning Respondent, and
Respondent’s favorable performance evaluations. Thereafter, Dr. Noble decided to sustain
Principal Mak’s recommendation for dismissal, as he felt troubled that Respondent’s 
physical contact made some of his students feel uncomfortable.

75.

District commenced dismissal proceedings against Respondent, and filed an 

Accusation against Respondent on June 10, 2016.

Respondent’s Testimony

76.

Respondent testified at hearing.  Respondent has resided in South Central Los 

Angeles his entire life.  He attended high school in Reseda as a participant in a voluntary
busing program.  Upon graduation, Respondent attended the UCLA and earned his 
bachelor’s degree in history in 1989.  Thereafter, he attended CSULB, where he earned his 
master’s degree in history in 1994.

77. While he was an undergraduate student at UCLA, Respondent worked at 

District during the summer of 1986 as an outdoor education assistant. He also worked at a 
bank and later at a credit union. Additionally, Respondent performed volunteer work at a 
church in which his father was the minister. Although Respondent enjoyed the banking 
industry, he wished to pursue teaching because he enjoyed watching children learn, and,
much like he had as a church volunteer, he wanted to become a positive role model for 
African-American youth and for his community.  In May 1995, after earning his master’s
degree, Respondent pursued a career in teaching by securing employment with the District as 

15 References to Education Code section 44938 were preprinted and appeared on the 

first and last pages of the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts.

16

a substitute teacher, and served in that capacity until August 1996. Respondent then pursued 
his teaching credential at CSUDH. Respondent returned to the District as a full-time teacher 
in 1998, the same year he obtained his teaching credential, and was assigned to 15th Street 
School, where he remained until his removal from the classroom in November 2014.

78.

Respondent acknowledged attending annual teacher in-service meetings 

conducted by Principal Mak, in which she distributed bulletins, the Standards, the Code of 
Conduct, and the Code of Ethics, among other things.  During those meetings, Principal Mak 
highlighted portions of those handouts, and instructed the teachers to review the remainder of 
the handouts on their own.  One of the matters highlighted by Principal Mak concerned the 
Code of Conduct regarding item 6, cautioning teachers from “touching or having physical
contact with a student(s) that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of the 
employee’s/individual’s responsibilities and/or duties.” (Exhibit 7.)

79.

Respondent also acknowledged that Principal Mak verbally instructed the 

teachers at the annual in-service meetings that “touching students was unacceptable,
unprofessional, and violated district policy.” However, in the context in which Principal
Mak presented her “no-touch policy,” Respondent interpreted the policy as addressing
touching of an inappropriate, sexual, or abusive nature. Respondent did not interpret 
Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy” as prohibiting benign touching, such as issuing high-fives,
pats on the back or shoulder, or other appropriate touching of the like.  This was because the 
Code of Conduct permitted age-appropriate physical contact, and Respondent had witnessed 
Principal Mak frequently give students high-fives herself.

80.

Consistent with District policy, Respondent tailored his teaching style to
develop an age-appropriate rapport with his students such that they felt supported and 
congratulated when they completed tasks or accomplished goals. Respondent made it his 
custom and practice to deliver a lesson or instruction to his students, and then circulate 
around the classroom to ensure the students remained on task.  As he circulated the 
classroom, he typically offered words and acts of affirmation and encouragement, such as 
saying “good job” or “great” or “keep working,” and by randomly giving his students, both 
male and female, a quick pat on the back or shoulder, a handshake or high-five, particularly
when they completed a task well.  Occasionally, Respondent would give students side-hugs.

81. When students raised their hands as he circulated the room, Respondent would

sometimes give a student a high-five as his or her hand was raised, or sometimes he would 
interlace his fingers in his or her hand and give the student’s hand a short grip, reminiscent of 
a champion’s grasp.  Occasionally, he would give the student a quick handshake.  Each 
contact, whether a high-five, an interlaced finger grasp, or a handshake, would last a second 
or two, and were generally accompanied by verbal praise or encouragement. Also,
Respondent would occasionally give students a one or two second side-hug for 
congratulatory purposes. Although Respondent would not issue high-fives, champion’s 
grasps, handshakes, or side-hugs every time he approached a student, such conduct played a 
significant part in his interaction with his students.  At no time did any student voice any
complaint to Respondent stating such interaction made him or her feel uncomfortable, or 

17

pulled away from his grasp during handshakes or interlaced grips.  On the contrary, students 
in his classroom continued raising their hands his class, and Respondent saw no reduction in 
the level of participation of any of his students.

82.

In order to recapture the attention of students who had veered off task during 

their class assignment, Respondent sometime touched the top of the student’s shoulder or
patted the student’s back. Occasionally, in an effort to show support, Respondent would give 
a student’s shoulder a quick squeeze for a second or two. At no time did any student voice 
any complaint to Respondent stating such interaction made him or her feel uncomfortable.
On the contrary, students in his classroom appeared content.

83.

Respondent did not change his routine or the manner in which he interacted 

with the students when Principal Mak or other adults entered his classroom. He rarely knew
in advance when an administrator, teacher, or any other adult would elect to enter is room
during class time, as they generally arrived unannounced.

84.

Respondent considered the physical component involved in how he interacted

with his students (i.e, high-fives, interlaced finger grasps, handshakes, side-hugs, shoulder 
touches, shoulder squeezes, or back pats) as age-appropriate contact and within the scope of 
his responsibilities and duties. By adopting this style of teaching, which he had been 
executing for years, it was his sole intent to promote a positive and supportive environment
for his students.  In that regard, Respondent felt successful that he was achieving this goal, 
because, in his performance evaluations, Principal Mak commended him for his sensitivity to
his students’ social and cultural norms, emotional development, and his modeling and 
promotion of fairness, caring, equity, and respect in the classroom.

85.

Prior to the investigation, no one, including Principal Mak, any parent, student, 

teacher, or other administrator complained to Respondent about how his physical interaction
with his students left them feeling uncomfortable in his class.  Additionally, Mr. Earl, who 
served as Respondent’s voluntary aide during the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015, and who 
witnessed Respondent’s interactions with the students, never reported to Respondent that he 
felt uncomfortable about how Respondent interacted with the students or received or 
repeated any reports from students that they felt uncomfortable by Respondent’s interactions.
Indeed, during the time in which A.O., M.M., J.G., and S.R. attended Respondent’s class, 
they remained good students, experienced no change in grades, and remained enthusiastic 
and active.

86.

Given Respondent’s intention of creating and promoting a positive and 

supportive environment for his students, Respondent suffered great remorse when he learned 
on November 14, 2014, the day he was removed from the classroom, that some students felt 
uncomfortable. Respondent wished someone had advised him earlier. Had he known, he 
would have made adjustments in the manner in which he interacted with his students.
Specifically, he would have adopted new approaches to support students that did not involve 
the use of physical contact. Respondent expressed he would still be very willing to modify
his teaching style to omit any touching if afforded an opportunity to return to the classroom.

18

Respondent has already conducted research and read pertinent books highlighting alternative
methods to touching, which similarly encourage and support students.

87.

Respondent acknowledged that the Code of Conduct warned that, despite his 

professional intent, the District was obliged to investigate allegations of inappropriate 
conduct or behavior, and, if warranted, “take appropriate administrative and/or disciplinary
action.” He understood why the District felt it needed to take action against him.
Nevertheless, Respondent wishes he had been afforded an opportunity to return to the 
classroom to correct any alleged deficiencies, and endeavor to follow the assistance,
guidance, and directives issued by Principal Mak in her December 14, 2015 conference 
memorandum.

Respondent’s Denials

88. While Respondent admitted to some of the allegations set forth in the 

Accusation, namely that he issued high-fives, interlaced finger grasps, handshakes, side-
hugs, shoulder touches, shoulder squeezes, or back pats, Respondent categorically denied a
number of other allegations. Specifically, Respondent denied running his hand down the 
small of M.M.’s back or down the back any other student.  He also denied hugging M.M.
from behind or hugging any other student in that manner, including M.R..  Additionally,
Respondent denied rubbing or massaging the neck or shoulders of M.M. or any other student,
including M.R. and S.R..  Respondent also denied placing his hand on the thighs of female 
students, as M.M. testified.

89.

Respondent recalled no instance of buttoning A.O.’s shirt, as it was not his 

habit of touching or manipulating anybody’s clothes. He also denied touching the chest of 
A.O. or any other female student.  Respondent also recalled no instance of holding V.J.’s
face and touching his forehead against hers, as A.O. testified. Respondent also denied 
staring at the breasts of A.S., as A.O. testified, or the breasts of any other student.

90.

Respondent also denied a number of other allegations in the Accusation, but 

District failed to proffer any competent direct evidence to address or prove those 
allegations.16 Consequently, Respondent’s denial of those allegations is not listed here.

Character Evidence

A.

Imelda Cabral

91.

Imelda Cabral provided character testimony on Respondent’s behalf.  Ms. 

Cabral has taught at 15th Street School for more than 21 years, and prior to that, served as a 
teacher’s assistant there for approximately six years. Ms. Cabral maintains a positive view of 
Respondent, despite the allegations leveled against him, because she has observed 

16 See Factual Findings 22, 32, 41, 46, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, and 59.

19

Respondent interacting with his students, trusts her own daughters (ages 10 and 13) with 
him, and he is held in high esteem.

92.

The copy machine was located right next door to Respondent’s classroom,

which afforded Ms. Cabral opportunities to stop by Respondent’s classroom and observe him 
interact with his students. Ms. Cabral characterized all interactions she witnessed as “pretty
normal” and that the students’ reactions appeared normal.  Specifically, she observed 
Respondent giving students a pat on the back and giving students high-fives.  Nothing about 
Respondent’s physical contact struck her as inappropriate, and she never witnessed any
behavior suggesting Respondent had been conducting himself in an inappropriate way.

93. Ms. Cabral’s daughters attended 15th Street School and spent a lot of time in 
Respondent’s class, although Respondent did not serve as their teacher. They often visited 
Respondent just to say “hi” or to help him in his classroom.  Ms. Cabral’s daughters love
Respondent and affectionately refer to him as “Uncle Jenkins.” Ms. Cabral never received 
any complaints from her daughters about Respondent, and she witnessed nothing
inappropriate in the manner in which Respondent interacted with her daughters.  Ms. Cabral 
expressed that she would completely trust Respondent to serve as their fifth grade teacher.

94.

Principal Mak respected Ms. Cabral as a teacher.

B.

Sylvia Barbas

95.

Sylvia Barbas provided character testimony on Respondent’s behalf.  Ms. 

Barbas has worked at 15th Street School for more than 35 years, and is currently a
categorical program advisor.  Prior, she served as a teacher there, and had opportunities to 
observe Respondent in his classroom.

96. Ms. Barbas characterized Respondent as a very calm, organized, and 

encouraging teacher. She has witnessed Respondent pat students’ backs, both male and 
female, as he observed their work.  Ms. Barbas considered Respondent’s physical contact 
with students as age-appropriate and within the scope of his duties.

97. Ms. Barbas described Respondent as an upstanding, wonderful, encouraging 

human being, and would fully trust Respondent to teach her own two children.

98.

Principal Mak respected Ms. Barbas as a teacher.

C.

Diane Dibrell

99.

Diane Dibrell provided character testimony on Respondent’s behalf.  Ms. 

Dibrell has worked at 15th Street School as a fourth and fifth grade teacher since 1996.

100. Ms. Dibrell’s classroom was located directly across the hall from 
Respondent’s. She entered his class unannounced on a daily basis because Respondent’s 

20

supply cabinet was routinely stocked with supplies she needed.  During those visits, which 
lasted approximately five minutes, Ms. Dibrell had opportunities to observe Respondent 
interact with his students.

101. Ms. Dibrell witnessed Respondent give his students high-fives, interlace finger

grasps, place his hand on students’ shoulders, or pat students’ backs, and did not see 
Respondent engaged in any inappropriate conduct. The students appeared “normal-looking”
when Respondent touched their shoulders or backs, and no student ever complained to her 
about Respondent. Ms. Dibrell never witnessed Respondent stare at any student’s breasts, 
hug any student from behind, or run his hand down to the lower back of any student.

102. On cross-examination, Ms. Dibrell testified she witnessed Respondent give a 
quick shoulder massage with both hands to female students once or twice for encouragement
purposes, which lasted for approximately two or three seconds, but could not recall the name 
of those students.  She also saw him button a girl’s blouse collar on picture day, but denied 
that Respondent touched her chest in doing so.  Ms. Dibrell could not recall that student’s 
name either, but did recall that the student smiled after Respondent fixed her collar.  Ms. 
Dibrell found nothing alarming or inappropriate about these or any other instances of 
physical contact she witnessed, because “many teachers touch” in her experience. Ms.
Dibrell also acknowledged that she was a mandated reporter and, as such, was required to 
report inappropriate contact had she witnessed Respondent engage in it.

103.

Principal Mak respected Ms. Dibrell as a teacher.

D.

Bradley Mack

104. Bradley Mack provided character testimony on Respondent’s behalf.  Mr. 

Mack has worked as a teacher at 15th Street School for 21 years, and has taught fifth grade 
for the last four years.

105. Mr. Mack and Respondent have observed each other teach class lessons, have 
attended class field trips together, and have supervised children on the school yard together.
Mr. Mack witnessed Respondent’s use of physical contact during his interactions with 
students, including touching a shoulder when leaning in to see what a student was working
on, issuing a high-five or grabbing a student’s hand, giving a student a squeeze on the neck, 
and hugging a student from the side.  Mr. Mack considered all of Respondent’s physical
interactions with students as proper and age-appropriate, and acknowledged that teachers use 
physical contact with students at school.

106.

Principal Mak has come into Respondent’s class while Mr. Mack was present 

observing Respondent.  Respondent did not change anything about how he interacted with
the students in Principal Mak’s presence, including touching them.

107. Mr. Mack has never witnessed Respondent bring his hand down the small of a 

student’s back or approach a female student from behind and put his arms around her.

21

108. Mr. Mack, who is married to Ms. Cabral, confirmed that their two daughters 

(presently, ages 10 and 13) have been alone with Respondent on a number of occasions.
They have never voiced any complaint to Mr. Mack about Respondent.

109.

Principal Mak respected Mr. Mack as a teacher.

E.

Character Letters

110.

In addition to proffering character testimony from some of his colleagues, 

Respondent proffered character letters from other colleagues.  Specifically, Donna P. 
McGary and Cindy Paieda, who serve as teachers at 15th Street School, described 
Respondent as a responsible, conscientious, and dedicated teacher, and a very active member 
of the school community.

Credibility Findings17

A.

Respondent

111. The Commission found credible the overall testimony of Respondent, given 

the forthright and transparent manner in which he responded to questions.  The Commission 
observed Respondent answer questions in a sincere, straight forward manner, without a cloud 
of prevarication.  Respondent’s credibility was strengthened by his ready admission to a 
number of the allegations set forth in the Accusation, including that he gave his students 
side-hugs, shoulder touches, shoulder squeezes, back pats, and interlaced finger grasps.

112. Respondent provided persuasive and credible testimony about his 

disagreement with the District’s insinuated intent behind his physical interactions with his 
students, particularly his female students, and its implication that he engaged in such conduct 
for inappropriate, sexual, or predatory purposes.  The Commission, too, disagrees with the 
District’s implication.  The evidence shows that Respondent’s physical contact with his 
students was age-appropriate and within the scope of his duties, as collectively attested to by
Ms. Cabral, Ms. Barbas, Ms. Dibrell, and Mr. Mack.  The evidence shows that Respondent 

17

In this matter, the Commission evaluated the credibility of the witnesses 

pursuant to the factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780: the demeanor and manner of 
the witness while testifying, the character of the testimony, the capacity to perceive at the 
time the events occurred, the character of the witness for honesty, the existence of bias or 
other motive, other statements of the witness which are consistent or inconsistent with the 
testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the witness testified, and the attitude 
of the witness toward the proceeding in which the testimony has been given.  The manner 
and demeanor of a witness while testifying are the two most important factors a trier of fact 
considers when judging credibility.  The mannerisms, tone of voice, eye contact, facial 
expressions and body language are all considered, but are difficult to describe in such a way
that the reader truly understands what causes the trier of fact to believe or disbelieve a 
witness.

22

did not engage with his students in any way that was sexualized or harassing or otherwise 
inappropriate for their age.  Indeed, if Respondent had wished to engage in such immoral 
conduct, and was brazen enough to do so in front of the entire class, particularly in the 
presence of fellow teachers when they visited his class, it is reasonable to believe one of his 
mandated reporter colleagues would have reported the conduct, if not a brave student.

113. The Commission also found credible the deep regret Respondent expressed 

upon learning that students in his class felt uncomfortable by his physical contact with them, 
especially since his purpose for engaging in such conduct was for the innocent purpose of 
supporting and encouraging his students.

B.

Principal Mak

114. The Commission considered Principal Mak a devoted and ardent administrator 

who cares deeply about the school under her charge.  However, the Commission found 
concerning the apparent lack of understanding of the plain wording of the District policies 
and procedures she touted, and the inconsistent manner in which she testified. In particular, 
Principal Mak testified she interpreted Item 6 of the Code of Conduct, which prohibited 
employees from “touching or having physical contact with a student(s) that is not age-
appropriate or within the scope of the employee’s/individual’s responsibilities and/or duties,” 
as prohibiting all touching.  Specifically, she stated that she considered “all touching [as]
inappropriate.”  However, the plain language of Item 6 clearly permits teachers to engage in 
“age-appropriate” touching with students, as long as it is within the scope of the teacher’s 
responsibilities and/or duties.  When repeatedly pressed on this issue, and requested to 
reconcile her interpretation with the “age-appropriate” wording found in Item 6, she 
acknowledged the presence of the “age-appropriate” wording, but applied a narrow definition 
of what she considered “age-appropriate touching.” Specifically, she limited “age-
appropriate touching” to physical contact designed “to keep students safe.”  Principal Mak’s 
attempt to limit the scope of Item 6 contradicted its plain meaning and was wrong.

115. Additionally, the Commission found troubling Principal Mak’s inability to
articulate the meaning of Education Code section 44938 which appeared in the Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Acts that she issued to Respondent. Despite her inability to articulate the 
meaning of this section of the Education Code, Principal Mak testified she expected 
Respondent to rely on it because it appeared in the Notice. Education Code section 44938 
addresses, in part, opportunities for individuals to correct or remedy their deficiencies.  Yet, 
as Principal Mak acknowledged, Respondent was not permitted to return to his teaching 
assignment after she issued the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts.

116. With respect to Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy,” to which she expected all

of her teachers to strictly adhere, she expressed her belief that “touching students was 
unacceptable and unprofessional and violated district policy.” However, the weight given 
her testimony, and the District’s burden of proof, was undermined by her failure to identify
in any of the materials she distributed to her teachers (i.e., policies, procedures, codes, and 
bulletins) any language memorializing her “no-touch policy.”

23

117. The Commission found that Principal Mak sometimes testified in a halting, 

inconsistent, and confusing manner, particularly when pressed to clarify her beliefs and 
positions, making it difficult to understand all facets of her testimony.  As such, and for the 
reasons stated above, Principal Mak’s overall testimony was not afforded the same weight as 
testimony and evidence contrary to Principal Mak’s testimony.

C.

M.R.

118. The Commission considered M.R. a bright young lady who expressed herself 

well, and found her testimony credible as it related to the discomfort she experienced by
Respondent’s physical contact.  Specifically, the Commission considered credible M.R.’s
testimony concerning Respondent’s physical contact of her shoulders.  While she first 
testified that Respondent “rubbed” her shoulders, M.R. clarified during cross-examination
that Respondent “touched” her shoulder or bicep for a few seconds on multiple occasions per 
week, when Respondent helped her at her desk.  This is consistent with testimony offered by
Respondent, who stated he would sometimes touch or squeeze his students’ shoulders, as 
well as with testimony offered by Ms. Dibrell and Mr. Mack, who witnessed Respondent 
place his hand on students’ shoulders when leaning in to observe their work.

119. However, the Commission found incredible M.R.’s testimony that Respondent 

hugged her from behind, particularly when she stated that Respondent would approach her 
while she sat at her desk, wrap both of his arms around her, and rest his hands on her 
stomach. No other witness proffered any testimony suggesting that Respondent engaged in 
such conduct, despite Respondent purportedly engaging in such conduct in the presence of 
the entire class.  The only witness who alleged Respondent engaged in similar conduct was 
M.M., but, as set forth in more detail below, the Commission found M.M.’s testimony less
than credible on this subject.

D.

M.M.

120. The Commission considered M.M. a smart and articulate young lady, and

found her testimony credible as it related to the discomfort she experienced by Respondent’s
physical contact of her and other girls.  Specifically, the Commission considered credible 
M.M.’s testimony concerning Respondent’s touching of her shoulder and Respondent’s
placing his arm around her shoulder. This testimony was consistent with testimony proffered
by Respondent, who stated he would sometimes place his hand on the shoulder of his 
students, as well as give them one-armed side hugs as a gesture of encouragement or praise.

121. However, the Commission did not find credible M.M.’s testimony purporting

that Respondent had run his hand down the small of her back.  No other witness proffered 
any testimony in that regard, despite Respondent purportedly engaging in such conduct in the 
presence of the entire class.  Additionally, as discussed above, Respondent’s denial of this 
allegation was deemed credible, given the overall transparent and unequivocal manner in 
which he testified.

24

122.

In its consideration of M.M.’s testimony that Respondent reserved his acts of 
physical contact for the girls in the class only, and that Respondent never touched her or any
of the other girls in the classroom when other adults were present, the Commission 
considered A.O.’s, J.G.’s, and S.R.’s testimony, which were similar to M.M.’s in that regard.
However, the Commission also considered the more credible and persuasive testimony of
Respondent, who credibly testified he physically interacted with both the male and female 
students in the classroom, and of Ms. Barbas, who credibly testified that she witnessed 
Respondent touch both male and female students as Respondent observed their work.
Inherent in their observations, as well as in the credible testimony of Ms. Cabral and Ms. 
Dibrell, who also observed Respondent engage in physical contact with the students, is that 
Respondent continued to engage in physical touch while adults were present.  Indeed, 
according to the credible testimony of Mr. Mack, who also testified he witnessed Respondent
engage in physical contact with the students, also witnessed Principal Mak come into 
Respondent’s class while Mr. Mack was present, and saw that Respondent did not change 
anything about how he interacted with the students in Principal Mak’s presence, including
touching them. These collective testimonies corroborated Respondent’s testimony that he 
did not alter his routine when adults entered the room. Balancing these testimonies, the 
Commission did not find M.M.’s, A.O.’s, J.G.’s, and S.R.’s versions more persuasive than 
Ms. Barbas’, Ms. Cabral’s, Ms. Dibrell’s, Mr. Mack’s, and Respondent’s in this regard.

123. The Commission found incredible M.M.’s testimony that Respondent hugged 
her from behind, rubbed her neck for two or three minutes at a time, rubbed her shoulders for 
two or three minutes at a time, and rub or touch other girls in the classroom for one to three 
minutes each time. It appears M.M. raised such allegations for the first time during hearing,
and not anytime during the six-month investigation conducted by LAPD or during the 
dismissal process undertaken by the District.  Consequently, no such allegations were 
included in Principal Mak’s December 14, 2015 conference memorandum, in the January 21,
2016 Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts, or in the Accusation itself.  As such, M.M.’s testimony
in this regard is deemed unreliable.

E.

A.O.

124. The Commission considered A.O. an intelligent and dynamic young lady, and 
found her testimony credible as it related to the discomfort she experienced by Respondent’s
physical contact of her and other female students.  Specifically, the Commission considered 
credible A.O.’s testimony concerning instances of Respondent placing his arm around her 
shoulder and instances of him interlocking his fingers with hers when she raised her hand in 
class.  This testimony was consistent with testimony proffered by Respondent, who stated he 
would sometimes give his students one-armed side hugs as a gesture of encouragement or 
praise. Additionally, Respondent proffered testimony that when students worked on 
classwork and would raise their hands, he would sometimes give the students “high-fives,”
handshakes, or he would interlace his fingers in the hand of a student and give the student’s 
hand a short grip.

25

125. Although Respondent could not recall adjusting A.O.’s shirt at one time, the 
Commission found credible A.O.’s testimony that Respondent made a reference about the 
messiness of her shirt and buttoned her collar, because J.G. corroborated A.O.’s testimony in
that regard.  Additionally, although it is not conclusive, the Commission surmises that Ms. 
Dibrell witnessed the same when she saw Respondent button a girl’s collar on what she 
believed to be picture day. The Commission found understandable Respondent’s failure to 
recall this incident, given the time that has elapsed since the incident, the number of students 
in his class, and the fact that such an occurrence was a rare one.  The Commission declined 
to assign an inappropriate meaning to this incident. Specifically, the Commission believed 
that when Respondent made reference to the messiness of A.O.’s shirt, he did not mean it in 
a demeaning way.  Rather, it appeared he wished to take care of his student.  Consequently,
when Respondent helped to button A.O.’s shirt, the Commission did not believe Respondent 
did so with an inappropriate purpose, especially given the fact that he did so in front of the 
entire class, and potentially in front of Ms. Dibrell.

126. Although Respondent could not recall the incident, the Commission found 

credible A.O.’s testimony that she witnessed Respondent hold V.J.’s face with his hands and 
tap his forehead against hers. The Commission found understandable Respondent’s failure 
to recall this incident, given the time that has elapsed since the incident, the number of 
students in his class, and the fact that such an occurrence appeared to be a rare one.
However, the District did not proffer any competent direct evidence to explain the context in 
which the act took place, other than it occurred at front of the class.  Specifically, A.O.
offered no testimony describing what precipitated the act, and the District failed to present
V.J. as a witness to describe the details and effects of the incident.  Consequently, the 
Commission declined to assign an inappropriate meaning to this conduct, as insufficient 
evidence existed to determine whether or not the physical contact occurred within
Respondent’s scope of duties.

127. The Commission found incredible A.O.’s testimony that she witnessed 

Respondent look down the shirt of and stare at the breasts of her classmate, A.S. S.  The 
Commission was unclear what A.O. could see and interpret from her desk, which was 
located 30 feet away.  Additionally, Respondent’s categorical denial of this allegation 
appeared credible, and the District failed to present V.J. as a witness to establish otherwise.

F.

J.G.

128. The Commission considered J.G. a smart and pleasant young lady, and found 

her testimony credible as it related to the discomfort she experienced by Respondent’s
physical contact of her and other female students.  Specifically, the Commission considered 
credible J.G.’s testimony concerning instances of Respondent interlocking his fingers with 
hers when she raised her hand in class, as Respondent proffered testimony that he would 
sometimes interlace his fingers in the hand of a student when the student raised his or her 
hand.

/ / /

26

129. Although the District did not allege in the Accusation that Respondent touched 

or rubbed her shoulders “for just seconds,” the Commission found her testimony credible in 
that regard, as it was consistent with Respondent’s acknowledgement that he sometimes
touched or squeezed his students’ shoulders, as well as with others’ observations that he did 
so only for a few seconds.

G.

S.R.

130. The Commission considered S.R. an anxious, though brave, young lady, and 
found her testimony credible as it related to the discomfort she experienced by Respondent’s
physical contact of her and other female students.  Specifically, the Commission considered 
credible S.R.’s testimony concerning instances of Respondent interlocking his fingers with 
hers when she raised her hand in class, as Respondent proffered testimony that he would 
sometimes interlace his fingers in the hand of a student when the student raised his or her 
hand. Additionally, the Commission considered credible S.R.’s testimony concerning 
instances of Respondent touching her shoulders, as it is consistent with Respondent’s 
testimony that he would sometimes touch or squeeze the shoulders of his students.

H.

Ms. Cabral, Ms. Barbas, Ms. Dibrell, and Mr. Mack

131. The Commission found credible the testimony of Respondent’s colleagues, 

Ms. Cabral, Ms. Barbas, Ms. Dibrell, and Mr. Mack, given the clear, concise, and direct 
manner in which they individually testified, buttressed by the corroborating nature of their 
collective testimonies, and their individual and collective experience in the teaching 
profession. As such, the Commission afforded great weight to the testimony of these 
witnesses.

Burden of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Absent a statute to the contrary, the burden of proof in disciplinary

administrative proceedings rests upon the party making the charges.  (Parker v. City of 
Fountain Valley (1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113; Evid. Code, § 115.)  The “burden of proof” 
means the obligation of a party, if he or she is to prevail on a particular fact, to establish by
evidence a requisite degree of belief or conviction concerning such fact.  (Redevelopment
Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.)  The burden of proof in this 
proceeding is on the District to prove the charging allegations.

2.

The standard of proof in this proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence.
(Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-
1040; Evid. Code, § 115.)  “The phrase ‘preponderance of evidence’ is usually defined in 
terms of probability of truth, e.g., ‘such evidence as, when weighed with that opposed to it, 

27

has more convincing force and the greater probability of truth.’  (BAJI (8th ed.), No. 2.60.)”
(1 Witkin, Evidence, Burden of Proof and Presumptions § 35 (4th ed. 2000).)

Section 44938 Considerations 

3.

Section 44938, subdivision (a), provides: 

The governing board of any school district shall not act upon
any charges of unprofessional conduct unless at least 45 
calendar days prior to the date of the filing, the board or its 
authorized representative has given the employee against 
whom the charge is filed, written notice of the unprofessional 
conduct, specifying the nature thereof with such specific
instances of behavior and with such particularity as to furnish 
the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and 
overcome the grounds for the charge. The written notice shall 
include the evaluation made pursuant to Article 11 (commencing
with Section 44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee.

4.

Respondent asserts that, in light of section 44938, he should have been given 

an opportunity to return to his teaching assignment and correct any perceived deficiencies.
Courts have held that the Commission may consider the lack of opportunity to correct 
deficiencies during its evaluation of the evidence.  (Blake v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 513 (Blake); Crowl v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 334 (Crowl).)

Dismissal Authority

5.

6.

A permanent District employee may be dismissed for cause only after a 

dismissal hearing. (§§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

Under section 44944, subdivision (c), the dismissal hearing must be conducted 

by a three-member Commission on Professional Competence, unless waived by the parties.
Two members of the Commission must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the employee
(Respondent) and one by the governing board (District), and the third member of the 
Commission must be an administrative law judge from the Office of Administrative 
Hearings.

7.

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission may

only vote for or against it.  The Commission may not dispose of a charge of dismissal by
imposing probation or an alternative sanction.  (§ 44944, subd. (d)(3).)

/ / /

/ / /

28

8.

Section 44932 provides, in pertinent part:

No permanent employee shall be dismissed except for one or 

(a)
more of the following causes:

(1)

Immoral conduct, including, but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct. For purposes of this chapter, “egregious 
misconduct” is defined exclusively as immoral conduct that is 
the basis for an offense described in Section 44010 or 44011 of 
this code, or in Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive, of the 
Penal Code.18

(2)

Unprofessional conduct.

(6)

Evident unfitness for service.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(8)

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the 
state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 
the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the
governing board of the school district employing him or her.

9.

Unprofessional conduct as used in § 44932, subd. (a)(2), may be

defined as conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is 
unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing. (Board of Ed. v. Swan (1953)
41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled in part, on another ground, in Bekiaris v. Board of Ed.
(1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.)

10.

The term “immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity,
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Board of Ed. of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)

/ / /

/ / /

18 Education Code section 44010 addresses sex offenses.  Education Code section 
44011addresses controlled substance offenses.  Penal Code sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, 
inclusive, address child abuse and neglect reporting offenses.

29

11.

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.
(Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992)
2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  “‘Evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” (Id.)

12.

“Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State 
Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing her,” which 
concerns Education Code, section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), requires a “showing of 
intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.” (San Dieguito Union High School District v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) In order for a 
teacher to be terminated under Education Code section 44932(a)(8), for violations of law or 
school rules, the violations must be either “persistent” or “motivated by an attitude of 
continuous insubordination.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. 
Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81 (Seaman).) “The word ‘persistent’ is defined by
lexicographers as ‘refusing to relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition … 
stubborn; persevering … constantly repeated.’  And, in the judicial decisions of this, as well 
as other states, the word has been interpreted to mean ‘continuing or constant.’”  (Id. at p. 
82.)  It is the persistent disregard of school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate.”
(Id.)

13.

Section 44939, subdivision (b), provides in part:

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified
by the person filing them with the governing board of a 
school district, or upon a written statement of charges 
formulated by the governing board, charging a permanent 
employee of the district with immoral conduct, . . . with 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, . . . the 
governing board may, if it deems such action necessary, 
immediately suspend the employee from his duties and 
give notice to him of his suspension, and that 30 days 
after service of the notice, he will be dismissed, unless 
he demands a hearing.

14.

Even where immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service are established, it 

must also be established that such immoral conduct or evident unfitness renders the 
Respondent unfit to teach.  (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-
230 (Morrison); Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208 
(Fontana); Woodland, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at 1444-1445.) In Morrison, the California 

30

Supreme Court set forth guidelines (eight factors) to aid in determining whether the conduct
in question indicates such unfitness:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, 
fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated.

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.

The type of credential held by the person involved.

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct.

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in 
the conduct.

The likelihood of the reoccurrence of the questioned conduct.

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 
chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or 
other teachers. 

(8)

The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.

15.

Not all “Morrison factors” need be present for the Morrison test to be 

satisfied. (Governing Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.)
Moreover, the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, 
but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (Woodland Joint 
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 
1429, 1457.)

16.

District failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that

Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(2)), immoral conduct
(§ 44932, subd. (a)(1) and § 44939), evident unfitness for service (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6)),
persistent violation of or refusal to obey reasonable regulations (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8)), and 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (§ 44939). As such, 
as set forth in more detail below, no cause exists to dismiss Respondent from his position as 
a permanent certificated employee of District. 

Analysis

/ / /

/ / /

31

A.

Unprofessional Conduct 

17.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 9, unprofessional conduct may be defined as 
conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is unbecoming a member of 
a profession in good standing. District contends Respondent engaged in unprofessional
conduct by individually and/or collectively violating Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy,” the 
Code of Ethics, the Code of Conduct, and the Standards. Each argument is discussed below.

1.

“No-Touch Policy”/ Code of Ethics

18.

District asserts Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when he failed 

to adhere to Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy,” which led to the discomfort and frustration 
felt by several female students in his class.  Such defiance, District contends, not only
demonstrated unprofessional conduct, but it subjected the students to conduct negatively
impacting their learning environment and overall experience as a student.  Additionally,
District asserts that such conduct violated its Code of Ethics requiring employees to keep 
policies, procedures, and rules.  A minority of the Commission agrees with District’s 
assertion in this regard.

19.

The majority of the Commission rejects the notion that Principal Mak’s verbal 

“no-touch policy” was, in fact, a District rule or policy.  Although Principal Mak testified 
that she told her teachers that she considered touching to be “a violation of District policy,”
the evidence simply does not support that assertion.  The record shows that Principal Mak
could not identify, in any of the policies, procedures, codes, and bulletins distributed to 
teachers, any language memorializing her “no-touch policy.”  That’s because no such 
language existed.  The Commission majority maintains that converting or elevating a 
principal’s verbal edicts to a policy or rule recognizable under Education Code dismissal 
provisions circumvents an essential purpose of the Code:   to prevent arbitrary firing of 
tenured teachers.  If principals are permitted to characterize their self-described codes of 
conduct as district or state policy, it could encourage arbitrary and capricious personnel 
decisions, and undermine basic due process protections.

20.

Additionally, Respondent’s dedicated and credible colleagues, Mr. Mack, Ms. 

Barbas, Ms. Dibrell, and Ms. Cabral, affirmed a culture of supporting 15th Street School 
students through the practical application of age-appropriate physical touch, despite Principal 
Mak’s “no-touch policy,” evident from their collective testimonies. They affirmed that 
teachers sometimes use physical contact with students, and acknowledged that such contact 
in the form of side-hugs, shoulder touches, shoulder squeezes, back pats, interlaced finger 
grasps, high-fives, and handshakes, was age-appropriate and within the scope of duties.
Indeed, Principal Mak herself frequently issued high-fives to students, according to 
Respondent’s credible testimony.  The existence of such commonly used affirmations gives
credence to Respondent’s belief that when Principal Mak discussed no touching, it was in 
reference to touching of an inappropriate, sexual, or abusive nature.

/ / /

32

2.

Code of Conduct 

21.

District asserts that as a result of Respondent’s conduct, which caused the
discomfort and frustration of several female students, Respondent violated the Code of 
Conduct. A minority of the Commission agrees with District’s assertion in this regard.

22. With respect to the Code of Conduct, District contends that Respondent’s 
conduct, which violated Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy”, demonstrated a disregard for the 
warnings set forth in its preamble and closing.  Specifically, District asserts Respondent 
ignored its preamble reminding employees that “they must be mindful of the fine line drawn 
between being sensitive to and supportive of students and a possible or perceived breach of 
responsible, ethical behavior.” (Exhibit 7.) Additionally, District asserts Respondent 
ignored its closing, advising that “the District is obligated to investigate allegations and, if 
warranted, take appropriate administrative and/or disciplinary action” should “allegations of 
inappropriate conduct or behavior” be leveled against an employee. (Exhibit 7.) In other 
words, District contends that Principal Mak made Respondent aware of the potential 
consequences should Respondent or any other teacher violate specific items of the Code of 
Conduct, particularly as related to violations of her “no-touch policy;” yet, Respondent 
assumed the risk and violated her policy anyway.

23.

However, irrespective of these warnings, the majority of the Commission finds 

District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent, in fact, 
violated any item of the Code of Conduct, notwithstanding his failure to adhere to Principal 
Mak’s verbal “no-touch policy.” Contrary to District’s claim, insufficient evidence exists to 
establish that Respondent violated Item 6, as District has claimed, which prohibits “touching 
or having physical contact with a student(s) that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of 
the employee’s/individual’s responsibilities and/or duties.”  Insufficient evidence also exists
to demonstrate that Respondent violate Item 3 of the Code of Conduct, which prohibits 
employees from “engaging in any behaviors, either directly or indirectly with a student(s) or 
in the presence of a student(s), that are unprofessional, unethical, illegal, immoral, or 
exploitative.” The overwhelming evidence established by the record demonstrates 
Respondent engaged in age-appropriate physical contact with his students, male and female, 
as discussed in detail above.  Age-appropriate contact under the Code of Conduct cannot 
simultaneously be considered unprofessional, unethical, illegal, immoral, or exploitative 
contact under a different section of the same District code.

3.

The Standards

24. With respect to the Standards, which addresses creating and maintaining 
effective environments for student learning, District contends Respondent violated six 
subsections of Standard 2.  Specifically, District asserts Respondent violated subsections 2.1, 
2.2, 2.3, 2.5, 2.6, and 2.7 by engaging in physical contact that caused the girls to feel 
uncomfortable, thereby negatively impacting the promotion of a socially caring environment; 
the creation of an environment promoting student learning; the maintenance of a physically,
intellectually, and safe learning environment; the development of maintaining high 

33

standards; the employment of classroom routines, procedures, norms, and supports ensuring 
a climate in which students can learn; and the utilization of instructional time to optimize 
learning.  A minority of the Commission agrees with District’s position.

25.

The Commission majority cannot deny the significance of students feeling 

uncomfortable in their own classroom, and the overall impact it must have had on them.
However, the totality of the record suggests that of Respondent’s classes during the 2013-
2014 and 2014-2015 school years, which included a total of approximately 50 students, a 
very small minority expressed feelings of discomfort, according to the credible direct 
evidence presented at hearing.  Specifically, only five students testified at hearing and 
expressed their experiences in Respondent’s class.  However, an equal number of witnesses 
(i.e., Mr. Mack, Ms. Dibrell, Ms. Cabral, Ms. Barbas, and Respondent) provided persuasive 
testimony describing the supportive and encouraging environment Respondent promoted.
Indeed, Respondent, who had been working at 15th Street School since 1998 with an 
unblemished disciplinary record, received multiple performance evaluations from Principal 
Mak describing Respondent as “aware of and sensitive to the norms of the students’ social, 
cultural, and emotional development.”  Principal Mak also stated Respondent “model[ed] 
and promot[ed] fairness, caring, equity, and respect in his classroom.”  Given these factors, 
the Commission majority finds no violation of the Standards.

26.

In light of the foregoing, District has failed to meet its burden of establishing 

Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct under Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(2).

B.

Immoral Conduct

27. While District established that Respondent’s physical interaction with his 

students left some of his female students feeling uncomfortable, the Commission 
unanimously determined that District failed to establish that such physical interaction 
constituted conduct inconsistent with rectitude, indicative of corruption, indecency,
depravity, dissoluteness, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, as describe in Legal Conclusion 10. The evidence 
showed that Respondent gave his students side-hugs, shoulder touches, shoulder squeezes,
back pats, interlaced finger grasps, high-fives, and handshakes, conduct objectively viewed
as appropriate and within the purview of his role as a teacher, according to the credible 
testimony of Ms. Cabral, Ms. Barbas, Ms. Dibrell, and Mr. Mack. While District implied 
that Respondent’s intent behind his interactions with his female students stemmed from an
inappropriate, sexual, or predatory purpose, District simply did not prove that assertion.
Instead, the evidence established Respondent incorporated physical contact into his teaching 
style to help create a supportive and encouraging environment for his students.  Given the 
above, District failed to establish Respondent engaged in immoral conduct under Education 
Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939.

/ / /

34

C.

Evident Unfitness for Service 

28.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 11, evident unfitness for service addresses
whether a teacher is unfit or unsuitable for teaching, by reason of temperamental defect or 
inadequacies. Legal Conclusion 11 also describes unfitness for service as that which 
connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s 
conduct fails to meet the expectation of the District. While District expressed concern about 
how some of Respondent’s female students felt in Respondent’s class as a result of his 
physical contact with them, the Commission unanimously determined that such concern does 
not constitute a demonstration that Respondent suffered a temperamental defect, inadequacy,
or a fixed character trait resistant to remediation. On the contrary, as set forth in more detail 
below, the Commission strongly believes District’s perceived concerns about Respondent’s
conduct can be remedied very easily by a simple modification of his teaching style, which he 
testified he would be willing to implement. Given the above, District failed to establish 
Respondent’s evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(6).

D.

Persistent Violation of or Refusal to Obey School Laws 

29.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 12, cases interpreting whether a teacher has 

persistently violated or refused to obey school laws require a showing of intentional and 
continual refusal to cooperate.  Here, the Commission unanimously determined that the 
evidence did not demonstrate a showing that Respondent persistently violated or refused to 
obey school laws or intentionally or continually refused to cooperate, though for two 
different reasons.  The same Commission majority that concluded Respondent engaged in no 
unprofessional conduct, reasoning Respondent had not violated any official District codes or
policies, has hence concluded that Respondent, by definition, could not have committed a
violation of the present cause.  In other words, District failed to meet its burden of 
establishing that Respondent engaged in the persistent violation of or the refusal to obey 
school laws, because it failed to establish that Respondent violated any official school laws 
or policies in the first place.

30.

The Commission minority that concluded Respondent had engaged in 
unprofessional conduct for violating Principal Mak’s “no-touch policy,” the Code of 
Conduct, the Code of Ethics, and the Standards, also concluded District failed to meet its
burden of proving Respondent committed a violation of the present cause.  Specifically, the 
minority reasoned that a violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 
requires a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.”  (San Dieguito Union 
High School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 
1176, 1196.). The minority concluded there was no showing of an intentional and continual 
refusal to cooperate, because Respondent had been teaching for years, had been receiving
positive evaluations from Principal Mak, and District proffered no evidence demonstrating
that any administrator, colleague, student, or parent had advised him that any pertinent facet
of his teaching style required remediation. Given the above reasons, District failed to 

35

establish Respondent’s persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws under Education 
Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).

E.

Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments

31.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 13, a teacher’s willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments is actionable when done without reasonable cause. The Commission 
unanimously finds that District presented no evidence that Respondent refused to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause.  On the contrary, the evidence showed that 
Respondent was fully dedicated to his role as a teacher, and performed accordingly, as 
evidenced by Respondent positive performance evaluations.  Given the above, District failed 
to establish Respondent willfully refused to perform regular assignments under Education 
Code section 44939.

Conclusion

Morrison Factors

32.

Based on the foregoing, District failed to demonstrate Respondent engaged in 
unprofessional conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(2)), immoral conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1) and 
§ 44939), evident unfitness for service (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6)), persistent violation of or 
refusal to obey reasonable regulations (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8)), and willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause (§ 44939). Accordingly, District’s Accusation 
shall be dismissed.

33.

Usually when deciding whether cause for dismissal exists, it also must be 

established that a teacher’s misconduct relates to his fitness to teach, within the meaning of 
Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230. In Morrison v. State 
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the California Supreme Court held that “an 
individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that his 
retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school 
employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  The court 
concluded that a teacher’s conduct cannot abstractly be characterized as “immoral,” 
“unprofessional,” or “involving moral turpitude” unless the conduct indicated that a teacher 
is unfit to teach. (Id. at p. 229.)  The court set forth guidelines to aid in determining whether 
the conduct in question indicated this unfitness.

34.

In this case, because it was not established that Respondent’s conduct 

supported any of the charges, examination of the Morrison factors is unnecessary.
Nonetheless, it is doubtful that the Morrison factors would support cause for discipline if 
applied to any of the causes, including the cause for unprofessional conduct. Specifically,
while it is evident that some students felt negatively impacted by the physical component of 
Respondent’s teaching style,19 Respondent’s conduct was not driven by any negative or 

19 See Legal Conclusion 14, Morrison factor (1).

36

impure intent.20 On the contrary, Respondent’s conduct was driven by a desire to provide his 
students with a positive, encouraging, and supportive environment. 21 In that regard, and as 
further example of his commitment to his students, Respondent has researched and explored 
alternative teaching methods that will help in the furtherance of his endeavor to promote a 
positive environment and meet District expectations. 22

ORDER

The Accusation against Respondent Dennis Jenkins is dismissed. Respondent shall

be retained by the Los Angeles Unified School District as a permanent certificated employee.

DATED:

February 17, 2017

DATED:

February 16, 2017

DATED:

February 17, 2017

DocuSigned  by: 

Carls  L.  Garrett 

40D088C388950430D...   
CARLA L. GARRETT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
Commission on Professional Competence

DecuSigned  by: 

acs oCornaa 

EAS4OC 7400284017  ...   
LACEY LEMUS
Commission Member
Commission on Professional Competence

DocuSigned  by: 

Solu  Colombo 

BBEAS69117BS483...   
JOHN COLOMBO
Commission Member
Commission on Professional Competence

 

20 See Legal Conclusion 14, Morrison factor (5).

21 See Legal Conclusion 14, Morrison factor (5).

22 See Legal Conclusion 14, Morrison factor (6).

37

