BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
ANAHEIM UNIFIED HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

JILL BRIQUELET,
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No.:  2016040305

Respondent.

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard the above-
captioned matter in Los Angeles on October 10, 11, and 14, 2016, and on February 22 and 
23, 2017. The Commission members were Amber Hughes, Adam Camacho, and John E. 
DeCure, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH),
presiding. The Anaheim Union High School District (the District) was represented by 
attorneys Daniel R. Shinoff and Amanda M. Friedman, of Artiano Shinoff.  Respondent Jill 
Briquelet (respondent) appeared with her attorney, Richard J. Schwab, of Trygstad, Schwab 
& Trygstad.     

The matter was submitted for decision on February 23, 2017.  The Commission 

hereby makes its factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.  

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE

In this proceeding the District seeks the termination of one of its tenured lead 
counselors, respondent Jill M. Briquelet. Three statutory grounds were asserted as justifying 
termination: dishonesty (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4); evident unfitness for service (Ed. 
Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a)(6); and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state laws or 
regulations, or the district’s regulations, for the governance of schools (§44932, subd. 
(a)(8)).1

The central allegation of this case is that respondent authored an anonymous letter, 

which was mailed to a school board member and two other school officials at Oxford 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

Academy (Oxford), where respondent is the lead counselor.  The letter alleged that Oxford’s 
principal, Ron Hoshi, created a negative work environment, was dishonest, and had violated 
school and district admissions policies by exercising favoritism in the admission of five new 
students to Oxford for the upcoming 2015/2016 school year.  The District further alleged that 
when respondent revealed information regarding the five students in the letter, she violated 
school and district confidentiality rules.  Lastly, the District alleged respondent continuously 
obstructed its subsequent investigation into the charge contained in the anonymous letter that 
Oxford engaged in unfair student admission practices.   

Respondent denied all of the allegations.  She provided evidence regarding the facts 

and circumstances of the events referenced in the Amended Notice of Charges, and otherwise 
provided evidence in support of her retention by the District.  The evidence failed to establish 
the District’s factual allegations against her.  The Commission finds and concludes, 
unanimously, that cause for termination has not been established.   

The Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Complainant Brad Jackson (complainant) executed the Amended Notice of 
Charges in this matter while acting in his official capacity as Assistant Superintendent of 
Human Resources of the District.  

2.

The District commenced this proceeding on February 22, 2016, when 

complainant executed a Notice of Charges against respondent.  That Notice of Charges was 
filed with the District's governing board, which thereafter determined to terminate 
respondent.  

3.

On February 22, 2016, the District gave respondent written notice of its intent 

to terminate her, and served respondent with a copy of the Notice of Charges.  Respondent 
made a timely request for hearing.  She then filed a Notice of Defense, and this hearing 
ensued.  

4.

On July 26, 2016, the District executed an Amended Notice of Charges against 
respondent.  That Amended Notice of Charges was filed with the District's governing board, 
which thereafter determined to terminate respondent.  Respondent made a second timely 
request for hearing. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met.   

5.

6.

Respondent is a certificated counselor in the District's employ, credentialed to 

teach math, economics, and to provide pupil personnel services (in the area of school 
counseling) to high school students.  During the spring 2015 semester at Oxford, which is the 
time relevant to this proceeding, respondent was the Lead Counselor at Oxford, a combined 

2

junior high school and high school serving students from grades 7 through 12, located in 
Cypress, California. Among the several high schools within the District, Oxford is a 
nationally renowned college preparatory school known for its rigorous academic standards 
and a competitive admissions process.    

Findings on the Factual Allegations Made Against Respondent

AUTHORSHIP OF THE ANONYMOUS LETTER

7.

On or about August 13, 2015, an anonymous letter (the letter), dated the same, 

was delivered to Annmarie Randle-Trejo, a District appointee on its Board of Trustees, by 
United States mail.2 The letter referenced five students, whose names are redacted herein to 
protect their privacy rights, and stated:

We are writing to you and the other [District] trustees to let you 
know about problems that have been developing at Oxford 
Academy.  Mr. Hoshi’s poor organization and communication 
skills, lack of sound judgment, seemingly vindictive behaviors, 
and the perception he gives of being completely unprepared to 
serve in his position have created a very negative work 
environment and have resulted in angry and frustrated teachers, 
counselors and secretaries.  Mr. Matsuda3 knows about these 
problems but is doing nothing to resolve them because Mr. 
Hoshi is a personal friend.  These are things we encourage you 
to investigate because we are sure that many staff members will 
be happy to share their own experiences.

More importantly we need to make you aware of Mr. Hoshi’s 
dishonesty and his violation of school and district policy.  Mr. 
Hoshi is only supposed to accept students who deserve to be at 
Oxford Academy.  Students earn this honor by taking the 
entrance exam and scoring well enough to be admitted.  We 
have recently discovered that Mr. Hoshi has passed over 
students who should have earned this honor and has instead 
admitted students whose parents he knows and favors or those 
who have siblings he favors.  What is even more concerning is 
that Mr. Hoshi admitted a student named [name redacted] (Rank 
40, Area 38), whose mother was paid to arrange an East Coast 
College Tour that Mr. Hoshi promoted to Oxford families and 
that he himself attended.  Here are the names of several other 

Copies of the letter were also sent to two persons on Oxford’s teaching and 

administrative staff, by U.S. mail, on or about August 13, 2015.

Mr. Matsuda is Michael Matsuda, the District’s Superintendent. 

2

3

3

students we have learned were selected out of rank: [name 
redacted] (Rank 64, Area 32), [name redacted] (Rank 32, Area 
37), [name redacted] (Rank 38, Area 40), and [name redacted] 
(Rank 32, Area 37).  We are certain there are others.

Oxford Academy is an incredible school and we do not want to 
see its reputation damaged.  Can you imagine what would 
transpire if the cheated students’ parents learned about this?  
What might happen if the media or Gloria Romero4 and her 
charter school supporters were informed of this?  Please look 
into these matters and take action on behalf of the parents, 
students and staff of Oxford Academy because we deserve 
better.  

Sincerely,

Concerned in Cypress

8.

Soon after the letter was received, the District commenced an investigation to 

determine the source of the letter, and to inquire into the allegations of unfair admissions 
practices set forth in the letter.5 The District asked a licensed private investigator, Nicole 
Miller, to conduct the investigation.  Ms. Miller interviewed multiple witnesses, most of 
whom were Oxford employees.  Ms. Miller also interviewed respondent, and respondent’s 
husband, John Briquelet, a high school principal and former District employee.  

9.

At no time did anyone subject to the District’s investigation, including 

respondent, admit to having authored the letter.  No direct evidence was found to establish 
who had authored the letter.  Instead, the District’s allegation that respondent authored the 
letter was based on circumstantial evidence, theory, and conjecture as follows.

ACCESS TO THE ADMISSIONS LIST

10.

The names, rankings, and school areas of the five students referenced in the 
letter were derived from a master admissions list (list) compiled by Oxford’s then registrar, 
Kartha King.  The list was to be used by Mr. Hoshi to determine which students who had 
applied for admission would be admitted to Oxford for the upcoming 2015-2016 school year.  
The list was compiled from several sub-lists, one for students in the geographic area of each 

4

5

Gloria Romero, a former California State Senator and the former Director of 

California Democrats for Education Reform, is active in the realm of education reform.   

Although the ostensible purposes of the investigation included an analysis of 

the letter’s contents, the evidence established that the District’s primary objective was to 
determine who wrote the letter.  

4

junior high school in the district, with each such school assigned an “area” number; those 
sub-lists ranked each student based on his or her overall score on a pre-admission entrance 
examination that tested students in math, English and essay writing.  Every student that 
applied and was tested appeared on the sub-list for his or her area’s junior high school.  Thus, 
far more than 25 students appeared on each sub-list.  The students’ applications and grade-
point-averages were also recorded and considered in the selection process.  Although the 25 
top-ranked students from each junior high school area were initially offered admission, each 
year a certain number of those students would typically decline Oxford’s offer, choosing to 
attend school elsewhere.  This resulted in a number of additional openings for admission 
during each admission cycle, and these newly-available positions were filled at the discretion 
of the school principal.  There were also District policies for the principal to consider.  One 
District policy allowed for an exception to the top-25 admission policy for students of 
District employees, who were offered admission to Oxford as a “perk” attendant to their 
parents’ employment.  Another District policy favored the admission of any new student who 
had a sibling currently attending Oxford.  Mr. Hoshi followed both policies while also
exercising his discretion to fill additional openings. 

11.

The District initially contended that the author of the anonymous letter would 
have had access to the list prior to authoring the letter, since the letter contained confidential 
admissions information regarding the five students specifically mentioned.  This contention 
was both logical and reasonable, as several Oxford employees, including Ms. King, Mr. 
Hoshi, and respondent, testified that the list was the primary source of such specific 
admissions information.

12.

The District’s second contention was that respondent, who had access to the 

list, was therefore the author of the anonymous letter.  This contention was not established by 
the evidence. Respondent’s access to the list was brief, and preceded Mr. Hoshi’s selection 
of the students referenced in the letter.  Moreover, because the list was unsecured and kept in 
a busy common space, a wide number of other people may also have had access to it. The 
specific facts and circumstances are as follows. 

13.

Respondent had access to the student admissions information only once, when 
she was asked by Ms. King in the spring of 2015 to assist her in selecting the top 25 students 
from each sub-list.  Ms. King testified that although this was a process Mr. Hoshi was 
responsible for completing, he had been “evasive” about following through and had failed to 
take action, frustrating Ms. King.  Respondent spent approximately 15 to 20 minutes working 
with Ms. King, using a formula to deduce the top 25 ranking students on each area sub-list.  
When respondent finished, Ms. King took back the list, which she later presented to Mr. 
Hoshi so that he could engage in his final selection process.  According to Ms. King, Mr. 
Hoshi was grateful to respondent for her assistance when Ms. King described to him how
respondent had helped her.

14.

The evidence established that respondent’s act of assisting Ms. King with the 

selection process was respondent’s only exposure to the list. This being so, a reasonable 
presumption cannot be made that during that brief period while she provided assistance, 

5

respondent could have also gleaned specific student-ranking information regarding the five 
students whose non-admission would be protested in the letter. The sub-lists were
substantial, as they contained information regarding every student applicant from each 
District area, not just the 25 top students. As she sat with Ms. King and compiled top 25 
rankings for every sub-list, respondent also would have had to memorize information about 
other students beneath the cusp of the top 25, on several sub-lists. All this she would have to 
accomplish within a time-window of 15 to 20 minutes, and with the school registrar sitting 
beside her.  This was hardly a prime opportunity for respondent to study the list for other 
information regarding students who were below the cusp of the top 25. The evidence did not 
establish that Respondent could plausibly perform such a feat of memory.  

15.

The timing of respondent’s only exposure to the list also fails to implicate her.  

In short, her exposure came too early: At the time respondent helped Ms. King with the 
preliminary selections, Mr. Hoshi had not yet seen the list.  Thus, as respondent went over 
the admissions information with Ms. King, she would not have known what to even look for
in order to argue later that Mr. Hoshi engaged in an inequitable selection process or 
committed admissions-policy violations.  It was too soon for respondent to even consider 
those possibilities, because no controversy existed.  Mr. Hoshi had yet to make his selections.

16.

The District further alleged respondent also had access to the list at a later 

date, which would have facilitated her in writing the letter.  But the evidence failed to 
establish this contention.  After Ms. King retired as Oxford’s registrar in June 2015, she was 
replaced by Josefina Laris in July 2015.  Ms. Laris testified that sometime before the 2015-
2016 schoolyear began, respondent asked Ms. Laris for a list of new students, to be used for 
the new-student orientation process.  However, Ms. Laris had no recollection of actually 
locating or providing such a list to respondent.  Ms. Laris was also unclear as to whether the 
list of new students was a list that would have contained student admissions information.  

17.

The District presented no other evidence to prove respondent accessed the list 
at a later date.  Respondent adamantly denied she ever saw the list after Mr. Hoshi made his 
final admissions selections.  

18.

The evidence established that any number of people other than respondent 

potentially had access to the list, as follows.  

19.

At one point in the summer of 2015 the list’s location was uncertain.  After 

Ms. King retired, her registrar’s items, some of which were placed in binders, were boxed up 
and placed in a conference room.  Ms. Laris could not recall whether she located Ms. King’s 
binders before or after the District’s investigation.  Ms. Laris believed there was an original 
list, and one copy, but she could not recall ever seeing either list. Mr. Hoshi kept the 
original, and the registrar had the copy.  

20. Mr. Hoshi testified that to his knowledge, the list never went missing.  

6

21.

The copy of the list was kept in a drawer in the registrar’s desk. The evidence 

did not establish that any specific security measures were routinely taken to secure 
confidential documents kept in the registrar’s desk.  The desk’s location was also 
problematic.  Sometime during the previous school year, Oxford’s administration had the 
registrar’s desk moved from a private office into the school’s main office, in a busy spot
open to foot traffic from teachers, students, administrators, parents, and others.  Because the 
registrar’s desk was a place where confidential student information was kept, several 
witnesses, including Ms. Laris, Ms. King, and respondent, testified that this main-office 
location was less than ideal, as the desk was not cordoned off in a cubicle or protected by a 
surrounding countertop.  Too many people routinely occupied the same space, and there was 
no privacy.  When Ms. Laris began her position as school registrar in July 2015, which was 
after the 2015-2016 admissions selections had been made, she was concerned about her desk 
being “out in the middle” and requested that the school provide her with a locking file 
cabinet.  A few weeks after the District’s investigator interviewed her, Ms. Laris received the 
locking file cabinets she had requested.

22.

The sum of the evidence established that the list was kept in an open space in a 
main office and was not consistently secured or safeguarded.  Thus, no reasonable inferences 
can be made as to who may have had access to the list, and whether such a person would be 
more likely to have written the letter. Under the circumstances, those possibilities were too 
broad to be probative of respondent’s alleged conduct.

RESPONDENT’S AGREEMENT WITH THE LETTER’S CONTENTS;
WORKING WITH MR. HOSHI

23.

The District contended that because the letter contained multiple criticisms of 
Mr. Hoshi, and because respondent was similarly critical of Mr. Hoshi, she was the letter’s 
likely author.  This theory was undermined by the testimony of multiple witnesses who were 
currently or previously employed at Oxford and had worked with Mr. Hoshi. All but one of 
those witnesses expressed reservations and concerns regarding Mr. Hoshi’s abilities as 
principal. The District further posited that respondent did not get along with Mr. Hoshi, and 
due to her frustration with him, she authored the letter.  Although the evidence established 
that respondent and Mr. Hoshi did not always enjoy a good working relationship, by most 
accounts, including their own, they continued to work together.  None of the evidence 
regarding their workplace collaboration allowed for a further reasonable inference to be 
made that respondent was thereby compelled to write the letter.  The relevant evidence 
regarding these issues is as follows.   

24.

Kathy Scott was Oxford’s principal for seven years, from approximately 2006 
until 2012, and she worked with Mr. Hoshi acting as her assistant principal during that time.  
She recalled that Mr. Hoshi and respondent had problems working together at times, but they 
often agreed with one another and collaborated as a team.  Ms. Scott knew respondent was 
sometimes frustrated with Mr. Hoshi’s lack of leadership, but other faculty members made 
similar complaints about Mr. Hoshi.  Ms. Scott viewed Mr. Hoshi as having weaknesses as a 
leader and taking workplace events “very personally.”  He also took it personally if others 

7

criticized his work.  If he grew upset, he was known to have “temper tantrums.”  Ms. Scott 
did not recall respondent complaining to her that Mr. Hoshi was “vindictive,” as set forth in 
the letter, nor did respondent complain that Mr. Hoshi was unprepared, or had a personal 
relationship with Superintendent Matsuda.  

25. Ms. King saw Mr. Hoshi as “not a very organized principal” who was often 

occupied with other things, and was not a good communicator.  Ms. King believed 
respondent disliked Mr. Hoshi as a principal and did not conceal her concerns about him.
However, Ms. King was aware that other Oxford staff shared mutual concerns about Mr. 
Hoshi.

26.

Shelly Nicola, an Office Assistant at Oxford since 2004, had worked with Mr. 
Hoshi since 2009, when he became assistant principal.  Ms. Nicola recalled witnessing stress 
and tension between Mr. Hoshi and respondent at times, when they “didn’t see eye-to-eye.” 
She did not recall respondent speaking critically of Mr. Hoshi to others.

27.

Hiba Taylor, a Teacher on Special Assignment at Oxford who has been 

employed at the school since approximately 2007, testified that Mr. Hoshi was not a good 
communicator, was not organized, and had a general reputation at Oxford as not being a very 
good leader.  Ms. Taylor was aware that sometimes there was stress or tension between 
respondent and Mr. Hoshi when those two worked together. Respondent’s reputation as 
Oxford’s lead counselor is excellent.  She is known as a strong leader on campus and a hard 
worker who is very honest, straightforward, and willing to say what she believes.      

28.

Bruce Stevens, a teacher of biology and eighth-grade math, has taught at 

Oxford since the school first opened in 1998.  He has worked with Mr. Hoshi since 2000, 
when Mr. Hoshi began at Oxford as a choir director, then later when Mr. Hoshi became an 
assistant principal, and finally the principal.  He described Mr. Hoshi as a poor 
communicator who often does not finish his own sentences when he speaks.  Mr. Hoshi is 
not well organized during his meetings with staff, and as a result, his meetings were often “a 
jumble.”  Mr. Stevens believed Mr. Hoshi exercises unsound judgment, sometimes 
prioritizing students’ participation in sports and musical events over the students’ timely 
completion of their school work.  Because Oxford is primarily an academically rigorous 
college preparatory institution, Mr. Stevens sees Mr. Hoshi’s priorities as principal as not 
aligned with the school’s main objectives.  Halfway through Mr. Hoshi’s first year as 
principal, Mr. Stevens, who was then the science department chairperson at Oxford, resigned 
from his post.  The chairpersons of the math, English, and social studies departments also 
resigned from their posts at or about the same time.  Mr. Stevens and the other department 
chairs resigned in response to having meetings with Mr. Hoshi, during which Mr. Hoshi 
would dictate his own meeting agenda and essentially tell the chairs “how to run their 
departments.”  Mr. Stevens never told Mr. Hoshi why he resigned because he believed Mr. 
Hoshi was vindictive.  Mr. Stevens has discussed Mr. Hoshi’s problems as principal with 
other staff at Oxford several times.  Respondent had complained to Mr. Stevens about things 
Mr. Hoshi did that she did not like, but Mr. Stevens did not consider respondent to be a 
“gossip.”  Mr. Stevens has worked with respondent for approximately 13 years and said she 

8

is known as being hard-nosed, amenable, forthright, honest, diligent, and well-respected at 
Oxford.   

29.

Deanna Miner, Oxford’s instrumental-music teacher, has worked on the 

school’s teaching staff since approximately 2004.  She described Mr. Hoshi as being 
frustrated with respondent for not always being “on board” with his objectives.  Because Mr. 
Hoshi is Ms. Miner’s current boss, she felt reluctant to criticize him, but over time, his style 
of running the school has made it difficult for her to do her job.  She described respondent as 
not being a “gossip” about Mr. Hoshi.

30.

Respondent testified she had experienced difficulties and frustrations at times 

working with Mr. Hoshi, and he with her. However, she maintained a professional 
relationship with him and tried to make improvements.  In May 2015, she contacted Dr.
Jared Fried, the District’s Assistant Supervisor in charge of Human Resources, and asked Dr. 
Fried to set up a meeting with her and Mr. Hoshi, so that she and Mr. Hoshi could explore 
how to better work together. Dr. Fried was aware of respondent’s concerns that the overall 
work environment was at times chaotic, and that communication between she and Mr. Hoshi 
was not always good.  In June 2015, Dr. Fried conducted the meeting.  Respondent and Mr. 
Hoshi were able to air their concerns, and they discussed how they might improve their 
working relationship.  Respondent and Mr. Hoshi ultimately agreed they were happy to be 
working together, and overall, respondent felt the meeting was productive.

31.

The evidence established that respondent offered to help Mr. Hoshi with his 

principal’s duties in a manner that went beyond her role as lead counselor.  In 2014, Mr. 
Hoshi sought assistance from respondent through her husband, John Briquelet, who was the
principal at Loera High School, which is also within the District, from 2012 to 2016.  Upon 
Mr. Hoshi’s request, respondent set up a meeting between her husband and Mr. Hoshi, and 
Mr. Briquelet provided advice and suggestions to Mr. Hoshi regarding how to plan out his 
first school year at Oxford as its principal. The meeting was productive, and Mr. Hoshi was 
grateful to respondent and Mr. Briquelet for their support.  On another subsequent occasion, 
Mr. Briquelet provided advice to Mr. Hoshi about whether Mr. Hoshi’s proposed class 
assignment for a teacher at Oxford might run afoul of the current teacher’s-union 
employment contract.  

32.

Nicole Miller, the private investigator, interviewed Mr. Briquelet, among 

others, during the course of her investigation.  Mr. Briquelet testified credibly that when Ms. 
Miller interviewed him, she asked him whether Mr. Hoshi was a good leader.  Mr. Briquelet 
responded by saying he had no firsthand knowledge of Mr. Hoshi’s leadership abilities. Ms. 
Miller then told him, “I don’t think Mr. Hoshi was a good leader.” 6

6

When Ms. Miller testified, she admitted having told Mr. Briquelet she did not 

believe Mr. Hoshi was a very good principal. 

9

33.

Only one witness testified in support of Mr. Hoshi’s abilities as a principal.   
Hilda Vasquez, Oxford’s Assistant Principal, described Mr. Hoshi as a good communicator 
and a fine leader who enjoyed a solid reputation as principal.  Ms. Vasquez observed 
respondent and Mr. Hoshi in weekly leadership meetings, and she believed respondent was 
abrasive, defensive, and reactive toward Mr. Hoshi, undermining his authority. In particular, 
Ms. Vasquez took exception that respondent, a counselor, would speak to Mr. Hoshi, an 
administrator, as if respondent was on the same level with him as an Oxford employee.  Ms. 
Vasquez displayed a substantial bias in favor of Mr. Hoshi, as he was her current supervisor 
and had been her assigned mentor many years ago when she was a new teacher at another 
high school.  Ms. Vasquez displayed an equally substantial bias against respondent, having 
clashed with her in a school-related incident in which she allegedly called respondent a 
racist.  Because Ms. Vasquez had “truncated” her side of the story, she was required to 
apologize to respondent in order to resolve the matter.   

34. Mr. Hoshi described his relationship with respondent as “challenging.”  He 

met with respondent frequently on a leadership team, and felt she was undermining his 
authority by speaking with others after these meetings, and by not being “transparent” during 
the meetings.  In general, Mr Hoshi felt respondent was challenging his leadership.  
However, he did not contend that he and respondent could not work together.  Mr. Hoshi 
denied he had temper tantrums on the job, explaining that he was passionate about his work.  
He conceded that several department chairpersons had resigned during his first year as 
Oxford’s principal, but he did not believe their resignations were due to their objections to 
his leadership skills.

35.

In sum, the evidence established that Mr. Hoshi had many critics at Oxford, 

including respondent.  This generally negative view of the principal’s abilities was even 
shared by the District’s investigator.  The evidence further established that respondent and 
Mr. Hoshi did not always get along well, yet they continued to work together.  None of this 
evidence allowed for a reasonable inference to be made that respondent authored the letter.   

     

INVESTIGATOR’S OPINION OF RESPONDENT’S CREDIBILITY

36.

To prove respondent authored the letter, the District offered Ms. Miller’s 

testimony that in her view, respondent lacked credibility.  However, Ms. Miller’s opinion 
was not persuasive. 

37. Ms. Miller stated that when she evaluates a witness’s credibility, she judges 
whether the witness gives honest answers that are consistent with other evidence.  She also 
judges whether the witness shows a consistency in her statements.  In other words, if a 
witness says she has information but won’t supply it, the witness lacks consistency.  Ms. 
Miller offered one example to show why respondent was, in her view, not a credible witness.  
Respondent had criticized Mr. Hoshi’s abilities as principal, and told Ms. Miller three 
department chairs had stepped down from those positions due to Mr. Hoshi’s incompetence.  
However, respondent would not provide Ms. Miller with the names of the department chairs.
Thus, in Ms. Miller’s opinion, respondent was not credible.  Ms. Miller’s testimony on this 

10

issue was unpersuasive.  The incident involving the resignation of several department 
chairpersons during Mr. Hoshi’s first year as principal was well known to Mr. Stevens and 
Mr. Hoshi, both of whom testified about it at the hearing.  Withholding the names of the 
department chairs is therefore not a basis for disbelief in light of this other evidence.  

38. Ms. Miller was similarly unpersuasive in her assertion that respondent was not 

an honest witness.  Respondent’s statements were candid and substantive when Ms. Miller
interviewed her.  When respondent was shown the letter, she denied having authored it, but 
she did not shy away from discussing its contents, telling Ms. Miller she agreed with the 
assertions contained in it.7 Respondent also offered the opinion that she believed Ms. King 
would not have authored the letter.  Respondent further described how she had assisted Ms. 
King in making admissions-process selections, a fact which concretely established 
respondent’s exposure to the list.  Respondent also openly described Mr. Hoshi’s ability, as 
principal, to select students he wanted to see admitted to Oxford, and she further opined that 
the selection of the five students mentioned in the letter was unfair. None of respondent’s 
assertions were self-serving: instead of distancing herself from the letter, she agreed with it; 
she offered an opinion eliminating a colleague as the letter’s suspected author; and she 
described her use of the list. This suggests respondent was answering Ms. Miller’s questions 
truthfully, without concern for how she might be perceived.                       

39.

As detailed above, the evidence established, by the testimony of multiple 

witnesses, that respondent is a straightforward, direct, assertive person who often speaks her 
mind without hesitation.  Judging by the content of her answers, respondent was being frank 
and honest, in keeping with her reputation at Oxford, when she spoke with Ms. Miller.

40. Ms. Miller exhibited biases favoring the District and against respondent.  
Although Ms. Miller was tasked with performing an independent investigation, her firm 
regularly works for the District and she receives a $5,000 per month retainer fee from the 
District for performing such services.  This arrangement suggests that Ms. Miller viewed the 
District as a regular client, an arrangement which would make it more difficult for her to 
approach each investigation in an unbiased fashion.  

41. Ms. Miller exhibited bias against respondent when she interviewed Mr. 
Briquelet, who testified credibly that during that interview, Ms. Miller had openly accused 
respondent of having written the letter.  When Mr. Briquelet voiced his firm disagreement, 
Ms. Miller further challenged him, stating that if respondent did not write the letter, then Mr. 
Briquelet himself must have written it.  Although Ms. Miller denied having confronted Mr. 
Briquelet in this way, she was a less credible witness than was he.  The evidence established 
that during Mr. Briquelet’s interview, Ms. Miller spoke disparagingly of Mr. Hoshi, stating
that he was not a good principal. In doing so, the investigator was plainly repeating 

7

Respondent qualified this viewpoint when she testified, explaining that she 

had no knowledge of Mr. Hoshi being vindictive or creating a hostile work environment; nor 
did she know who Gloria Romero was, or what Ms. Romero or the media would do if 
Oxford’s admissions policies were discovered.   

11

information told to her by witnesses in other, confidential interviews.  Ms. Miller was also 
suggesting the answer to a question that she had just asked Mr. Briquelet.  For an investigator 
conducting an independent, fact-finding investigation, such conduct showed a lack of
neutrality and discretion.

42.

In view of the evidence presented, complainant’s logic regarding respondent’s 
credibility was at cross-purposes.  On one hand, complainant argued respondent’s agreement 
with the letter’s contents when she spoke with Ms. Miller indicates that she wrote the letter.
Yet concurrently, the District offered Ms. Miller’s testimony to allege that respondent was 
not being honest when questioned, indicating that respondent authored the letter. Neither of 
these disparate contentions established that respondent did any such thing. This was a 
constant evidentiary problem for the District: while it suggested that one inference could be 
made from the evidence, another, opposite inference could also be drawn.  In this instance,
respondent’s candor regarding her views of the letter’s contents just as readily suggest she is 
not the letter’s author; had she written the letter, she would better conceal her authorship by 
denying any agreement with its contents, or even rejecting it outright.  Instead, respondent 
said what she believed.  

43.

Considering all of these factors, the evidence established that respondent was a 

credible witness during the course of the District’s investigation. No reasonable inferences 
could be made that based on respondent’s interview with Ms. Miller, respondent was the 
author of the letter.  

ALLEGED CONTINUOUS OBSTRUCTION OF THE COURSE OF THE INVESTIGATION

44.

The District contends respondent continuously obstructed the course of its 

investigation.  As evidence in support of this allegation it offered the testimony of four
witnesses with whom respondent had spoken after the investigation commenced.

45.

Kartha King retired in June 2015, before the letter was mailed and before the 

District’s investigation began.  She was interviewed by Ms. Miller, but could not recall 
receiving any instructions to not talk with anyone else about the investigation.  In the 
summer of 2015, she attended a Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim baseball game as part of a 
Loera High School employees’ reunion.  Respondent was present at the game and expressed 
her unhappiness with Mr. Hoshi as a principal.  Later that summer respondent called Ms. 
King at home.  Ms. King could not precisely recall the subject of the conversation, but 
respondent said nothing to her about the letter.  

46.

Amanda Bean, a school counselor at Oxford since January 2015, testified that 

during the summer of 2015, she had asked respondent to refrain from having respondent’s 
children, who were students at Oxford, walk through private school spaces reserved for 
school employees and staff.  Respondent replied that she felt this prohibition was “funny, 
considering the letter going around.” 

12

47. Ms. Laris recalled attending a meeting with District administrators, Oxford 

teachers, and respondent, regarding an investigation.  Ms. Laris did not recall anyone at the 
meeting directing Oxford staff, including herself, not to talk with each other.  Just after the 
meeting, respondent told Ms. Laris the meeting was regarding the letter, but she did not tell 
Ms. Laris anything specific about the letter.  At times during the investigation, other people 
told Ms. Laris about the letter, but she was unconcerned, as she felt it had nothing to do with 
her.  Respondent once called Ms. Laris at home and told her the District was blaming the 
letter on respondent.  Ms. Laris told respondent she did not want to discuss it.  Respondent 
respected Ms. Laris’s wishes and said no more.        

48. Ms. Nicola testified that in the summer of 2015, respondent once asked her if 
she had spoken with Ms. Miller.  At the time, Ms. Nicola did not know who Ms. Miller was, 
and respondent explained she was an investigator seeking information regarding Oxford’s
admission process.  Ms. Nicola recalled no further details about this conversation.  Another 
time, in October 2015, sometime after Ms. Nicola was interviewed by Ms. Miller, respondent 
had a brief conversation with Ms. Nicola in the school parking lot, telling her she believed 
the District thought she wrote the letter.  Respondent also asked Ms. Nicola if she had told 
the investigator that respondent “hated” Mr. Hoshi.  Ms. Nicola said no.   

49.

Respondent denied she ever attempted to interfere with the District’s 

investigation, or to frustrate, in any way, the cooperation of others involved in the 
investigation.  When she called Ms. King at home one night, it was because Ms. King had 
retired from Oxford, yet Ms. King had been emailed, along with respondent, about an
upcoming private meeting involving school business.8 Respondent had called to ask Ms. 
King why she was being contacted about a school meeting following her retirement.  By the 
time respondent spoke with Ms. Nicola regarding the District’s belief that respondent wrote 
the letter, the District had already notified respondent and her lawyer in writing that 
respondent was to be formally charged.  Respondent’s attorney had directed respondent to 
begin speaking to people she knew who might be potential witnesses on respondent’s behalf. 

50.

No evidence was presented to show respondent attempted to coerce, threaten, 

harass, intimidate, or discourage the cooperation of any witnesses during the District’s 
investigation.  Ms. Miller testified at length about her investigation, yet she made no claims 
that respondent interfered with her inquiries, or that any person refused to provide testimony 
or evidence to the District due to respondent’s actions.

51.

The District alleged that because it did not inform respondent in writing that 
its investigation had concluded, any related communications she had with others, including 
those occurring after the District determined to charge her with misconduct, were forbidden.  
Yet the evidence did not establish that the District was in the practice of providing such 
written notice, nor did the evidence show such written notice was ever provided to 

8

Respondent testified that unbeknownst to her at that time, the meeting had 

been scheduled to inform certain Oxford employees about the letter and discuss the 
upcoming investigation.

13

respondent.  Considering that the District’s investigation was plainly focused on respondent, 
the District’s contention that she could speak to no one until they deemed the investigation 
concluded was unreasonable. By this logic, the District could have indefinitely withheld 
notice that its investigation had concluded, rendering respondent incapable of contacting 
potential witnesses in preparation of her defense. Such a policy would appear unfair and in
violation of respondent’s fundamental rights to due process of law.           

CONFIDENTIALITY ALLEGATIONS

52.

Because the evidence did not establish respondent authored the letter, the 

Commission need not address the corresponding allegation that she violated district policy 
and federal laws preserving the privacy and confidentiality of student information.  The 
District did not prove respondent included confidential student information in the letter and, 
by mailing the letter, disseminated that information to others.

OTHER MATTERS

53. Multiple witnesses testified that Respondent is an exceptionally capable, 
excellent lead counselor with a strong reputation among the Oxford staff as well as the 
students and parents she serves.  The evidence established that respondent has to her credit 
many years of good service to the District and its students.  In 2015, the Coca-Cola Scholars 
Foundation bestowed an Educator of Distinction Award upon respondent due to her 
exemplary dedication to the field of education.   

54.

No evidence was presented to establish respondent has fixed character traits 

that make her unsuitable for school counseling.    

Legal Conclusions of General Application:

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to section 

44944, and Factual Findings 1 through 5.

2.

“Unprofessional conduct” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), may be 
defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct 
that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of Education v. 
Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)  However, the conduct in question, to amount to 
unprofessional conduct, must indicate unfitness to teach.  (Perez v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)  

3.

“Evident unfitness for service” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(5),

means “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident 

14

unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 
receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 
district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at 1444.)  

4.

“Immoral conduct” is not confined to sexual matters.  It has been defined to 

mean that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.  
It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, and dissoluteness.  Or, it can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  
(Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. 
App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland); San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)

5.

In order for a teacher to be dismissed under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 

for persistent disobedience of applicable rules and regulations, it must be established that 
there has been continuous and constant refusal to obey, or behavior motivated by an attitude 
of continuing insubordination;  a single instance of disobedience is insufficient.  (Governing 
Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.)  

6.

Even where unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident 

unfitness for service, or refusal to follow rules and regulations is or are established, it must 
also be established that such conduct renders the Respondent unfit to teach.  (Morrison v. 
State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 (Morrison); Fontana Unified School 
District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, fn. 12; Woodland Joint Unified School District v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445; See 
Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317, 321.)  

7(a).

It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness 

and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens v. 
Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 
testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions 
with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a 
cloth of truth out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)  Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a 
witness, even an expert, although not contradicted.  (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon
(1971) 3 Cal.3d  875, 890.)  Moreover, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute 
substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality 
Assurance (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, at 1052.)

7(b). The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to that which is 

deemed untrustworthy.  That is, disbelief does not create affirmative evidence to the contrary 
of that which is discarded.  That the trier of fact may disbelieve the testimony of a witness 
who testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself furnish any evidence in support of 

15

the affirmative of that issue, and does not warrant a finding in the affirmative thereof unless 
there is other evidence in the case to support such affirmative.  (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ 
State License Bd. (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. Central 
California Traction Co. (1923) 191 Cal.295, 304.)

Legal Conclusions Pertaining to the Specific Allegations of the Accusation:

8.

The evidence did not establish that respondent committed an act of dishonesty 
within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).  The evidence failed to establish that 
respondent authored the anonymous letter in question.

9.

The evidence did not establish that respondent displayed evident unfitness for 

service within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(4).  The evidence failed to 
establish the allegations that respondent authored the anonymous letter in question, revealed 
confidential student information in the letter, or continuously obstructed the District’s 
investigation.  Even if the District had proved a single alleged violation, it did not establish 
that respondent has fixed character traits that make her unsuitable for school counseling.  To
the contrary, the record established that respondent is an excellent school counselor with 
many years of good service to the District and its students.  

10.

The evidence did not establish that respondent engaged in the persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey state laws or regulations, or the district’s regulations, for the 
governance of schools within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). There was 
no evidence that respondent obstructed the District’s investigation in any way.  Instead, the 
District’s investigation proceeded as planned and the witnesses the District interviewed 
cooperated.  The handful of brief, inconsequential conversations respondent engaged in with 
other school personnel did not amount to her persistent refusal to obey the District’s rules 
and regulations.  

11.

The Commission agrees unanimously that grounds for termination have not 
been established, and that consideration of the Morrison factors is therefore not necessary.

12.

The Commission unanimously views this case as deeply regrettable, both for 

the complainant, who pursued the matter vigorously despite a notable lack of reliable 
evidence; and for respondent, whose direct, outspoken manner with the school principal cost 
her dearly, as it made her the prime suspect in the District’s investigation.    

//

//

//

//

16

Respondent Jill Briquelet shall not be dismissed as a certificated employee of the 

 
Anaheim Union High School District. 

ORDER 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

DocuSigned  by:

___________________________ 
AMBER HUGHES 
Commission Member 

___________________________ 
ADAM CAMACHO 
Commission Member 

___________________________ 
JOHN E. DECURE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

March 23, 2017

March 23, 2017

March 23, 2017

DATED:   
 
 
 

 
 
 

DATED:   
 
 
 

 
 
 

DATED:   
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

17

