BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

MARIA MIGLIORE (EN 725968), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2016070474

Respondent.

DECISION

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard the above-
captioned matter in Los Angeles on December 12 and 13, 2016.  The Commission members 
were Renae Roberts, Helen Shepherd, and Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge 
(ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). 

Complainant was represented by Cherrie Moe, Assistant General Counsel, and My T.

Huynh, Associate General Counsel, Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or 
District).

Respondent Maria Migliore appeared with her attorney, Richard Schwab, Trygstad,

Schwab, & Trygstad.

During the hearing, exhibit 52 was ordered sealed to protect confidential information.

A separate written order will issue sealing that exhibit.

The matter was submitted for decision on December 13, 2016. Thereafter, the ALJ 
ordered the matter reopened so that he could review the status of the documentary evidence
with counsel for both parties.  A telephonic conference was held on March 7, 2017, and the 
matter again re-submitted for decision on that date.  The Commission hereby makes its 
factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.

INTRODUCTION AND STATEMENT OF THE CASE

In this proceeding the District took steps to terminate Respondent, and she demanded 

a hearing on the matter. Six statutory grounds were asserted in the Amended Accusation as

justifying termination:  unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2)); immoral 
conduct (Ed. Code, § 44939); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code § 44932, subd. (a)(6));
dishonesty (Ed. Code, §44932, subd. (a)(4)); persistent violation or refusal to obey state laws 
or regulations, or the district’s regulations, for the governance of schools (Ed. Code, §44932,
subd. (a)(8)); and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the District (Ed. Code, § 44939).1

In the main, it is alleged that on two occasions Respondent took paid sick leave, and

represented and agreed not to be employed elsewhere during her regular work hours, but then
worked for a school district in Florida during each leave period. When requested leave, 
stated in writing and under penalty of perjury, that she had not and would not be so 
employed.

Respondent provided evidence regarding the facts and circumstances of the events

referenced in the Amended Accusation, and asserted she should be retained by the District.
However, the District proved the vast majority of the allegations against Respondent, and the 
Commission finds and concludes, unanimously, that cause for termination has been 
established.

The Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Complainants Marjorie Josaphat and Jose R. Cantu, Ed.D. each executed the 

Accusation and the Amended Accusation in this matter while acting in their official
capacities as Co-Lead Chief Human Resources Officers of the District.

2.

The District commenced this proceeding on May 27, 2016, when Justo H. 
Avila signed a Statement of Charges against Respondent. Avila was then Chief Human 
Resources Officer of the District. That Statement of Charges was filed with the District's 
governing board, which thereafter voted to terminate Respondent.

3.

On June 14, 2016, the District gave Respondent written notice of its intent to 

terminate her, and it served Respondent with a copy of the Statement of Charges.
Respondent made a timely request for hearing, which led to the issuance of the Accusation,
on July 19, 2016. Respondent then filed a Notice of Defense, and this proceeding ensued.
On September 12, 2016, Complainant filed the Amended Accusation. By operation of law, 
Respondent is deemed to have denied the allegations of the Amended Accusation.  All 
jurisdictional requirements have been met.

///

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

4.

Respondent is a certificated teacher employed by the District, and at the times 

relevant to this decision was teaching second grade students. Respondent holds a multiple
subject teaching credential, and she is credentialed for social work.  She is separately
credentialed or certificated to teach elementary school classes in New York, New Jersey,
Connecticut, and Florida. During the time relevant to this proceeding—January through
November 2015—Respondent was assigned to teach at 93rd Street Elementary School (93rd
Street).

Other Procedural History

5.

Respondent was issued a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and a Notice of 

Suspension for 15 days on February 12, 2016. It is not clear from the record if she actually
served the suspension, in that she otherwise taught during the balance of the second semester 
of the 2015-2016 school year. The Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts asserted that Respondent 
had engaged in unprofessional and immoral conduct, dishonesty, persistent violation of 
school laws or reasonable District regulations, and willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments. These claims were based on assertions that Respondent had been employed in 
Florida as a teacher on various days while she was on paid illness leave from the District.
Other charges, also the subject of this proceeding, were asserted. 

6.

After Respondent was served with the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and 

Notice of Suspension, she was given notice that the District intended to conduct an 
Administrative Review hearing, with the purpose of allowing her a chance to respond to the 
Notices.  The hearing, referred to at times in this proceeding as a “Skelly” hearing, or “the 
Skelly,” was initially scheduled for March 18, 2016, but was reset to April 14, 2016.2

7.

(A) The Skelly hearing occurred on April 14, 2016, and was conducted by Dr.
James Noble, Administrator of Operations for the District’s Local District South.  During the 
proceeding, Respondent was provided with a number of documents pertinent to the matter, 
including copies of pay records.  Respondent and her attorney stated her position, including a 
claim that she did not work in Florida during her regular work hours for the District, and that 
the amount of work she did was minimal.

(B) On April 21, 2016, Dr. Noble wrote to Respondent and informed her that 

notwithstanding Respondent’s assertions and arguments, he intended to recommend her 
dismissal to the District’s governing board. The District’s Statement of Charges followed.

8.

From the time of the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts through the end of the 

2015-2016 school year in June, Respondent continued to teach at 93rd Street.

2 This is the shorthand reference typically used to cite the case Skelly v. State 
Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, where the California Supreme Court held that before
a permanent employee could be disciplined, some preliminary steps must be taken to ensure 
due process.

3

Findings on the Allegations of the Amended Accusation

9.

(A) It was established, as alleged, that on January 12, 2015, Respondent

signed a District Certificated Request for Leave of Absence form (Certificated Request for 
Leave) requesting leave from January 13, 2015 through May 30, 2015. Near the bottom of 
the document, set out in a box, it states in part:  “I certify I was not and will not be employed
elsewhere during my regular work hours within the time period claimed on this certification”
(Ex. 48.)

(B) The certification statement was clearly set out above the place on the

Certificated Request for Leave where Respondent signed the document.  The last line of text 
above Respondent’s signature states:  “I declare under the penalty of perjury that I have read 
the paragraph above, and it is true and correct.”  (Ex. 48, underline in original.)

10.

Thereafter, Respondent went to Florida, and worked for the Collier County
Public Schools (Collier Schools).  She worked for the Collier Schools on 16 days between 
February 19, 2015, and May 26, 2015.  The dates she worked for Collier Schools are:
February 19 and 23; March 2, 3, 6, and 27; April 6, 23, and 24; May 1, 7, 12, 13, 15, 19, and 
26, 2015. Each of these work days were during the period of paid leave that was granted to 
Respondent after she submitted the January 2015Certificated Leave Request. 

11.

On February 6, 2015, Respondent took and completed two training programs 
for the Collier Schools.  One course was entitled “Diversity Awareness: Staff to Staff.” The
other was entitled “Blood Borne Pathogen Exposure Prevention.”

12.

On June 1, 2015, Respondent returned to the District from her paid leave and

returned to work.  She then worked for four days, from June 1 to June 5, 2015, which was the 
end of the 2014-2015 school year.  Thereafter, on the first day of the next school year (2015-
2016), August 17, 2015, Respondent started another paid leave.

13.

(A)  In August 2015, Respondent submitted another Certificated Request for 

Leave.  As with her January Certificated Request for Leave, Respondent certified that “I was
not and will not be employed elsewhere during my regular work hours within the time period 
claimed on this certification.” (Ex. 23.) As with the January Certificated Leave Request, the
last text before Respondent’s signature states: I declare under the penalty of perjury that I 
have read all of the paragraph above, and it is true and correct.”  (Ibid., underline in original.)

(B)  Respondent’s second Certificated Request for Leave was signed by

Respondent on August 14, 2015.  The second page of the document, however, acknowledges 
that request for leave was received on August 12, 2015. Respondent requested leave from 
August 17, 2015 to January 11, 2016, and her request for leave was granted.

14. Meanwhile, in August 2015, Respondent accepted an offer of employment
from the Collier Schools, to work as a second grade teacher, at Village Oaks Elementary
School.  She worked as a second grade teacher for the Collier Schools on August 7, 2015, at 

4

Village Oaks Elementary School.  Later that day, she rescinded her acceptance of 
employment with Collier Schools.  However, on August 8, 2015, she contacted Collier 
Schools, and enquired if the teaching position was still open. Collier Schools informed
Respondent that the position had been filled.

15.

On August 12, 2015, Respondent submitted a District Certification of Health 

Care Provider form to the District.  The form stated that Respondent’s initial date of 
incapacity was June 18, 2015, and that her anticipated day of return to the District was 
January 11, 2016.3

16.

On November 4, 2015, Respondent submitted another document to the 

District, a District Request to Return from Leave. It stated Respondent was not available to 
work until November 20, 2015.

17.

During the period from August 15, 2015 until November 20, 2015, 

Respondent worked on the following days for Collier Schools, even though she was on paid 
leave from the District, based on her second Certificated Request for Leave.  Those days that 
she worked are: October 22, November 4, 6, 10, and 13, 2015.

18.

During 2015, Respondent earned over $1,400 from working for Collier 

Schools.

19.

(A)  It was not established, as alleged, that Respondent applied for work with 
the Collier Schools on February 6, 2015.  However, she did apply for work with the Collier 
Schools in September 2015.  She was then on paid leave from the District.  The application 
asked if she was then “currently employed.”  Respondent answered “no.” (Ex. 23, p. 1.) The
application is clearly dated in September 2015 at the end of the document, and she stated she 
could start work during that time period.  It appears that the February 6, 2015 date, which 
runs across every page of the application, may be a reference to when the form was 
generated by the Collier Schools.

(B) As part of her application to the Collier Schools, Respondent gave the 

following information regarding her work experience and teaching experience:

(i)   Dates of employment, 7/2011 to 8/2014
(ii)  School District, Los Angeles Unified 
(iii) Grade & Subjects, Second grade/all subjects
(iv)  Reason for Leaving, Need to live closer to my mother and 

grandmother.

3 As noted in Factual Finding 13(B), the District acknowledged request for leave on 
August 12, 2015.  That date may reflect the submission of the Certification of Health Care 
Provider.

5

(C)  Other parts of the application, however, indicated that Respondent was 

still employed by the District.  For example, in response to a question as to how much notice 
she would have to give her current employer, she provided a date.  And, in a section that set
out some of her job history, she stated that she was “currently in Los Angeles.”  (Ex. 25, p. 
3.)

(D) Respondent testified that she wanted to appear available for employment

by Collier Schools so stated that she was not employed, but did state she needed to give a 
month’s notice. On balance, Respondent’s statement to the Collier Schools to the effect that
she was not then employed while she was on leave was potentially misleading, but not 
dishonest.

20.

(A)  It was established, as alleged in Paragraph 10 (a) of the Amended 

Accusation, that all District teachers were (and are) obligated, as part of their employment, to 
avoid conflicts of interest and improper outside income.  It was further established that such 
obligations were part of Respondent’s regular assignment as a teacher in the District, and that 
she failed to comply with her obligations, without reasonable cause, by taking employment
in another school system while she was on paid leave from the District.

(B)  It was established, as alleged in Paragraph 10 (c) of the Amended 

Accusation, that demonstration of professional responsibility, integrity, and ethical conduct 
is a regular assignment of all District teachers, and that Respondent failed to comply with
that obligation, without reasonable cause, by taking employment in another school system
while on paid leave from the District.

(C) By twice signing a Certificated Request for Leave, and stating therein that

she would not and had not worked during regular school hours, Respondent acted 
unethically, and evinced a lack of integrity. This is especially the case regarding the second 
of the two Certificated Requests for Leave, because it was signed after she had worked for 
Collier Schools while on a previous leave.  Thus her certified statement, that she had not and 
would not work elsewhere, looking back was false, and looking forward was made false by
her working for Collier Schools in the fall of 2015.

(D)  Respondent’s actions constituted violations of the District’s Ethic’s 
Policy.  Her actions constituted a violation of the California Standards for the Teaching 
Profession as well.

Respondent’s Assertions

21.

(A) Respondent asserted that she did not necessarily work in Florida during

her regular District work hours, relying on the time difference of three hours between 
Florida, and Los Angeles.  That assertion was made at the Skelly and during this proceeding.
However, the documentary evidence indicates that most of the days when she worked at 
Collier Schools did overlap with work hours in Los Angeles. Respondent testified that her 
typical work day at 93rd Street School started at 7:50 to 8:00 a.m., and that if she worked 

6

beginning at 8:15 in the morning Florida time, a full day in Florida would overlap with 
Respondent’s normal work hours for the District.  That is, if she worked seven hours in 
Florida, beginning at 8:00 a.m. Florida time, and left work at 3:00 Florida time, she was 
working in Florida from 8:00 a.m. until noon Los Angeles time.

(B) Respondent worked seven hours or more for Collier Schools on 13 days:

February 19 and 23; March 3, 27, and 30; April 6, 23, and 24; May 1, 7, 15, and 19; and 
November 6, 2015. She worked four or more hours, which would have created a smaller 
overlap, on March 2 and 6, May 8, and October 22, 2015.

(C)  Relying (after the fact) on the time differences between Los Angeles and

Collier County, Florida, is antithetical to the obvious conditions and representations made by
Respondent in the January and August 2015 Certificated Leave Requests.

22.

(A) Respondent testified she did not read the provisions of either of the 

Certificated Requests for Leave closely, as it was “fine print.” Respondent also testified that 
she read the document to mean that she could not take a job or sign a contract to work for 
another entity, implying she believed part-time work was acceptable.  She testified on direct 
exam that “it was hard to understand if I could work, [or] not work.  I don’t think I read it 
correctly.  It’s hard to read as well.” 

(B)  The Commission finds that Respondent’s written certifications that she 

had not and would not work elsewhere during her regular District work hours, to be clear and 
legible, and obvious to any reasonable teacher signing the form near the statement.4
Furthermore, in each Certificated Request for Leave Respondent stated under the penalty of
perjury she had read the paragraph containing the certification, and that everything she stated 
was true and correct.  As shown above, that statement was underlined, drawing the eye to 
that oath. 

(C)  Respondent testified that she had signed other Certificated Requests for 

Leave after 2012 and prior to the two that are in issue in this case.  She said she did not fully 
read them, and had not asked District personnel about the meaning of the statement
pertaining to not working during regular work hours. If that is true, her consistent negligence
is hardly a defense to making false statements.

23.

Respondent’s credibility suffered as a result of her protestations.  Her 

misconduct occurred over a period of months, and she appeared to have little remorse, 
except, perhaps, for being found out.

///

4 The Commissioners were able to read a less-than-perfect photocopy of each 
Certificated Request for Leave.  It is fairly inferred that the originals were somewhat easier 
to read.

7

The Morrison Factors

24.

(A)  Where there is conduct that might justify termination of a teacher, an 

examination must still be made of whether or not that conduct indicates that the teacher in
question is unfit to teach.  The misconduct must be shown to have some rational connection, 
some nexus, to the teacher’s ability to teach in the District.

(B)  This requirement was first set forth in Morrison v. State Board of 
Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229.  In that case a teacher had been discovered to be 
homosexual, though there had been no inkling of that fact within the school.  The California 
Supreme Court held that such alone was not enough to discipline his teaching credential, 
requiring that some connection of his private conduct be made to his job duties and 
performance had to be shown. The court listed a number of factors that might be considered 
in determining whether or not unfitness to teach had been established, but the court 
ultimately did not find a sufficient connection between the conduct and fitness to teach.

25.

(A)  The first factor to consider is the likelihood that the conduct may have 
adversely affected students or fellow teachers.  While the principal at 93rd Street asserted 
that Respondent’s actions hurt students, there is little or no hard evidence of such.  On the 
other hand, there may have been an impact on the District or other teachers, in that while 
Respondent was living and working part time in Florida, the District must have arranged to 
have other teachers covered her assignment at 93rd Street.

(B)  Another factor is the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct.  In 
this case the misconduct occurred fairly recently, in 2015.  In this regard, it should be noted 
that Respondent twice signed Certificated Requests for Leave.

(C)  Another factor is the type of certificate held by the teacher, which in this 

case is a multiple subject credential allowing Respondent to teach elementary school
students.

(D)  Extenuating or aggravating circumstances is another Morrison factor.  In 

this case there are few extenuating circumstances.  Respondent provided evidence that she 
has had significant medical problems, and personal problems, but that does not excuse or 
justify false statements to the District. In aggravation Respondent had notice of District 
policies, including its Ethics Code and other policies. She had executed Certificated 
Requests for Leave prior to signing the two in question.  Finally, her second 2015 
Certificated Request for Leave falsely implied that she had not previously worked elsewhere
during her regular District work hours.

(E)  The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct should be considered.  There is no praiseworthiness to the Respondent’s conduct, 
but it was blameworthy to make false statements to the District, and to work, even part time, 
while on paid illness leave.

8

(F)  Another factor is the likelihood that the conduct in question will recur.

The Commission believes that there is a significant likelihood that the Respondent’s 
dishonest conduct would recur.  While it might not recur in the context of working while on
leave, it is likely she could exhibit dishonesty in another context.  As noted by the Court of 
Appeal, dishonesty is not readily compartmentalized.  (Windham v. Board of Medical 
Quality Assurance (1980) 104 Cal.App.3d 461, 470.)

Legal Conclusions Generally Applicable To All Claims:

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44944, and Factual Findings 1 through 3.

(A) It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a 

witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens
v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 
testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions 
with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a 
cloth of truth out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.)  Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a 
witness, even an expert, although not contradicted.  (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon
(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.)  And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute
substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality 
Assurance (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, at 1052.)

(B)  The rejection of testimony does not create evidence contrary to that which 

is deemed untrustworthy.  That is, disbelief does not create affirmative evidence to the 
contrary of that which is discarded.  That the trier of fact may disbelieve the testimony of a 
witness who testifies to the negative of an issue does not of itself furnish any evidence in 
support of the affirmative of that issue, and does not warrant a finding in the affirmative 
thereof unless there is other evidence in the case to support such affirmative.  (Hutchinson v. 
Contractors’ State License Bd. (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. 
Central California Traction Co. (1923) 191 Cal. 295, 304.)

(C)  “On the cold record a witness may be clear, concise, direct, unimpeached, 

uncontradicted—but on a face to face evaluation, so exude insincerity as to render his 
credibility factor nil. Another witness may fumble, bumble, be unsure, uncertain, contradict 
himself, and on the basis of a written transcript be hardly worthy of belief. But one who 
sees, hears and observes him may be convinced of his honesty, his integrity, his reliability.”
(Wilson v. State Personnel Board (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 865, at 877-878, quoting Meiner v.
Ford Motor Co. (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 127, 140.)

9

3.

“Unprofessional conduct” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), may be
defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is such conduct 
that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing.  (Board of Education v. 
Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)  However, the conduct in question, to amount to 
unprofessional conduct, must indicate unfitness to teach.  (Perez v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

4.

“Evident unfitness for service” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), 

properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by
reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” Unlike “unprofessional conduct,”
“evident unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 
merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing
school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (Zuber) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at 1444.)

5.

“Immoral conduct,” of which Respondent has been accused, is not confined to 
sexual matters.  It has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals.  It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness.  Or, it can be conduct that 
is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. 
Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland); San Diego Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)

6.

“Dishonesty” needs no especial definition, as it is an ordinary term known to 

the members of the Commission.   However, within the context of these proceedings, not 
every act of dishonesty will constitute grounds for discipline.  (Fontana Unified School 
District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208 (Fontana).)5

7.

In order for a teacher to be terminated under section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), 

for persistent disobedience of applicable rules and regulations, it must be established that 
there has been continuous and constant refusal to obey, or behavior motivated by an attitude 
of continuing insubordination; a single instance of disobedience is insufficient. (Governing
Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81-82.) It is 
reasonable to apply such reasoning to section 44939.

8.

As noted in the Factual Findings, even where grounds to terminate have been 
established, such as immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, or refusal to 
follow rules and regulations are established, it must also be established that such conduct 

5 As stated in Fontana, “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest fib to the 

most flagrant lie.  Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, 
and not every falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” (Fontana,
supra, 45 Cal.3d at 220, fn. 12.)

10

renders the Respondent unfit to teach.  (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214, 229-230; Fontana, supra, 45 Cal.3d 208; Zuber, supra,  4 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1444-1445; See Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 
Cal.App.3d 317, 321.)

Legal Conclusions Pertaining to the Specific Allegations of the Accusation

9.

It was established that Respondent was dishonest in violation of Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), based on Factual Findings 9 through 23.  She twice 
made false written statements to the District, and she made a somewhat misleading statement 
to the Collier Schools. This Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 9 through 19, 21 and 
22, and Legal Conclusions 1, 2, and 6. (See also Bassett Unified School District v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 1444, 1452 [any
reasonably competent person knows you can’t be paid by two employers for working the 
same hours].)

10.

It was established that Respondent violated or refused to obey the school laws 

of the state, or reasonable regulations of the Board.  Her violations were persistent, as they
occurred on many days over a period of months. Therefore, she violated section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), based on Factual Findings 9 through 23, and Legal Conclusions 1, 2, and 
7.

11.

(A)  It was established that Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct by

making false statements to the District in obtaining leave, and by working for another 
District while on paid leave, in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).  This 
Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 9 through 23, and Legal Conclusions 1, 2, and 3. 

(B)  The Code requires that a teacher that has allegedly engaged in 

unprofessional conduct be given 45 days’ notice of the unprofessional acts, so that the 
teacher may mend his or her behavior.  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (a).)  The District may not
act on a charge of unprofessional conduct until that 45-day period has run.  (Id.)  The District 
gave such a notice, and allowed 45 days to run before filing the Statement of Issues.  (Factual 
Findings 2, 3, and 5.) Thus, there is no jurisdictional failing of the type found in Tarquin v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1978) 84 Cal.App.3d 251.

(C)  There is no evidence of other unprofessional acts of the type alleged in the 

period following the service of the Notice is Unprofessional Acts, which occurred on 
February 12, 2016.   On the other hand, Respondent did not seek any paid leave, and with the 
District’s knowledge of her behavior, she had every motive not to engage in further dishonest 
conduct.  Given the Commission’s concern that some other dishonest conduct could occur, it 
is difficult to find or conclude that Respondent has mended her ways. Her teaching during 
the period after February 12, 2016 is an evidentiary matter, to be weighed against other 
evidence in the case.  (Blake v. Commission on Professional Competence (1989) 212 
Cal.App.3d 513, 517.)

11

12.

It was not established that Respondent is evidently unfit to teach within the 

meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), based on Legal Conclusion 4.  There was 
insufficient evidence regarding her temperament; that she remained in her assignment after 
she received her Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts indicates that her temperament was not and is 
not an issue.

13.

It was not established that Respondent has engaged in immoral conduct within 

the meaning of section 44939, based on Legal Conclusion 5.  While her conduct was not 
honest, it was not depraved or so rising to the level contemplated by the cases cited in Legal 
Conclusion 4.

14.

It was not established that Respondent refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the 
District.  At bottom, her leave had been approved, and the record showed, for the second 
leave period, a medical justification.

15.

The Morrison factors indicate that Respondent is not fit to teach in the District.
(Factual Findings 23 & 24.)  Based on all the foregoing, the Commission finds and concludes 
that Respondent should be terminated from her position as a certificated employee of the 
District.

ORDER

Respondent Maria Migliore shall be terminated as a certificated employee of the Los 

Angeles Unified School District, forthwith.

DATED:

March 11, 2017

DATED:

March 16, 2017

DATED:

March 10, 2017

_______________________
RENAE ROBERTS
Commission Member

DocuSigned  by:

____________________________
HELEN SHEPHERD
Commission Member

___________________________
JOSEPH D. MONTOYA
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

12

