BEFORE A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE OCEANSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Suspension of:

ROBYN MIZOGUCHI,

OAH No. 2016120176

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION

On April 3, 4, and 5, 2017, a Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) 

heard this matter in Oceanside, California.  The Commission consisted of the following 
members: Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge; Carolyn Friedman; and
Rebecca McQuestion, Ed.D.

Daniel Shinoff and Amanda Johnston, Attorneys at Law, represented complainant,

Cheri Sanders, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Oceanside Unified School 
District.

Jon Vanderpool, Attorney at Law, represented respondent, Robyn Mizoguchi, who 

was present throughout the hearing.

The record was held open to permit the committee to deliberate and reach a decision.

The record was closed and the matter submitted on April 14, 2017.

PROTECTIVE ORDER

The names and images of all children referred to in this matter are subject to a 
protective order. Any document received as evidence in this matter that contains the name of 
a minor shall, before any disclosure to the public, be redacted and replaced by the initials of 
the minor’s first and last name. No court reporter or transcription service shall transcribe the 
names of the minors but shall instead refer to each minor by his or her initials.

1

Did Mr. Mizoguchi engage in the conduct alleged in the Notice of Charges on 

September 16, 2016, concerning the control of students?  If so, did his conduct constitute
immoral conduct and evidence unfitness for service warranting the imposition of a two-day
suspension without pay?

ISSUE

SUMMARY

A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that, on September 16, 2016, Mr. 

Mizoguchi engaged in the conduct alleged in the Notice of Charges.  Although Mr. 
Mizoguchi used a degree of physical contact to control a chaotic situation outside the 
classroom of another teacher, the amount of physical contact established by the evidence was 
appropriate under the circumstances and allowed by law.  It was not established that the 
physical contact violated district policy, professional standards, or various cited provisions of 
the Penal Code and Education Code pertaining to corporal punishment.  Accordingly, Mr. 
Mizoguchi’s conduct did not constitute immoral conduct or show unfitness for service, and 
the Notice of Charges is dismissed.

Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On October 31, 2016, complainant signed the Notice of Charges in her official 
capacity advising Mr. Mizoguchi of the board’s intention to suspend him for two days without 
pay under Education Code section 44932.

2.

The Notice also advised that the district will send a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct, pursuant to Education Code section 44938, to Mr. Mizoguchi, indicating that he had 
45 days to “correct his faults and overcome the grounds for charges . . . or the district [would] 
move for further discipline . . . .”

3.

The Notice of Charges and other jurisdictional documents were served on Mr. 

Mizoguchi, who timely filed a notice of defense; this hearing ensued.

Mr. Mizoguchi’s Background

4.

Mr. Mizoguchi has held a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential since 

1998.  He also holds a Clear Resource Specialist Certificate of Competence, authorizing him 
to provide instruction to special education students.

5.

Mr. Mizoguchi has been teaching for 19 years, 14 of which have been within 
the Oceanside Unified School District.  His current assignment, where he has been for four

2

years, is Jefferson Middle School.  His primary duty is to teach special education students.
However, he provides support to other teachers in their classrooms.  When functioning in 
that capacity, the general education teacher delivers the lessons to the students, and Mr. 
Mizoguchi supports his special education students as well as students who are not qualified 
to receive special education services but who may be struggling.

6.

Mr. Mizoguchi’s most recent personnel evaluation indicated he met standards 

expected of him.  The author of the document made the following comments on his 
personnel evaluation:

I have observed Mr. Mizoguchi in a variety of settings: in-class
support teacher in 8th grade Algebra, Learning Center/Study
skills with small groups and conducting IEP meetings 
throughout the year.  The words like:  Professional, Caring, 
Organized, Methodical, and Well-Prepared, come to mind when 
I am around Mr. Mizoguchi.  He is very consistent with his 
support within the classroom and carries it over during learning 
center time.  This has been a valuable support for our 8th grade
students.  He has also shown great respect, humility and support 
when meeting with parents during IEP meetings.  Mr. 
Mizoguchi has made sure to have all pertinent data at hand in 
order to present the best information that is used to draft the 
goals that support and ensure student learning and success.

7.

Mr. Mizoguchi has never been accused of misconduct in connection with his 

employment and has never been disciplined.

The District’s Investigation

8.

Christy Dayhoff is an Educational Support Services Coordinator for the 

district.  At the time of the September 16, 2016, incident, she was the principal at Jefferson 
Middle School.  She had been appointed principal in July 2016 just before the start of the 
academic year, and left in December 2016.

Ms. Dayhoff testified that on the date of the incident, she heard over the school radio 
(handheld) that something had occurred outside Mr. London’s classroom.  Shortly thereafter,
she received a call to contact the student health clerk, Herlinda Ahmad.  When Ms. Dayhoff
arrived at the health room, she saw a student, L.R., crying.  L.R. told her his back hurt and
that he had been “thrown against a wall.”

Ms. Ahmad, who has been a health clerk at Jefferson Middle School for 23 years, also 

testified at the hearing.  Ms. Ahmad authenticated an entry she made in the Aeries system
(computerized school records for each student) on September 16, 2016, regarding L.R.  That 
entry stated:

3

Student reports that he was grabbed by a male teacher and 
slammed against a wall with his back.  No visible injury.  Cold 
compress applied.  Principal C. Dayhoff and AP- C. Coscuna
informed.

Ms. Ahmad testified at the hearing, consistent with her entry, that she did not see any

bruising, redness, or injuries anywhere on L.R.  Photographs admitted into evidence at the 
hearing did not show any bruising, marks, or injuries.  Ms. Ahmad said that Ms. Dayhoff 
took the photographs; Ms. Dayhoff said she did not know who took the photographs.

After she left the health office, Ms. Dayhoff contacted human resources and spoke 

with Todd McAteer, the Director of Human Resources for certificated personnel.  Mr. 
McAteer told her to speak to adult witnesses and L.R.  Ms. Dayhoff spoke to teachers Joel 
London and Rasela Mendez, as well as several students.  She also filed a report with Child 
Protective Services as required by law.  The students were provided with “Witness 
Declaration/Incident Report” forms so they could write their own statements; the adult 
witnesses, with the exception of the school security guard, were not provided with those 
forms. During the investigation, Ms. Dayhoff learned that another student, J.M., claimed to
have been “grabbed by the shirt and pulled” by Mr. Mizoguchi for “misbehaving.”

Witness Testimony Concerning the September 16, 2016, Incident

MR. LONDON’S TESTIMONY

9.

Mr. London is credentialed to teach multiple subjects and has taught in the 

district for several years.  On September 16, 2016, he was assigned to Jefferson Middle 
School and taught math.  On that date, he was outside his classroom with the door open 
attempting to have his students line up for class.  The students were not complying, and he 
was having a hard time getting them to comply.  Mr. London saw Mr. Mizoguchi coming up 
the stairs with J.M., who was late to class.  Mr. Mizoguchi was holding on to J.M.’s baggy
sweater.  He explained that Mr. Mizoguchi was not pulling or grabbing at J.M.; rather, the 
two were walking up the stairs simultaneously.  J.M. was wearing a backpack and was 
smiling.  Mr. London would poke his head in and out of the classroom because there were 
some students inside his classroom.  He said there were about 20 students inside his 
classroom and 10 outside refusing to line up.  He continued to give commands for students to 
line up, and Mr. Mizoguchi was helping him.  He heard L.R. say something like “fool, you
can’t tell me what to do” or “you can’t do that” to Mr. Mizoguchi.  Mr. London said L.R. 
was instigating students to not comply with the line-up order.  Mr. London heard Mr. 
Mizoguchi tell L.R. to have a seat between two double doors on the second floor landing on 
the opposite side of his classroom.  Mr. London demonstrated and explained that Mr. 
Mizoguchi held his arms open in a manner like a “basketball player would play defense” and 
“ushered” L.R. to the doorway.  Mr. London was adamant that Mr. Mizoguchi did not touch 
L.R.  However, as Mr. Mizoguchi tried to usher L.R. to the double doors with open arms, 
L.R. was pacing back and forth and yelling things at Mr. Mizoguchi.  Eventually Mr.
Mizoguchi was able to usher L.R. to the area of the double doors.  Mr. London said Mr. 

4

Mizoguchi did not grab L.R., did not throw L.R. against the wall, and did not push L.R.  Mr. 
London also never saw L.R. lying on the ground as L.R. claimed. 

At some point, Ms. Mendez –whose classroom is next to the double doors where L.R. 

was standing – came out and asked what was going on.  Once Ms. Mendez came out, Mr. 
London went back to his classroom.  Shortly after that, L.R. came into his class and asked to
go to the health office.  L.R. was not crying.

Mr. London testified that he has never seen Mr. Mizoguchi act inappropriately with

any students. He said that Mr. Mizoguchi is “like a father” to the students.

Mr. London’s testimony was sincere, credible, and forthright.

MS. MENDEZ’S TESTIMONY

10.

Rasela Mendez has taught 8th grade math at Jefferson Middle School for 10 

years.  Her classroom is on the second floor across from Mr. London’s classroom.  On 
September 16, 2016, she was sitting at her desk, which is 20-25 feet from the door.  She 
could see the students on the second floor landing, but she could not see Mr. London.  She 
heard Mr. London shouting “listen to your teacher.”  She said it was just the typical volume 
of noise one hears when trying to settle students and get them into the classroom.  On this
date, however, the noise continued a “little longer than normal,” and she heard Mr. London 
constantly repeating “listen to your teacher.” Ms. Mendez said she respects her colleagues 
and did not want to intervene, so she waited a few seconds before coming outside.  She did 
not hear any banging noises or any noises that sounded like someone being thrown up 
against a door. She did see L.R. “shifting” back and forth trying to get around Mr. 
Mizoguchi.  She could not see Mr. London from where she was seated at her desk.

When Ms. Mendez walked outside her classroom, she saw L.R. standing by the
double doors next to her classroom.  She waited until Mr. Mizoguchi was able to get L.R. to 
settle down, and then she walked over to L.R. to assist.  She said L.R. looked agitated, 
frustrated, and upset, but he was not crying.  When she began to talk to L.R., L.R. did not tell 
her he was injured in any way, and she never observed him lying on the ground.  She said 
Mr. Mizoguchi did not appear angry.  Ms. Mendez told L.R. he needed to resolve whatever 
his issues were with Mr. Mizoguchi and apologize to Mr. London for not listening.  L.R. then 
walked up to Mr. Mizoguchi, who had moved away from the double doors while Ms. 
Mendez was speaking to L.R., and said something quietly to Mr. Mizoguchi.  Ms. Mendez
trusted her colleagues to handle the situation, so she went back to her classroom.

Ms. Mendez’s testimony was sincere, credible, and forthright.

//

5

STUDENT TESTIMONY

11.

Several students testified about what they claimed to have observed on the 

landing during the incident.  All students were properly qualified and determined to 
understand the difference between the truth and a lie prior to giving testimony.

12.

J.M. is 12 years old and is in Mr. Mizoguchi’s special education class.  The 
September 16, 2016, incident occurred on the second floor landing outside Mr. London’s 
class.  He said he was standing near the railing wearing his backpack.  Students were outside 
the classroom “being bad.”  He said the students were not standing in line and were talking
very loud.  J.M. said Mr. Mizoguchi grabbed his jacket and backpack on one side with one 
hand but that it was “not a hard tug” and “only moved [him] a little.”  Mr. Mizoguchi told 
him not to be like the other kids and moved him back in line.  He did not recall Mr. 
Mizoguchi saying anything like what L.R. wrote in his statement, to the effect of “don’t be 
like the other kids they are fools.”  He did hear L.R. say “let him go” and remembered Mr. 
London telling L.R. that Mr. Mizoguchi was “just doing his job.”  He also remembered Mr. 
Mizoguchi telling him to make good choices.  When he demonstrated how Mr. Mizoguchi
interacted with L.R., he demonstrated a slight push with one hand but did say L.R.’s back 
“hit” the wall.

J.M.’s written declaration stated the following:

So I was walking upstairs and I wasn’t in line and Mr. 
Mizoguchi pulled my jacket and backpack and he pulled me on 
the rail and he told me to not be like my other friends he pulled 
me in line and he also did the same to . . . but he pushed . . . on 
the wall and Mr. Mizoguchi was trapping him.

13.

Student E.S. is 13 years old.  On September 16, 2016, she was in Mr. 

London’s 6th grade math class.  The incident occurred on the second floor landing outside
Mr. London’s math class.  She was not standing in line as students were supposed to be 
doing; she was standing off to the side.  Mr. London did not let students come inside.  She 
testified Mr. London “usually picks on the kids that are bad and makes the bad kids stay
outside.”  She described “bad” kids as the ones who do not pay attention and have bad 
behavior.  At some point, she heard Mr. Mizoguchi yell, “get in line.”  Some students 
listened; others did not. A quarter then fell out of her hand, so she started walking down the 
stairs to get it. Mr. Mizoguchi told her to go back upstairs, and she complied. It was at that 
point that she saw Mr. Mizoguchi “grab” L.R. by the “front” of his shirt and push L.R. 
against the double doors.  She also remembered that Mr. Mizoguchi grabbed J.M.’s “elbow 
or something” while J.M. was standing near the stairs.  She thought the interaction between 
L.R. and Mr. Mizoguchi happened before the interaction between Mr. Mizoguchi and J.M.
Afterwards, Ms. Mendez came out of her classroom and told everyone to get in line.

E.S.’s statement was not consistent with her written declaration taken the date of the 
incident.  In that statement, she did not say anything about trying to walk downstairs to get a 

6

quarter and did not say anything about the interaction with J.M. To the contrary, her 
declaration stated L.R. and J.M. were yelling, and Mr. Mizoguchi “pulled” one of them (it is 
unclear) by the “head” and then pulled someone to the “side.”  She stated that L.R. “just 
wanted to go back in line,” but Mr. Mizoguchi blocked his way and L.R. ended up against 
the wall. Thus, her testimony at the hearing was significantly more detailed than the
statement she made on the day of the incident, when the events would have been fresh in her 
memory.

14.

Student N.B. was 12 years old on September 16, 2016, and is in 6th grade.

Mr. London was his math teacher at that time.  N.B. testified that the incident occurred on 
the second floor landing outside Mr. London’s math class where everyone was lining up.  He 
said the students were loud and noisy, so Mr. London would not let them into the classroom, 
although Mr. London had let some students in the classroom.  He saw Mr. Mizoguchi come 
upstairs and saw him “grab” J.M. away from railing (by the arm) and push J.M. on the front 
of his chest to get him back in line.  He then heard someone say “shut up.”  He thinks it was 
L.R. who made that statement.  He said Mr. Mizoguchi “pulled” L.R. and “cornered” him 
against a wall.  When he demonstrated the contact, he demonstrated a light pull of the shirt 
by the shoulder area and a light push.  N.B. testified that L.R. “tried to leave” and Mr. 
Mizoguchi would not let him leave.  N.B. said he did see L.R.’s back against the wall.
Shortly thereafter, Ms. Mendez came outside to see what was happening. N.B.’s testimony
was generally consistent with his written declaration taken the date of the incident.

15.

Student S.U. is in seventh grade and is in Mr. Mizoguchi’s special education 

class.  Mr. London is his math teacher.  On September 16, 2016, he was inside Mr. London’s 
classroom before the incident occurred.  Students were talking while Mr. London was trying
to speak, and they generally were not listening to directions.  He remembered Mr. Mizoguchi 
coming up the stairs to the second floor landing outside Mr. London’s classroom, and he 
“heard” Mr. Mizoguchi telling the students to stop talking and be quiet.  He then heard one 
of the students yell “shut up.”  After that, he “heard” L.R. talking back to Mr. Mizoguchi.
S.U. testified that Mr. Mizoguchi “made him go” towards the double doors.  He then 
clarified his statement and noted that Mr. Mizoguchi “grabbed” L.R.’s shirt and “pulled” 
L.R. towards the double door area.  He also contended that Mr. Mizoguchi “pushed” L.R. 
“towards” the wall.  S.U. said that immediately before the interaction with L.R., there was an 
incident between J.M. and Mr. Mizoguchi.  He said J.M. was talking back to Mr. Mizoguchi,
and Mr. Mizoguchi pushed J.M. “against the rail,” while telling him to be quiet and get back 
in line.  When S.U. demonstrated what Mr. Mizoguchi did to J.M., he demonstrated a push 
with both hands against the chest.

16.

L.R. is 12 years old and is a student at Jefferson Middle School.  On 

September 16, 2016, he was in Mr. London’s math class when Mr. London said the students 
needed to go outside and line up because they were being loud.  He said he went outside, and
J.M. also came outside.  He said Mr. London stayed inside the classroom, and Mr. 
Mizoguchi came outside the classroom.  L.R. said J.M. was standing in and out of line, so
Mr. Mizoguchi told him to get back in line and stop talking.  J.M. would not listen, so Mr. 
Mizoguchi grabbed him and pulled him by the arm, told J.M. not to do that, and “tried to 

7

push him back into line” by placing hands on J.M.’s back.  L.R. said that, when he saw Mr. 
Mizoguchi trying to “drag” J.M. out of line, he “screamed” to let J.M. go.  He said he was 
about seven feet away from where J.M. and Mr. Mizoguchi were standing.

L.R. said Mr. Mizoguchi started walking towards him. L.R. said he tried to avoid Mr.
Mizoguchi, but Mr. Mizoguchi became angry, “grabbed” him by the shirt, and “pushed” him 
into the wall next to the double doors. L.R. said he “pushed” Mr. Mizoguchi’s hands away at
one point prior to being pushed against the wall.  L.R. said that, when he was pushed against 
the double doors, it hurt, and he started to cry.  L.R. said he sat down.  After he sat down, 
Ms. Mendez came outside, “tried to cheer [him] up,” and told him that it would “all be OK.”
L.R. said Mr. Mizoguchi walked away. L.R. said he went to the health clerk’s office and got 
some ice.  He said he was still crying while at the health clerk’s office.

L.R.’s testimony was inconsistent with the testimony of Mr. London, Ms. Mendez,

and Mr. Mizoguchi with respect to what occurred between him and Mr. Mizoguchi.  L.R.’s 
testimony regarding what occurred between Mr. Mizoguchi and J.M. was also not consistent 
with what other student witnesses said.  L.R. not only instigated the chaos on the second 
floor landing, but his own written statement and testimony confirmed he pushed Mr. 
Mizoguchi’s hands away from him as Mr. Mizoguchi tried to control the situation.

Mr. Mizoguchi’s Testimony

17. Mr. Mizoguchi has been a teacher for 19 years.  He has never been disciplined 

or accused of wrongdoing.  He did not recall whether he has had formal training regarding 
when it is appropriate to place hands on students but understands putting hands on students 
to control them is not a first option unless safety is an issue.  Mr. Mizoguchi said that he does 
touch students because, especially in special education, there are often self-control issues.
For example, sometimes students cannot hold still or touch other students at a time when the 
other students are not desirous of being touched.  He also has had students speaking out, 
throwing things, or doing things to get attention.  Mr. Mizoguchi said he will sometimes 
place his hand on a student’s shoulder to calm the student down.

On September 16, 2016, Mr. Mizoguchi was heading up the stairs to Mr. London’s 

classroom.  He could see the students on the second floor landing and observed that Mr.
London was having a difficult time controlling them.  J.M. began running down the stairs as 
Mr. Mizoguchi was heading up the stairs.  Mr. Mizoguchi yelled to J.M. and asked him what 
he was doing.  J.M. tried to sidestep him and continue going downstairs so Mr. Mizoguchi 
reached out and held the loop on J.M.’s backpack to keep him from going downstairs.  J.M. 
is not permitted to mill about the campus on his own; he must always be accompanied.  Mr. 
Mizoguchi testified J.M. started making excuses as to why he had to go downstairs, but Mr.
Mizoguchi told J.M. he needed to go back upstairs.  Mr. Mizoguchi said he did not grab, 
squeeze, or pinch anything on J.M.; he merely held J.M. by his sweater and began walking 
up the stairs with him.

8

Once he reached the second floor landing, Mr. Mizoguchi saw students engaged in 

“horseplay.”  Some students were leaning on the railing.  Some students were banging on the 
elevator door.  Mr. London was having difficulty getting them under control.  Mr. Mizoguchi 
“felt alarmed” by the students’ challenging Mr. London.  Mr. Mizoguchi saw J.M. start to 
engage in horseplay with the other boys on the landing.  He called out to J.M. repeatedly.
Eventually, Mr. Mizoguchi said he “touched” J.M. to “move” him.  He said at one point J.M. 
was bent over the railing spitting, so he held J.M.’s backpack and pulled him back from the 
railing.  As he was speaking with J.M. about his behavior, Mr. Mizoguchi said L.R. came 
within a foot of his face and started screaming that he could not touch students, calling him a 
molester, and saying Mr. Mizoguchi was gay.  The statements did not anger Mr. Mizoguchi 
because he has heard much worse in his career.  Once L.R. started yelling, the other boys on 
the landing started yelling the same thing.  Thus, L.R.’s conduct escalated the intensity of the 
problems on the landing.

At that point, Mr. Mizoguchi turned to L.R. because he thought it was a good idea to 
get L.R. away from the other boys. Mr. Mizoguchi ordered L.R. to go to the opposite side of 
the landing away from Mr. London’s classroom.  Mr. Mizoguchi pointed to the double door 
area and told L.R. to “sit down over there.”  He did not place any hands on L.R., who did not 
comply.

Because L.R. continued yelling and would not comply, Mr. Mizoguchi put his arms 

out (in the same manner as described by Mr. London) and tried to guide L.R. towards the 
double doors.  L.R. kept trying to shift left and right so Mr. Mizoguchi shifted his position to 
block L.R.  At some point, L.R. hit Mr. Mizoguchi’s hand.  Mr. Mizoguchi was successful in 
getting L.R. to move to the double door area.  However, he never touched L.R, never pushed 
L.R., and did not shove L.R. onto the ground.

After L.R. was standing by the double doors, Ms. Mendez called out to some of the 

boys to “knock it off” and then started speaking to L.R.  Once he saw Ms. Mendez talking to 
L.R., Mr. Mizoguchi backed up and let her handle L.R.  Once Ms. Mendez released L.R., he 
came up to Mr. Mizoguchi and said he was sorry and walked into Mr. London’s classroom.

Mr. Mizoguchi said that at the November 1, 2016, meeting when they notified him he 

would be facing discipline, he was in a “state of disbelief.”  He said he could not believe he 
was being accused of child abuse and may have commented how difficult the job is 
becoming.  He did not, however, state that he needed to put his hands on students to do his 
job.  He also did not recall apologizing at the meeting because none of his actions were 
physically aggressive.

Mr. Mizoguchi regrets the situation that occurred and said that looking back he 

realizes he might have been able to handle things differently.  He said he realizes now that 
his colleagues – like Ms. Mendez – are very willing to help in situations like the one that
occurred on the landing.  Mr. Mizoguchi reflected that perhaps he should be more willing to 
ask for help in the future.  He also said that in the future perhaps it might be a better idea to 

9

take more time to assess the situation and make an assessment as to what superiors might 
desire.

Mr. Mizoguchi’s testimony was sincere and credible.  His testimony was consistent 

with that of Mr. London, Ms. Mendez, and J.M.  Mr. Mizoguchi’s testimony was also 
consistent with a written statement he sent to Ms. Sanders on December 16, 2016, after he 
had been notified of the allegations against him.

District Actions Following the Incident 

18.

Cheri Sanders is the Associate Superintendent of Human Resources and 

testified at the hearing.  According to Ms. Sanders, she spoke with Mr. McAteer following 
the incident. They made a determination to place Mr. Mizoguchi on paid administrative 
leave, which became effective September 19, 2016. Mr. McAteer told her he was going to 
conduct follow-up interviews with the students, which he did.

19. Mr. McAteer did not testify at the hearing, and his notes regarding the 
interviews he conducted constituted administrative hearsay and were generally not helpful.
Some of the notes indicated that they were summaries.  Other portions of the notes did not 
contain dates of interviews.  One of the dates, October 2, 2016, was actually a Sunday, and 
was therefore not a correct date.  Moreover, because Mr. McAteer did not testify, it is not 
known whether the words he used in his notes are direct quotes or paraphrased statements.
Thus, Mr. McAteer’s notes concerning his interviews were not relied on in forming 
conclusions concerning credibility of witnesses or in making findings of fact.

20. Mr. Mizoguchi reported back to full duty at the school on October 12, 2016. 

21.

According to Ms. Sanders, following the investigation, she presented the board 

with the Notice of Charges and statements provided by the student witnesses, Ms. Dayhoff’s
paraphrased notes, and photographs of L.R. However, Mr. London’s statements concerning 
the incident were not attached; Ms. Mendez’s statements concerning the incident were not 
attached; and Mr. Mizoguchi’s statements concerning the incident were not attached. Those
statements generally were helpful to Mr. Mizoguchi, provided credible accounts of the 
incident, and called the credibility of the student statements into question.  Ms. Sanders did 
not know why those statements were not included and said nothing requires that every
investigation document be provided to the board.

22.

On November 2, 2016, a meeting occurred among Mr. Mizoguchi, Ms. 

Sanders, Mr. McAteer, and Jennifer Skellet (President of the California Teacher’s
Association).  The purpose of the meeting was to review the Notice of Charges with Mr. 
Mizoguchi. Ms. Sanders testified that, when Mr. Mizoguchi was presented with the packet 
containing the Notice of Charges and what had been provided to the board, he was surprised 
and upset. Ms. Sanders testified that Mr. Mizoguchi commented that he could not do his job 
if he could not put hands on students.  Ms. Sanders found this statement troubling, as she 
personally believes the only time a teacher should ever touch a student is in self-defense.  In 

10

response to Mr. Mizoguchi’s concerns regarding the fact that not all of the witness 
statements were provided to the board, Ms. Sanders stated there is no rule that requires 
everything be provided to the board.

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a preponderance 

of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.)

Relevant Statutory and Constitutional Authority 

2.

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), provides in part:

A permanent employee shall not be dismissed except for one or 
more of the following causes:

(1) Immoral conduct, including, but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct. For purposes of this chapter, “egregious 
misconduct” is defined exclusively as immoral conduct that is 
the basis for an offense described in Section 44010 or 44011 of 
this code, or in Sections 11165.2 to 11165.6, inclusive, of the 
Penal Code.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(6) Evident unfitness for service.

3.

4.

Education Code section 44934 permits a district to seek suspension or 

dismissal for a violation of provisions of Education Code section 44932.

Under the California Constitution, students and employees “have the 

inalienable right to attend campuses which are safe, secure and peaceful.”  (Const. art. 1, 
§28.) It is an explicit duty of teachers to reasonably control the conduct of students to 
maintain a safe and healthy learning environment.  (Ed. Code, § 44807).

5.

Education Code section 49000 et seq., sets forth the law regarding the 

prohibition of utilizing corporal punishment in schools.  Section 49001, subdivision (a), 
provides:

For the purposes of this section “corporal punishment” means 
the willful infliction of, or willfully causing the infliction of, 

11

physical pain on a pupil.  An amount of force that is reasonable 
and necessary for a person employed by or engaged in a public 
school to quell a disturbance threatening physical injury to
persons or damage to property, for purposes of self-defense, or 
to obtain possession of weapons or other dangerous objects 
within the control of the pupil, is not and shall not be construed 
to be corporal punishment within the meaning and intent of this 
section.  Physical pain or discomfort caused by athletic
competition or other such recreational activity, voluntarily
engaged in by the pupil, is not and shall not be construed to be 
corporal punishment within the meaning and intent of this 
section.

6.

Penal Code section 11165.3, provides:

As used in this article, “the willful harming or injuring of a child 
or the endangering of the person or health of a child,” means a 
situation in which any person willfully causes or permits any
child to suffer, or inflicts thereon, unjustifiable physical pain or 
mental suffering, or having the care or custody of any child,
willfully causes or permits the person or health of the child to be 
placed in a situation in which his or her person or health is 
endangered.

7.

Penal Code section 11165.4, provides:

As used in this article, “unlawful corporal punishment or injury”
means a situation where any person willfully inflicts upon any
child any cruel or inhuman corporal punishment or injury
resulting in a traumatic condition.  It does not include an amount 
of force that is reasonable and necessary for a person employed
by or engaged in a public school to quell a disturbance 
threatening physical injury to person or damage to property, for 
purposes of self-defense, or to obtain possession of weapons or 
other dangerous objects within the control of the pupil, as 
authorized by Section 49001 of the Education Code.  It also 
does not include the exercise of the degree of physical control
authorized by Section 44807 of the Education Code.  It also 
does not include an injury caused by reasonable and necessary 
force used by a peace officer acting within the course and scope 
of his or her employment as a peace officer.

12

8.

Education Code section 44807 provides: 

Every teacher in the public schools shall hold pupils to a strict 
account for their conduct on the way to and from school, on the 
playgrounds, or during recess.  A teacher, vice principal, 
principal, or any other certificated employee of a school district, 
shall not be subject to criminal prosecution or criminal penalties 
for the exercise, during the performance of his duties, of the 
same degree of physical control over a pupil that a parent would 
be legally privileged to exercise but which in no event shall 
exceed the amount of physical control reasonably necessary to 
maintain order, protect property, or protect the health and 
safety of pupils, or to maintain proper and appropriate 
conditions conducive to learning. The provisions of this section 
are in addition to and do not supersede the provisions of Section 
49000.  [Emphasis added].

Relevant Board Policies

9.

The applicable board policy for professional standards cited in the Notice of 

Charges, section 4119.21, provides:

The Board of Education expects district employees to maintain 
the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, 
follow district policies and regulations, and abide by state and 
federal laws.  Employee conduct should enhance the integrity of
the district and advance the goals of the district’s educational
programs.  Each employee should make a commitment to 
acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to fulfill his/her 
responsibilities and should focus on his/her contribution to the 
learning and achievement of district students.

Relevant Judicial Authority

10.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the Supreme 

Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 
school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  The court 
delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he or 
she is not fit to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students 
or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood 
of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may

13

inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.  (Id., at pp. 229-230.)

Unfitness for Service

11.

Unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), is 
established by conduct demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable 
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.”  (Woodland Joint 
Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 
1429, 1444.) As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria must be examined to ascertain 
whether the conduct in question indicates unfitness for service.  “If the Morrison criteria are 
satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident,’ i.e., whether the 
offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.”  (Id., at 1445.) A Commission has 
broad discretion to determine what constitutes unfitness to teach and to decide whether the 
teacher should be sanctioned.  (California Teachers Association v. State of California (1999) 20 
Ca1.4th 327, 343.)

12.

In Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the Supreme Court 

detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the 
standard established in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in 
which not only his conduct but also these factors are analyzed:  (1) likelihood of recurrence 
of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the 
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ relationships; (5) 
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of 
conduct.  (Id., at f.n. 5.) 

A Preponderance of the Evidence did not Establish Immoral Conduct or Evident Unfitness for 
Service

13.

A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Mizoguchi’s

conduct on September 16, 2016, violated any provisions of the Penal Code or Education 
Code, violated any policies of the school district, or constituted corporal punishment, as
alleged in the Notice of Charges.  Therefore, cause does not exist to suspend Mr. Mizoguchi
for two days without pay pursuant to Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 
44932, subdivision (a)(6) [immoral conduct and evidence unfitness for service].

Mr. Mizoguchi has been teaching for 19 years. His most recent evaluation noted 
exemplary conduct.  Mr. Mizoguchi has never been disciplined.  Thus, the conduct alleged in 
the Notice of Charges is entirely out of character with Mr. Mizoguchi’s background. Mr.
Mizoguchi credibly denied any inappropriate contact with both J.M. and L.R.  The student
witnesses tell another story.

The student witnesses all generally agree that Mr. Mizoguchi had some form of 
physical contact with J.M. and L.R.  However, the manner and degree in which that contact 
occurred varied widely.  The student witnesses used terms in their statements to school 

14

personnel and during testimony like “slammed, pushed, grabbed, and touched.” To the 
contrary, Mr. London, who was in a position to view the interactions with both students, 
testified credibly that Mr. Mizoguchi simply held J.M. to guide him up the stairs and also 
guided him into line.  J.M., who was credible, corroborated that version of events. Mr.
London also saw Mr. Mizoguchi, with his arms outstretched, trying to guide L.R. – who was 
belligerent, yelling, and instigating – into a corner away from the other students. Mr.
Mizoguchi’s credible testimony corroborated what Mr. London observed with respect to the 
interaction between respondent and L.R.  Ms. Mendez also credibly testified that she came 
outside her classroom during the commotion and saw respondent speaking to L.R. who was 
still being disrespectful, and she did not see respondent push L.R.  She did not hear anything
unusual.  She did not see L.R. crying.  She did not see L.R. on the ground.  Ms. Mendez’s 
observations directly contradict L.R.’s testimony that he was on the ground and crying after 
respondent “slammed” him into the wall by the double doors.  Indeed, Ms. Mendez’s 
classroom was right next to the double doors, yet she heard nothing, placing L.R.’s account 
and/or recollection of what occurred in doubt.  L.R. had no injuries, and the photographs 
provided showed no evidence of redness or bruising.

The version of events related by Mr. Mizoguchi, Ms. Mendez, and Mr. London is 

much more plausible and consistent than the version of events presented by the student
witnesses. A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Mizoguchi engaged in 
immoral conduct or that he is unfit for service.  A preponderance of the evidence did not 
establish that Mr. Mizoguchi violated any professional standard, student discipline 
requirement, or provisions of the Penal Code and Education Code. Mr. Mizoguchi acted 
reasonably in his minimal physical contact with J.M. and L.R., as permitted by Penal Code 
section 44807, to maintain control of the situation on the landing outside Mr. London’s 
classroom on September 16, 2016.

There may have been a variety of ways that the situation on the landing could have 

been handled differently. Mr. Mizoguchi – or Mr. London – could have called security.
Other teachers, like Ms. Mendez, could have been summoned to assist.  Or perhaps, the 
principal could have been called. Perhaps additional training for all teachers would be of 
assistance as none of the faculty witnesses expressed a clear standard of what they believe
the district expects of them. Nonetheless, it is not the job of the Commission to decide what 
other options should have been selected to maintain control of the situation; the only issue
before us is whether the evidence established that Mr. Mizoguchi engaged in immoral 
conduct or demonstrated unfitness for service. On this record, he did not.

//

//

15

The Notice of Charges against Robyn Mizoguchi is dismissed.

ORDER

DATED:

May 11, 2017
  

___________________________________
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

[  Carol 

Cricdmaw 

___________________________________
CAROLYN FRIEDMAN
Certificated Special Education Teacher, Retired
Chino Valley Unified School District

[  Kebecce  MLaustion
_______________________________________
REBECCA MCQUESTION, Ed.D.
Certificated Special Education
Teacher/Administrator
Bonsall Unified School District

16

