BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
SAN  DIEGO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OAH  No.  2016060112 

RITA  BRADSHA W-McKERRING, 

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  in  San  Diego,  California  on  November  14,  15,  16,  and  17,  2016.  The  Commission 
was  comprised  of  the  following  members:  Administrative  Law  Judge  Mary  Agnes 
Matyszewski,  Tamatha  Parker  and  Ursula  Sack,  Ph.D. 

Kari  D,  Sullivan,  Esq.,  represented  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District. 

Jon  Cadieux,  Esq.,  of  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool  and  Wax,  APC,  represented 
respondent  Catherine  Bradshaw-McKerring,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

On  December  9,  2016,  ALJ  Matyszewski  conducted  a  telephonic  conference  with  the 

parties’  attorneys  during  which  they  provided  a  confidential  names  list,  a  request  of  what 
records  to  seal  and/or  redact,  and  a  lawsuit  descriptions  list  identifying  the  three  lawsuits  at 
issue  in  this  litigation.  The  confidential  names  list  was  marked  and  received  as  Exhibit  C  and 
was  sealed.  The  request  identifying  records  to  be  sealed  or  redacted  was  marked  and  received 
as  Exhibit  D  and  was  sealed. 
evidence  as  Exhibit  E  and  was  sealed. 

The  lawsuit  descriptions  list  was  marked  and  received  in 

On  December  12,  2016,  the  Commission  met  to  deliberate  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

CASE  SUMMARY 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was  employed  as  a  school  psychologist  at  an  elementary 
school  in  the  district.  After  being  employed  at  that  school  for  a  few  years,  when  incidents 
occurred  on  campus,  including  sexual  assaults,  sexual  harassment  and  failure  to  implement 
IEPs,  she  began  disseminating  confidential  and  privileged  information  to  individuals  not 

i   

i 

; 
i

  

entitled  to  that  information.  Her  dissemination  of  that  information  constituted  persistent 
violations  of  applicable  district  policies.  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  also  filed  a  false 
residency  declaration  with  the  district  asserting  that  her  children  lived  within  school 
boundaries  when  they  did  not.  Filing  that  false  document  constituted  dishonesty.  Based 
upon  the  evidence  presented  both  in  support  of,  and  in  defense  to,  the  charges  filed  against 
Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring,  the  Commission  concluded  that  the  allegations  that  were 
sustained  warranted  her  dismissal  from  the  district. 

PROTECTIVE  ORDER  AND  REDACTION 

The  information  contained  in  the  records  in  this  matter  is  subject  to  a  protective  order. 

Exhibits  8,  27,  32,  35,  46,  69,  79,  C,  D,  and  E,  inclusive,  were  admitted  into  evidence  and 
contain  confidential  information,  as  does  the  Exhibit/Witness  List.  It  is  impractical  to  redact 
the  information  from  these  exhibits  and  that  list.  To  protect  privacy  and  the  confidential 
personal  information  from  inappropriate  disclosure,  Exhibits  8,  27,  32,  35,  46,  69,  79,  C,  D, 
and  E,  inclusive,  and  the  Exhibit/Witness  List  are  ordered  sealed.  This  sealing  order  governs 
the  release  of  documents  to  the  public.  A  reviewing  court,  parties  to  this  matter,  their 
attorneys,  and  a  government  agency  decision  maker  or  designee  under  Government  Code 
section  11517,  may  review  the  documents  subject  to  this  order,  provided  that  such 
documents  are  protected  from  release  to  the  public.  No  court  reporter  or  transcription  service 
shall  transcribe  the  information  contained  in  the  records  or  transcribe  the  names  of  the 
children  or  their  parents. 

Confidential  and  identifying  information  from  other  exhibits  was  redacted  post- 

hearing  to  protect  the  privacy  of  witnesses  and  children. 

Commission  Concerns 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Although  not  an  issue  to  be  decided  in  this  proceeding,  the  Commission  was 

very  concerned  about  the  evidence  that  was  introduced  regarding  allegations  of  multiple 
sexual  assaults  occurring  at  Green  Elementary  School,  the  lack  of  principal  leadership  while 
all  of  these  events  were  taking  place,  and  the  almost  complete  disregard  by  the  district  for 
what  was  occurring  on  this  campus.  The  Commission  was  struck  by  the  district’s  lack  of 
action  and  how  it  stood  idly  by  while  these  numerous  sexual  assaults,  instances  of  sexual 
harassment,  and  what  appeared  to  be  utter  chaos  were  happening,  especially  given  that  the 
victims  and  perpetrators  of  this  widespread  sexual  abuse  were  elementary  school  age 
children.  The  Commission  was  very  disturbed  by  the  evidence  of  sexual  assaults  introduced 
in  this  hearing  and  the  district’s  failure  to  intervene. 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

2. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was  employed  by  the  San  Diego  Unified  School 
District  as  a  school  psychologist.  At  all  relevant  times  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was  the

school  psychologist  at  Green  Elementary  School.  She  worked  on  that  campus  two  days  per 
week,  the  other  three  days  she  worked  at  Trace,  an  alternative  schoo!  in  the  district. 

3. 

On  July  1,  2015,  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was  placed  on  paid  administrative 

leave  pending  the  outcome  of  an  investigation  of  her  actions. 

4, 

On  April  27,  2016,  Tim  Asfazadour,  the  district’s  Chief  Human  Resources 

Officer,  signed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  the  Dismissal  Charges  in  his  official 
capacity.  The  notice  and  dismissal  sought  to  immediately  dismiss  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring 
from  employment  with  the  district  on  the  grounds  of  unprofessional  conduct,  dishonesty  and 
persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  school  and/or  district  rules.  (The  charges  pertaining  to 
the  last  cause  incorrectly  cited  to  former  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7), 
the  correct  code  section  is  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8).) 

Moreover,  although  the  pleading  asserted  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was 

dishonest  and  demonstrated  unprofessional  conduct  (paragraph  2,  page  1),  identified  the 
alleged  acts  that  constituted  unprofessional  conduct  (paragraph  3,  subsections  a  through  j, 
pages  1through  4)  and  listed  the  act  that  constituted  dishonesty  (paragraph  4,  page  4), 
nowhere  in  the  pleading  did  the  district  identify  the  specific  acts  that  constituted  persistent 
violations  of  its  rules  and  regulations.  That  violation  was  charged  in  the  introductory 
paragraph  (page  1,  lines  15-17),  but  the  pleading  did  not  specify  what  acts  violated  the 
district’s  policies.  As  such,  the  Commission  reviewed  each  act  alleged  in  conjunction  with 
the  policies  introduced  at  hearing  (Administrative  Procedures  6527,  7039,  7045)  to 
determine  if  those  acts  met  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  criteria. 

5. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  timely  appealed  the  dismissal  action,  denying  that 

grounds  for  her  dismissal  from  employment  existed,  and  this  hearing  followed. 

Motions  in  Limine! 

6. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  motion  in  limine  to  exclude  evidence,  argument,  or 

allegations  related  to  the  charge  of  unprofessional  conduct,  per  Education  Code  section 
44938,  was  granted  in  part  and  denied  in  part.  Complainant  failed  to  comply  with  the  45-day 
requirement  as  mandated  by  Education  Code  section  44938.  As  such,  it  was  not  allowed  to 
proceed  against  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  on  the  charge  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McKerring’s  request  to  exclude  the  documents  referenced  in  her  motion  in  limine 
was  denied  as  those  documents  pertained  to  other  charges  filed  against  her. 

Even  though  the  district  could  not  proceed  on  its  charge  of  unprofessional  conduct  in 
this  hearing,  the  Commission  was  troubled  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  never  received  an 
unfavorable  evaluation  or  performance  review,  nor  was  she  ever  placed  on  an  assistance 
plan.  Instead,  she  was  placed  on  leave  pending  the  district’s  investigation  of  the  issues 

'The  motions  in  limine,  oppositions  thereto  and  this  court’s  Order  weré  received  in 

evidence  as  Exhibit  A.

alleged  in  the  pleadings.  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  was  never  given  any  guidance, 
directives,  an  opportunity  to  improve,  or  a  chance  to  demonstrate  a  change  in  her  behavior. 
As  with  the  concerns  noted  in  Finding  1,  the  Commission  was  bothered  by  this  fact,  as  well. 

7. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  motion  in  limine  to  exclude  evidence  and 

allegations  pre-dating  the  charges  by  four  years  was  granted  in  part  and  denied  in  part.  No 
evidence  of  incidents  occurring  before  April  27,  2012,  was  allowed  to  be  introduced, 
including  the  2010  enrollment  form  and  her  2004/2009  performance  evaluation,  as  well  as 
any  other  records  beyond  the  four  year  limitation  period.  The  parties  were  permitted  to 
introduce  the  district’s  “regularly  kept  records”  but  no  decision  was  based  on  any  evidence 
occurring  before  April  27,  2012.  Alternatively,  the  parties  were  permitted  to  introduce  older 
evidence  to  impeach  any  witness  or  if  they  could  demonstrate  that  equitable  principles 
applied.  No  such  evidence  was  introduced  at  hearing. 

Evaluation  of Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  Alleged  Persistent  Violations  of District  Policies 

8. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  shared  privileged  and/or  confidential  student 

information  with  Parent  3,  including  informing  Parent  3  about  incidents  on  campus  involving 
students  other  than  Parent  3’s  child,  identifying  students  involved  in  incidents  who  were  not 
Parent  3’s  child,  informing  Parent  3  about  information  contained  in  internal  district 
documents,  providing  Parent  3  teacher  assignments,  and  identifying  and/or  providing 
identifying  information  about  other  parents  seeking  services  and/or  students  receiving 
services  who  were  not  Parent  3’s  child.  (Exhibit  32  pages  49-51,  55-59,  64,  74-75,  78,  80- 
85;  Exhibit  41  pages  91-92;  and  testimony  of  Parent  3.) 

Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  disclosures  and  communications  to  Parent'3  violated 

district  Administrative  Procedure  numbers  6527,  7039  and  7045.  Her  repeated  disclosures 
and  communications  demonstrated  a  persistent  violation  of  those  policies. 

9. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  shared  privileged  and/or  confidential  student 

information  with  Parent  2,  including  informing  Parent  2  about  incidents  on  campus  involving 
students  who  were  not  Parent  2’s  child,  providing  identifying  information  about  students 
who  were  not  Parent  2’s  child,  informing  Parent  2  that  the  principal  was  on  leave  due  to 
investigations  occurring  on  campus,  disclosing  information  about  investigations  on  campus, 
advising  Parent  2  about  litigation  and  settlements  involving  students  at  the  school  who  were 
not  Parent  2’s  child,  and  providing  Parent  2  with  information  involving  other  parents. 
(Exhibit  27  page  96;  Exhibit  46  pages  25,  96,  99  and  101;  Exhibit  79  page  166;  and 
testimony  of  Parent  2.) 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  disclosures  and  communications  to  Parent  2  violated 

district  Administrative  Procedure  numbers  6527,  7039  and  7045,  Her  repeated  disclosures 
and  communications  demonstrated  a  persistent  violation  of  those  policies. 

10. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms. 

Bradshaw-McKerring  shared  privileged  and/or  confidential  student  information  with  Noon

Duty  Assistant  Nikki  Dodd  about  students  with  IEPs.  The  only  evidence  of  that  charge  was 
provided  by  Cesia  Guizar,  the  Green  Elementary  School  Assistant,  who  gave  a  statement  and 
testified.  Ms.  Dodd  did  not  testify  nor  was  she  interviewed  during  the  investigation.  Ms. 
Guizar’s  claim  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  provided  information  to  Ms.  Dodd  about  IEPs 
was  hearsay  and  not  supported  by  any  non-hearsay  evidence. 

11. 

Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring  shared  privileged  and/or  confidential  student 

information  by  forwarding  e-mails  to  a  parent  and  two  unknown  individuals  about  students 
who  were  not  their  children.  (Exhibit  9  page  138;  Exhibit  10  page  140;  and  Exhibit  13  page 
144.) 
two  unknown  individuals  violated  district  Administrative  Procedure  numbers  6527,  7039  and 
7045, 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  disclosures  and  communications  to  that  parent  and  the 

12. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McKerring’s  sharing  of  privileged  and/or  confidential  student  information  by 
forwarding  e-mails  to  staff  violated  district  Administrative  Procedure  numbers  6527,  7039  or 
7045. 
(Exhibit  11  page  142;  Exhibit  21  page  259;  Exhibit  22  page  261;  Exhibit  16  page 
151;  and  Exhibit  17  page  155.)  Moreover,  although  alleged,  no  evidence  was  introduced 
indicating  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  disclosed  confidential  or  privileged  information  to 
Jack  Robertson,  district  education  specialist. 

13. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms, 

Bradshaw-McKerring  failed  to  adequately  complete  Individualized  Education  Program 
(IEPs)  psychological  reports  in  a  timely  manner.  Although  evidence  in  support  of  that 
allegation  was  introduced  (Exhibit  79;  Exhibit  82,  page  1;  and  testimony  of  Scott  Lemler), 
the  evidence  in  rebuttal  refuted  that  contention  (Exhibit  81  and  testimony  of  Melinda 
Dayharsh  and  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring).  Moreover,  the  evidence  offered  by  complainant 
regarding  this  allegation  was  too  generalized  and  nonspecific  to  support  a  finding, 
Furthermore,  even  if  this  cause  had  been  established,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not 
demonstrate  that  this  act  violated  any  of  the  district  policies  introduced  in  this  proceeding, 

14. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms. 

Bradshaw-McKerring  disrupted  student  instructional  time.  Moreover,  even  if  this  cause  had 
been  established,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  this  act  violated 
any  of  the  district  policies  introduced  in  this  proceeding. 

15. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms, 
Bradshaw-McKerring  was  unprofessional  and  disruptive  when  conducting  GATE  testing 
Moreover,  even  if  this  cause  had  been  established,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not 
demonstrate  that  this  act  violated  any  of  the  district  policies  introduced  in  this  proceeding. 

16. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  disclosed  GATE  scores  via  e-mail  before  the  scores 

were  released  by  the  school  (Exhibit  12).  Although  Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  actions  in 
doing  so  demonstrated  a  lack  of  good  judgment,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  her  actions  violated  any  of  the  district  policies  introduced  in  this  proceeding.

Evaluation  of Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  Alleged  Dishonesty 

17. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  submitted  a  false  “Declaration  of  Residency”  form 
(Exhibit  7).  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  signed  the  form  under  penalty  of  perjury  stating  that 
her  children  lived  at  an  address  within  Green  Elementary  School’s  boundaries  when,  in  fact, 
they  did  not.  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  offered  various  explanations  for  signing  the 
document:  that  it  was  provided  to  her  by  the  office  staff,  that  she  did  not  read  the  form,  and 
that  she  was  coming  through  the  office  with  her  hands  full  when  she  was  stopped  and  asked 
to  complete  the  form.  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  also  testified  that  it  was  her  understanding 
that  this  was  the  correct  form  to  complete  and  that  she  relied  on  the  office  staff  to  give  her 
the  proper  form.  In  other  testimony,  she  asserted  that,  on  one  occasion,  her  children  had 
attended  daycare  at  that  residence,  but  the  owner  of  that  home  denied  that  the  children 
resided  there,’  While  it  was  unclear  from  the  evidence  presented  if  the  children  had  ever 
attended  daycare  at  that  residence,  it  was  clear  that  neither  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  nor  her 
children  resided  at  that  address. 

None  of  the  explanations  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  put  forth  was  persuasive  or 

credible,  and  demonstrated  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  inability  to  own  up  to  her  actions. 
The  district’s  residency  form  only  contained  two  sentences,  one  stating  that  the  signer 
declared  that  their  children  lived  at  the  address  provided,  and  the  other  stating  that  the  form 
was  being  signed  under  penalty  of  perjury.  The  bottom  of  the  form  cautioned  that  the  signer 
would  be  “committing  a  crime  punishable  under  the  laws  of  the  state  of  California”  if  the 
statements  provided  on  the  form  were  incorrect.  Thus,  there  was  no  excuse  why  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McKerring  failed  to  appreciate  the  significance  of  signing  a  false  document. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  Testimony 

18. 

Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring  testified  about  all  of  the  sexual  assaults,  sexual 

harassment,  and  other  incidents  occurring  on  campus.  She  explained  that  despite  the 
concerns  she  raised  on  campus,  nothing  was  being  done  to  end  those  incidents,  Out  of 
concern,  she  was  sharing  information  with  parents,  but  claimed  it  was  information  that  was 
already  publicly  available,  was  disclosed  by  her  after  individuals  already  knew  about  it,  or 
was  important  information  she  thought  they  should  know.  As  to  the  residency  declaration, 
she  acknowledged  not  reading  the  document,  but  blamed  the  district  for  not  providing  her 
with  the  correct  form, 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  testimony  demonstrated  a  complete  lack  of  ownership  by 

her  for  her  actions.  Moreover,  contrary  to  her  testimony,  her  many  texts  demonstrated  that 
she  was  gossiping.  with  parents,  not  professionally  communicating  information.  Further,  her 
communications  indicated  that  she  had  blurred  the  line  between  the  professional  duties  she 
owed  as  the  school  psychologist  at  Green  Elementary  School  and  conversations  in  which  she 

*  The  owner’s  statements  to  the  principal  were  received  as  administrative  hearsay. 

Those  statements  supplemented  and  explained  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  testimony  that 
she  did  not  reside  at  that  address.

could  engage  as  a  parent  of  students  attending  the  school.  Despite  Ms.  Bradshaw- 
McKerring’s  contention  that  she  was  disclosing  this  information  for  the  greater  good,  the 
colloquial  tone  of  her  texts  and  emails  refuted  that  assertion  because  they  portrayed  a  woman 
who  was  gossiping  about  confidential  and  privileged  information  with  parents  who  were  not 
entitled  to  that  information.  For  example,  in  her  communications  to  Parent  3  Ms,  Bradshaw- 
McKerring  texted:  “Hell  hath  No  fury  like  a  Momma  scorned!”  “Here  COMES  the  PAIN! 
Game  On!  This  mom  is  coming  for  you  with  a  vengeance  next  year.  Get  in  ur  little  jabs 
when  you  can  cause  it’s  gonna  be  a  knockout  in  the  END!”  (Exhibit  46  page  52.)  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McKerring  also  criticized  her  administrator/teacher  on  campus  in  texts  to  Parent  3. 
(Exhibit  46  pages  55-59.)  Moreover,  the  evidence  established  that  her  actions  of  repeatedly 
sharing  information  only  stirred  up  more  acrimony  and  discord  on  the  campus. 

Additionally,  the  Commission  was  struck  by  the  fact  that  although  Ms.  Bradshaw- 

McKerring  sought  medical  treatment  due  to  the  stress  she  was  experiencing  on  campus,  that 
on  April  28,  2015,  her  physician  signed  documentation  stating  that  she  was  “not  to  work  at 
Green  Elementary  School  at  all,”  and  that  the  district’s  Human  Resources  Department 
approved  her  request  to  be  away  from  that  school,  Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring  continued  her 
actions.  Despite  being  out  on  medical  leave,  she  accessed  privileged  and  confidential  district 
information  regarding  Green  Elementary  School  students  and  disseminated  that  information 
to  Parent  3,  That  dissemination  resulted  in  Parent  3  becoming  very  upset  and  instructing  Ms, 
Bradshaw-McKerring  to  stop  contacting  her. 
It  was  troubling  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McK  erring 
continued  her  persistent  violation  of  district  policies  even  while  on  medical  leave. 

Finally,  despite  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  testimony  about  her  concerns,  she  failed 

to  offer  an  adequate  explanation  for  her  failure  to  notify  the  proper  channels  of  those 
concerns  and  or  follow  her  chain  of  command.  Her  testimony  about  the  lack  of  principal 
leadership  on  campus  was  supported  by  the  evidence  and  was  concerning  to  the  Commission, 
She  also  testified  that  she  thought  the  residency  issue  and  the  school  dis-enrolling  her  two 
children  mid-year  was  retaliatory  for  her  informing  people  about  what  was  taking  place  on 
the  campus.  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  further  asserted  that  the  she  believed  that  the 
instructions  she  was  getting  about  being  late,  having  to  specially  sign  in  on  campus,  and  her 
issues  regarding  her  reports  were  also  retribution  for  the  concerns  she  was  voicing  about  the 
campus.  However,  these  explanations  were  insufficient  to  warrant  her  actions. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  supervisor  was  not  the  Green  Elementary  School 

principal;  her  supervisor  was  at  Trace,  the  district’s  alternative  school  where  she  worked 
three  days  per  week.  Why  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring  did  not  properly  notify  that  supervisor 
was  never  adequately  explained.  Instead,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Bradshaw- 
McKerring  improperly  and  repeatedly  disseminated  confidential  and  privileged  information 
to  individuals  who  were  not  entitled  to  it.  The  dissemination  of  that  confidential  and 
privileged  information  to  those  individuals,  the  length  of  time  she  disseminated  it,  and  the 
numerous  times  that  she  disseminated  information,  demonstrated  that  she  persistently 
violated,  or  refused  to  obey,  the  three  district  policies  introduced  at  hearing. 

i 
i

  : 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections 

1. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44934,  and  44944.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 

permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (4)  authorizes  dismissal  for  dishonesty.  Subdivision  (8)° 
authorizes  dismissal  for  the  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  or 
reasonable  regulations. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process 

for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and  sets  forth  the 
Commissions’  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4, 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing  board 

must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent  employee. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

5. 

The  “burden  of  proof”  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.) 

6. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence,  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Morrison  Factors 

7. 

The  seminal  case  for  teacher  dismissals  is  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  There  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  that  a 
‘ 
school  board  may  consider  when  considering  discipline:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by 
the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if 

*  The  district’s  Dismissal  Charges  incorrectly  cited  to  Subdivision  (a)(7),  the  former 

number  of  this  Education  Code  section.  This  subdivision  was  renumbered  by  A.B.  215.

any,  sutrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7) 
the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

8. 

The  Morrison  factors  can  be  applied  to  all  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When 

a  camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which 
one  could  have  done  the  deed. A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the 
offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

Persistent  Violation  of or  Refusal  to  Obey  Laws 

. 

9. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  stubborn;  persevering  ..  .  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  , 
repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  A  single  violation  of a school  board’s  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the 
dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher.  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8), 
violations  pertain  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the 
Legislature  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal, 
apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the 
subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  (/d.  at  p.84.) 

10. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the 
District  must  further  establish  that  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 
“persistent,”  i.e,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.) 
incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally 
considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.) 

Isolated 

Dishonesty 

11.  .  “Dishonesty  necessarily  includes  the  element  of  bad  faith.  As  defined  in  the 

dictionaries  and  in  judicial  decisions,  it  means  fraud,  deception,  betrayal,  faithlessness, 
[Citations.]  As  put  by  the  court  in  Alsup  v.  State,  91  Tex.  Cr.  224,  ‘dishonesty  denotes  an 
absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray.””  (Hogg 
v,  Real  Estate  Commissioner  (1942)  54  Cal.App.2d  712,  717.) 

12. 

In  Fontana Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220,  fn  12, 
the  California  Supreme  Court  required  application  of  the  Morrison  factors  to  the  determination 
of  “dishonesty,”  noting:  “Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smallest  fib  to  the  most 
flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,  and  not 
every  falsehood  will  constitute  ‘dishonesty’  as  a  ground  for  discipline.”  (Ibid).

Evaluation  of Appropriate  Discipline  Given  the  Commission’s  Findings 

13, 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  use  of  phrases  when  communicating  with  Parent  3 

such  as  “a  little  bird  told  me  so  please  keep  this  information  for  your  eyes  only,”  “as  ever... 
you  know  I  will  keep  you  informed,”  this  is  “highly  unprofessional  of  me”  and  instructing 
Parent  3  to  provide  an  alternative  explanation  for  how  Parent  3  obtained  the  information  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McKerring  was  sharing,  followed  by  the  word  “wink;”  Ms.  Bradshaw- 
McKerring’s  use  of  phrases  when  communicating  with  Parent  2  such  as  “just  a little  bird 
with  some  info,”  “mum’s  the  word  my  friend,”  and  “mum  is  the  word;”  and  her  use  of 
phrases  “for  ur  eyes  only,”  “for  us  eyes  only,”  and  “mum’s  the  word”  when  sending  emails 
to  staff  and  unknown  individuals,  demonstrated  that  she  was  aware  that  she  should  not  be 
sharing  the  information  she  was  providing.  Moreover,  in  one  of  her  texts  to  Parent  3,  Ms. 
Bradshaw-McK erring  admitted  that  her  criticizing  Green  Elementary  School  staff  was 
“highly  unprofessional  of  me.”  Her  admission  demonstrated  that  she  was  aware,  at  least  on 
some  level,  that  her  behavior  was  inappropriate.  However,  she  repeatedly  disclosed 
confidential  information  despite  her  misgivings.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
established  that  she  persistently  violated,  or  refused  to  obey,  district  policies, 

The  district’s  residency  form  that  she  signed  under  penalty  of  perjury  was  false.  Ms. 

Bradshaw-McKerring  failed  to  own  up  to  her  action  of  providing  false  information  under 
penalty  of perjury  and  made  excuses  for  her  conduct.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
established  that  her  conduct  was  dishonest. 

Having  established  the  causes  alleged,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  the  appropriate 

discipline.  Applying  the  Morrison  factors  to  this  case,  the  evidence  established  that: 

(1)  Not  only  was  it  likely,  but  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  conduct  adversely 

affected  students,  parents  and  fellow  teachers  to  a  great  extent; 

(2)  Her  conduct  was  fairly  recent,  taking  place  between  2012  and  2015; 

(3)  She  was  the  school  psychologist  which  required  her  to  be  especially  vigilant  about 

maintaining  the  confidential  and  privileged  information  she  possessed; 

(4)  The  extenuating  circumstances  were  the  lack  of  district  involvement  and 

principal/administrator  leadership  on  the  campus  such  that  Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring 
thought  her  actions  were  helpful.  However,  the  tone  of  her  communications  and  her 
acknowledgments  in  them  that  she  was  acting  unprofessionally  and/or  disclosing  information 
that  she  should  not,  was  an  aggravating  factor,  as  was  her  providing a  false  residency 
declaration  to  the  district; 

(S)  Although  Ms.  Bradshaw-McK erring’s  testimony  about  her  good  intentions,  and 

the  chaos  on  the  campus  made  some  of  her  actions  understandable,  those  factors  were 
insufficient  to  warrant  her  disclosure  of  privileged  and  confidential  information,  and  there 
was  nothing  praiseworthy  about  her  false  declaration  of  residency; 

10

(6)  Given  the  amount  of  information  she  disclosed,  the  many  people  to  whom  she 

disclosed  it,  her  lack  of  ownership  of  her  actions  when  she  testified,  and  her  failure  to 
acknowledge  her  inappropriate  actions,  coupled  with  the  many  references  in  her  texts 
acknowledging  that  she  was  disclosing  confidential  or  privileged  information,  it  is  likely  that 
her  conduct  would  recur;  and 

(7)  It  is  highly  unlikely  that  dismissing  her  from  employment  would  adversely  impact 

or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  teachers. 

  

ORDER. 

Ms.  Bradshaw-McKerring’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  San 

Diego  Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  Ms.  Bradshaw- 
McKerring  is  granted.  Ms,  Bradshaw-McKerring  shall  be  dismissed  from  the  district. 

@ 

Dated:  December  2%  ,  2016 

Dated: 

faniacats 

WW, 

Zot be 

Dated:  January 
6)  2007 

     
nn 
MAR\  AGNES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

MAY  SZEWSKI 

Tamatha  Parker 
Commission  Member 

Le  64, PD. 

Ursula  Sack,  Ph.D. 
Commission  Member 

il

