BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FOR  THE  JURUPA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

NENOISE  TROTTER, 

OAH  No.  2017100785 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

DECISION 

On  March  19  through  23,  2018,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Jurupa  Valley,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of 
the  following  members:  Adam  L.  Berg,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings;  Virginia  Escobar,  Baldwin  Park  Unified  School  District;  and  Deidra  Johnson, 
Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

Kerrie  McNally,  Attorney  at  Law  with  the  law  firm  of  Adams,  Silva  &  McNally, 

LLP,  represented  complainant,  Tamara  Elzig,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Personnel  Services, 
Jurupa  Unified  School  District  (district). 

Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law  with  the  law  firm  of  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan, 

represented  respondent,  Nenoise  Trotter,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  March  23,  2018. 

Procedural  Background 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  elementary  school  teacher  who  was  assigned  as  a 

third  grade  teacher  at  Granite  Hill  Elementary  School  (Granite  Hill)  during  the  time  period  that 
is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings.  She  has  taught  elementary  school  for  20  years  with  the 
district.  She  holds  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential. 

2. 

On  August  21,  2017,  complainant  signed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and 

Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of  Charges),  alleging  that  respondent  was  subject  to

termination  for  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  the  district’s  regulations,  in  violation  of Education  Code  sections  44932, 
subdivisions  (a)(2),  (a)(6),  and  (a)(8),  respectively. 

3, 

On  September  13,  2017,  the  district  served  the  Statement  of  Charges  on 

respondent,  who  timely  filed  a  demand  for  hearing. 

4. 

On  January  30,  2018,  the  district  filed  a  motion  to  amend  the  Statement  of 

Charges,  which  was  opposed  in  part  by  respondent.  By  order  dated  February  27,  2018,  the 
district’s  motion  was  granted  in  part,  and  the  district  was  permitted  to  amend  the  Statement  of 
Charges  to  make  technical,  non-substantive  corrections,  which  were  not  opposed  by  respondent. 
However,  the  district  was  not  permitted  to  allege  additional  substantive  allegations  because  it 
failed  to  establish  good  cause  to  do  so.' 

5. 

On  February  28,  2018,  complainant  filed  an  Amended  Statement  of  Charges.  In 

support  of  the  three  grounds  for  dismissal,  complainant  alleged  multiple  incidents  between 
respondent  and  students,  parents,  and  staff,  beginning  in  September  2013.7 

2013-2014  School  Year 

ALLEGATIONS  RELATED  TO  THE  GRADE-LEVEL  MEETING 

6. 

Adrianne  Lara  1s  currently  a  fourth  grade  teacher  at  Granite  Hill  who  testified 

at  the  hearing.  During  the  2013-2014  school-year,  she  was  one  of  four  third  grade  teachers  at 
Granite  Hill,  including  respondent.  That  school-year  was  Ms.  Lara’s  first  year  teaching  at 
Granite  Hill.  She  had  previously  taught  at  another  elementary  school  in  the  district  for  five 
years,  but  several  weeks  into  the  school-year,  she  was  involuntarily  transferred  to  Granite 
Hill  to  fill  a  vacant  position.  Soon  after  she  started  at  Granite  Hill,  respondent  volunteered  to 
watch  her  class  for  several  hours  so  Ms.  Lara  could  unpack  her  boxes  and  prepare  her 
classroom  for  the  new  school-year.  Respondent  would  also  share  instructional  materials  with 
Ms.  Lara  and  the  rest  of  the  third  grade  team. 

7. 

On  November  18,  2013,  Ms.  Lara  was  teaching  her  students  a  language  arts 

lesson  when  respondent  called  her  and  asked  if  respondent  could  send  over  a  few  students  to 
Ms.  Lara’s  class  to  read  something  they  had  written.  Ms.  Lara  testified  that  she  told 
respondent  she  was  in  the  middle  of  something,  at  which  point  respondent  said,  “I  won’t 
bother  with  you”  and  hung  up.  Later  that  afternoon,  Ms.  Lara  wrote  an  email  to  Granite  Hill 
Principal  Corrine  Ortiz,  with  the  subject  line,  “I  stepped  on  Nenoise’s  Toes.”  The  email 

  

'  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  the  Statement  of  Charges 

may  be  amended  less  than  90  days  before  the  hearing  only  upon  a  showing  of  good  cause. 

*  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  all  evidence  and 
allegations  relating  to  events  occurring  more  than  four  years  before  the  initial  Statement  of 
Charges  was  served  were  excluded  and  not  considered  by  the  Commission.

related  the  incident  and  stated  that  respondent  had  complained  to  the  grade-level  leader, 
Sherine  Candido,  who  told  Ms.  Lara  that  Ms.  Lara  had  hurt  respondent’s  feelings.  Ms.  Lara 
wrote  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  did  not  want  the  collaboration  between  the  two  to  be  affected,  but 
Ms.  Lara  did  not  feel  she  needed  to  apologize  because  she  was  in  the  middle  of  a  lesson 
when  respondent  called. 

Ms.  Ortiz  responded  to  Ms.  Lara  stating  that  she  understood  Ms.  Lara  not  wanting  to 
interrupt  the  flow  of  her  lesson,  but  suggested  that  Ms.  Lara  could  have  provided  respondent 
an  alternative  time  for  her  students  to  read  to  Ms.  Lara’s  class.  Ms.  Ortiz  suggested  that  a 
conversation  at  the  next  grade-level  meeting  would  be  appropriate  for  the  team  to  discuss 
how  to  deal  with  a  similar  situation  in  the  future. 

Ms.  Lara  sent  Ms.  Ortiz  an  email  expressing  that  she  agreed  with  Ms.  Ortiz’s 
suggestions  and  would  ask  Ms.  Candido  to  address  the  issue  at  the  next  grade-level  meeting. 

8. 

On  November  20,  2013,  a  grade-level  meeting  was  held  with  Granite  Hill’s 
third  grade  teachers.  The  purpose  of  the  meetings  was  for  the  teachers  to  collaborate  and 
plan  lessons.  Ms.  Candido,  the  grade-level  leader,  began  the  meeting  with  a  discussion  about 
the  incident  between  respondent  and  Ms.  Lara.  Respondent  apologized  for  interrupting  Ms. 
Lara’s  class,  but  then  said  Ms.  Lara  was  selfish  and  only  cared  about  herself.  Respondent 
said  that  she  had  helped  Ms.  Lara  when  she  first  came  to  Granite  Hill  by  taking  her  students, 
she  would  no  longer  send  students  to  Ms.  Lara,  and  she  would  not  accept  any  of  Ms.  Lara’s 
students  in  return.  Ms.  Lara  felt  that  the  tone  of  the  “apology”  was  clearly  disingenuous  and 
insincere.  She  was  shocked  by  respondent’s  reaction  because  she  felt  it  was  a  small  incident 
that  had  been  overblown.  Lorena  Graves,  another  third  grade  teacher,  tried  to  speak,  but 
respondent  said,  “Oh,  shut-up  Lorena,”  and  then  laughed.  Ms.  Lara  told  respondent  she 
would  not  accept  the  apology  because  respondent  called  her  selfish.  She  called  respondent 
unprofessional  and  arrogant.  Respondent  began  to  mimic  Ms.  Lara  and  used  a  high-pitched 
voice,  like  that  of  a  child’s.  Ms.  Lara  testified  that  she  felt  very  intimidated  by  respondent 
during  the  meeting. 

That  evening,  Ms.  Lara  sent  an  email  to  Ms.  Ortiz  and  Ms.  Elzig,  in  which  she  stated 

she  felt  that  respondent  and  Ms.  Candido  “ripped  her  to  shreds”  during  the  meeting.  Ms. 
Lara  sent  Ms.  Ortiz  another  email  late  at  night,  which  was  very  emotional  and  clearly 
expressed  her  frustration  and  anxiety  about  the  incident.  Ms.  Lara  testified  that  the  incident 
affected  her  emotionally.  She  was  intimidated  because  she  was  new  at  the  school  and 
respondent  had  a  lot  of  clout. 

9. 

Ms.  Ortiz  is  currently  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  the  district  on  special 
assignment.  Previously,  she  was  Principal  of  Granite  Hill  for  three  school-years,  from  2013 
through  2016.  After  Ms.  Lara  reported  to  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  had  felt  intimidated  by 
respondent  at  the  grade-level  meeting,  Ms.  Ortiz  spoke  to  each  of  the  teachers  who  had  been 
present.  The  other  teachers  generally  confirmed  Ms.  Lara’s  version  of  events.  Ms.  Graves 
confirmed  respondent  told  her  to  “shut-up”  when  she  tried  to  speak.  Ms.  Ortiz  also  learned 
that  respondent  mimicked  what  Ms.  Lara  said  using  a  baby  voice  or  demeaning  tone.  Ms.

Lara  reported  that  she  left  the  meeting  by  saying  that  she  would  be  more  careful  with 
everyone’s  feelings  and  consider  dealing  with  the  situation  differently. 

10. 

On  December  4,  2013,  Ms.  Ortiz  sent  respondent  a  “letter  of  concern”  about 

the  incident.*  Ms.  Ortiz  wrote  that  after  a  thorough  investigation,  it  was  determined  that 
respondent  was  unprofessional  when  she  “mocked,  mimicked,  and  intimidated”  another 
teacher  at  a  grade-level  meeting.  Ms.  Ortiz  issued  respondent  several  directives  relating  to 
appropriate  communication  with  staff  members.  Ms.  Ortiz  also  ordered  that  all  future  grade- 
level  meetings  would  be  held  in  the  library,  which  Ms.  Ortiz  could  observe  from  her  office. 

11. 

Ms.  Lara  testified  that  after  the  incident,  she  never  had  a  substantive 

conversation  with  respondent.  At  future  grade-level  meetings,  respondent  would  not 
participate.  Ms.  Ortiz  observed  several  third  grade-level  meetings  that  school-year.  Ms. 
Ortiz  testified  that  during  the  meetings  she  attended,  respondent  was  “standoffish,”  did  not 
participate  in  the  meetings,  would  grade  papers,  and  when  asked  to  contribute,  would 
respond  that  she  had  nothing  to  say. 

12. 

Respondent’s  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  Ms.  Lara  started 

approximately  one  month  into  the  school-year.  When  Ms.  Lara  first  started,  respondent 
learned  that  Ms.  Lara’s  room  was  in  disarray.  Respondent  volunteered  to  take  Ms.  Lara’s 
students  all  day  to  give  Ms.  Lara  a  chance  to  organize  her  room. 

In  November  2013,  all  of  the  third  grade  classes  were  doing  theme  writing  and 
stories.  Respondent  thought  her  students  did  an  exceptional  job,  and  as  a  reward  she  wanted 
a  few  of  her  students  to  go  to  the  other  classrooms  to  share  what  they  had  written.  The  other 
two  third  grade  teachers  said  it  was  fine  for  her  students  to  come  read,  but  when  respondent 
called  Ms.  Lara,  Ms.  Lara  flatly  said  “no.”  Respondent  was  stunned  at  the  response 
especially  because  Ms.  Lara  did  not  offer  any  other  times,  which  is  what  respondent  wanted 
to  hear. 

At  the  next  grade-level  meetings,  when  it  was  respondent’s  turn  to  speak,  she 

apologized  to  Ms.  Lara  for  interrupting  her  class.  The  other  two  teachers  complimented 
respondent  on  what  a  great  job  her  students  did,  but  Ms.  Lara  said  she  would  not  accept 
respondent’s  apology.  Respondent  testified  that  her  apology  was  sincere  and  not  sarcastic. 
She  explained  she  did  not  know  Ms.  Lara  that  well,  and  she  sincerely  wanted  to  apologize  for 
interrupting  Ms.  Lara’s  class.  Ms.  Lara  then  stood  up,  pointed  her  finger  at  respondent,  and 
“told-off’  respondent  about  how  unprofessional  she  was.  Respondent  thought  this  was 
inappropriate.  Respondent  denied  ever  mimicking  Ms.  Lara  or  making  any  comments  about 
Ms.  Lara  being  uncomfortable.  Ms.  Lara  then  left  and  said  she  was  going  to  talk  to  Ms.  Ortiz 

  

*  Ms.  Ortiz  originally  wrote  a  letter  of  concern  that  contained  many  more  details  about 

her  investigation,  but  on  advice  of  district  administration,  the  letter  she  provided  to 
respondent  did  not  contain  any  specifics.  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  the  letter  of  concern  she 
issued  to  respondent  was  maintained  in  the  school  site  file  but  was  not  placed  in  respondent’s 
personnel  file.

because  she  was  being  harassed.  Ms.  Ortiz  spoke  to  all  of  the  teachers  at  the  meeting  and 
asked  them  to  write  statements. 

13. 

Respondent  continued  to  participate  in  the  grade-level  meetings.  After  that 
incident,  the  meetings  were  held  in  the  library.  Respondent  did  not  remember  if  Ms.  Ortiz 
ever  indicated  to  her  that  Ms.  Ortiz  was  concerned  with  respondent’s  lack  of  participation. 
All  of  the  meetings  concluded  with  asking  the  teachers  if  they  had  anything  else  to  add. 
Respondent  always  said,  “No,  I  don’t  have  anything  else  to  say.”  Respondent  had  a  good 
working  relationship  with  Ms.  Lara  after  the  incident  and  regularly  communicated  with  Ms. 
Lara  and  the  other  teachers.  Respondent  would  speak  to  Ms.  Lara  in  the  lounge  and 
discussed  vacations  or  holidays. 

14. 

On-cross  examination,  respondent  denied  that  she  was  at  all  upset  when  Ms. 
Lara  said  her  students  could  not  come  to  her  class  to  read.  Respondent  met  with  Ms.  Ortiz 
after  the  grade  level  meeting  and  told  Ms.  Ortiz  that  Ms.  Lara  called  her  names  and  shook 
her  finger  at  her.  When  asked  why  at  her  deposition  respondent  said  she  could  not  recall  the 
details  of  the  meeting  with  Ms.  Ortiz,  respondent  testified  that  she  remembered  more  details 
about  the  meeting  after  she  gave  it  more  thought  and  did  not  recall  the  details  at  that 
particular  time. 

15. 

Inrebuttal  testimony,  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  she  spoke  to  all  of  the  teachers 

who  were  at  the  grade  level  meeting,  including  respondent.  No  teacher,  including 
respondent,  told  Ms.  Ortiz  that  Ms.  Lara  stood  up  and  yelled  at  respondent  or  that  Ms.  Lara 
stormed  out  of  the  meeting.  Ms.  Ortiz  said  that  Ms.  Lara  admitted  to  calling  respondent 
unprofessional  and  arrogant,  but  this  was  after  respondent  called  Ms.  Lara  selfish. 

ALLEGED  COMMENTS  ABOUT  THE  THIRD  GRADE  TEACHERS 

16. 

At  the  end  of  the  2013-2014  school-year,  the  teaching  assignments  for  the  next 
school-year  were  released  to  the  teachers.  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  respondent  approached  her 
and  made  a  comment  to  the  effect  of,  “You  must  not  like  the  third  grade  because  you  put  all 
the  oldest  people  on  the  third  grade  team.”  Ms.  Ortiz  responded  by  saying  that  age  had 
nothing  to  do  with  teacher  assignments.  Ms.  Ortiz  felt  that  the  comment  was  unprofessional 
because  it  was  not  normal  for  a  teacher  to  talk  negatively  about  other  teachers. 

17.  | Respondent  testified  that  she  had  gone  to  a  training  at  the  end  of  the  2013- 

2014  school  and  other  people  at  the  training  made  a  comment  about  all  of  the  older  people 
being  put  on  the  third  grade  team.  Respondent  told  Ms.  Ortiz  what  the  other  people  had  said; 
she  did  not  mean  anything  by  the  comment.  Respondent  did  not  remember  what  Ms.  Ortiz’s 
response  was  to  the  comment. 

18. 

‘In  rebuttal  testimony,  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  she  never  solicited  respondent’s 

opinion  about  the  third  grade  team  and  respondent  never  told  her  that  the  statement  about  the 
third  grade  being  taught  by  the  older  people  came  from  others  at  a  training.

2014-2015  School  Year 

19. 

Renne  Wedin  has  taught  third  grade  at  Granite  Hill  since  the  2014-2015 

school-year.  During  a  grade-level  collaboration  meeting,  respondent  said  that  Ms.  Wedin 
should  take  notes  because  she  was  new.  Ms.  Wedin  testified  that  she  felt  a  little  offended 
because  although  she  was  a  new  teacher  at  Granite  Hill,  she  had  experience  teaching  at 
another  school. 

20. 

Respondent  denied  telling  Ms.  Wedin  that  she  had  to  take  notes.  Ms.  Graves 
was  the  team  leader  that  year  and  it  would  have  been  her  responsibility  to  decide  who  would 
take  notes  at  the  meeting. 

21. 

The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  respondent  told  her  grade- 

level  team  that  they  were  going  to  fail  this  year  because  Ms.  Byjazevich  was  always  sick,  Ms. 
Graves  always  forgets  things,  and  Ms.  Wedin  was  new  to  the  school.  No  non-hearsay 
evidence  was  presented  by  the  district  regarding  this  allegation.  However,  respondent  denied 
telling  this  to  the  grade-level  team.  Instead,  she  said  Ms.  Ortiz  asked  her  opinion  about  the 
third  grade  level  team  and  respondent  told  her  that  Ms.  Bjazevich  was  always  absent,  Ms. 
Graves  was  forgetful,  and  Ms.  Wedin  was  new.  Respondent  never  told  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she 
was  “concerned”  about  her  team  or  thought  that  it  would  fail. 

ALLEGATIONS  INVOLVING  A  PIZZA  PARTY 

22. 

Complainant  alleged  that  respondent  “taunted”  her  third  grade  students  by 
having  a  pizza  party  in  her  classroom  for  sixth  grade  students  but  would  not  let  her  third 
grade  students  participate.  On  September  12,  2014,  Ms.  Ortiz  received  two  phone  calls  from 
parents  of  third  grade  students  in  respondent’s  class,  who  were  upset  that  respondent  had  a 
pizza  party  for  sixth  grade  students  in  front  of  the  third  graders,  who  were  not  allowed  to 
participate.  Ms.  Ortiz  was  concerned  that  instructional  time  had  been  used  for  a  pizza  party 
for  sixth  graders  and  sent  respondent  an  email  asking  for  clarification.  Respondent  did  not 
actually  provide  an  explanation  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  but  simply  responded  that  the  information  was 
not  correct  and  if  the  parents  would  contact  her  she  would  discuss  their  concerns.  Ms.  Ortiz 
responded  that  the  parents  wished  to  remain  anonymous,  but  she  had  asked  them  to  speak  to 
respondent  about  the  incident. 

23. 

Respondent’s  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  This  was  the  first  year  for 

common  core,  and  her  students  were  having  some  difficulty  with  the  concepts.  Some  of 
respondent’s  former  students,  who  were  in  the  sixth  grade,  came  in  during  lunch  to  tutor  the 
third  graders  and  help  them  with  the  concepts.  As  a  reward,  her  third  grade  class  decided 
they  would  throw  a  pizza  party  for  the  sixth  grade  students.  The  sixth  grade  students  sat  on 
the  carpet  and  ate  pizza  as  respondent  taught  a  lesson  to  her  students.  The  third  graders 
participated  in  planning  the  party,  and  they  were  excited  that  they  could  do  this  for  the  sixth 
graders.  Respondent  never  held  up  a  slice  of  pizza  in  the  air  to  taunt  her  students.  When 
respondent  received  Ms.  Ortiz’s  email,  she  requested  that  the  parents  who  had  concerns 
contact  her  so  she  could  tell  them  it  was  a  reward;  however,  Ms.  Ortiz  said  the  parents

wished  to  remain  anonymous.  One  day,  Manuel  and  Nancy  Chavez,  the  parents  of  one  of 
respondent’s  third  grade  students,  spoke  to  respondent  about  the  incident.  They  said  they 
had  contacted  Ms.  Ortiz  about  their  concerns  but  were  satisfied  by  respondent’s  explanation. 

24. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  in  late  January  2015,  several  months  after  the  pizza 

party,  Nancy  Chavez,  a  parent  of  a  third  grade  student  in  respondent’s  class,  returned  to  Ms. 
Ortiz  to  talk  about  the  pizza  incident.  Ms.  Chavez  was  crying  and  visibly  upset.  She  gave 
Ms.  Ortiz  a  letter  explaining  that  respondent  had  clarified  the  issue  regarding  the  pizza  party 
and  Ms.  Chavez  was  upset  that  respondent  had  gotten  in  trouble  for  the  incident. 

Ms.  Chavez’s  letter,  dated  January  29,  2015,  stated  that  she  and  her  husband  had 
discussed  the  incident  with  respondent  and  realized  respondent  did  nothing  wrong.  They  felt 
they  got  incorrect  information  from  their  son,  and  they  now  understood  that  it  was  a  reward 
for  the  sixth  graders.  They  apologized  for  the  inconvenience  and  wrote  that  they  were 
extremely  happy  with  respondent. 

The  letter  was  dated  two  days  after  Ms.  Elzig  had  emailed  respondent  to  schedule  a 

meeting  to  discuss  complaints  of  unprofessional  conduct,  and  one  day  after  Ms.  Ortiz  issued 
respondent  a  letter  of  reprimand  regarding  two  other  unrelated  incidents.  Considering  the 
pizza  incident  occurred  months  before,  respondent  was  questioned  on  cross  examination  if 
she  asked  Mrs.  Chavez  to  write  a  letter  on  her  behalf.  Respondent  denied  telling  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Chavez  that  she  was  in  trouble  with  the  district,  and  said  she  never  asked  them  to  write 
a  letter  to  Ms.  Ortiz  on  her  behalf.  When  asked  how  she  had  obtained  a  copy  of  the  letter, 
which  respondent  submitted  as  evidence,  respondent  said  that  Mrs.  Chavez  took  it  to  the 
office  to  give  to  Ms.  Ortiz  and  then  later  gave  respondent  a  copy  of  the  letter. 

25. 

Mr.  Chavez  also  testified  at  the  hearing.  His  son  told  him  he  was  upset  that 

other  children  had  received  pizza  and  he  did  not.  Mr.  Chavez  and  his  wife  spoke  to  Ms. 
Ortiz  to  complain.  After  they  spoke  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  they  talked  to  respondent,  who  explained 
why  she  had  the  party.  They  then  told  Ms.  Ortiz  that  they  had  misunderstood  the  situation. 
Mr.  Chavez  testified  that  he  could  not  remember  when  the  party  occurred  or  when  he  and  his 
wife  spoke  to  Ms.  Ortiz.  Mr.  Chavez  did  not  remember  if  respondent  told  them  anything 
about  her  getting  in  trouble  regarding  the  incident.  He  denied  that  respondent  asked  his  wife 
to  write  the  letter  to  Ms.  Ortiz. 

ALLEGATIONS  INVOLVING  INSUBORDINATION  AT  STAFF  MEETINGS 

26. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  an  English  Language  Development  (ELD)  meeting  was 

held  for  teachers  on  October  15,  2014.  Prior  to  the  meeting,  Ms.  Ortiz  had  sent  an  email  to 
the  teachers  directing  them  to  bring  a  certain  book  to  the  meeting.  When  Ms.  Ortiz  noticed 
that  respondent  had  not  brought  the  book,  respondent  told  her  she  had  already  read  the  book 
and  would  look  at  her  neighbor’s.  Ms.  Ortiz  asked  her  to  retrieve  the  book  from  her 
classroom,  to  which  respondent  said  that  by  the  time  she  went  to  her  classroom  to  get  the 
book,  the  meeting  would  be  over.  Ms.  Ortiz  felt  that  respondent  was  being  insubordinate, 
especially  since  her  classroom  was  just  across  the  hall.  Ms.  Ortiz  denied  that  respondent

ever  mentioned  anything  about  not  having  her  glasses  with  her,  such  that  she  was  unable  to 
read  the  book. 

27. 

Respondent  testified  that  prior  to  the  ELD  meeting,  the  teachers  were 

instructed  to  read  the  ELD  book.  When  respondent  went  to  the  meeting,  she  did  not  have  the 
book  with  her.  Ms.  Ortiz  asked  her  to  go  and  bring  the  book  to  the  meeting.  Respondent 
told  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  did  not  have  her  reading  glasses  and  thus  could  not  read  the  book 
anyway.  She  explained  that  a  student  had  accidentally  broken  her  reading  glasses  that  day, 
and  she  did  not  have  a  second  pair.  Respondent  said  in  no  way  did  she  intend  to  be 
disrespectful  to  Ms.  Ortiz. 

28. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  during  a  technology  meeting  held  in  December  2014, 

the  teachers  were  requested  to  complete  a  survey  on  their  laptops.  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that 
respondent  did  not  complete  the  survey  as  requested. 

29. 

Respondent  testified  that  although  she  did  not  complete  the  survey  at  the 

meeting,  she  completed  the  survey  when  she  returned  to  her  room. 

ALLEGATIONS  INVOLVING  STUDENT  A.V. 

30. 

During  the  2014-2015  school-year,  A.V.  was  in  respondent’s  third  grade  class. 
A.V.’s  mother  testified  at  the  hearing.  Before  the  winter  break,  A.V.’s  mother  and  A.V.  met 
with  respondent  to  discuss  A.V.’s  grades  and  how  she  was  doing  in  class.  A.V.’s  mother 
was  talking  about  A.V.’s  homework,  when  respondent  said  she  did  not  like  that  A.V.’s  pants 
fell  down  in  the  back  and  made  the  comment,  “nobody  wants  to  see  what  your  mama  gave 
you.”  A.V.’s  mother  felt  this  was  disrespectful  and  unrelated  to  the  issue  they  were 
discussing.  A.V.’s  mother  did  not  remember  if  respondent  told  her  that  other  kids  in  the 
class  were  making  fun  of  the  way  A.V.  dressed  because  she  would  have  a  gap  between  her 
pants  and  her  shirt. 

At  another  point,  respondent  asked  A.V.  to  explain  something.  When  A.V.  began 
crying  and  could  not  talk  anymore,  respondent  said  she  would  tell  the  story.  When  A.V. 
tried  to  speak,  respondent  put  her  hand  up  and  told  A.V.  she  had  her  chance  and  was  not 
going  to  speak.  A.V.’s  mother  testified  that  during  the  meeting,  respondent  called  A.V.  a 
“drama  queen,”  although  she  did  not  remember  the  context  in  which  this  statement  was 
made.  She  testified  that  respondent  was  very  rude  and  she  could  not  believe  how  respondent 
had  acted.  A.V.’s  mother  reported  the  incident  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  but  the  school  refused  to 
transfer  A.V.  out  of  respondent’s  class. 

31. 

A.V.  is  12  years  old  and  now  in  sixth  grade.*  A.V.  testified  that  when  she  first 
started  third  grade  she  liked  respondent.  She  said  respondent  would  say  mean  things  in  class, 
and  she  and  other  children  sometimes  cried,  although  she  did  not  recall  why.  Respondent 

  

*  All  of  the  children  who  testified  at  hearing  were  determined  to  be  competent.  (Evid. 

Code,  §  700;  701.)

would  call  A.V.  a  “drama  queen”  in  class.  A.V.  did  not  like  this  and  wanted  to  be  called  by 
her  real  name.  During  the  meeting  with  respondent  and  A.V.’s  mother,  when  A.V.  tried  to 
talk,  respondent  put  her  hand  up  in  front  of  her  face.  She  called  A.V.  a  drama  queen  and  told 
her  that  she  needed  to  pull  her  pants  up  in  class.  A.V.  explained  that  she  started  gaining 
weight  that  year  and  normally  wore  leggings.  However,  when  she  wore  jeans,  they  would 
sometimes  fall  down  in  back. 

32. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  A.V.’s  mother  reported  her  concerns  about 

respondent’s  conduct  during  the  meeting  and  spoke  to  Ms.  Ortiz  about  the  incident  on 
January  20,  2015.  According  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  A.V.’s  mother  felt  that  the  meeting  was  supposed 
to  be  about  A.V.’s  missing  homework,  but  respondent  would  go  off  topic  and  then  made  a 
rude  comment  about  A.V.’s  clothes  that  embarrassed  A.V.  When  A.V.  tried  to  speak, 
respondent  made  a  “shushing”  sound  and  put  her  hand  up.  A.V.’s  mother  also  reported  that 
respondent  had  called  A.V.  a  “drama  queen.” 

Ms.  Ortiz  later  went  to  respondent’s  class  to  talk  to  respondent  about  the  incident. 
Respondent  said,  “Get  her  out,  I  don’t  want  her  in  my  class.”  When  Ms.  Ortiz  brought  up 
A.V.’s  mother’s  concern,  respondent  put  up  her  hand  and  said,  “Get  her  out”  before  Ms. 
Ortiz  could  discuss  the  issue  with  respondent.  Ms.  Ortiz  told  respondent  that  it  did  not  work 
that  way  and  it  was  not  possible  to  move  every  student  with  whom  there  is  a  problem.  When 
Ms.  Ortiz  was  leaving  the  classroom,  respondent  stated,  “You  are  going  to  move  her  out  of 
my  room.” 

33. 

Respondent  testified  that  A.  V.’s  mother  had  stopped  by  the  classroom  and 

asked  respondent  how  A.V.  was  doing  in  class.  Respondent  explained  that  A.V.  had  just  had 
a  progress  report,  but  her  mother  had  not  yet  seen  it.  There  were  assignments  listed  on  the 
progress  report  that  A.V.  had  not  turned  in.  Respondent  wanted  to  let  A.V.’s  mother  know 
that  other  students,  especially  the  boys,  were  laughing  at  A.V.  because  her  shorts  were  too 
low  and  her  shirt  was  too  high,  exposing  her  lower  back.  Respondent  denied  ever  referring 
to  A.V.  as  a  “drama  queen.”  Respondent  said  she  does  not  even  use  the  phrase,  and  to  her, 
the  term  refers  to  a  female  impersonator  from  a  restaurant  in  San  Francisco.  Respondent 
denied  ever  making  a  comment  about  A.V.  being  too  sensitive.  A.V.  was  not  crying  during 
the  meeting  with  her  mother,  and  respondent  never  put  her  hand  up  to  “shush”  A.V.  or  told 
her  to  be  quiet.  As  respondent  recalled,  the  meeting  was  quite  short.  Respondent  suggested 
that  A.V.  wear  longer  tops  or  tie  a  sweater  around  her  waist  but  denied  making  any  jokes 
about  it.  Respondent  did  not  recall  A.V.  ever  attempting  to  turn  in  late  work,  but  there  was  a 
tray  on a  shelf  in  the  classroom  where  students  could  turn  in  late  work.?  Respondent  taught 
her  students  about  the  tray  the  first  day  of  class  and  never  got  frustrated  when  a  student 
would  attempt  to  turn  in  late  homework.  Finally,  respondent  denied  ever  calling  A.V.  a  “hot 
mess.”  She  said  she  only  uses  that  term  to  refer  to  her  daughter’s  make-up,  although  the 

  

>  The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  respondent  would  not  allow  A.V.  to 
turn  in  missing  work  the  next  day  and  was  rude  to  her.  There  was  no  admissible  evidence 
supporting  this  allegation  and  respondent  denied  the  substance  of  it.

Commission  noted  that  in  testimony  the  day  before,  respondent  referred  to  a  student’s 
handwriting  as  a  “hot  mess.” 

34. 

Respondent  offered  as  evidence  a  written  assignment  completed  by  A.V.  on 

January  28,  2015.°  The  written  assignment,  entitled  “Third  Grade,”  stated  that  A.V.  was 
glad  to  be  in  this  grade,  but  she  “kind  of  wanted  to  go  back  to  second  grade  because  third 
grade  was  hard.”  She  wrote  that  even  though  respondent  was  strict,  she  was  a  nice  person 
and  she  loved  third  grade.  Respondent  testified  that  she  gave  the  class  a  writing  assignment 
where  they  were  to  discuss  something  that  they  loved.  She  gave  the  class  her  example  that 
pepperoni  pizza  was  the  best.  She  testified  that  the  students  came  up  with  their  own  topics  to 
write  about.  A.V.  came  up  with  the  topic  of  why  she  loved  third  grade.  Respondent  denied 
that  she  instructed  the  students  to  write  about  third  grade  specifically. 

ALLEGATIONS  REGARDING  STUDENT  A.O. 

35. 

During  the  2014-2015  school-year,  A.O.  was  also  in  respondent’s  third  grade 
class.  A.O.,  who  is  now  12  years  old  and  in  sixth  grade,  testified  at  the  hearing  as  follows: 
A.O.  did  not  like  respondent  because  she  was  mean.  A.O.  would  cry  in  class  once  or  twice  a 
week  and  cried  after  coming  home  almost  every  day.  She  frequently  cried  in  the  morning 
because  she  did  not  want  to  go  to  class.  One  day,  the  playground  monitor  brought  her  to 
class.  Respondent  told  her  to  sit  next  to  respondent’s  desk.  A.O.  never  had  to  sit  next  to  the 
desk  before,  and  respondent  never  made  other  children  sit  next  to  the  desk  Respondent  told 
A.O.  that  she  was  not  GATE  (Gifted  and  Talented  Education)  material  and  asked  A.O.  who 
put  her  in  respondent’s  class.  When  A.O.  responded  that  her  mother  had,  respondent  pointed 
to  other  students  by  name  and  said  that  they  were  not  crying.  She  then  said  in  front  of  the 
class  that  A.O.  looked  like  respondent’s  two-year-old  granddaughter.  A.O.  felt  embarrassed 
by  this  statement  and  felt  that  comment  about  her  not  being  GATE  material  meant  she  was 
not  smart. 

36. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  as  follows:  On  January  20,  2015,  a  playground  supervisor 
informed  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  found  A.O.  crying  on  the  playground  and  A.O.  said  she  did  not 
want  to  return  to  respondent’s  class  because  she  was  “uncomfortable.”  Ms.  Ortiz  called  A.O. 
into  the  office  to  discuss  what  occurred.  A.O.  reported  the  following:  After  the  supervisor 
escorted  A.O.  to  the  class,  respondent  asked  A.O.  why  she  was  uncomfortable  in  her 
classroom.  Respondent  pointed  out  other  students  by  name  and  indicated  that  they  were  not 
crying.  Respondent  commented  that  her  two-year-old  granddaughter  does  not  cry  like  that. 
A.O.  then  asked  to  go  to  the  office,  but  respondent  told  her  to  sit  on  the  floor  by  respondent’s 
desk  to  think  about  why  she  wanted  to  go  to  the  office.  Respondent  asked  A.O.  who  put  her 
in  the  class  and  A.O.  responded  that  her  mother  had.  Respondent  said,  “I  did  not  want  you 
here,”  and  began  to  name  other  students  and  why  they  were  in  the  class,  such  as  because  they 
were  GATE  students.  Respondent  said  maybe  A.O  should  be  in  Mrs.  Bjazevich’s  class,  who 

  

°  This  was  the  same  day  Ms.  Ortiz  issued  respondent a  letter  of  concern  that 
referenced  the  interactions  with  A.V.,  and  a  day  after  Ms.  Elzig  notified  respondent  that  a 
meeting  had  been  scheduled  to  discuss  allegations  against  her. 

10

is  more  like  a  first  grade  teacher.  A.O.  also  said  respondent  made  other  comments  and  told 
her  that  she  needed  to  work  on  her  “sensitivity”  and  “develop  a  sense  of  humor.” 

37. 

That  morning,  respondent  sent  Ms.  Ortiz  an  email  regarding  the  interaction. 
The  email  is  summarized  as  follows:  Before  school,  a  playground  supervisor  had  brought 
A.O.  to  her  class  and  informed  her  that  she  found  A.O.  crying  because  she  felt  uncomfortable 
being  in  respondent’s  class.  Respondent  asked  A.O.  why  she  was  uncomfortable.  A.O. 
would  not  answer  but  just  whimpered.  Respondent  had  her  sit  alone  “for  a  moment  to  reflect 
so  she  could  tell  me  why.”  A.O.  still  would  not  answer  so  respondent  reminded  her  that  her 
parents  had  transferred  her  into  the  class  and  “perhaps  they  knew  something  more  than  she.” 
Respondent  reminded  her  that  she  had  asked  to  be  with  her  friends.  A.O.  said  she  changed 
her  mind,  did  not  want  to  be  in  the  class  with  them,  and  asked  to  go  to  the  office.  Instead, 
respondent  had  her  sit  and  study  at  her  table.  A.O.  then  stopped  crying.  The  problem  started 
the  week  before  when  respondent  moved  A.O.  and  other  students  to  new  tables.  A.O.  was 
not  happy  at  her  new  table. 

38. 

That  afternoon,  Ms.  Ortiz  went  to  respondent’s  classroom  to  discuss  the 

interaction  with  A.O.  in  addition  to  the  complaint  by  A.V.’s  mother.  Respondent  admitted 
that  she  made  the  comparison  to  respondent’s  two-year-old  granddaughter  and  had  other 
students  stand  up  to  indicate  that  they  were  happy  in  the  class.  Respondent  told  Ms.  Ortiz  to 
“Get  her  out.  I  don’t  want  her  in  my  classroom.”  Ms.  Ortiz  discussed  the  appropriate  use  of 
humor  and  that  eight  year  old  children  may  not  always  respond  well  to  these  types  of 
remarks.  Ms.  Ortiz  suggested  a  parent-teacher  conference  would  be  appropriate  to  address 
the  issue. 

39. 

 A.O.’s  mother  testified  as  follows:  A.O  would  often  come  home  crying 

because  of  how  respondent  treated  her.  On  January  22,  2015,  A.O.’s  mother  and  father, 
along  with  Ms.  Ortiz  and  respondent,  had  a  conference  after  school  to  discuss  the  issue  of 
respondent  having  made  A.O.  sit  on  the  floor.  During  the  meeting,  A.O.’s  parents  attempted 
to  discuss  their  concerns  with  respondent.  The  whole  time,  respondent  would  look  at  her 
watch,  scribble  on  her  pad,  and  did  not  engage  at  all  in  conversation.  At  one  point, 
respondent  asked  A.O.s  mother  to  repeat  something  because  respondent  said  she  was  taking 
notes.  Respondent  addressed  their  concern  that  she  made  A.O.  sit  next  to  the  desk  by  saying 
it  was  “orchestra  seating”  and  the  “best  seat  in  the  house.”  Abruptly,  respondent  got  up. 
A.O.’s  mother  asked  her  if  there  was  somewhere  she  had  to  be.  Respondent  said  she  had  an 
appointment  and  left  the  meeting.  A.O.’s  mother  felt  that  at  the  meeting,  respondent  did  not 
care  about  her  daughter. 

AO. 

Ms.  Ortiz,  who  was  also  at  the  conference,  testified  that  respondent  was 

“standoffish”  during  the  meeting  and  just  took  notes.  Ms.  Ortiz  said  that  neither  of  A.O.’s 
parents  yelled  at  the  meeting,  but  A.O.’s  father  did  get  upset  when  he  was  asking  respondent 
questions  but  not  getting  any  answers.  A.O.’s  mother  then  calmed  him  down  and  he  never 
raised  his  voice  again.  Before  the  meeting  was  over,  respondent  said  she  had  an  appointment 
with  an  electrician,  made  a  comment  about  not  being  on  contract  time,  and  left  the  meeting. 
Ms.  Ortiz  felt  that  the  parents’  concerns  were  not  addressed  at  all. 

11

41. 

Ms.  Ortiz  made  notes  about  the  meeting  that  she  documented  in  a  draft  letter 

of  concern  as  follows:  Respondent  admitted  to  making  the  comment  about  her  two-year-old 
granddaughter  in  order  to  compare  it  to  A.O.’s  whimpering.  She  admitted  to  having  other 
students  stand  up  in  class  to  show  how  happy  they  were.  A.O’s  mother  said  she  wanted  A.O. 
to  stay  in  respondent’s  class  but  does  not  want  A.O.  to  fear  her  teacher.  She  asked 
respondent,  “If  you  don’t  want  A.O.  in  your  class,  tell  us. 
us  know.”  Respondent  did  not  respond  and  most  of  the  meeting  just  looked  down  taking 
notes.  Finally,  respondent  looked  at  her  watch  so  frequently  that  A.O.’s  parents  asked  if 
there  was  somewhere  she  needed  to  be.  Respondent  said  she  had  an  electrician  coming  to 
her  house  and  had  to  leave  as  the  meeting  was  after  her  contract  hours. 

If  you  don’t  like  our  daughter,  let 

42. 

The  next  day,  respondent  wrote  Ms.  Ortiz  an  email  with  a  summary  of  what 
occurred  at  the  meeting.  Respondent  wrote  that  A.O.’s  parents  were  totally  unreceptive  to 
what  respondent  was  saying  and  repeatedly  cut  her  off  and  prevented  respondent  from 
speaking.  Respondent  felt  that  nothing  she  could  do  would  please  the  parents,  and  even 
though  they  requested  their  daughter  to  be  in  her  class,  the  parents  were  incensed  with 
everything  she  did.  Respondent  questioned  why,  if  A.O.  was  so  uncomfortable,  she  would 
come  to  the  class  early  the  next  day  and  spend  her  lunch  inside  the  classroom.  She  wrote, 
‘Perhaps  we  need  to  investigate  why  the  other  students  don’t  wish  to  play  with  her.  We  may 
have  a  social  problem  that  needs  to  be  addressed.”  Finally,  respondent  wrote  that  before  she 
left  the  meeting,  it  had  become  “rather  heated.”  She  said  it  was  “extremely  hostile  with 
anger,  irritability  and  rage  being  directed  directly  toward  ‘me’!!””  Respondent  felt  like  1t  was 
teacher  harassment  and  again  referenced  removing  A.O.  from  her  class  “as  a  viable  solution 
to  the  prevention  of  future  vexations,  frustrations  and  irritations  for  all.” 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  the  letter  absolutely  did  not  reflect  what  had  occurred  at  the 

meeting,  as  the  parents  did  not  act  in  the  manner  described  by  respondent. 

43. 

 A.O.  testified  that  the  day  after  the  parent-teacher  conference,  A.O.  and  a 

couple  friends  went  to  respondent’s  classroom  to  help  clean  before  school  started.  Often, 
students  from  the  third  grade  and  other  grades  would  go  to  respondent’s  class  to  clean  the 
classroom.  A.O.  testified  that  she  wanted  respondent  to  like  her  so  she  went  to  the  classroom 
to  help  clean,  but  respondent  told  her  that  her  friends  could  stay  but  she  could  not.  A.O. 
testified  that  she  later  apologized  to  respondent  because,  she  again,  wanted  respondent  to  be 
nice  to  her.  Respondent  told  the  whole  class  that  A.O.  had  apologized,  the  class  clapped,  and 
then  respondent  gave  A.O.  a  piece  of  candy. 

44. 

__ Respondent’s  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  At  the  beginning  of  the 

school-year,  A.O.  was  not  originally  in  respondent’s  class,  but  her  parents  requested 
respondent  as  her  teacher.  Respondent  approved  the  transfer  of  A.O.  into  her  class. 
January,  it  was  respondent’s  custom  to  change  students’  seats.  A.O.  was  one  of  the  students 
that  she  moved.  A.O.  was  not  happy  about  having  to  move  to  another  table,  and  her  parents 
came  to  respondent’s  class  after  school  to  speak  to  her  about  this  issue.  Respondent 
explained  to  A.O.’s  parents  that  she  moved  half  the  class,  and  A.O.  had  not  been  singled  out. 

In 

12

Respondent  submitted  an  email  she  sent  to  Ms.  Ortiz  on  January  14,  2015.  In  the 

email,  respondent  wrote  that  A.O’s  parents  were  upset  that  respondent  moved  A.O.  to 
another  table.  Respondent  explained  that  she  moved  half  the  class  around  so  certain  students 
could  function  better.  Respondent  wrote  that  A.O.’s  parents  accused  her  of  favoritism 
because  respondent  did  not  move  all  the  students.  Respondent  concluded  that  she  spoke  to 
the  parents  for  half  an  hour  and  she  thought  they  were  fine  with  the  explanation.  However, 
respondent  suggested  to  them  that  they  had  the  right  to  remove  A.O.  from  her  class  if  they 
thought  respondent  was  treating  her  unfairly. 

Ms.  Ortiz  responded  by  thanking  respondent  for  the  email,  noting  that  A.O.’s  parents 

are  “quick  to  jump  the  gun,”  and  stating  that  she  would  remind  them  about  their  request  to 
place  A.O.  in  respondent’s  class  and  that  Ms.  Ortiz  thought  the  class  was  a  “perfect  fit”  for 
A.O. 

45.  |  Approximately  one  week  later,  one  of  the  playground  monitors  brought  A.O. 

to  respondent’s  class  before  school  started  because  A.O.  was  crying  and  said  she  was 
uncomfortable  being  in  respondent’s  class.  Respondent  brought  A.O.  to  her  desk  and  asked 
her  what  was  wrong.  A.O.  said  she  did  not  want  to  be  in  respondent’s  class  anymore.  At  the 
time,  A.O.  was  not  crying  but  was  “whimpering.”  Class  had  not  yet  started  and  other 
students  were  coming  into  the  classroom.  At  first,  A.O.  was  standing,  but  respondent  asked 
her  to  sit  down  next  to  respondent’s  desk  because  she  did  not  want  other  students  to  hear  the 
conversation.  Respondent  attempted  to  inquire  what  exactly  was  wrong  but  A.O.  would  only 
say  that  she  was  uncomfortable  and  continued  to  whimper.  She  told  A.O.  that  her  parents 
put  her  in  respondent’s  class  and  said,  “Don’t  you  think  your  parents  know  what  they  are 
doing?”  Respondent  had  other  students  in  the  class  respond  that  their  parents  had  put  them 
in  respondent’s  class,  as  well.  Respondent  denied  making  a  statement  that  A.O.  was  not 
GATE  material  and  never  referenced  GATE  at  all.  When  A.O.  was  whimpering,  respondent 
could  not  understand  anything  A.O.  was  saying.  She  told  A.O.  that  when  her  two-year-old 
granddaughter  does  the  same  thing,  respondent  cannot  understand  her  either.  Respondent 
told  A.O.  that  she  could  not  understand  her  and  asked  her  to  enunciate.  Respondent  never 
made  a  comment  that  A.O.  should  be  in  a  first  grade  class.  She  explained  that  another  third 
grade  class  was  taught  by  Ms.  Bjazevich,  and  since  Ms.  Bjazevich  had  been  A.O.’s  first 
grade  teacher,  there  were  not  a  lot  of  choices  for  classes  for  her  to  transfer  to  (A.O.  had  been 
transferred  to  respondent’s  class  after  being  originally  assigned  to  Ms.  Wedin  and  respondent 
believed  that  Ms.  Graves’s  class  was  at  capacity). 

Respondent  documented  the  conversation  in  an  email  she  sent  to  Ms.  Ortiz. 
Respondent  denied  telling  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  wanted  A.O.  out  of  her  class  or  requested  that 
A.O.  should  be  removed.  She  did  suggest  that  if  the  parents  were  not  satisfied,  A.O.  could 
be  removed.  Respondent  testified  that  in  her  deposition  testimony,  where  she  stated  that  she 
requested  that  A.O.  be  removed,  she  simply  meant  that  Ms.  Ortiz  could  transfer  her  if  the 
parents  were  not  satisfied.  Respondent  testified  that  she  did  not  recall  Ms.  Ortiz  telling  her 
during  the  meeting  that  she  should  be  careful  joking  with  students  and  they  do  not 
understand  sarcasm.  However,  during  the  deposition,  respondent  did  state  that  this  had 
occurred. 

13

46. 

|  Respondent  had  planned  to  meet  with  A.O.,  her  parents,  and  Ms.  Ortiz  after 
school  on  January  22,  2015.  However,  that  morning,  all  of  the  electricity  went  out  in  her 
house  and  the  electrician  told  her  he  could  come  at  4:00  p.m.  At  the  morning  recess, 
respondent  went  to  the  office  to  inform  Ms.  Ortiz  that  she  had  to  leave  before  4:00  p.m.  in 
order  to  meet  the  electrician. 

The  parent-teacher  meeting  began  soon  after  school  ended,  at  approximately  3:15 

p.m.  At  the  meeting,  A.O.  spoke  first  and  began  talking  about  the  problems  she  had  moving 
desks  and  why  she  was  upset.  On  cross-examination,  respondent  was  asked  why  at  her 
deposition  respondent  stated  she  did  not  remember  what  A.O.  talked  about.  Respondent 
testified  that  it  came  back  to  her  after  going  through  the  testimony.  Soon  after,  A.O.’s 
parents  jumped  up,  began  screaming  and  yelling,  pounded  the  table,  and  called  respondent 
names.  A.O.’s  mother  said  that  respondent  had  made  A.O.  sit  on  the  floor,  and  respondent 
explained  that  it  was  the  “orchestra  section,”  and  “the  best  seat  in  the  house.”  Respondent 
said  the  class  was  going  to  do  a  stage  show  and  had  talked  about  orchestra  seating. 
Respondent  said  A.O.  had  trouble  seeing  the  board  and  A.O.  sat  there  so  she  could  see.  Any 
student  who  had  trouble  seeing  the  board  could  go  to  the  orchestra  section  to  sit.  Respondent 
asked  A.O.’s  mother  to  have  A.O.’s  eyes  checked  because  A.O.  did  not  have  glasses  and  had 
difficulty  seeing. 

Respondent  said  that  normally  at  meetings  she  takes  notes,  but  did  not  do  so  on  this 

occasion  because  she  had  no  reason  to  take  notes.  She  said  A.O’s  parents  would  “tag-team” 
each  other  and  pound  the  table.  Respondent  never  raised  her  voice  or  asked  the  parents  to 
repeat  something  so  she  could  put  it  in  her  notes.  Respondent  did  not  look  at  her  watch 
during  the  meeting;  she  has  not  worn  a  watch  for  years.  Respondent  said  she  politely  tried  to 
excuse  herself  when  A.O.’s  father  asked  Ms.  Ortiz  if  respondent  was  leaving  the  meeting. 
Respondent  explained  that  the  electrician  was  coming  and  she  was  beyond  her  contract  time. 
Respondent  noticed  the  clock  when  she  was  walking  out  and  saw  it  was  3:50  p.m. 
Respondent  testified  she  probably  could  have  done  a  few  things  differently,  such  as  inform 
the  parents  at  the  beginning  of  the  meeting  that  she  had  to  leave  early. 

Respondent  was  shocked  about  the  parents’  behavior  and  had  never  seen  anything 

like  it  before.  She  wrote  an  email  to  Ms.  Ortiz  the  next  day  to  discuss  her  concerns  with  the 
meeting.  When  asked  why  the  e-mail  made  no  reference  to  the  parents  yelling,  screaming, 
and  pounding  the  table,  respondent  said  she  used  the  words  “irate  and  hostile”  to  describe 
their  behavior. 

The  next  day,  A.O.  came  to  respondent’s  class  before  school  started.  She  said 
students  often  go  to  her  class  to  help  out  before  school  starts,  but  if  there  are  too  many,  some 
have  to  leave.  She  told  A.O.  and  her  friends  that  they  had  to  leave  so  respondent  could  use 
the  restroom  before  school  started.  Respondent  denied  making  a  comment  that  A.O.  should 
not  be  there  in  the  morning  “under  the  circumstances,”  as  alleged  in  the  Amended  Statement 
of  Charges. 

14

Respondent  testified  that  A.O.  remained  in  her  class  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  and 

was  happy.  On  January  26,  2015,  A.O.’s  mother  came  to  the  class  and  started  screaming  at 
respondent.  Students  were  in  the  classroom  cleaning,  and  they  ran  to  her  desk  because  they 
were  scared,  so  respondent  asked  the  mother  to  leave.  Respondent  sent  Ms.  Ortiz  an  email 
about  this,  to  which  Ms.  Ortiz  responded  that  she  spoke  to  A.O.’s  mother  who  apologized  for 
speaking  to  respondent  in  front  of  other  students.  Respondent  replied  to  Ms.  Ortiz’s  email, 
stating  she  was  being  harassed  on a  daily  basis,  felt  A.O.  should  be  transferred  to  another 
class,  and  asked  Ms.  Ortiz  to  arrange  this  immediately. 

Like  with  A.V.,  respondent  submitted  a  writing  assignment  A.O.  completed  on 

January  28,  2015.  Again,  respondent  said  the  assignment  was  for  the  students  to  write  an 
opinion  about  a  topic  that  they  chose.  The  students  could  choose  whatever  they  wanted  to 
write  about.  Like  A.V.,  A.O.  wrote  about  the  third  grade.  She  wrote  that  although  third 
grade  was  hard,  “it  1s  the  best.” 

47. 

In  rebuttal  testimony,  Ms.  Ortiz  again  testified  that  at  no  time  did  A.O.’s 

parents  yell,  pound  the  table,  or  use  profanity  during  the  meeting. 

LETTER  OF  REPRIMAND 

48. 

On  January  28,  2015,  Ms.  Ortiz  gave  respondent  a  letter  of  concern  outlining 
respondent’s  interactions  with  A.O.  and  A.V.  Ms.  Ortiz  directed  respondent  to  refrain  from 
the  use  of  inappropriate  comments  and  sarcastic  language,  which  create  a  climate  of 
intimidation  and  negatively  impact  her  classroom.  Ms.  Ortiz  wrote  that  she  expected  all 
teachers  to  provide  parents  with  the  utmost  respect. 

49. 

‘Two  days  later,  Ms.  Elzig  issued  respondent  a  formal  letter  of  reprimand.  The 

letter  outlined  Ms.  Elzig’s  concerns  regarding  respondent.  For  the  period  at  issue  in  these 
proceedings,  the  letter  referenced  the  2013  grade  level  meeting  with  Ms.  Lara;  respondent’s 
failure  to  participate  in  future  grade  level  meetings;  her  refusal  to  bring  materials  to  the  ELD 
staff  development  meeting;  her  refusal  to  complete  a  survey;  her  interaction  with  Ms. 
Weden;  the  pizza  party  in  which  her  third  grade  class  could  not  participate;  and  the 
interactions  with  A.O.,  A.V.,  and  their  parents.  Ms.  Elzig  directed  respondent  to  treat  others 
with  courtesy,  respect,  and  professionalism;  participate  in  scheduled  meetings;  be 
professional  in  dealing  with  parents;  refrain  from  making  inappropriate  comments  and  using 
sarcastic  language;  and  deal  with  the  district  honestly.  Ms.  Elzig  concluded  that  failure  to 
follow  these  directives  or  make  necessary  improvements  could  result  in  disciplinary  action. 
She  also  warned  respondent  not  to  threaten,  intimidate,  retaliate  against,  or  otherwise 
confront  any  person  about  the  contents  of  the  letter  of  reprimand. 
respondent  an  opportunity  to  provide  a  written  response,  which  she  declined. 

The  letter  provided 

2015-2016  School  Year 

50. 

Eric  Loder  is  currently  the  lead  night  custodian  at  a  junior  high  school  in  the 
district.  During  the  2015-2016  school-year,  he  was  a  custodian  at  Granite  Hill.  Mr.  Loder 

15

testified  about  an  interaction  he  had  with  respondent  after  spring  break.  Normally  during 
spring  break,  the  custodial  staff  goes  through  and  details  the  classrooms.  However,  in  2016, 
three  classrooms  received  new  carpet  so  he  had  to  remove  all  the  furniture  from  those 
classrooms.  Mr.  Loder  explained  that  because  he  was  the  only  custodian  working  on  the 
project,  he  got  behind  on  the  cleaning  of  the  other  classrooms.  Consequently,  none  of  the 
classrooms  got  vacuumed  over  spring  break.  As  he  saw  the  various  teachers,  he  apologized 
and  explained  that  he  would  get  caught  up.  On  April  4,  2016,  after  school  had  ended,  Ms. 
Loder  went  into  respondent’s  classroom  to  empty  the  trash.  He  saw  respondent  inside  with  a 
parent  and  two  students.  Respondent  came  at  Mr.  Loder  pointing  at  him  and  demanding  to 
know  why  her  room  had  not  been  vacuumed.  Mr.  Loder  tried  to  explain,  but  respondent 
made  a  comment  about  her  being  smart  enough  to  know  to  vacuum  when  cleaning  the  room. 
Respondent  said  she  would  “not  get  in  Mr.  Loder’s  face,”  but  would  “get  in  Juan’s  face,” 
who  was  the  head  custodian.  Mr.  Loder  said  he  was  put-off  by  respondent’s  demeanor  and 
tone  of  voice.  Instead  of  engaging  respondent,  he  left  the  classroom  and  immediately 
reported  the  incident  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  who  asked  him  to  write  a  statement. 

51. 

According  to  the  statement  Mr.  Loder  submitted  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  Mr.  Loder  went 
to  respondent’s  class  to  empty  the  trash  when  respondent  said,  “I’m  pissed,”  in  an  aggressive 
tone,  and  demanded  to  know  why  her  room  had  not  been  vacuumed.  Mr.  Loder  attempted  to 
explain  why,  and  she  commented  that  she  did  not  get  new  carpet  in  her  room.  Mr.  Loder 
wrote  that  respondent  was  very  condescending  and  said,  “If  you  guys  had  any  common 
sense,  you’d  know  to  vacuum  when  you  clean,”  and  “I’ve  been  cleaning  for  many  years  and 
I’m  smarter  than  that.”,  When  Mr.  Loder  tried  to  sympathize  with  her  situation,  her  tone  did 
not  change  and  she  said,  “I’m  not  going  to  get  in  your  face  like  I  will  Juan’s.”  Mr.  Loder 
then  left  the  room. 

52. 

Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  Mr.  Loder  approached  her  that  afternoon  to  complain 
about  respondent’s  conduct.  She  asked  him  to  write  a  statement,  which  he  did  that  evening. 
Ms.  Ortiz  approached  respondent  in  the  office  during  her  lunch  period  on  April  15,  2016. 
Ms.  Ortiz  asked  respondent  if  “she  had  a  minute.”  Respondent  replied  curtly  that  she  had 
“one  minute.”  Ms.  Ortiz  showed  respondent  Mr.  Loder’s  statement,  to  which  respondent 
stated,  “This  is  bullshit.”  Respondent  made  no  other  response.  Ms.  Ortiz  told  respondent  to 
review  the  statement  and  provide  a  written  response  so  that  there  could  be  a  meeting  about 
the  incident. 

53. 

On  May  2,  2016,  Ms.  Ortiz  emailed  respondent  and  stated  that  she  has  had 
approximately  two-and-a-half  weeks  to  submit  a  response,  which  she  had  not.  Ms.  Ortiz 
attached  a  letter  of  concern  stating  that  respondent’s  interaction  with  Mr.  Loder  was 
unprofessional,  as  was  her  reaction  when  Ms.  Ortiz  asked  to  speak  to  her  during  lunch.  The 
letter  of  concern  contained  several  directives,  including  using  an  appropriate  and  professional 
tone  and  avoiding  sarcastic  and  hostile  remarks. 

54. 

Several  days  later,  respondent  requested  a  meeting  with  Ms.  Ortiz  that  was 

held  on  May  17,  2016.  Respondent  arrived  at  the  meeting  with  a  union  representative,  Ms. 
Snow,  although  Ms.  Ortiz  had  not  been  notified  a  union  representative  would  be  coming. 

16

During  the  meeting,  only  Ms.  Snow  spoke.  During  the  meeting,  respondent  was  standoffish, 
did  not  speak,  and  only  took  notes.  Ms.  Ortiz  said  respondent  would  “smirk”  and  roll  her 
eyes  when  Ms.  Ortiz  spoke.  Ms.  Snow  provided  Ms.  Ortiz  two  letters,  one  from  a  parent  and 
the  other  from  a  student,  who  were  in  the  classroom  during  the  interaction  between  Mr. 
Loder  and  respondent.  Ms.  Snow  requested  that  Ms.  Ortiz  shred  the  letter  of  concern 
because  she  was  not  allowed  to  put  written  directives  in  respondent’s  file.  Ms.  Ortiz  refused 
to  shred  the  letter.  Ms.  Ortiz  said  she  never  requested  the  parents  or  the  student  write  a  letter 
about  the  confrontation. 

The  letter  from  the  parent  dated  May  7,  2016,  stated  that  she  was  in  respondent’s 

classroom  after  school  when  the  janitor  (Mr.  Loder)  came  in  and  began  to  take  out  the  trash. 
Respondent  then  asked  Mr.  Loder  why  the  floor  was  not  done.  Mr.  Loder  responded  that 
five  rooms  had  new  carpet  and  vacuuming  “wasn’t  their  first  ‘priority.’  He  then  said  he  at 
least  dusted  all  the  classrooms.  Respondent  then  said  she  did  not  get  new  carpet  and 
questioned  why  her  room  wasn’t  vacuumed.  The  janitor  said  the  vacuum  was  too  much  to 
carry.  The  parent  felt  Mr.  Loder  was  rude.  The  parent  wrote  that  respondent  has  “a  special 
way  of  talking”  but  she  did  not  feel  that  respondent  talked  down  to  Mr.  Loder  or  said  any  bad 
words  to  him.  The  parent  thought  Mr.  Loder  should  have  waited  before  coming  into  the 
classroom. 

A  letter  from  student  M.D.  stated  that  she  was  in  the  classroom  having  a  meeting  with 

respondent  and  her  mother,  when  the  janitor  came  in  and  started  talking  about  how  none  of 
the  rooms  were  cleaned.  She  wrote,  “Everything  seemed  nice  and  calm  &  nobody  said  any 
curse  words.” 

55. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  was  in  her  classroom  meeting  with  a  parent  and 
her  two  children  when  Mr.  Loder  came  in  to  empty  the  trash.  Respondent  asked  him  if  the 
classrooms  had  been  cleaned  during  spring  break.  Mr.  Loder  began  “screaming  and  yelling” 
about  why  they  were  not  cleaned  because  new  carpet  was  installed  and  there  had  been  a 
district  meeting  so  he  had  not  cleaned  any  of  the  rooms.  Respondent  said  she  had  previously 
gotten  along  with  Mr.  Loder  quite  well.  She  was  seated  at  her  desk  the  entire  time,  but  “he 
got  to  screaming  and  yelling,”  which  caused  the  parent  to  become  scared  and  put  her  arms 
around  her  children.  After  Mr.  Loder  left,  the  four  left  the  classroom  because  they  were 
afraid  Mr.  Loder  would  return.  Respondent  said  she  did  not  report  Mr.  Loder’s  behavior  to 
anyone  because  it  was  the  first  and  only  incident;  she  would  have  reported  it  had  Mr.  Loder’s 
behavior  been  repetitive. 

56. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  was  in  the  office  the  next  day  talking  to  the 

secretaries  when  Ms.  Ortiz  approached  her  and  asked  her  if  she  had  a  minute.  Respondent 
said,  “Just  a  minute,”  and  Ms.  Ortiz  showed  her  the  statement  written  by  Mr.  Loder. 
Respondent  said  she  did  not  realize  the  incident  was  that  important,  and  he  was  the  one  who 
was  screaming  and  yelling.  When  asked  why  respondent  did  not  provide  a  written  response 
to  the  letter,  respondent  said  she  did  not  think  it  was  that  important,  and  she  is  “not  one  to 
report  things.” 

17

57. 

After  respondent  received  the  letter  of  concern  from  Ms.  Ortiz  about  the 

incident,  she  asked  to  meet  with  Ms.  Ortiz.  She  wanted  Ms.  Snow,  the  union  representative, 
to  accompany  her.  At  the  meeting,  she  gave  Ms.  Ortiz  the  letters  written  by  the  parent  and 
the  child  who  observed  the  encounter  with  Mr.  Loder.  Ms.  Snow  spoke  on  respondent’s 
behalf  at  the  meeting.  At  the  end  of  the  meeting,  Ms.  Ortiz  and  Ms.  Snow  agreed  to  “squash 
the  whole  thing.”  Respondent  denied  smirking  at  Ms.  Ortiz  or  rolling  her  eyes.  She  did  not 
think  she  did  anything  intimidating. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  did  not  ask  the  parent  or  the  student  to  write  a  letter 

outlining  what  had  occurred.  Respondent  said  they  volunteered  to  write  the  letter  the  same 
day.  When  it  was  pointed  out  to  respondent  that  the  letters  were  dated  May  7,  2016,  a  month 
after  the  incident  and  several  days  after  respondent  received  a  letter  of  concern  from  Ms. 
Ortiz,  respondent  said  she  did  not  know  why  they  wrote  the  letters  when  they  did. 

58. 

In  rebuttal  testimony,  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  she  never  agreed  to  shred  her 

letter  of  concern  or  quash  the  incident.  Ms.  Ortiz  testified  that  respondent  never  reported  to 
her  the  allegation  that  Mr.  Loder  had  acted  in  a  manner  that  scared  the  parent  and  students 
who  were  in  the  classroom  during  that  time. 

59. 

On  May  24,  2016,  Ms.  Elzig  issued  respondent  a  letter  of  reprimand.  Ms. 

Elzig  wrote  that  respondent  was  unprofessional  in  her  interactions  with  the  custodian  in  front 
of  a  parent  and  two  children.  Respondent  was  unprofessional  with  Ms.  Ortiz  when  she  asked 
to  speak  to  her  about  the  incident,  when  respondent  responded,  “I  will  only  give  you  one 
minute.”  Respondent  then  looked  at  the  statement  and  said,  “This  is  bullshit.”  Ms.  Elzig 
alleged  that  respondent  approached  the  parent  and  students  and  told  them  Ms.  Ortiz  wanted 
them  to  write  letters  about  the  incident.  This  was  untrue  and  respondent  inappropriately 
involved  them  in  her  employment  issues.  Finally,  respondent  was  unprofessional  at  the 
meeting  with  Ms.  Ortiz,  when  she  rolled  her  eyes  and  was  disrespectful.  Like  the  previous 
letter  of  reprimand,  Ms.  Ortiz  directed  respondent  to  be  professional  in  her  interactions. 
Although  respondent  wrote  on  the  letter  of  reprimand  that  a  rebuttal  would  be  forthcoming, 
none  was  submitted.’ 

60. 

2015-2016  was  the  last  school-year  Ms.  Ortiz  was  principal  at  Granite  Hill. 

She  testified  that  she  has  concerns  about  respondent’s  ability  to  be  professional.  She 
believed  respondent  intimidated  fellow  staff  and  students  alike.  She  had  no  confidence  in 
respondent’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  teacher. 

  

’  The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  during  the  2015-2016  school-year, 

respondent  refused  to  allow  a  female  student,  C.G.,  to  use  the  restroom  during  class.  This 
allegation  was  not  contained  in  the  letter  of  reprimand.  Although  there  was  some  testimony 
during  the  hearing  about  respondent’s  practice  for  letting  students  use  the  restroom,  there 
was  insufficient  evidence  offered  at  this  hearing  to  substantiate  this  allegation. 

18

2016-2017  School  Year 

ALLEGATIONS  REGARDING  N.J. 

61. 

|  Denise  Hernandez  is  the  current  principal  at  Granite  Hill,  which  she  began  at 
the  beginning  of  the  2016-2017  school-year.  N.J.  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  third  grade 
class  that  year.  N.J.’s  mother  made  a  number  of  complaints  to  Ms.  Hernandez  regarding  her 
daughter’s  treatment  by  respondent,  which  were  alleged  in  the  Amended  Statement  of 
Charges.  However,  because  neither  N.J.  nor  her  mother  testified  at  the  hearing,  most  of  their 
statements  constituted  inadmissible  hearsay  under  Government  Code  section  11513, 
subdivision  (d),  and  were  insufficient  to  support  a  finding.  One  of  the  allegations  was  related 
to  the  way  that  N.J.  wore  her  hair  and  a  comment  respondent  made  about  her  barrettes  Ms. 
Hernandez  testified  that  N.J.  was  a  “fashionista”  and  would  wear  her  hair  in  many  different 
styles. 

62. 

Elisa  Ortega  (formerly  Elisa  Aguilar)  is  a  clerk/typist  at  Granite  Hill.  Ms. 

Ortega  testified  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  2016-2017  school-year,  N.J.  was  absent  for  an 
extended  period  of  time.  N.J.’s  mother  came  to  the  office,  provided  a  doctor’s  note,  and 
requested  her  daughter’s  homework  or  make-up  work.  She  told  Ms.  Ortega  that  N.J.  had 
been  in  the  hospital.  Ms.  Ortega  spoke  to  respondent  about  N.J.  and  told  respondent  that  her 
mother  had  requested  N.J.’s  homework  because  she  was  going  to  be  in  the  hospital  for  a  few 
days.  Respondent  questioned  how  N.J.  could  make  up  work  if  she  was  in  the  hospital.  Ms. 
Ortega  observed  that  N.J.  would  often  wear  barrettes  in  her  hair. 

63. 

On  October  19,  2016,  Ms.  Elzig  sent  respondent  a  memorandum  entitled 

“Summary  of  Allegations.”  The  allegations  related  to  N.J.,  and  a  meeting  was  held  that  day 
with  Ms.  Elzig,  Ms.  Hernandez,  and  Daniel  Brooks,  the  district’s  director  of  personnel. 
During  the  meeting,  respondent  denied  knowing  that  N.J.  had  been  in  the  hospital  and  denied 
talking  to  anyone  in  the  office  about  make-up  work.  She  also  denied  knowing  that  N.J.  wore 
barrettes  in  her  hair.  All  three  of  the  district  administrators  believed  that  these  statements  by 
respondent  were  misrepresentations,  based  on  the  conversations  that  Ms.  Ortega  had  with 
respondent,  and  the  fact  that  it  was  common  knowledge  that  N.J.  wore  barrettes.  Ms. 
Hernandez  removed  N.J.  from  respondent’s  class  on  October  4,  2016. 

64. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  never  spoke  to  N.J.’s  mother  about  N.J.’s 

absence.  Respondent  submitted  a  September  15,  2016,  letter  from  N.J.’s  mother  requesting 
her  daughter’s  absences  be  excused  for  sickness.  Respondent  also  received  a  note  from 
N.J.’s  doctor  stating  that  respondent  would  be  out  for  several  days  in  September. 
Respondent  testified  that  she  did  have  a  conversation  with  Ms.  Ortega  about  N.J.  being 
absent,  but  Ms.  Ortega  never  told  respondent  that  N.J.  had  been  in  the  hospital.  Respondent 
did  not  tell  Ms.  Ortega  that  N.J.  could  not  make  up  work,  and  she  did  not  prevent  N.J.  from 
turning-in  any  make-up  work,  as  alleged  in  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges. 

19

Ms.  HERNANDEZ’S  CLASSROOM  OBSERVATIONS 

65. 

Ms.  Hernandez  conducted  three  classroom  observations  of  respondent’s  class. 

The  first  observation  was  on  November  1,  2016.  Respondent  would  repeatedly  interrupt 
students  to  tell  them  to  speak  louder.  Ms.  Hernandez  said  that  she  was  close  to  respondent 
and  felt  the  students  had  been  speaking  at  an  appropriate  volume.  Respondent  would  also 
call  out  students  for  making  incorrect  answers  in  a  negative  or  sarcastic  manner.  Ms. 
Hernandez  felt  that  respondent  did  not  create  an  emotionally  safe  environment.  Ms. 
Hernandez  provided  respondent  an  evaluation  form  indicating  that  she  “needs  improvement” 
in  four  separate  categories  and  “meets  expectations”  in  one  category.  Ms.  Hernandez 
discussed  the  evaluation  with  respondent,  who  just  nodded  her  head  and  did  not  say  anything 
about  what  was  being  discussed. 

66. 

Ms.  Hernandez  conducted  a  second  observation  on  December  2,  2016. 

Respondent  was  teaching  an  ELD  lesson.  At  the  beginning  of  the  lesson,  respondent  had 
each  student  stand  up  and  say  what  level  of  English  learner  he  or  she  was.  Each  student  then 
told  the  class  what  level  he  or  she  was.  Ms.  Hernandez  did  not  think  it  was  appropriate  to 
make  students  share  with  the  class  what  their  proficiency  level  was  because  it  could  make 
students  who  were  less  proficient  feel  less  competent.  Ms.  Hernandez  spoke  to  respondent 
about  this,  and  respondent  said  that  she  was  doing  what  the  district  taught  her  to  do.  Ms. 
Hernandez  provided  respondent  an  evaluation  listing  that  she  needed  improvement  in  two 
categories  and  met  expectations  in  three  categories. 

67. 

Ms.  Hernandez  attempted  to  schedule  a  third  observation  with  respondent  on 

January  20,  2017,  at  1:15  p.m.,  and  sent  her  an  email  appointment  request  for  this  time. 
Respondent  declined  the  appointment  request  and  wrote  to  Ms.  Hernandez  that  lunch  ended 
at  1:15  p.m.,  and  she  would  not  want  to  shorten  the  students’  lunch.  She  requested  that  Ms. 
Hernandez  schedule  the  observation  for  five  minutes  later.  Ms.  Hernandez  responded  that 
she  understood  that  it  would  take  a  few  minutes  to  bring  the  kids  in  from  lunch,  but  she 
would  be  in  respondent’s  room  at  1:15  p.m.  and  the  observation  would  begin  once  the  kids 
were  settled.  Ms.  Hernandez  testified  that  it  was  important  for  her  to  observe  how 
respondent  transitioned  her  class  from  lunch.  Ms.  Hernandez  admitted  that  at  a  previous 
observation,  she  started  the  observation  five  minutes  after  lunch  ended.  The  third 
observation  ultimately  occurred  on  January  20,  2017.  Ms.  Hernandez  rated  respondent  as 
meeting  expectations  for  each  category. 

68. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  met  with  Ms.  Hernandez  after  the  first 

observation.  Respondent  did  not  say  anything  in  response  to  Ms.  Hernandez’s  comments 
because  they  were  Ms.  Hernandez’s  observations  and  respondent  did  not  want  to  appear 
pushy  or  say  something  Ms.  Hernandez  might  misconstrue.  After  the  second  observation  of 
the  ELD  lesson,  Ms.  Hernandez  thought  it  was  demeaning  to  the  students  to  have  them  stand 
up  and  announce  their  proficiency  levels.  Respondent  thought  that  Ms.  Hernandez  made  a 
valid  point,  and  from  then  on  changed  the  way  she  did  things.  As  for  the  final  observation, 
respondent  did  not  refuse  the  observation  as  alleged.  Instead,  she  said  the  observation  time 
was  right  when  the  students  came  back  from  lunch,  and  she  thought  it  might  start  at 

20

1:20  p.m.,  instead.  Respondent  noted  that  Ms.  Hernandez’s  first  observation  started  at  1:20 
p.m.,  so  she  assumed  Ms.  Hernandez  wanted  this  observation  to  start  at  1:20  p.m.,  as  well. 

NOTICE  OF  UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

69. 

On  January  9,  2017,  Ms.  Elzig  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44938.  The  notice  outlined  all 
of  the  conduct  previously  addressed  in  the  letters  of  reprimand,  with  the  addition  of  the 
allegations  related  to  student  N.J.  Respondent  declined  to  provide  a  written  response.  At  a 
meeting  with  Ms.  Elzig  and  Ms.  Hernandez,  Ms.  Elzig  recommended  respondent  attend  a 
training  session  provided  by  the  Riverside  County  Office  of  Education  about  how  to  support 
students  with  social  and  emotional  needs.  Respondent  attended  this  training.  Ms.  Elzig  also 
referred  respondent  for  an  anger  management  program  offered  by  the  district’s  employee 
assistance  program.  Ms.  Elzig  provided  respondent  release  time  for  the  program  and  told  her 
what  code  to  use  for  her  timecard.  Respondent  did  not  attend  this  program  as  instructed. 

70. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  reviewed  the  plan  of  assistance  and  had  no 
questions  about  it.  She  denied  that  Ms.  Elzig  gave  her  a  flyer  regarding  the  employee 
assistance  program  and  said  Ms.  Elzig  never  told  her  how  to  record  her  absences.  She  did 
not  attend  any  employee  assistance  program  sessions  because  she  assumed  someone  would 
contact  her.  She  attended  training  on  classroom  management  at  California  State  University, 
Fullerton.  Respondent  said  she  had  to  register  for  the  class  but  did  not  retain  any 
documentation  corroborating  her  attendance. 

71. 

Ms.  Elzig  testified  in  rebuttal  that  at  the  meeting  with  respondent  she  provided 

respondent  a  tri-fold  brochure  that  included  the  contact  information  for  the  employee 
assistance  program.  Ms.  Elzig  directed  respondent  to  make  arrangements  to  attend  and  told 
her  how  to  arrange  for  a  substitute  teacher  to  cover  her  absence. 

ALLEGATIONS  RELATED  TO  STUDENT  E.B. 

72. 

During  the  2016-2017  school-year,  E.B.  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  third 

grade  class.  E.B.’s  aunt  and  mother  both  testified  at  the  hearing  with  the  assistance  of  a 
court-certified  Spanish  language  interpreter.  E.B.’s  aunt  volunteered  at  a  Valentine’s  Day 
party  held  in  respondent’s  class.  When  she  was  leaving  the  party,  respondent  told  her  that 
E.B.  was  not  learning  and  was  a  “burro,”  which  she  thought  was  offensive. * 

73. 

E.B.’s  mother  testified  that  she  did  not  have  much  contact  with  respondent, 

except  for  the  first  day  of  school.  One  day  she  took  E.B.  to  the  doctor’s  office  for  a  physical 
exam.  E.B.  told  her  that  he  did  not  want  to  return  to  class  because  respondent  was  ripping 
apart  his  homework.  The  next  day,  E.B.  came  home  crying  and  reported  that  respondent 
would  not  let  him  work  in  the  cafeteria,  for  which  he  was  scheduled  to  work.  E.B.’s  mother 
went  to  Ms.  Hernandez  in  order  to  get  E.B.  removed  from  respondent’s  class. 

  

*  The  interpreter  translated  the  term  to  mean  a  “dunce.” 

21

74. 

E.B.  is  10  years  old  and  had  respondent  last  year  for  third  grade.  He  testified 

that  respondent  would  rip  his  homework  apart  and  would  sometimes  yell  in  class.  He  said  he 
sometimes  cried  when  he  got  home.  He  did  not  know  why  respondent  would  rip  up  his 
homework.  After  his  doctor’s  appointment,  he  was  afraid  to  go  back  to  school  because  he 
feared  respondent  would  not  let  him  return  if  she  thought  he  was  sick,  which  he  had  not 
been.  He  felt  that  he  was  punished  the  next  day  because  respondent  did  not  let  him  work  the 
cafeteria  duty,  which  he  was  assigned. 

75. 

K.G.1is  11  years  old  and  in  fifth  grade  and  testified  at  the  hearing.  She  also 

had  respondent  as  a  third  grade  teacher  and  is  E.B.’s  cousin.  Last  year,  K.G.  and  other  older 
students  would  sometimes  go  to  respondent’s  class  during  lunch  to  help  clean  or  set  things 
up.  One  day  she  was  in  respondent’s  classroom  when  respondent  told  K.G.  that  E.B.  never 
did  his  homework.  K.G.  thought  E.B.  was  there  and  heard  this.  K.G.  felt  sad  for  E.B.  and 
told  E.B.’s  mother  about  the  incident. 

76. 

On  March  3,  2017,  E.B.’s  mother  and  aunt  met  with  Ms.  Hernandez  and 

requested  that  E.B.  be  moved  to  another  third  grade  class.  They  described  why  E.B.  did  not 
want  to  go  to  class  and  related  the  comment  respondent  made  about  E.B.  being  “un  muy 
burro.”  Ms.  Hernandez  emailed  the  district’s  director  of  personnel,  Daniel  Brooks,  on  March 
6,  2017,  and  summarized  the  complaint  made  by  E.B.’s  mother  and  aunt.  They  reported  that 
E.B.  did  not  want  to  return  to  school  after  he  had  a  physical  exam  because  he  was  afraid 
respondent  would  not  let  him  back  in  if  she  thought  he  was  sick  and  would  not  believe  that 
he  just  had  a  physical.  They  felt  respondent  was  causing  E.B.  stress  and  anxiety. 

77. 

On  April  11,2017,  Ms.  Hernandez  issued  respondent  a  Letter  of  Concern 

related  to  her  interactions  involving  E.B.  Ms.  Hernandez  directed  respondent  to  refrain  from 
disparaging  students,  refrain  from  making  derogatory  comments,  treat  students  in  a  nurturing 
and  respectful  manner,  refrain  from  acting  in  anger  or  frustration,  and  conduct  herself  in  a 
professional  manner.  Respondent  did  not  submit  a  written  response. 

78. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  had  met  E.B.’s  aunt  a  few  times,  the  first  being  at 

Back  to  School  Night.  Respondent  denied  having  any  conversation  with  E.B.’s  aunt  at  the 
Valentine’s  Day  party  held  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  said  she  does  not  speak  Spanish 
and  never  used  the  term  “burro”  because  she  does  not  know  what  it  means.  The  first  time 
she  heard  of  1t  was  when  she  saw  it  in  Ms.  Hernandez’s  letter  of  concern. 

Respondent  did  have  discussions  with  her  class  about  coming  to  school  sick  after 

several  students  had  to  be  sent  home.  She  explained  to  them  that  if  they  were  sick  they 
should  stay  home.  Respondent  never  told  E.B.  that  he  could  not  return  to  class  after  going  to 
a  doctor’s  appointment.  She  explained  that  cafeteria  duty  was  a  privilege  that  many  students 
volunteered  to  do.  They  went  to  the  cafeteria  a  half-hour  before  lunch  and  would  volunteer 
during  their  lunch  hour.  Ifa  student  is  absent,  respondent  would  send  a  substitute  student. 
Respondent  did  not  know  E.B.  was  upset  about  not  being  able  to  work  in  the  cafeteria,  and 
he  never  raised  any  issues  with  her  about  it. 

22

E.B.’s  cousin,  K.G.,  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  class  the  previous  year.  She  would 

come  into  respondent’s  classroom  regularly  during  lunches  and  recesses.  Sometimes  K.G. 
would  check  on  E.B.  She  found  out  that  E.B.  was  hiding  his  homework  and  not  taking  it 
home.  Respondent  denied  ever  ripping  up  E.B.’s  homework.  She  said  that  E.B.  had  very 
poor  penmanship  and  his  homework  was  a  “hot  mess.”  Respondent  would  have  E.B.  re- 
write  his  work.  After  he  rewrote  his  work  she  would  have  him  throw  away  his  previous 
version.  Respondent  denied  ever  making  any  comments  to  K.G.  about  E.B. 

ALLEGATIONS  RELATED  TO  STUDENT  L.L. 

79. 

L.L.  was  in  respondent’s  third  grade  class  during  the  2016-2017  school-year, 

until  he  was  transferred  to  Ms.  Weden’s  third  grade  class  the  last  couple  weeks  of  the  school- 
year.  L.L.’s  mother  testified  that  two  months  into  the  school-year,  L.L.  was  diagnosed  with 
Tourette  ’s  syndrome  (Tourette’s).  As  a  result,  he  has  tics  making  his  body  twitch  and  he 
makes  certain  vocal  noises  when  he  is  nervous.  L.L.’s  mother  testified  that  in  the  beginning, 
respondent  was  a  great  teacher.  However,  toward  the  end  of  the  school-year,  L.L.  would 
frequently  come  home  crying.  When  he  started  developing  tics,  she  informed  respondent  to 
ignore  the  tics  and  let  him  relax. 

On  April  18,  2017,  she  sent  respondent  an  email  stating  that  L.L.  was  diagnosed  with 

Tourette’s  and  asked  that  respondent  continue  to  ignore  it  or  1t  would  only  make  it  worse. 
She  also  asked  that  L.L.’s  classmates  ignore  it  and  not  make  it  a  big  deal.  She  included a list 
of  “10  Things  Teachers  Can  Do  for  Students  with  Tourette  syndrome.” 

L.L.  reported  to  his  mother  that  respondent  announced  in  front  of  the  class  that  L.L. 
had  Tourette’s  and  they  should  ignore  his  tics.  Although  she  wanted  respondent  to  address 
the  issue  with  the  class,  she  did  not  think  it  was  appropriate  to  make  an  announcement  as  it 
embarrassed  L.L. 

80. 

On  April  20,  2017,  she  sent  respondent  another  email  asking  to  see  how  L.L. 
was  doing  and  whether  he  twitched  as  much  as  the  other  days.  She  wrote  that  he  is  on  some 
medication  and  would  like  to  know  if  it  1s  effective.  She  also  asked  how  the  seating 
arrangement  was  working  and  whether  he  was  paying  more  attention.  She  concluded  by 
asking  for  an  update  on  L,L.’s  behavior. 

The  next  day,  respondent  emailed  L.L.’s  mother  stating  that  1t  appeared  the  twitching 

was  the  same.  She  wrote,  “As  requested,  he  still  sits  in  at  a  single  desk  slightly  away  from 
other  students.  He  now  shouts  across  the  room  to  talk  with  others  and  sends  notes  in  lieu  of 
having  proximity.  In  one  of  his  notes  he  wrote  on  4/18/17,  he  drew a  distorted  picture  of  a 
fellow  female  student  and  writes  that  she  is  ugly.  Not  acceptable!!”  Regarding  L.L.’s 
learning  skills,  respondent  wrote  that  she  would  be  sending  all  parents  some  of  the  students’ 
tests  to  evaluate.  Finally,  she  stated  that  perhaps  he  had  not  been  on  medication  long  enough 
to  make  a  difference  in  his  behavior  or  academics. 

23

L.L.’s  mother  responded  that  she  would  address  the  problem,  but  also  wanted  to 

address  that  someone  threw  L.L.’s  glasses  yesterday  and  wanted  to  know  if  respondent  was 
aware.  According  to  L.L.,  respondent  told  him  that  if  he  had  his  glasses  on  it  would  not  have 
happened.  She  concluded  by  saying  that  it  might  be  best  to  move  L.L.  to  another  class  more 
appropriate  for  his  condition. 

Respondent  then  emailed  L.L.’s  mother  stating  that  L.L.  wanted  to  share  with  her 
what  the  doctor  said  about  what  might  have  caused  his  condition.  She  then  listed  several 
moves  the  family  had  made  to  different  houses,  the  houses  being  crowded,  having  to  live  in  a 
motel  room,  moving  to  a  trailer,  and  then  moving  to  an  apartment.  Respondent  wrote  that 
L.L.  was  insistent  on  telling  her  this  and  perhaps  it  was  bothering  him  “to  the  point  that  it 
may  be  worth  you  pursuing  this  avenue  of  thought  and  how  it  may  be  contributing  to  some  of 
his  condition.” 

L.L.’s  mother  testified  that  the  family  house  had  burned  down  in a  fire  and  they  were 

forced  to  live  in  a  number  of  different  locations  until  repairs  were  made.  There  reached  a 
point  where  L.L.  would  come  home  crying  every  day  and  complain  about  being  made  fun  of 
and  not  wanting  to  go  to  school.  He  made  the  comment  that  he  did  not  want  to  live  anymore 
if  he  had  Tourette’s  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  She  spoke  to  Ms.  Hernandez  and  requested  L.L. 
be  moved  to  another  class,  which  occurred.  After  he  changed  classes,  his  vocal  tics  stopped 
and  his  body  tics  improved.  Ms.  Lara  is  now  his  fourth  grade  teacher.  He  is  very 
comfortable  in  the  class,  nobody  makes  fun  of  him,  and  his  tics  have  almost  stopped.’ 

81. 

 L.L.1is  10  years  old  and  testified  at  the  hearing.  At  the  beginning  of  the 

school-year  he  liked  respondent.  However,  something  changed  and  he  became  scared  that 
respondent  would  yell  at  him  in  class.  He  would  sometimes  cry  and  was  afraid  to  go  to  class. 
He  did  not  like  that  respondent  told  the  whole  class  that  he  had  Tourette’s  and  felt  mad  and 
embarrassed.  L.L.  only  told  respondent  that  he  had  to  move  homes  once.  He  denied  telling 
respondent  that  the  doctor  said  his  Tourette’s  was  caused  by  the  multiple  family  moves. 

82. 

Ms.  Hernandez  testified  that  she  did  not  feel  the  email  communication 

between  respondent  and  L.L.’s  mother  reflected  any  concern  by  respondent  or  demonstrate 
patience  in  dealing  with  L.L.  This  was  especially  true  for  the  email  where  respondent 
suggested  that  the  family  moves  were  the  cause  of  his  problems.  Overall,  Ms.  Hernandez  did 
not  feel  that  respondent  was  treating  L.L.  appropriately  and  that  she  was  causing  him  stress. 
As  aresult,  she  removed  L.L.  from  respondent’s  class  on  April  24,  2017. 

83. 

Respondent  testified  that  L.L  was  likeable,  but  he  was  new  to  Granite  Hill,  and 

he  started  to  have  problems  the  first  couple  weeks  of  school.  He  began  making  involuntary 
sounds,  kicking  his  desk,  and  hopping  out  of  his  seat.  Respondent  spoke  to  L.L.’s  mother 
who  reported  seeing  the  same  behaviors  at  home.  Respondent  contacted  the  school  nurse  to 
assist  her  with  some  of  the  issues.  She  also  spoke  to  L.L.’s  mother  and  suggested  she  take 
him  to  a  doctor,  which  she  did.  Respondent  never  heard  back  from  L.L.’s  mother  so  she 

  

”  Ms.  Lara  confirmed  this  statement  during  her  testimony. 

24

asked  the  nurse  to  follow-up.  Respondent  testified  that  she  moved  L.L.  to  sit  by  himself  at 
his  mother’s  suggestion.  L.L.’s  parents  thought  respondent  had  moved  him  into  time-out, 
but  she  explained  to  them  that  she  moved  him  at  L.L.’s  mother’s  suggestion.  Respondent 
denied  telling  the  class  that  L.L.  had  Tourette’s.  She  told  the  class  that  L.L.  was  not  in 
trouble  because  he  was  sitting  in  “Siberia,”  which  was  what  she  referred  to  as  where  L.L.  sat 
because  it  was  off  by  itself  where  students  would  sit  when  in  trouble.  She  explained  to  the 
class  that  they  needed  to  have  patience  with  L.L.  After  that,  L.L  was  fine  and  did  not  have 
any  problems  in  the  class.  Respondent  never  noticed  any  of  the  students  making  fun  of  L.L. 
She  denied  ever  saying  anything  to  him  that  was  demeaning  or  mean.  L.L.  told  respondent 
that  his  doctor  had  said  that  his  repeated  moves  had  caused  him  stress.  Until  then, 
respondent  did  not  know  about  the  moves.  Respondent  passed  this  information  along  to 
L.L.’s  mother  because  respondent  had  agreed  to  keep  in  close  contact  with  her  and  L.L.  had 
thought  it  was  important. 

ALLEGATIONS  REGARDING  STUDENT  J.S. 

84. 

—J.S.  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  third  grade  class  during  the  2016-2017 

school-year,  until  she  was  transferred  to  another  teacher  at  the  end  of  the  year.  J.S.’s  mother, 
who  is  also  a  district  employee,  testified  that  J.S.  has  been  diagnosed  with  Attention  Deficit 
Hyperactivity  Disorder  (ADHD)  and  Obsessive  Compulsive  Disorder.  In  the  beginning, 
J.S.’s  mother  was  initially  satisfied  with  respondent,  but  J.S.  began  to  come  home  crying, 
would  not  want  to  go  to  school,  and  would  have  temper  tantrums.  J.S.  would  tell  her  mother 
that  respondent  would  throw  away  her  things,  such  as  her  mechanical  pencils  and  fidget 
spinner  and  would  yell  at  JS.  On  May  2,  2017,  when  J.S.’s  mother  picked  J.S.  up  from 
school,  J.S.  was  crying  uncontrollably.  Finally,  J.S.  was  able  to  say  that  respondent  threw 
away  her  fidget  cube.  A  fidget  cube  is  an  item  that  J.S.  uses  to  help  with  her  ADHD.  J.S.’s 
mother  was  livid  and  went  to  the  office  to  speak  to  Ms.  Hernandez,  who  was  not  there.  An 
office  staff  member  went  to  respondent’s  classroom  and  said  she  found  the  fidget  cube  on 
respondent’s  desk.  J.S.’s  mother  called  the  district  office  to  make  a  complaint  about 
respondent,  which  was  then  referred  to  Ms.  Hernandez  the  next  day. 

J.S.’s  mother  also  reported  other  issues  involving  respondent.  She  said  that  J.S.’s 

psychiatrist  had  given  her  a  rating  scale  to  have  J.S.’s  teacher  complete  so  the  psychiatrist 
could  evaluate  how  J.S.  was  focusing  in  class.  She  first  gave  the  form  to  respondent  in 
October  2016  and  asked  her  to  complete  it.  Two  months  later  she  followed-up  with 
respondent  about  completing  the  form.  Respondent  told  her  she  misplaced  the  form  and 
requested  another  copy.  Although  she  gave  respondent  another  form  to  complete,  respondent 
never  completed  the  form.  She  also  complained  that  respondent  would  throw  away  J.S.’s 
items.  She  said  she  gave  J.S.  mechanical  pencils  because  she  would  sharpen  regular  pencils 
down  to  the  bit  and  respondent  complained  to  her  about  this.  She  knew  that  respondent  did 
not  permit  mechanical  pencils  in  class,  but  believed  this  was  the  only  solution  to  the 
problem.  When  she  initially  told  respondent  that  J.S.  was  diagnosed  with  ADHD, 
respondent  said  she  did  not  believe  in  ADHD.  She  offered  to  show  something  to  respondent 
from  the  psychiatrist  but  respondent  said  she  did  not  want  to  see  it. 

25

85. 

 J.S.1s  now  10  years  old  and  in  fourth  grade.  J.S.  testified  that  she  did  not  like 
respondent  as  a  teacher  because  respondent  would  yell  at  her  and  make  her  cry. 
J.S.  said  she 
brought  the  fidget  cube  to  school  to  help  her  focus.  J.S.  said  respondent  took  away  the  fidget 
cube  and  then  threw  it  in  the  trash.  Respondent  then  took  it  out  of  the  trash  and  placed  it  on 
her  desk.  Respondent  did  not  say  anything  when  she  did  this.  The  class  was  taking  the  state 
test  at  the  time.  J.S.  also  brought  mechanical  pencils  to  school,  which  respondent  also  threw 
away. 

86. 

Ms.  Hernandez  testified  that  she  spoke  to  J.S.  and  J.S.’s  mother  about 

respondent.  Ms.  Hernandez  was  concerned  that  respondent  would  not  allow  J.S.  to  use  an 
accommodation  to  help  with  her  ADHD.  Ms.  Hernandez  reported  the  complaint  to  Mr. 
Brooks. 

87. 

Respondent  testified  that  J.S.’s  mother  did  give  her  a  survey  to  fill  out,  but 

respondent  misplaced  it.  She  asked  J.S.’s  mother  for  another  survey  but  she  never  provided 
one  to  respondent.  Respondent  never  made  a  comment  that  she  did  not  believe  in  ADHD. 
She  did  ask  J.S’s  mother  for  a  doctor’s  note  because  there  was  nothing  in  her  file  about 
ADHD.  However,  J.S.’s  mother  never  offered  to  show  anything  from  a  doctor,  and 
respondent  believed  that  J.S.’s  mother  only  suspected  J.S.  of  having  ADHD.  Respondent 
said  she  did  have  a  conversation  about  mechanical  pencils  not  being  allowed  in  class. 
Nevertheless,  J.S.  would  bring  them  to  class. 
and  respondent  spoke  to  her  and  the  class  about  the  dangers  of  lead  poisoning.  She  denied 
knowing  that  mechanical  pencils  actually  contain  graphite  and  not  lead.  She  swapped  out 
J.S.’s  mechanical  pencils  with  yellow  pencils  and  gave  the  mechanical  pencils  back  for  her  to 
take  home.  This  happened  on  multiple  occasions. 

J.S.  would  take  the  lead  in  and  out  of  the  pencil 

Respondent  spoke  with  J.S.’s  mother  once  in  the  parking  lot. 

J.S.’s  mother  wanted 

J.S.  to  sit  on  a  balancing  ball  during  class  as  she  thought  this  might  help  her  attention  issues. 
Respondent  was  concerned  about  what  might  happen  if  J.S.  fell  off  the  ball,  so  she  requested 
she  provide  a  doctor’s  note. 

During  state  testing,  J.S.  was  sitting  at  a  desk  in  the  middle  of  the  classroom. 
Respondent  saw  J.S.  playing  with  something,  but  respondent  did  not  know  what  it  was.  She 
asked  J.S.  to  place  the  object  on  respondent’s  desk.  Respondent  denied  ever  putting  the 
object  in  the  trash  and  said  she  never  looked  at  what  it  actually  was.  She  never  saw  J.S.  cry 
in  class  and  denied  ever  making  comments  about  J.S.  crying.  She  denied  ever  throwing 
away  J.S.’s  pencils  or  erasers. 

ADMINISTRATIVE  LEAVE 

88. 

Ms.  Hernandez  provided  respondent  a  Teaching  Unit  Member  Evaluation  on 

April  17,  2017.  Respondent  received  a  “needs  improvement”  in  three  areas  of  the 
evaluation,  a  rating  of  “unsatisfactory”  in  the  area  of  “Creating  and  maintaining  effective 
environments  for  student  learning”  and  an  overall  evaluation  of  “needs  improvement.” 

26

89. 

Ms.  Hernandez  does  not  believe  respondent  is  professional  or  has  the  well- 

being  of  her  students  in  mind.  She  noted  respondent  may  have  some  good  qualities,  and  she 
is  very  kind  to  some  students,  but  the  number  of  incidents  in  such  a  short  time  where 
respondent  belittled  or  demeaned  students  cause  Ms.  Hernandez  to  believe  that  respondent 
cannot  provide  a  safe  environment  for  her  students.  Ms.  Hernandez  felt  that  she  gave 
respondent  several  opportunities  to  change  and  demonstrate  that  she  cares  about  her  students’ 
emotional  well-being. 

90. 

On  May  3,  2017,  the  district  placed  respondent  on  administrative  leave  to 

investigate  the  allegations  that  occurred  subsequent  to  the  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct. 
The  district  served  respondent  with  a  Summary  of  Allegations  on  May  11,  2017.  Respondent 
did  not  provide  a  written  response. 

Mr.  Brooks  testified  that  it  is  a  common  practice  for  the  district  to  place  a  teacher  on 

administrative  leave  while  it  conducts  an  investigation,  in  order  to  protect  the  teacher  and 
students  without  putting  them  in  a  compromising  position.  He  explained  that  it  is  sometimes 
awkward  to  interview  students  about  a  teacher  when  they  remain  in  the  teacher’s  class. 

91. 

Mr.  Brooks  interviewed  L.L.  and  J.S.  on  May  15,  2017,  with  their  parents 

present.  The  answers  they  recorded  were  generally  consistent  with  their  testimony  at  this 
hearing. 

92. 

Ms.  Elzig  testified  that  after  all  of  her  interactions  with  respondent,  she  did  not 

believe  respondent  recognized  any  areas  where  she  needed  to  improve.  At  each  meeting, 
Ms.  Elzig  reviewed  her  directives  and  was  clear  with  what  she  expected  of  respondent.  At 
each  meeting,  respondent  would  not  engage  but  would  instead  frantically  take  notes,  which, 
to  Ms.  Elzig,  appeared  to  be  detached  and  rude.  Ultimately  the  decision  to  terminate 
respondent  was  made  because  respondent  showed  no  improvement  and  Ms.  Elzig  believed 
she  was  not  providing  for  the  emotional  needs  of  her  students.  Ms.  Elzig  does  not  believe 
that  respondent  can  properly  and  effectively  serve  as  a  teacher  because  respondent,  “just 
can’t  help  herself,  she  is  mean  and  our  kids  deserve  better.” 

93. 

|  While  she  was  on  administrative  leave,  the  parent  of  D.B.,  a  second  grade 

student,  submitted  a  letter  to  Ms.  Hernandez  on  June  2,  2017,  requesting  that  D.B.  be 
enrolled  in  respondent’s  class  for  the  next  school-year.'° 

94. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  wishes  to  return  to  teaching  elementary  students. 

She  thinks  she  has  been  a  good  teacher  over  the  years  and  has  been  able  to  help  mold  and 
develop  students  to  become  successful.  She  denied  making  comments  that  belittled  students. 

  

'°  The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  contained  an  allegation  regarding  the 
conversation  Ms.  Hernandez  had  with  the  mother  about  the  letter.  However,  it  was 
determined  that  the  conversation  was  inadmissible  hearsay.  (Gov.  Code,  §  11513,  subd.  (d).) 

27

School  District  Policies 

95. 

The  statement  of  charges  alleged  respondent  violated  three  board  policies  and 

acted  contrary  to  one  other  board  policy. 

Board  Policy  100,  “Philosophy,  Goals,  Objectives,  and  Comprehensive  Plans,” 

provides  that  “teachers  employed  by  the  district  shall  have  an  abiding  concern  for  students. 
They  should  demonstrate  in  their  actions  that  excellence  which  best  instructs  youth,  the 
ability  to  relate  effectively  their  knowledge  to  students  and  to  be  dedicated  to  the  ideals  of 
the  teaching  profession  as  set  forth  in  the  Code  of  Ethics.” 

Board  Policy  4119.21,  “Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Teaching  Profession,”  provides 
principals  regarding  commitment  to  students,  the  public,  and  the  profession.  Included  in  the 
code  are  that  a  teacher  “honors  the  dignity  of  students  and  influences  them  through 
constructive  criticism  rather  than  by  ridicule  and  harassment.”  The  Code  of  Ethics  contains  a 
clause  at  the  end  providing  that  the  code  governs  the  profession  and  any  violations  will  be 
considered  “unprofessional.”  The  clause  goes  on  to  say  that  in  order  to  constitute  grounds 
for  discipline,  the  violation  must  “endanger  students,  evidence  malice,  indicate  serious 
incompetency,  bad  judgement,  or  a  pattern  of  bad  judgement.” 

Board  Policy  4119.32,  “Duties  and  Responsibilities  of  Teachers,”  defines  instruction, 
pupil  supervision,  and  communication.  Complainant  alleged  respondent  refused  to  cooperate 
with  her  colleagues,  despite  multiple  directives  to  do  so,  and  exhibited  a  reluctance  to  meet 
with  parents  outside  regular  class  hours. 

Board  Policy  5000,  “Concepts  and  Rules,”  sets  forth  responsibilities  of  the  governing 
board  and  explains  the  commitment  of  the  governing  board  to  students.  The  policy  cannot  be 
violated  by  teachers,  but  complainant  alleged  that  respondent  failed  to  provide  her  students 
with  a  safe,  positive  school  environment  and  created  a  negative,  unwelcoming  environment 
contrary  to  the  policy. 

Respondent’s  Character  Witnesses 

TESTIMONY  OF  BRIGIT  PARDO 

96. 

Brigit  Pardo  was  a  student  in  the  district  from  kindergarten  through  12th 

In  March  2015,  while  on  a  break  from  college,  Ms.  Pardo  volunteered 

grade.  She  graduated  from  University  of  California,  Santa  Barbara,  with  a  degree  in  political 
science.  Although  Ms.  Pardo  never  had  respondent  as  a  teacher,  her  four  siblings  had  been 
in  respondent’s  class. 
to  work  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Ms.  Pardo  was  in  the  classroom  each  day  for  the  entire 
school  day  for  approximately  three  or  four  weeks.  She  testified  that  respondent  always 
treated  the  students  with  respect,  and  they  in  turn  respected  her.  She  said  respondent  was 
very  professional  with  the  way  she  ran  the  classroom,  and  the  class  was  conducted  at  a  level 
of  maturity  uncommon  for  that  age.  Respondent  spoke  to  her  students  about  the  importance 

28

of  education,  and  she  asked  Ms.  Pardo  to  speak  to  the  students  to  explain  that  it  was  possible 
for  them  to  go  to  college  too. 

TESTIMONY  OF  SOLEDAD  RAMIREZ 

97. 

Soledad  Ramirez  is  the  mother  of  a  student  who  was  in  respondent’s  class 

during  the  2016-2017  school-year.  Ms.  Ramirez  had  requested  her  child  be  placed  in 
respondent’s  class.  Ms.  Ramirez  volunteered  in  the  class  approximately  10  times.  She 
described  respondent  as  an  excellent  third  grade  teacher,  and  she  never  observed  respondent 
be  mean  to  students. 

TESTIMONY  OF  JAMES  MOORE 

98. 

James  Moore  began  working  as  a  teacher  for  the  district  in  1965.  He 

predominantly  worked  as  an  elementary  school  teacher  until  he  retired  in  2004.  After  he 
retired,  he  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher  at  Granite  Hill.  He  was  respondent’s  substitute 
teacher  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  would  be  at  the  school  site  approximately  once  or 
twice  a  week.  If  he  knew  respondent  was  going  to  be  out,  he  would  go  to  the  school  the  day 
before  to  meet  with  respondent  about  her  lesson  plan.  They  discussed  particular  students  and 
the  best  ways  of  working  with  them.  For  example,  respondent  spoke  to  him  about  L.L.  and 
told  him  that  she  was  concerned  about  his  tics  and  the  reaction  by  the  class.  She  did  not  want 
the  class  to  laugh  at  him.  Mr.  Moore  had  the  opportunity  to  observe  respondent  interacting 
with  students  and  other  teachers.  He  said  she  had  a  good  sense  of  humor  and  was  often 
laughing  and  visiting  with  other  teachers.  He  never  observed  respondent  be  disrespectful  or 
discourteous  with  students.  He  said,  “It  is  not  in  her  DNA.”  He  said  respondent  had  high 
expectations  for  her  students.  When  he  observed  her  teaching,  her  students  were  relaxed.  If 
he  was  a  parent,  he  would  love  to  have  respondent  teach  his  child. 

Mr.  Moore  testified  that  respondent  discussed  her  discipline  by  the  district  with  him. 
Respondent  told  Mr.  Moore  she  believed  it  was  unfair  and  that  nothing  she  did  was  right  in 
the  district’s  view.  She  said  she  would  continue  to  do  the  best  job  that  she  could. 

TESTIMONY  OF  DEBBIE  RAMIREZ 

99. 

Debbie  Ramirez  has  been  a  teacher  for  15  years,  13  years  at  Granite  Hill.  She 

has  taught  at  the  same  grade  level  as  respondent  but  not  for  the  past  four  years.  She  is 
currently  a  primary  intervention  teacher  for  second  and  third  graders.  In  this  position  she 
identifies  high  risk  students  and  provides  them  strategies  to  improve  reading.  She  goes  into 
the  classroom  and  works  with  small  groups  of  students.  During  the  2016-2017  school-year, 
she  worked  with  four  of  respondent’s  students.  Ms.  Ramirez  would  periodically  do 
assessments  and  work  with  students  in  the  back  of  respondent’s  classroom  for  brief  periods 
of  time.  During  this  time  she  was  able  to  observe  respondent’s  teaching.  She  believed 
respondent’s  classroom  was  extremely  well-managed;  the  students  knew  exactly  where  they 
needed  to  be  and  what  they  needed  to  be  doing.  Ms.  Ramirez  believed  that  respondent  had  a 
good  relationship  with  her  students.  She  spoke  to  them  respectfully  and  they  seemed  to  have 

29

a  sense  of  being  safe  in  the  classroom.  Ms.  Ramirez  never  observed  respondent’s  students  be 
frightened  or  upset.  Ms.  Ramirez  also  had  a  good  working  relationship  with  respondent. 
Respondent  often  wanted  to  know  how  second  grade  students  were  doing  and  she  seemed 
very  interested  in  all  her  students.  Ms.  Ramirez  said  she  learned  a  lot  from  respondent.  She 
said  respondent  would  occasionally  come  into  the  lunchroom.  She  was  friendly  and  joked 
around  with  other  teachers.  Ms.  Ramirez  acknowledged  that  respondent’s  reputation  among 
the  other  teachers  at  Granite  Hill  was  mixed.  There  were  people  who  liked  and  respected  her 
and  those  who  did  not  get  along  with  her.  Respondent  is  strong-willed  and  “has  a  strong 
face.” 

Ms.  Ramirez  testified  that  she  does  fear  retaliation  by  the  district  for  testifying  on 

respondent’s  behalf.  However,  Ms.  Ramirez  loves  the  work  she  does  as  a  teacher  and  feels  it 
is  important  for  her  to  be  honest  about  her  support  for  respondent. 

TESTIMONY  OF  LILA  GUILLEN 

100. 

Lila  Guillen  has  worked  as  a  bilingual  tutor  for  the  district  since  1995  and 

spent  three  years  at  Granite  Hill.  She  worked  in  respondent’s  classroom  for  two  years.  She 
worked  with  a  small  group  of  students  for  approximately  45  minutes  a  day.  Ms.  Guillen 
loved  working  with  respondent.  She  described  respondent  as  firm  who  did  not  tolerate 
students  misbehaving.  She  tried  to  make  them  responsible  for  their  learning,  which  was  a 
quality  Ms.  Guillen  liked.  Ms.  Guillen  never  observed  respondent  yell  at  or  demean 
students.  She  said  respondent’s  voice  would  change,  not  necessarily  in  volume,  but  such  that 
students  would  know  if  they  were  doing  something  wrong.  Ms.  Guillen  was  familiar  with 
L.L.  Respondent  told  the  students  that  L.L.  could  not  help  what  he  was  doing  and  that  it  was 
not  on  purpose.  Ms.  Guillen  thought  she  was  a  great  teacher.  She  did  recall  a  student  upset 
once,  but  that  was  because  she  had  not  done  her  homework. 

TESTIMONY  OF  RHONDA  BREWSTER 

101. 

Rhonda  Brewster  has  worked  for  the  district  for  27  years  and  teaches  first 
grade  at  Granite  Hill.  She  testified  that  respondent  had  a  lot  of  energy  and  was  outgoing. 
Ms.  Brewster  never  had  any  problems  getting  along  with  respondent.  She  was  not  aware  of 
respondent’s  reputation;  she  just  heard  positive  things.  Ms.  Brewster  never  spoke  to  any 
other  teachers  about  their  interactions  with  respondent. 

Evaluation  of  the  Factual  Allegations 

102. 

The  district  alleged  multiple  incidents  spanning  a  four  year  period  involving 
staff,  parents,  and  students.  For  almost  every  detail  involving  each  of  the  alleged  incidents, 
respondent’s  testimony  directly  contradicted  the  district’s  numerous  witnesses  who  testified 
about  their  recollection  of  events.  Thus,  in  evaluating  the  district’s  factual  allegations, 

30

credibility  is  the  determinative  issue.  In  this  regard,  respondent’s  testimony  is  found  to  be 
wholly  lacking  in  credibility.  '! 

103. 

Ms.  Lara’s  testimony  regarding  her  interactions  with  respondent  at  the  third 

grade-level  meeting  during  the  2013-2014  school-year  was  far  more  credible  than 
respondent’s  testimony.  Respondent  testified  that  Ms.  Lara  stood  up,  pointed  her  finger  at 
respondent,  and  “told-off’  respondent.  Whereas  Ms.  Lara’s  testimony  was  largely 
corroborated  by  Ms.  Ortiz’s  investigation,  which  included  interviews  with  all  the  teachers 
present,  respondent  had  no  corroborating  evidence.  Indeed,  this  hearing  was  the  first  time 
that  respondent  alleged  Ms.  Lara  had  behaved  in  this  manner.  Moreover,  respondent’s 
testimony  that  she  was  not  mad  at  Ms.  Lara  for  declining  to  host  her  students  and  that  her 
apology  to  Ms.  Lara  had  been  sincere  was  unconvincing.  Accordingly,  the  district’s 
witnesses  were  fully  credible  regarding  respondent’s  conduct  at  the  meeting;  respondent’s 
testimony  is  rejected. 

104. 

In  September  2014,  respondent  held  a  pizza  party  in  her  class  for  sixth  grade 

students.  This  caused  two  parents,  including  Mrs.  Chavez,  to  complain  to  Ms.  Ortiz.  No 
further  action  was  taken  regarding  this  incident.  Four  months  later,  Mrs.  Chavez  tearfully 
went  to  Ms.  Ortiz  to  inform  her  that  the  issue  regarding  the  pizza  party  had  been  a  complete 
misunderstanding.  As  if  this  was  not  enough,  Mrs.  Chavez  wrote  a  letter  to  Ms.  Ortiz,  a  copy 
of  which  respondent  also  obtained.  Respondent  testified  that  she  never  told  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Chavez  that  she  was  in  trouble  with  the  district  and  never  asked  them  to  write  a  letter  to  Ms. 
Ortiz  on  her  behalf.  Although  this  was  corroborated  by  Mr.  Chavez,  he  could  provide  no 
explanation  for  why  they  would  have  tried  to  intervene  with  Ms.  Ortiz  four  months  later. 
is  also  suspicious  that  Mrs.  Chavez  approached  Ms.  Ortiz  a  day  after  Ms.  Ortiz  issued 
respondent  a  letter  of  reprimand  and  two  days  after  Ms.  Elzig  scheduled  a  meeting  with 
respondent  to  discuss  allegations  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent’s  testimony  that 
she  had  no  involvement  in  Mrs.  Chavez’s  decision  to  write  a  letter  to  Ms.  Ortiz  was  not 
believable. 
  

It 

'!  The  credibility  of  the  witnesses  has  been  evaluated  pursuant  to  the  factors  set  forth 

in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  The  demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witness  while  testifying; 
the  character  of  the  testimony;  the  capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred;  the 
character  of  the  witness  for  honesty;  the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive;  other  statements 
of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the  testimony;  the  existence  or 
absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness  testified;  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the 
proceeding  in  which  the  testimony  has  been  given.  A  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part 
accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.  3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also 
“reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the 
accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses 
thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.  at  p.  67-68,  quoting  from 
Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.  App.  2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject 
the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an  expert,  although  it  1s  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  & 
Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.  3d  875,  890.) 

31

105. 

A.V.  and  her  mother  presented  consistent  testimony  about  their  interactions 

with  respondent.  This  testimony  was  corroborated  by  statements  they  made  to  Ms.  Ortiz 
shortly  after  the  incident.  Respondent’s  testimony  on  the  issue  was  not  credible. 

106. 

A.O  and  her  mother  presented  consistent  testimony  about  their  interactions 

with  respondent.  In  particular,  respondent’s  version  of  the  meeting  that  took  place  between 
A.O.,  her  parents,  and  Ms.  Ortiz,  was  not  believable.  Although  respondent  did  write  an 
email  to  Ms.  Ortiz  the  next  day  in  which  she  claimed  A.O.’s  parents  were  hostile, 
respondent’s  testimony  was  far  more  vivid.  Had  A.O.’s  parents  acted  in  such  a  manner,  it  is 
implausible  that  Ms.  Ortiz  would  have  permitted  the  meeting  to  continue.  Indeed, 
respondent  only  left  the  meeting  because  she  claimed  she  needed  to  meet  an  electrician,  a 
claim  in  itself  that  was  not  believable.  Finally,  respondent  offered  a  written  assignment  by 
both  A.O.  and  A.V.  stating  why  they  liked  third  grade.  This  assignment  was  completed  a 
day  after  respondent  received  a  letter  of  concern  from  Ms.  Ortiz  regarding  respondent’s 
interactions  with  A.V.  and  A.O.  Although  respondent  testified  that  she  only  prompted  the 
students  to  write  about  something  they  liked,  not  specifically  why  they  liked  the  third  grade, 
her  testimony  is  simply  not  believable  under  the  circumstances. 

107. 

Respondent’s  account  of  her  interaction  with  Mr.  Loder  was  not  credible.  By 

her  testimony,  Mr.  Loder  entered  respondent’s  room  and  began  a  rampage  against  respondent 
for  not  having  had  time  to  vacuum  her  classroom.  This  caused  respondent,  two  students,  and 
their  parent  sufficient  alarm  such  that  they  immediately  left  the  school.  Yet,  respondent  did 
not  report  Mr.  Loder;  rather,  Mr.  Loder  immediately  reported  respondent  to  Ms.  Ortiz.  Like 
the  pizza  incident,  respondent  testified  that  she  never  asked  the  parent  and  student  who  had 
observed  the  interaction  with  Mr.  Loder  to  write  letters  on  her  behalf.  Respondent  testified 
that  they  volunteered  to  write  letters  about  what  they  saw  right  after  the  incident.  However, 
when  it  was  noted  that  the  letters  were  dated  a  month  later,  and  just  days  after  respondent 
received  a  letter  of  reprimand  about  the  incident,  respondent  offered  no  credible  explanation. 

108. 

These  examples  reflect  a  pattern  in  respondent’s  testimony:  an  absence  of 

credibility  in  almost  every  aspect  of  her  testimony.  In  almost  every  detail,  respondent’s 
testimony  flatly  contradicted  the  testimony  offered  by  the  district’s  witness.  This  case  did 
not  just  involve  one  or  two  witnesses;  it  involved  over  a  dozen  witnesses  with  nothing  to  gain 
by  lying  about  their  observations.  Some  of  respondent’s  actions,  such  as  instructing  Ms. 
Weden  to  take  notes  because  she  was  new,  do  not  constitute  unprofessional  conduct. 
However,  when  viewed  cumulatively,  the  district’s  witnesses,  who  were  all  credible, 
established  respondent  made  inappropriate  comments  to  her  students,  parents,  colleagues, 
and  principals;  failed  to  follow  the  directives  of  her  supervisors;  and  continuously  engaged  in 
an  unprofessional  manner  that  impacted  her  students’  education. 

// 

32

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

1. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  disciplinary  proceeding  is  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 
Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  “Preponderance  of  the  evidence”  means  evidence  that  has 
If  the  evidence  is  so  evenly  balanced  that  one 
more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it. 
is  unable  to  say  that  the  evidence  on  either  side  of  an  issue  preponderates,  the  finding  on  that 
issue  must  be  against  the  party  who  had  the  burden  of  proving  it.  (People  v.  Mabini  (2000) 
92  Cal.App.4th  654,  663.) 

Applicable  Law 

2. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  &  44944.) 

3. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the  Commission  may 
not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).) 

4. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  the  following: 

unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him  or  her. 

(Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subds.  (a)(2),  (a)(6),  &  (a)(8).) 

Applicable  Case  Law 

5. 

In  Morrison  vy.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the  Supreme 

Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 
showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students, 
school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  The  court 
delineated  the  following  criteria  to  determine  whether  a  teacher’s  conduct  indicates  that  he  or 
she  is  not  fit  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students 
or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  the 
extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct  in  question;  (6)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may 
inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher 
involved  or  other  teachers.  (Ud.  at  pp.  229-230.) 

6. 

In  Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1970)  19  Cal.3d  691,  the  Supreme  Court 

detailed  the  process  to  be  considered  in  determining  fitness  to  teach.  In  addition  to  the 

33

Morrison  factors,  the  court  provided  additional  factors  that  may  be  considered  to  determine 
whether  there  is  a  nexus  between  the  conduct  and  a  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach:  (1)  likelihood 
of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if 
any;  (3)  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  impairment  of  teachers’  and  students’ 
relationships;  (5)  disruption  of  educational  process;  (6)  motive;  (7)  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  conduct.  (/d.  at  fn.  5.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

7. 

The  phrase  “unprofessional  conduct”  is  conduct  such  as  to  indicate  unfitness 
to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  On  Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167, 
1174.)  Unprofessional  conduct  has  been  defined  as  “that  conduct  which  breaches  the  rules 
or  ethical  code  of  a  profession,  or  conduct  which  is  unbecoming  a  member  in  good  standing 
of  a  profession.”  (Shea  v.  Bd.  of  Medical  Examiners,  (1978)  81  Cal.  App.3d  564,  at  575;  Bd. 
of  Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

The  definition  of  unprofessional  conduct  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the 

unique  position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed  responsibilities  and 
limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.  (San  Diego 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th 
1454,  1466.)  The  determinative  test  of  a  charge  of  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  is 
fitness  to  teach,  which  1s  a  question  of  ultimate  fact. 
Cal.3d  691.) 

(Bd.  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  10 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

8. 

Unfitness  for  service  means  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable; 

incapable;  incompetent;  and  physically  or  mentally  unsound.”  (Palo  Verde,  supra,  at  p.  972.) 
As  a  threshold  matter,  the  Morrison  criteria  are  examined  to  ascertain  whether  the  conduct  in 
question  is  related  to  the  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach.  In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist 
to  dismiss  a  certificated  employee  on  the  basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  not  all 
Morrison  factors  need  be  examined,  only  the  pertinent  ones.  (Governing  Board  v.  Haar 
(1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384.)  In  this  sense,  the  purpose  of  examining  the  Morrison  criteria 
is  to  establish  a  nexus  between  the  proven  conduct  and  fitness  to  teach. 

However,  even  if  the  Morrison  analysis  shows  a  nexus  between  the  conduct  and  fitness 
to  teach,  it  must  also  be  determined  that  the  alleged  conduct  shows  evident  unfitness  for  service. 
(Morrison,  supra,  at  p.  1445  [emphasis  added].)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly 
not  fit  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies;  it 
connotes  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that 
one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  expectations  of  the  school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444 
[emphasis  added].) 

34

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  LAWS 

9. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  (Governing  Bd.  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Subdivision  (7)  pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional 
transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient 
to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of 
school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  (Ud.  at.  p.  84.) 

.  stubborn;  persevering  . 

. 

. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the 
District  must  further  establish  that  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 
“persistent,”  1.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.)  Isolated 
incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally 
considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.) 

Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss  Respondent 

10. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(2).  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  respondent  engaged  in 
unprofessional  conduct  throughout  the  period  subject  of  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges. 
This  conduct  was  directly  related  to  her  fitness  to  teach,  as  it  directly  impacted  the  education 
of  her  students  and  the  district’s  operations. 

11. 

|  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6).  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  respondent  is  evidently 
unfit  for  service.  Respondent’s  principals  and  the  district  gave  respondent  multiple 
opportunities  to  correct  her  conduct  and  to  treat  students,  parents,  and  her  colleagues  with 
respect.  Respondent  consistently  refused  to  follow  these  directives  and  continued  to  act  in  a 
manner  that  reflected  a  complete  lack  of  insight  or  desire  to  remedy  her  behavior.  Her 
conduct  directly  impacted  students  and  directly  related  to  her  fitness  to  teach. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  appreciates  the  nature  of  her  behavior  or  has 

engaged  in  any  meaningful  self-reflection.  Her  testimony  at  hearing  reflected  an  indifference 
to  the  truth.  Consequently,  there  is  little  doubt  that  respondent  would  treat  students,  parents, 
and  colleagues  in  a  similar  manner  if  returned  to  the  classroom.  Ample  evidence  has 
demonstrated  that  respondent’s  temperament  is  not  remediable  and  she  is  evidently  unfit  to 
teach. 

12. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(8).  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  respondent  persistently 
violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of 

35

the  district.  Respondent  received  multiple  directives  from  district  administrators  to  change 
her  behavior  and  to  create  a  positive  environment  for  her  students.  Respondent  refused  to 
follow  reasonable  direction  from  his  supervisors  and  the  multiple  incidents  of  unprofessional 
conduct  represented  repeated  bad  judgment  and  constituted  a  violation  of  Board  Policy 
4119.21,  “Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Teaching  Profession.” 

Conclusion 

13. 

It  is  clear  that  for  many  of  her  students,  respondent  was  a  good  teacher  who 

had  a  positive  impact  on  their  education.  However,  the  issue  in  this  case  is  not  how  she 
treated  the  students,  parents,  and  colleagues  whom  she  liked,  but  how  she  treated  those  who 
are  the  subject  of  the  allegations.  Although  the  district  provided  respondent  with  multiple 
opportunities  to  correct  her  behavior,  respondent  consistently  refused  to  change  or  comport 
her  conduct  to  the  professionalism  expected  by  the  district.  Her  inability  to  accept  any 
responsibility,  or  provide  credible  testimony,  leaves  no  doubt  that  dismissal  1s  appropriate 
based  on  any  one  of  the  three  established  grounds. 

ORDER 

Respondent,  Nenoise  Trotter’s,  appeal  from  her  dismissal  of  employment  by  the 
Jurupa  Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  respondent  is 
upheld. 

DATED: 

DATED: 

DATED: 

  

ADAM  L.  BERG 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

VIRGINIA  ESCOBAR 
Commission  Member 

  

DEIDRA  JOHNSON 
Commission  Member 

36

