BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE JURUPA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

ROBIN RIGGLE,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2017061010

Respondent.

DECISION

On September 11, 12, and 13, 2017, a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) heard this matter in Jurupa Valley, California.  The Commission consisted of 
the following members: Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH); Pamela Bernard; and Greg Solomon.

Kerrie McNally, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Adams, Silva & McNally,

LLP, represented complainant, Tamara Elzig, Deputy Superintendent of Personnel Services,
Jurupa Unified School District (JUSD).

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Reich, Adell & Cvitan,

represented respondent, Robin Riggle, who was present throughout the hearing.

The record was held open to permit the committee to deliberate and reach a decision.

The record was closed and the matter submitted on September 29, 2017.

Did two Facebook comments made by Mrs. Riggle on a Facebook thread concerning 

“A Day Without Immigrants” (protest event), wherein she commented, “I had 50 absences
today” and “Yes.  It was a very pleasant day,” constitute immoral conduct or evident 
unfitness for service?

Was Mrs. Riggle dishonest when she was questioned by complainant regarding
whether she knew about the protest event prior to posting her comments on Facebook?

ISSUES

1

SUMMARY

Although Mrs. Riggle could have used better judgement before posting her comments 

to a public Facebook thread that arguably contained some negative commentary about
immigrants and people who supported the protest event, the district did not show by a
preponderance of the evidence that her conduct constituted immoral conduct or evident
unfitness for service.  Further, the district did not show by a preponderance of the evidence 
that she was dishonest about whether she knew about the protest event prior to making her 
Facebook comments. Accordingly, applicable law prohibits the district from terminating 
Mrs. Riggle.

Procedural History and Jurisdictional Matters

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Mrs. Riggle is a permanent certificated teacher employed by the JUSD.  At the 

time of the incident that formed the basis for these proceedings, she was an art teacher assigned 
to Rubidoux High School (RHS).

2.

On February 16, 2017, Mrs. Riggle made two comments on a Facebook thread.

The district learned about the Facebook thread because many people in the community were
upset by some of the comments they read. Gale Hammons, a communications and public 
relations contract employee of the district, also notified district administrators about the 
comments.

3.

On February 16, 2017, complainant placed Mrs. Riggle on paid administrative 

leave.

4.

On May 15, 2017, complainant signed the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 
Immediately Suspend Without Pay and the Statement of Charges, in her official capacity,
alleging that Mrs. Riggle is subject to termination for immoral conduct, dishonesty, and evident 
unfitness for service, in violation of Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1),
(a)(4), and (a)(6).

5.

6.

7.

On May 16, 2017, complainant placed Mrs. Riggle on unpaid leave.

The charging documents, and other jurisdictional documents, were served on 

Mrs. Riggle, who timely filed a Demand for Hearing denying the charges against her.

Mrs. Riggle filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) 

with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, alleging that the charging documents 

2

did not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension.1 Under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), review of a motion filed pursuant to this section is limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the charging documents, if true, would be 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension.

8.

On July 11, 2017, the Hon. Adam L. Berg granted Mrs. Riggle’s motion. Mrs.

Riggle was taken off unpaid administrative leave and placed on paid administrative leave 
pending the outcome of the hearing.

The Protest Event

9.

On February 16, 2017, a protest event called “A Day Without Immigrants” 

was held throughout the country. The protest event was meant for persons who were 
immigrants, or who supported immigrants, to stay home in order to show what impact 
immigrants have, economically, on society.  It was a nationwide protest event and was not 
limited to any particular profession.

10.

RHS has approximately 1,600 students.  Approximately 90 percent of the 
students are Hispanic.  According to the principal of RHS, Jose Araux, a “robocall” was 
made to parents prior to the protest event urging them to have their students come to school.
Tamara Elzig, the Assistant Superintendent, also testified that a posting was placed on the 
district’s website informing parents about the importance of having their students come to 
school on February 16, 2017.  Nonetheless, about 355 students, or 22 percent of the student 
body, were absent on the day of the protest event. Dr. Araux conceded that there was no way
of knowing precisely what the reason was for each absence, but presumably, many were
attributable to the protest event.

The Facebook Thread

11.

On February 16, 2017, several teachers at RHS – Geoffrey Greer, Robin 
Riggle, Charles Baugh, Patricia Crawford, and Allen Umbarger, posted comments on a 
Facebook thread started by Mr. Greer on his public Facebook page.2 The original post by
Mr. Greer read as follows:

1 Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states, that a school district may
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude,
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District . . . .”

2 According to the testimony of Gale Hammons, the communications and public 

relations employee that works for the district, regardless of whether a person has their 
personal Facebook page set to private, if they comment on a public post, their comments can 
be viewed by everyone.

3

Well.  A day without immigrants.  Perhaps all the missing 
workers in all the various industries out there had the intended 
impact and sent the desired message.  I don’t know.  As for the 
public school system, having my class size reduced by 50% all 
day long only served to SUPPORT Trumps initiatives and prove 
how much better things might be without all the overcrowding. 

That’s what you get when you jump on some sort of bandwagon 
cause as an excuse to be lazy and/or get drunk.  Best school day
ever.

Several other individuals posted comments on Mr. Greer’s Facebook thread.
Eventually, Mrs. Riggle posted the following free-standing comment (i.e. not in reply to Mr. 
Greer):  “I had fifty absences today.”  Mr. Greer replied, “Yup.  And I bet your class went a 
whole lot more smoothly as well.”  Mrs. Riggle then posted the following, “Yes, it was a 
very pleasant day.”

Those two comments were the only comments posted by Mrs. Riggle on the 

Facebook thread.

It is unknown overall, how many people continued to comment on the Facebook 

thread, or if the reproduction of the Facebook thread provided in the exhibits was a full and 
complete copy of all the comments on the thread. Nonetheless, the exhibit provided 
contained the comments of Mrs. Riggle.

The Aftermath

12.

It did not take long for the entire Facebook thread to “go viral.”  Aside from 

the numerous comments people made on Facebook, an individual by the name of “Marina,” 
whom Ms. Hammons identified as someone who works for MTV, tweeted the link to the 
Facebook thread on her Twitter page. The Facebook thread and comments were shared by
individual Facebook users and spread about various social media platforms.  Eventually, Mr. 
Greer deleted the Facebook thread, as he explained, to “mitigate” any damage and apologize 
for the “hurtful structure” of the post.  However, because the original content of the 
Facebook thread had been captured in screenshots and reproduced so many times, deleting 
the posts did nothing to stop the continuing viral spread.

In the ensuing days, the story would be covered on most local news stations as well as 

Univision, a Spanish language news station. Local newspapers covered the story; some of
the news articles simply reported the facts of what occurred; other articles used less-neutral
headlines and editorialized the articles to express the belief that the Facebook posts were 
racist or anti-immigrant, which certainly could have added fuel to an already out-of-control

4

firestorm.3 The district received angry e-mails from students, parents, community members,
individuals who had no affiliation or personal interest in the district, and some who lived
across the country.  The American Civil Liberties Union, Department of Justice4, Anti-
Defamation League, and various immigrant organizations wrote to the district regarding their 
concern after learning of the comments on the Facebook thread.  Some of the angry
communications were directed solely towards Mr. Greer.  Others were directed at all the 
teachers whose comments appeared on the Facebook thread. In many of the e-mail
communications, it was unclear if the writers were reacting to the actual posts, the 
representation in the news regarding the posts, or what they had read from others regarding 
their opinions of what the posts contained. Nonetheless, it was not disputed that many
people from all walks of life were upset for a variety of reasons about the comments 
contained on the Facebook thread.

February 17, 2017, and the Student Walkout

13.

On February 17, 2017, the district had extra personnel on the RHS campus in 

case any problems arose.  Two classrooms, one belonging to Mrs. Riggle and the other 
belonging to Mr. Greer, had been vandalized overnight, with messages stating “fuck you” 
and “fuck your opinion” spray-painted outside the front of the classrooms.

14.

Janiece Bailey, an English teacher at RHS, testified that by the time she 

arrived at school that day, Mr. Greer’s classroom was covered up with butcher paper.  Some 
students on campus were wearing the Mexican flag on their hat, and some had bandanas in 
their pockets. In her first class, they discussed the Facebook thread.  Students expressed their 
opinions.  Many wanted to know what happened to the teachers.  Many expressed frustration, 
anger, and feeling of betrayal.  In her next class, the students were not really discussing the 
Facebook thread; Ms. Bailey felt they probably had already done so in their earlier class.  As 
the day went on, most of the students did not want to discuss the Facebook thread.

Ms. Bailey said that around lunchtime, a large group of students started chanting very

loud, yelling, and acting very upset.  She said teachers followed them to monitor the 
situation.  Some students threw food and water bottles.  Some students moved towards the 
flagpole and attempted to climb it.  An announcement was made for the students to return to
class, but many did not.  The group of students made their way to a gate and started to push 
on it; campus security opened the gate “for their safety.”  Opening the gate allowed the group 
to walk off campus and into the street. Some students began jumping on a news van.

3 For example, one article from the Huffington Post was simply entitled, “Riverside 
Teachers Put on Paid Leave Over Immigrant Protest Comments.”  Another article from the 
Washington Post, however, was entitled, “These California Teachers Mocked Students For 
Skipping School On Immigrant Boycott Day.”

4 It was never made clear in testimony whether it was the California Department of 

Justice or the federal Department of Justice.

5

Ms. Bailey returned to her classroom.  She had fewer students than normal. She

believed the students who were in class felt embarrassed and were upset about the “general 
disrespect” the other students were showing towards school staff. The sixth period was
cancelled; students remained in their fifth period classrooms.

The following day, Ms. Bailey had her students do a writing assignment.  The 
purpose of the letters was to express their opinions and sentiments, write letters of apology,
or whatever the students wanted to do.  Some of the letters expressed support for the teachers 
whose comments appeared on the Facebook thread; others expressed anger and frustration.

Ms. Bailey said most of the anger was directed at Mr. Greer.  Personally, Ms. Bailey
did not feel Mrs. Riggle’s two comments were a concern; her concern was always with the 
initial post made by Mr. Greer.  Since February 17, 2017, there have been no further 
walkouts at RHS.  Ms. Bailey feels bad for Mrs. Riggle because Mrs. Riggle is the “nicest 
person she has ever known.” When she saw the Facebook thread, Ms. Bailey worried that 
Mrs. Riggle’s comments could be misinterpreted; she did not find Mrs. Riggle’s comments
to be offensive or hurtful.

15.

Testimony of several other witnesses corroborated the testimony of Ms. Bailey

regarding what occurred during the student walkout on February 17, 2017.

16.

Leanna Apodaca is an English teacher at RHS.  Ms. Apodaca said she did not 

see a big difference in her classes on February 16, 2017.  Her students did raise some 
concerns with her in class on February 21, 2017, concerning the protest event and Facebook 
thread incident.  She documented the concerns in an e-mail to the principal.  The concerns, 
which were many, included things that both supported and opposed the protest event, as well
as various views on how the Facebook thread incident was treated (i.e. some students pointed 
out that the comments could be construed as racist or hurtful, while others pointed out the 
importance of not taking things out of context).  Ms. Apodaca knows Mrs. Riggle and said 
that she has seen no “racist tendencies” and would not consider Mrs. Riggle to be “racist.”

17.

Cindy Aguilar is a translator and clerk/typist for the school district.  She 

testified that on February 17, 2017, many parents contacted the school about the Facebook 
thread and generally expressed one of two sentiments:  either they were upset about the 
comments or they supported the teachers and were upset the teachers were going to be put on 
leave.

18.

Karime Espinoza is a student at RHS whose parents are immigrants.  She 

stayed home for the protest event.  When she saw the Facebook thread, it made her feel “sad”
because she thought it was “disrespectful.”  She felt Mr. Greer’s comment suggested that 
“we are lazy and drunk.”  Mrs. Riggle’s comment only upset her a “little” because “it kind of 
agreed” with Mr. Greer’s post. She said when she returned to RHS on February 17, 2017, 
there “was a lot of tension.”  She has never had Mrs. Riggle as a teacher. 

6

19.

E  C

 is a student at RHS whose parents are immigrants.  He went to

school the day of the protest event. He said he felt betrayed “mainly by Mr. Greer” because 
he felt Mr. Greer’s comment meant that students who did not show up were lazy or drunk.
When asked if he felt betrayed by Mrs. Riggle, he said, “no.”  He said he thought Mrs.
Riggle’s comment could be interpreted either that it was a pleasant day because there were 
fewer students, or because there were less immigrants.  Mr. Castillo has never had Mrs. 
Riggle as a teacher.

20. M

 L

 is a former student of RHS.  She has several siblings that either 

are attending, or have attended, RHS.  Ms. Lopez did not have Mrs. Riggle for a teacher.
Ms. Lopez felt the “posts” were “mocking of our struggle” and were degrading.  She said she 
knew Mrs. Riggle’s comments were “not as offensive as the rest” but still feels that fact that
Mrs. Riggle commented “shows she agrees” with Mr. Greer’s comment.  She has a 
continuing concern regarding what will be done with the teachers because she feels they will
not be effective if they are returned to the classroom. Ms. Lopez said that she was “one of 
the persons who organized the [student] walkout” on February 17, 2017.  She now works for 
the Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice, although she did not work for that organization at 
the time she participated in organizing the student walkout. Ms. Lopez did not feel Mrs. 
Riggle’s comments were racist, but she did feel they were “discriminatory.”

Other Evidence Presented by the District

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT SANTIAGO

21.

Robert Santiago is a math teacher at RHS. Mr. Santiago was angry when he 

saw the Facebook thread and felt it showed a lack of sensitivity.  Specifically regarding Mrs. 
Riggle’s two comments, he felt her comments “tacitly approved” of Mr. Greer’s original 
comment.  Mr. Santiago “experienced racism” when he was younger and said he “started to 
relive” those moments when he saw the comments.  Mr. Santiago said that throughout the 
day during his classes, the students were angry and discussing the Facebook thread.  By the 
time of fifth period, the students were more interested in expressing themselves than tending 
to class, so Mr. Santiago let them do so because he feared if he did not, he would have the 
“same problem” in the classroom that was “occurring outside.”  By the time sixth period
came around, most of the students remaining were his “high achieving seniors” who were 
ready to “get back on task.”

Mr. Santiago posted a comment in the Facebook group “What’s going on in Jurupa 

Valley” on February 17, 2017.  He did so because he started receiving texts from former 
students and saw many comments on Facebook, and felt that a “broad brush” was being used 
to paint all teachers at RHS in a bad light.  His comment was:

[I] cannot easily explain what happened.  I know some of these 
people; they are my colleagues.  Their actions at work do not 
seem reflected by these comments.  I have witnessed them go 
beyond the requirements of the job to care for students.  They 

7

need to answer for themselves.  Please know that Rubidoux is 
filled with caring people.  It is a privilege for me to work there, 
and I know that many others share this feeling. 

TESTIMONY OF JOSH LEWIS

22.

Josh Lewis is the Director of Information Technology at the JUSD.  His 
primary duty is to oversee the networks.  Mr. Lewis testified about the existence of the 
district’s acceptable use policy for the use of technology, which is contained in the district’s 
policy manual entitled, “Annual Notification to Employees.”  This manual is provided to 
employees at the commencement of the school year.  District documents confirm that Mrs. 
Riggle received a copy of the policy manual on September 1, 2016.

Mr. Lewis testified that the policy does not address employee use of social media but 

does address conduct when online.  He pointed out several provisions of the policy that he 
felt Mrs. Riggle’s comments on the Facebook thread violated.  However, the policy itself 
commences with the following sentence:  The Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) defines the 
proper use of the district technology resources.  (Emphasis added.)  Thus, a teacher cannot 
violate the AUP unless they are engaging in inappropriate conduct in connection with the use 
of district resources.  Mrs. Riggle’s comments on the Facebook thread were made after 
school hours, on her personal computer, on her personal time, and as such, no district 
resources were utilized.

Mr. Lewis also testified that the district hosts two events, Techfest and Summerjam, 
held at the beginning and end of the school year, respectively.  These events relate to the use 
of information technology in the classroom.  Mr. Lewis said, however, that the events are 
optional.

Finally, Mr. Lewis testified that all teachers are required to teach digital citizenship to 

their students.  Exhibits provided showed the content of the curriculum, which generally
entails proper conduct online in a variety of situations.  Mrs. Riggle did provide the digital 
citizenship curriculum to her students during the 2016-2017 school year.  The documents 
provided that entail the digital curriculum do not show any curriculum aimed at teachers and 
their personal conduct online after school hours.

TESTIMONY OF DANIEL BROOKS

23.

Daniel Brooks is the Director of Personnel at JUSD. His duties include 

overseeing the personnel department, hiring, recruitment, investigations, and discipline, 
among other things.  Prior to becoming the Director of Personnel, Mr. Brooks served in both 
teaching and administrative positions.

When Mr. Brooks saw the Facebook thread, he was very disappointed to see “Mr. 

Greer’s post would express sentiments like that.”  Mr. Brooks felt that the post “perpetuates 
anti-immigrant sentiments,” as well as negative stereotypes of immigrants being lazy and

8

drunk, and affects people’s perceptions of immigrant groups.  Mr. Brooks felt the posts were 
inappropriate.

Following the incident, many people were upset and angry and called the school.  Mr. 

Brooks testified that some people called the school in support of the teachers, as well.

In a meeting on March 17, 2017, between himself, complainant, and Mrs. Riggle, Mr. 

Brooks testified that Mrs. Riggle stated she was not aware of the day without immigrants at
the time the students were missing.

TESTIMONY OF JOSE ARAUX

24.

Dr. Araux has been the principal at RHS for five years.  He has held other 

positions in administration and as a teacher throughout his career.  Dr. Araux’s testimony is
summarized below.

RHS has approximately 1,578 students.  Approximately 90 percent of the students are 
Hispanic, two percent are black, two percent are white, and the rest are “other.”  Dr. Araux is 
aware that some of the students at the school have parents who are immigrants.  Dr. Araux 
said the purpose of the protest event on February 16, 2017, was to show the “importance of 
the immigrant community” and their contribution to this country.  Many students were absent 
the day of the protest event, but a majority of the students came to school.

Dr. Araux reviewed the comments made on the Facebook thread and said he could 

not believe the comments were made by his teachers.  He was especially disheartened when 
he read Mr. Greer’s post. He was offended by Mrs. Riggle’s comments, however, because 
“they were in the chain of comments.”

When Dr. Araux went to RHS on February 17, 2017, his primary goal was to ensure 

the “physical, psychological, and emotional well-being” of the students.  That day, there 
were also many extra people on campus from the district to help provide support.  Dr. Araux
read a message over the school PA system acknowledging the reaction to the Facebook
thread and letting students know that the district was committed to investigate and “take 
appropriate action.”  He responded to over 200 e-mail complaints from parents and people 
across the country.  Dr. Araux also set aside additional time to meet with parents, should they
want to do so. RHS received many calls regarding the Facebook thread. Talking points were 
provided to teachers to help them deal with any situations that might arise in the classroom.
During lunchtime, a student walkout occurred.

On February 18, 2017, Dr. Araux received an e-mail from a student notifying him 
about a potential second student walkout planned for February 21, 2017.  The student was 
very “disappointed” with the actions of the other students who walked off the campus on
February 17, 2017, and concerned about the safety of students and staff members at RHS 
should the second walkout have occurred.  Dr. Araux sent out an e-mail to all staff with a 
modified schedule for that day in order to avert a second walkout.  Dr. Araux sent a 

9

notification to parents warning them of the safety concerns should a second walkout occur 
and also telling them that the school day would be modified on February 21, 2017. The
message did not encourage parents to tell their students to remain in class and refrain from 
participating in the second walkout.  Nonetheless, the second walkout never occurred.

COMPLAINANT’S TESTIMONY

25.

Complainant is the Deputy Superintendent for the JUSD.  Her responsibilities 

include human resources, contract negotiations, developing policies, and disciplinary
matters, among other things.  Complainant has served in various teaching and administrative 
positions in her career.  Complainant’s testimony is summarized as follows.

The district did a “robocall” to parents regarding the February 16, 2017, protest event 

urging them to have their students remain in school.  The district also posted as much on 
their internet site.

Complainant saw the posts by the teachers at RHS on February 16, 2017.  She said 
she knew it would be a firestorm, because they were “significant” and “discriminatory” in 
nature and had already gone “viral.”  Complainant believed that Mr. Greer’s post meant that 
immigrants were lazy and drunk and this was a problem for the district because most of the 
students are Hispanic.  Complainant interpreted Mrs. Riggle’s two comments as 
“discriminatory” and being “part of” Mr. Greer’s original post, perpetuating the same 
thinking.  Complainant said she believed Mrs. Riggle was making a comment about 
immigrants, and by commenting, Mrs. Riggle opened the door for other teachers to respond.

On February 17, 2017, complainant went to RHS.  She went to Mrs. Riggle’s second

period classroom and asked her to come with her – in front of the students.  Complainant said
some students cheered and applauded.  She escorted Mrs. Riggle to a room, where Mr. 
Brooks was also located.  Mrs. Riggle asked why she was there.  At that point, complainant 
gave Mrs. Riggle a letter indicating that she was being placed on paid administrative leave 
due to the Facebook thread incident.

Complainant’s recollection of the student walkout on February 17, 2017, was 
consistent with what other witnesses described.  She estimated approximately 300 students 
left class after lunch.  After about an hour and a half, some came back, some did not.  Prior to 
walking off campus, the students were completely unruly.  They attempted to take down the 
American flag from the flagpole and raise the Mexican flag.  The students chanted, “Fuck
you” and “Fuck Trump.”  When students began to shake a gate that secures the campus, she 
made the decision to open it for their safety. Students then jumped on top of a news van. As
the students marched down public streets outside the school, police tried to block 
intersections. She believed that the student’s opinions on national immigration policy were
also mixed in with the outrage over the posts.

On March 21, 2017, complainant met with Mrs. Riggle.  Mr. Brooks was also present.
Complainant said, when Mrs. Riggle was asked whether she knew about the protest event on 
February 16, 2017, prior to making her Facebook comments, Mrs. Riggle told her that she 

10

did not know.  However, complainant said that e-mails on Mrs. Riggle’s district e-mail
account showed that she was aware.  Specifically, complainant pointed to an e-mail where 
Mrs. Riggle questioned the absenteeism in school that day and another district employee
replied, “It’s a Day Without Immigrants Boycott today.”

Multiple documents containing various policies and procedures of the district were 

provided.  Complainant said she believed Mrs. Riggle violated some of these policies.

Specifically, complainant believed Mrs. Riggle’s Facebook posts violated Board 
Policy 4000, which describes personnel “concepts and roles.”  However, this policy talks
about what the governing board must do, not teachers.  This policy is not one that can be 
violated by a teacher.

Complainant also believed Mrs. Riggle’s two Facebook posts violated the Code of 

Ethics, contained in Board Policy 4119.21.  However, the Code of Ethics speaks of teacher’s 
responsibilities in the classroom – not activities engaged in during their personal time.
Moreover, the broad language complainant referred to as being violated came from the 
preamble of the document, which cannot be violated.5

Complainant also believed Mrs. Riggle’s comments violated Board Policy 4119.32,

having to do with the duties and responsibilities of teachers.  Again, this policy explains what 
teachers must do in the classroom and in their job as educators; nothing in the policy states 
what a teacher may and may not do outside the classroom with respect to social media. 

Complainant also believed Mrs. Riggle’s comments violated Board Policy 5000,

having to do with concepts and roles of teachers.  Again, like Board Policy 4000, this policy
sets forth responsibilities of the governing board and explains the commitment of the 
governing board to students.  It cannot be violated by teachers.

Complainant believed that Mrs. Riggle’s comments violated Board Policy 5145.3,
concerning harassment and discrimination.  This policy applies to activities on campus as 
well as off campus that create a hostile environment at the school.  It is unclear, however,
how Mrs. Riggle’s comments violate this policy given that her comments merely reflected on 
class size during the protest event, and did not disparage any student or contain any racially
inappropriate or discriminatory language.  It is also unclear how the comment could be 

5 The Code of Ethics contains a clause at the end stating that the code governs the 

profession and any violations will be considered “unprofessional.”  The clause goes on to say
that in order to constitute grounds for discipline, the violation must endanger students, 
evidence malice, indicate serious incompetency, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad 
judgement.”  Interestingly, complainant stated the Code of Ethics was violated, but did not 
charge Mrs. Riggle with unprofessional conduct.  A reasonable inference, then, can be drawn 
that the district did not believe Mrs. Riggle did anything that constituted a danger to students, 
and her conduct did not involve provable malice, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad 
judgement.

11

construed as being racially motivated, given that the students who participated in the protest 
event were Hispanic; but those who remained were also predominantly Hispanic.

Complainant confirmed Mrs. Riggle made her comments on personal time and that 

she did not use a district computer to do so.

Evidence Presented by Mrs. Riggle

CHARACTER WITNESSES

T

26.

 L  is a former student of RHS who graduated in 2011.  He said Mrs. 
Riggle was he teacher in 2007 and 2008, and he continues to communicate with her.  He 
described Mrs. Riggle as a very kind, caring, person, who went out of her way to check up on 
students.  In his senior year, Japan had a major earthquake.  He became involved in a project
trying to raise money for disaster relief.  Mrs. Riggle went out of her way to help him.  He 
does not believe Mrs. Riggle is a racist.  She did not exhibit any racist behavior in class.  She 
did not exhibit any anti-immigrant behavior in class.  The last time he saw her was in 2012 or 
2013, when he came to visit her on campus.

27.

David Reed is Mrs. Riggle’s father.  He has been a minister for 50 years.  He 
holds a doctorate in church administration and charitable planning, along with a Bachelor of 
Arts in psychology and an Associate of Arts degree in sociology.  Mr. Reed said Mrs. Riggle 
was raised in a family that is one of faith and diversity.  For example, farm workers in 
California are a very disadvantaged group.  He marched in support of them over 50 years ago 
– Mrs. Riggle saw that.  He also marched in support of the Caesar Chavez hunger fast – Mrs.
Riggle saw that.  At one point during Mrs. Riggle’s youth, she was in a church group that 
went back and forth to Arizona and missions in Mexico to help the disadvantaged.  She also 
helped build a well in a poor city in Mexico.  Mr. Reed said that the church and youth group 
Mrs. Riggle participated in were very ethnic, multi-racial, and socioeconomically diverse.
According to Mr. Reed, Mrs. Riggle uses art to “reach into the lives and souls of her 
students” and teach them “in a way that goes beyond the color palette.”  Mr. Reed’s 
testimony was credible and compelling. 

28.

Charles Baugh is a teacher at RHS, who also made a post on Mr. Greer’s 

Facebook thread.  He said he took Mrs. Riggle’s post to mean merely that she had 50 
absences, and that his post – that he had 49 and his classes were also quieter – responded to 
that post.  Mr. Baugh did not say much about Mrs. Riggle; his testimony was more geared 
towards his own comments on Facebook.

29.

Diane Rose is a Special Education teacher at RHS.  She has known Mrs. 

Riggle for seven years.  They served as co-advisors to the travel club.  She said Mrs. Riggle 
was both a camper and a counselor at a church camp they both attend – where Ms. Rose is 
the craft director.  On occasion, some of her students go into Mrs. Riggle’s classroom, so she 
also goes into Mrs. Riggle’s classroom.  Ms. Rose described Mrs. Riggle as the “gentlest 
soul in the world” who has never exhibited any behaviors that could be considered 

12

discriminatory or anti-immigrant.  Ms. Rose said Mrs. Riggle finds the positive in every
single person and is an amazing woman.  Ms. Rose described her as a “gift” whose reason 
for being on this earth is “to let children be who they want to be.”

MRS. RIGGLE’S MOST RECENT EVALUATION FORM

30. Mrs. Riggle received her most recent evaluation on April 24, 2015.  She 
received an “exceeds” standards in all but two categories; in those two categories, she 
received a “meets” standards.  Some of the comments on her evaluation are as follows:

“Mutual respect is evidenced between Mrs. Riggle and 
students.”

“She is aware of the different learning styles of her student[s] 
and work[s] individually with those needing additional support.”

“Riggle circulated around the room as students gathered their 
research materials and the art work they had begun.  She 
reminded students that they needed to complete their assignment 
and use the appropriate use of color combination keeping in 
mind the theme.”

“Mrs. Riggle developed . . . activities that supported student
learning.”

MRS. RIGGLE’S TESTIMONY

31.

The following is a summary of Mrs. Riggle’s testimony.

Mrs. Riggle has been a teacher for approximately 10 years.  She is currently assigned 

to RHS.  She has worked in at least one other school in the district. She also worked as a 
substitute in another school district. Mrs. Riggle has a Master of Education from the 
University in LaVerne, which is also where she received her teaching credential in art.  She 
also has a Bachelor’s Degree in Fine Arts and an Associate of Arts degree in Fashion. 

Mrs. Riggle was aware of the February 16, 2017, protest event before it happened.

She said she had heard things on campus and had also seen it on the news.  The morning of 
February 16, 2017, she did not notice anything unusual, but as the day went on, she noticed 
an unusually high rate of absenteeism.

When Mrs. Riggle returned home after school, she went on Facebook.  She saw Mr. 

Greer’s post and thought it was a bit insensitive.  She wrote her comment because she 
wanted to add something to the discussion that was positive; she explained that teachers are
taught to make observations and be reflective about what is happening in classes.  Mrs. 
Riggle explained that she believed her post was positive, because on a very politically

13

charged day, in “crazy political times,” it could have been very volatile in the classroom;
instead, it was a pleasant day.  She said that evening she did see some comments on 
Facebook calling the Facebook thread racist and referring to her as a racist, but she did not 
realize at that point the extent of the response.

On February 17, 2017, she went to school and taught her first period class.  In her 

second period class, complainant removed her from her class.  She did not recall any students 
clapping.  They went into an office and complainant asked for her ID badge and keys and 
told her she was on paid administrative leave.  Mrs. Riggle asked if it was because of the 
Facebook posts and if she should have a union representative present.  Complainant told her 
it was not a disciplinary matter.  Later, complainant gave her a letter explaining the reason 
for the leave.

Mrs. Riggle said the district has never given any guidance as to proper use of social 

media on a private computer and has never been made aware of any social media policy.  She 
has taught digital citizenship.  She has never attended Summerjam or Techfest.

On March 21, 2017, Mrs. Riggle met with complainant and someone else.  She said 
complainant did not ask any questions.  She said the purpose of the meeting was to let her 
know what charges were being made against her.  Mrs. Riggle recalled being asked whether 
she knew about the February 16, 2017, protest event before it happened.  Mrs. Riggle said 
she told them she had been made aware of it on the news the night before and from hearing 
conversations between students in her class.

Mrs. Riggle said she is absolutely not a racist and has no reason to hate immigrants.
She said she does not believe she did anything in the classroom to show she is a racist and 
she has never said anything racist or discriminatory.  Regarding her comments, she had no 
intention of saying anything mean, derogatory, or racist; she only wanted to express 
observations about what had happened in her classroom that day – and it was a very pleasant
productive day.  She said her Facebook settings are set to the highest privacy settings and 
that she did not even know members of the public could view her posts.  She said never in 
her wildest imagination could she have seen what happened.  Mrs. Riggle said she was 
deeply sorry for anything she did that contributed to the outrage and she felt bad about how 
the situation was publicized.

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a preponderance 

of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.)

14

2.

“‘Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more convincing 

force than that opposed to it.’  [Citations.]” (Glage v. Hawes Firearms Company (1990) 226 
Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325)  The sole focus of the legal definition of ‘preponderance’ in the 
phrase ‘preponderance of the evidence’ is on the quality of the evidence.  The quantity of the 
evidence presented by each side is irrelevant.”  (Ibid., italics emphasis in original.)

Applicable Law

3.

4.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on 

Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may 
not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction.
(Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

5.

A permanent certificated teacher may be dismissed for, among other things, 

dishonesty, immoral conduct, and evident unfitness for service.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. 
(a)(1), (a)(4), and (a)(5).)

6.

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), provides that a teacher may

DISHONESTY

be dismissed for being dishonest.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

7.

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in

the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California Teachers Association v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, 
or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 
808, 811.)

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 

15

conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach.  (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.)

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

8.

Unfitness for service means “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; 

incapable; incompetent; and physically or mentally unsound.” (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.)
As a threshold matter, the criteria outlined by the California Supreme Court in Morrison v. 
State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, are examined to ascertain whether the conduct in 
question indicates unfitness for service. In reaching a conclusion that grounds exist to dismiss 
a certificated employee on the basis of evident unfitness for service, not all Morrison factors
need be examined, only the pertinent ones.  (Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28
Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) In this sense, the purpose of examining the Morrison criteria serves,
initially, to establish a nexus between the proven conduct and fitness to teach.

However, even if the applicable Morrison criteria are satisfied, it must also be 

determined that the offensive conduct constitutes evident unfitness for service.  (Morrison,
supra, at p. 1445 [emphasis added].) “Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit for 
teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies; it connotes fixed
character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct 
fails to meet expectations of the school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 [emphasis 
added].)

THE MORRISON FACTORS

9.

In Morrison , the court held that an individual can be removed from the teaching 

profession only upon a showing that his or her “retention in the profession poses a significant 
danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his
actions as a teacher.” (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d 214,. at p. 235.)  Thus, even in instances 
where the charged conduct is established, it must also be established that the conduct renders 
the respondent unfit to teach.  (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d 214, a pp. 229-230; Fontana Unified
School Dist. v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208; Woodland, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1444-
1445.) The court then delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s 
conduct indicated that he or she is not fit to teach:  (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have
adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) 
the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by
the teacher; (5) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in 
question; (6) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 
(7) the likelihood of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which 
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.  (Morrison, supra, at pp. 229-
230.)

10.

In Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the Supreme Court 

detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach.  This opinion upheld the 

16

standard established in Morrison that a discharged teacher is entitled to a fitness hearing in 
which not only his conduct but also these factors are analyzed:  (1) likelihood of recurrence 
of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the 
effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ relationships; (5) 
disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of 
conduct.  (Id., at f.n. 5.) 

Evaluation and Conclusion

11. Mrs. Riggle’s choice to post two comments on a Facebook thread that
contained other posts with questionable commentary regarding immigrants evidenced poor 
judgement, especially given the demographics of the school district in which she is 
employed. However, the law does not permit dismissal of a teacher solely based on poor 
judgment; the question is whether her two Facebook posts on the Facebook thread
constituted immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

12.

Once the Facebook thread was discovered, it went viral.  Parents, students, 
teachers, immigrant groups, civil rights organizations, and community members became 
upset about the overall content of the Facebook thread. The district received e-mails from a 
variety of individuals expressing their anger about the Facebook posts. The incident gained 
widespread media attention. Mrs. Riggle’s and Mr. Greer’s classrooms were sprayed with 
graffiti. The day after the Facebook posts, her classroom was disrupted. According to Mrs. 
Bailey, her classroom conditions were somewhat disrupted during the day but by the end of 
the day, most of the students had addressed the issues in their other classes. Thus, things 
seemed to be returning to normal.

However, school and district operations were substantially interrupted by the same 

conditions above, as well as by a student protest in the form of a walk-out from regularly
scheduled classes.  The walk-out was organized in part by Ms. Marina, according to her 
testimony, and occurred the day after the Facebook posts.  During the walkout, several
hundred students left the campus without permission.  They blocked streets and almost
damaged a school gate. A majority of the students who comprised the approximately 1,600
total students at RHS, however, remained on campus and did not partake in the disruption.
Most certainly, the reaction to the Facebook thread affected the schools’ ability to provide 
educational services on February 17, 2017. 

At the same time, the nature of the Facebook posts must be considered. Mrs. Riggle’s

Facebook comments were made on her personal time, on her personal computer, on her 
private Facebook account, after school hours.  Her comments did not disparage any student.
They did not comment on any student activities.  They did not comment on student race.
They did not express agreement with Mr. Greer’s comments about immigrants or with 
anyone else on the Facebook thread.  Her comments did not contain strong language or other 
questionable material that showed an inappropriate temperament, an undesirable character 

17

trait, corruption, depravity, moral indignation for any class of persons, or contain any
material that suggest Mrs. Riggle would be unfit to teach art.  Her comments merely
reflected her observations of what impact the protest event had on her classroom that day.

Furthermore, Mrs. Riggle’s credible testimony established that she did not 

intentionally make the comments to harm students nor did she have any insidious motive; she
merely expressed her view about her classroom conditions on the day that a very public
event took place. Mrs. Riggle had no idea that her comments would be construed in the 
manner that they were; in fact, she thought she was adding something positive to the 
discussion as she found Mr. Greer’s initial comment to be somewhat insensitive. Indeed,
Mrs. Riggle’s background, as recounted by her father, showed that she has been raised in a
very diverse and inclusive environment. Mrs. Riggle has also taught in the district for 10 
years without issue. Her most recent personnel evaluation noted that the mutual respect 
between Mrs. Riggle and the students was evident.

Simply put, while several of the factors set forth in Morrison6 and Jack M. arguably
may have been satisfied, thus establishing a nexus between the comments and the fitness to 
teach, ultimately, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mrs. Riggle’s two
comments on the Facebook thread were attributable to a temperamental defect, inadequacy,
or a fixed character trait not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet expectations of the school district. In other words, she was not shown to be unfit, not
adapted to a purpose, unsuitable, incapable, incompetent, or physically or mentally unsound to
continue teaching. Thus, her comments do not constitute evident unfitness for service.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

13.

A preponderance of the evidence also did not establish that Mrs. Riggle’s

comments constituted immoral conduct. Again, while she may have used poor judgement in 
participating in a Facebook thread that contained other questionable comments, for the same 
reasons discussed above, her decision to post about conditions in her classroom were not

6 Clearly there was a lot of notoriety surrounding this incident and there was an impact 
on the students because of the overall Facebook thread – which Mrs. Riggle happened to be a 
part of.  Mrs. Riggle’s comments could be construed as adversely affecting students and
teachers to the extent that her comments were contained on a Facebook thread that contained
other questionable comments. Teachers and district personnel were also affected because they
had to modify their schedules to tend to the problems that arose following the Facebook 
incident.  Given the demographics of the district, Mrs. Riggle should have anticipated some 
backlash about commenting on a Facebook thread that contained arguably insensitive remarks 
about immigrants, or at least persons participating in the protest event.  There were no 
aggravating circumstances or bad motives; to the contrary, Mrs. Riggle’s credible testimony
established she thought she was adding a positive tone to the conversation.  Mrs. Riggle 
apologized for what happened and there is no reason to believe something of this nature will 
happen again. Mrs. Riggle is an art teacher where political issues are unlikely to arise in her 
class.

18

flagrant, shameless, inconsistent with public decency, or reflective of a moral indifference to 
the opinions of others.

DISHONESTY

14.

The Notice of Intent to Dismiss charged that, in an interview with the district 
on March 21, 2017, Mrs. Riggle said she was not aware of the reason students were absent 
from school prior to posting her comments on the Facebook thread. However, the evidence 
did not show precisely what question was asked of Mrs. Riggle; here, the exact wording of 
the question is crucial because of conflicting testimony regarding Mrs. Riggle’s response.
Complainant testified that Mrs. Riggle told her during the interview that she was unaware of 
the existence of the protest event. Mrs. Riggle testified that she was asked if she knew about 
the protest event itself, and she stated that she did, but she had not discussed it with her 
students.  Mr. Brooks, who was also in the meeting, testified that Mrs. Riggle said she was 
not aware of the protest event “at the time her students were missing.”  These different 
interpretations of Mrs. Riggle’s response could have been attributed to several different 
questions.  Accordingly, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mrs. Riggle 
was dishonest.

Conclusion

15.

As role models, teachers need to be cognizant of the nature of their job and the 

impact their personal speech may have on the population they serve. Most definitely,
teachers need to use discretion and sound judgment if they decide to engage in social media 
interaction. Mrs. Riggle should have considered the overall manner in which her comments 
might be construed, given the other comments that existed in other portions of the Facebook 
thread.

Perhaps remedial training on how to use social media would be desirable. Perhaps

the district should enact a policy, which it does not currently have, to help guide employees
on proper conduct when utilizing social media. Perhaps the classes the district currently has
pertaining to social media and computer usage could be made mandatory rather than 
voluntary.  There are many remedial measures that could be taken to try and prevent 
employees from using poor judgement on social media platforms when not in the classroom.
Nonetheless, the Commission is not permitted to make recommendations nor to impose any
remedial measures for conduct raised in this case, which might have been appropriate.
Rather, the choice the district gave the Commission was all or nothing: dismiss Mrs. Riggle
or dismiss the charges entirely.

Given that the district did not establish the charged offenses by a preponderance of

the evidence, cause does not exist to dismiss Mrs. Riggle pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(4), or (a)(6).

19

The Statement of Charges against Robin Riggle is dismissed.

ORDER

DATED:

October 26, 2017

DATED:

(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:8)(cid:10)(cid:12) (cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2) (cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)

DATED:

October 27, 2017

yoo  DocuSigned  by: 

Crean  Colombo. 

_ _____________________________________
GREG SOLOMON
Certificated Music Teacher and Coordinator for 
Visual and Performing Arts
Moreno Valley Unified School District

oot  DocuSigned  by: 

|  Pamela  Ponaard, 
_ _____________________________________
PAMELA BERNARD
Certificated Theater Arts Teacher
Beaumont Unified School District

wows  DocuSigned  by: 

 himberlu  Bubaedere
_______________________________________
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

20

