BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
WILLIAM  S.  HART  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

EDWARD  COLLEY, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

Case  No.  2017010228 

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  William  S.  Hart  Union  High  School  District  (District),  County  of  Los  Angeles,  State 
of  California  (Commission),  in  Santa  Clarita,  California,  on  November  27,  28,  29,  and  December 
6,  2017.  The  Commission  consists  of the  following  members: 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Chairperson 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of Administrative  Hearings 

David  Duffield,  Member 
Selected  by  the  Governing  Board 

Allen  Robert  Stubblefield,  Member 
Selected  by  Respondent 

Kerrie  E.  McNally,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  District. 

Tamra  M.  Smith,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Edward  Colley  (Respondent),  who  was 

present  throughout  the  proceedings. 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  Respondent  on  grounds  of  evident  unfitness  for  service  and 
persistent  refusal  to  obey  school  laws.  The  District  hired  Respondent  in  August  1995  to  teach  in 
its 
Air  Force  Junior  Reserve  Officer  Training  Corps  (AFJROTC  or  JROTC)  Program. 
Respondent  taught  in  the  Program  until  June  30,  2015,  when  the  United  States  Air  Force  (Air

Absent  the  certification, 
Force)  revoked  his  certification  to  serve  as 
Respondent  cannot  teach  in  the  JROTC  program.  The  District  relies  on  the  deceritfication  and  the 
facts  surrounding  the  decertification  to  argue  that  cause  for  dismissal  exists.  Respondent  disputed 
some  of  the  factual  allegations  and  argued  that  grounds  for  dismissal  do  not  exist. 

a  JROTC  instructor. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  recerved  at  the  hearmng.  The  record  was  left  open  for 
submission  of  closing  argument.  Initial  argument  was  recetved  from  both  parties  on  December  29, 
2017,  and  reply  argument  was  received  from  both  on  January  12,  2018.  The  matter  was  submitted 
for  decision  on  January  12,  2018. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional  Findings 

i. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of the  District. 

2. 

On  November  17,  2017,  the  District  filed  a  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and 
Respondent  thereafter 

Statement  of  Charges  (Accusation),  seeking  Respondent’s  dismissal. 
requested  a  hearing,  and  the  mstant  proceedings  followed. 

3. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent's  Background  and  Employment  With  The  District 

4. 

Respondent  holds  a  Designated  Subjects  Special  Subjects  Teaching  Credential 
(ROTC)  and  an  Admumstratrve  Services  Credential,  Certificate  of  Eligibility,  both  issued  by  the 
California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 
He  obtained  the  former  credential  on 
september  |,  1995,  and  he  received  the  latter  on  August  30,  2005. 

5. 

Respondent  attended  three  institutions  of  higher  education:  Onodaga  Community 
College  in  Syracuse,  New  York,  from  June  August  1979  to  May  1980:  Rochester  Institute  of 
Technology,  ta  Rochester,  New  York,  from  the  Fail  of  1980  until  the  Fall  of  1983;  and,  the  Aur 
Force  Institute  of  Technology,  on  Wright-Patterson  Air  Force  Base  in  Ohio,  from  May  1989  until 
December  1989.  During  his  tenure  at  these  schools,  Respondent  obtamed  credit  for  28  semester 
In  addition,  in  order  to  become  an  ROTC 
units  in  Math  and  32  semester  units  in  Science. 
mstructor,  Respondent  received  traming  trom  the  Air  Force  and  from  the  Ventura  County  Office 
of  Education. 

a. 

6. 

1995,  the  District  and  Respondent,  a  retired  Am  Force 
Captain,  entered  into  an  employment  contract  for  Respondent  to  provide  “certificated  service,” 
effective  September  |,  1995.  The  agreement  was  to  continue  m  effect  until  Respondent  resigned,

On  August  2, 

abandoned  his  position,  was  laid  off  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,’  was  non- 
reelected  pursuant  to  section  44882,  retired  from  employment,  was  dismissed  pursuant  to  sections 
44932,  44948.3,  or  44948.5,  failed  to  maintain  his  teaching  credential  or  certificate,  failed  to  pass 
either  the  CBEST  or  a  District-prescribed  proficiency  test,  gave  false  information  in  the  application 
for  employment,  or  was  terminated  by  any  other  reason  authorized  by  law. 

b. 

With  respect  to  “Maintenance  of  Credentials,”  the  agreement  provided,  in 
pertinent  part:  “Applicant  warrants  and  represents  that  he/she  will,  with  respect  to  each  credential 
recited  above  and  any  other  credential  subsequently  obtained  by  Applicant: 
1.  Immediately 
register  each  credential  with  all  appropriate  agencies,  including  the  County  Superintendent  of 
2.  Take  and  pass  all  examinations  or  continuing  education  courses  which  are  now  or 
Schools.  [§] 
3.  Refrain  from  any  act  or  omission  which  is 
may  be  required  for  renewal  of  each  credential. 
intended  to  or  will  result  in  suspension,  revocation,  or  deregistration  of  any  or  all  credentials. 
[] 
Applicant  acknowledges  that  his/her  continuing  employment  with  the  District  is  expressly  subject 
Failure  to  maintain  each  credential  may  be  treated  by  the 
to  maintenance  of  each  credential. 
District,  at  its  sole  option,  as  a  material  breach  of  this  contract  and  as  grounds  for  dismissal  for 
unprofessional  conduct  and  insubordination.”  (Exh.  5,  at  pp.  2  and  3.) 

[§] 

[§] 

C. 

The  reference  in  the  provision  of  the  contract  set  forth  in  factual  finding 
number  6b  to  the  “credential  recited  above”  was  to  the  “R.O.T.C.,  Designated  Subjects”  credential 
issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teaching  Credentialing  (CTC).  (Ud.,  at  p.  1.)  By  its  own 
in  the  context  of  the 
terms,  the  provision  pertains  to  “Maintenance  of  Credentials,’  and, 
employment  contract  for  “certificated”  employment,  the  term  must  refer  to  credentials  required  to 
be  maintained  for  certificated  employment,  namely,  those  issued  by  the  CTC. 

d. 

The  employment  contract  also  contains  the  following  requirement: 

“The 
Applicant  agrees  that  he/she  will  faithfully  adhere  to  all  laws  of  the  State  of  California,  and  the 
United  States,  the  regulations  of  the  State  Board  of  Education,  the  regulations,  policies,  and 
directives  of the  District  Board  and  all  lawful  directives  of  Applicant’s  superiors.”  (/d.,  at  p.  4.) 

7. 

The  District  assigned  Respondent  to  serve  as  an  instructor  in  the  JROTC  program, 

a  position  he  discharged  until  June  30,  2015. 

8. 

Between  his  initial  employment  and  June  30,  2015,  Respondent  was  certified  by 
the  Air  Force  to  serve  as  a  JROTC  instructor. 
On  May  18,  2015,  the  Air  Force  revoked  the 
certificate,  effective  June  30,  2015,  and  Respondent  does  not  currently  hold  a  certification  from  the 
Aur  Force  to  teach  JROTC. 

9. 

On  June  30,  2015,  following  the  decertification  by  the  Air  Force,  the  District  non- 
reelected  Respondent  as  a  probationary  employee.  Respondent  challenged  his  non-reelection  in 
On  September  26,  2016,  the  court 
the  Superior  Court  of  California,  County  of  Los  Angeles. 
  

‘All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

a  permanent  employee  of  the  District. 
ordered  Respondent's  reinstatement  as 
remstatement,  Respondent  has  been  working  as  a  substitute  teacher  im  the  District. 

Followime  his 

The  JROTC  Program 

oa 

10 

The  Dustrict  mamtams  the  JROTC  Program  at  Valencia  High  School 
(Valencia  High)  pursuant  to  a  contract  with  the  Air  Force.  As  part  of  the  contract,  the  Air  Force 
aprees:  to  establish  a  JROTC  unit;  to  prescribe  course  content;  to  provide  all  curriculum  text, 
teaching  aides,  and  other  academic  text  supplies  associated  with  the  program:  to  provide 
certification/licensure  training  to  instructors  contracted  by  the  District,  provided  the  mstructors  are 
retired  Aw  Force  officers  or  non-commissioned  officers;  to  issue  Air  Force  uniforms,  supplies,  and 
equipment;  and  to  remmburse  the  District  for  the  Air  Force  portion  of  the  instructors  pay  and  other 
costs  associated  with  District  support  of  unit  activities,  such  as  transportation  and  logistical 
SUPpOFT, 

b. 

In 

the 

contract  the 

District  agrees,  among  other  things: 

to  establish 
Aerospace  Science  as  a  separate,  integral  academic,  and  administrative  department  and  to  establish 
a  iminimum  three-year  course  of  JROTC  consisting  of  at  least  120  classroom  hours  per  year;  to 
teach  the  required  JROTC  courses  prescribed  by  the  Air  Force;  to  grant  academic  credit  applicable 
toward  graduation  requirements  for  the  successful  completion  of  JROTC  courses;  to  make 
available  to  the  Aerospace  Science  Department  the  necessary  classroom  facilities  and  office  space 
for  the  efficient  and  effective  accomplishment  of  JROTC  course  objectives:  to  provide  and 
maintain  drill  area(s)  at  or  m  the  mmiediate  vicinity  of  the  school;  to  provide  and  maintain  storage 
facilities  for  the  protection  and  care  of  uniforms,  supplies  and  equipment  used  by  the  JROTC 
program:  to  provide  Aerospace  Science  faculty  access  to  the  worldwide  web;  to  employ,  at  a 
minimum,  one  retired  Air  Force  commissioned  officer  and  one  Air  Force  non-cormiussioned 
officer  to  conduct  JROTC  classes 
to  conduct  annual  instructor 
evaluations,  as  outhned  in  JROTC  instructions,  and  to  submit  them  through  Air  Force  channels;  to 
provide  the  JROTC  instructors  with  employment  contracts  meeting  certain  requirements;  to  make 
available  to  the  Aerospace  Science  Department  all  mstructional  supplies,  materials,  services, 
furniture,  and  privileges  afforded  other  academic  departments  at  the  mstitution;  and  to  comply  with 
Aar  Force  directives  governing  unit  operations,  JROTC  curriculum,  cadet  performance,  instructor 
management,  and  logistics  management. 

and  leadership  activities; 

il. 

Between  1995  and  June  30,  2015,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  TROTC  Unit  CA- 
782  at  Valencia  High  in  the  District.  Respondent  was  the  Senior  Acrospace  Science  Instructor 
(SAS)  and  commanding  officer  of  FROTC  Unit  CA-782. 

12, 

In  June  2004,  the  District  hired  retired  Master  Sergeant  Frederick  D.  Malcomb,  Jr. 

(Malcomb}  to  work  at  the  JROTC  as  an  Aerospace  Science  Instructor. 

iB. 

The  Valencia  High  principal  was  the  District  manager  responsible  for  the 
direct  supervision  of  Respondent  and  Malcomb.  Dr.  Paul  Priesz  (Priesz)  was  the  principal  until

oa 

June  30,  2014,  and  John  Costanzo  (Costanzo),  the  current  principal,  assumed  his  position  in  July 
2014.  In  the  JROTC  program,  Respondent,  as  SASL  unit  commander,  and  higher  ranking  officer, 
was  responsible  for  supervising  and  assigning  work  to  Maicomb. 

b. 

Respondent  and  Maicomb  had  a  good  working  relationship,  and  the 
reporting  relationship  was  an  informal  one. 
To  the  extent  possible,  Respondent  and  Malcomb 
typically  divided  up  their  responsibilities  to  the  Air  Force  and  the  District.  Thus,  Respondent  was 
Maicomb  was  primarily 
orimariy  responsible  for  accountimg, 
responsible  for  Air  Force  equipment  and  other  property,  logistics,  curriculum,  and  organizing 
community  events  and  fundraisers. 

and  fundraising. 

finances, 

c. 

To  meet  Air  Force  requirements,  Respondent  appointed  Malcomb  as  the 
orimary  Information  Technology  Equipment  Custodian  (TEC),  responsible  for  ordermg  and 
conducting  inventory  of  computer  and  other  clectronic  equipment,  and  as  the  Military  Property 
Custodian  (MIPC),  responsible  for  ordering  and  conducting  mventory  of  all  other  Air  Force 
property,  such  as  cadet  uniforms.  Respondent  was  the  alternate  ITEC. 

i4, 

Respondent  deemed  Malcomb  to  be  a  competent  non-commissioned  officer,  and 
trusted  him  to  discharge  his  duties.  Respondent  tended  to  be  hands-off  m  areas  of  Malcomb’s 
responsibilities,  wicluding,  as  pertinent  to  this  matter,  handling  of  IT  equipment  and  IT  matters. 
However,  as  SASL  Respondent  was  responsible  for  oversight  of  Air  Force  Automated  Data 
Processing  Equipment  (ADPE)  compliance. 

iS. 

Air  Force  ROTC  units  were  under  the  direction  and  supervision  of  a  command 
structure  based  at  Holm  Center,  located  in  Maxwell  Air  Force  Base  in  Alabama  (Headquarters). 
Respondent  was  responsible 
from 
level 
Headquarters. 

for  compliance  with  the 

directives 

unit 

the 

at 

Communications  with  JROTC  Unit  CA-782 

i6. 

Respondent  and  Malcomb  had  two  separate  electronic  mail  (email)  accounts,  one 
for  contacts  with  the  District  and  one  for  contacts  with  the  Air  Force.  They  were  cach  part  of  three 
Agar  Force  email  distribution  groups,  one  at  the  unit  level,  one  as  the  regional  level,  and  one  at  the 
national  level. 

17, 

Except  for  the  period  of  September  2014  through  May  2015,  when  he  did  not  have 
access  to  his  email  JROTC  account,  tt  was  Respondent's  custom  and  practice  to  check  his  email 
about  once  per  week.  It  was  Malcomb’s  custom  and  practice  to  check  his  FROTC  email  account 
three  to  four  times  per  week. 

8. 

WINGS  is 

a  JROTC  website  and  database  that  also  serves  as  a  communications 
vehicle  with  the  JROTC.  TROTC  emai  accounts  can  be  accessed  through  WINGS.  WINGS  is 
used  to  exchange  information  between  Headquarters  and  JROTC  units. 

y
F
[

19, 

Respondent's  primary  work  computer  was  a  District-issued  desktop  computer, 
whose  operating  system  was  Windows  XP.  He  used  the  computer  to  check  his  emauls,  both  from 
the  District  and  from  the  Au  Force,  and  to  perform  his  school  administrative  duties. 
Matters 
pertaming  to  mstruction,  curriculum,  and  student  mformation  were  handled  through  a  separate  Air 
Force-issued  computer. 

20. 

Effective  September  15,  2014,  the  Air  Force  restricted  WINGS  access  for 
computers  using  Windows  XP  because  the  operating  system  would  no  longer  receive  security 
updates  or  other  support  from  Microsoft  Corporation.  As  a  result,  Respondent  lacked  the  ability  of 
accessing  WINGS  from  his  computer  until  he  obtamed  a  new  computer  in  March  or  April  2015. 

21. 

 Malcomb’s  computer  did  not  have  the  outdated  operating  system,  and  he  had 
access  to  WINGS  at  all  relevant  times.  He  did  occasionally  experience  difficulties  locating  certain 
modules  and  uploading  some  information. 

22, 

Except  as  otherwise  noted,  Respondent  and  Malcomb  recenved  all  electronic 
communications  sent  to  the  Valencia  High  JROTC  unit  from  Headquarters  via  email  or  WINGS. 
The  emails  were  sent  through  regularly  established  channels  of  communication  im  the  regular 
course  of  business. 
Respondent  and  Malcomb  testified  that  they  regularly  checked  their  email 
accounts  and  WINGS,  with  the  noted  exception  for  Respondent  during  the  period  of  September 
2014  to  May  2015. 
Even  when  Respondent  was  without  access  to  his  emails  or  to  WINGS 
through  his  computer,  it  was  Malcomb’s  custom  and  practice  to  print  important  emails  and  provide 
them  to  Respondent.  Moreover,  Respondent  and  Malcomb  specifically  acknowledged  receiving 
specific  emails.  While  both  Respondent  and  Malcomb  asserted  numerous  times  that  they  did  not 
recall  recetving  a  particular  communication,  this  lack  of  recollection  is  msufficient  negate  receipt 
of  communications  made  through  regular  channels, 

Data  Processing  Equipment  and  Air  Force  Instructions 

by 

As 

23, 

the 

law, 

federal 

authorized 

Air  Force 

Secretary  of  the 

publishes 
“Instructions,”  mcliding  some  that  exclusively  apply  to  AFJROTC,  all  of  which  prommently  state 
“COMPLIANCE  WITH  THIS  PUBLICATION  Is  MANDATORY,”  to  govern  management  of 
the  TROTC  units.  AFFROTC  Instruction  36-2002,  issued  October  11,  2013,  requires  AFJROTC 
mstructors,  among  other  things:  (1)  to  perform  duties,  accept  responsibilities  and  meet  standards  as 
prescribed  by  applicable  Department  of  Defense  (DoD),  Air  Force,  Holm  Center,  and  AFFROTC 
mstructors;  (2)  log  ito  therr  WINGS  and  their  email  accounts  at  least  weekly  to  ensure  they 
remain  current  on  all  announcements,  perform  all  required  system  updates,  and  meet  all  required 
suspenses;  and  (3)  comply  with  all  Air  Force  directives  governing  AFTROTC.  (Exh.  19,  at  pp.  4 
and  11.) 

24, 

As  part  ofthe  JROTC  Program,  TROTC  Unit  CA-782  uses  the  Air  Force’s  ADPE. 
The  Air  Force  requires  accountability  and  safekeeping  of  the  ADPE.  As  set  forth  in  AFJROTC 
Instruction  36-2001,  dated  September  8,  2010,  the  ITEC  is  required  to  mamtam  an  imventory  of  all

ADPE.  (Exh.  7,  at  p.  622.5  In  addition,  the  ITEC  must  conduct  an  annual  AIM  imventory,  which 
includes  accounting  for  all  computers,  projectors,  digital  cameras,  and  other  electronic  equipment, 
and  revise  the  annual  inventory  any  time  there  are  changes  in  the  equipment  count. 
A 
signed  copy  of  the  AIM  Inventory  must  be  returned  to  Headquarters.  (bid.)  Letters  setting  forth 
the  Primary  and  Alternate  ITEC  must  also  be  prepared  annually,  but  the  Instruction  does  not 
specifically  require  providing  a  copy  to  Headquarters.  Respondent  and  Malicomb  testified  that  all 
that  was  required  was  for  the  ITEC  letters  to  be  kept  locally.  These  tasks  must  be  accomplished 
between  January  |  and  April  30  of  every  year.  bid.)  The  sanction  for  failure  to  submit  required 
documentation  to  Headquarters  was  described  as  follows: 
“Failure  to  comply  with  the  Holm 
Center/SDCS  suspense  [or  deadline]  for  submitting  an  updated  IT  equipment  custodian  letter  or 
completing  an  AIM  inventory  will  result  m  the  unit’s  AIM  account  locked  and  meligible  to  obtain 
IT  equipment  refreshes.”  (bid. ) 

Ubid.)) 

25, 

AFJROTC  Instruction  36-2001,  dated  May  28,  2014,  made  certain  changes  and 
For  mstance,  it  made  clear  that  “New  ADPE  equipment  custodian  letters  and  AIM 
clarification. 
mventories  will  be  accomplished  and  signed  every  year  whether  there  have  been  ADPE  equipment 
custodian  changes  of  not.”  (Exh.  40,  at  p.  10.)  Moreover,  in  stating  that  “Failure  to  comply  with 
the  Holm  Center  for  submitting  an  updated  ADPE  equipment  custodian  letter  or  completing  an 
AIM  taventory  will  result  in  the  unit’s  AIM  account  being  Jocked  and  the  unit  declared  ineligible 
to  obtain  ADPE  equipment  refreshes,”  the  Instruction  made  clear  that  the  [TEC  letters  also  had  to 
be  submitted  to  Headquarters  in  order  to  obtain  new  equipment.  Gd.,  atp.  11.) 

26, 

The  Air  Force  also  maintains  an  Am  Force  Manual  (Manual). 

Manual  33-153, 
dated  March  19,  2014,  which  like  the  Instructions  promimently  states  “COMPLIANCE  WITH 
(Ex. 
THIS  PUBLICATION  IS  MANDATORY.”  pertains  to  Communications  and  Information. 
J,atp.  1.) 
In  pertment  part,  the  Manual  requires  (1)  ITEC  “Appointment  letters  will  be  reviewed 
annually  and  a  new  appomtment  letter  will  be  accomplished  if  there  have  been  any  changes.”  CEx. 
J,  atp.  13);  2)  the  equipment  control  officer  must  conduct  training  of  ITECs  within  30  days  of 
initial  appomtment  and  annually  thereafter,  (4)  TTECs  are  required  to  perform,  at  a  minumum,  an 
annual  inventory  of  all  assets  in  the  AIM  account;  (Exh.  J.,  at  pp.  13,  14) 

Pertinent  School  Rules 

27, 

The  superintendent  or  designee  shall  ensure  that 

Board  Policy  4100  requires,  in  pertment  part:  “The  Governing  Board  recognizes 
that  teachers  and  other  certificated  personnel  work  closely  with  students  im  carrying  out  the 
duties, 
district’s  educational  goals. 
responsibilities,  and  district’s  expectations  for  certificated  positions  are  clearly  defined  and  made 
known  to  cach  member  of  the  certificated  staff. 
[fF]  Each  certificated  staff  member  shail  be  held 
accountable  for  duties  assigned  to  him/her  and  shall  undergo  regular  performance  evaluations  in 
[{]  The  Board  strongly  encourages  certificated 
accordance  with  law  and  negotiated  agreements. 
staff  to  continually  unprove  their  skills  and  pursue  excellence  within  their  profession. 
ff]...  (YP 
(Exh.  60.)

the 

Submission  of ADPE  Documentation  Before  the  2013-2014  School  Year 

28, 

ROTC  units  had  the  opportunity  to  request  new  equipment  on  a  scheduled,  yearly 
basis,  a  process  known  as  the  “IT  Refresh.”  Requesting  the  equipment  required  compiction  and 
submission  to  Headquarters  of  an  ITEC  Appointment  Letter  and  an  AIM  Inventory.  Submission 
could  be  done  via  facsimile  or  email  transmission.  In  addition,  those  responsible  for  the  equipment 
had  to  complete  training,  which  consisted  of  reviewing  power  point  shdes,  and  sign  a  traming 
certification, 

29. 

Malcomb,  the  ITEC  for  Unit  CA-782,  testified  that  if  there  was  no  need  for  new 
His  testimony  was 
equipment  there  was  no  need  to  submit  the  documents  to  Headquarters. 
consistent  with  APFJROTC  Instruction  36-2001,  set  forth  in  factual  finding  25,  and  a  January  4, 
2012  email  from  Amy  Frasier  (Frasier),  the  electronic  control  officer  at  Headquarters  responsible 
for  Unit  CA-782. 
In  the  January  4,  2012  email,  Frasier  reminded  recipients  that  the  TTEC 
appointment  letters  and  AIM  inventories  were  required  “In  order  to  be  eligible  to  request  new 
equipment  in  WINGS  in  May...  .” 
(Exh.  8,  at  p.  936.)  The  deadline,  or  “suspense”  date,  was 
April  23,  2012. 

30. 

 Malcomb  testified  that  the  unit  did  not  need  new  equipment  during  the  2012-2013 
school  year,  and  he  did  not  send  the  documents  to  Headquarters.  He  nevertheless  kept  inventory 
of  the  equipment  and  kept  the  list  in  a  folder. 

3H. 

On  November  14,  2012,  Malcomb  was  notified  that  the  ADPE/AIM  Inventory 
account  had  been  locked  for  three  years,  precluding  the  ordering  of  equipment  until  the  account 
As  part  of  the  process,  an 
was  unlocked.  Instructions  for  unlocking  the  account  were  provided. 
annual  mventory  had  to  be  provided  to  the  Headquarters  clectronic  control  officer.  Maicomb  and 
Respondent  discussed  the  email,  and  decided  to  take  no  action  to  unlock  the  ADPE  account 
because  the  unit  did  not  need  new  equipment. 

32. 

On  January  2,  2013,  Frasier  sent  another  email  to  units  in  her  area  of  responsibility, 
micluding  umit  CA-782,  about  the  annual  TT  Refresh,  with  the  reminder  that  in  order  to  be  cligible 
to  request  new  equipment  m  WINGS  in  May  2013  the  [TEC  Appomtment  letters  and  signed  AIM 
Inventory  documents  would  have  to  be  submitted  by  January  25,  2013. 

33. 

Respondent  and  Malcomb  discussed  the  January  2,  2013  email,  and  they  agreed 
that  mventory  and  ITEC  appointment  letters  should  be  sent  for  the  unit  to  be  eligtble  to  procure 
As  was  his  custom,  and  consistent  with  prior  direction  from  Headquarters, 
new  equipment. 
Maicomb  faxed  the  ITEC  appointment  letter  and  the  AIM  Inventory  to  Frasier. 
The  documents 
were  approved,  on  January  17  and  28,  2013,  respectively,  and  Frasier  uploaded  them  to  the 
WINGS  system. 

34. 

was  not  [T-refresh  compliant. 

On  February  20,  2013,  Malcomb  wrote  to  Frasier  that  WINGS  showed  the  unit 
“That’s  still  showing  last

Frasier  replied  on  February  21,  2013: 

year,  if  you  look  at  your  letter  and  inventory  it  shows  they  are  2013  and  you  are  compliant  for 
2013."  (Exh.  143 

a. 

35, 

On  February  22,  2013,  Headquarters  sent  an  email  to  all  FROTC  Units, 
which  stated,  in  part:  “[2.]  Have  all  currently  appointed  Primary  and  Alternate  IT  Equipment 
Custodians  take  the  below  noted  trainmg  and  provide  a  signed  training  certificate  to  their 
appointed  Equipment  Control  Officer  (ECO)  [Ne  Later  Than]  15  March  2013. 
(The  ECO 
contacts  are  contamed  in  the  tramig  sides)  Failure  te  provide  your  training  certificate  by  the 
13  Mar  suspense  date  will  cause  your  ADPEH  account  to  be  locked  as  non-compliant.”  (Exh. 
15,  at  p.  432;  erphasis  m  origial.) 

b. 

The  February  22,  2015  email  communicated  a  change  im  the  past  practice, 
and  clearly  required  submission  of  the  traming  certificates  to  Headquarters.  The  communication 
did  not,  as  the  District  argues,  require  annual  submission. 
ft  did  not  expressly  state  that  the 
documents  would  be  required  every  year,  and  referred  to  only  one  deadline.  Respondent  and 
Maicomb  read  the  printed  copies  of  the  power  point  slides  and  signed  the  ITEC  Traming 
Certification  on  February  25,  2013.  Maicomb  emailed  or  faxed  both  documents  to  Frasier  on  or 
about  February  23,  2013. 

Submission  of ADPE  Documentation  During  the  2013-2014  School  Year 

36. 

In  order  to  get  a  head  start  on  the  2014  IT  Refresh,  on  January  14,  2014,  Malcomb 
sent  the  MPC  appomtnient  letter  to  Headquarters,  and  received  confirmation  of  receipt  on  January 
24,  2014, 
In  the  email  acknowledging  receipt  of  the  MPC  letter,  an  unidentified  Headquarters 
staff  person  wrote  that  the  letter  had  been  uploaded  to  WINGS  and  provided  instructions  on  how 
the  letter  could  be  viewed  on  the  system. 

37.4, 

Malcomb  was  unable  to  locate  the  MPC  letter  on  WINGS  and  requested 
|  went  there  last  year  and  many  other  times  and  I  have  no  tabs  to 
clarification,  writing:  “I’m  lost. 
upload  anything  under  that  tab.  Pve  used  Mozilla-google  chrorme-internet  explorer  8-9-10  etc... 
Vve  also  tried  my  pe  at  home  and  3  at  school.  [{]]  Am  |  missing  something?”  Cixh.  20.) 

b. 

The  January  27,  2014  reply  email  from  Headquarters  stated:  “lam  sorry  for 
the  confusion.  HQ-Logistics  has  to  upload  the  MPC  letter  at  this  tame.  [  have  uploaded  the  letter. 
You  can  go  to  Unit  Management/Maintam  Unit  Data/Unit  Correspondence  and  see  the  MPC 
So  uf  there  are  any  changes  in  the 
letter. 
primary,  alternate  or  prmectpal  for  the  MPC  letter  —  just  send  it  to  us  and  we  will  upload  it...” 
Ubid.) 

At  this  tome  HO-Logistics  has  to  do  the  uploading. 

38. 

 Malcomb  testified  that  m  January  2014  he  also  faxed  an  mventory  list  to  Fraster. 
Neither  the  copy  of  the  imventory  or  a  contemporancous  written  account  of  its  berg  sent  or 
received  was  submitted  at  the  hearmg.  WINGS  did  not  reflect  that  the  document  was  received,  an 
imdication  that  Frasier  did  not  receive  it  or  that,  if  she  did,  did  not  upload  it. 

9D

39, 

On  March  7,  2014,  Headquarters  sent  an  email  to  all  JROTC  units  regarding  the 

“Annual  IT  equipment  account  compliance.”  It  states  in  part: 

“ADPE  accountability  is  an  Air  Force  requirement.  ALL  units  must  be  comphant  by  10 

April  2014.  *A  word  of  caution:  The  process  may  take  up  to  7  days  to  complete;  ... 

“SD  has  created  a  new  module  in  WINGS  to  help  units  keep  EC,  Trainmg  Certification 
Units  will  no  longer  email  or  fax  ttems  to  ECO,  but  will  work 
and  ADPE  inventory  current. 
within  the  new  IT  Refresh  Account  Information  Module  in  WINGS  ...  and  will  be  able  to  see  the 
status  of  their 

unit  at  anytone.  (FE...  [| 

“Four  documents  are  required  for  an  account  to  be  compliant: 

“Th. 

TEC]  apt  letter 

ITEC  training  certificate  for  Primary  ITEC 

ITEC  training  certificate  for  Alternate  TTEC 

“2. 

“3. 

“a 

information): 

An  Inventory  listing  signed  by  the  commander/director  and  ITEC 

“A  quick  overview  of  the  process  is  as  follows  (use  the  attached  info  guide  for  detailed 

“t. 

Use  the  IT  Refresh  ->Account  Information  page  in  WINGS  to  generate  [TEC 

appointment  letter.  Print,  sign,  scan  and  upload  into  WINGS. 

“2. 

Have  the  appointed  primary  and  alternate  ITEC  click  the  “Traming  Slides’  link  in 
WINGS  to  review  the  ITEC  traming  slides.  The  primary  and  Alternate  ITECs  need  to  print,  sign 
and  date  the  tramme,  certificate  (the  last  slide}.  Scan  and  upload  trainimg  certificates  into  WINGS. 

“3. 

Upon  receipt  of  the  signed  ITEC  appomtment  letter  and  both  trammg  certificates, 
the  ECO  office  will  generate  a  current  AIM  Inventory  with  the  [TEC  names  and  load  a  copy  into 
WINGS. 

“a 

The  appointed  ITECs  must  then  review  the  AIM  Inventory  listing  for  accuracy. 
The  appomted  ITEC  and  Commander/Director  must  sign  the  last  page  of  the  mventory  listing. 
Scan  and  upload  the  complete  AIM  Inventory  listing  into  WINGS, 

“AH  documents  are  required  to  be  uploaded  into  WINGS  to  be  compliant.  The  IT  Refresh- 
>  Eguipment  Request  page  will  open  on  |  May  for  all  compliant  ADPE  accounts  so  that  the  unit 
may  request  IT  equipment. 
The  Equipment  Request  page  will  not  open  for  non-compliant 
accounts.  f]]...  Ph"  CExh.  21,  at  p.  159;  emphasis  m  orgimal.) 

10

a. 

AQ, 

Respondent  and  Maicomb  received  and  read  the  March  7,  2014  email,  but 
did  not  provide  any  mformation  in  response. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  believed  they  had 
comphed,  and  that  he  relied  on  Maicomb  to  do  anythmg  required  for  compliance.  Malcomb 
testified  that  he  believed  he  had  already  provided  the  mformation  m1  January  2014. 
They  had 
There  had 
completed  the  trainmg  on  February  25,  2013,  and  had  submitted  it  to  Headquarters. 
been  no  changes  since  the  last  ITEC  letter  he  provided,  and  he  did  not  believe  a  new  one  was 
required  unless  the  primary  or  alternate  [TEC  changed. 

b. 

The  March  7,  2017  email  clearly  communicated  a  change  in  procedure,  and 
a  prudent  equipment  custodian  or  his  unit  commander  should  have,  at  a  minimum,  inquired  if 
already  submitted  documents  were  comphant  with  the  new  rules. 

41. 

By  email  dated  Apri  7,  2014,  Retired  Aw  Force  Colonel  Peter  Gray,  the 
Headquarters  Director  responsible  for  the  region  that  included  the  Valencia  High  unit,  notihed 
Unit  CA-782  and  other  units:  “Wings  shows  the  Units  listed  on  this  email  have  not  started  the  10 
April  IT  Refresh  Suspense  that  the  director  said  was  extremely  important!  You  may  already  be 
bchind  the  power  curve  to  make  the  suspense  stnce  it  normally  requires  up  to  7  days  of  lead  time  to 
Please  start  on  this  Aur 
complete  the  required  coordination/review  from  your  ADPE  POC. 
Force  level  suspense  ASAP  to  avoid  any  possible  negattve  impacts  to  imstructors/units  not  making 
this  suspense  that  has  general  officer  interest.”  (Exh.  22;  emphasis  in  original.)  Malcomb  received 
the  April  7,  2014  emai  after  his  return  from  spring  break. 

[€| 

42. 

By  email  dated  April  11,  2014,  Retired  Air  Force  Colonel  Cameron  Gilbert 
(Gilbert),  Headquarters  JROTC  Dtrector,  notified  several  JROTC  units,  melding  CA-782,  that 
they  had  not  met  the  April  10,  2014  suspense  for  their  respective  ADPE  accounts.  The  email 
Stated: 
“|Bloth  instructors  are  responsible  for  the  management  and  administration  of  their 
AFIROTC  program  which  inchides  meeting  headquarters’  suspenses.  [f  you  have  not  completed 
the  suspense  by  18  Apr,  both  mstructors  at  your  unit  will  be  placed  on  probation  until  the  unit’s 
ADPE  account  is  fully  compliant.  [f  you  fail  to  bring  the  ADPE  account  within  compliance  by  30 
Apr,  both  mstructors  wil  be  considered  for  decertification.” 
(Exh.  23.)  Malcomb  recerved  the 
email, 

43. 

Respondent  testified  he  did  not  recall  recetving  the  April  7  or  April  IL,  2014 
emails.  However,  Malcomb  received  the  documents,  and  because  they  were  important  emails,  it  1s 
concluded  that,  pursuant  to  his  custom  and  practice,  Malcomb  printed  a  copy  of  the  emails  and 
showed  them  to  Respondent. 

44, 

Neither  Respondent  nor  Maicomb  took  any  action  m  response  to  the  April  7  or  11, 
Malcomb  did  not  submit  any 
The  emails  constituted  Headquarters  directrves. 
2014  emails. 
documents  or  make  any  mauiries  of  Headquarters  staff  to  confirm  his  belief  or  to  seek  clarification 
about  why  Unit  CA-782  was  on  the  email  of  non-compliant  units. 
Respondent  did  not  direct 
Maicomb  to  take  any  action  im  response  to  the  emails.  Malcomb  explained  his  failure  to  act  on  the 
basis  that  he  belicved  the  unit  was  already  compliant.  Respondent  explained  that  he  had  generally 

il

directed  Malcomb  to  do  his  job  and  had  trust  in  the  master  sergeant’s  abilities.  Malcomb’s  belief 
the  unit  was  compliant  and  Respondent’s  failure  to  take  action  to  ensure  compliance  are  not 
reasonable  in  light  of  the  repeated  emails  containing  contrary  information,  their  failure  to  verify 
information  in  WINGS,  and  their  failure  to  seek  clarification  about  the  emails’  accuracy. 

AS. 

Accounting  for  ADPE  is a  strict  Air  Force  compliance  requirement. 

On  April  22,  2014,  the  Air  Force  placed  Respondent  on  probation.  An  email  from 
Gilbert,  sent  at  5:26  a.m.  to  the  responsible  District  administrator  at  Valencia  High,  Priesz,  with  a 
“Effective  immediately  I  am  placing  your  AFJROTC  instructors  on 
copy  to  Respondent,  stated: 
probation  for  failing  to  meet  a  critical  Headquarters  suspense.  I  have  sent  personal  requests  to  your 
instructors  on  March  7,  2014  and  April  11,  2014  to  provide  the  required  documents  to  maintain 
accountability  of  your  unit’s  Automated  Data  Processing  Equipment  (ADPE).  This  is  in  addition 
to  numerous  attempts  by  the  Regional  Director  and  other  Headquarters  staff  have  made  to  your 
instructors.["] 
This  is  an 
annual  recurring  requirement.  As  of  April  18,  2014  both  instructors  failed  to  respond  to  repeated 
[]]  Both  instructors  are  responsible  for  the 
attempts  from  my  headquarters  to  close  the  suspense. 
management  and 
meeting 
administration 
headquarters’  suspenses.  Your  instructors  will  remain  on  probation  until  the  unit’s  ADPE  account 
is  fully  compliant.  Ifthe  mstructors  fail  to  bring  the  ADPE  account  within  compliance  by  April  30, 
Please  monitor  this  situation 
2014,  we  will  initiate  decertification  actions  for  both  instructors. 
[§]  My  staff 
closely  and  ensure  your  instructors  are  fully  aware  of  the  seriousness  of  this  situation. 
is  ready  to  provide  any  assistance  your  instructors  may  need  to  take  care  of  this  matter...  . 
(Exh. 
24) 

of  ther  AFJROTC  program 

includes 

which 

46. 

—  Respondent  received  the  April  22,  2014  email.  He  testified  that  he  was  surprised 
about  the  email  because  he  did  not  know  the  Air  Force  had  concerns  about  the  unit’s  performance. 
Part  of  his  surprise  stemmed  from  the  fact  that  Malcomb  had  been  conducting  inventory  earlier  in 
January. 
Respondent  met  with  Priesz,  informing  the  principal  that  he  did  not  know  what  the 
problem  was  and  assuring  him  that  the  matter  would  be  taken  care  of. 

47. 

Respondent  spoke  with  Malcomb,  who  reiterated  his  belief  that  the  unit  was 
compliant  and  professed  confusion  about  the  Air  Force  directives.  Respondent  directed  Malcomb 
to  correct  the  problem.  Respondent  and  Malcomb  completed  the  training  and  completed  the  ITEC 
Training  Certifications,  both  of  which  were  signed  April  22,  2014. 
Both  signed  the  ITEC 
appointment  letter,  which  was  also  dated  April  22,  2014.  Malcomb  uploaded  the  documents  into 
WINGS.  Malcomb  was  unable  to  open  a  link  to  WINGS  to  generate  an  inventory  list,  and 
submitted  an  inventory  list  to  Frasier  for  her  to  upload  to  WINGS. 

48. 

On  April  22,  2014,  at  11:19  am.,  Malcomb  replied  to  Gilbert’s  email  as  follows: 
“Both  [Respondent]  &  I  completed  the  training  module,  and  it’s  been  uploaded.  I’ve  uploaded  the 

  

“Except  for  the  written  communications  set  forth  in  this  Decision,  no  evidence  was 
presented  at  the  hearing  regarding  additional  communications  by  other  headquarters  staff 
regarding  this  matter. 

12

new  EC  letter.  Our  miventory  is  completed,  and  we  pust  need  to  have  access  to  the  link  to  generate 
a  new  inventory  listing  to  ensure  there  is  [src]  no  new  ttems  unaccounted  for. 
[{]  As  a  heads  up  IJ 
completed  an  inventory  in  Jan  2014  when  we  sent  in  the  MPC  letter.  My  understanding  was  that 
we  were  current  on  our  inventory. 
Pd  had  communications  with  Amy  Frasier  via  e-mail  and 
phone.  We  discussed  my  confusion  on  what  documents  were  needed  and  how  to  upload  them  into 
Wings. 
I  do  believe  at  that  time  it  was  my 
understanding  that  the  documents  were  recerved,  and  during  one  of  our  conversations  I  was 
mstructed  on  how  to  upload  the  letter  into  Wings.  I  actually  thought  we  were  ahead  of  the  game.” 
(Exh.  29,  at  p.  1004.) 

Ud  previously  faxed  them  and  e-mailed  them. 

49, 

The  ITEC  appomtment  letter  submitted  by  Malcomb  was  rejected  on  April  22, 
2014,  because  it  lacked  Respondent’s  signature.  Malcomb  obtained  Respondent's  signature  and 
re-submutted  the  document  on  Apnil  28,  2014. 

50. 

The  AIM  Inventory  was  processed  by  Frasier  and  was  ready  for  download,  review, 
and  signature  on  April  23,  2014,  afler  4:58  p.m.  Malcomb  thereafter  downloaded  the  document. 
Respondent  and  Malcomb  signed  the  document  on  Apml  29,  2014,  and  Maicomb  submitted  to 
Frasier,  who  uploaded  it  to  WINGS. 

Si. 

Respondent  stayed  in  touch  with  Malcomb  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  Aur  Force 
directive.  When  Malcomb  reported  that  the  matter  was  resolved,  Respondent  communicated  the 
miformation  to  Priesz. 

52. 

Respondent’s  probation  was  termmated  following  submission  of  the  documents. 
By  email  dated  May  2,  2014,  which  was  also  sent  to  the  respective  ROTC  units,  including  CA- 
782,  Gilbert  notified  individuals  at  several  schools  with  JROTC  programs,  including  Priest,  as 
follows:  “Pim  pleased  to  inform  you  that  your  instructors  have  met  the  April  30,  2014  deadline  to 
account  for  all  Ar  Force  ADPE  and  |  have  removed  them  from  probation  for  failure  to  meet  a 
a  mandatory  annual  Air  Force 
Accounting  for  ADPE  is 
critical  Headquarters  suspense. 
comphance  requirement. 
Please  encourage  your  instructors  to  continue  to  adhere  to 
AFIROTC  directives  and  deadimnes  and  to  stay  engaged  with  us  through  consistent  monitoring  of 
ther  APJRTC  email  account  in  WINGS,  our  primary  means  of  communicating  with  your 
mstructors.”  CExh.  39.) 

["{| 

Submission  of ADPE  Documentation  During  the  2014-2015  School  Year 

53. 

Malcomb  testified  he  tried  to  be  proactive  for  the  2014-2015  school  year  and  avoid 
the  problems  of  the  prior  year. 
In  January  2015,  the  month  he  had  been  told  by  Frasier  that  the 
new  inventory  module  would  be  ready  in  WINGS,  Malcomb  completed  an  inventory  list. 
Respondent  corroborated  that  he  had  seen  Malcomb  conducting  inventory  in  January  2015. 
Maicomb  faxed  the  inventory  list  to  Frasier,  anticipating  that  she  would  upload  it  to  WINGS. 

13

54. 

On  October  23,  2014,  after  receiving  a  new  computer,  Malcomb  wrote  to  Frasier: 

Malcom  testified  that  he  did  not  upload  the  inventory  to  WINGS  because  she  had 
told  him  to  wait  for  her  to  update  the  unit’s  inventory  in  WINGS  during  an  exchange  m  October 
2014. 
“I 
received  our  new  PC.  Where  in  Wings  do  |  show  it  recerved’? 
[I  looked  in  the  Logistics/receive 
Frasier 
orders,  and  I  didn’t  see  anything  there. 
replied:  “You  don't  do  anything  in  WINGS  at  this  pomt  until  1  load  your  updated  inventory  after 
all  the  equipment  has  been  shipped  out.” 
CUbid.)  Frasier  loaded  the  AIM  inventory  into  WINGS 
on  March  26,  2015.  (Exhs.  45  and  47.) 

Do  I  simply  add  mt  to  my  ADPE?”  (Exh.  NL) 

55, 

On  March  14,  2015,  R.  Wayne  Barron  (Barron),  the  new  Headquarters  Director 
responsible  for  the  region  that  included  Unit  CA-782,  sent  a  “Heipful  Reminders”  emai  to  untts  in 
the  region,  reminding  mstructors  to  submit  EC  letters,  traming  certificates,  and  AIM  Inventory  lists 
by  the  IT  Refresh  April  10,  2015  deadline.  Malcomb  received  the  email,  and  provided  a  printed 
copy  to  Respondent. 

56. 

On  Friday  April  17,  2015,  at  4:53  p.m.,  TROTC  Headquarters  sent  an  emai  to  Unit 
CA-782,  to  the  Valencia  High  Principal,  and  to  other  units  and  their  school  admunistrators  who  had 
missed  the  Apml  10,  2015  deadline  for  submission  of  ADPE  documentation,  mforming  them  of 
the  missed  deadline  and  stating: 
“[Yjou  MUST  complete  this  tasking  by  [NO  LATER  THAN] 
April  24,  2015  or  you  and  your  unit  will  certainly  be  placed  on  probation  for  failure  to  comply  with 
Again,  Decertification  consideration 
HO-Director  guidance  and  considered  for  Decertification. 
[4] 
will  be  given  to  those  who  fail  to  complete  this  tasker  by  24  April  based  on  the  importance. 
The  attached  documents  walk  you  through  the  required  steps  in  the  WINGS  IT  Refresh  Module 
that  are  required  to  complete  the  compliance  items. 
(J)...  [—]."  CExh.  43,  at  pp.  26-27;  emphasis 
in  original.) 

57, 

Costanzo  testified  that  he  spoke  to  Respondent  the  week  after  recerving  the  April 
17,  2018  email,  before  the  April  24,  2015  deadline,  about  submission  of  the  ADPE  documents. 
light  of  Respondent’s  demal,  Costanzo’s 
Respondent  demed  having  such  conversation. 
testimony  1s  tasutficient  to  establish  that  the  conversation  took  place. 

In 

58. 

Between  the  March  14,  2015  email  and  April  24,  2015,  Respondent  did  not  ask 
Malcomb  if  he  had  submitted  documents,  checked  the  WINGS  database,  or  otherwise  followed  up 
on  whether  Maicomb  had  complied  with  ADPE  reporting.  Rather,  Respondent  continued  to  rely 
on  Malcomb’s  ability  to  properly  discharge  his  ITEC  tasks.  In  light  of  the  prior  year’s  probation 
and  the  emails  of  March  14  and  April  17,  2015,  Respondent's  failure  to  make  or  direct  any  mquiry 
to  confirm  compliance  is  not  reasonable.  By  the  end  of  the  2013-2014  school  year,  nt  should  have 
been  clear  that  despite  any  past  custom  or  practice,  the  ITEC  appoimitment  letters,  the  traming 
an  annual  basis. 
certificates, 
Respondent's  argument  that  neither  the  Instructions  nor  the  Manual  direct  annual  submission  of 
the  traming  certificates  is  not  persuasive,  as  the  Manual  did  not  actually  prohibit  such  submission, 
and  the  emails  directing  submission  of  training  certificates  constituted  proper  directrves  from 
Headquarters. 

and  the  inventory  lists  had  to 

be  uploaded  to  WINGS  on 

i4

59, 

Would  you  please  call  me  on  my  cell  at...  and  advise.” 

On  Friday,  April  24,  2015,  at  3:59  p.m.,  Barron  wrote  an  email  to  Respondent  and 
[sic]  TT  compliance 
Malcomb,  which  noted,  “We  stil  show  that  your  unit  has  not  started  it’s 
(Exh.  44,  at  p.  177) 
documents. 
Respondent  received  the  email. 
He  called  Barron  about  the  matter,  but  was  unable  to  make 
contact.  On  Sunday,  April  26,  2015,  at  9:26  a.m.,  Respondent  wrote  to  Malcomb:  “Please  try  to 
remember  to  talk  about  this.  What  is  the  issue?”  Ud.,  at  p.  178.)  Malicomb  was  out  of  town,  and 
did  not  see  the  emails  until  Monday,  April  27,  2015,  at  4:08  am. 
He  rephed  to  Barron  and 
Pll  be  returning  late  tonight  and  will  finish 
Respondent:  “I’m  out  of  the  office  &  out  of  the  area. 
the  inspection  &  upload  documents  tomight  when  I  return. 
PH  make  sure  it’s  completed  by 
Tuesday.”  (bid.) 

60. 

On  Tuesday,  April  28,  2015,  Maicomb  completed,  signed,  obtained  Respondent’s 
signature  on  the  document,  and  uploaded  the  AIM  Inventory  to  WINGS.  On  the  same  date, 
Malcomb  completed,  signed,  and  had  Respondent  sign,  the  ITEC  appointment  letter.  At  9:53  a.m., 
(Exh.  44,  at  p. 
Maicomb  sent  an  email  to  Barron,  stating:  “Sir. 
178.) 

Everything  is  complied  with.” 

61. 

Neither  Respondent  nor  Malcomb  submitted  ITEC  Trammg  Certificates  with  the 
other  documents  on  April  28,  2015.  Malcomb  testified  that  he  did  not  realize  they  were  also  due 
on  a  yearly  basis. 
On  May  7,  2015,  Respondent  and  Malcomb  signed  and  submutted  the  2015 
ITEC  Tramnmeg  Certificates. 

62. 

But  considering  the  evidence  in  its  entirety,  nt 

 Respondent’s  actions  with  respect  to  ADPE  documentation  requirements,  even  if 
viewed  in  the  aggregate,  do  not  constitute  intentional  disregard  of  Air  Force  orders  or  directives. 
As  noted  above,  Kespondent’s  actions  at  various  times  were  not  reasonable  and  may  have  even 
been  negligent. 
is  conchided  that  Respondent's 
actions  or  inaction  do  not  mse  to  the  level  of  mtentional  misconduct.  While  a  prudent  ROTC 
officer  may  not  have  made  some  of  the  assumptions  Respondent  made  and  may  have  more 
actively  sought  or  direct  his  non-commussioned  officer  to  seek  guidance,  the  fact  remaims  that  in 
both  early  2014  and  carly  2015  Malcomb  attempted  to  comply  with  what  he  understood  the 
The  existence  of  past  practices  that  differed  from  new  requirements 
requirements  to 
fadlure  to  submit  documents  to 
communicated  via  email  and  the  understood  sanction  for 
Headquarters,  namely  the  mability  to  obtain  new  equipment,  while  not  excusing  non-compliance 
with  the  new  directives,  provide  insight  into  Respondent’s  state  of  mind.  Also  pointing  away  from 
arrogance,  defiance,  or  other  intentional  disregard  of  duty  is  the  fact  that  Respondent  had  delegated 
the  IT  compliance  duties  to  Malcomb,  a  person  he  considered  competent  and  trustworthy. 

be. 

63. 

On  May  18,  2015,  the  Ai  Force  removed  Respondent’s  certification  as 

an 
AFJROTC  instructor.  In  his  action  memorandum,  Bobby  C.  Woods,  Jr,  Colonel,  USAF,  Director, 
Headquarters,  AFTROTC,  explamed  that  his  action  was  based  “upon  performance  that  does  not 
meet  the  standards  expected  of  an  Air  Force  officer  and  an  Air  Force  Junior  ROTC  instructor.” 
(Exh.  54.)  The  following  was  set  forth  as  the  basis  for  the  decision:  “[].Jast  year  you  were  placed 
on  probation  followimg  the  failure  to  complete  the  2014  Air  Force  ADPE  suspense  in  the  specified 

1S

This  year,  once  again,  you  have  failed  to  meet  the  specified  suspense  for  2015,  despite 
time. 
personal  direction  and  phone  calls  from  your  Regional  Director.’  Your  inability  to  comply  with 
AFJROTC  requirements  even  after  direct  Headquarters  involvement  and  reminders  more  than 
warrant  decertification  and  are  clear  indicators  of unsatisfactory  performance.  [§]  ..  .  [§].  bid.) 

Additional  Evidence  Offered  in  Mitigation  and  Rehabilitation 

64. 

On  May  26,  2015,  Costanzo  completed  an  “Air  Force  Junior  ROTC  Instructor 
Evaluation  Report,’  rating  Respondent’s  performance  as  “Outstanding.” 
In  the  evaluation, 
Costanzo  referred  to  Respondent  as  “an  outstanding  educator  who  loves  teaching  and  mentoring 
his  cadets.”  (Exh.  R,  at  p.  1.) 

65. 

|  Respondent  submitted  ten  letters  and  declarations  of  support  from  former  students, 
family  members  of  former  students,  educators,  and  members  of  other  ROTC  units  attesting  to 
Respondent’s  good  character  and  to  the  excellence  of the  ROTC  program  at  Valencia  High. 

Respondent’s  Fitness  to  Teach 

66.  |  Respondent’s  conduct  is  not  related  to  his  fitness  to  teach,  as  determined  by  an 
analysis  of  the  pertinent  factors.*  Thus,  his  failure  to  submit  documents  required  by  Headquarters, 
did  not  potentially  or  actually  adversely  impact  students  or  fellow  teachers. 
While  failure  to 
comply  with  the  documentation  requirements  resulted  in  the  temporary  freezing  of  Unit  CA-782’s 
account,  students  were  not  deprived  of  any  necessary  equipment  and  the  documents  necessary  for 
unlocking  the  account  were  ultimately  submitted  in  the  event  any  equipment  was  actually  desired. 
  

*No  evidence  of  personal  direction  give  or  phone  calls  made  by  Barron  to  Respondent 

or  Malcomb  was  received  in  evidence. 

“Courts  require  evaluation  of  a  teacher's  alleged  misconduct  in  terms  of  its  impact  on 
fitness  for  service  utilizing  the  following  criteria  first  enunciated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Morrison  yv.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  (Morrison):  the  likelihood  that  the 
conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity 
anticipated;  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  party  involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding 
the  conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 
Not  all  factors  may  apply  in  each  case  and 
only  the  pertinent  ones  need  to  be  examined.  (West  Valley-Mission  Community  College 
District  v.  Conception  (1993)  16  Cal.App.4th  1766,  1777;  Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994) 
28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384  (Haar).)  The  determination  of  fitness  for  service  required  by 
Morrison  is 
a  factual  one.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  698,  fn.  3 
(Jack  M.);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d.  208,  220-221 
(Fontana);  Haar  (1994),  supra,  28  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  384). 

16

the 

the 

lack 

conduct, 

of  prudence  evidenced  m  his 

extenuating  circumstances 
Despite 
predominate.  Respondent  relied  on  the  person  he  believed  to  have  expertise  in  IT  documentation. 
Respondent  relied  on  appropriate  past  customs  and  practices,  albeit  ones  that  were  changing  in 
2014  and  2015;  the  changes  were  communicated  to  Respondent  via  email  directives  and  not  by  the 
In  light  of  the 
use  of  the  established  methods,  namely,  Air  Force  Instructions  or  the  Manual. 
severity  of  the  decertification  sanction  levied  upon  Respondent  and  the 
legal  proceedings 
surrounding  such  decertification,  Respondent  is  not  likely  to 
fail  to  timely  submit  documents 
required  by  Air  Force  personnel  if  he  ever  returns  to  teaching  JROTC.  The  conduct  m  question 
occurred  in  the  relatively  recent  time,  and  Respondent  possessed  a  teaching  credential  and  an  Aur 
Force  certification  at  the  time  of  the  conduct  in  question. 
Respondent’s  motives  were  neither 
praiseworthy  nor  blameworthy. 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

i, 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a6),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee  for 
“evident  unfitness  for  service.”  Evident  unfitness  for  service  under  this  provision  is  established  by 
conduct  demonstrating  that  the  teacher  is  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  (Woodland  foint  Unified  School 
District 
1444 
(Woodland).)  As  a  threshold  matter,  the  Morrison  criteria  must  be  examined  to  ascertain  whether 
the  conduct  i  question  indicates  unfitness  for  service. 
“If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the 
next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’  is  ‘evident’;  1e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is 
caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.”  Ud.  at  p.  1445.) 

Commission  on  Prafessional  Campetence  (4992) 

2  CaLApp4th  1429, 

vy. 

In  Woodland,  durmg  the  span  of  approximately  one  year,  the  teacher  mm  question  had  failed 
to  follow  proper  mstructions  for  disciplining  students,  had  written  sarcastic  and  belittling  notes 
about  students,  had  insulted  students  in  class,  had  used  profanity  in  class,  had  behaved  rudely  and 
contemptuously  toward  parents,  had  made  sarcastic  remarks  about  other  teachers  in  the  hearing  of 
students,  had  displayed  insubordination  and  disrespect  toward  administrators,  had  threatened  other 
teachers,  and  had  disrupted  the  gradmg  process  by  mterfermg  with  the  grading  policy  of  a 
substitute  who  took  over  one  of  his  classes.  The  court  concluded  that  the  teacher's  conduct 
demonstrated  unfitness  fo  teach  and  that  the  conduct  was  traceable  to  a  defect  m  temperament, 
namely,  the  contempt  for  fellow  teachers  and  the  administration. 

As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  mumber  66,  the  Morrison  criteria  were  not  satisfied,  and 
Respondent's  unfitness  for  service  was  not  established.  Therefore,  there  is  no  need  to  ascertain  if 
In  any  event,  Respondent's 
any  such  unfitness  for  service  was  “evident”  under  Woodland. 
conduct  does  not  demonstrate  that  he  is  “not  fit,  not  adapted  or  suitable  for  teaching.” 
The 
Woodland  case  1s  instructive  because  it  shows  the  type  of  conduct  courts  have  found  to  constitute 
evident  unfitness  for  service.  Unlike  the  teacher  in  the  Woodland  case,  Respondent  did  not  display 
arrogance,  defiance,  or  contempt  toward  students,  teachers,  administrators,  or  Air  Force  personnel. 
Nor  was  it  established  that 
any  shoricoming  m  the  compliance  with  ADPE  paperwork 
requirements  was  the  result  of  any  temperament  defect  or  inadequacy. 

V7

2. 

The  District  argues  that  Respondent  is 

unfit  to  teach  under  section  449372, 
subdivision  (a\(3),  because  he  lacks  the  Air  Force  certification  to  teach  the  ROTC  courses  he  was 
hired  to  teach. 
It  argues  unsuitability  for  service  is  not  limited  to  instances  of  temperamental 
deficiencies  and  relies  on  the  phrase  m  Woodland,  cited  legal  conclusion  1  above,  that  the 
unsuitability  is  “ordinarily”  due  to  a  temperamental  defect  or  madequacy.  The  District  argues  that 
court’s  use  of  “ordimarily”’  necessarily  means  that  in  exceptional  circumstances  a  defect  in 
in  Respondent’s  case,  the  District  maintams,  the  exceptional 
temperament  is  not  required. 
circumstance  is  Respondent’s  failure  to  possess  the  Am  Force  certification. 
This  argument  is 
unpersuasive  and  is  rejected. 

The  District  has  not  cited  any  case  m  which  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  has  been 
held  not  to  require  a  defect  or  inadequacy  in  temperament  or  a  case  that  construed  the  provision  to 
apply  to  a  situation  such  as  Respondent’s.  More  importantly,  Weedland  does  not  stand  for  the 
proposition  urged  by  the  District.  The  Woodland  court  carefully  considered  the  text  of  the  statute 
and  several  cases  which  had  construed  the  statute  before  concluding  that  subdivision  (a)\(6),  as  one 
of  several  grounds  for  dismissal,  was  intended  to  refer  to  acts  or  omissions  not  necessarily  included 
in  the  others.  What  made  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  unique  was  the  concept  of  a  character 
or  temperament  deficiency. 
As  the  court  noted,  in  the  sentence  immediately  followimeg  the  one 
relied  upon  by  the  District,  distinguishing  evident  unfitness  from  another  grounds  for  dismussal: 
“(Uinlike  “unprofessional  conduct,’  evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  by  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employme  district.” 
Similarly,  the  court 
concluded:  [°E’}vident  unfitness  for  service’  requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  a 
defect  i  temperament  -a  requirement  not  necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct.’  ” 

(Woodland,  supra,  at  p.  1444.) 

3, 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a8),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee  for 
“persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  Jaws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
A  violation  of  section  44932, 
gzovering  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.” 
subdivision  (a8),  must  also  be  established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors. 
If  unfitness  to 
teach  is  shown,  then  the  District  must  further  establish  that  Respondent’s  refusal  to  follow  the  Laws 
or  regulations  was  “persistent,”  Le.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School 
District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (98S)  174  Cal  App.3d  1176, 
1183, 
Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  High  School  District  v.  Seaman  (A972)  28  Cal  App.3d  77, 
82  (Seaman).)  Isolated  meidents  or  mcidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time 
are  not  generally  considered  “persistent.”  (See,  ¢.2.,  Bourland  v.  Commission  an  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal. App.3d  317;  Seaman,  supra.) 

The  District  has  not  established  that  Respondent  violated  or  failed  to  obey  “the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 
State  Board  of  Education  or  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her.”  The 
only  regulation  adopted  by  the  District’s  governing  board  arguably  violated,  Board  Policy  4100, 

18

the  pertinent  language  relied  upon  by  the  District, 

that  “The  Board  strongly 
provides,  im 
encourages  certificated  staff  to  continually  improve  their  skills  and  pursue  excellence  within  their 
profession.”  The  District  argues  that  Respondent  violated  this  policy  by  not  maintaining  his  Air 
Force  certification.  However,  failing  to  follow  directives  to  submit  the  ADPE  documentation  docs 
not  have  to  do  with  the  improvement  of  skills  or  mamtainmg  excellence  in  the  teaching  profession. 
Moreover,  the  revocation  of  Respondent's  Air  Force  certification  was  not  related  to  his  shalls  or 
excellence  as  a  teacher. 
Board  Policy  4100  therefore  does  not  apply  to  Respondent’s  alleged 
misconduct. 

The  District  also  argues  that  the  employment  contract  signed  by  Respondent  constitutes  a 
reasonable  regulation  of  the  governing  board. 
[It  argues  that  the  contract  requires  Respondent  to 
maintain  Air  Force  certification  and  to  adhere  to  directives  from  Respondent’s  superiors,  including 
the  Air  Force  staff.  Since  Respondent  has  failed  to  meet  both  requirements,  grounds  for  dismissal 
exist. 
However,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  6,  the  contract  requires  Respondent  to 
maintain  CTC-issued  credential  or  certificates,  which  he  has  done.  Moreover,  the  District  has  not 
cited  any  authority  fo  support  its  construction  of  an  employment  contract  as  a  governing  board 
regulation,  and  such  construction  would  be  contrary  to  the  common  sense  meaning  of  the  words 
“reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the...  governing 
board  of  the  school  district...”  m  section  44932,  subdevision  (a)(8)}.  The  District’s  argument  is 
therefore  rejected. 

Moreover,  even  if  Respondent’s  conduct  were  found  to  constitute  a  violation  of  or  the 
failure  to  obey  a  valid  school  regulation,  his  conduct,  as  set  forth  m  factual  finding  number  66  does 
Such  failure  obviates  the 
not  demonstrate  unfitness  to  teach  pursuant  to  the  Morrison  criteria. 
In  any  event,  the  facts  that 
need  to  determine  if  the  violation  or  refusal  was  “persistent.” 
Respondent's  deficiencies  occurred  in  a  smigle  area  of  contention  and  that  he  believed,  albeit  not 
entirely  reasonably,  that  he  was  complying  with  applicable  directives  would  prechide  a  conclusion 
that  his  conduct  was  “stubborn”  or  “continuing.” 

4. 

The  District  has  not  established  that  cause  exist  for  Respondent’s  dismissal,  by 

reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  66  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  3. 

ig

ORDER 

Respondent  Edward  Colley  shall  be  retatned  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

William  S.  Hart  School  District. 

DATED: 

March  16,  2018 

DATED: 

March  15,  2018 

DocuSigned  by: 

ae 

AMSCBSFTS4  838406... 

  
SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of Administrative  hearings 

DocuSigned  by: 

KORY 

S08CRECSBSHE4SE  ... 

  
ROBERT  ALLEN  STUBBLEFIELD 
Commission  Member 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

20

PARTIAL  CONCURRENCE  AND  DISSENT 

of  Respondent  pursuant  to 

I  concur  in  factual  findings  numbers  |  through  65,  but  would  uphold  the  District’s 
dismissal 
(a)(8). 
section 
Respondent’s  lack  of  an  Air  Force  certification  renders  him  unfit  to  teach  AFJROTC.  His 
failure  to  meet  ADPE  requirements  for  two  consecutive  years  constitutes  arrogance  and 
disregard  for  Air  Force  JROTC  regulations,  which  also  renders  him  evidently  unfit  for 
service.  In  addition,  Respondent’s  failure  to  comply  with  ADPE  documentation  requirements 
constitutes  a  breach  of  his  employment  contract  and,  therefore,  is  a  violation  of  District  school 
laws  and  rules. 

subdivisions 

44932, 

(a)(6) 

and 

DATED: 

March  13,  2018 

DocuSigned  by: 

ALA be 

SCFSESBASSAO4 SS 

... 

  

DAVID  DUFFIELD 
Commission  Member 

21

