BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
WILLIAM  S.  HART  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

DEBORAH  HARRIS, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2017040988 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  the  above- 
captioned  matter  in  Santa  Clarita,  California  on  October  16  through  20,  23,  and  24,  2017,  and 
on  March  19  through  21,  and  March  26,  27,  and  29,  and  May  16,  17,  and  25,  2018.  The 
Commission  members  were  Davina  Keiser,  Sherri  Prosser,  and  Joseph  D.  Montoya, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH). 

William  S.  Hart  Union  High  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Littler 

Mendelson  P.C.,  Barrett  K.  Green,  Laila  S.  Tafreshi,  and  Michelle  M.  Holmes. 

Respondent  Deborah  Harris  appeared  on  all  hearing  dates  with  her  attorney,  Tamra 

M.  Smith,  Egality  Law  Office. 

After  the  case  was  argued  on  May  25,  2018,  the  record  was  held  open  so  that  further 

documents  could  be  lodged  with  the  Commission.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on 
June  1,  2018. 

Some  exhibits,  such  as  Respondent’s  medical  records,  will  be  sealed  by  a  protective 

order  that  will  issue  separately  from  this  decision. 

The  Commission  hereby  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and 

order. 

/// 

///

INTRODUCTION  AND  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CASE 

In  this  proceeding  the  District  took  steps  to  terminate  Respondent,  and  she  demanded 

a  hearing  on  the  matter.  Two  statutory  grounds  were  asserted  in  the  Statement  of  Charges 
(SOC)  as  justifying  termination:  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd. 
(a)(6)),  and  dishonesty  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(4)).'  The  District  amended  the  SOC  to 
assert  a  claim  that  Respondent  was  unfitted  to  teach  or  associate  with  students  due  to  abuse 
of  alcohol  or  prescription  drugs,  but  it  later  dropped  that  claim. 

In  the  main,  it  is  alleged  that  during  parts  of  the  2015-2016,  and  2016-2017  school 
years,  Respondent  engaged  in  “bizarre,  inappropriate,  and  dishonest  conduct  in  connection 
In  support  of  that  claim,  a 
with  classroom  instruction  and  oversight.”  (SOC,  ex.  501,  p. 
number  of  episodes  were  alleged,  such  as  a  claim  that  Respondent  inappropriately  provided 
quiz  answers  to  students  in  advance  of  the  quizzes,  failed  to  provide  instruction,  required 
form  over  substance  by  telling  her  students  to  make  sure  their  homework  looked  “pretty,” 
and  gave  all  of  the  students  in  one  of  her  classes  an  A+  grade  when  such  was  not  warranted. 

1.) 

Prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  Respondent  amended  her  Notice  of 

Defense  (NOD)  to  allege  that  the  District  was  retaliating  against  her  because  she  had 
physical  disabilities  and  because  she  had  sought  accommodations  for  her  disabilities. 
Substantial  hearing  time  was  devoted  to  establishing  the  nature  of  her  disabilities  and 
whether  the  District  took  adequate  steps  to  accommodate  her  disability.  Respondent  also 
provided  evidence  in  response  to  the  core  allegations  against  her,  to  support  her  retention  by 
the  District. 

Notwithstanding  the  evidence  provided  by  Respondent,  the  Commission  finds, 

unanimously,  that  the  District  proved,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  cause  for 
termination  has  been  established.  The  Commission  also  finds,  unanimously,  that  Respondent 
has  not  established  that  the  District  was  retaliating  against  her  because  she  was  disabled,  or 
for  her  efforts  to  obtain  accommodations.  Therefore,  she  shall  be  terminated  as  a  certificated 
employee  of  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

Michael  Vierra,  Ph.D,  signed  the  SOC  while  acting  in  his  official  capacity  as 

Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  of  the  District. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  teacher  employed  by  the  District,  and  at  the  times 
relevant  to  this  decision  was  teaching  math  to  high  school  students  at  Valencia  High  School 
(Valencia  High).  Respondent  holds  a  single  subject  math  teaching  credential. 

  

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  noted.

3. 

4. 

After  receiving  the  SOC,  Respondent  demanded  a  hearing. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Other  Procedural  History 

5. 

As  noted  in  the  introduction,  Respondent  filed  an  amended  NOD  asserting  as 
an  affirmative  defense  that  the  District  had  engaged  in  retaliation  against  her  because  of  her 
disabilities  and  her  requests  for  accommodation.  That  amendment  was  submitted  on  August 
9,  2017. 

6. 

Just  prior  to  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  District  moved  to  amend  the  SOC  to 

assert  that  Respondent  was  physically  or  mentally  unfit  to  teach  or  associate  with  students  as 
a  result  of  her  alleged  abuse  of  prescription  drugs  and  alcohol,  within  the  meaning  of  section 
44932,  subdivisions  (a)(7)  and  (a)(11).  However,  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  the 
District  gave  notice  that  it  was  dropping  the  claim,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision 
on  the  original  claims  of  evident  unfitness  to  teach  and  dishonesty. 

Background  Information 

7. 

The  bulk  of  the  relevant  events  that  occurred  in  the  classroom  occurred  during 
the  fall  semester  of  the  2015-2016  school  year,  and  the  fall  semester  of  the  2016-2017  school 
year.  In  each  of  those  semesters,  Respondent  was  only  in  the  classroom  for  a  few  weeks. 

8. 

Respondent  had  been  assigned  to  teach  at  Valencia  High  for  several  years 

before  the  start  of  the  2015-2016  school  year.  At  the  beginning  of  the  2014-2015  school  year 
a  new  principal,  John  Costanzo  was  assigned  to  Valencia  High.  At  that  time,  Respondent 
was  teaching  with  some  disability  accommodations  in  place.  This  included  allowing  her  to 
sit  in  a  recliner  chair,  and  to  use  a  computer  and  projector  to  project  work  images,  such  as 
equations  and  drawings,  onto  a  board  for  the  students  to  see. 

9. 

Respondent  received  unsatisfactory  performance  reviews  in  the  fall  of  2014 
and  early  part  of  2015.  She  was  pressed  to  participate  in  the  Peer  Assistance  and  Review 
program,  known  as  PAR.  The  record  discloses  that  Respondent  was  given  a  chance  to 
volunteer  for  the  program,  which  had  the  advantage  of  giving  her  two  years  to  improve  her 
teaching  skills.  A  teacher  required  to  participate  could  have  only  one  year.  Nina  Zamora,  an 
experienced  math  teacher,  was  assigned  to  work  with  Respondent. 

10. 

—_  In  the  fall  of  2015,  within  a  few  weeks  of  the  start  of  school,  it  was  agreed  that 

Respondent  would  change  assignments,  moving  out  of  the  classroom  to  the  opportunity 
room.  This  change  came  about  in  the  context  of  numerous  complaints  about  her  teaching, 
and  requests  from  students  (or  their  parents)  to  have  the  students  transferred  out  of  her  math 
classes.  She  did  not  engage  in  meaningful  instruction  in  that  latter  post.  Thereafter,  in  early 
2016,  she  went  out  of  work  on  a  disability  claim.

11. 

Late  in  the  summer  of  2016,  Respondent  communicated  to  the  District  that  she 

was  able  to  return  to  work,  and  her  doctor  had  reduced  the  restrictions  upon  her  activities, 
which  implicated  the  amount  of  accommodations  that  would  be  necessary.  Respondent  was 
unable  to  teach  during  the  first  few  school  days,  in  part  because  of  an  issue  of  needed 
training,  and  also  because  she  claimed  illness.  Later,  in  September  2016,  she  was  also  absent 
on  several  days,  in  part  due  to  attendance  at  court  proceedings  related  to  the  dissolution  of 
her  marriage.  Within  weeks  of  the  semester  start,  complaints  were  coming  in  from  students 
and  parents,  to  the  effect  that  when  Respondent  was  in  the  classroom,  her  instruction  was 
deficient,  the  students  did  not  understand  the  material,  she  was  going  over  the  same  material 
over  and  over,  and  it  was  asserted  she  was  giving  out  quiz  answers  ahead  of  the  quizzes. 
Students  and  their  parents  demanded  transfers  from  Respondent’s  classes. 

12. 

Respondent  was  relieved  of  her  teaching  assignments  on  September  19,  2016, 

and  placed  on  administrative  leave.  Thereafter,  the  District  commenced  this  proceeding. 

Findings  on  the  Allegations  of  the  SOC 

13. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  Respondent  threatened  to  have  student  L.M. 

removed  from  class  for  asking  questions  about  the  instructional  material,  and  that  she 
threatened  to  suspend  the  student  from  further  attendance  at  the  class.  Respondent  claimed 
that  this  would  happen  at  the  college  level. 

14. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  in  August  2016,  Respondent  told  a  class  to 

enjoy  their  weekend  and  to  not  drink  or  do  drugs  during  the  weekend.  While  this  was 
established,  it  does  not  provide  a  basis  for  termination  under  the  two  statutory  categories 
asserted  by  the  District. 

15.  —  It  was  also  established  that  during  back  to  school  night,  Respondent  appeared 
flustered,  and  she  appeared  unprepared.  It  should  be  noted  that  during  back  to  school  night 
in  2016,  when  parents  voiced  concerns  and  asked  questions  about  extra  credit,  that  their 
children  did  not  understand  the  material,  and  sometimes  could  not  read  the  notes  she  was 
posting  on  the  board,  she  deflected  those  questions  and  concerns,  rather  than  squarely 
addressing  them. 

16. 

—_  It  was  established  that  Respondent  provided  quiz  answers  to  students  in 

advance  of  the  tests  during  the  fall  2016  time  period.  A  number  of  students  credibly  testified 
to  this  matter,  and  they  testified  that  Respondent  repeatedly  instructed  them  to  memorize 
problems  and  answers. 

17. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  in  September  2016,  student  A.H.  asked  to 

use  the  restroom  and  Respondent  denied  the  request  without  explanation.  The  student 
renewed  her  request,  and  was  again  denied.  Respondent  then  went  to  the  student,  and  began 
whispering  to  her  about  the  upcoming  Valencia  High  football  game,  including  where  was  the 
student  going  to  sit.  Respondent  then  gave  the  student  a  paper  with  Respondent’s  phone 
number  on  it,  and  asked  her  to  text  her  during  the  game.

18. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  on  September  2,  2016,  during  an  Algebra 
1A  class,  Respondent  gave  confusing  instructions  to  the  students,  and  that  several  students 
appeared  confused,  while  others  were  off  task  during  class.  Respondent  started  the  class  late, 
and  failed  to  take  roll  or  enter  attendance  into  the  Infinite  Campus  system.  Respondent 
provided  incorrect  instruction  to  the  students  regarding  commutative  and  associate 
properties,  and  she  used  inappropriate  vocabulary,  including  “binkity  bink.”  Respondent 
ended  the  class  late,  two  minutes  into  the  passing  period. 

19. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged,  that  on  or  about  September  13,  2016,  student 
It  was 

T.R.  quietly  got  up  and  grabbed  her  backpack,  and  tried  to  quietly  leave  the  class. 
established  that  she  did  so  because  she  needed  to  use  the  restroom.  The  student  apologized, 
and  made  her  need  clear,  but  Respondent  cut  her  off.  Respondent  asked  for  the  student’s 
name,  but  Respondent  cut  her  off  when  she  tried  to  speak.  The  student  finally  just  left  the 
class. 

20. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  in  September  2016,  a  parent  emailed  Respondent, 

asking  for  a  copy  of  her  child’s  graded  quiz,  and  a  copy  of  a  graded  make-up  quiz  that  the 
student,  L.M.,  had  taken  that  day  at  lunch.  Two  days  later,  Respondent  announced  to  the 
class  that  a  parent  had  requested  copies  of  the  quizzes,  and  Respondent  stated  to  the  class 
that  she  was  not  going  to  give  them  out. 

(B)  It  was  established  that  the  parent  complained  to  the  school  about 

Respondent’s  failure  to  give  her  copies  of  the  two  quizzes,  and  that  Respondent  thereafter 
announced  to  the  class  that  L.M.,  the  student  in  question,  “needed  to  get  a  life.”  Respondent 
told  L.M.  that  she  needed  to  better  represent  Valencia  High  softball. 

(C)  Respondent  never  provided  the  copies  of  the  quizzes  to  the  parent  in 

question. 

21. 

 Inconnection  with  the  make-up  quiz  referenced  above,  Respondent  allowed 

L.M.  to  memorize  the  answers  before  the  student  retook  the  quiz. 

22. 

(A)  It  was  established  as  alleged  in  paragraphs  k  and  /  of  the  SOC  that  when 

Respondent  was  teaching,  she  was  providing  little  instruction.  Students  were  told  to  copy 
what  was  on  the  board,  and  they  were  told  to  memorize  the  problems,  and  were  told  that  the 
problems  would  be  on  the  quiz.  Respondent’s  teaching  methods  failed  to  promote  student 
learning;  rather,  her  methods  promoted  memorization  of  the  problems  and  their  answers. 

(B)  Students  testified  credibly  during  the  hearing  that  they  were  not  learning 

how  to  solve  the  problems  presented  by  the  course,  whether  it  was  algebra  or  geometry.  One 
student  testified  that  he  would  like  to  become  an  engineer,  and  though  he  was  an 
underclassman,  he  knew  that  he  needed  to  learn  the  subject  matter  of  Respondent’s  class,  not 
just  to  get  a  good  grade,  but  so  that  he  could  put  the  knowledge  to  work  in  subsequent 
classes,  and  in  other  endeavors.  He  perceived  that  he  was  not  learning  the  material.  Other

students  believed  they  were  not  learning  the  material  either.  This  caused  students  and 
parents  to  question  Respondent’s  ability  to  teach  her  courses. 

23.  —  It  was  established  that  Respondent  told  her  students  to  redo  the  same  page  as 

homework  multiple  times  so  that  it  was  “neat  and  pretty.”  As  a  result,  sometimes  the 
students  were  redoing  the  same  homework  more  than  once. 

24. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  that  homework  assignments 
had  correct  answers.  The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  rarely  reviewed  or  corrected 
the  homework,  and  often  had  one  student  simply  check  other  students  homework  to  verify 
some  had  been  done.  The  situation  devolved  to  the  point  that  homework  was  credited  if  it 
showed  any  effort,  even  if  the  answers  were  incorrect. 

25. 

Some  of  Respondent’s  students  went  to  tutors  for  help  in  learning  the  subject 
matter  of  Respondent’s  classes.  Respondent  told  such  students  that  they  would  have  to  redo 
their  assignments  because  they  weren’t  doing  it  Respondent’s  way.  However,  the  students 
didn’t  understand  just  what  Respondent’s  way  was,  given  her  poor  teaching. 

26.  —  It  was  established  that  during  the  Fall  2016  semester,  Respondent  entered  an 

A+  grade  for  every  student  in  her  Geometry  1A  class.  Such  grades  were  not  supported  or 
warranted.  Respondent  has  provided  various  explanations  for  this.  At  one  point,  she  stated 
that  these  outstanding  grades  were  just  “place  holders,”  and  that  the  correct  grades  would  be 
entered  later.  At  another  point  she  told  Principal  Costanzo  about  the  grades,  to  show  how 
well  the  students  were  doing.  The  grades,  however,  were  submitted  into  the  system  and  they 
cannot  be  justified  for  all  students  in  the  class,  if  any  of  them. 

27. 

—  It  was  established  that  Respondent  told  her  students  to  go  home  and  tell  their 

parents  that  they  were  doing  fine  in  Respondent’s  class,  and  the  parents  did  not  need  to  be 
concerned.  She  also  told  students  that  everyone  would  pass  the  class.  That  was  not  an 
accurate  state  of  affairs  given  the  evidence  that  numerous  students  were  not  learning  the 
material,  and  what  they  were  learning  tended  to  be  how  to  memorize  questions  and  answers 
for  quizzes. 

Respondent’s  Disability  Claims 

28. 

Respondent  suffers  from  a  physical  disability.  As  a  result  of  surgery  that 

occurred  years  before  the  events  in  this  case,  she  developed  a  large  hernia  that  has  not  been 
repaired.  Her  physician,  Dr.  John  Barstis,  provided  evidence  that  it  may,  at  this  point,  be 
inoperable.  The  hernia  affects  her  entire  midsection. 

29. 

—  Respondent’s  physical  condition  plainly  presents  challenges  for  her.  She 

wore,  and  still  wears,  a  large  binder  to  give  her  trunk  area  support,  and  to  help  hold  her  body 
together.  According  to  Respondent,  her  legs  often  go  numb,  and  she  has  to  worry  about 
falling,  as  a  fall  could  literally  open  up  her  body,  leading  to  serious  injury  or  death.

30. 

Notwithstanding  the  serious  nature  of  her  condition,  it  appears  that 

Respondent  was  generally  ambulatory.  How  much  endurance  she  had  at  any  one  time  is  not 
clear,  but  she  could  get  around  her  classrooms.  She  had  a  wheelchair  which  she  sometimes 
used,  but  there  were  times  she  did  not  use  it.  For  example,  she  recounted  parking  in  front  of 
the  school,  and  walking  into  the  office. 

31. 

The  District  took  steps  to  accommodate  her  disabilities.  As  noted  above,  she 

could  sit  in  a  recliner  chair  and  use  technology  to  instruct,  projecting  images  to  a  white  board 
with  a  projector.  She  was  encouraged  to  move  about  the  classroom,  to  review  students’ 
work.  When  she  asserted  that  such  was  difficult  or  not  possible,  the  District  obtained  small 
erasable  white  boards  so  the  students  could  show  their  work  to  Respondent,  by  holding  them 
up  for  her  to  see  what  they  had  written. 

32. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  the  accommodation  process  went  smoothly.  At  some 

point,  it  devolved  so  that  Respondent  would  not  talk  directly  to  administrators,  instead 
calling  her  attorney  to  have  that  person  speak  to  the  District’s  counsel.  And,  the  record  is 
replete  with  written  communications  between  the  attorneys  on  each  side,  often  accusatory. 

33. 

Throughout  the  hearing,  much  evidence  was  adduced  regarding  the  efforts  to 

make  the  accommodation  process  work,  or  as  claimed  by  Respondent,  the  District  taking 
steps  to  not  have  it  work.  Ifthe  District’s  efforts  were  not  perfect,  those  efforts  were  made. 
For  example,  at  one  point,  District  staff  was  taking  Respondent’s  recliner  from  her  room  to 
the  library  on  a  golf  cart  so  she  could  participate  in  a  meeting.  Efforts  were  made  to  hold 
some  smaller  meetings  in  her  classroom.  When  staff  suggested  moving  a  smaller  chair  that 
Respondent  had  in  her  classroom—more  of  a  typical  office  chair  by  size  and  weight—she 
would  not  agree,  as  it  was  her  personal  property,  specially  made,  and  she  feared  damaging  tt. 
But,  rather  than  leave  it  in  her  classroom  where  she  could  continue  to  use  it  some  of  the  time 
to  work  from  her  desk,  she  took  it  home.  The  District  took  steps  to  buy  a  similar  chair, 
which  did  not  come  to  fruition  before  she  was  placed  on  leave. 

34. 

(A)  Respondent  asserted  during  the  events  in  question,  and  during  the  hearing, 

that  the  technology  provided  to  her  as  an  accommodation  failed  her,  and  that  the  District 
could  not  or  would  not  make  it  work.  Thus,  she  claimed  to  have  problems  with  her  laptop 
and  her  tablet,  and  hence  had  problems  using  her  projection  system. 

(B)  The  record  shows  that  the  District  did  make  efforts  to  make  the 

technology  work.  Mr.  Costanzo  authorized  obtaining  a  new  computer.  Ms.  Zamora  was 
present  one  day  in  Respondent’s  classroom  when  staff  appeared  there  to  work  with  the 
computer  and/or  projection  gear.  Ms.  Zamora  took  steps  to  obtain  technical  support, 
communicating  with  administrators  and  staff  to  assist.  She  offered  to  help  Respondent  with 
her  equipment,  but  Respondent  refused  her  help. 

(C)  Respondent  asserted  while  still  teaching,  and  during  the  hearing,  that  she 

lacked  access  to  the  school’s  computer  system,  the  Infinite  Campus  program  and  the 
District’s  e-mail.  However,  an  audit  by  the  IT  staff  disproved  this.  Further,  even  if  her

laptop  or  pad  were  balky,  Respondent  had  access  to  a  desktop  computer  that  could  access  the 
system.  Respondent  was  capable  of  standing  for  short  periods,  and  could  have  used  that 
computer.  Until  she  took  her  customized  office-style  chair  home,  she  could  have  used  it  to 
work  at  her  desk.  Respondent  had  enough  access  to  the  system  that  she  was  able  to  put  all  of 
the  A+  grades  into  the  system  on  or  about  September  19,  2016. 

(D)  It  must  be  noted  that  the  students  who  were  complaining  about,  and 

testified  to,  the  poor  instruction,  and  the  fact  that  they  were  not  learning  in  Respondent’s 
classes  did  not  bring  up  issues  with  the  technology.  They  could  see  what  was  being 
projected  on  the  board,  but  they  could  not  read  Respondent’s  notes,  or  they  did  not 
understand  what  she  was  teaching.  The  parents  who  wrote  complaints  and  demanded 
transfer  of  their  children  from  Respondent’s  classes  didn’t  complain  that  the  projector  wasn’t 
working;  again,  the  claims  were  that  the  instruction  provided  by  Respondent  was  deficient, 
that  she  kept  teaching  the  same  thing.  Of  further  note  is  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Johnson,  a 
parent  who  attended  a  back-to-school  night  with  Respondent.  She  recounted  that  on  that 
night  Respondent  was  having  a  problem  getting  her  pad  synched  up  with  the  projector,  and 
Ms.  Johnson  got  it  working  for  Respondent.  This  leads  to  the  inference  that  any  problems 
that  existed  were  not  insurmountable,  if  a  parent  who  likely  had  not  seen  the  system  before 
could  make  the  technology  work  in  short  order. 

35. 

(A)  Itis  found  that  Respondent’s  physical  disabilities  and  any  failure  by  the 

District  to  wholly  accommodate  them  do  not  excuse  her  poor  teaching  and  dishonest 
conduct.  It  appeared  that  at  times  she  used  her  disability  as  an  excuse  for  noncompliance  on 
her  part.  There  were  times  that  she  avoided  meetings  or  interactions  claiming  that  she  had  to 
leave  early,  or  could  not  get  to  the  meeting.  At  times  the  District  took  steps  to  accommodate 
Respondent,  and  she  then  made  new  demands  for  some  other  accommodation. 

(B)  It  is  found  that  any  problems  that  Respondent’s  supportive  technology 

presented  does  not  excuse  her  poor  teaching  and  her  dishonesty. 

36.  —  It  is  found  that  the  District,  in  bringing  this  termination  proceeding,  was  not 

retaliating  against  Respondent  due  to  her  disabilities,  or  for  her  efforts  to  obtain 
accommodations  for  her  disabilities. 

Other  Matters 

37. 

Respondent  told  her  students  that  if  an  administrator  or  other  teacher  came  to 

the  class  that  they  should  look  busy  and  look  as  if  they  were  engaged. 

38. 

|  Respondent  on  numerous  occasions  told  her  students  to  “fake  it  till  you  make 

it.”  Some  of  the  students  placed  this  in  the  context  of  her  telling  them  to  look  busy  if  an 
administrator  was  present.  To  others  it  appeared  she  was  telling  them  to  “fake  it”  if  they 
didn’t  understand  the  material.

39. 

Respondent  generally  would  not  answer  questions  in  class,  and  discouraged 

such.  She  told  the  students  that  they  could  e-mail  her  with  questions  in  the  evening,  but  she 
told  them  she  would  not  respond  when  football  games  were  on  the  television.  Some  students 
did  send  her  e-mails,  but  did  not  get  responses.  Ms.  Zamora  counseled  Respondent 
regarding  taking  questions  in  class,  but  Respondent  was  not  persuaded. 

AQ. 

Respondent  would  not  use  the  District’s  e-mail  system,  despite  being  told  it 
was  arequirement.  Thus,  she  often  used  her  personal  e-mail  address.  In  late  August  2016, 
Ms.  Zamora  advised  Respondent  she  should  not  have  students  contact  her  on  the  personal  e- 
mail,  and  Ms.  Zamora  informed  her  that  communications  regarding  the  PAR  program  had  to 
go  through  the  District’s  system.  It  got  to  the  point  that  Jayme  Allsman,  president  of  the 
Hart  District  Teachers’  Association  advised  Respondent  in  writing  that  she  was  required  to 
use  the  District’s  system,  or  be  in  danger  of  being  found  insubordinate. 

Credibility 

Al. 

The  students  who  testified  were  all  credible  in  their  demeanor,  and  in  the 

content  of  their  testimony.  There  was  consistency  in  their  testimony  about  Respondent’s 
classroom  conduct.  The  parents  who  testified  were  credible  in  their  demeanor  as  well. 

42. 

Nina  Zamora,  the  PAR  coach,  was  credible  in  her  testimony,  both  in  her 

demeanor  and  in  the  content  of  her  testimony.  She  was  plainly  a  highly  qualified  teacher 
who  was  attempting  to  improve  Respondent’s  skills  and  performance. 

43. 

Mr.  Costanzo’s  credibility  suffered  from  what  appeared,  during  cross 

examination,  to  be  a  selective  memory.  Further,  his  testimony  regarding  his  attitude  toward 
Respondent  was  severely  impeached  by  the  testimony  of  Edward  A.  Colley. 

44. 

—_ Respondent  was  not  credible  in  a  number  of  areas,  and  it  harmed  her  defense 

and  her  affirmative  claims  as  well.  For  example,  she  testified  to  attending  court  proceedings 
in  Chatsworth,  California  to  deal  with  her  divorce  on  more  than  one  day  in  September  2016, 
and  to  going  from  there  (after  court)  to  her  doctor’s  office.  This  claim  was  not  credible  in 
that  her  physician’s  medical  records  did  not  support  the  claim,  and  further,  because  traffic 
conditions  when  travelling  from  the  West  San  Fernando  Valley  to  the  Santa  Clarita  Valley 
are  typically  poor  during  the  rush  hour  that  occurs  after  court  sessions  end,  1.e.,  after  4:30  in 
the  afternoon.  Respondent’s  claims  of  disability  were  belied  by  the  surveillance  video  of  her 
activities,  taken  between  the  October  2017  and  March  2018  hearing  sessions.  Those  films 
show  that  she  was  much  more  capable  of  movement  than  she  had  led  others  to  believe,  and 
that  she  was  not  disabled  to  the  extent  asserted  by  her.  Respondent’s  claims  regarding  the 
A+  grades  she  put  into  the  Infinite  Campus  system  also  strained  credulity,  as  she  has  told 
different  stories  about  why  those  grades  were  put  in  the  system.  Given  the  pressure  she  was 
under  from  students  and  parents  who  found  her  teaching  inadequate,  it  is  inferred  that  she 
was  motivated  to  inflate  the  students’  grades  to  relieve  that  pressure.  Further,  Respondent’s 
claims  that  she  could  not  access  the  Infinite  Campus  and  the  e-mail  system  were  shown  to 
lack  credibility  after  an  audit  was  run  by  the  District  IT  staff.  That  audit  showed  she  was

able  to  access  the  system.  Finding  34,  pertaining  to  claimed  technology  problems  also 
negatively  implicates  Respondent’s  credibility.  Other  examples  of  her  diminished  credibility 
are  found  in  the  record. 

The  Morrison  Factors 

AS. 

(A)  Where  there  is  conduct  that  might  justify  termination  of  a  teacher,  an 

examination  must  still  be  made  of  whether  or  not  that  conduct  indicates  that  the  teacher  in 
question  is  unfit  to  teach.  The  misconduct  must  be  shown  to  have  some  rational  connection, 
some  nexus,  to  the  teacher’s  ability  to  teach  in  the  District. 

(B)  This  requirement  was  first  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214,  229.  In  that  case  a  teacher  had  been  discovered  to  be 
homosexual,  and  a  proceeding  was  filed  to  discipline  his  credential  because  of  his 
homosexuality.  The  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  teacher’s  homosexuality  alone 
was  not  enough  to  discipline  his  credential,  instead  requiring  that  some  connection  or  nexus 
between  his  private  conduct  and  his  job  duties  and  performance  had  to  be  shown.  The  court 
listed  a  number  of  factors  that  might  be  considered  in  determining  whether  or  not  such 
unfitness  to  teach  had  been  established. 

46. 

 (A)(i)  The  first  factor  to  consider  is  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have 

adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers.  Here  Respondent’s  actions  adversely  affected 
students.  Many  students  did  not  learn  the  subject  matter  of  Respondent’s  math  classes 
during  the  fall  semesters  in  2015-2016,  and  2016-2017.  One  student  was  unable  to  make  up 
a  test  grade  after  she  was  absent  because  Respondent  never  made  herself  available,  as  she 
said  she  would,  to  allow  the  student  to  take  the  test.  Thus,  that  student  was  saddled  with  a 
low  grade,  bringing  down  her  overall  grade.  There  has  also  been  a  negative  impact  on  the 
District  and  other  teachers,  in  that  parents  and  students  demanded  transfers  from  her  classes 
because  of  Respondent’s  inability  to  provide  adequate  instruction  and  a  temperament  that  did 
not  allow  for  her  to  change  her  ways  for  the  better.  The  District  was  required  to  take  her  out 
of  the  classroom  and  to  find  replacement  instructors. 

(A)ai)  Giving  students  quiz  answers  in  advance,  not  checking  and  correcting 

their  homework,  and  giving  some  a  false  grade  of  A+  adversely  affected  students,  in  that 
they  did  not  learn  the  material.  This  must  have  an  adverse  effect  on  other  teachers  and  the 
District  because  those  students  would  move  on  to  other  math  classes  with  a  deficiency  in 
their  math  knowledge. 

(A)ait)  The  adverse  consequences  for  students  and  fellow  teachers  is  rooted 

in  Respondent’s  tendency  to  avoid  responsibility  generally  and  her  duties  specifically. 
Instead  of  taking  steps  to  improve  her  instruction,  she  claimed  that  she  couldn’t  physically  do 
the  work,  or  that  her  technology  was  not  adequate,  or  there  was  some  other  reason  that  her 
students  were  not  learning  vital  material.  Instead  of  answering  questions,  she  told  one 
student  she  would  remove  the  student  from  class.  Instead  of  teaching  she  told  her  students 
the  questions  and  answers.  Some  took  her  saying  that  one  should  “fake  it  till  you  make  it”  to 

10

mean  they  should  go  through  the  motions  in  class.  Claiming  all  the  students  would  pass  the 
class,  she  tried  to  use  memorization,  and  providing  answers  to  tests  or  quizzes  in  advance. 
Such  conduct  was  detrimental  to  the  students,  other  staff,  and  the  District. 

(B)  Another  factor  is  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  In 

this  case  the  conduct  in  question  occurred  recently,  in  two  of  the  last  three  school  years. 

(C)  Another  factor  is  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher,  which  in  this 

case  is  a  single  subject  credential  allowing  Respondent  to  teach  math.  It  is  plain  that 
mathematics  are  a  critical  part  of  education. 

(D)  Whether  there  are  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  is  another 

Morrison  factor.  In  this  case  there  are  some  extenuating  circumstances.  Respondent 
provided  evidence  that  she  has  had  significant  medical  problems  and  personal  problems, 
such  as  her  unravelling  marriage.  However,  there  is  evidence  that  her  medical  problems 
were  not  as  debilitating  as  she  let  on,  and  she  took  a  less  than  co-operative  attitude  toward 
the  District  when  it  tried  to  work  with  her.  Overall,  Respondent  exhibited  an  attitude  that 
things  had  to  work  her  way,  on  a  one-way  street.  Furthermore,  her  medical  and  personal 
issues  did  not  justify  Respondent  in  giving  an  A+  to  every  student  in  her  2016  geometry  1A 
class,  nor  did  they  justify  her  in  teaching  memorization,  or  providing  quiz  questions  and 
answers  in  advance.  Indeed,  these  are  aggravating  circumstances. 

(E)  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 

conduct  should  be  considered.  There  is  no  praiseworthiness  to  the  Respondent’s  attitude 
toward  the  administrators,  and  it  was  blameworthy  to  engage  in  dishonest  conduct,  such  as 
the  false  grades,  in  order  to  appear  to  be  instructing  and  actually  teaching  the  students. 

(F)  Another  factor  is  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  in  question  will  recur. 
The  Commission  believes  it  is  highly  likely  that  Respondent’s  misconduct  will  recur.  She 
has  been  unapologetic  about  her  misconduct. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Conclusions  Generally  Applicable  To  All  Claims 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  section 

44944,  and  based  on  Factual  Findings  |  through  4. 

2. 

(A)  It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact  may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a 

witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens 
v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions 
with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a 
cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (Ud.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell 

11

(1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a 
witness,  even  an  expert,  although  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon 
(1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the  testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute 
substantial  evidence,”  including  a  single  expert  witness.  (Kearl  v.  Board  of Medical  Quality 
Assurance  (1986)  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  at  1052.) 

(B)  The  rejection  of  testimony  does  not  create  evidence  contrary  to  that  which 

is  deemed  untrustworthy.  That  is,  disbelief  does  not  create  affirmative  evidence  to  the 
contrary  of  that  which  is  discarded.  While  the  trier  of  fact  may  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  a 
witness  who  testifies  to  the  negative  of  an  issue,  that  does  not  of  itself  furnish  any  evidence 
in  support  of  the  affirmative  of  that  issue,  and  does  not  warrant  a  finding  in  the  affirmative 
thereof,  unless  there  is  other  evidence  in  the  case  to  support  such  affirmative  position. 
(Hutchinson  vy.  Contractors’  State  License  Bd.  (1956)  143  Cal.App.2d  628,  632-633,  quoting 
Marovich  vy.  Central  California  Traction  Co.  (1923)  191  Cal.  295,  304.) 

(C)  “On  the  cold  record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  unimpeached, 

uncontradicted—but  on  a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his 
credibility  factor  nil.  Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict 
himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who 
sees,  hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.” 
(Wilson  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1976)  58  Cal.App.3d  865,  877-878,  quoting  Meiner  v. 
Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17  Cal.App.3d  127,  140.) 

3. 

Respondent  is  charged  with  dishonesty  under  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(4).  “Dishonesty”  needs  no  especial  definition,  as  it  is  an  ordinary  term  known  to  the 
members  of  the  Commission.  However,  within  the  context  of  these  proceedings,  not  every 
act  of  dishonesty  will  constitute  grounds  for  discipline.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v. 
Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208  (Fontana).)’  And,  as  noted  some  years  ago  by  the  Court  of 
Appeal,  dishonesty  is  not  readily  compartmentalized.  (Windham  v.  Board  of  Medical 
Quality  Assurance  (1980)  104  Cal.App.3d  461,  470.) 

4. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6), 

properly  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 
reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,” 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  (Woodland.) 

  

*  As  stated  in  Fontana,  “Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smallest  fib  to  the 

most  flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct, 
and  not  every  falsehood  will  constitute  ‘dishonesty’  as  a  ground  for  discipline.”  (Fontana, 
supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  220,  fn.  12.) 

12

5. 

As  noted  in  the  Factual  Findings,  even  where  grounds  to  terminate  have  been 

established,  such  as  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  or  evident  unfitness  for  service,  it  must 
also  be  established  that  such  conduct  renders  the  Respondent  unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v. 
State  Board  of  Education,  supra,  \  Cal.3d  214,  229-230;  Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  208; 
Woodland,  supra,  4  Cal.App.4th  at  1444-1445;  see  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317,  321.) 

Legal  Conclusions  Pertaining  to  the  Specific  Allegations  of  the  Accusation 

6. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  was  dishonest  within  the  meaning  of 

section  44932,  subdivision  (4),  based  on  Factual  Findings  16,  21,  22(A),  26,  27,  37,  and  44, 
and  Legal  Conclusion  3.  Respondent’s  entry  of  false  grades  into  the  grading  system  is  not 
“the  smallest  fib”  but  instead  is  a  matter  of  flagrant  wrongdoing  that  goes  to  the  heart  of  a 
teacher’s  obligations.  Her  practice  of  providing  quiz  questions  and  answers  in  advance  was 
also  dishonest.  Ifa  student  were  to  obtain  a  copy  of  a  test  and  the  answers  to  it  in  advance  of 
the  test,  and  use  that  information  for  a  passing  grade,  all  would  say  the  student  had  cheated; 
all  would  deem  that  a  dishonest  act. 
It  is  no  different  if  the  teacher  engages  in  such  conduct. 
The  students  were  being  cheated  out  of  learning  opportunities,  and  Respondent  was  being 
placed  in  a  position  where  further  false  information  would  be  put  into  the  grading  system. 
She  was  also  being  a  poor  role  model  for  the  students  by  engaging  in  such  conduct. 

7. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  based  on  Factual  Findings  10,  11,  13,  15 
through  24,  27,  37  through  42,  44,  46(A)(i11),  and  Legal  Conclusion  4.  This  is  not  because 
of  the  sort  of  bad  or  vulgar  behavior  displayed  in  cases  such  as  Woodland  or  Palo  Verde  etc. 
Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.  App.3d  967).  Instead  Respondent  has  shown a  fixed 
character  trait  of  avoiding  her  responsibilities,  and  shifting  the  blame  for  her  shortcomings 
and  missteps  elsewhere.  She  has  shown  little  or  no  desire  to  improve  her  skills,  disregarding 
Ms.  Zamora’s  efforts  and  advice.  Respondent  has  retreated  behind  her  physical  and  personal 
ailments,  when  those  were  not  the  reasons  that  her  students  were  not  learning.  Her  refusal  to 
answer  questions  in  class  is  also  a  manifestation  of  a  character  trait  that  avoids  obligation,  as 
it  was  Respondent’s  obligation  to  see  to  it  that  the  students  understood  the  material  she  was 
to  teach. 

8. 

It  was  not  established  that  this  action  was  brought  to  retaliate  against 

Respondent  for  having  physical  disabilities,  or  for  her  efforts  to  obtain  accommodations  for 
her  disabilities,  based  on  Factual  Findings  28  through  36,  and  Legal  Conclusions  2  through 
7. 

9. 

Review  of  the  Morrison  factors  and  their  application  to  the  facts  of  this  case 

establish  that  Respondent  is  not  fit  to  teach  in  the  District.  (Factual  Findings  45  and  46.) 
The  Commission  firmly  believes  that  if  she  is  retained,  her  misconduct  will  likely  continue, 
to  the  detriment  of  students,  teachers,  and  the  District.  Based  on  all  the  foregoing,  the 
Commission  finds  and  concludes  that  Respondent  should  be  terminated  from  her  position  as 
a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

13

ORDER 

Respondent  Deborah  Harris  shall  be  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the 

Wiliam  S.  Hart  Union  High  School  District. 

DATED: 

September  10,  2018 

DATED:  September  9,  2018 

DATED: 

September  7,  2018 

oo  DocuSigned  by: 

: 

vaseph D.  Mantaya 

Nae  FO77568D88CB4  1... 

  
JOSEPH  D.  MONTOYA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

7  DocuSigned  by: 

i 

L 

¢ 

;  Savina 

a 

ue  3 

\ 

A  NeetaLy 

“Neeee  BSEESEO2DCB24EC... 

  
DAVINA  KEISER 
Commission  Member 

not  DocuSigned  by: 

:  Shui  Presse 

‘annem  253F26A312E  144... 

  
SHERET  PROSSER 
Commission  Member

