BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

HECTOR SCHMIDT (EN 602067),
a Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No. 2017010717

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) 

in Los Angeles, California, on September 11-15 and 18, 2017. The Commission consists of
Tom Hood, Los Angeles Unified School District (retired);1 Jay San Agustin, Los Angeles 
County Office of Education; and Administrative Law Judge Eric Sawyer, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, who presided.

Mampre R. Pomakian, Associate General Counsel, and Michael Voigt, Assistant 

General Counsel, represented complainant Los Angeles Unified School District (District).

Roshanne C. Katouzian, Esq., Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented Hector

Schmidt (respondent), who was present on each day of hearing.

The record was closed and the case submitted for decision at the conclusion of the 

hearing on September 18, 2017. The Commission thereafter deliberated in executive session.

SUMMARY

The District seeks to terminate respondent’s employment based on allegations of his 

ineffective teaching, improper behavior with other staff (including contacts perceived as threats
and sending numerous, bizarre “mass e-mails”), disobeying administrator directives, and an 
unresolved mental illness determined by the Superior Court to render him unfit to teach.

1 Mr. Hood’s qualification to serve as a commissioner in this case, in light of his
former employment, was discussed during the Prehearing Conference (PHC) held on April 3, 
2017, and decided in the PHC Order issued on April 5, 2017.

Respondent contends he is a good teacher with many years of unblemished service for 

the District, who hit “a rough patch” of mental illness around 2011, but is now committed to 
getting better.  Respondent denies ever intending to threaten any colleague. He contends his
techniques in the classroom (e.g., heavily relying on internet videos and having students play
games for grade points) were misunderstood by administrators and were not deficient.  While 
he agrees there are grounds for employment discipline, he believes termination is unnecessary.

It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent’s mental illness 

significantly impairs his ability to perform the duties of a teacher, renders him unfit to teach 
children, and warrants termination of his employment with the District.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

2.

3.

1.

The Board of Education (Board) is the duly elected, qualified and acting 

governing board of the District, organized, existing and operating pursuant to the provisions 
of the California Education Code and other laws of the State of California.

Respondent was, and is, a permanent certificated employee of the District.

On or about December 16, 2016, Marjorie Josaphat and Jose R. Cantu, in their

official capacities as the District’s Co-Lead Chief Human Resources Officers, signed a
Statement of Charges against respondent, alleging factual and legal grounds for termination 
of his employment with the District. (Ex. 2.)

4.

By a letter dated January 11, 2017, respondent was advised by Ms. Josephat

and Mr. Cantu that the Statement of Charges had been filed with the Board, and that, during
a closed session of a Board meeting held on January 10, 2017, the Board decided to dismiss 
respondent within 30 days, unless he demanded a hearing.  (Ex. 1.) On or about January 18,
2017, respondent timely requested a hearing. (Ex. 3.)

5.

On or about February 8, 2017, the District filed an Accusation with OAH and
served it on respondent, including the allegations made in the Statement of Charges. (Ex. 4.)
Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense, which contained a request for the hearing that 
ensued. Respondent was timely provided with notice of the hearing before the Commission. 
(Ex. 6.)

Respondent’s Background Information

6.

Personal. Respondent is a 51-year-old married man with three children.  He 
grew up in Los Angeles and attended local colleges.  In 1993, he graduated with a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in health sciences with a certificate in occupational safety.  In 2000, 
respondent completed a credential program at California State University, Los Angeles.

2

7.

Credential. Beginning in 1997, respondent was issued emergency teaching

permits, which allowed him to teach while working on his credential.  In 2000, after 
completing his credential program, respondent was issued a preliminary single subject 
teaching credential in health and biological sciences.  His credential became clear upon 
reaching tenure at the District in 2002.

8.

A. Teaching Experience. Respondent was hired with the District as a 

Teacher’s Assistant on November 15, 1988, but then, for reason(s) not established, resigned
from District service on September 31, 1996.

B. On July 15, 1997, respondent was rehired by the District as a secondary

biological and health science teacher at Garfield High School (Garfield).  On July 1, 2002, 
respondent gained permanent status with the District.  Respondent continued teaching at 
Garfield for several years.

C. In 2010, respondent was displaced from Garfield because the school was 

reconstituted and broken into smaller magnet schools.  However, respondent believes his 
displacement from Garfield was related to his whistleblowing activity there and a “corrupt”
administration at the school, a topic he would frequently and copiously complain about later.

D. In 2010, respondent was placed at South East High School (SEHS) and 

assigned to teach science and health classes.

9.

Respondent generally received favorable evaluations while teaching at the 

District through the 2010-2011 school year.  No evidence was presented indicating he had 
been subject to discipline prior to that time.

Preface I: the Events of 2011

10.

In addition to working for the District, respondent also worked on Saturdays at 

a local YMCA in membership services.  At a time not established, he began experiencing 
work-related problems at the YMCA.

11.

On October 7, 2011, a male student stabbed and killed a female student (his

ex-girlfriend) at SEHS, which had a profound impact on students, teachers (including
respondent), and administrators at SEHS.

12.

A. By mid-October 2011, respondent believed he was “under surveillance” at 
the YMCA.  He was upset about the murder at SEHS.  He was experiencing stress related to 
students who “occasionally challenged him,” as respondent believed the students he 
encountered at SEHS were more aggressive than those at Garfield. (Ex. 23, p. 2.) He was 
still upset about his displacement from Garfield, a concern which he tried to share with the 
Los Angeles Times and the FBI.  Thus, respondent began making cryptic comments to staff 
at SEHS about being under surveillance, being an FBI informant, and that “everyone would 
try to cover it up and soon they would know the truth.”  (Ibid.)

3

B. Respondent’s strange comments caused concern among his colleagues and 

students, who advised SEHS administrators.  By October 13, 2011, the administrators 
directed respondent not to attend the “Back to School Night” and removed him from the 
classroom at SEHS.

13.

Soon thereafter, District Medical Director, Dr. Rosa Mercado, contacted 

clinical psychologist Paul J. Lane concerning respondent.  Dr. Mercado indicated the District 
wanted respondent evaluated to determine his mental health and fitness for duty.

14.

In October and November 2011, Dr. Lane met with respondent three times to
perform evaluative testing, review relevant background information including his medical 
and mental health history, review records provided by the District, and formulate a final 
conclusion with recommendations.

15.

Dr. Lane concluded that respondent presented with obsessive compulsive, 

paranoid, histrionic features, and questionable social judgment.  Dr. Lane believed 
respondent probably had a Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (NOS).
Notwithstanding those findings, Dr. Lane determined respondent was still fit for duty as a 
teacher, but that he needed to consult with a mental health practitioner for individual 
psychological treatment.  Dr. Lane also opined that, absent treatment, respondent’s mental 
health may deteriorate.  Dr. Lane communicated his findings to Dr. Mercado via telephone 
and sent her a written report dated November 7, 2011.

16.

Dr. Lane also recommended that respondent be reassigned to another campus
for his personal welfare.  Respondent rejected Dr. Lane’s recommendation and insisted on 
being returned to SEHS.  Respondent received some mental health treatment at Kaiser 
Permanente (Kaiser) during 2011, but the specifics were not established.  However,
respondent was not prescribed any medication and he stopped his treatment that same year.

Preface II: the Events Subsequent to 2011

17.

In 2012, respondent was arrested for domestic violence.  It was not established 

whether criminal charges were filed or, if so, whether there was a conviction or formal
disposition.  However, as a result of his arrest, respondent was required to take 52 domestic 
violence classes, which he later successfully completed.  During this time, he and his wife 
were separated for a period not established, and his children were temporarily placed in a 
foster home.  (Ex. 94, p. 5.)

18.

In June 2014, respondent filed a complaint against the District with the 

California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH).  (Ex. 32.) He complained
the District discriminated against him for various reasons.

19.

In early 2015, respondent was laid off from his part-time job at the YMCA.

He was told the layoff was due to a policy change requiring a greater number of work hours
by part-time employees.  However, respondent drew a connection between his layoff from

4

the YMCA and his domestic violence arrest, employment issues at the District, and his
complaint to the FBI about the District.  In many subsequent mass e-mails respondent would 
send to District administrators, fellow teachers, and outside parties (including the media and 
high-level officials in other government agencies), he commonly complained about a 
conspiracy against him involving the District, FBI, YMCA, and child welfare agencies 
involved in his domestic violence arrest.

Charges Related to Respondent’s Classroom and School Behaviors

20.

A. (Charge 1).  From August 13, 2014, through December 17, 2014, 

respondent used hard-tipped darts and an electronic dartboard in his classroom to determine,
in part, students’ grades.  Respondent divided students into various teams.  Toward the end 
of class, if respondent determined students had behaved well in class, a student from each 
team would throw a dart at the dartboard.  Respondent would keep track of the scores in an 
Excel spreadsheet that was typically projected on the back wall of the classroom.  While the 
students were throwing darts, the rest of the class would usually talk among themselves and 
not engage in coursework. Students in teams scoring higher than other teams would earn 
more grade points; respondent would lower their grades if their team scored fewer points 
than other teams.  A student who did not throw darts at the dartboard received a lower grade.

B.  In using the dartboard game as he did, respondent did not use appropriate 
means or established standards to determine students’ grades.  By so doing, respondent also
failed to adhere to District Bulletin 1353.1 (Marking Practices and Procedures in Secondary
Schools) because using the game to determine students’ grades had no bearing on individual 
student achievement and impermissibly compared students’ achievements against other 
students.  This conduct also violated California Standards for the Teaching Profession
(CSTP) Standard 5 (Assessing Students for Learning) because respondent was not using 
proper assessment data to establish learning goals and to plan, differentiate or modify
instruction.

21.

(Charge 2).  From August 13, 2014, through at least January 17, 2015, 

respondent used a basketball and basketball hoop to determine points for students’ grades, 
similar to the dartboard game involved in Charge 1. In doing so, respondent did not use 
appropriate means or established standards to determine students’ grades.  For the same 
reasons explained above regarding Charge 1, respondent also failed to adhere to District 
Bulletin 1353.1 and CSTP Standard 5 in using the basketball and hoop.

22.

(Charge 3).  From August 13, 2014, through December 17, 2014, respondent 

required students to access materials and homework through the internet and periodically
requested them to respond to him by e-mail.  Respondent testified that most of his students 
had access to the internet and that those who did not could be given alternate modes of 
communicating.  Other than a curt written complaint from student L  C. and a sentence 
from Principal Jesus Nunez during his testimony, there was no other evidence provided on 
this charge.  Primarily, none of the conference memos presented in this case contained 
warnings or directives advising respondent to discontinue this practice.  Under these 

5

circumstances, it was not established that respondent failed to provide his students with equal 
opportunities to complete their school work by having them access the internet to complete 
on-line assignments.  For the same reasons, it was not established that respondent’s conduct 
violated District Bulletin 1353.1 and/or CSTP Standard 5.

23.

(Charge 4).  On August 27, 2014, Assistant Principal Maribel Flores

conducted a classroom observation of respondent’s fourth period health class.  She observed
that respondent did not use instructional time effectively and the learning activities he used 
were not academically challenging, as follows:

a. From approximately 11:45 a.m. to 11:56 a.m., he showed an internet video

on strokes.  He told the students to take notes.  He said, “Okay guys, let's take the notes.
Remember, if you want double wins (referring to the dartboard game), everyone takes 
notes.”

b. At approximately 11:59 a.m., he said, “We're going to watch the video one 

more time.  Then I'll collect your notes.  Then you're gonna [sic] show me what you know 
about it.”

c. The class watched the section on strokes again and he collected the notes,

which he wanted done in the Cornell format.

d. At approximately 12:16 p.m., he turned on an electronic dartboard for a 

game. One by one he called students from each group to throw a hard-tipped dart at the 
dartboard. He then typed the points into an Excel spreadsheet he displayed on the wall. 

e. When the game ended, at approximately 12:26 p.m., a student asked, 

“Mister. Can we play another game?” Respondent did not respond to the question.  Instead,
he said, “Ok, let's review [the video] one more time.” He played the video for a third time as 
students sat and watched. He did not provide direction or an assignment for students as they
watched the video. Students did not take notes or discuss the video.

24.

A.  (Charge 5). On or about October 8, 2014, Assistant Principal Flores 

conducted a classroom observation of respondent’s first period biology class, and observed 
that respondent did not create a classroom environment that supported student learning.  The 
classroom was not safe.  There were physical hazards in respondent’s classroom that 
endangered student safety.  No student work was posted.  Other than two commercially
produced posters, there was no graphic evidence that this was a science room.  In fact, 
respondent had not followed through on Assistant Principal Flores’s prior directive that he 
make his classroom more attractive for student learning.  She saw the electronic dartboard 
mounted on one of the whiteboards that respondent and students used with hard-tipped darts, 
as described above.  She also saw the basketball hoop on a stand located just inside one of 
the doors to the classroom.  Assistant Principal Flores believed those objects were safety
hazards.

6

B.  Assistant Principal Flores had not previously given respondent clear 

directives on these topics, other than that he must make his classroom more conducive to 
student learning. This observation occurred very early in the school year, which did not 
provide respondent enough time to decorate his classroom.  Under these circumstances, it 
was not established that respondent’s conduct violated the District’s Code of Ethics, Code of 
Conduct with Students, or Bulletin 1353.1.  However, respondent’s failure to comply with
Assistant Principal Flores’s directive to make his environment conducive to student learning
was in violation of CSTP Standards 2.2 (creating physical or virtual learning environments 
that promote student learning) and 2.5 (developing, communicating, and maintaining high 
standards for individual and group learning).

25.

(Charge 6).  On November 17, 2014, respondent sent an e-mail to his fellow 
teachers, Kayla Bakos and Paul Butterfield, which had no District or instructional purpose.
Neither teacher understood the e-mail and both deleted it quickly without reading it fully.
Respondent’s conduct violated the District’s Responsible Use Policy, because using the 
District’s data system in this manner was not responsible, efficient, or in support of the 
District’s business and education objectives. However, given the nebulous nature of the e-
mail and that the recipients did not read all of it, it was not established that any other District 
policy was violated.

26.

(Charge 7).  On November 18, 2014, during a professional development 

meeting as part of SEHS’s professional learning community (PLC), respondent was agitated
because Ms. Bakos and Mr. Butterfield had not responded to his November 17, 2014 e-mail.
He instructed Ms. Bakos to respond to the e-mail and told her he knew she “was telling bad 
things about him to students.” Respondent told Mr. Butterfield he was documenting that Mr. 
Butterfield had not responded to the e-mail and that Mr. Butterfield needed to “watch out 
because you are messing with my career.” Ms. Bakos was threatened by respondent’s 
behavior.  Mr. Butterfield, who knew and liked respondent, was upset that respondent 
behaved that way toward him, but he did not feel threatened. Respondent’s conduct violated 
the District’s Respectful Treatment of All Persons Resolution, and section A.2. (Create an 
Environment of Trust, Respect and Non-Discrimination) of the District’s Code of Ethics.

27.

(Charge 8). On October 24, 2014, respondent received a written directive 

from Assistant Principal Flores to stop using the dartboard in his classroom.  On December 
11, 2014, Assistant Principal Flores also issued a conference memorandum containing 
directives to stop using the dartboard in his classroom. In fact, respondent had received a 
similar directive by the principal at Garfield before respondent was displaced from that 
school. Respondent willfully refused to comply with Assistant Principal Flores’s directives.
For example, on December 15, 2014, respondent sent Principal Nunez an e-mail with the 
following message, “I have to respectfully and professionally decline your directive of the 
removal of the dartboard game based on the district reasons of safety.” On December 17, 
2014, Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) Consulting Teacher Charlotte Sampson-Holm
reported to Principal Nunez that she observed respondent facilitating students’ use of the 
dartboard in his classroom earlier that day. After receiving that report, Principal Nunez
visited respondent in his classroom and told respondent to stop using the dartboard.

7

28.

(Charge 9).  On December 17, 2014, respondent acted unprofessionally toward

a District Administrator and again willfully refused to follow directives given to him by site
administration. Specifically, Principal Nunez had advised his District superiors that 
respondent was refusing to comply with directives to stop using the dartboard in his 
classroom. Local District Operations Administrator, Dr. James Noble, and Operations 
Coordinator, Erick Juarez, decided to come to SEHS to investigate.  They met with Principal 
Nunez.  The three of them went to respondent’s classroom during the lunch break and took 
possession of the dartboard and darts while the classroom was empty. Respondent entered 
the classroom as the three administrators were leaving. Dr. Noble informed respondent that 
he could not use the dartboard because previously he had been directed by site administration 
to stop using it. In response, respondent attempted twice to forcibly grab the dartboard from 
Dr. Noble. Dr. Noble deflected respondent’s efforts and told him to stop.  He then instructed 
respondent to retrieve the dartboard from Principal Nunez’s office after school and reiterated 
the directive to stop using the dartboard in class. Because the classroom door was open, the
incident was visible to the students present in the hallway at the time.

29.

(Charge 10).  On January 17, 2015, while his class was being observed by

Assistant Principal Flores, respondent told students they would play basketball in class with a 
Nerf ball the following day. Prior to this, Assistant Principal Flores had directed him to 
remove the basketball hoop.  Respondent intended to use the basketball and hoop as a 
replacement for the removed dartboard, but he knew this was not acceptable to his 
administrators, given the dartboard had been forcibly removed and Assistant Principal 
Flores’s directive prohibiting the basketball hoop.

30.

(Charge 13).2 On or about April 22, 2015, respondent did not interact with a
student in a way that projected respect or created a supportive learning environment, when, 
after he noticed that student was sitting and passively watching a video, respondent directed 
that student to, “Take notes, please.  I will change your teams and give you more work.”
This was not supportive because it threatened punitive action against the student.
Respondent’s conduct, in this regard, violated the District’s Respectful Treatment of All 
Persons Resolution, section A.2. of the Code of Ethics, and CSTP Standard 2.  While the 
other events described in this charge occurred as alleged, respondent could have just as easily
been trying to garner student engagement, which would not have been problematic.

31.

During the 2014-2015 school year, Assistant Principal Flores conducted a total 

of four formal classroom observations of respondent teaching his various classes.  She was 
dissatisfied with respondent’s performance in each lesson she observed.  Assistant Principal 
Flores tried to provide respondent with support and guidance to help him improve his 
performance when she met with him after each observation, which she confirmed with 
conference summary memoranda.  (Exs. 33, 36, 47 & 55.) Assistant Principal Flores’s
support consisted of detailed instruction, guidance, and reference materials, as well as 
directives which were easy to follow.  Respondent failed to use her suggestions, guidance or 
materials, and his performance did not improve.

2 Charges 11 and 12 are discussed in the next section.

8

Charges Related to Respondent’s Mass E-Mails

32.

On December 2, 2014, Principal Nunez directed respondent orally, and again

in writing on December 4, 2014, to maintain professional decorum when communicating 
with colleagues; not engage in any activity that directly or indirectly makes his colleagues 
feel threatened; and adhere to the District’s Code of Ethics, Responsible Use Policy, and 
Respectful Treatment of All Persons Resolution.  Those directives were also generally
covered during the required yearly training provided to all certificated teachers. These
directives came on the heels of respondent sending e-mails to numerous District teachers and 
others which discussed respondent’s conspiracy theories involving the District, FBI, YMCA 
and others, and were disjointed, rambling, and bizarre.  (See, e.g., exs. 34, 35, & 38.)
Because the e-mails had so many recipients, they became known as “mass e-mails.”

33.

A. (Charge 11).  On or about March 2, 2015, respondent sent an e-mail to 

approximately 152 recipients.  The majority of those recipients were faculty and staff 
members of SEHS. The e-mail contained a chain of about 16 older e-mails and included at 
least eight internet links, six of which were YouTube videos. The e-mails were rambling,
incoherent, and discussed respondent’s concerns about the FBI, YMCA, and his personal 
conflict with the District. The e-mail had no District or instructional purpose.

B.  (Charge 12). When respondent engaged in the conduct described in 
Charge 11, he willfully refused to follow the above-described administrative directives 
previously given to him.

34.

(Charge 14).  On April 26, 2015, respondent sent an unauthorized e-mail to 

approximately 158 recipients. The majority of those recipients were faculty and staff 
members at SEHS. The e-mail contained approximately 13 segments and included at least 
11 internet links to YouTube videos.  The e-mail was rambling, incoherent, and discussed 
respondent’s children, Dr. Mercado, and respondent’s experience at Garfield. There were 
many other topics and segments, which were disjointed and unconnected. The e-mail had no 
District or instructional purpose.

35.

A.  (Charge 15). On or about April 28, 2015, respondent sent an e-mail to 

Principal Nunez, which included a Star Wars video titled, “Execute Order 66” and instructed 
his students to watch the video and answer the following questions: (1) Who in the film clip 
represents the administrators? (2) Who in the film clip represents the teachers? (3) Who in 
the film clip represents the students? (4) Who in the film clip represents respondent?

B. Respondent and other teachers at SEHS knew Principal Nunez was an avid 

Star Wars fan.  Respondent knew Principal Nunez would understand the reference of the 
video, which depicted violence by the forces of dark against the forces of good.  In light of 
the circumstances, respondent knew or reasonably should have known that Principal Nunez 
would have taken the e-mail with the embedded video as a threat, which is how Principal 
Nunez in fact interpreted the e-mail. As a result of seeing the e-mail, Principal Nunez 
became worried that respondent might jeopardize his personal safety and security.  During 

9

the hearing, respondent explained he had innocent intentions in sending the e-mail to 
Principal Nunez.  However, respondent’s explanation was convoluted, fantastic, and 
unbelievable.

36.

(Charge 16).  On April 29, 2015, respondent sent an unauthorized e-mail to 

approximately 148 recipients. The majority of those recipients were faculty and staff 
members of SEHS. The e-mail contained approximately four segments and included at least 
one internet link to a YouTube video and the contents of the above-described e-mail sent on 
April 26, 2015. Respondent referred to his labor union, prayers, divine intervention, Dr. 
Mercado, his complaint to the DFEH, and his experience with the YMCA. The e-mail had 
no District or instructional purpose. In fact, by respondent’s own admission, he sent the e-
mail hoping that one of the recipients would intervene on his behalf.

37.

(Charge 17).  On or about April 30, 2015, respondent sent an unauthorized e-

mail to approximately 148 recipients. The majority of those recipients were faculty and staff 
members of SEHS. The e-mail contained approximately four segments and included at least 
two internet links to a YouTube video and an ESPN video, as well as the contents of the
above-described e-mail sent on April 29, 2015. Respondent discussed his children, the FBI, 
homicides, and his conflict with the District. The e-mail had no District or instructional 
purpose.  Like the e-mail involved in Charge 16, respondent sent this e-mail hoping others
would intervene on his behalf.

38.

A.  (Charge 18). Principal Nunez gave respondent the administrative 

directives described in Factual Finding 32 above orally on March 12, 2015, and in writing on 
March 13, 2015.

B. Respondent willfully refused to follow the administrative directives 

previously given to him and described above when he sent the above-described e-mails on 
April 26, 2015, April 28, 2015, April 29, 2015, and April 30, 2015.

C.  In doing so, respondent also failed to adhere to the following District rules 

and regulations:

(i) Code of Ethics.  Respondent did not respect his colleagues’ time

and privacy.  When some people asked to be removed from his e-mail list, respondent
initially refused, unless they answered his inquiry why they wanted to be removed.

(ii) Responsible Use Policy.  By obtaining many e-mail addresses from 

District e-mail lists and sending e-mails to District employees’ using District e-mail
addresses, respondent accessed District data systems and networks in a way that was not 
respectful of employees’ time and privacy.

D.  However, it was not established that respondent did anything prohibited by

the Respectful Treatment of All Persons Resolution.

10

39. 

During  the  2014-2015  school  year,  Principal  Nunez  conferenced  with 

respondent  at  least  five  times  and  counseled  him  on  various  topics.  On  two  such  occasions, 
Principal  Nunez  advised  respondent  that  his  mass  e-mails  had  no  instructional  purpose, 
violated  several  District  rules  and  regulations,  and  SEHS  staff  had  complained  to  him  about 
them.  During  those  conferences,  Principal  Nunez  directed  respondent  to  stop  sending  mass 
e-mails  to  District  staff  which  had  no  instructional  purpose.  (Exs.  68  &  80.)  As  discussed 
above,  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  Principal  Nunez’s  directives. 

Charges  Related  to  Respondent’s  Mental  Health 

40. 

After  receiving  a  series  of  bizarre  e-mails  from  respondent,  Principal  Nunez 
contacted  Dr.  Rosa  Mercado,  the  District’s  Medical  Director,  to  request  that  respondent  be 
“evaluated.”  (Ex.  75.)  By  this  time,  Ailleth  Thom,  a  District  threat  assessment  coordinator, 
had  also  contacted  Dr.  Mercado  over  concerns  about  respondent’s  mental  health  which 
SEHS  administrators  had  brought  to  her.  (Ex.  169,  Mercado  Declar.,  pp.  2-3.)  Dr.  Mercado 
had  also  received  a  number  of  respondent’s  mass  e-mails,  which  she  described  as 
“unsolicited,  random,  difficult  to  understand,  disjointed.  . 

.”  Ibid.) 

. 

41. 

Based  on  the  above,  Dr.  Mercado  became  concerned  about  respondent.  She 

decided  respondent  should  again  be  evaluated.  Dr.  Mercado  contacted  respondent,  who 
agreed  to  be  evaluated  again  by  Dr.  Lane.  (Ex.  169,  Mercado  Declar.,  pp.  2-4.)  Since  Dr. 
Lane  had  previously  found  respondent  fit  for  duty,  and  respondent  did  not  believe  he  had  any 
mental  health  problems,  he  believed  Dr.  Lane  would  again  find  him  fit  for  duty. 

42. 

A.  (Charge  19).  On  May  13  and  15,  2015,  respondent  met  with  Dr.  Lane  for  a 
psychological  evaluation  and  an  examination  of  his  fitness  for  duty.  As  described  below,  Dr. 
Lane  concluded  and  communicated  to  Dr.  Mercado  that  respondent  was  no  longer  fit  for 
duty. 

B.  On  May  15,  2015,  Dr.  Mercado  contacted  respondent  and  relayed  Dr. 

Lane’s  findings  that  respondent  was  not  fit  for  duty  as  a  teacher.  Respondent  advised  Dr. 
Mercado  that  he  was  fit  for  duty  and  wanted  to  be  evaluated  by  a  panel  of  psychiatrists. 

C.  On  May  27,  2015,  Dr.  Lane  issued  and  transmitted  a  report  to  the  District, 

wherein  he  concluded  respondent  was  not  fit  for  duty  and  should  not  return  to  duty  in  light  of 
to  work  as  a  teacher  in  the 
his  psychiatric  condition  and  how  it  adversely  impacted  his  ability 
classroom. 

   

Dr.  Lane  reiterated  these  findings  and  conclusions  in  a  more 

comprehensive  written  report  he  issued  and  transmitted  to  the  District. 

  

D.  On  June  9,  2015,  the  District’s  Board  took  action  by  placing  respondent  on 

a  mandatory  sick  leave  of  absence  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44942,  based  on, 
among  other  things,  findings  that  respondent  was  unfit  to  continue  teaching. 

ll

  

  

43.

A.  (Charge 20).  On July 7, 2015, respondent was evaluated by a panel of 

three psychiatrists pursuant to Education Code section 44942.  The panel was composed of 
psychiatrists Timothy Hayes, Richard Sandor, and Marta Pariewski.  The panel conducted a 
complete and detailed examination of respondent, which included: history of present illness, 
past and current psychiatric history, family psychiatric history, past medical history, social, 
educational, and occupational history, and mental status.  The panel also reviewed with 
respondent his past fitness for duty evaluations with Dr. Lane in 2011 and 2015, and Dr.
Lane’s recommendation after the 2011 consultation that he be transferred to another school 
location.

B. On July 8, 2015, the panel issued a written report wherein it concluded 

respondent was suffering from mental illness to such a degree as to render him incompetent 
to perform his duties as a teacher.  The report noted respondent demonstrated a complete lack 
of insight into his psychiatric condition, did not believe he had a psychiatric disorder, and
thus he had no motivation to seek treatment.

C. On July 14, 2015, the District sent respondent a letter advising him that,

effective July 15, 2015, as a result of action taken by the Board, and the examination by the
panel on July 7, 2015, respondent was placed on mandatory sick leave of absence in 
accordance with Education Code section 44942.

D. Respondent did not believe he suffered from a mental health disability.  He 

disagreed with the panel’s findings and the District’s decision to place him on mandatory
sick leave of absence.

44.

A.  (Charge 21). On July 20, 2015, respondent requested that the District 

initiate a Declaratory Relief action in the Superior Court of the State of California, pursuant
to Education Code section 44942, for purposes of reviewing the Board’s action placing him 
on mandatory sick leave of absence.

B. On July 29, 2015, the District filed a Complaint for Declaratory Relief in 

the Superior Court of the State of California, County of Los Angeles.

C. On June 3, 2016, the District filed a motion for summary judgment on the 

grounds that no triable issue existed in the Declaratory Relief action and that all evidence and 
undisputed material facts supported a finding that respondent was unfit for duty as a teacher 
at the time the Board placed him on mandatory sick leave of absence.

D. On September 28, 2016, Superior Court Judge Fredrick C. Shaller 

considered and granted the District’s motion, concluding that, at the relevant times,
respondent was incompetent to perform his assigned duties and should have been placed on 
mandatory sick leave of absence. The judgment was not appealed and is final.

E. Since being placed on leave in July 2015, respondent has not provided

verification from a mental health provider or expert that he is fit for duty as a teacher.

12

45. 

(Charge  22).  On  November  28,  2016,  respondent  was  again  evaluated  by  the 

same  panel  of  three  psychiatrists,  at  his  request  and  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44942.  The  panel  determined  respondent  still  suffered  from  mental  illness  to  such  a  degree 
as  to  render  him  unfit  to  perform  his  duties  as  a  teacher. 

Other  Relevant  Findings 

46. 

As  mentioned  above  in  Factual  Finding  27,  respondent  was  provided  a  PAR 
coach  at  least  during  the  2014-2015  school  year.  Due  to  the  confidential  nature  of  the  PAR 
program,  respondent’s  administrators  were  not  advised  how  respondent  was  progressing. 

47. 

Respondent  made  a  number  of  comments  in  class  about  his  personal  situation 

with  the  YMCA,  FBI,  and  the  District,  which  made  some  students  uneasy,  particularly  his 
comments  alluding  to  being  affiliated  with  the  FBI.  It  was  improper  for  respondent  to  raise 
such  personal  concerns  with  students.  In  fact,  in  May  2015,  respondent  assigned  his  students 
the  task  of  writing  letters  of  recommendation  for  him  if  he  submitted  an  application  to  the  FBI. 
(Ex.  87.)  When  he  was  questioned  about  that  assignment  during  his  deposition  before  the 
hearing,  respondent  admitted  he  did  it  “for  students  to  save  him.”  The  assignment,  and 
tespondent’s  motivation  in  giving  it  to  students,  improperly  crossed  over  professional 
boundaries  between  respondent  and  his  students. 

48. 

Two  of  respondent’s  fellow  teachers  from  SEHS  testified  during  the  hearing, 

Paul  Butterfield  and  David  Sievers.  It  was  clear  from  their  testimony  that  they  liked  respondent 
and  initially  respected  him  as  a  teacher.  However,  it  was  equally  clear  that  whatever  respect 
they  had  for  respondent  had  fully  eroded  by  fall  2014.  Several  other  faculty  members  sent 
written  complaints  to  Principal  Nunez  about  respondent’s  behavior  during  lunch  breaks  or  at 
staff  meetings,  and/or  the  tone  of  his  mass  e-mails.  Many  expressed  feeling  anxious  for  their 
security.  By  fall  2014,  many  of  the  SEHS  staff  tried  to  avoid  respondent.  Ms.  Bakos  was  so 
upset  after  her  interactions  with  respondent  that  she  began  keeping  pepper-spray  in  her  desk  at 
school.  As  discussed  above,  Principal  Nunez  was  also  concemed  for  his  safety  after  receiving 
tespondent’s  Star  Wars  e-mail.  Finally,  Principal  Nunez  credibly  testified  the  professional 
community  at  SEHS  has  improved  since  respondent  was  removed. 

49. 

A.  Dr.  Hayes  testified  during  the  hearing.  He  was  the  lead  psychiatrist  in  the 
panel  that  evaluated  respondent’s  fitness  for  duty  as  a  teacher  in  2015  and  2016.  Dr.  Hayes 
is  well  credentialed  and  qualified.  His  testimony  was  clear  and  persuasive. 

B.

in 

boundaries  manifested 

his  telling  students  about  his  personal  problems  during  class. 

a  TITTIES  For  example,  respondent’s  poor  insight  and  lack 
of 
Respondent’s  obsessive  and  intense  focus  on  using  the  dartboard  game,  even  in  the  midst  of 
directives  to  stop  doing  so,  disrupted  the  learning  process,  caused  anxiety  among  some 
students,  frustration  in  others,  and  deprived  the  class  as  a  whole  of  actual  learning.  His  poor 
judgement  and  failure  to  observe  boundaries  interfered  with  his  ability  to  have  a 
collaborative  relationship  with  peers  at  SEHS  and  his  administrators.  Dr.  Hayes  persuasively 
opined  respondent  is  not  fit  to  teach. 

D. 

however,  the  Commission  is  not  convinced 
   
   
participate  in  counseling,  treatment,  or  take  psychiatric  medication.  The  Commission  is 
convinced  respondent  does  not  believe  he  has  a  mental  illness  and  that  he  sees  no  need  to 
receive  mental  health  treatment  in  order  to  return  to  the  classroom. 

respondent  in  the  future  would  voluntarily 

   

Based  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence, 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard of Proof  on  the  Accusation 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  charges  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  “the  evidence  on  one  side 
outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v. 
Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314,  325.) 

Mil 

  

14

Cause for Termination

2.

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 

employee if one or more of the causes enumerated in Education Code sections 44932,
subdivision (a), 44939, and 449423 are established by a preponderance of the evidence.

3.

A. A certificated employee may be subject to dismissal for unprofessional 

conduct pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(2).

B.  Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession has been defined as that 

which violates the rules or ethical code of the profession or is unbecoming a member of the 
profession in good standing.  (Board of Educ. of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 
553, overruled, on another ground, by Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 
588, fn. 7.)

C. In this case, it was established by a preponderance of the evidence that 

respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct within the meaning of section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(2). As discovered during Assistant Principal Flores’s classroom observations 
of respondent teaching his various classes, respondent failed to create a rigorous and positive 
learning environment in his classroom that properly assessed student learning. Respondent’s
persistent use of the dartboard game, and later the basketball game, to determine students’
grades had no bearing on individual student achievement and violated District policies on 
marking and comparing students’ achievements against other students.  His numerous mass
e-mails showed a constant failure to follow District policies on conduct, and demonstrated
that respondent was not respectful of colleagues’ time and privacy.  The tone of the Star
Wars e-mail respondent sent to Principal Nunez was threatening.  Respondent also refused to 
follow multiple directives from Assistant Principal Flores and Principal Nunez regarding
removal of the dartboard and basketball hoop from his classroom.  Respondent continued
sending mass e-mails to colleagues after being directed not to do so by administrators.
Respondent’s interaction with Dr. Noble in trying to grab the dartboard away from him was
unprofessional and modeled poor behavior in front of students in the hallway. (Factual
Findings 20-21, 23-25, 27-29, 32-39.)

4.

A. A certificated employee may be subject to dismissal for unsatisfactory 

performance pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).

B.  The term “unsatisfactory performance” is not specifically defined in the 

Education Code or case law.  Inasmuch as there is separate cause for dismissal for 
unprofessional conduct in section 44932, as discussed above, and it is not to be presumed 
that the Legislature intended to enact completely duplicative statutes (In re Maes (2010) 185 
Cal.App.4th 1094, 1110), unsatisfactory performance must mean something different from 
unprofessional conduct.  In fact, section 44938, subdivision (c), specifies that “unsatisfactory
performance” does not include any other cause for dismissal specified in section 44932. 

3 Further undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code.

15

C. While unprofessional conduct can be determined by analyzing a teacher’s 
conduct relative to the broader educational community, unsatisfactory performance must be 
analyzed with an eye toward the teacher’s performance as evaluated by his or her employing
school district.  Section 44938 requires a charge of unsatisfactory performance to be 
preceded by a written notice of unsatisfactory performance.  Section 44938 refers to section 
44660 et seq., which in turn establishes guidelines for how school districts should evaluate 
and assess the performance of their certificated employees.  Thus, cause for discipline may
be established if a certificated employee performs in a manner unsatisfactory to his
employing school district.

D. However, it has been observed that the purpose of the statute giving tenure 

to teachers is to insure an efficient permanent staff of teachers whose members are not 
dependent on caprice for their positions as long as they conduct themselves properly and 
perform their duties efficiently and well.  (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. 
Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1293, fn 20, citing 56 Cal.Jur.3d 
(2003) Schools, § 411, p. 757.)  Therefore, an employing school district cannot be arbitrary
or capricious in making decisions regarding whether a certificated employee has performed 
in an unsatisfactory manner.

E. In this case, it was established by a preponderance of the evidence that 

respondent’s performance was unsatisfactory pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5).
Assistant Principal Flores was dissatisfied with respondent’s performance in all of her 
classroom observations.  When she met with respondent after each observation, she tried to 
help him improve his performance, by providing him with support and guidance, which, 
respondent did not heed.  Assistant Principal Flores provided respondent with detailed 
instruction, guidance, and reference materials, as well as directives, which were easy to
follow and could have remedied aspects of respondent’s unsatisfactory performance.
Respondent failed to use her suggestions, guidance or materials, and his performance did not 
improve.  (Factual Findings 23-24, 30-31.)

5.

A. A certificated employee may be subject to dismissal for evident unfitness 

for service pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

B.  “Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.
(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 
Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “'Evident unfitness for service' connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” (Id.)

C. It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent is

evidently unfit for service as a teacher pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(6).
Respondent failed to follow through after nine formal conferences with administrators that 
outlined directives for him to be more effective in the classroom and more professional as a 
member of his teaching community.  He refused to follow clear and simple directives to stop 

16

using  hazardous  games  in  his  classroom  and  sending  mass  e-mails  to  colleagues  that  had  no 
instructional  purpose. 
     

he  was 

Respondent  could  not  reflect  on  his  behaviors  and  understand  that 

  
doing  was  wrong.  He  was  also  unable  to  identify  methods  he  used  that  were  not 

   
what 
good  for  students.  Respondent  was  repeatedly  notified  by  his  administrators  that  his  actions 
in  question  were  not  acceptable,  yet  respondent  was  not  able  to  remedy  the  problems  upon 
receipt  of  that  notice.  (Factual  Findings  20-21,  23-45.) 

6. 

A.  A  certificated  employee  may  be  subject  to  dismissal  for  willfully  refusing 

to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  rules  and 
tegulations  of  an  employing  school  district,  pursuant  to  section  44939. 

B.  The  willful  refusal  of  a  teacher  to  obey  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  employing  school  district  is  tantamount  to  insubordination.  (Board  of Educ.  of  City  of 
Los  Angeles  v.  Swan,  supra,  41  Cal.2d  at  p.  552,  overruled,  on  another  ground,  by  Bekiaris  v. 
Board of Education  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575.) 

C. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent 

willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 
the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District,  pursuant  to  section  44939,  subdivision  (b). 
Respondent  was  given  four  formal  classroom  observations  in  a  one-year  period,  after  which 
Assistant  Principal  Flores  gave  him  directives  and  advised  him  how  to  teach  properly.  He 
completely  ignored  almost  all  of  those  directives  and  continued  doing  as  he  pleased  in  the 
classroom.  Principal  Nunez  and  Assistant  Principal  Flores  gave  him  repeated  directives  to 
not  use  the  dartboard  and  basketball  games  in  his  classrooms  or  send  mass  e-mails  to  school 
colleagues.  Respondent  refused  to  comply  with  those  directives.  It  was  only  after  the 
incident  involving  Dr.  Noble,  when  the  dartboard  was  physically  removed  from  his 
classroom,  that  respondent  stopped  using  the  dartboard.  He  quickly  replaced  the  dartboard 
with  the  basketball  and  hoop,  which  respondent  knew  was  not  permissible.  (Factual 
Findings  20-21,  23-24,  27-29,  31-39.) 

q 

A  certificated  employee  may  be  subject  to  dismissal,  pursuant  to  sections 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  and  44942,  for  having  a  physical  or  mental  condition  unfitting  him 
or  her  to  instruct  or  associate  with  children.  In  this  case,  it  was  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  has  a  mental  condition  making  him  unfit  to 
instruct  children  in  the  classroom.  In  2015,  Dr.  Lane  found  respondent  unfit  to  teach  due  to  a 
mental  condition.  Dr.  Lane’s  decision  was  confirmed  in  2015  and  2016  by  a  panel  of  three 
psychiatrists,  who  similarly  found  respondent  unfit  for  duty  as  a  teacher  due  to  a  mental 
condition.  The  panel’s  conclusion  reached  in  2015  was  subsequently  confirmed  by  the 
Superior  Court  in  a  final  judgment.  Respondent  has  presented  no  medical  or  expert  evidence 
suggesting  he  is  fit  for  duty  as  a  teacher.  (Factual  Findings  40-47.) 

Ml 

17

  

8.

A. A certificated employee may be subject to dismissal for persistent violation 
of, or refusal to obey, the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board 
of the school district employing him, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).

B.  Cause for dismissal here may be based on the violation of school rules or 

district policies.  (San Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1180-1181.)  However, there must be a “showing 
of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.”  (Id. at p. 1196.)  The violation must be 
persistent or “motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.”  (Governing Board of 
the Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 
81-82.)  Isolated events or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are 
generally not considered persistent.  (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence
(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.)

C. It was established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent 

persistently violated, and refused to obey, the school laws of the state and reasonable District 
regulations, pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).  Respondent persistently violated
District Bulletin 1353.1 and CTSP Standard 5 by using the dartboard and basketball games to
determine student grades, even after he was given explicit directives to discontinue that 
practice.  Respondent persistently violated the District’s Responsible Use Policy by sending
mass e-mails with no instructional purpose to colleagues, even after he was given explicit 
directives by an administrator to not do so. (Factual Findings 20-21, 25, 27-29, 32-39.)

Analysis of the Morrison Factors

9.

A.  In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists under the amorphous concepts 

of unprofessional conduct and evident unfitness for service, it also must be established that a 
teacher’s misconduct relates to his fitness to teach, within the meaning of Morrison v. State 
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230.  The Morrison analysis does not apply to
causes for dismissal for unsatisfactory performance, willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments, or persistent violation of school rules, laws or policies, because such theories, by
definition, have a direct nexus with teaching.  (Id., at pp. 227-230). While it is unclear whether 
the Morrison analysis applies to the cause for dismissal of mental unfitness to instruct children,
the Commission assumes it does for purposes of this case out of abundance of caution.

B. With regard to the three identified causes for dismissal that must be analyzed,
all of the factors suggested by Morrison were considered and compared to the facts established 
above.  Not all “Morrison factors” need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied.
(Governing Board v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.)  Moreover, the Morrison analysis need 
not be conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the 
accumulated facts established collectively.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v.
Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.)

///

18

C.  In this case, the Commission has analyzed the Morrison factors and 

concludes they establish by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent’s misconduct 
makes him unfit to teach, as follows:

1. The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow teachers.

Respondent’s students suffered most.  They were not learning, were deprived of District
curriculum and the opportunity to learn science, and were not allowed to develop as critical 
thinkers. There was a lack of engagement in respondent’s classes, with no challenges for
students. Respondent’s frequent and off-topic mass e-mails invaded the time and privacy of his 
colleagues. In fact, teachers who were once respondent’s allies lost respect for him and became 
increasingly nervous about the tone of his e-mails.  Many teachers at SEHS tried to avoid him.
Respondent’s conduct increased anxiety on campus.  Since respondent has been removed from 
school, the collaborative community at SEHS has improved.

2. The degree of such adversity.  Students suffered the greater amount of 
adversity, especially given most of respondent’s classes were composed of students being
introduced to senior level science.  Respondent failed to give his students a good foundation to 
problem-solve, or engage in creative learning, which impeded their matriculation to other 
sciences. The adversity to faculty was more moderate, although respondent’s behavior was 
enough to cause many teachers to complain to administrators, and one teacher, Ms. Bakos, to
obtain her own personal protection.

3. The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s

misconduct is fairly proximate, in that it occurred two to three years ago.  The misconduct’s
proximity is practically greater, in that respondent still contends he does not have a mental 
illness impairing his ability to function in the classroom.

4. The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. As touched on 

above, respondent’s credential put him in contact with high school students just beginning their 
introduction to senior sciences.  His poor teaching and behaviors undercut those students’ 
ability to gain a solid foothold in that level of science.

5. The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any,

surrounding the conduct. The Commission finds neither exists.

6. The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct. The Commission finds neither exists.  The Commission concludes respondent’s 
mental illness best explains the motives behind his misconduct.

7. The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. If respondent is 

returned to the classroom, he will engage in misconduct exactly the same as before.

8. The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. The Commission does not see 
how discipline will have such an effect upon properly exercised constitutional rights.

19

Disposition

10.

A.  “The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 

unfitness to teach . . ., and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.”
(California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.)  Thus, 
even where cause for dismissal has been established, a Commission still has broad discretion 
to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted.  (Fontana Unified School Dist. v. 
Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)

B. Respondent engaged in serious misconduct, even after being given 
numerous directives, guidance, and support.  His misconduct includes unsatisfactory
teaching, unprofessional interactions with colleagues, and willful refusal to follow clear 
directives of his supervisors.  More concerning is respondent’s mental illness, which the 
overwhelming and uncontroverted evidence shows renders him unfit to teach.  Despite an 
avalanche of evidence, respondent continues to deny he has a problem or that it impairs his 
fitness to teach.  Until respondent accepts those facts and takes significant and long-term
steps to address his illness, it is certain that, if returned to the classroom, he will continue to 
engage in the same misconduct that was proven in this case.  All students should have the 
opportunity to learn.  Respondent cannot give them that opportunity in his present condition.
His colleagues at school also should not be subjected to the anxiety and fear provoked by his
erratic behavior.  Even respondent agrees he is still many months away from being ready to
return to the classroom.  Respondent’s termination from the District is therefore warranted.
(Factual Findings 1-50; Legal Conclusions 1-9.)

///

///

///

///

///

///

///

///

///

///

///

20

ORDER

Hector Schmidt is dismissed from employment with the Los Angeles Unified School 

District.

DATED:

November 5, 2017

oo  DocuSigned  by: 

___________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

November 3, 2017
DATED: _________________

I concur.

I concur.

November 3, 2017
DATED: _________________

 
‘

DocuSigned  by: 

Tom  Hood 

 
,
s
e
r

 
r
e
e
r

___________________________
Tom Hood, Commissioner

~DocuSigned  by: 

 
y
s

__

___________________________
Jay San Agustin, Commissioner

21

