BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

CATERINA  LIPERA  (EN  705167), 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2017090853 

  

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  on  November  13-17,  2017,  and  January 
8,  2018,  in  Los  Angeles.  The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  upon  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

Michael  Voigt  and  Meredith  G.  Karasch,  Assistants  General  Counsel,  as  well  as 

Mampre  R.  Pomakian  and  My  T.  Huynh,  Associates  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Daniel  E.  Curry,  Esq.,  Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers  LLP,  represented 

Caterina  Lipera  (respondent),  who  was  present  each  hearing  day. 

The  District  seeks  to  affirm  its  termination  of  respondent’s  employment,  based  on 

allegations  that  in  2009  and  2015  respondent  engaged  in  the  egregious  misconduct  of  child 
abuse  against  special  education  students  when  she  forced  one  to  sit  in  soiled  clothes  for  20 
minutes;  physically  restrained  two  others  in  an  adapted  chair  against  District  policy;  and 
made  several  negative  remarks  about  and  to  her  students.  Respondent  contends  she  was  not 
in  the  classroom  in  2009  when  the  student  soiled  herself  but  thereafter  assisted  in  changing 
her  clothes;  admits  that  in  2015  she  occasionally  restrained  two  students  in  chairs  for  their 
safety  and  not  as  punishment;  and  that  some  of  her  comments  were  taken  out  of  context  and 
not  said  angrily,  while  others  were  not  made  by  her. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  committed 
egregious  misconduct  in  2009  and  2015  by  acts  constituting  child  abuse  as  defined  in  the 
Penal  Code.  Application  of  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education 
demonstrate  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach.  Respondent  presented  insufficient  evidence  of 
rehabilitation  or  remediation.  Her  termination  therefore  1s  warranted.

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

2. 

3. 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing  and  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Jose  R.  Cantu,  Ed.D.,  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  District’s  Assistant  Chief 

Human  Resources  Officer,  verified  on  information  and  belief  a  Statement  of  Charges  against 
respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for  respondent’s  immediate  suspension 
without  pay  and  termination  of  her  employment  as  a  result  of  various  alleged  incidents  of 
“egregious  misconduct”  involving  special  education  students. 

4. 

By  a  letter  dated  August  23,  2017,  respondent  was  advised  that  the  Statement 

of  Charges  had  been  filed  with  the  Board,  and  that  during  a  closed  session  of  a  Board 
meeting  held  on  August  22,  2017,  the  Board  decided  to  suspend  respondent  without  pay  and 
dismiss  her  from  employment.  The  dismissal  would  become  effective  within  30  days,  unless 
she  demanded  a  hearing.  Respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

5, 

On  September  27,  2017,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation  and  Statement  of 

Charges  with  OAH,  as  well  as  respondent’s  aforementioned  request  for  a  hearing. 

Respondent’s  Background  Information 

6. 

Credentials.  Respondent  has  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential,  as 

well  as  a  level  II  special  education  credential  allowing  her  to  teach  students  with  moderate  to 
severe  disabilities.  She  obtained  her  credentials  after  receiving  undergraduate  and  master’s 
degrees  from  California  State  University,  Northridge. 

7. 

Employment  with  the  District.  During  the  events  alleged  in  the  Accusation, 
  

respondent  was  assigned  as  a  special  education  teacher  at  Northridge  Middle  School  (2009) 
and  Stanley  Mosk  Elementary  School  (2015).  Her  overall  employment  chronology  with  the 
District  is  as  follows: 

a.  Respondent  was  first  employed  by  the  District  in  1998  as  a 

paraprofessional,  1.e.,  teacher’s  aide,  in  special  education  classrooms.  She  continued 
working  in  that  capacity  while  she  attended  college.  She  began  teaching  for  the  District  in 
1999  under  an  emergency  credential.  She  completed  her  probationary  service  with  the 
District  in  2004.  (Ex.  119,  p.  7.) 

b.  Respondent  taught  special  education  classes  from  1999  through  2006  at 

Joaquin  Miller  High  School.  She  next  taught  special  education  classes  at  Northridge  Middle

School  from  2006  through  2011;  she  thereafter  was  reassigned  and  taught  general  education 
classes  at  NMS  for  the  2011/2012  school  year. 

c.  As  aresult  of  displacements  and  reassignments  from  2012  through  July 

2015,  respondent  taught  mostly  special  education  classes  at  Hart  Street  Elementary  School 
and  the  Lokranitz  Special  Education  Center  (or  Lokrantz).  When  Lokrantz  was  closed, 
respondent  was  displaced  to  Stanley  Mosk  Elementary  School  (or  Mosk)  in  July  2015.  She 
taught  a  special  education  class  at  Mosk  from  August  16,  2015,  until  she  was  removed  from 
the  classroom  on  October  6,  2015,  as  a  result  of  the  investigation  leading  to  the  filmg  of  the 
Accusation  in  this  matter.  (2x.  119,  p.  7.) 

8. 

Respondent  submitted  a  number  of  performance  evaluations  completed  by 

District  administrators  covering  the  range  of  school  years  from  2005/2006  through 
2007/2008,  and  2010/2011  through  2011/2012.  On  balance,  the  evaluations  were  generally 
favorable.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  notes  buried  within  many  of  the  evaluations 
revealing  the  following  patterns  during  respondent’s  tenure  with  the  District. 

a.  Every  evaluation  presented,  but  one,  contains  an  overall  rating  that 

respondent  “meets  standard  performance.”  None  rates  respondent  as  “exceeding  standard 
performance,”  but  the  evaluation  for  the  2007/2008  school  year  rates  respondent’s 
performance  as  “below  standard.” 

b.  More  than  a  majority  of  the  evaluations  contain  critical  ratings  and 

comments  bearing  on  some  of  the  issues  in  this  case,  e.g.,  respondent’s  classroom 
environment,  supervision  of  students,  and  collegiality  with  colleagues.  Specific  examples 
follow.  In  2006,  it  was  noted  respondent  “[hjas  shown  a  lack  of  good  judgment  on  several 
occasions  while  in  the  community  which  has  compromised  the  health,  safety,  and  welfare  of 
her  students  and  staff”  and  “[njeeds  to  devote  more  time  to  developing  effective  working 
relationships  with  coworkers,  which  has  resulted  in  extensive  resentment  between  her  and 
other  coworkers.”  CEx.  126,  p.  2.) 
climate  “is  often  not  conducive  to  student  learning  duc  to  other  students  screaming  or  out  of 
control.  Avoid  making  negative  comments  about  students  in  front  of  the  class  to  aides  in  the 
classroom,”  (Ex.  128,  p. 
provides  supervision  of  students  at  all  times.”  (Ex.  129,  p.3.)  In  2012,  respondent  was 
again  advised  that  she  “[dloes  not  consistently  provide  appropriate  supervision  for  students.” 
(Ex.  130,  p.  4.) 

In  2011,  respondent  was  directed  to  “follow  a  schedule  that 

In  2008,  respondent  was  advised  that  her  classroom 

1.) 

¥. 

For  reasons  not  established,  respondent  also  received  counseling  from 

Cornelia  Romey,  an  assistant  principal  at  Northridge  Middle  School,  on  February  16,  2010, 
concerning  her  relationships  with  classroom  aides,  mecluding  that  she  refrain  from  making 
embarrassing  comments  about  aides  in  the  classroom  in  front  of  students.  (Ex.  24,  pp.  2-3.) 
In  addition,  as  aresult  of  Ms.  Romey’s  perception  that  respondent  misunderstood  mandatory 
child  abuse  reporting  requirements  when  students  were  taken  to  the  school  nurse’s  office, 
respondent  was  also  directed  to  take  additional  child  abuse  training  provided  by  Assistant 
Principal  Claudia  M.  Lara.  (Eixs.  24-25.)

The  Events  in  2009  Involving  Student  Kf  (Charges  1-3) 

10. 

—  For  the  2009/2010  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  a  special  day 

class  (or  SDC)  for  mainly  autistic  children  at  Northridge  Middle  School  (or  NMS). 

11. 

One  of  the  students  in  respondent’s  class  that  year  was  im  G.,  a  severely 

autistic  girl  in  the  sixth  grade,  who  had  cognitive  abilities  well  below  her  grade  level. Rm” 
was  described  as  being  non-verbal,  stubborn,  with  no  social  skills. 

12.  im  and  other  special  education  students  in  respondent’s  SDC  also  attended 
an  elective  computer  class  taught  by  Laurice  Harris  during  second  period  at  NMS.  Although 
Ms.  Harris  was  a  general  education  teacher,  she  had  worked  with  special  education  students 
since  at  least  1993.  Students  from  respondent’s  class  were  usually  brought  to  Ms.  Harris’s 
classroom  by  one  of  respondent’s  aides,  but  occasionally  respondent  went  to  the  classroom  to 
observe  her  students’  behavior  there. 

13. 

An  incident  happened  on  September  30,  2009,  during  Ms.  Harris’s  second 

period  computer  class,  in  which Rm”  urinated  in  her  clothes  and  subsequently  remained  in 
soiled  clothing  for  at  least  10  minutes  before  she  was  removed  from  the  classroom  to  change. 

14. 

Ms.  Harris  complained  to  Assistant  Principal  (or  AP)  Cornelia  Romey  about 
respondent’s  handling  of  the  situation  by  or  before  the  lunch  period  that  day.  Specifically, 
Ms.  Harris  complained  to  AP  Romey  that  after 
urinated  in  her  clothes,  respondent 
made  her  sit  in  soiled  clothing  for  approximately  20  minutes;  and  that  when  Ms.  Harris 
offered  to  assist,  respondent  told  Ms.  Harris  that 
“old  enough  to  not  soil  herself,”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

needed  to  “learn  a  lesson”  and  was 

   

15. 

After  speaking  with  Ms.  Harris  and  a  few  of  the  other  aides  present  in  the 
classroom  that  day,  AP  Romey  met  with  respondent  to  discuss  the  incident  on  October  5, 
2009.  AP  Romey  told  respondent  the  particulars  of  Ms.  Harris’s  complaint,  including  that 
described  immediately  above.  Respondent  provided  a  verbal  response  to  AP  Romey.  Ms. 
Harris’s  complaint,  as  well  as  respondent’s  response,  were  memorialized  in  a  conference 
memorandum  dated  October  12,  2009.  (Ex.  23.) 

16. 

As  aresult  of  the  office  conference,  AP  Romey  provided  respondent  with 

guidance  and  assistance.  However,  that  part  of  the  conference  memorandum  was  not 
submitted  in  evidence,  so  the  particular  counseling  provided  was  not  established.  AP  Romey 
took  no  other  disciplinary  action  against  respondent  as  a  result  of  this  incident,  nor  did  she 
report  to  any  person  or  authority  that  she  believed  the  incident  constituted  child  abuse. 

17. 

Ms.  Harris  retired  from  the  District  in  2014  and  moved  to  Indiana.  She  was 

deposed  for  this  case  and  her  testimony  from  the  deposition  was  presented  at  hearing. 

  

'  Last  names  are  omitted  to  protect  the  privacy  of  the  involved  students.

  

18. 

Based  on  the  above,  the  following  findings  are  made  concerning  what 
happened  on  September  30,  2009,  during  Ms.  Harris’s  second  period  computer  class: 

a.  im  was  present  in  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom  at  the  beginning  of  the 

period,  along  with  an  aide  from  respondent’s  SDC,  Michelle.  Ms.  Harris  also  had  a  few  of 
her  aides  present  in  the  classroom  that  morning.  There  were  also  a  number  of  Ms.  Harris’s 
general  education  students  present. 

b. 

It  was  not  established  that  respondent  took Rm”  to  Ms.  Harris’s  class 

along  with  her  aide.  Although  AP  Romey  wrote  in  her  conference  memorandum  that 
respondent  had  done  so,  respondent  testified  she  had  not  taken  im  to  Ms.  Harris’s  class 
that  morning.  Ms.  Harris  was  not  asked  during  her  deposition  who  had  taken Rm”  to  her 
classroom  that  morning. 

c.  However,  respondent  was  present  in  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom  when 

urinated  in  her  clothes.  Ms.  Harris  was  clear  in  her  deposition  testimony  that  respondent  was 
there  when  this  incident  occurred,  and  AP  Romey’s  conference  memorandum  1s  similarly 
clear  that  Ms.  Harris  told  her  respondent  was  there  at  that  time.  As  discussed  above, 
respondent  occasionally  went  to  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom  to  observe  her  students  in  that 
environment.  Respondent’s  testimony  during  the  hearing  was  not  persuasive  that  she  was  in 
her  own  classroom  at  the  time  and  only  knew  of  the  incident  when  called  by  her  classroom 
aide.  Based  on  AP  Romey’s  conference  memorandum,  respondent  did  not  tell  AP  Romey 
when  first  confronted  about  the  incident  that  she  was  absent  when Rm”  urinated. 
Although  respondent  testified  that  she  probably  submitted  a  written  response  to  AP  Romey 
after  the  conference  meeting,  which  would  have  contained  that  assertion,  respondent  failed  to 
submit  such  a  document  in  evidence  or  prove  one  exists. 
classroom  when Rm”  soiled  her  clothes,  one  would  expect  her  to  have  said  so  to  AP 
Romey  when  first  confronted  about  the  incident;  respondent  did  not.  Moreover,  respondent’s 
version  of  events  on  this  point  is  not  internally  consistent.  As  discussed  in  more  detail 
below,  Rs  spare  clothes  remained  in  respondent’s  classroom;  they  were  not  taken  with 
to  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom.  If  respondent  was  in  her  own  classroom  when  notified  by 

If  respondent  had  not  been  in  the 

her  aide  that im  soiled  her  clothes,  one  would  expect  respondent  to  bring  the  spare 
clothes  with  her  when  she  left  for  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom. 

d.  Although  Ms.  Harris  testified  during 

her  deposition  that  respondent  was  not 

only  present  at  the  time,  but  actually  refused  to  let  a  use  the  restroom  before  soiling 
herself,  it  was  not  established  that  occurred.  AP  Romey’s  conference  memorandum  contains 
nothing  indicating  respondent  was  advised Rm”  needed  to  use  the  restroom  and  refused  to 
let  her  go.  One  would  expect  the  conference  memorandum  to  include  such  an  assertion  if 
Ms.  Harris  had  said  that  to  AP  Romey.  Ms.  Harris  was  deposed  almost  eight  years  after  the 
fact.  She  had  no  motive  to  purposely  exaggerate  the  events  in  question.  The  most 
reasonable  explanation  for  this  inaccuracy  is  that  her  memory  failed  her  on  this  point. 

/I/

e.  The  adults  in  the  classroom  noticed Rm”  had  soiled  her  clothes  when 

they  saw a  trickle  of  fluid  running  down  her  chair  and  onto  the  floor  beneath  her.  Ms.  Harris 
asked  respondent  if  she  needed  assistance  with  the  situation.  Respondent  declined  Ms. 
Harris’s  offer,  telling  Ms.  Harris  that  im  needed  to  “learn  a  lesson”  and  was  “old  enough 
to  not  soil  herself,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  AP  Romey’s  conference  memorandum  is  clear 
that  Ms.  Harris  had  made  that  exact  complaint  to  her  later  the  day  of  the  incident;  Ms.  Harris 
was  consistent  on  this  point  in  her  deposition  testimony. 

f.  Respondent’s  testimony  was  not  persuasive  that  the  above  comments  were 
made  when  she  was  speaking  to  her  aide,  overheard  by  Ms.  Harris,  and  taken  out  of  context. 
First,  Ms.  Harris  would  have  known  if  respondent  was  talking  to  her  or  an  aide,  especially 
after  offering  assistance  directly  to  respondent.  Second,  respondent  admitted  in  her 
testimony  that  she  had  told  her  aide,  “hi  is  too  old  to  do  that,  we  have  to  teach  her  a 
lesson,”  indicating  that  in  fact  she  had  made  the  comments  heard  by  Ms.  Harris.  Also, 
respondent’s  testimony  is  self-serving  and  too  convenient  that  her  comments  pertained  to 
modifying  classroom  activity  from  the  computer  work  im  did  not  like.  Again,  Ms. 
Harris  would  have  understood  what  respondent  was  saying,  and  she  did  not  believe 
respondent  was  referring  to  modifying  Rs  substantive  academic  program. 

g.  im  could  not  be  changed  immediately  because  her  spare  clothes  were  in 

respondent’s  classroom.  Respondent  decided  to  send  her  aide  back  to  her  classroom  to 
retrieve  Rs  spare  clothes,  which  would  take  approximately  10  minutes.  For  the  next  10 
minutes  or  so, . 
being 
. 

remained  seated  in  her  soiled  clothes  while  the  spare  clothes  were 
retrieved.  Both  respondent  and  Ms.  Harris  were  consistent  in  their  testimony  that 

remained  in  the  classroom  in  soiled  clothes  approximately  10  minutes. 

h.  Ms.  Harris  admitted  during  her  deposition  that  she  did  not  know  im  S 

spare  clothes  were  in  respondent’s  classroom.  Therefore,  when  Ms.  Harris  reported  the 
incident  to  AP  Romey,  she  did  not  include  that  Rs  spare  clothes  were  elsewhere.  AP 
Romey  similarly  admitted  her  ignorance  of  this  fact  such  during  her  cross-examination  at 
hearing.  As  aresult,  AP  Romey  had  a  more  negative  view  of  respondent’s  handling  of  the 
situation,  1.e.,  believing Rm”  had  spare  clothes  with  her  in  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom  but  no 
effort  was  made  to  use  them  during  the  10  minutes  or  so  before Rm”  was  taken  out  of  the 
classroom. 

i.  Special  education  students  commonly  soil  themselves  during  class; 

sometimes  their  spare  clothes  are  not  available.  It  was  established  by  the  testimony  of  AP 
Romey,  Ms.  Harris,  and  the  District’s  expert  witness,  Laura  Zeff,  that  when  such a  situation 
occurs  while  a  student  is  in  a  classroom,  the  student  should  be  moved  to  a  more  private 
location  for  changing,  such  as  a  restroom  or  the  nurse’s  office.  Moving  the  student  will 
reduce  the  embarrassment  of  being  with  other  students  while  in  soiled  clothing,  and  expedite 
cleaning  the  student’s  soiled  area  and  removing  the  soiled  clothes  to  reduce  the  chances  of  a 
rash  developing.

j.  Respondent  decided  to  not  move  =  immediately  to  a  private  location. 

did  not  do  so.  The  decision  was  also 
Respondent  did  not  explain  during  the  hearing  why  she 
curious,  because  in  all  likelihood, 
would  not  have  been  changed  in  the  classroom  full 
of  students  once  the  spare  clothes  arrived;  she  would  have  been  taken  to  another  location  for 
the  change.  Respondent  only  testified  that  after  a  period  of  time,  she  realized  her  plan  “was 
not  efficient,”  and  so  she  decided  to  move  a  and  meet  her  aide  Michelle  at  the  nearby 
restroom  to  clean  up 
|  and  change  her  into  spare  clothes.  Based  on  the  above- 
described  testimony  of  respondent  and  Ms.  Harris, ia  remained  in  Ms.  Harris’s 
classroom  in  soiled  clothes  approximately  10  minutes  before  being  taken  to  the  restroom. 

k. 

It  was  established  by 

the  testimony  of  Ms.  Harris  and  AP  Romey  that 

immediately  to  a  private  location  for  changing  was 
respondent’s  decision  to  not  move 
meant  to  teach  her  a  lesson  about  constantly  requesting  to  use  the  restroom  when  she  did  not 
want  to  participate  in  certain  classroom  activities.  During  her  deposition,  Ms.  Harris  testified 
respondent  had  made  that  complaint  to  her  after rm  soiled  herself;  during  the  hearing, 
respondent  did  not  deny  making  such  a  complaint.  To  the  contrary,  respondent  corroborated 
Ms.  Harris’s  testimony  when  she  testified  that  her  aide,  Michelle,  had  complained  to  her  at 
the  time  of  the  incident  that  a  always  asked  to  use  the  restroom  to  get  out  of  work  and 
that  she  thought 
punitive  state  of  mind  was  corroborated  by  her  other  statements  to  Ms.  Harris  that  she  needed 
to  teach im  a  lesson  and  she  was  too  old  to  soil  herself.  As  a  veteran  special  education 
teacher  at  the  District,  respondent  undoubtedly  knew  it  was  proper  to  immediately  remove  a 
student  who  had  soiled  herself  from  a  classroom  to  a  private  location.  Respondent  provided 
no  satisfactory  explanation  for  not  doing  so.  Her  denial  that  she  made  the  above-described 
statements  to  Ms.  Harris  is  not  only  unpersuasive,  but  indicates  she  knows  her  omission  was 
improper  and  punitive. 

had  soiled  herself  that  morning  for  that  reason.”  Respondent’s 

1. 

It  was  not  established  that  respondent  was  required  to  ensure im  took 

spare  clothes  with  her  to  Ms.  Harris’s  classroom.  Because  there  would  have  been  a  delay  in 
*s  clothes  due  to  her  not  having  spares  with  her,  it  is  not  possible  to  quantify 
changing 
how  long 
would  have  waited  to  be  changed.  However,  if  removed  to  a  private 
location  immediately,  the  soiled  clothes  could  have  been  removed  faster. 

   

19. 

According  to  Ms.  Harris,  after  _  soiled  herself,  she  seemed  “a  little 

upset:”  she  was  just  sitting  and  shaking,  and  perhaps  was  crying  “a  little.”  AP  Romey  also 
convincingly  testified  that  by  sitting  in  her  own  waste, 
rash.  In  her  own  testimony,  respondent  described 
she  normally  did  when  she  got  upset;  she  was  sitting  calmly.  Respondent’s  testimony  is  not 
credited  because  it  is  self-serving;  it  is  also  not  likely  that 
herself,  would  have  remained  seated  in  her  chair  as  if  nothing  happened.  However,  it  is 
undisputed  that  the  other  students  present  in  the  classroom  were  busy  working  with  their 
computers,  wearing  headphones,  and  did  not  seem  to  notice 

was  at  risk  of  developing  a 
as  not  crying  or  doing  the  things 

,  who  had  just  soiled 

had  soiled  herself. 

  

*  This  testimony  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  is  used  to  explain  or  supplement 

the  deposition  testimony  of  Ms.  Harris.  (Gov.  Code,  §  11513,  subd.  (d).)

  

  

           
  

20. 

The  Accusation  alleges  respondent’s  conduct  violated  a  number  of  District 

policies,  based  on  AP  Romey’s  more  negative  view  of  respondent’s  actions  depicted  in  her 
conference  memorandum.  The  District’s  special  education  expert  witness,  Ms.  Zeff,  offered 
various  opinions  on  this  issue,  based  on  the  more  extreme,  and  unproven,  view  that 
respondent  initially  had  refused  to  allow im  to  use  the  restroom.  However,  based  on  the 
above  findings  that  respondent  punitively  delayed  the  process  of  changing  Rs  soiled 
clothing  to  teach  her  a  lesson  about  soiling  herself  to  avoid  undesirable  class  work,  1t  was 
established  that  respondent  violated  the  following  policies  in  the  following  regards: 

a.  The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (ex.  14)  was  violated  because 

respondent  engaged  in  behavior  with  a  student  that  was  unprofessional  (no.  3). 

b.  The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (ex.  13)  was  violated  because 

respondent  did  not  set  a  good  example  for  students  (no.  1),  create  an  environment  of  trust 
(no.  2),  or  maintain  an  appropriate,  positive  relationship  with  her  student  (no.  11). 

c.  The  District’s  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  (ex.  15)  policy  was 

violated  because  respondent  did  not  treat  im  respectfully. 

d.  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  [CSTP]  (ex.  16),  standard 

2,  was  violated  because  respondent  did  not  create  and  maintain  an  effective  learning 
environment  for Rm”  in  this  instance. 

21. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District’s  Discipline  Foundation  Policy:  School- 

Wide  Positive  Behavior  Intervention  and  Support  Bulletin  (ex.  18)  was  violated,  in  that  the 
version  submitted  in  evidence  was  enacted  well  after  the  events  in  question  and  no  witness 
established  that  a  prior  version  in  effect  in  2009  was  violated  by  respondent’s  actions.  It  was 
not  established  that  the  District’s  Multi-Tiered  System  of  Behavior  Support  for  Students  with 
Disabilities  Bulletin  (ex.  17)  was  violated,  for  the  same  reasons.  The  District’s  version  of  its 
Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment  Bulletin  in  effect  in  2009  was  not  established. 

The  Events  in  2015  Involving  Other  Special  Education  Students 

22. 

—  For  the  2015/2016  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  a  Multiple 

Disabilities-Orthopedics  (MDO)  special  education  class  at  Stanley  Mosk  Elementary  School 
(hereinafter  Mosk).  She  began  teaching  at  Mosk  on  or  about  August  16,  2015.  Her 
classroom  was  initially  located  on  the  second  story,  but  it  was  subsequently  moved  to  the 
ground  floor.  Respondent  had  four  students  in  her  class;  each  was  developmentally  and 
orthopedically  disabled.  Respondent  described  all  four  students  as  “severely”  disabled  and 
in  need  of  close  supervision. 

23. 

One  of  respondent’s  students  was Ng.  who  has  seizure  disorder  and 

balance/coordination  issues.  He  was  a  fourth  grader.  Another  student  was Mg.  who  has 
a  seizure  and  injure 
severe  seizure  disorder  that  makes  her  apt  to  fall  to  the  ground  during 
W. 
herself.  She  was a  fifth  grader.  The  other  two  students  were  _  N.  and 

 

is  intellectually  disabled  and  also  has  a  heart  condition.  She  was  a  fourth  grader. 

as  a  genetic  disorder  and  was  a  fourth  grader.  All  four  students  were  either  at  the 

preschool  or  kindergarten  level  academically. 

24. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  respondent  had  two  paraprofessionals  in 

her  classroom,  Renee  Peeples  and  Julio  Alanya.  Mr.  Alanya  was Mas  one-to-one  (1:1) 
aide,  who  spent  most  of  his  time  with  Ml.  but  was  also  available  to  help  with  other  students 
when  present  and  available.  A  few  weeks  into  the  school  year,  Mr.  Alanya  was  replaced  as 
Mars  1:1  aide  by  Isaias  Miza.  Aside  from  occasional  times  when  an  aide  was  on  a  break  or 
pulled  away  from  the  classroom  when  tending  to Mg.  respondent’s  class  usually  had  two  or 
three  adults  present  at  any  given  time.  It  was  rare  for  respondent  to  be  the  only  adult  in  the 
classroom  when  students  were  present. 

25. 

Ms.  Peeples  served  as  respondent’s  primary  aide  in  the  classroom.  At  the 

time,  Ms.  Peeples  was  enrolled  at  CSUN  in  the  process  of  getting  her  teaching  credential. 
She  asked  respondent  to  serve  as  her  mentor.  Initially,  the  two  had  a  good  working 
relationship.  Over  time,  the  relationship  eroded  and  became  “toxic,”  as  described  by  Mosk’s 
principal  Barbara  Friedrich.  Ms.  Peeples  testified  the  problems  began  after  she  made 
comments  respondent  perceived  as  critiques  from  which  respondent  became  resentful.  Ms. 
Friedrich  (or  “former  principal  Friedrich”  when  her  testimony  is  described),  retired  in  June 
2016.  She  testified  respondent  once  complained  to  her  that  Ms.  Peeples  did  not  follow  her 
instruction  because  she  was  getting  her  own  credential  and  was  “out  to  get  her.” 

26. 

A.  On  October  5,  2015,  Ms.  Peeples  complained  about  respondent  to  Principal 
and  _  in  the  classroom 

Friedrich,  saying  that  respondent  physically  restrained 
as  a  way  of  punishing  them  for  misbehavior  and  that  she  made  several  improper  comments 
about  students  to  them  and/or  in  their  presence. 

B.  After  Ms.  Peeples’  complaint,  Principal  Friedrich  obtained  written 

statements  from  Mr.  Alanya  and  Mr.  Miza.  Upon  advice  from  Northwest  Local  District 
Director  Margaret  Kim,  Principal  Friedrich  removed  respondent  from  the  classroom  on 
October  6,  2015.  Principal  Friedrich  also  submitted  a  child  abuse  complaint  to  the  Los 
Angeles  Police  Department  (LAPD),  which  declined  to  conduct  an  investigation. 

C.  On  October  12,  2015,  the  District’s  Student  Safety  Investigation  Team 

(SSIT)  began  investigating  the  matter.  Respondent  and  the  three  aides  in  her  classroom  were 
interviewed,  as  well  as  Principal  Friedrich  and  school  Physical  Therapist  (PT)  Chrissa 
Patterson,  who  had  done  several  consultations  in  respondent’s  classroom  that  school  year. 

D.  After  the  SSIT  concluded  its  investigation,  an  office  conference  was  held 

between  Director  Kim  and  respondent  on  October  4,  2016.  Director  Kim  conducted  the 
conference  because  Principal  Friedrich  had  retired.  Director  Kim  issued  a  conference 
memorandum  dated  October  6,  2016.  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  dated 
October  28,  2016.

    

  

NEGATIVE  COMMENTS  MADE  TO  AND  ABOUT  STUDENTS  (CHARGES  19-28) 

27. 

A.  It  was  established  that,  on  at  least  a  few  occasions  during  the  period  of 

August  16,  2015,  through  October  5,  2015,  respondent  called 
presence;  told 
called 

   
—_  and  = 

“evil”  in  their  presence. 

,  “You  are  a  horrible  and  terrible  child,”  or  words  to  that  effect;  and 

7  a  “brat”  in  her 

B.  Ms.  Peeples  was  convincing  in  her  testimony  that  respondent  had  made 

these  comments  in  a  negative  way  and  in  the  students’  presence.  It  is  true  that  Ms.  Peeples 
had  a  “toxic  relationship”  with  respondent.  But  that  fact  alone  does  not  make  her  testimony 
unreliable,  in  that  her  testimony  was  corroborated  as  described  below.  Moreover,  as 
discussed  above,  respondent  has  been  consistently  criticized  by  supervisors  for  poor 
relationships  with  colleagues,  including  her  aides.  Based  on  this  record,  the  fact  there  was 
conflict  between  Ms.  Peeples  and  respondent  is  more  likely  attributable  to  respondent,  and 
not  likely  evidence  that  Ms.  Peeples  was  untruthful  about  respondent.  In  addition,  Ms. 
Peeples’  testimony  was  consistent  with  her  complaint  on  this  point  to  Principal  Friedrich. 
Ms.  Peeples’  testimony  was  also  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Miza  (described 
below)  that  he  had  heard  respondent  make  negative  comments  about  students  in  their 
presence,  including  that  the  students  were  “evil.”  Finally,  respondent  had  been  previously 
counseled  in  2008  to  avoid  making  negative  comments  about  students  in  front  of  the  class. 

C. 

In  her  hearing  testimony,  respondent  admitted  using  the  words  “brat,” 

“evil,”  and  “horrible  or  terrible”  to  describe  _  and/or Ha.  and  that  her  comments 
were  made  in  the  presence  of  the  students.  She  maintained,  however,  that  she  would  have 
only  done  so  after  the  students  misbehaved  in  some  way;  she  did  not  say  these  things  directly 
to  the  students  but  rather  to  her  aides;  and  that  she  did  not  say  them  in  a  mean  or  angry 
manner.  In  fact,  respondent  told  the  SSIT  that  she  referred  to  _  as  a  brat  in  a  “sweet 
and  joking  manner.”  (Ex.  119,  p.  5.)  Respondent’s  attempt  to 
which  her  comments  were  made  was  not  persuasive  because  it  was  self-serving  and  not 
corroborated  by  the  evidence.  In  addition,  respondent  admitted  in  her  testimony  that  the 
comments  in  question  were  not  appropriate,  indicating  a  reluctant  concession  that  they  were 
viewed  as  negative  by  others  hearing  them. 

downplay  the  negativity  in 

28. 

A.  It  was  also  established  that,  during  the  same  time  period,  respondent  told 

the  students  in  her  class  that  other  people  did  not  like  them  because  of  their  disabilities  and  if 
they  did  not  act  normal  other  kids  would  not  like  them,  or  words  to  that  effect. 

B.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  persuasive  testimony  of  Mr.  Miza.  His 

testimony  is  generally  consistent  with  the  written  statement  he  provided  to  Principal 
Friedrich  when  first  contacted  about  respondent,  as  well  as  in  his  interview  with  the  SSIT. 
During  the  hearing,  Mr.  Miza  was  a  credible  witness,  in  terms  of  the  content  of  his  testimony 
and  his  demeanor  while  giving  it,  even  under  at  times  hostile  cross-examination.  Moreover, 
Mr.  Miza  did  not  appear  to  have  any  agenda  or  bias  against  respondent.  While  he  did  not 
approve  of  some  of  respondent’s  conduct  in  the  classroom,  he  was  slow  to  make  judgments 
about  her  and  he  never  initiated  a  complaint  against  her. 

10

  

or 

   

C.  Respondent’s  denial  during  the  hearing  that  she  said  the  things  attributed  to 
her  by  Mr.  Miza  was  not  persuasive.  She  flatly  denied  saying  these  things  when  interviewed 
by  the  SSIT.  However,  in  her  response  to  Director  Kim’s  conference  memorandum,  she 
denied  ever  calling 
“evil;”  yet  she  admitted  during  the  hearing  that  she 
used  the  word  “evil”  when  referring  to  them.  In  her  response  to  Director  Kim’s  conference 
memorandum,  respondent  denied  making  the  other  comments  described  by  Mr.  Miza  on  the 
one  hand,  but  wrote  “the  conversation  was  taken  out  of  context”  on  the  other  hand  (ex.  28,  p. 
4),  begging  the  question  what  conversation  she  was  referring  to  if  not  the  one(s)  described  by 
Mr.  Miza.  Like  other  portions  of  her  conference  memorandum  response,  the  just  cited 
excerpt  was  hazy.  During  the  hearing,  respondent  clarified  she  had  simply  told  Ms.  Peeples 
the  general  education  students  did  not  like  her  students  because  of  their  misbehavior.  But  it 
was  clear  from  Mr.  Miza’s  testimony  that  respondent  had  made  far  more  pointed  and  critical 
comments  about  the  students  in  their  presence.  In  any  event,  Mr.  Miza  was  a  more  credible 
witness  than  respondent,  so  any  conflict  between  the  two  is  resolved  in  favor  of  Mr.  Miza. 

29. 

Because  the  four  students  in  question  had  limited  communication  skills,  they 

were  not  interviewed  by  the  SSIT  or  anyone  else.  Respondent  testified  that  none  of  the 
students  reacted  to  her  comments  and  that  she  believed  none  of  them  understood  what  she 
was  saying.  Respondent’s  testimony  was  corroborated  to  an  extent  by  Mr.  Miza,  who 
testified  that  because  the  students’  cognitive  abilities  were  low,  they  did  not  respond  to  the 
negative  comments.  However,  Ms.  Peeples  opined  in  her  testimony  that  the  students  “could 
sense”  the  negativity  of  respondent’s  comments,  which  did  not  create  a  proper  environment 
for  them.  Respondent’s  above-described  concession  that  her  comments  were  improper 
because  they  were  not  effective  in  teaching  and  did  not  “look  good  to  others”  corroborated  to 
an  extent  Ms.  Peeples’  testimony.  Thus,  in  terms  of  any  harm  done  to  the  students,  it  was 
only  established  that  respondent’s  negative  comments  were  sensed  by  the  students  and 
created  a  negative  learning  environment  for  the  students  at  that  time. 

30. 

Respondent’s  negative  comments  described  above  violated  the  following 

policies  in  the  following  ways: 

a.  The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (ex.  14)  was  violated  because 

respondent  acted  unprofessionally  in  her  students’  presence  (no.  3). 

b.  The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (ex.  13)  was  violated  because 

respondent  did  not  set  a  good  example  for  students  (no.  1),  create  an  environment  of  trust 
(no.  2),  or  maintain  an  appropriate,  positive  relationship  with  her  students  (no.  11). 

c.  The  District’s  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  (ex.  15)  policy  was 

violated  because  respondent  did  not  treat  the  students  respectfully. 

d.  CSTP,  standard  2,  was  violated  because  respondent  did  not  create  and 

maintain  an  effective  learning  environment  for  the  students. 

11

e.  The  District’s  Discipline  Foundation  Policy:  School-Wide  Positive 

Behavior  Intervention  and  Support  Bulletin  (ex.  18)  was  violated  because  respondent  was  not 
providing  a  “safe,  respectful,  and  welcoming  environment”  to  her  students  by  making 
negative  comments  about  them. 

31. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  following  policies  were  violated  by  respondent’s 
negative  comments  about  her  students  described  above,  either  because  there  was  insufficient 
witness  testimony,  or  respondent’s  conduct  does  not  fall  within  the  definition  of  the 
misconduct  described  in  the  policies:  the  District’s  Multi-Tiered  System  of  Behavior  Support 
for  Students  with  Disabilities  Bulletin  (ex.  17);  and  the  District’s  Abolition  of  Corporal 
Punishment  Bulletin  in  effect  in  December  2013  (ex.  11). 

RESTRAINING 

AND  Ei  tn  Cuairs  (CHARGES  4-18) 

32. 

Due  to  the  severity  of  Ms  seizure  disorder,  her  individualized  education 

program  (IEP)  required  her  to  use  an  adapted  chair  which  had  an  attached  seat-belt  that  could 
to  the  ground  and  injuring  herself  when 
be  buckled  around  her  waist  to  keep  her  from  falling 
she  had  seizure.  The  adapted  chair  was  added  to 
*s  IEP  in  a  prior  school  year  after  she 
dropped  from  a  seizure  and  injured  herself  by  hitting  her  head.  Mg  was  only  placed  in  the 
adapted  chair  when  she  needed  to  be  seated  while  doing  academic  work  at  the  class  work 
table.  According  to  school  PT  Chrissa  Patterson,  a  child  properly  restrained  in  an  adapted 
chair  pursuant  to  an  IEP  still  must  be  removed  when  she  wants  to  get  out  of  it. 

33. 

As  established  by  the  persuasive  testimony  of  PT  Patterson,  former  principal 
Friedrich,  District  expert  witness  Laura  Zeff,  and  some  of  the  policies  discussed  in  further 
detail  below,  by  the  beginning  of  the  2015/2016  school  year  the  District  had  an  express 
policy  of  only  using  an  adapted  chair  to  support  the  safety  of  the  student  in  question;  only 
using  an  adapted  chair  as  intended  in  a  student’s  IEP;  only  using  an  adapted  chair  after 
consulting  with  a  school  PT  or  occupational  therapist  (OT)  for  proper  positioning;  never 
adapting  the  chair  without  first  consulting  a  school  PT  or  OT;  never  using  the  chair  as  a  way 
of  restraint;  and  never  adding a  strap  or  belt  to  the  adapted  chair  to  restrain  the  student  or 
restrict  his  or  her  movement.  Staff  were  also  advised  to  tell  an  administrator  if  a  student  was 
seen  improperly  restrained  in  a  chair.  (See  also  ex.  19.) 

34. 

PT  Patterson  provided  informal  training  on  the  above-described  uses  and 

prohibitions  of  adapted  chairs  to  respondent  and  her  aides  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year 
and  a  few  times  thereafter.  She  also  provided  them  a  form  with  the  above-described 
instructions.  (Ex.  19.) 

35. 

Nonetheless,  within  the  first  few  weeks  of  the  school  year,  before  Mr.  Alanya 
in  the  adapted  chair  and 

was  replaced  by  Mr.  Miza,  respondent  placed 
buckled  them  in  with  the  attached  seat-belt.  Ms.  Peeples  witnessed  respondent  do  this. 
Although  Mr.  Alanya  never  saw  respondent  place  a  student  in  a  chair  and  restrain  her  in  this 
manner,  he  did  come  into  the  classroom  and  see 
removed  her.  After  Mr.  Miza  replaced  Mr.  Alanya,  he  too  observed  respondent  place 

so  restrained;  he  immediately 

   

and 

12

  

[NO 

and Ha  in  an  adapted  chair  and  restrain  them  by  using  the  seat-belt.  On  a  few 

other  occasions,  respondent  placed 
in  aregular  chair  and  restrained 
     
them  by  wrapping  Velcro  straps  around  them  and  the  chair.  Respondent’s  classroom  aides 
estimated  respondent  so  restrained 
at  least  three  to  five  times  between 
     
the  beginning  of  the  school  year  through  when  respondent  was  removed  from  the  classroom. 
The  two  students  remained  restrained  for  10-60  minutes. 

and 

and 

36. 

Respondent  restrained 

in  this  manner  to  physically 

   
and 
restrict  their  movement.  This  was  not  proper,  because  no  chair  was  to  be  used  to  physically 
restrain  a  student  absent  a  safety  concern.  There  was  nothing  in  either  student’s  IEP 
allowing  the  use  of  an  adapted  chair  or  other  means  of  physical  restraint.  After  seeing  the 
girls  restrained,  the  aides  reminded  respondent  of  PT  Patterson’s  directions  described  above, 
but  respondent  either  ignored  them  or  explained  that  the  students  needed  to  be  placed  in  the 
chair  because  they  were  misbehaving.  All  three  of  respondent’s  aides  thought  restraining  the 
two  students  was  a  bad  idea. 
PT  Patterson  about  the  situation.  PT  Patterson  visited  the  classroom  and  told  respondent  that 
she  could  not  restrain 
because  such  a  restraint  was  not  included  1n  their 
IEPs  and  was  not  required  for  safety  reasons.  Respondent  continued  to  restrain  the  students 
after  PT  Patterson’s  visit.  PT  Patterson  ultimately  removed  the  seat-belt  strap  from  the 
adapted  chair  and  later,  after  being  advised  respondent  was  still  using  the  chair  as  restraint, 
took  the  adapted  chair  out  of  the  classroom. 

In  fact,  before  he  was  replaced  by  Mr.  Miza,  Mr.  Alanya  told 

   

or 

37. 

Respondent  restrained 

   

and 

in  the  chairs  because  of  their 

behavior,  including  climbing  on  furniture,  trying  to  elope  from  the  classroom,  or  bothering 
other  students.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  the  two  students’  behaviors  rose  to  the 
level  of  a  safety  concern.  In  any  event,  no  evidence  was  presented  indicating  any  concern 
about  the  two  students’  behavior  was  placed  in  their  IEPs  or  that  respondent  contacted 
Principal  Friedrich  for  help  with  this  situation.  To  the  contrary,  the  aides  had  ways  of 
deescalating  the  two  students’  problem  behaviors.  Respondent  became  increasingly 
frustrated  with  the  students  and  did  not  use  those  tactics;  it  was  easier  for  her  to  restrain  them 
in  the  chairs.  Moreover,  Ms.  Peeples  and  Mr.  Miza  persuasively  testified  much  of  the 
students’  problem  behaviors  arose  because  respondent’s  classroom  was  chaotic,  lacked 
structure,  and  the  assignments  were  “random.”  Respondent  previously  was  critiqued  for 
shortcomings  in  supervising  her  students  and  creating  an  environment  conducive  to  learning. 

38.  | Respondent’s  motivation  in  restraining 

   
and 

in  the  chairs  was 

punitive.  This  was  amply  established  by  the  actions  and  testimony  of  the  three  classroom 
aides,  who  were  troubled  by  seeing  the  two  students  so  restrained.  The  aides’  conclusions 
that  respondent  acted  punitively  was  corroborated  by  the  negative  comments  respondent 
made  about  the  students  discussed  above;  the  fact  the  aides  either  told  respondent  the 
restraint  was  a  bad  idea,  advised  PT  Patterson  about  the  situation,  or  ultimately  complained 
to  Principal  Friedrich;  as  well  as  the  incident  described  in  more  detail  below  when 
knocked  something  over  in  the  classroom  and  respondent  stated,  “Okay  you’re  going  in  that 
chair  now.” 

13

  

39. 

Based  on  the  above  and  the  evidence  presented,  it  was  established,  as  alleged, 

that  during  the  period  of  August  16,  2015,  to  October  5,  2015,  on  several  occasions, 
respondent  strapped 

in  an  adapted  chair  to  restrain  her,  for  up  to  one  hour  at  a  time. 

a7 

AO. 

Based  on  the  above  and  the  evidence  presented,  it  was  established,  as  alleged, 

that  during  the  period  of  August  16,  2015,  to  October  5,  2015,  on  several  occasions, 
respondent  strapped  A  in  an  adapted  chair  to  restrain  her,  for  up  to  one  hour  at  a 
time. 

Al. 

Based  on  the  above  and  the  evidence  presented,  it  was  established,  as  alleged, 
knocked  something 

that  during  the  period  of  August  16,  2015,  to  October  5,  2015, 
over,  to  which  respondent  stated,  “Okay  you’re  going  in  that  chair  now.”  Despite 

"s  attempts  to  resist  the  restraint  by  dropping 

to  the  floor,  squirming  and  yelling, 
respondent  still  restrained  her  in  the  adapted  chair.  —  wiggled  in  an  attempt  to  free 
herself  from  the  restraint  and  slid  down  the  chair  until  the  strap  was  below  her  neck,  before 
she  was  removed  from  the  chair. 

   

A. 

42. 

between  August  16,  2015,  through  October  5,  2015,  respondent  made 

It  was  not  established  that,  on  at  least  one  occasion  during 

the  period 
and/or 
sit  in  a  chair  with  their  legs  pinned  against  a  cupboard  as  a  means  of  punishment. 

_— 

B.  The  allegations  related  to  this  finding  arose  as  a  result  of  Ms.  Peeples’ 

statement  to  the  SSIT  that  respondent  had  done  so.  However,  Director  Kim’s  conference 
memorandum  did  not  include  this  complaint,  suggesting  Ms.  Peeples  had  not  made  this 
complaint  to  Principal  Friedrich  when  she  first  approached  her  about  respondent.  Neither  of 
the  other  two  aides  in  respondent’s  classroom,  Mr.  Alanya  or  Mr.  Miza,  mentioned  this  to 
either  Principal  Friedrich  or  the  SSIT.  While  respondent  told  the  SSIT  that  the  girls 
sometimes  voluntarily  sat  in  chairs  near  a  wall  or  cupboard,  she  ultimately  denied  ever 
“pinning”  them  in  a  chair  against  a  cupboard  in  order  to  punish  them.  Under  these 
circumstances,  there  was  insufficient  corroboration  of  Ms.  Peeples’  complaint  to  establish 
this  allegation. 

43. 

Respondent  testified  during  the  hearing  that  restraining 

   
as  described  above  was  “wrong  to  do,”  a  “very  bad  choice,”  she  “would  not  do  it  again,”  and 
that  doing  so  violated  various  District  policies.  Respondent  nonetheless  tried  to  minimize  or 
mitigate  her  misconduct  for  various  reasons,  none  of  which  were  persuasive,  as  follows: 

and 

a.  When  respondent  was  questioned  about  the  incidents  by  the  SSIT,  she 

essentially  denied  ever  restraining  the  two  students;  her  response  to  Director  Kim’s 
conference  memorandum  on  this  point  was  evasive,  but  she  did  not  admit  ever  restraining  the 
students.  The  fact  she  initially  denied  restraining  the  students,  only  to  later  admit  she  had, 
calls  into  question  respondent’s  veracity  on  this  point. 

/I/ 

14

  

  

but  rather  trying 
a  and 

to 

b.  Respondent  testified  she  was  not  acting  punitively 

protect  the  safety  of  all  the  students  in  her  classroom  by  keeping 
from 
hurting  themselves  or  others.  She  described  a  number  of  problem  behaviors  engaged  in  by 
the  two  students.  However,  respondent  never  advised  the  SSIT  or  Director  Kim  that  she  had 
restrained  the  students  for  their  own  safety,  a  discrepancy  that  calls  into  question  this 
explanation.  As  a  veteran  special  education  teacher,  respondent  knew  there  were  many  ways 
of  dealing  with  problem  behaviors  before  resorting  to  something  as  drastic  as  physical 
restraint.  As  discussed  above,  the  classroom  aides  did  not  depict  the  two  students’  behavior 
as  severe  enough  to  warrant  restraint,  and  they  had  effective  ways  of  dealing  with  the 
students’  behaviors  in  the  past.  Finally,  former  principal  Friedrich  persuasively  testified  the 
students  did  not  pose  major  behavior  problems;  teachers  who  taught  them  prior  to  respondent 
did  not  experience  severe  behavior  problems  from  them;  and  respondent  should  have  been 
able  to  control  them  with  so  many  adults  present  in  her  classroom. 

c.  Respondent  testified  she  had  little  to  no  training  on  how  to  use  adapted 

_— 

restrained  in  a  chair  and  told  her  “whatever  you  need  to  do  to  keep 

chairs  prior  to  coming  to  Mosk,  including  nobody  advising  her  that  a  student  could  not  be 
restrained  in  a  chair  if  that  was  not  part  of  her  IEP.  She  also  testified  PT  Patterson  visited  her 
classroom  four  to  five  times,  but  intimated  all  PT  Patterson  told  her  was  that  the  “District 
was  moving  away  from  using  adapted  chairs.”  Respondent  testified  PT  Patterson  did  not 
give  her  a  copy  of  the  instructional  form  on  adapted  chair  use  and  did  not  provide  her  with 
much  training.  Respondent  also  testified  that  on  her  last  classroom  visit,  PT  Patterson 
actually  saw 
your  classroom  secure  is  ok  with  me.”  Respondent’s  testimony  in  this  regard  1s  given  no 
credit.  Based  on  the  persuasive  testimony  of  PT  Patterson,  and  corroborated  by  all  three  of 
respondent’s  classroom  aides,  there  is  no  way  PT  Patterson  would  have  made  the  comment 
attributed  to  her,  or  not  immediately  objected  if  she  saw [NO 
combined  testimony  of  all  four  of  those  witnesses  also  established  that  respondent  was 
present  when  PT  Patterson  explained  how  to  use  the  adapted  chair  as  well  as  its  prohibited 
uses.  As  a  veteran  special  education  teacher  for  the  District,  respondent  knew  or  should  have 
known  that  using  restraints  as  she  did  was  improper,  especially  when  all  of  her  aides 
immediately  recognized  the  problem  and  repeatedly  questioned  her  about  using  restraints. 

restrained  in  a  chair.  The 

44. 

and 

did  not  like  being  restrained  in  the  chairs. [NO 

     

sometimes  expressed  her  displeasure  by  yelling  and  screaming. Ha  was  more 
communicative  and  would  say  things  like,  “get  me  out.”  : 
sometimes  would  cry  when 
restrained.  Both  students  sometimes  also  wiggled  to  get  free  of  the  restraints.  The  restraints 
were  loose,  allowing  the  students  to  wiggle  and  slide  down  the  chair  under  the  restraints. 
Sometimes  the  strap  would  get  close  to  their  neck,  as  discussed  above  regarding  the  incident 
had  wiggled  so 
involving 
much  he  saw  her  virtually  hanging  over  the  side  of  the  chair.  But  the  students  were  not 
removed  from  the  restraints  after  expressing  they  wanted  out,  contrary  to  the  policy  outlined 
did  not  like  being  restrained  in  the  chairs,  1t  was 
by  PT  Patterson.  While  the  students  clearly 
were  in  pain  when  so  restrained  or  exhibited 
not  established  that  either 
symptoms  of  pain.  The  screaming  and  crying  was  related  to  being  restrained  in  place,  not 
feeling  pain. 

.  Mr.  Alanya  also  described  a  time  when 

    

  

  

or 

15

    

  

45. 

On  the  other  hand, Mg  did  not  express  the  same  types  of  complaints  when  put 

in  the  adapted  chair.  As  discussed  above,  she  was  only  placed  in  it  for  a  limited  time  and 
mostly  did  not  object  to  being  in  it.  She  was  usually  let  out  of  the  chair  when  she 
complained  about  being  in  it,  unless  she  had  not  yet  completed  the  assignment  at  the  work 
*s  placement  in  the 
table  that  prompted  her  placement  in  the  chair.  As  discussed  above, 
chair  was  required  by  her  IEP  due  to  legitimate  concern  for  her  safety.  During  the  hearing, 
respondent  seemed  to  analogize  placement  of  restraints  on [NO 
adapted  chair  for Mg.  For  the  reasons  explained  herein,  this  was  a  faulty  analogy. 

and 

|  to  using  the 

46. 

—  Respondent’s  use  of  restraints  with 

7  and  Ha”  described  above 

violated  the  following  policies  in  the  following  ways: 

a.  The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (ex.  14)  was  violated  because 

respondent  acted  unprofessionally  (no.  3). 

b.  The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (ex.  13)  was  violated  because 

respondent  did  not  set  a  good  example  for  students  (no.  1),  create  an  environment  of  trust 
(no.  2),  or  maintain  an  appropriate,  positive  relationship  with  her  students  (no.  11). 

c.  The  District’s  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  (ex.  15)  policy  was 

violated  because  respondent  did  not  treat  the  two  students  respectfully. 

d.  CSTP,  standard  2,  was  violated  because  respondent  did  not  create  and 
maintain  an  effective  learning  environment  for  the  students;  and  standard  4  was  violated 
because  respondent  did  not  provide  the  students  with  appropriate  learning  experiences  when 
restrained. 

e.  The  District’s  Discipline  Foundation  Policy:  School-Wide  Positive 

Behavior  Intervention  and  Support  Bulletin  (ex.  18)  was  violated  because  respondent  was  not 
providing  a  safe,  respectful,  and  welcoming  environment  to  her  students  by  restraining  them 
as  punishment;  and  she  did  not  respond  to  student  misconduct  by  consequences  paired  with 
meaningful  instruction  and  guidance. 

f.  The  District’s  Multi-Tiered  System  of  Behavior  Support  for  Students  with 
Disabilities  Bulletin  (ex.  17)  was  violated  because  respondent  did  not  appropriately  respond 
to  the  two  students’  behaviors  with  multi-tier  levels  of  behavioral  support  before  resorting  to 
the  drastic  intervention  of  physical  restraint. 

47. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District’s  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment 

Bulletin  in  effect  in  December  2013  (ex.  11)  was  violated  by  respondent  restraining  the  two 
students  in  chairs.  This  policy  specifically  defines  “corporal  punishment”  as  the  “willful 
infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of,  physical  pain  on  a  pupil.”  (Ex.  11,  p.  1.) 
The  policy  clarifies  that  corporal  punishment  “refers  to  the  intentional  application  of  physical 
pain  as  a  method  of  changing  behavior.”  Although  A  and 

were  not 

16

comfortable  while  being  restrained  in  the  chairs,  and  clearly  wanted  out  of  them,  it  was  not 
established  that  either  was  feeling  or  exhibited  symptoms  of  physical  pain  while  restrained. 

Other  Relevant  Facts 

48. 

Respondent  submitted  letters  of  recommendation  from  the  principals  of  Hart 

Street  Elementary  School  (ex.  116)  and  Lokrantz  (ex.  117),  written  in  2014  and  2015 
respectively.  Respondent  testified  she  requested  the  letters  after  learning  she  was  being 
reassigned.  The  letters  are  generally  favorable  to  respondent;  they  essentially  recommend 
her  for  employment  when  respondent  looked  for  her  next  school  site. 

49. 

Character  reference  letters  and  witnesses  were  presented  in  favor  of 

respondent’s  general  character  and  ability  to  teach  special  education  students.  That  evidence 
indicates,  in  a  general  way,  that  respondent  has  some  support  from  colleagues  and  parents  of 
former  students.  Some  other  observations  are  worth  noting  about  this  evidence: 

a.  The  only  classroom  aide  who  testified  during  the  hearing  in  favor  of 

respondent  was  Mariela  Christian,  who  worked  with  respondent  at  Hart  Street  Elementary 
School  during  the  2012/2013  and  2013/2014  school  years.  Ms.  Christian  opined  respondent 
is  a  good  teacher  who  did  not  engage  in  any  of  the  actions  involved  in  this  case. 

b.  Respondent’s  other  character  witnesses  were  a  friend,  two  parents  of 
former  students,  and  a  fellow  teacher  at  the  District  who  was  recently  dismissed  by  the 
Board.  Those  witnesses  also  have  a  favorable  view  of  respondent’s  teaching  ability. 
Nonetheless,  the  probative  value  of  those  witnesses’  testimony  was  undercut  because  they 
either  did  not  observe  respondent  teach  in  the  classroom,  did  so  in  years  that  substantially 
pre-dated  the  events  in  question  at  Mosk  (and  less  so  at  NMS),  and/or  admitted  in  testimony 
that  their  opinions  of  respondent  would  change  if  the  charges  against  her  were  proven. 

c.  The  many  character  reference  letters  were  admitted  only  as  administrative 

hearsay.  The  letters  can  only  be  used  to  explain  or  supplement  the  above-described  character 
witness  testimony.  (Gov.  Code,  §  11513,  subd.  (d).) 

50.  |  Respondent  was  not  disciplined  as  a  result  of  the  incident  with Rm”  G.  AP 

Romey  did  not  explain  in  her  testimony  why  respondent  was  not  disciplined,  which  is 
perplexing  given  that  AP  Romey  had  a  more  extreme  understanding  of  the  incident  than  was 
proven  and  she  testified  that  respondent  essentially  did  not  deny  Ms.  Harris’s  complaint 
during  the  office  conference. 

51. 

The  only  child  abuse  report  against  respondent  was  by  Principal  Friedrich  after 

she  received  Ms.  Peeples’  complaint.  Given  the  findings  above,  the  lack  of  reporting  1s 
surprising,  especially  considering  the  District  provides  annual  child  abuse  report  training  to 
all  District  staff.  This  lack  of  reporting  is  partially  explained  by  the  following  facts:  there 
were  no  visible  signs  of  injury  to  any  of  the  involved  students;  the  personnel  in  question 
were  not  familiar  with  respondent  and  were  giving  her  the  benefit  of  the  doubt;  some  of  the 

17

involved  staff  made  complaints  to  superiors  (e.g.,  AP  Romey,  PT  Patterson  or  Principal 
Friedrich)  and  believed  appropriate  action  would  be  taken;  or  respondent’s  classroom  aides 
were  reluctant  to  submit  a  report  about  a  superior  with  whom  they  still  worked. 

52. 

The  fact  that  the  one  child  abuse  report  was  not  investigated  by  the  LAPD 

does  not  exonerate  respondent.  The  LAPD’s  reasoning  in  declining  to  investigate  the  report 
was  not  provided.  There  are  a  myriad  of  possible  reasons  for  the  LAPD’s  declination, 
including  Director  Kim’s  uncontroverted  testimony  that  the  LAPD  generally  does  not 
investigate  such  complaints  in  the  absence  of  visible  signs  of  physical  injury. 

53. 

No  evidence  suggests  the  parent  of  any  student  involved  in  this  matter 

complained  to  any  person  or  entity  about  respondent  or  the  events  in  question.  But  this  fact 
is  substantially  tempered  by  the  lack  of  sufficient  evidence  establishing  any  of  those  parents 
were  advised  of  the  particular  events  in  question. 

54. 

Respondent  attempted  to  demonstrate  remorse  for  her  conduct  by  testifying,  as 

     

described  above,  that  her  restraint  of 
comments  made  about  her  students  were  inappropriate.  However,  respondent  was  quick  to 
point  out  that  she  only 
punitively  against  a  or  in  making  the  negative  comments.  Those  denials  were  not 
persuasive,  as  explained  above.  Under  these  circumstances,  respondent  did  not  demonstrate 
much  remorse,  if  any. 

restrained  the  students  for  their  protection,  and  that  she  did  not  act 

was  wrong,  and  the  negative 

and 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  discipline  in  this  matter  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  “the 
evidence  on  [the  District’s]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  1s  more  than,  the  evidence 
on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314,  325.) 

Egregious  Misconduct  Generally 

2. 

Complainant  alleges  respondent  should  be  terminated  for  “egregious 

misconduct”  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),°  which  states  in 
pertinent  part: 

(a)  A  permanent  employee  shall  not  be  dismissed  except  for  one 
or  more  of  the  following  causes: 

  

*  Further  unspecified  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

18

  

(1)  Immoral  conduct  including,  but  not  linited  to,  egregious 
misconduct.  For  the  purposes  of  this  chapter,  “egregious 
misconduct”  is  defined  exclusively  as  immoral  conduct  that  is 
the  basis  for  an  offense  described  im  Section  44010  or  44011  of 
this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the 
Penal  Code. 

3. 

As  shown  above,  two  Education  Code  sections  are  used  to  partially  define 

“egregious  misconduct.”  But,  they  do  so  by  themselves  referring  to  other  statutory  schemes. 
Section  44010  refers  to  many  sections  of  the  Penal  Code  that  pertain  to  sex  offenses.  Section 
44011  refers  generally  to  controlled  substance  offenses,  listing  various  sections  of  the  Health 
and  Safety  Code  which  proscribe  the  possession,  use,  or  sale  of  controlled  substances.  None 
of  the  charges  im  this  case  refer  to  sex  offenses  or  controlled  substances. 

4. 

The  remaining  statutes  used  to  define  egregious  misconduct  are  Penal  Code 

sections  11165.2  through  11165.6,  which  define  various  forms  of  child  abuse.  These  are  the 
provisions  relied  upon  by  the  District  in  this  case. 

Eeregious  Misconduct  as  Defined  by  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  through  11165.6 

5. 

Sections  [1165.2  through  11165.6  are  part  of  the  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect 
Reporting  Act  (CANRA)  contained  in  part  4  of  the  Penal  Code.  The  stated  purpose  of  the 
CANRA  is  “to  protect  children  from  abuse  and  neglect....”  (Pen.  Code,  §  11164,  subd. 
(b).)  Pursuant  to  Penal  Code  section  11165.9,  those  persons  deemed  to  be  “mandatory 
reporters”  are  required  to  report  “suspected  child  abuse  or  neglect,”  including  that  conduct 
defined  in  sections  [1165.2  through  11165.6.  Such  reports  are  required  “whenever  the 
mandated  reporter,  in  his  or  her  professional  capacity  or  within  the  scope  of  his  or  her 
employment,  has  knowledge  of  or  observes  a  child  whom  the  mandated  reporter  knows  or 
reasonably  suspects  has  been  the  victim  of  child  abuse  or  neglect.”  (Pen.  Code,  §  11166.) 

6. 

The  only  provision  of  the  CANRA  cited  in  the  Accusation  is  Penal  Code 

section  11165.6,  which  in  turn  defines  “child  abuse  or  neglect”  by  referencing  other 
provisions  of  the  CANRA  pertinent  to  this  case  as  follows: 

As  used  in  this  article,  the  term  “child  abuse  or  neglect” 
mcludes  physical  injury  or  death  inflicted  by  other  than 
accidental  means  upon  a  child  by  another  person,  ...  neglect  as 
defined  in  Section  11165.2,  the  willful  harming  or  myuring  ofa 
child  or  the  endangering  of  the  person  or  health  of  a  child,  as 
defined  in  Section  11165.3,  and  unlawful  corporal  punishment 
or  injury  as  defined  in  Section  11163.4.... 

19

7. 
follows: 

Penal  Code  section  11165.2  provides  a  definition  for  child  “neglect”  as 

As  used  in  this  article,  “neglect”  means  the  negligent  treatment 
or  the  maltreatment  of  a  child  by  a  person  responsible  for  the 
child’s  welfare  under  circumstances  indicating  harm  or 
threatened  harm  to  the  child’s  health  or  welfare.  The  term 
includes  both  acts  and  omissions  on  the  part  of  the  responsible 
person. 

8. 

Penal  Code  section  11165.3  provides  a  definition  for  “the  willful  harming  or 

endangering  of  a  child”  as  follows: 

As  used  in  this  article,  “the  willful  harming  or  injuring  of  a  child 
or  the  endangering  of  the  person  or  health  of  a  child,”  means  a 
situation  in  which  any  person  willfully  causes  or  permits  any 
child  to  suffer,  or  inflicts  thereon,  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or 
mental  suffering,  or  having  the  care  or  custody  of  any  child, 
willfully  causes  or  permits  the  person  or  health  of  the  child  to  be 
placed  in  a  situation  in  which  his  or  her  person  or  health  is 
endangered.” 

9. 

A.  Penal  Code  section  11165.4  defines  the  term  “unlawful  corporal 

punishment  or  injury”  as  follows: 

As  used  in  this  article,  “unlawful  corporal  punishment  or  injury” 
means a  situation  where  any  person  willfully  inflicts  upon  any 
child  any  cruel  or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or  injury 
resulting  in  a  traumatic  condition.  It  does  not  include  an  amount 
of  force  that  is  reasonable  and  necessary  for  a  person  employed 
by  or  engaged  in  a  public  school  to  quell  a  disturbance 
threatening  physical  injury  to  person  or  damage  to  property,  for 
purposes  of  self-defense,  or  to  obtain  possession  of  weapons  or 
other  dangerous  objects  within  the  control  of  the  pupil,  as 
authorized  by  Section  49001  of  the  Education  Code.  It  also 
does  not  include  the  exercise  of  the  degree  of  physical  control 
authorized  by  Section  44807  of  the  Education  Code.  ... 

  

*In  closing  argument,  the  District  cited  the  federal  case  of  Garcia  ex  rel.  Marin  v. 

Clovis  Unified  School  Dist.  (E.D.  Cal.  2009)  627  F.Supp.2d  1187,  1192,  for  the  proposition 
that  “even  leering  or  staring”  constitutes  child  abuse  under  Penal  Code  section  11165.3. 
However,  aside  from  the  fact  that  this  federal  district  court  case  is  not  binding  precedent,  the 
underlying  facts  alleged  in  that  matter  were  more  extreme  than  simply  “leering  and  staring” 
and  involved  much  more  overt  sexual  acts  against  a  female  middle  school  student  by  the 
school  personnel  in  question.  The  case  therefore  is  not  analogous  or  persuasive. 

20

&.  Corporal  punishment  is  not  specifically  defined  in  this  statute  or  elsewhere 
in  the  CANRA.  However,  the  term  is  defined  in  Education  Code  section  49001,  subdivision 
(a},  to  mean  “the  wilh  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of,  physical  pain  on  a 
pupil.”  Education  Code  section  49001  was  enacted  in  1986.  Penal  Code  section  11165.4, 
was  enacted  one  year  later  im  1987  and,  as  seen  above,  refers  to  section  49001.  [tis  assumed 
the  Legislature,  when  enacting  a  statute,  was  aware  of  existing  related  laws  and  intended  to 
maintain  a  consistent  body  of  rule.  (Apartment  Ass’n  of  Los  Angeles  County,  inc.  v.  City  of 
Los  Angeles  (2009)  173  Cal.  App.4th  13,  21.)  Based  on  this  general  principle  of  statutory 
construction,  it  is  assumed  that  the  definition  of  corporal  punishment  contained  in  Education 
Code  section  49001  is  similarly  used  in  Penal  Code  section  11165.4,  including  “the  infliction 
of...  physical  pain.”  Interestingly,  the  same  definition  is  used  in  the  District’s  corporal 
punishment  bulletin  in  effect  in  2013. 

C.  The  parties  have  different  interpretations  of  Penal  Code  section  11165.4. 

The  District  argues  one  meets  the  definition  of  the  statute  if  she  either  willfully  inflicts  cruel 
or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or  willfully  inflicts  injury  resulting  tn  a  traumatic  condition. 
Respondent  argues  all  of  those  conditions  must  be  present,  meaning  one  must  willfully 
engage  in  cruel  or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or  injury  that  also  leads  to  a  traumatic 
condition.  While  Penal  Code  section  11165.4  is  far  from  clear,  cases  interpreting  the  exact 
same  language  contained  in  Penal  Code  section  273d  have  consistently  held  that  lability  for 
crucl  or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or  injury  on  a  child  also  requires  the  infliction  of  a 
traumatic  condition.  (People  v.  Burns  (1948)  88  Cal  App.2d  867,  873.)  Stated  another  way, 
“Injo  conviction  under  section  273d  may  be  had  without  evidence  that  the  child  has  suffered 
a  traumatic  condition.”  (People  vy.  Stewart  1961)  £88  Cal  App.2d  88,  91.)  More  recently,  it 
has  been  held  that  lability  under  Penal  Code  section  273d  “requires  the  defendant  to  inflict  a 
cruel  or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or  impury  upon  a  child  and  the  actual  result  is  an  injury 
resulting  in  a  traumatic  condition.”  (People  v.  Cockburn  (2003)  109  Cal  App.4th  LISI, 
1160.)  For  purposes  of  Penal  Code  section  273d,  “traumatic  condition  has  been  defined  as  a 
wound  or  other  abnormal  bodily  condition  resultmg  from  the  application  of  some  external 
force.”  (People  v.  Stewart,  supra,  188  Cal. App.2d  at  p.  91.) 

D.  The  Legislature  is  presumed  to  be  aware  of judicial  decisions  already  in 
existence  and  to  have  enacted  or  amended  a  statute  in  light  of  those  decisions.  (People  y. 
Giordano  (2007)  42  Cal.  4th  644.)  Thus,  when  legislation  has  been  judicially  construed  and 
a  subsequent  statute,  on  the  same  or  an  analogous  subject,  is  framed  in  identical  or 
substantially  similar  language,  courts  ordinarily  presume  that  the  Legislature  intended  the 
language  used  in  the  later  statute  receive  a  like  interpretation.  (Moran  v.  Murtaugh  Miller 
Meyer  &  Nelson,  LLP  (2007)  40  Cal.  4th  730.)  Since  Penal  Code  section  11165.4  was 
enacted  many  years  after  the  first  two  appellate  cases  cited  above,  which  premise  hability  for 
corporal  punishment  or  injury  on  the  infliction  of  a  traumatic  condition,  it  is  presumed  the 
Legislature  intended  the  same  requirement  when  placing  in  section  111635.4  the  same 
wording  contained  in  Penal  Code  section  273d. 

if 

21

E.  The  definitions  of  “willful  harming  or  injuring  of  a  child”  and  “unlawful 

corporal  punishment  or  injury”  incorporate  the  parental  privilege  to  impose  reasonable 
physical  discipline.  (Gonzalez  v.  Santa  Clara  County  Department  of Social  Services  (2014) 
223  Cal.App.4th  72,  review  denied,  on  subsequent  appeal.)  Successful  assertion  of  the 
privilege  requires  both  a  reasonable  occasion  for  discipline  and  a  punitive  measure  that  is 
reasonable  in  kind  and  degree.  (People  v.  Clark  (2011)  201  Cal.App.4th  235,  250.)  Courts 
recognize  that  the  parental  privilege  also  extends  to  teachers,  who  are  viewed  as  standing  “in 
loco  parentis  ”  for  purposes  of  disciplining  pupils.  (Gonzalez  v.  Santa  Clara  County 
Department  of Social  Services,  supra,  223  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  88.) 

10. 

<A.  Inthis  case,  three  distinct  sets  of  misconduct  by  respondent  were  proven: 
*s  soiled  clothing  to  teach 

(a)  she  punitively  decided  to  delay  the  process  of  changing 
her  a  lesson  about  soiling  herself  to  avoid  undesirable  class  work;  (b)  she  made  several 
negative  comments  about  and  to  her  students;  and  (c)  she  physically  restrained  _ 
and Ha”  in  chairs  as  punishment.  To  determine  whether  respondent’s  misconduct  was 
egregious,  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  through  11165.4  are  analyzed  separately,  as  follows: 

   
    

B.  Respondent  committed  child  neglect  as  defined  by  Penal  Code  section 
to  remain  in  soiled  clothing  for  a  substantial  period  of  time, 
to  the  threat  of  getting  a  rash.  By  using  straps  to  physically 
in  chairs,  respondent  subjected  those  students  to  physical  harm 

11165.2.  By  forcing 
respondent  subjected 
restrain  =  and 
by  either  falling  over  the  side  of  the  chair  and  onto  the  floor  or  by  choking  when  they 
attempted  to  slide  under  the  straps.  It  was  not  established,  however,  that  respondent’s 
negative  comments  constituted  child  neglect,  in  that  it  was  not  proven  the  comments  harmed 
or  threatened  to  harm  the  students.  (Factual  Findings  10-47.) 

C.  Respondent  also  willfully  harmed  and/or  endangered  children  as  defined 

fellows  students: 

to  suffer  the  indignity 

by  Penal  Code  section  11165.3.  By  forcing rm  to  remain  in  soiled  clothing  for  a 
substantial  period  of  time,  respondent  caused  or  permitted 
sitting  in  her  own  waste  in  a  classroom  full  of  other  adults  and 
mental  suffering  was  demonstrated  by  Ms.  Harris’s  observation  that 
upset,”  was  “shaking,”  and  perhaps  crying  “a  little.”  As  explained  above, 
was  also  endangered  by  the  threat  of  rash  caused  by 
minutes.  By  using  straps  to  physically  restrain 
subjected  those  students  to  mental  suffering,  in  that  the 
demonstrably  objected  to  it.  As  explained  above, 
endangered  by  being  so  restrained,  either  from  falling  over  the  side  of  the  chair  and  onto  the 
floor  or  by  choking  when  they  attempted  to  slide  under  the  straps.  It  was  not  established, 
however,  that  respondent’s  negative  comments  constituted  willful  harm  or  endangerment,  in 
that  it  was  not  proven  the  comments  harmed  or  threatened  to  harm  the  students.  (Factual 
Findings  10-47.) 

in  her  own  waste  for  several 
and 

girls  did  not  like  being  restrained  and 

in  chairs,  respondent 

*s  health  was  also 

seemed  “a  little 

     

     

    

’s  health 

of 
s 

sitting 

and 

D.  It  was  not  established  that  respondent  committed  unlawful  corporal 

punishment  or  injury  of  a  child  as  defined  by  Penal  Code  section  11165.4.  As  discussed  in 
detail  above,  corporal  punishment  for  purposes  of  this  statute  requires  the  infliction  of 

a2

  
  

    

,  and 

were  uncomfortable  and 

   
physical  pain  on  a  child.  Although Ri. 
suffered  mentally,  it  was  not  established  that  any  of  them  encountered  physical  pain  by 
respondent’s  acts  or  omissions.  The  same  is  true  concerning  the  negative  comments 
respondent  made.  The  fact  that  respondent’s  acts  did  not  violate  the  District’s  corporal 
punishment  bulletin  is  consistent  with  this  conclusion.  In  addition,  1t  was  not  established  that 
respondent’s  conduct  caused  an  injury  resulting  in  a  traumatic  condition,  1.e.,  a  wound  or 
other  abnormal  bodily  condition  resulting  from  the  application  of  some  external  force.  It  is 
therefore  unnecessary  to  consider  whether  the  parental  reasonable  discipline  privilege 
(extended  to  teachers  by  the  loco  parentis  doctrine)  is  applicable  here,  though  it  is  worth 
noting  that  respondent  has  at  all  times  denied  using  discipline  against  any  of  the  students. 
(Factual  Findings  10-47.) 

11. 

Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  in  2009  and  2015  that  constituted  child 

neglect  pursuant  to  Penal  Code  section  11165.2  and  willful  harming  or  endangering  of  a 
child  pursuant  to  Penal  Code  section  11165.3.  It  therefore  was  established  that  she 
committed  egregious  misconduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(1).  (Factual  Findings  1-47.) 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

12. 

Curiously,  both  parties  argue  an  analysis  of  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  v. 

State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  is  unnecessary  in  this  egregious  misconduct 
case.  However,  the  definition  of  egregious  misconduct  includes  acts  that  are  deemed  to  be 
immoral;  the  Morrison  case  expressly  requires  analysis  of  the  various  factors  specified  in  all 
teacher  discipline  cases  involving  alleged  immoral  conduct.  (/d.  at  pp.  227-230.)  Therefore, 
the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  are  compared  to  the  facts  established  in  this  case.  Not  all 
Morrison  factors  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  v. 
Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted 
on  each  individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts 
established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.)  In  this  case,  the  Morrison 
factors  demonstrate  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  as  follows  (Factual  Findings  1-54): 

a.  The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 

teachers.  It  is  likely  respondent’s  misconduct  adversely  affected 
special  education  students  in  2015.  The  individual  acts  of  misconduct  caused  the  students  to 
feel  discomfort;  respondent’s  collective  acts  in  2015,  including  her  negative  comments  about 
the  students,  created  a  negative  classroom  environment  not  conducive  to  student  learning. 

in  2009  and  two 

b.  The  degree  of  such  adversity.  There  was  a  minimal  level  of  adversity 
created  in  2009  by  respondent’s  single  act  of  misconduct,  but  more  moderate  adversity 
created  by  her  more  pervasive,  collective  acts  in  2015. 

  

/I/ 

23

  

  

c.  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  The  events  in  2009  are 
remote,  but  the  events  in  2015  are  proximate.  However,  combining  the  misconduct  with  the 
patterns  of  related  poor  performance  noted  in  respondent’s  various  evaluations  shows  a  more 
pervasive  pattern  of  problematic  behavior  spanning  from  2009  through  2015. 

d.  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  This  factor  has 

  

significant  application.  Respondent’s  special  education  certificate  allows  her  to  teach  the 
District’s  most  vulnerable  students,  many  of  whom  were  not  able  to  articulate  their 
discomfort  or  objection  to  respondent’s  treatment  of  them.  There  is  a  sense  from  this  case 
that  respondent’s  patience  with  these  at  times  trying  students  gradually  eroded  to  the  point 
where  she  became  frustrated  and  acted  punitively  in  response. 

e.  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

  

  

surrounding  the  conduct.  Respondent  presented  a  number  of  mitigating  facts,  including  that 
none  of  the  students  suffered  from  physical  pain  or  sustained  a  traumatic  injury;  none  of  the 
involved  parents  made  a  complaint  about  respondent;  she  was  not  disciplined  for  her 
misconduct  in  2009;  only  one  child  abuse  report  was  made  among  the  many  mandatory 
reporters  who  observed  respondent’s  actions;  and  no  criminal  investigation  or  prosecution 
was  undertaken.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  aggravating  factors  that  essentially  off-set 
the  mitigation.  For  example,  respondent  committed  multiple  acts  and  varieties  of  misconduct 
over  a  span  of  years  demonstrated  a  concerning  pattern.  It  is  not  clear  that  any  of  the 
involved  parents  knew  of  the  events  in  question.  Respondent  was  not  completely  candid 
when  interviewed  by  the  District  during  its  investigation  or  when  testifying  in  this  matter. 
Ultimately,  respondent  did  not  demonstrate  much  remorse  or  contrition,  if  any. 

f.  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 

conduct.  There  is  only  blame  for  the  way  respondent  acted. 

g.  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  Respondent  has 
failed  to  accept  meaningful  responsibility  for  her  misconduct  and  demonstrated  very  little 
remorse,  if  any.  She  has  not  presented  any  evidence  indicating  regenerative  steps  or 
measures  to  change  her  behavior,  such  as  anger  management  or  continuing  education  on 
topics  such  as  classroom  teaching,  supervision,  or  student  behavior  management.  The 
totality  of  the  evidence  indicates  that  if  respondent  is  returned  to  the  classroom,  she  is  likely 
to  engage  in  the  same  or  similar  behavior. 

h.  The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the 

  

constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  This  is  not  foreseen. 

  

Disposition 

A.  “[An  ALJ]  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness 
.,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.”  (California 

13. 
to  teach  .. 
Teachers  Ass’n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.)  Even  where  cause  for 
dismissal  has  been  established,  an  ALJ  still  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  such 

24

discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (988)  45  Cal.3d 
208,  222.) 

B.  The  District  argues,  without  any  supporting  legal  authority,  that  once 

egregious  misconduct  is  established,  there  is  no  discretion  to  do  anything  other  than  affirm 
termination  of  the  imvoived  teacher.  The  District’s  argument  is  not  persuasive.  First,  there  is 
nothing  tn  the  Education  Code  supporting  such  an  argument.  Second,  when  pushed  to  the 
extreme,  this  argument  crumbles,  especially  considering  that  no  limitations  period  applies  to 
egregious  misconduct  allegations.  Consider  a  hypothetical  scenario  in  which  a  teacher,  with 
no  other  record  of  discipline,  commits  one  substance  abuse  violation  described  in  Education 
Code  section  44011  (e.g.,  possession  of  a  controlled  substance),  off-campus  and  unrelated  to 
school  activity,  more  than  ten  years  ago,  and  has  been  sober  ever  since.  Under  the  District’s 
argument,  that  teacher  is  subject  te  termination  without  any  discretion,  even  though  the 
above-described  Morrison  factors  may  warrant  a  different  disposition. 

C. 

In  this  case,  respondent  engaged  im  egregious  misconduct  with  three 

Students.  Her  misconduct  is  especially  concerning  because  it  involved  special  education 
Students  who  were,  and  are,  significantly  disabled.  Respondent’s  egregious  misconduct  was 
punitive  and  cruel.  While  respondent’s  negative  comments  about  the  students  were  not 
established  to  be  egregious  misconduct,  they  were  also  cruci  and  contributed  to  a  negative 
lcarning  environment  for  her  students.  Those  comments  also  provide  a  glimpse  into 
respondent's  negative  mind-set  about  the  special  students  she  was  entrusted  to  instruct. 
While  the  acts  of  misconduct  were  separated  by  the  span  of  cight  years,  that  gap  was  bridged 
by  a  consistent  pattern  of  critiques  from  respondent's  supervisors  showing  her  deficiencies  mn 
getting  along  with  her  aides,  properly  supervising  her  students,  and  providing  an 
environment  conducive  to  learning.  Those  are  exactly  the  shortcomings  that  created  the 
cucumstances  during  which  respondent  engaged  in  her  misconduct.  It  is  apparent  that  over 
time,  respondent  has  lost  her  patience  working  with  special  education  students  and  lost  focus 
of  her  special  mission  in  that  regard.  This  is  perplexing  given  that,  m1  2015,  respondent  only 
had  four  students  in  her  classroom,  but  one  or  two  other  adults  to  assist  her.  Respondent’s 
unconvincing  denials  and  half-hearted  apologies  demonstrate  she  has  not  learned  much  of  a 
lesson,  The  Morrison  factors  indicate  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  in  her  current  condition. 
Under  the  circumstances,  terminating  her  employment  with  the  District  is  warranted. 
(Factual  Findimgs  1-34;  Legal  Conclusions  1-12.)

ORDER 

Respondent  Caterina  Lipera  is  terminated  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District. 

DATED: 

February  6,  2018 

e--~  DocuSigned  by: 
f 

Lhe 

Nene  E0838  1E7779D4F  0... 

  
ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

