BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
POMONA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

OSENI  IRIAFEN, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2017110534 

  

Respondent. 

  

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  in  Pomona  on  February  26  &  28,  2018,  and  March  1,  2,  5-9,  12-15,  2018. 
The  Commission  consisted  of  Tom  Hood,  Ray  Andrzejewski,  and  Erlinda  G.  Shrenger, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of 
California,  who  presided. 

L.  Carlos  Villegas  and  Nima  Jalali,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented 

Pomona  Unified  School  District  (District).  Eli  Naduris-Weissman  and  Daniel  B.  Rojas, 
Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  Oseni  Iriafen  (respondent). 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  As  stated  on  the  record,  the  ALJ 

ordered  that  student  names  would  appear  in  the  hearing  transcript  as  first  name  and  last 
initial.' 
student  names  in  that  format. 

In  addition,  when  noted  by  the  ALJ,  documentary  evidence  was  redacted  to  show 

The  presentation  of  witness  testimony  concluded  on  March  14,  2018. 
lateness  of  the  hour,  the  respective  counsel  for  the  parties  agreed  to  having  the  ALJ  alone 
conduct  a  telephonic  conference  on  March  15,  2018,  to  address  issues  and  finalize  the 
exhibits  admitted  into  the  record. 

Due  to  the 

On  March  15,  2018,  the  ALJ  held  a  telephone  conference  with  counsel,  which  was 

electronically  recorded.  During  the  telephone  conference,  documents  were  presented  and 
marked  as  Exhibits  29  through  33.  Exhibits  29  and  30  were  admitted  for  impeachment 

  

'  The  students'  full  names  are  set  forth  in  a  confidential  names  list  marked  and 

admitted  under  seal  as  Exhibit  33.

purposes.  Exhibits  32  and  33  were  admitted.  Respondent's  objection  to  Exhibit  31  was 
sustained,  and  that  exhibit  was  not  admitted. 

The  hearing  was  concluded  on  March  15,  2018.  The  record  was  held  open  for  the 
subnission  of  written  closing  bricfs  as  follows:  District's  closing  brief  was  due  by  April  16, 
2018;  Respondent's  closing  brief  was  due  by  May  18,  2018;  and  District's  reply  brief  was  due 
by  June  1,  2018.  The  ALJ  permitted  the  parties,  ifthey  wished,  to  lodge  with  OAH  excerpts 
from  the  hearing  transcript  cited  in  their  closing  briefs. 

The  parties  tumety  filed  their  briefs.  The  District's  Closing  Brief  was  marked  as 

Exhibrt  34.  On  April  16,  2018,  the  District  also  filed  a  Notice  of  Lodging  Exhibits  m 
Support  of  Closing  Brief,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  35,  and  a  Supplemental  Notice  of 
Lodging  Exhibits,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  36.  On  April  30,  2018,  the  ALJ  issued  an 
order  directing  the  District's  counsel  to  prepare  an  index  that  identified  the  witnesses  whose 
testimony  was  reflected  in  the  hearing  transcript  pages  contained  in  the  Notice  of  Lodgmg 
and  Supplemental  Notice  of  Lodging,  and  to  file  the  mdex  with  OAH  by  June  1,  2018.  The 
ALJ's  order  was  marked  as  Exhibit  37. 

On  June  {,  2018,  the  District  submitted  a  written  request  to  extend  the  deadline  for 

filine  the  hearing  transcript  index  to  June  5,  2018,  which  respondent  did  not  oppose.  The 
ALJ  issued  an  order  extending  the  deadline  for  filing  the  index  to  June  8,  2018.  The 
District's  written  request  was  marked  as  Exhibit  38.  The  ALJ's  order  extending  the  deadline 
was  marked  as  Exhibit  39.  Thereafter,  the  District's  index  for  the  hearing  transcript  excerpts 
was  filed  and  served  on  June  8,  2018,  and  marked  as  Exhibit  40.  Respondent's  Closing  Brief 
was  marked  as  Exhibit  T.  The  District's  Reply  Brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  41.  The 
District's  Notice  of  Lodging  of  Exhibits  in  Support  of  Reply  Brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  42. 

The  record  closed  and  the  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  June  &,  2018. 

FACTUAL  FENDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

I. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

On  September  20,  2017,  the  District  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

Immediate  Suspension  Without  Pay  and  Intent  to  Dismiss  (Notice),  which  notified 
respondent  of  the  District's  intent  to  dismiss  him  within  30  days  uniess  he  made  a  written 
request  for  a  hearmg.  The  Notice  included  a  Statement  of  Charges  with  exhibits,  a  Demand 
for  Hearing  form,  and  copies  of  relevant  Education  Code  sections. 

3. 

On  October  16,  2017,  respondent,  through  his  counsel,  served  the  District  with 

a  Demand  for  Hearmg/Notice  of  Defense,  which  contained  respondent's  demand  for  a

hearing  and  also  served  as  his  notice  of  defense  pursuant  to  Government  Code  sections 
11505  and  E1506. 

4A. 

AMT  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent's  Background 

5. 

6. 

Respondent  is  originally  from  Nigeria.  He  completed  high  school  in  Nigeria. 

In  March  1986,  respondent  moved  from  Nigeria  to  California.  He  attended 

Fullerton  College,  where  he  received  an  associate's  degree  im  architecture  in  1988  and  an 
associate's  degree  in  biology  in  1990.  Respondent  subsequently  attended  California  State 
Polytechnic  University,  Pomona  (Cal  Poly  Pomona).  In  June  1994,  respondent  graduated 
from  Cal  Poly  Pomona  with  a  bachelor's  degree  in  biological  sciences. 

7. 

In  June  1998,  after  completing  the  teaching  credential  program  at  Cal  Poly 
Pomona,  respondent  received  his  professional,  clear  single-subject  with  CLAD  credential, 
and  supplemental  credential  in  mathematics  and  chemistry.  In  June  2000,  respondent 
received  his  master's  degree  in  education  from  Azusa  Pacific  University. 

8. 

Respondent  began  teaching  as  a  day-to-day  substitute  teacher  for  four  different 

school  districts,  including  the  District,  from  September  1995  to  January  1996.  He  worked 
for  the  District  as  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  at  Pomona  High  School  from  September 
1996  to  January  1997.  He  then  went  to  work  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  as 
a  biology  and  life  science  teacher  at  John  Mutr  Middle  School  from  January  to  June  1997.  In 
September  1997,  respondent  was  hired  by  the  District  as  a  physical  science  and  math  teacher 
at  Marshall  Middle  School.  After  receiving  his  teaching  credential  in  June  199%,  respondent 
continued  working  at  Marshall  Middle  School  as  a  physical  science  and  math  teacher  during 
the  next  five  years  until  Tune  2003.  From  September  2003  to  June  2011,  respondent 
continued  his  employment  with  the  District  as  a  teacher  at  Simons  Middle  School,  where  he 
taught  physical  science,  life  science  and  algebra.  In  September  2011,  respondent  began 
working  as  a  teacher  at  Pomona  High  School,  teaching  biology  for  ninth  and  tenth  graders 
and  anatomy  &  physiology  for  eleventh  and  twelfth  graders. 

9, 

At  Pomona  High  School,  respondent  also  taught  Saturday  School,  which  are 

classes  beld  on  campus  on  Saturdays  so  students  can  make  up  work  missed  because  of 
absences  and/or  get  extra  help  from  teachers.  Not  every  teacher  teaches  Saturday  School, 
which  is  voluntary.  Students  choose  which  teacher's  classroom  they  will  attend  for  Saturday 
School. 

10. 

Respondent  is  the  club  advisor  for  the  Science  Club,  which  was  formed  in  the 

2013-2014  school  year.  Respondent  was  involved  in  forming  the  Science  Club. 

li. 

Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  at  Pomona  High  School  since  the  2011-2012 
school  year.  This  dismissal  proceeding  is  based  on  alleged  conduct  by  respondent  while  a 

3
o
L

teacher  at  Pomona  High  School  during  the  2013-2014,  2014-2015,  2015-2016,  and  2016- 
2017  school  years. 

Pomona  High  School 

12. 

Pomona  High  School  has  approximately  1,600  students.  Most  of  the  students 

are  from  Title  1,  low  income  households. 

13.  | Pomona  High  School  received  a  three-year  school  improvement  grant.  The 

grant  covered  the  2010-2011,  2011-2012,  and  2012-2013  school  years.  The  school  used  the 
grant  money  for  instructional  coaches  for  English,  math,  and  science.  The  instructional 
coaches  were  other  Pomona  High  School  teachers  selected  to  be  coaches.  The  school 
provided  extra  professional  development  for  the  faculty  in  the  same  content  area  to  meet  one 
hour  per  week. 

14. 

(A)  Roger  Fasting  has  been  the  principal  at  Pomona  High  School  since 

February  2008.  Principal  Fasting's  testimony  established  the  steps  taken  by  Pomona  High 
School  to  change  the  culture  and  climate  of  the  school.  There  were  five  student-free  days  in 
a  school  year.  There  were  also  late-start  Fridays  that  were  used  for  professional  learning  and 
meetings.  The  school  also  received  an  S-3  grant  (school  safety  grant)  which  was  a  grant  to 
enhance  school  culture.  One  late-start  Friday  was  dedicated  to  improving  and  enhancing  the 
school's  culture  and  climate.  Teachers  received  training  on  staff  development  days.  At  the 
start  of  the  school  year,  teachers  received  one  paid  day  to  set  up  their  classrooms.  The 
school  also  had  a  "student  norming  day"  during  which  the  school  developed  behavioral 
norms.  During  the  first  semester  of  a  school  year,  teachers  in  every  class  spent  five  to  15 
minutes  per  day  teaching  students  the  behavioral  norms,  so  the  students  were  taught  the 
norms  in  all  of  their  classes  throughout  the  school  day. 

(B)  In  addition,  the  school  developed  a  Wellness  Center  as  an  alternative  to 
off-campus  suspension.  Thus,  for  example,  when  students  are  off-task  or  have  behavioral 
issues,  the  students  are  kept  at  school  at  the  Wellness  Center  instead  of  sent  home  from 
school,  which  gives  the  school  the  opportunity  to  determine  the  root  of  the  behavior.  The 
Wellness  Center  and  S-3  grant  center  provide  each  teacher  with  a  binder  that  is  a  compilation 
of  resources  and  materials  from  meetings.  The  binder  is  separate  from  the  teacher  handbook 
and  is  specific  to  classroom  management,  student  engagement,  and  best  practices  to 
de-escalate  situations  with  students. 

15.  | Pomona  High  School  invested  in  AVID?,  which  is  a  program  to  prepare 

students  for  college  eligibility  and  success.  The  school  eventually  became  an  AVID 
demonstration  school.  AVID  demonstration  schools  undergo  a  rigorous  validation  process  to 
ensure  implementation  of  AVID  strategies  and  must  be  revalidated  every  few  years. 

  

2  AVID  stands  for  Advancement  Via  Individual  Determination.

16. 

According  to  Principal  Fasting,  the  graduation  rate  at  Pomona  High  School  ts 
now  higher  than  the  county  and  state-wide  averages.  The  school  has  received  awards  from 
the  California  Department  of  Education.  Pomona  High  School  is  one  of  12  schools  to 
receive  an  award  for  engaging  students  in  crvic  projects.  Principal  Fasting  attributes  the 
school's  success  to  the  collective  efforts  of  the  faculty  and  administration  to  change  the 
culture  and  climate  of  the  school  for  the  better. 

District  Policies 

17. 

The  District  has  a  policy  regarding  the  acceptable  use  of  electronic 

information  resources,  which  are  defined  as  "technology  resources  including,  but  not  luntted 
to,  computers  and  systems,  Intranet  and  Internet  resources,  electronic  communications  and 
data  files."  (Exh.  23.)  The  policy  provides  that  access  to  electronic  information  resources 
“must  be  for  the  purpose  of  education  or  research,  and  must  be  consistent  with  the 
educational  goals  and  objectives  and/or  the  business  uses  of  [the  District]."  Ud.)  The  policy 
gives  examples  of  unacceptable  use,  which  include  "[clreating,  communicating,  using,  or 
knowingly  accessing  images  or  text  that  are  obscene,  pornographic,  inflammatory,  harassing, 
threatening,  degrading,  or  harmful  to  mimors,  or  that  promote  illegal,  discriminatory,  or 
unethical  activities.”  Cd.) 

18. 

Board  Policy  Nos.  4119.11,  4219.11,  and  4319.11  set  forth  the  District's  policy 

regarding  sexual  harassment  of  District  personnel.  (Exh.  24.)  Board  Policy  No.  3145.7  is 
the  District's  policy  regarding  sexual  harassment  of  students  (Exh.  25).  Board  Policy  No. 
5145.7  states,  in  part:  “The  Governing  Board  is  commutted  to  maintaining  a  learning 
environment  that  is  free  of  harassment.  The  Board  prohibits  the  unlawful  sexual  harassment 
of  any  student  by  any  employee,  student,  or  other  person  at  school  or  any  school-related 
activity.”  (Exh.  25.)  Under  the  policy,  the  types  of  conduct  which  are  prohibited  in  the 
District  and  which  may  constitute  sexual  harassment  include,  but  are  not  limited  to, 
unwelcome  sexual  firtations  or  propositions;  unwelcome  sexual  slurs,  leering,  epithets, 
threats,  verbal  abuse,  derogatory  comments  or  sexually  degrading  descriptions;  graphic 
verbal  comments  about  an  mdividual's  body  or  overly  personal  conversations,  and  sexual 
jokes,  notes,  stories,  drawing,  pictures  or  gestures. 

(Exh.  25.) 

19. 

Board  Policy  No.  1270  is  the  District's  civility  policy,  which  provides,  in  part: 

"The  District]  is  committed  to  a  learning  environment  that  fosters  mutual  respect  and  civil 
conduct  between  and  among  students,  school  District  employees,  parents,  volunteers,  and  the 
general  public.”  (@xh.  26,  p.  249.)  The  policy  further  provides:  "The  Board  of  Education 
encourages  positive  communication  and  discourages  volatile,  hostile,  or  aggressive  actions 
that  could  have  a  negative  inypact  on  the  learning  environment  of  both  teachers  and 
students."  Ud.)  The  policy  defines  civility  as  "[mjutual  respect  and  consideration  reflected 
in  language,  attitudes,  and  behaviors.”  Ud.)  Expected  behaviors  include,  but  are  not  limited 
to,  respect  and  courtesy  in  language,  demeanor,  and  actions,  and  respectful  acknowledgment 
of cultural  differences.  (Exh.  26,  p.  250.)  Unacceptable  behaviors  mclude,  but  are  not 
lumited  to,  rude,  insulting,  or  demeaning  language  and/or  actions,  harassment  and 
imtimidation,  and  threatening  and/or  abusing  gestures  and  behavior.  (bid. ) 

A
‘

20. 

Board  Policy  No.  4119.21  sets  forth  the  District's  Code  of  Ethics.  The  policy 

states  that  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  “believes  that  certificated  staff  members 
should  accept  as  guiding  principles  and  abide  by  the  'Code  of Ethics  of  the  Teaching 
Profession’  as  adopted  and  revised  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.”  (Exh.  27.) 
The  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Teaching  Profession  sets  forth  specific  commitments  to  the 
student,  the  public,  and  the  teaching  profession,  when  teachers  accept  the  responsibility  to 
practice  the  profession  according  to  the  highest  ethical  standards.  Gd.) 

21. 

Board  Policy  No.  5137  1s  the  District's  policy  for  promoting  a  Positive  School 
Clinate.  (Exh.  28.)  The  policy  provides,  m  part:  “The  Governing  Board  desires  to  enhance 
student  learning  by  providing  an  orderly,  caring,  and  nurturing  educational  and  social 
environment  m  which  all  students  can  feel  safe  and  take  pride  in  their  school  and  their 
achievements.  The  school  environment  should  be  characterized  by  positive  interpersonal 
relationships  among  students  and  between  students  and  staff,  [4]...%|  All  staff  are  expected 
io  serve  as  role  models  for  students  by  demonstrating  positive,  professional  attitudes  and 
respect  toward  cach  student  and  other  staff  members.  Teachers  shall  use  effective  classroom 
management  techniques  based  on  clear  expectations  for  student  behavior.”  Ud.) 

22. 

Board  Policy  No.  5121  sets  forth  the  District's  policy  for  examimation,  grading, 

and  rating  of  student  performance.  (xh.  22).  The  policy  requires  letter  grades  to  be 
reflective  of  academic  achievement.  Students’  letter  grades  are  expected  to  directly  measure 
students’  knowledge  and  skills  in  the  content  area.  The  policy  provides  that  in  grades  7-12, 
each  student  is  given  a  letter  grade  according  to  the  student's  performance  on  each  course 
objective,  as  follows:  "A"  for  excellent,  "B"  for  very  good;  "C"  for  satisfactory;  "D"  for 
below  average;  and  "F"  for  unsatisfactory.  Students  can  also  be  graded  as  "P"  for  pass  and 
"I/P"  for  incomplete  pass. 

23. 

Board  Policy  No.  5125  sets  forth  the  District's  policy  for  maintaming  the 

confidentiality  of  student  records.  (ixh.  21.)  The  policy  states,  in  part:  "The  Governing 
Board  believes  that  itis  useful  and  necessary  to  keep  accurate,  comprehensive  records  of 
each  student's  academic,  physical,  emotional  and  social  development.  Information  about  a 
student  shall  be  used  judiciously,  always  m  ways  that  contribute  to  the  student's  welfare." 
(Exh.  21.)  The  school  "shall  establish  safeguards  to  protect  the  student  and  the  student's 
family  from  invasion  of  privacy.”  Ud.) 

School  Policies 

24. 

Teachers  and  staff  at  Pomona  High  School  are  prohibited  from  transporting 

students  off  campus  during  school  hours,  but  administrators  are  permitted  to  do  so.  Teachers 
and  statf  are  prohibited  from  giving  rides  to  students  during  school  hours  because  of  the 
school's  potential  bability 
there  is  an  accident  or  if students  are  brought  to  an  off-campus 
location  and  left  unsupervised  during  school  hours.  Teachers  may  not  transport  students  m 
their  personal  vehicles  unless  they  pass  a  background  check  and  provide  a  copy  of  their 
msurance  and  driver's  hcense.  Typically,  teachers  who  are  allowed  to  transport  students  in

their  personal  vehicles  are  the  coaches  of  sports  tearns.  For  field  trips,  there  is  a  process  for 
arranging  student  transportation  and  obtainme  written  permission  from  parents. 

25. 

A  lunch  pass  allows  a  student,  who  meets  certain  requirements,  to  leave 

campus  during  the  school  day.  The  student  must  be  18  years  oid,  meet  testing  scores,  and 
have  approval  from  their  parent,  a  counselor,  and  an  administrator.  However,  sunply 
because  a  student  has  a  lunch  pass  does  not  mean  the  student  can  leave  campus  with  a 
teacher.  The  teacher  must  have  authorization  from  the  school  and  the  District,  as  discussed 
above. 

26. 

Deanna  Konop  has  been  an  assistant  principal  at  Pomona  High  Schoal  since 

2012.  She  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  2004.  Ms.  Ronop  first  met  respondent  in 
2012.  She  oversaw  the  Science  Department  at  Pomona  High  School  where  respondent  was  4 
teacher.  Ms.  Konop's  testimony  established  that  teachers  at  Pomona  High  School  are 
prohibited  from  selling  food  in  their  classrooms.  The  school  has  a  student  store  that  sells 
food.  All  food  sold  on  carpus  must  meet  nutritional  guidelines.  Student  clubs,  with 
approval  from  ASB  and  Ms.  Konop,  are  permitted  to  sell  food  as  a  fundraising  activity  for 
the  club.  The  items  sold  must  be  approved  by  ASB  and  Ms.  Ronop.  When  a  student  club  is 
given  authorization  for  food  sales,  the  authorization  is  only  for  specified  school  events  (¢.g., 
Food  Carnival,  Club  Rush,  Homecoming)  and  for  specified  days  and  time  periods.  Ms. 
Konop  emphasized  that  the  authorization  to  sell  food  is  given  to  the  club,  not  to  individual 
teachers.  It  is  primarily  the  student-members  of  the  club  that  do  the  selling.  The  club  may 
sell  food  before  and  after  school,  and  during  lunch  and  passing  periods.  No  sales  are 
permitted  during  class  time. 

Respondent's  Classroom 

27. 

The  school  day  at  Pomona  High  School  consisted  of  six  periods.  Teachers  had 

five  content  periods  and  one  non-content  period.  Respondent's  non-content  period  was 
fourth  period.  His  first  period  class  consisted  of  English-learner  students. 

28. 

The  Commission  heard  testimony  from  many  witnesses  who  were  students  mn 
respondent's  classes  at  Pomona  High  School  during  the  relevant  school  years.  The  students 
described  respondent  as  relating  well  to  his  students  and  referred  to  him  as  "Mr.  1."  Many  of 
the  students  described  respondent  as  “strict”  and  a  "good  teacher.”  Many  of  the  students 
liked  respondent's  classes.  Some  students  went  to  respondent  for  advice  beyond  the  lessons 
i  respondent's  class,  such  as  advice  for  college  and  personal  and  family  issues.  Some 
students  viewed  respondent  as  a  father  figure.  Many  students  would  spend  the  hinch  period 
i  respondent's  classroom,  which  he  allowed.  Although  other  teachers  allowed  students  im 
their  classroom  during  the  lunch  period,  many  students  chose  respondent's  classroom.  They 
described  respondent  as  funny  and  friendly.  They  felt  they  could  approach  him  about  all 
topics.  Respondent  was  described  as  being  able  to  relate  to  students  "at  their  level.” 
Respondent's  manner  of  interacting  with  students  made  him  a  polarizing  figure.  Some  of  the 
students  reacted  positively  to  his  teaching  style,  while  other  students  were  offended  or  felt 
uncomfortable  by  some  of  his  jokes  and  comments.  However,  those  students  who  were

offended  or  felt  uncomfortable  by  respondent's  comments  or  conduct  did  not  complain  to 
school  administrators  about  it. 

29. 

Respondent's  classroom  had  a  sink,  which  respondent  used  to  wash  his  hands 

and  the  dishes  he  used  for  his  breakfast  or  lunch.  When  he  washed  his  hands,  respondent 
used  towels  to  dry  his  hands;  however,  he  also  dried  his  hands  on  the  backs  and  shoulders  of 
the  students.  Students  would  wash  respondent's  dishes  in  exchange  for  serving  formal 
detention  or  to  get  back  their  cell  phone  that  respondent  took  away  from  them  during  class. 
Respondent's  classroom  also  had  a  stockroom  and a  refrigerator,  where  respondent  stored 
food. 

2013-2014  School  Year 

Directives  Given  to  Respondent   

30. 

On  September  27,  2013,  Principal  Fasting  held  a  meeting  with  respondent  to 

discuss  allegations  by  students  that  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  in  the 
classroom.’  During  the  meeting,  Principal  Fasting  reviewed  the  students'  allegations  with 
respondent  and  allowed  him  to  respond  to  the  allegations.  On  October  1,  2013,  respondent 
was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave  while  the  District  and  the  school  site  investigated  the 
students’  allegations.  (Exh.  2.)  When  the  investigation  was  completed,  Principal  Fasting 
prepared  a  Conference  Summary  memorandum  dated  October  15,  2013  (2013  Conference 
Summary),  which  summarized  the  students'  allegations,  respondent's  response  to  the 
allegations,  and  the  discussion  between  Principal  Fasting  and  respondent  during  their 
September  27,  2013  meeting.  (Exh.  4.)  Respondent  was  provided  a  copy  of  the  2013 
Conference  Summary  by  Principal  Fasting  on  October  16,  2013,  which  respondent  signed  to 
acknowledge  his  receipt  of  the  document  on  that  date. 

31. 

The  2013  Conference  Summary  directed  respondent  as  follows: 

Effective  immediately,  you  are  directed  to: 

1.  Cease  using  the  term  sucky,  sucky,  suck  or  any  other 
derivation  of  the  word  suck. 

2.  No  use  of  profanity  for  any  reason  but  not  limited  to  fuck, 
shit,  bitch,  or  big  dick. 

  

>In  making  its  decision  in  this  dismissal  proceeding,  the  Commission  did  not  consider 

the  specific  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct  that  were  the  subject  of  the  September  27, 
2013  meeting  between  Principal  Fasting  and  respondent.  The  District's  evidence  was 
insufficient  to  establish  that  the  underlying  allegations  occurred  within  four  years  of  the 
September  20,  2017  Notice.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (b)(2)(B).)

3.  Not  share  personal  information  which  is  sexual  in  nature  or 
may  be  considered  sexual  in  nature. 

4.  Refrain  from  physical  contact  of  any  type  with  students, 
including  but  not  limited  to  touching  students  on  the  shoulder  or 
buttocks. 

(Exh.  4.) 

32. 

The  2013  Conference  Summary  warned  respondent  that  his  failure  to  follow 

the  above  directives  could  result  in  further  disciplinary  action,  including  suspension  without 
pay  and/or  termination  from  employment. 

33. 

As  of  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent  had  been  advised  of  the  school 
policy  regarding  food  sales  by  student  clubs  (discussed  in  Finding  26,  above).  Ms.  Konop 
had  spoken  with  respondent  in  November  2012,  advising  him  that  he  was  not  permitted  to 
sell  food  without  ASB  approval.  In  the  2013  spring  semester,  Ms.  Konop  sent  an  email  and 
spoke  to  the  entire  teaching  staff  about  the  school  policy  for  food  sales  and  advised  the 
teaching  staff  that  if  they  wanted  to  sell,  they  had  to  form  a  club  and  get  items  approved  by 
ASB.  She  also  spoke  with  respondent  in  his  classroom  about  this  policy.  In  August  2013,  at 
the  start  of  the  2013-2014  school  year,  Ms.  Konop  had  a  conversation  with  respondent  to 
remind  him  he  was  not  allowed  to  sell  ttems  on  campus  without  ASB  approval.  During  this 
conversation,  respondent  spoke  with  Ms.  Konop  about  forming  the  Science  Club.  The  club 
constitution  for  the  Science  Club  was  completed  in  October  2013,  and  the  club  was  assigned 
a  week  during  the  2013-2014  school  year  to  sell  food. 

Charge  5 

34. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charges  5a,  5d,  5e,  5h,  and  51,  that, 

notwithstanding  the  directives  given  in  the  2013  Conference  Summary,  and  Ms.  Konop's 
directives  regarding  food  sales,  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  as  follows. 
Respondent  washed  his  hands  in  the  classroom  sink  and  dried  his  wet  hands  on  students' 
backs  and  shoulders.  He  told  racial  jokes  about  Mexicans  and  referred  to  Mexicans  as 
"beaners."  He  told  male  students  who  were  misbehaving,  "I  will  shove  this  up  your  ass," 
referring  to  his  penis.  He  sold  food  to  students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  used  profanity, 
including  "ass,"  "bitch,"  "fuck,"  mother  fucker,"  "shit,"  "bullshit,"  and  "nigger,"  and  he 
continued  to  use  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky."  The  District's  evidence  was  insufficient  to 
establish  the  allegations  of  Charges  5b,  5c,  5f,  5g,  5j,  5k,  and  Si. 

35. 

The  District  presented  the  testimony  of Ym  D.,  who  was  a  ninth  grade 

student  in  respondent's  biology  class  for  the  2013-2014  school  year.  The  Commission  found 

D.'s  testimony  was  credible.  Her  testimony  established  that  respondent  engaged  in 

inappropriate  conduct,  as  alleged  by  the  District.  That  testimony,  however,  did  not  establish 
D.  was  inherently  biased  against  respondent.  She  also  provided  testimony  that 
reflected  favorably  on  respondent.  For  example,  she  described  respondent  as  a  teacher  who 
related  well  to  students,  she  liked  respondent's  class,  and  respondent  encouraged  her  to  learn.

  

She  also  recounted  that  she  chose  to  spend  the  lunch  period  in  respondent's  classroom,  even 
though  other  teachers’  classrooms  were  also  available  for  students  to  spend  lunch.  The 
Commission  also  found Yr  D.'s  testimony  credible  because  it  was  consistent  with  the 
testimony  of  students  from  respondent's  classes  in  subsequent  school  years  (discussed 
below). 

36. 

2013-2014  school  year. 

Respondent  presented  testimony  by  three  of  his  former  students  from  the 
B.  was  a  tenth  grade  student  in  respondent's  biology  class. 

      

M.  were  both  twelfth  grade  students  in  respondent's  anatomy  & 

H.  was  also  respondent's  teacher's  assistant  for  his  fifth  period 

H.  and 
physiology  class. 
biology  class.  These  three  former  students  provided  testimony  that  contradicted YR  D.'s 
testimony.  For  example,  they  testified  that  respondent  did  not  make  mean,  sexual  or 
inappropriate  jokes;  he  did  not  sell  food  in  class;  he  did  not  use  profanity  or  the  phrase 
"sucky  sucky";  he  did  not  dry  his  wet  hands  on  students;  and  he  did  not  refer  to  Hispanics  as 
of  respondent's  three  student 
"beaners."  The  Commission  found,  however,  that  the  testimony 
witnesses  was  not  sufficient  to  rebut Yr  D.'s  testimony. 
H.  and  i  M.  were  in 
respondent's  anatomy  class,  not  his  biology  class.  Kg  H.  was  respondent's  teaching 
assistant  for  his  fifth  period  biology  class,  but  no  evidence  was  presented  that Yr  D.  was 
in  that  class.  No  evidence  was  presented  that Rg  B.  was  in  the  same  biology  class  as 
.  Further,  unlike  Y's  testimony,  the  testimony  of  respondent's  three  student 
witnesses  was  strikingly  inconsistent  with  the  testimony  of  students  from  respondent's 
classes  in  subsequent  school  years  (discussed  below). 

37. 

Regarding  Charge  5a,  respondent  admitted  that  he  dried  his  wet  hands  on 

students,  by  patting  his  hands  lightly  on  students’  shoulders. 

38. 

(A)  Regarding  Charges  51  and  5d,  respondent  admitted  that,  during  the  2013- 
2014  school  year,  he  said  "fuck,"  "shit,"  and  "ass."  He  testified  that  he  said  "fuck"  when  he 
hurt  his  finger  while  moving  a  table  and  "shit"  when  he  hit  his  leg  on  something.  He  also 
said  "fuck"  after  making  a  mistake  on  his  computer.  He  testified  that  he  does  not  say  "fuck" 
all  the  time;  it  just  happens  in  the  heat  of  the  moment.  Respondent  explained  that  he  uses 
"fuck"  and  "shit"  not  as  profanity,  but  as  academic  vocabulary,  especially  for  English-learner 
students.  For  example,  he  used  "fuck"  to  explain  intercourse  and  copulation,  and  he  used 
"shit"  to  explain  feces.  Respondent  admitted  he  used  the  word  "ass"  to  tell  students  who 
were  misbehaving  in  the  lab  with  a  scalpel,  "stop  being  an  ass."  Respondent  denied  saying 
"mother  fucker"  or  "bitch.  Respondent  denied  saying  "beaner."  He  claimed  that  the  word 
came  up  in  class  because  students  said  it,  and  he  told  them  to  stop  saying  it.  Similarly, 
respondent  contends  he  heard  students  say  "nigger"  in  class  and  told  them  to  stop.  The 
students  told  him  they  were  saying  "nigga,"  not  "nigger."  According  to  respondent,  students 
would  ask  each  other,  "what's  up  my  nigga?" 

(B)  Respondent  denied  that  he  used  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky"  or  that  he  told 

Principal  Fasting  that  it  is  a  common  expression  used  in  Nigeria,  as  documented  in  the  2013 
Conference  Summary.  (Exh.  4.)  Respondent  contends  he  said,  "We  suck,  we  suck,"  which 
the  students  mistook  for  "sucky  sucky."  He  explained,  for  example,  that  if  the  class  did 

10

  

  

poorly  on  a  test,  he  would  tell  the  students  "we  suck  as  a  class."  Respondent  admitted  he 
used  the  word  "suck"  but  he  did  not  say  "sucky  sucky."  Respondent  also  said  "we  suck" 
when  the  class  returned  on  Monday  after  the  Raiders  football  team  lost  a  game  over  the 
weekend. 

(C)  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  testimony  and  explanations  do  not 

mitigate  or  excuse  his  use  of  inappropriate  language  and  profanity  in  the  classroom.  His 
denial  of  using  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky"  was  not  credible  and  was  inconsistent  with  his  prior 
statements  to  Principal  Fasting  documented  in  the  2013  Conference  Summary. 

39. 

—  The  District's  evidence  established  that,  during  the  2013-2014  school  year, 

respondent  sold  food  to  students  in  his  classroom.  According  to Yr  D.,  respondent  sold 
burritos,  soda,  ice  cream  and  water  to  students  during  the  first  few  months  of  the  2013-2014 
school  year.  Later  on,  respondent  told  the  class  he  was  getting  in  trouble  for  selling  food  in 
class,  and  then  he  rarely  sold  food  after  that. 
class,  he  "did  it  out  of  his  heart."  She  explained  that  respondent  sold  food  to  students  who 
begged  him  for  food.  She  noted  that  if  a  student  was  "really  hungry,"  respondent  would  just 
give  the  student  the  food. 

D.  felt  that  when  respondent  sold  food  in 

40. 

Daniele  Moatakef  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  15  years.  She  has 
been  an  Assistant  Principal  at  Pomona  High  School  for  the  past  six  years.  Ms.  Moatakef 
testified  credibly  regarding  one  occasion  when  she  saw  respondent  selling  food  in  his 
classroom  during  the  2013-2014  school  year.  Ms.  Moatakef  was  on  a  walk-through  of 
respondent's  classroom  with  Principal  Fasting  and  Ms.  Konop  when  she  observed  students 
exchanging  money  for  chips  with  respondent.  Ms.  Moatakef  told  Ms.  Konop  to  address  the 
situation  with  respondent.  According  to  Ms.  Moatakef,  teachers  are  never  allowed  to  sell 
food  in  the  classroom.  The  school  has  a  student  store  that  sells  food.  If  a  teacher  is  involved 
with  a  club,  there  is  paperwork  and  an  ASB  process  to  approve  the  food  items  sold  and 
where  the  food  is  sold.  Ms.  Moatakef  testified  that  a  teacher  is  not  allowed  to  sell  food  on 
campus  without  approval,  even  if  the  student  begs  the  teacher  for  food. 

41. 

At  this  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  he  sold  food  to  students  during  the 
four  school  years  at  issue.  According  to  respondent,  Ms.  Konop  explained  to  him  that  the 
proper  way  to  sell  food  was  to  form  a  club,  which  he  did  (1.e.,  the  Science  Club)  in  the  2013- 
2014  school  year.  Respondent  testified  that  he  started  the  Science  Club  so  that  he  could  raise 
money  to  buy  animal  specimens  and  utensils  (e.g.,  forceps  and  scalpels)  for  dissections 
performed  by  students  in  his  classes.  After  the  Science  Club  was  formed,  respondent 
understood  that  he  could  sell  food  before  school,  after  school,  and  during  lunch  and  break 
times,  but  he  was  not  allowed  to  sell  food  during  instructional  time.  He  also  understood  that 
money  from  food  sales  had  to  be  spent  on  the  students.  Respondent  testified  that  he  sold 
food  in  his  classroom  when  instruction  was  not  going  on. 
respondent  testified  he  also  gave  food  to  students.  Respondent  testified  the  members  of  the 
Science  Club  voted  on  the  items  to  be  sold.  Respondent  testified  the  Science  Club  sold 
Hagen-Daz  ice  cream  (from  Costco),  chips  (from  Smart  N  Final),  chimichangas,  water, 
Gatorade,  and  Cup  O'  Noodles.  The  food  was  stored  in  the  stockroom  of  respondent's 

In  addition  to  selling  food, 

11

  

classroom,  where  he  also  had  a  refrigerator.  He  testified  that  none  of  the  money  from  the 
food  sales  was  retained  for  his  personal  use. 

42. 

The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  by 

selling  food  to  students  during  the  four  school  years  at  issue  in  this  proceeding.  The 
District's  evidence  established  that  authorization  or  approval  by  ASB  and  Ms.  Konop  for 
food  sales  on  campus  is  given  to  the  student  club,  not  individual  teachers.  Further,  the 
evidence  was  clear  that  authorization  for  a  student  club  to  sell  food  allowed  the  club  to  sell 
only  during  designated  days  and  times  assigned  to  the  club.  Here,  respondent  was  routinely 
selling  food  that  he  stored  in  the  stockroom  of  his  classroom.  It  appears  to  the  Commission 
that  respondent  formed  the  Science  Club  as  a  pretext  so  that  he  could  continue  to  sell  food  to 
students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent's  explanation  that  he  formed  the  Science  Club  to  raise 
funds  to  buy  animal  specimens  and  utensils  used  to  teach  dissection  in  his  biology  and 
anatomy  classes  was  not  convincing.  The  Commission  finds  that  funding  to  purchase 
specimens  and  utensils  for  teaching  dissection  is  a  budgeting  matter  that  is  more 
appropriately  addressed  through  the  school's  administration,  similar  to  funding  of  student 
textbooks,  and  not  by  fundraising  activities  of  a  student  club.  The  school  and  the  District  are 
responsible  to  address  funding  issues  related  to  purchasing  materials  necessary  to  teach  the 
curriculum. 

2014-2015  School  Year 

Student  Witnesses   

43. 

G.  was  a  ninth  grade  student  in  respondent's  biology  class  in  the  2014- 

2015  school  year.  She  was  also  an  eleventh  grade  student  respondent's  anatomy  & 
physiology  class  in  the  2016-2017  school  year.  oma  O.  was  a  twelfth  grade  student  in 
respondent's  anatomy  &  physiology  class  during  the  2014-2015  school  year. 

G.  and 
O.  each  testified  credibly  regarding  their  experience  in  respondent's  classes  during  the 

2014-2015  school  year.  Although  they  testified  regarding  inappropriate  conduct  by 
respondent  in  the  classroom,  they  also  testified  to  matters  that  reflected  favorably  on 
respondent.  Neither  of  them  demonstrated  an  inherent  bias  against  respondent  to  affect  their 
credibility. 

Charges  6  and  7 

44. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  6,  that  during  the  2014-2015  school 

year,  despite  the  District's  previous  warnings  and  directives  regarding  procedures  for 
approval  to  sell  items  to  students  for  fundraising  and  the  legal  restrictions  on  selling  food  to 
students,  respondent  continued  to  sell  food  to  students  in  direct  violation  of  the  District's 
prior  directives,  the  school's  nutrition  laws,  and  applicable  fundraising  regulations. 
Testimony  by am  G.  and oma  O.  established  that  respondent  sold  food  in  their 
respective  classes  during  the  2014-2015  school  year. 

12

  

45.  _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  7,  that  during  the  2014-2015  school 

year,  respondent  encouraged  students  to  be  dishonest  if  they  were  asked  where  they  acquired 
the  food  he  sold  to  them,  telling 
to  that  effect.  According  to 
them  food  because  teachers  were  not  allowed  to  sell  to  students. 
respondent  encouraged  students  to  keep  it  to  themselves  that  he  had  sold  them  food. 

the  students  to  say  they  brought  it  from  home  or  something 

that  respondent  sold 
G.  testified  that 

G.,  the  students  knew  not  to  say 

Charge  8 

46. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2014-2015  school  year,  respondent 

continued  to  engage  in  inappropriate  conduct,  despite  prior  directives,  as  alleged  in  Charges 
8a  through  8e  and  Charges  81  through  8m.  The  District's  evidence  was  insufficient  to 
establish  the  allegations  of  Charges  8f,  8g,  and  8h. 

47. 

(A)  During  the  2014-2015  school  year,  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate 

conduct,  despite  prior  directives,  as  follows.  Respondent  washed  his  hands  in  the  classroom 
sink  and  dried  his  wet  hands  on  students'  backs  and  shoulders.  He  hugged  female  students 
and  male  students.  Respondent  told  racial  jokes  and  made  racial  comments  about  all  races, 
not  just  one  group.  He  also  told  gay  jokes  and  teased  students  about  being  gay.  For 
example,  when  a  student  wore  a  shirt  that  said  "GAP"  (the  name  of  the  clothing  store), 
respondent  joked  that  it  meant  "gay  ass  person."  Respondent  also  told  sexual  jokes  and 
joked  that  he  was  hiding  pornography  on  his  classroom  computer.  Respondent  joked  about 
his  ass  and  used  the  phrase  "fuck  you  in  the  ass." 

(B)  Respondent's  inappropriate  conduct  also  included  the  following.  He  used 
profanity  during  class  and  towards  students  including,  but  not  limited  to,  "fuck,"  "fuck  you," 
"asshole,"  "bitch,"  and  "broke  asses."  He  frequently  used  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky"  and  to 
such  an  extent  that  Diego  O.  thought  "sucky  sucky"  was  respondent's  catch  phrase. 
Respondent  made  comments  about  his  penis.  He  joked  about  his  "big  penis."  He  also  talked 
about  penis  enlargement  and  how  a  penis  can  be  stretched  out  a  certain  way;  the  comment 
had  no  relation  to  a  class  lesson.  Respondent  talked  about  how  he  liked  "big  boobs"  in 
women,  and  also  talked  about  his  wife's  body  and  her  big  boobs.  Respondent  commented  on 
the  physical  appearance  of  women  and  female  students.  For  example,  he  complimented 
female  students'  appearance  and  told  them  they  were  "looking  good  today"  or  he  called  them 
"beautiful."  Respondent  asked  students  about  their  relationship  (dating)  status.  During 
instructional  time,  respondent  used  the  classroom  computer  to  show  photos  and  videos  of  his 
family  or  when  he  was  on  vacation,  none  of  which  was  related  to  a  class  lesson.  Diego  O. 
testified  that  respondent  showed  his  personal  photos  and  videos  on  one  or  two  occasions. 

48. 

The  Commission  found  that  no  mitigation  or  excuse  was  established  for 

respondent's  inappropriate  conduct  described  above.  For  example,  there  was  no  excuse  for 
his  use  of  profanity  and  inappropriate  language  in  the  classroom  or  his  offensive  jokes  and 
comments.  Respondent  testified  that  he  showed  pictures  of  his  family  to  his  classes  as  a  way 
to  connect  with  his  students.  He  showed  pictures  of  his  family  on  vacation  and  pictures  of 
his  family  who  live  in  Nigeria.  Of  the  55  minute  class  period,  he  estimated  that  he  spent  up 

13

to  seven  to  10  minutes  showing  his  personal  pictures.  He  showed  his  personal  pictures  one 
to  two  times  per  month.  The  Commission  found  that  respondent's  display  of  personal 
pictures  was  not  an  appropriate  use  of  instructional  time,  even  if  the  purpose  was  to  connect 
with  his  students.  Respondent  testified  that  he  hugged  students  sideways,  not  face-to-face. 
He  hugged  female  students  and  male  students,  but  not  often.  Because  respondent  had  been 
directed  to  refrain  from  any  physical  contact  with  students,  the  hugs  were  still  inappropriate 
whether  they  were  face-to-face  or  sideways. 

Charge  9 

49. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2014,  2015  school  year,  respondent  failed  to 

exercise  good  judgment  in  the  performance  of  his  duties  and  failed  to  maintain  appropriate 
professional  boundaries  with  students,  when  he  provided  rides  to  students  in  his  personal 
vehicle  without  school  or  parental  permissions  or  notifications,  as  alleged  in  Charges  9a,  9b, 
and  9c. 

50. 

(A)  On  April  30,  2015,  respondent  left  the  staff  parking  lot  at  lunch  time  with 

four  female  students  1n  his  personal  vehicle,  and  he  returned  to  campus  near  the  end  of  the 
lunch  period  without  the  female  students.  A  campus  security  officer,  Tiawan  Hemmans,  had 
observed  respondent's  conduct  and  radioed  Principal  Fasting  when  he  saw  respondent  return 
to  campus  alone.  Upon  receiving  the  radio  call  from  security  officer  Hemmans,  Principal 
Fasting  contacted  respondent  in  his  classroom,  where  he  was  starting  to  teach  his  class. 
Respondent  identified  the  four  female  students  and  told  Principal  Fasting  he  had  dropped 
them  off  at  the  Wingstop  restaurant,  which  was  located  in  a  nearby  shopping  mall,  a  part  of 
which  bordered  the  north  side  of  the  campus.  Principal  Fasting  went  to  the  restaurant  but  did 
not  find  the  four  students  there.  The  students'  parents  were  notified  and  asked  to  call  their 
students  on  their  cell  phones  to  determine  their  locations.  The  four  students  returned  to 
campus  near  the  end  of  the  class  period  that  followed  the  lunch  period,  after  receiving  phone 
calls  from  their  parents  and  friends  that  the  school  was  looking  for  them.  The  four  students 
confirmed  to  Principal  Fasting  that  respondent  dropped  them  off  at  the  mall  for  lunch  but  did 
not  give  them a  ride  back  to  school. 

(B)  Principal  Fasting  spoke  with  respondent  after  school  on  April  30,  2015, 

regarding  the  incident  with  the  four  students.  During  that  conversation,  respondent's 
response  to  the  situation  was  "what's  the  problem,"  "what's  wrong,”  "I  don’t'  see  a  problem," 
and  "I  just  drove  them  to  get  lunch."  Principal  Fasting  explained  some  of  the  possible 
scenarios  that  could  occur  by  providing  rides  to  students  during  school  hours,  and  how 
respondent's  situation  became  more  precarious  because  he  left  the  four  students  at  an  off- 
campus  location  unsupervised  during  school  hours.  Principal  Fasting  strongly  advised 
respondent  to  refrain  from  providing  rides  to  students,  especially  during  school  hours. 

(C)  Respondent  does  not  dispute  that  he  drove  the  four  students  in  his  personal 
vehicle  to  the  Wingstop  restaurant  and  returned  to  campus  without  the  students.  He  admitted 
that  he  did  not  have  authorization  from  the  administration  to  drive  the  students  off  campus. 
Respondent  testified  that  the  four  students  asked  him  for  a  ride  as  he  was  leaving  his 

14

classroom  to  pick  up  his  lunch  at  Wingstop,  which  he  had  ordered  on  the  phone.  He  testified 
the  students  showed  him  they  had  a  pass.  Respondent  explained  he  did  not  wait  for  the 
students  to  get  their  lunches  because  he  did  not  want  to  be  late  coming  back  from  lunch  and 
leave  the  students  in  his  next  class  waiting  outside  the  classroom. 

(D)  Respondent's  explanations  do  not  mitigate  or  excuse  his  conduct.  No 

evidence  was  presented  to  corroborate  respondent's  claim  that  the  four  students  had  lunch 
passes.  Even  assuming,  arguendo,  the  students  had  lunch  passes,  the  lunch  passes  would  not 
authorize  respondent  to  drive  the  students  off-campus  in  his  personal  vehicle.  Respondent 
needed  authorization  from  the  school  and  the  District,  which  he  admitted  he  did  not  have. 
Respondent's  justification  for  leaving  the  four  students  at  the  restaurant  was  that  he  did  not 
want  to  be  late  for  his  next  class.  His  statements  to  Principal  Fasting  that  he  saw  no  problem 
with  his  conduct  are  concerning  because  they  reflect  a  failure  to  appreciate  and  understand 
the  obligation  of  the  school  and  its  teachers  to  provide  supervision  of  students  during  the 
school  day.  Respondent  left  four  female  students  at  an  off-campus  location  unsupervised 
during  the  school  day.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  "exercised  poor  judgment  in 
transporting  the  four  female  students  and  leaving  them  at  the  'Wingstop'  restaurant  so  they 
could  receive  their  food  order."  (Respondent's  Brief,  p.  6.) 

51. 

(A)  On  May  11,  2015,  respondent  attempted  to  transport.  a  male  student  off 

campus  in  his  personal  vehicle  during  lunch.  The  male  student  was  i”  A.  Respondent 
attempted  to  drive  his  car  from  the  staff  parking  lot  with  i”  A.  as  a  passenger.  Security 
officer  Hemmans  saw  respondent  and  the  student  get  into  the  car  and  start  driving  to  leave 
the  parking  lot.  Hemmans  radioed  Principal  Fasting  of  the  situation.  At  Principal  Fasting's 
direction,  security  officer  Hemmans  closed  the  exit  gate  of  the  parking  lot  and  prevented 
respondent's  car  from  leaving  and  told  cc 
The  next  day,  on  May  12,  2015,  Principal  Fasting  spoke  with  respondent  and  directed  him 
that  he  was  not  to  provide  transportation  to  students  during  school  hours. 

A.  to  exit  the  vehicle  and  remain  on  campus. 

(B)  Respondent  and 

A.,  the  male  student,  both  testified  that  respondent 

    

father  met  respondent  in  the  staff  parking  lot  and  dropped 

A.  in  his  car.  Rather,  both  testified  that  they  went  to 
parking  lot  to  retrieve  i's  project  for  his  Spanish  class. 

was  not  attempting  to  drive 
respondent's  car  in  the  staff 
They  both  testified  that . 
off Cis  project  with  respondent,  and  respondent  placed  the  project  in  his  car. 
Respondent  and 
retrieve  the  project  when  they  were  approached  by  security  officer  Hemmans. 
testified  he  did  not  go  inside  respondent's  car;  respondent  grabbed  his  project  and  gave  it  to 
him.  Respondent  testified 
A.  and  respondent  testified  the  car  never  moved  from  the  parking  lot. 
project.  Both 
However,  the  Commission  finds  Hemmans'  testimony  to  the  contrary  to  be  more  credible,  as 
he  ms  a  more  credible  and  sincere  demeanor.  Respondent  explained  he  did  not  take 

A.  testified  they  were  going  to  respondent's  car  at  lunch  time  to 

A.  may  have  stepped  in  or  leaned  into  his  car  to  get  the 

im” 

A. 

's  project  to  his  classroom  because  of  its  size  and  there  were  already  too  many  things 
in  respondent's  classroom  and  stockroom.  Respondent  estimated  the  size  of  the  project  was 
approximately  three  feet  by  three  feet. 

15

  
    

  

  

(C)  Principal  Fasting 

testified  that,  during  his  conversation  with  respondent 
's  family  and  the 

regarding  the  incident  with  a  A.,  respondent  stated  he  knew 
family  gave  him  permission  to  give  rides  to 
he  gave  rides  to  school.  At  this  hearing, 
testified  it  was  "not  true"  that  his  parents 
testified  he  had  an  off  campus  pass 
gave  respondent  permission  to  give  him  rides. 
during  his  senior  year  (i.e.,  the  2014-2015  school  year).  He  testified  that  the  only  times  he 
left  campus  with  respondent  was  during  his  freshman  year. 

.  He  also  identifie 

   

   

    

as  a  student 

Zi 

days  earlier  (on  April  30,  2015)  that  he  was  not  to 

(D)  The  Commission  finds  that  the  explanation  of  the  May  11,  2015  incident 
A.  was  not  credible.  The  more  persuasive  explanation 
A.  aride  at  lunch  time  in  his  personal  vehicle, 

proffered  by  respondent  and 
is  that  respondent  attempted  to  give 
even  though  he  had  been  advised  11 
rides  to  students  during  school  hours.  Even  assuming,  arguendo,  that  respondent  and 
A.  went  to  respondent's  car  in  the  staff  parking  lot  to  retrieve 
's  project  in  the  staff  parking 
showed  poor  judgment  in  agreeing  to  accept  delivery  of 
lot  and  then  going  to  his  car  at  lunch  time  with  the  student  to  retrieve  the  project.  The  project 
could  have  been  left  in  the  main  office,  which  was  a  logical  place  for  the  parent  to  drop  off 
the  project.  No  credible  evidence  was  presented  as  to  why  the  project  could  not  have  been 
left  in  the  main  office.  Further,  respondent  could  have  taken  the  project  to  his  classroom, 
which  has  a  stockroom,  instead  of  storing  the  project  in  his  car. 

's  project,  respondent 

   

give 

52. 

Respondent  was  issued  a  Letter  of  Reprimand  dated  May  13,  2015,  for  the 

incidents  on  April  30,  2015,  and  May  11,  2015.  (Exh.  5.)  The  Letter  of  Reprimand  served  as 
a  warning  regarding  his  conduct  providing  rides  to  students  during  the  school  day  without 
school  or  parental  permissions  or  notification.  The  Letter  of  Reprimand  included  a  directive 
that,  effective  immediately,  respondent  was  to  not  provide  transportation  in  his  personal 
vehicle  to  any  students  during  school  hours.  Respondent  received  a  copy  of  the  Letter  of 
Reprimand  on  May  18,  2015.  No  evidence  was  presented  of  respondent  engaging  in  similar 
conduct  subsequent  to  the  May  13,  2015  Letter  of  Reprimand. 

2015-2016  School  Year 

Student  Witnesses 

53. 

|  The  Commission  heard  testimony  from  witnesses  who  were  students  in 

respondent's  classes  during  the  2015-2016  school  year. 
and  yo  M.  were  11th  grade  students  in  respondent's  anatomy  &  "il  class.* 
These  11th  grade  students  graduated  from  Pomona  High  School  in  2017. 

P.M.  and 
did  not 
L.  were  9th  grade  students  in  respondent's  biology  class.  The  evidence 
specify  whether  any  these  six  students  were  in  respondent's  class  during  the  same  class 
period.  The  Commission  found  the  six  students,  generally  speaking,  testified  credibly 
regarding  their  observations  and  experiences  as  students  in  respondent's  classes.  They 

Ss, 
   

     

L<. 

     

M., 

  

;  Kim  L.C.  and im  C.  were  called  as  witnesses  by  the  District. 

a7  M.  and 

i 

M.  were  called  as  witnesses  by  respondent. 

  

  

  

  

  

16

appeared  to  put  forth  their  best  efforts  to  answer  questions  in  a  truthful  and  straightforward 
manner. 

Charge  10 

54. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  10,  that  respondent  told  his  students  at 
the  beginning  of  the  2015-2016  school  year  that  he  joked  around a  lot  and  told  them,  "if  you 
are  going  to  get  offended,  please  leave  my  class"  or  words  to  that  effect.  By  this  conduct, 
respondent  improperly  circumvented  his  responsibility  to  establish  and  maintain  a  learning 
environment  that  was  physically,  intellectually,  and  emotionally  safe,  and  put  the 
responsibility  on  students  to  either  endure  the  environment  or  leave  his  class. 

55. 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  told  the  students  he  told  jokes  sometimes,  his 
jokes  may  not  be  funny,  but  it  was  "all  for  a  good  mood."  Respondent  denied  that  he  told 
students  not  to  be  offended  by  his  jokes,  but  that  denial  is  inconsistent  with  evidence  of  his 
deposition  testimony  where  he  admitted  that  he  probably  told  students  not  to  be  offended  by 
his  jokes.  Respondent  also  denied  telling  students  they  should  leave  the  class  if  they  were 
going  to  be  offended  by  his  jokes.  The  Commission  finds  that  denial  was  not  credible 
because  it  is  inconsistent  with  a  similar  announcement  he  made  to  his  classes  at  the  start  of 
the  following  school  year  (1.e.,  2016-2017)  that  students  should  leave  "if  they  can't  take 
jokes."  (See  Findings  84-85,  below.)  The  totality  of  the  evidence  supports  a  reasonable 
inference  that  respondent  made  similar  announcements  in  both  school  years. 

56.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  11,  that  during  the  2015-2016  school 

year,  before  making  inappropriate  racial  or  ethnic  remarks,  respondent  asked  if  anyone  in  the 
class  was  of  the  race  or  ethnicity  he  was  about  to  disparage,  and  then  proceeded  with  his 
inappropriate  remarks.  For  example, Ym  P.M.,  a  ninth  grade  student  in  respondent's 
biology  class,  testified  credibly  that  respondent  told  racial  jokes  about  Mexicans  and 
Muslims  and  would  ask  if  there  were  any  Mexicans  or  Muslims  in  the  room  before  telling  the 
joke.  Respondent  denied  that  he  told  racial  jokes  or  made  derogatory  statements  about  racial 
groups.  The  denial  was  not  credible  and  easily  refuted  by  the  overwhelming  student 
testimony  to  the  contrary. 

Charge  11 

Charge  12 

57. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  engaged 

in  inappropriate  conduct,  despite  prior  directives,  as  alleged  in  Charges  12a  through  12k. 

58. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12a,  that  respondent  washed  his  hands 
in  the  classroom  sink  and  dried  them  on  students'  backs  and  shoulders.  Respondent  dried  his 
hands  on  students  every  day.  One  student,  m7  C.,  testified  she  felt  uncomfortable  when 
respondent  dried  his  hands  on  her  back.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  dried  his  hands  on 
students  by  lightly  patting  his  hands  on  their  shoulders. 

17

59. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12b,  that  respondent  hugged  female 
students  and  also  hugged  male  students.  Respondent's  testimony  that  he  hugged  boys  and 
girl  sideways,  not  face-to-face,  did  not  mitigate  or  excuse  his  conduct.  He  was  given a 
directive  to  refrain  from  any  physical  contact  with  students. 

60. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12c,  that  respondent  told  racial  jokes 

and  made  racial  comments  about  Mexicans  and  Muslims.  Respondent  denied  the  allegation. 

61. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12d,  that  respondent  regularly  used 

profanity  while  providing  instruction  and  towards  students,  including  "mother  fuckers," 
"fuck,"  the  N-word,  "shit,"  "broke  ass,"  "ass,"  and  "bitch."  It  was  also  established  that 
respondent  used  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky,"  which  students  thought  referred  to  penis  sucking 
L.C.  testified  that  respondent  said  "come  over  and  sucky  sucky,"  which 
and  oral  sex. 
he  thought  meant  sucking  i  Cte  penis  as  a  joke. 
P.M.  thought  "sucky  sucky" 
yi 
C.  testified  respondent's  use  of  profanity  made  her  feel  "a 
referred  to  penis  sucking. 
bit  uncomfortable."  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  used  profanity  to  explain 
content  in  his  classes  (e.g.,  "fuck"  to  describe  copulation  between  two  animals)  but  he  denied 
using  profanity  maliciously  or  in  a  humorous  way. 
profanity  but  "not  intentionally,"  such  as,  for  example,  when  respondent  said,  "shit"  after 
hitting  his  foot  on  something. 

M.  testified  that  respondent  used 

62. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12e,  that  during  instructional  time, 

respondent  used  the  classroom  computer  to  show  personal  pictures  unrelated  to  the  class 
lesson,  talked  about  his  personal  life,  and  talked  on  the  phone  to  his  wife  and  others.  This 
finding  was  established  by  the  student-witness  testimony. 

(B)  Ya  P.M.  testified  that  respondent  showed  pictures  and  videos  that  had 

nothing  to  do  with  the  biology  class.  For  example,  respondent  played  videos  of  songs  from 
YouTube  (e.g.,  a  music  video  by  singer  Celia  Cruz). 
    
respondent  used  the  computer  to  show  photos  and  videos  to  the  class  unrelated  to  biology. 

L.  similarly  testified  that 

P.M.  ae C.  testified  that  respondent  often  took  phone  calls  during  class. 
P.M.,  the  phone  calls  lasted  15  to  20  minutes  and  students  did  class 

According  to 
work  while  respondent  was  on  the  phone.  a  M.  and 
respondent  talked  about  his  family  in  class.  He  was  a  "proud  dad"  who  spoke  favorably 
about  his  children  and  his  wife. 

M.  testified  that 

(C)  Respondent  testified  that  he  used  the  classroom  computer  to  play  music 
during  class.  He  played  a  song  by  singer  Celia  Cruz  during  class,  while  the  students  were 
working,  because  the  students  asked  him  to  play  music.  He  testified  that,  since  2013,  he 
played  music  during  class  "many  times."  He  estimates  that,  in  one  semester,  he  played  music 
during  class  15  times.  He  said  it  was  common  to  play  music  in  his  first  period  class  while 
the  students  were  working.  Respondent  testified  that  no  one  from  the  District  told  him  he 
was  not  allowed  to  play  music  during  class. 

18

     

  

  

(D)  Respondent  testified  that  he  talked  to  his  students  about  his  dating  life  in 

college  because  his  students  asked  him  about  it.  According  to  respondent,  the  students  knew 
he  was  Muslim,  there  is  a  stereotype  that  Muslims  don't  date,  so  the  students  were  curious. 
Respondent  also  spoke  to  his  students  about  balancing  work  and  fun  in  college.  When 
students  asked  him  about  college,  respondent  told  them  that  students  in  college  must  have  a 
balanced  life.  He  knew  students  who  regretted  that  all  they  did  in  college  was  work  and  did 
not  take  time  to  have  fun.  Respondent  denied  that  he  told  his  students  he  was  a  "player." 

(E)  Respondent  testified  that,  during  the  2015-2016  school  year,  he  showed 

short  video  clips  and  memes  to  the  class,  which  he  described  as  quick  and  funny.  He 
testified  that  some  of  the  videos  were  related  to  a  class  lesson,  and  some  were  not.  He 
testified  that  he  showed  the  funny  videos  on  Mondays.  He  did  not  show  any  videos  with 
sexual  content. 

63. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12f,  that  respondent  discussed 

inappropriate  subject  matter,  including  partying  a  lot  during  college,  being  a  "player," 
women  he  dated  before  marriage,  and  his  sex  life. 
It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  12f,  that  respondent  discussed  drinking  alcohol  when  he  was  away  from  work.  This 
finding  was  established  by  the  student-witness  testimony. 

(B)  The  District's  witnesses  testified  credibly  in  support  of  Charge  12f. 

L.C.  testified  that  respondent  called  himself  a  "player"  and  talked  about  partying  in  college 
and  the  women  he  used  to  date. 
girlfriends  before  he  was  married. 
college  life,  that  he  did  a  lot  of  partying  and  was  a  "player,"  meaning  that  he  dated  multiple 
women. 
mean  that  respondent  dated  different  girls. 

L.  testified  that  respondent  called  himself  a  "player,"  which 

P.M.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  his 

C.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  his 

   

m7  took  to 

(C) 

M.,  who  testified  as  respondent's  witness,  testified  that  respondent 
spoke  to  him  about  college  and  shared  his  experiences.  =  M.  testified  that  respondent 
told  him  he  had  a  lot  of  fun  in  college  and  told  him  about  the  ay  he  dated  in  college,  but 
M.,  who  also  testified  as 
respondent  did  not  tell  him  about  drinking  in  college. 
respondent's  witness,  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  partying  when  he  was  in  college, 
and  also  spoke  about  women  he  dated  before  he  was  married. 

64. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12g,  that  respondent  disclosed  to 
the  entire  class  which  students  were  not  performing  well.  The  evidence  further  established 
that  respondent  also  disclosed  to  the  class  which  students  were  performing  well.  However,  it 
was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12g,  that  respondent  disclosed  which  students  were 
not  completing  their  work. 

19

  

  

(B) 

|  L.C.  testified  that  respondent's  "famous  kiss"?  was  when  a  student 

got  a  perfect  score,  respondent  gave  the  student  a  kiss  on  the  cheek. 
that  respondent  announced  who  did  well  and  who  did 
students  who  did  poorly;  he  just  announced  them. 
well  in  class,  respondent  had  the  class  applaud  for  the  student.  Ifa  student  did  poorly, 
respondent  told  the  student  to  see  him  after  class. Ym  P.M.  testified  that  respondent 
announced  grades  in  class.  He  announced  the  students  who  did  well. 
that  the  "famous  kiss"  was  when  respondent  got  close  to  a  student's  face  and  blew a  kiss  to 
the  student. 
did  poorly. 

L.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  students  who  did  well  and  who 

poorly  in  class.  He  did  not  tease 

M.  testified  that  if  a  student  did 

P.M.  testified 

|  L.C.  also  testified 

(C)  a7  M.  testified  that  if  a  student  did  well  on  a  test,  respondent  would 

call  them  out  and  the  other  students  clapped  for  them.  Respondent  also  gave  the  student  a 
chocolate  Hershey's  kiss. 
M.  testified  the  "famous  kiss"  was  when,  as  a  joke,  if  a 
student  did  not  do  well  on  a  test  but  still  wanted  a  chocolate  Hershey's  kiss,  respondent  had 
the  student  come  to  the  front  of  the  class  as  if  he  were  going  to  give  the  student  the  chocolate 
but,  suddenly,  would  just  pout  his  lips  as  if  he  was  going  to  give  the  student  a  kiss. 
According  to 
testified  that  respondent made  a  "kissy  face"  and  pouted  his  lips,  but  he  did  not  get  close  to 
students.  Respondent  made  kissing  noises.  Students  who  did  well  got  a  chocolate  Hershey's 
kiss. 
based  on  talking  to  each  other,  not  from  respondent. 

M.  testified  she  and  other  students  knew  which  students  didn't  score  well 

M.,  respondent  never  actually  kissed  the  student. 

aa  M. 

(D)  Respondent  testified  that  if  a  student  did  well,  he  recognized  the 

achievement  by  having  the  other  students  clap  for  the  student.  Sometimes,  respondent  gave 
the  student  a  candy  bar  or  an  ice  cream.  If  the  student  continued  to  do  well,  respondent  gave 
the  student  a  certificate.  If  a  student  also  showed  improvement,  he  might  also  call  the 
student's  parent  to  report  the  improvement.  Some  of  the  recognition  was  in  front  of  the  entire 
class.  Respondent  testified  that  if  a  student  did  poorly,  he  did  not  announce  that  to  the  class. 
He  passed  the  student  a  note  to  see  him  at  lunch  or  afterschool.  Respondent  testified  he  did 
not  shame  students  in  front  of  the  class.  Respondent  testified  he  had  never  been  told  that  he 
was  not  allowed  to  recognize  student  achievement  and  performance  in  this  manner. 

(E)  Respondent  testified  that  he  shared  students'  grades  with  the  class.  He 
projected  the  grades  by  student  identification  (ID)  number.  He  also  posted  grades  on  the 
classroom  door  by  student  ID  number.  Respondent  testified  that  he  projected  the  grades 
every  week,  on  Fridays.  He  posted  the  grades  once  a  month  or  every  two  weeks.  The 
students'  names  were  never  shown.  Respondent  testified  he  had  never  been  told  that  he  1s  not 
allowed  to  project  or  post  grades  by  student  ID  numbers.  He  admitted  he  did  not  ask 
students  ahead  of  time  for  permission  to  recognize  their  class  performance  or  grades.  He 
testified  that  it  is  a  common  practice  in  the  teaching  profession  to  recognize  students  who  are 
doing  well. 

  

>  The  Statement  of  Charges  refers  to  respondent's  "famous  kisses"  in  Charge  19d, 

which  pertains  to  the  2016-2017  school  year. 

20

    

    

  

(F)  The  Commission  finds  respondent  acted  inappropriately  when  he  disclosed 

to  the  entire  class  which  students  were  not  performing  well.  Calling  attention  to  students 
who  are  not  performing  well  does  not  create  a  good  learning  environment.  It  is  contrary  to 
the  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Teaching  Profession,  Principle  I,  subdivision  (g),  which  provides, 
in  part:  "The  educator  works  to  stimulate  the  spirit  of  inquiry,  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
and  understanding,  and  the  thoughtful  formulation  of  worthy  goals.  In  fulfilling  these  goals, 
the  educator:  .. 
.  [§|  (g)  Shall  keep  in  confidence  information  that  has  been  obtained  in  the 
course  of  professional  service,  unless  disclosure  serves  professional  purposes  or  is  required 
by  law."  (Exh.  27,  p.  255.) 

65. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12h,  that  respondent  told  his  students 

that  he  preferred  women  with  large  breasts  and  discussed  other  physical  attributes  that  he 
found  attractive  in  women. 
women. Ym  P.M.  testified  that  respondent  said  he  liked  breasts  and  butts  in  women. 

L.C.  testified  that  respondent  said  he  liked  a  "big  ass"  in 

66. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  121,  that  respondent  told  sexual 

jokes  and  made  sexual  comments.  For  example,  stating  words  to  the  effect  of  "choke  on 
these"  to  students  while  grabbing  his  testicles  and  penis.  This  finding  was  based  on  the 
credible  testimony  of  the  District's  student-witnesses. 

|  L.C.  testified  that  respondent  made  jokes  about  having  porn  on  his 
computer  and  also  talked  about  watching  porn.  Respondent  also  said,  "sucky  sucky,"  which 

(B) 

L.C.  thought  was  a  joke  about  sucking  respondent's  penis. 

|  L.C.  testified  that 

respondent  said  "choke  on  these"  while  holding  his  testicles  and  penis. Ym  P.M. 
testified  that  respondent  said,  "sucky  sucky,"  which  she  thought  referred  to  penis  sucking. 
She  testified  that  respondent  commented  that  the  penises  of  Black  men  were  bigger  than 
Asian  men's  penises,  which  he  said  were  shorter. Ym  P.M.  testified  respondent's 
comment  made  her  feel  disgusted.  Dp 
used  his  computer,  "don't  look  at  my  porn." 

L.  testified  that  respondent  told  students  who 

67.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12),  that  respondent  made  comments 
L.C.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  the  size  of  his  penis.  The 

about  his  penis.  Ki 
comment  was  not  related  to  any  class  lesson.  Respondent  also  made  a  comment,  "oh  I'm 
hard,"  in  reference  to  his  penis. 

68.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12k,  that  respondent  talked  about 

smoking  marijuana. Ym  P.M.  testified  that  respondent  said  that  he  smoked  weed 
(marijuana),  but  he  did  not  say  where  he  smoked  it.  She  testified  respondent,  not  the 
students,  started  the  conversation  about  marijuana. 
talked  about  marijuana,  which  respondent  referred  to  as  "herbs."  Respondent  said,  "I  got 
herbs."  Respondent  did  not  talk  about  smoking  herbs  but  did  talk  about  having  herbs  when 
he  went  hiking. 

L.  testified  that  respondent 

/// 

21

  

Charge  13 

69. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  engaged 
in  disrespectful  and  demeaning  conduct  toward  students  in  front  of  their  peers,  as  alleged  in 
Charges  13d,  13h,  and  131.  However,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  respondent 
engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charges  13a,  13b,  13,c,  13e,  13f,  and  13g  during  the  2015- 
2016  school  year. 

a7 

70. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  13d,  that  respondent  called  a  student 
M.  testified  that  respondent  called  him  a  "broke  ass"  after  he  spent  all 

"broke  ass." 
the  money  he  earned  from  his  job  at  Carl's  Jr.  to  buy  a  motorcycle. 
offended  by  the  comment  and  thought  it  made  sense. 
calling  other  students  "broke  ass."  The  allegation  in  Charge  13d,  that  respondent  called  a 
female  student  "broke  ass"  because  her  family  shopped  at  the  99  Cent  Store,  was  not 
established  by  the  evidence. 

a7  M.  was  not  aware  of  respondent 

M.  was  not 

a7 

71. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  13h,  that  respondent  disparaged 

homosexual  people  and  talked  about  them  having  sex.  For  example,  respondent  commented 
to  the  effect  of:  "Come  over  here  and  sucky  sucky"  to  a  student  who  was  "being  gay";  "Oh, 
you're  gay";  and  "Are  you  gay?"  Kim  L.C.  testified  that  respondent  said,  "come  over  and 
sucky  sucky,"  and  said  jokingly  "you're  gay"  or  "are  you  gay?" Om  L.  testified  that 
respondent  said,  "do  you  want  to  go  back  and  sucky  sucky?"  which  he  thought  referred  to 
oral  sex.  OZ  L.  testified  that  respondent  called  things  "gay,"  for  example,  he  would  say, 
"oh,  that's  gay." 

72. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  131,  that  respondent  attempted  to 

discourage  students  from  being  homosexual  by  making  a  comment  to  the  effect  that,  if  all  the 
women  were  on  one  island  and  all  the  men  were  on  another  island,  neither 
able  to  reproduce.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  credible  testimony  of 

group  would  be 

P.M. 

Charge  14 

73. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charges  14a,  14c,  14d,  and  14e,  that  during 

the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  repeatedly  engaged  in  conduct  and  made  statements 
objectifying  women,  and  demonstrating  a  lack  of  respect  for  women  and  gender  equality. 
However,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charges 
14b  and  14f  during  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

74. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  14c,  that  respondent  commented 

on  the  physical  appearance  of  women  and  female  students  by  saying,  for  example,  "you  look 
pretty  today,"  "she's  pretty,"  and  describing  some  female  students  as  having  nice  bodies.  It 
was  also  established  that  respondent  complimented  male  students  on  their  appearance. 

thought  were  "pretty." 

also  testified  that  respondent  complimented  male  students  on 

L.C.  testified  that  respondent  complimented  female  students  he 

(B)  Ki 

   

22

  

their  appearance. Om  L.  testified  that  respondent  complimented  female  students  on  their 
appearance,  calling  them  "pretty"  or  saying  "that  looks  nice  on  you."  He  testified  that 
respondent  complimented  both  male  and  female  students  on  their  outfits. Ym  P.M. 
testified  that  respondent  commented  on  the  appearance  of  female  students,  specifically,  if 
they  worked  out  and  had  a  nice  body  shape.  She  felt  respondent  went  over  the  line  by 
commenting  on  the  body  shape  of  female  students.  She  testified  that  respondent  called 
female  students  "pretty"  and  he  complimented  a  male  student  for  having  good  looking  shoes. 
P.M.  testified  that,  during  a  passing  period,  she  saw  respondent  "checking  out"  Miss 

Jones  (a  school  employee)  by  looking  at  her  body  up  and  down. 

75. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  14d,  that  respondent  told  students  he 

was  a  "player"  and  commented  to  the  effect  that  he  "got  all  the  girls"  or  "had  so  many  girls." 
This  finding  is  based  on  the  student  testimony  establishing  Charge  12f,  above. 

76.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  14e(1),  that  respondent  made  sexist 

comments  that  communicated  to  his  students,  especially  the  female  students,  that  he  did  not 
consider  men  and  women  to  be  equal. 
L.C.  testified  respondent  talked  about  the  roles 
of  men  and  women,  and  stated  his  opinion  that  men  and  women  were  not  equal. 
P.M.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  the  roles  of  men  and  women,  specifically,  that 
women  should  cook  and  clean,  and  men  should  earn  the  money. 
respondent  should  not  say  those  things  to  students. 

   

P.M.  felt 

77. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  14e(11),  that  on  one  occasion  in 

respondent's  seventh  period  class,  a  female  student  ( 
she  finished  taking  notes;  the  book  was  from  her  English  class. 
respondent  told  the  student  to  put  her  book  away  and  said  words  to  the  effect  that  reading 
was  not  going  to  get  her  anywhere.  The  student  testified  that  respondent's  comment  made 
her  feel  small  and  sad;  the  student  became  emotional  during  this  testimony.  Respondent 
denied  that  he  made  the  comment  to  the  student.  The  Commission  finds  the  student's 
testimony  was  credible  and  sufficient  to  establish  this  Charge.  Respondent's  comment  to  the 
student  was  inappropriate. 

C.)  took  out  a  book  to  read  after 
It  was  established  that 

78. 

The  District  presented  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  respondent 

engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charge  15  during  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

Charge  15 

Charge  16 

79. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  16,  that  on  March  22,  2016, 

respondent  instructed  one  student  to  hold  the  arms  of  another  student  behind  the  other 
student's  back,  while  respondent  reached  into  the  front  pockets  of  the  other  student's 
sweatshirt  and  removed  the  student's  ear  buds.  Respondent  held  the  ear  buds  as  collateral  for 
the  two  dollars  the  student  owed  for  an  ice  cream  respondent  gave  to  him.  When  Principal 
Fasting  discussed  the  incident  with  respondent,  respondent  expressed  there  was  nothing 

23

  

  

    

inappropriate  about  the  incident.  Respondent  was  issued  a  Letter  of  Reprimand  dated  March 
24,  2016,  which  was  based  in  part  on  the  March  22,  2016  incident.  (Exh.  6.) 

80. 

Assistant  Principal  Konop  testified  credibly  that  a  student  came  to  her  upset. 
The  student  reported  that  he  was  held  by  another  student  while  respondent  took  his  ear  buds 
because  respondent  said  he  owed  money  for  ice  cream.  After  speaking  with  the  student,  Ms. 
Konop  provided  coverage  for  respondent's  class  and  called  him  to  her  office.  Respondent 
admitted  that  he  had  one  student  hold  the  other  student,  because  the  student  owed  him 
money,  and  he  took  the  student's  ear  buds.  Ms.  Konop  told  respondent  he  could  not  engage 
in  such  conduct.  When  she  asked  respondent  how  he  would  feel  if  someone  held  his  own 
child,  respondent  answered  that  if  his  child  did  something  wrong,  there  would  be  nothing 
wrong  with  that.  Ms.  Konop  perceived  respondent's  answer  as  indicating  he  did  not  see  that 
he  did  anything  wrong.  Ms.  Konop  prepared  the  Letter  of  Reprimand.  (Exh.  6.) 

81. 

At  this  hearing,  respondent  admitted  that  he  directed  one  student  to  restrain 

another  student,  and  he  took  the  student's  earbuds  because  the  student  owed  the  Science  Club 
two  dollars  for  an  ice  cream.  Respondent  testified  he  was  "being  playful"  with  the  student. 
He  testified  that  if  he  wasn't  being  playful  with  the  student,  then  his  conduct  was  not 
respectful.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  testimony  that  he  was  "being  playful" 
did  not  excuse  or  mitigate  his  conduct  with  the  student. 

2016-2017  School  Year 

Student  Witnesses 

82. 

|The  Commission  heard  testimony  from  witnesses  who  were  students  in 

respondent's  classes  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  as  follows: 

Second  period  (anatomy):  iia  F. 

Third 
and 

period  (anatomy):  Vi 
M.  (fall  semester) 

   

M..,  A R.,  Co 

M., 

period  (anatomy): 
HV., 

Fifth 
   
     
Unspecified  class  period: 
Hl  M.  (fall  semester,  anatomy),  and 

   

C.-T; 

K...  _ M..,  Ya  ie 

C.,  and  Hi 

G: 

C.  (one  semester,  anatomy), 

|  A.  (biology). 

83. 

The  Commission's  findings  regarding  Charges  17  through  35,  set  forth  below, 

are  based  on  the  student-witness  testimony  taken  individually  and/or  in  combination. 

/// 

/// 

24

  

Charge  17 

84. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  17,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  2016- 
2017  school  year,  respondent  made  an  announcement  to  all  of  his  classes,  "I  joke  around  a 
lot  so  if  you  can't  take  jokes,  go  see  your  counselor  to  get  out  of  my  class,"  and  "if  you  are 
really  emotional,  you  shouldn't  take  this  class,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  Testimony  by  the 
student-witnesses  established  that  the  message  conveyed  by  respondent's  announcement  was 
that  students  should  switch  to  another  class  if  they  would  be  sensitive  to  or  offended  by 
respondent  making  jokes,  talking  about  "adult  things,"  or  using  cuss  words.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  told  his  classes  that  he  tells  jokes,  the  jokes  may  not  be  funny,  but  "it  was  all 
for  a  good  mood"  and  they  should  not  be  offended.  Respondent  denied  that  he  told  his 
students  that  if  they  did  not  like  his  jokes,  they  should  change  to  another  class. 

85. 

The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  announcement  improperly 

circumvented  his  responsibility  as  a  teacher  to  establish  and  maintain  a  learning  environment 
that  is  physically,  intellectually,  and  emotionally  safe,  and  put  the  responsibility  on  the 
students  to  either  endure  the  environment  or  leave  the  class.  i  did  not  think 
respondent  was  being  fair  because  she  was  looking  forward  to  taking  anatomy 
because  of  her  interest  in  becoming  an  emergency  medical  technician. 
it  was  unfair  that  students  had  to  put  up  with  respondent  or  leave  the  class,  because  she 
needed  to  take  the  class,  even  if  she  was  uncomfortable  with  respondent's  jokes  and 
comments.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  announcement,  when  viewed  in  the 
context  of  prior  directives  given  to  him,  was  an  attempt  to  avoid  or  preempt  potential 
complaints  about  his  vulgar  and  grossly  inappropriate  conduct. 

&  physiology 
C.T.  thought 

86.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  18,  that  during  the  2016-2017  school 
year,  respondent  attempted  to  avoid  potential  complaints  before  making  inappropriate  racial 
and  ethnic  remarks  by  asking  if  anyone  in  the  class  was  of  the  race  or  ethnicity  he  was  about 
to  disparage.  Respondent  then  proceeded  to  make  the  inappropriate  remarks.  For  example, 
M.  testified  that  when  respondent  made  racial  jokes,  he  first  asked  if  anyone  in  the 

   
class  was  a  member  of  the  racial  group.  Ya  T.  testified  that  respondent  told  racial  jokes 
about  Indian  people,  and  asked  if  there  were  any  Indians  in  the  room  before  telling  the  joke. 
At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  he  never  told  racial  jokes  or  made  any  derogatory 
statements  about  racial  groups.  The  Commission  does  not  find  respondent's  testimony 
credible. 

Charge  18 

Charge  19 

87. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  engaged 
in  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students  and  failed  to  respect  students’  personal  space, 
despite  prior  directives,  as  alleged  in  Charges  19a  through  19e. 

  

     

25

88. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  19a,  that  respondent  washed  his  hands 

and  dried  them  on  students'  backs  and  shoulders. 

89. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  19b,  that  respondent  hugged  female 

students,  but  it  was  not  established,  as  alleged  by  the  District,  that  he  often  stated  to  the 
female  students  "you're  the  best  thing  ever"  or  words  to  that  effect.  At  this  hearing, 
respondent  admitted  that  he  hugged  both  female  and  male  students,  and  that  he  hugged 
students  side-ways,  not  face-to-face.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  conduct  was 
inappropriate  regardless  of  whether  the  hug  was  face-to-face  or  side-ways. 

90. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  19c,  that  respondent  kissed  a  male 

student  on  the  cheek  in  his  third  period  class.  This  finding  was  established  by  the  testimony 

of  i  M 

91. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  19d,  that  respondent  frequently  got 

very  close  to  students  and  pretended  he  was  going  to  kiss  them,  while  saying  words  to  the 
effect,  "I  am  going  to  give  them  one  of  Mr.  I's  famous  kisses."  Testimony  of  the  student- 
witnesses  established  that  when  a  student  scored  a  high  grade  on a test,  or  if  it  was  the 
student's  birthday,  respondent  would  give  the  student  his  "famous  kiss."  The  student-witness 
testimony  described  the  "famous  kiss"  as  follows:  (1)  respondent  leaned  into  the  student's 
face  and  personal  space  and  made  a  smoochy  face  and  pretended  to  kiss  them;  (2)  respondent 
would  move  in  close  to  the  student  as  if  he  was  going  to  kiss  them,  but  then  given  them  a 
chocolate  instead;  or  (3)  respondent  gave  the  student  a  kiss  on  the  cheek.  At  this  hearing, 
respondent  testified  that  his  "famous  kiss"  was  a  way  for  him  to  recognize  a  student.  He  did 
not  actually  kiss  the  student,  but  only  made  a  gesture  putting  his  hand  to  his  lips  and 
throwing  a  kiss  to  the  student.  He  would  go  around  the  class  and  throw  a  kiss  with  his  hands. 
He  never  got  close  to  a  student  and  was  two  to  three  feet  away  from  a  student  when  he  threw 
them  a  kiss. 

(B)  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  "famous  kiss,"  for  the  most  part, 

did  not  involve  an  actual  kiss  on  the  cheek,  but  it  did  involve  leaning  in  close  to  students, 
into  their  personal  space,  which  some  students  found  was  not  appropriate  conduct  for  a 
teacher.  The  Commission  finds  it  inappropriate  for  a  teacher,  in  a  classroom  setting,  to 
recognize  student  achievement  by  blowing  kisses  to  students. 

92. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  a  19e,  that  on  August  25,  2016, 

respondent  made  physical  contact  with  student 
A.,  which  left  visible  marks  on  both 
sides  of  the  student's  torso.  The  incident  occurred  during  class.  Respondent  and  the  student 
had  a  verbal  exchange  that  led  to  the  student  getting  up  and  leaving  the  classroom.  The 
student  went  outside  the  classroom  where  two  other  male  students  were  standing. 
Respondent  followed  the  student  outside  the  classroom.  The  verbal  exchange  with  the 
student  continued  and  then  escalated  to  a  physical  altercation.  Respondent  called  security 
and  the  student  was  brought  to  Assistant  Principal  Moatakef's  office.  The  student  claimed  he 
was  injured  by  respondent  and  he  lifted  his  shirt  and  showed  Ms.  Moatakef  pink  marks 
where  he  claimed  respondent  grabbed  him.  Photographs  appear  to  show  marks  suggesting 

26

  

the  student  was  grabbed  on  both  sides  of  his  mid-section.  (Exh.  13.)  The  Pomona  Police 
Department  was  called  to  the  school  to  investigate  the  incident.  The  investigating  police 
officer  concluded  that  the  incident  was  a  mutual  battery.  Both  respondent  and  the  student 
were  given  the  opportunity  to  press  changes  and  both  of  them  declined. 

(B)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  was  engaging  in  self-defense 

when  he  and  the  student  made  physical  contact.  According  to  respondent,  their  chests 
bumped  two  times.  When  the  student  charged  a  second  time,  respondent  claims  he  stretched 
his  arms  in  front  of  him  to  maintain  a  safe  distance  from  the  student.  Respondent  held  onto 
the  student's  rib  area.  Respondent  claimed  that  when  the  student  charged  at  him  a  second 
time,  the  student  did  so  with  a  pencil  in  his  hand.  That  claim,  however,  is  not  credible,  as 
there  was  no  evidence  respondent  ever  claimed,  prior  to  this  hearing,  that  the  student  charged 
at  him  with  a  pencil  in  his  hand.  Respondent  claimed  he  requested,  but  was  never  provided, 
training  on  dealing  with  combative  or  violent  students. 

   

C)  The  Commission  finds  respondent  failed  to  address  the  situation  with 
A.  appropriately.  Teachers  are  trained  to  handle  situations  involving 

student 
students  who  are  difficult  or  upset;  they  are  taught  strategies  on  how  to  diffuse  a  situation, 
establish  command  presence,  and  avoid  conflict.  Having  a  difficult  student  is  not  unusual. 
Respondent's  claim  he  did  not  receive  training  on  dealing  with  combative  students  does  not 
mitigate  or  excuse  his  conduct.  Given  respondent's  years  of  experience  as  a  teacher,  he  can 
reasonably  be  expected  to  know  general  strategies  and  methods  to  diffuse,  de-escalate  and 
handle  difficult  situations  in  a  school  setting.  The  Commission  finds  respondent  acted 
inappropriately  by  chasing  after  student 
A.  when  he  left  the  classroom.  The 
Commission  finds  respondent's  physical  contact  with  student , 
wholly  unnecessary,  and  escalated  the  conflict. 

|  A.  was  egregious, 

Charge  20 

93. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  despite  prior 

directives  not  to  use  profanity,  respondent  continued  to  use  profanity  during  class  and 
towards  students,  as  alleged  in  Charges  20a,  20b,  and  20c.  Respondent  regularly  used  "ass," 
"asshole,"  "bitch,"  "fuck,"  "nigger,"  "mother  fucker,"  and  "shit"  when  addressing  students. 
He  regularly  referred  to  students  as  "broke  ass"  and  "broke  ass  nigger."  He  referred  to 
students  as  "mother  fuckers"  by  saying,  for  example,  "Get  to  work,  mother  fuckers." 

(B)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  used  profanity  to  explain 
concepts  in  his  classes.  For  example,  he  used  the  word  "fuck"  to  explain  intercourse  to 
English-learner  students.  Similarly,  he  used  the  word  "shit"  when  students  did  not 
understand  the  meaning  of  "feces."  Respondent  testified  he  did  not  use  the  word  "fuck"  as  a 
profanity  but  instead  used  it  for  academic  vocabulary,  as  a  way  to  break  the  language  barrier 
with  English-learner  students.  Respondent  testified  he  never  used  the  term  "broke  ass." 
However,  respondent's  own  witness, i: 
ass."  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  testimony  did  not  justify  or  excuse  his  use  of 
profanity  during  class  and  towards  students.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  used 

M.,  testified  that  respondent  called  him  "broke 

27

  

profanity  during  class  and  towards  students  on  a  regular  basis,  and  not  merely  as  "academic 
vocabulary"  to  teach  English-learner  students. 

94. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  21,  that  during  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  despite  being  explicitly  directed  to  stop  using  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky,"  the  term 
"suck,"  or  any  derivation  of  the  word  "suck,"  respondent  continued  to  use  the  phrase  "sucky 
sucky"  towards  students  on  a  consistent  basis.  Respondent  frequently  responded  to  requests 
from  students  by  stating  "you  can  go  sucky,  sucky"  or  words  to  that  effect.  For  example, 

T.  testified  that  if  a  student  asked  to  go  to  the  restroom,  respondent  responded  by 
saying  "sucky  sucky."  Some  students  did  not  know  what  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky"  meant. 
Other  students  thought  it  was  a  sexual  phrase,  referring  to  sucking  a  man's  penis. 
Respondent  denied  that  he  used  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky."  Respondent's  denial  is  not 
credible,  when  weighed  against  the  overwhelming  student  testimony  that  respondent  often 
used  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky."  A  student  from  a  prior  school  year  thought  it  was 
respondent's  catch  phrase  because  he  used  it  so  often.  Respondent's  denial  is  also 
inconsistent  with  his  statement  to  Principal  Fasting,  documented  in  the  2013  Conference 
Summary,  that  "sucky  sucky"  was  a  common  Nigerian  phrase. 

Charge  21 

Charge  22 

95. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent 

demeaned  and  criticized  other  District  employees  to  his  students,  as  alleged  in  Charges  22a 
and  22b.  However,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  the  District's  allegation  in  Charge 
22c. 

96.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  22a,  that  respondent  told  his  third 

period  class  that  he  did  not  like  his  colleague,  Ms.  Jones,  and  he  wanted  to  fight  her.  But  it 
was  not  established  that  respondent  said,  in  reference  to  Ms.  Jones,  that  he  wanted  to  "beat 
her  ass."  Vii 
ta  M.  were  students  in  respondent's  third  period 
anatomy  &  physiology  class.  Their  testimony  established  that  respondent  told  the  class  that 
Ms.  Jones  was  the  reason  he  no  longer  went  to  assemblies,  he  did  not  like  Ms.  Jones,  and  he 
called  Ms.  Jones  a  bitch.  Their  testimony  also  established  that  respondent  did  not  have  a 
good  relationship  with  Ms.  Jones,  and  he  did  not  talk  about  her  in  a  respectful  way. 

R.,  and 

M., 

97. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  22b,  that  respondent  told  his 

students  that  the  school's  administrators  did  not  like  him  and  were  trying  to  get  him  fired. 
However,  no  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  the  District's  allegation  that  respondent  told 
his  students  that  the  administrators  were  "always  in  [his]  business." 

(B)  Respondent  was  disrespectful  and  resentful  when  he  spoke  about  the 

administrators.  He  told  his  students  that  the  administrators  were  _"a  bunch  of  bitches"  and 
"mother  fuckers"  and  they  would  not  be  able  to  kick  him  out. 
F.  testified  that 
respondent  said  other  school  employees  did  not  like  him,  and  he  was  disrespectful  and 

vy 

28

T.  testified  that  that  respondent  talked  about  other  school  employees  and  said 

R.  testified  that,  once  or 
resentful  when  talking  about  other  school  employees. 
twice,  respondent  talked  about  other  employees  and  said  the  front  office  lady  did  not  like 
him. 
Ms.  Konop  and  Ms.  Moatakef  were  a  bunch  of  bitches. 
occasion  when  Ms.  Moatakef  came  by  the  class  while  respondent  was  presenting  a  lesson. 
When  Ms.  Moatakef  left,  respondent  told  the  class  the  administrators  were  mother  fuckers 
and  they  won't  be  able  to  kick  him  out. Ym  C.  and 
G.  testified  that  respondent 
said  some  of  the  staff  didn't  like  him. 

C.T.  testified  about  an 

(C)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  denied  that  he  talked  about  administrators  in  a 

negative  way  in  class.  Respondent  denied  saying  anything  negative  about  administrators 
coming  to  his  classroom. 

Charge  23 

98. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  discussed 

private  and/or  confidential  student  information  with  other  students,  as  alleged  in  Charges 
23a,  23b,  and  23c. 

99. 

   

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged in  Charge  23a,  that  respondent  discussed  the 
first  period  class,  with 
A.,  a  student  from  respondent's 

incident  between  himself  and 
all  of  respondent's  other  class 
A.  made  marks  on  himself  and 
about  the  incident  with 
tried  to  blame  respondent. 
—_ respondent  spoke  of  an  incident  with  a 
student  from  his  first  period  class.  Respondent  accused  the  student  of  trying  to  kick  him  out 
of  the  District.  Respondent  said  that  if  the  incident  was  different,  he  would  have  kicked  the 
student's  ass. 

A.,  including  that  J 
  
CT.  testified 

M.  testified  that  respondent  told  students 

   
  

   

   
periods. an 

(B)  Respondent  testified  that  he  told  his  students  about  the  incident  with 
A.  as  the  student 
knew,  including  that 

A.  only  after  they  brought  it  up,  including  naming 
Respondent  merely  confirmed  what  the  students  already 

involved. 
ma  A  was  involved.  Respondent  claimed  that  he  could  not  lie  to  his  students. 

100. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  23b,  that  respondent  regularly 

announced  which  students  did  the  best  on  tests  and  had  the  highest  grades  in  his  classes. 
This  finding  was  established  by  student-witness  testimony.  For  example, 
testified  she  did  well  in  respondent's  class  and  he  brought  attention  to  her,  which  she  did  not 
mind.  He  also  brought  attention  to  other  students  who  did  well  in  class. 

M.  and 

F. 

   

H.V.  announced  the  grades  of  students  who  did  well. 

R.  testified  that  respondent  gave  his  "famous  kiss"  to  students  who  scored  well  on  a 
C.T.  testified  that 

test. 
respondent  talked  about  which  students  were  doing  well  in  class.  Respondent  testified  that 
he  announced  in  class  which  students  did  well  on  tests,  but  he  did  not  ask  students  for 
permission  to  do  so  ahead  of  time.  Respondent  testified  that  it  is  common  practice  in  the 
teaching  profession  to  recognize  students  who  are  doing  well. 

  

    

  

  

29

  
    

    

101. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  23c,  that  respondent  discussed 

students  who  were  not  performing 
established  by  the  testimony  of 

well  and/or  were 
F.  and 

M. 

going  to  fail  his  class.  This  finding  was 

Charge  24 

102. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  engaged 
in  disrespectful  and  demeaning  conduct  toward  students  in  front  of  their  peers,  as  alleged  in 
Charges  24b,  24c,  24f,  and  24g.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  engaged  in 
the  conduct  alleged  in  Charges  24a,  24d,  and  24e. 

103. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  24b,  that  respondent  repeatedly 

discussed  his  disdain  for  his  first  period,  English  as  a  Second  Language  class  with  his  other 
class  periods.  Respondent  frequently  referred  to  the  class  as  his  United  Nations  class.  He 
told  his  other  classes  that  the  United  Nations  class  was  dumb  and  the  students  were  assholes; 
he  hated  and  disliked  the  United  Nations  class;  and  he  told  his  students  that  he  voted  for 
Trump  so  all  the  students  in  the  United  Nations  class  could  get  deported. 

104. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  24c,  that  respondent  referred  to  a 

student  with  limited  economic  resources  as  "broke  ass." 
referred  to  a  student  as  "broke  ass"  when  the  student  did  not  have  money  for  food.  It  was  not 
established,  as  alleged  by  the  District,  that  the  student's  economic  resources  were  "severely" 
limited  or  that  respondent  used  "broke  ass"  as  though  it  was  the  student's  name. 

A.  testified  that  respondent 

105. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  24f,  that  respondent  called 

students  by  various  inappropriate  nicknames,  including  "Ace  Ventura,"  "Stud  Muffin," 
"Vidal  Sassoon,"  and  "Fontucky."  i  F.  testified  respondent  called  her  "Stud  Muffin" 
and  that  she  did  not  care  about  the  nickname  he  gave  her. a. 
"  for  a  student  whose  name  was 
used  the  nickname  ‘va 
nickname  "Fontucky"  for  a  female  student  who  lived  in  Fontana. 
both  students  were  okay  with  the  nicknames  given  to  them  by  respondent.  fC  G. 
testified  that  respondent  called  a  female  student  "Ace  Ventura." 

R.  testified  respondent 
,  and  he  used  the 
R.  testified  that 

(B)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  joked  around  with  students  and 

gave  them  nicknames  when  he  liked  a  student's  name.  He  noted  that  students  called  him 
"Mr.  I."  while  pointing  at  their  eye.  Respondent  used  the  nickname  "Ace  Ventura"  for  a 
student  whose  name  was  Ventura.  He  used  the  nickname  Vi  s  ff  for  a  student 
named Vii.  Respondent  explained  that  he  used  nicknames  to  break  the  ice,  to  make 
friendships,  and  to  get  shy  students  to  open  up.  Respondent  testified  that  none  of  the 
students  complained  about  the  nicknames  he  gave  them.  Respondent  testified  he  also  used 
the  nickname  "Big  Bird"  for  a  big  student  who  played  football;  "Stud  Muffin"  for  a  smart 
student:  and  "Butterfinger"  for  a  football  player  who  did  not  catch  the  ball. 

106. 

and  made  racial  comments. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  24g,  that  respondent  told  racial  jokes 
C.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  different  races 

30

  

  

  

and  he  referred  to  African-American  people  as  "chocolate"  and  white  people  as  "white 
chocolate."  The  District's  allegation  that  respondent  referred  to  light-skinned  people  as 
"vanilla"  was  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

Charge  25 

107. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  discussed 
his  personal  drug  use  with  his  classes  on  a  recurring  basis,  as  alleged  in  Charges  25a  through 
25d.  However,  the  District's  allegation  in  Charge  25e  was  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

108. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  25a,  that  respondent  described  various 
occasions  when  he  used  marijuana.  He  told  multiple  classes  that  he  smoked  marijuana  while 
hiking  with  other  school  employees,  and  he  smoked  on  the  weekends  as  an  escape  and  to 
relax.  It  was  established  that  respondent  disclosed  to  students  his  intent  to  "smoke  a  big  one 
when  I  get  home"  and  "smoke  a  fat  blunt"  or  words  to  that  effect.  However,  it  was  not 
established  that  respondent  said  he  would  "have  a  cold  drink"  when  smoking  a  big  blunt  at 
home.  Respondent  told  his  students  that  he  smoked  marijuana  in  his  bathroom  at  home  so 
his  children  would  not  see  him  smoking.  Respondent  talked  about  rolling  blunts  but  did  not 
show  his  students  how  to  do  it. 

109. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  25b,  that  during  instructional  time, 

respondent  showed  students  digital  images  of  himself  when  he  was  high,  which  he  took  in 
his  bathroom  mirror  at  home.  Respondent  zoomed  in  on  the  image  to  show  the  students  how 
red  his  eyes  were  from  using  marijuana.  Respondent  told  his  students  that  he  locked  himself 
in  his  bathroom  because  his  children  came  home  while  he  was  high.  Testimony  by  student- 
witnesses  established  that  respondent  said  the  picture  showed  himself  getting  high  on 
marijuana.  The  picture  did  not  show  respondent  actually  smoking.  The  students  could  tell 
respondent  was  high  in  the  picture  because  his  eyes  were  red,  he  was  smiling,  and  there  was 
lots  of  smoke. 

110. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  25c,  that  respondent  advised  his 

students  that  he  had  a  medical  marijuana  card. 

111. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  25d,  that  respondent  discussed  with  his 

students  that  he  wanted  to  grow  marijuana  and  start  a  marijuana  business  (dispensary) 
after 
M. 
he  retired.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  testimony  of 
The  evidence  was  not  sufficient  to  establish  the  District's  allegation  that  respondent  told  his 
students  he  planned  to  sell  marijuana  to  high  school  students  because  he  already  knew  which 
students  used  it. 

   

R.,  and 

M., 

  

Charge  26 

112. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  despite  being 

directed  on  October  15,  2013,  not  to  share  personal  information  of  a  sexual  nature  with 
students,  respondent  continued  to  discuss  personal  sexual  information  and  conduct  with  his 

3]

  

students,  as  alleged  in  Charges  26a,  26b,  26c,  and  26e  through  26m.  The  District's 
allegations  in  Charge  26d  was  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

113. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26a,  that  respondent  routinely 
disclosed  to  students  that  he  really  liked  large  breasts  and  pointed  out  other  physical 
characteristics  he  found  attractive  in  women. 

114. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26b,  that  respondent  regularly 

informed  students  of  the  physical  attributes  that  he  found  attractive  about  his  wife  including: 
(1)  he  was  attracted  to  his  wife  because  of  her  big  breasts  and  (11)  regularly  commenting  on 
his  wife's  physical  characteristics.  Respondent  talked  about  his  wife  and  said  she  was  hot 
and  had  big  breasts.  Respondent  also  said  he  did  not  need  porn  because  he  had  his  wife. 

115. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26c,  that  respondent  discussed  aspects 
of  his  sex  life  with  his  students.  a  H.V.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  having  sex 
   
that  respondent  told  students  he  could  not  have  sex  often 
with  his  wife. 
with  his  wife  because  of  their  children. 
T.  testified  that  respondent  told  students  he 
did  not  need  pornography  because  he  had  his  wife,  and  also  talked  to  students  about  getting  a 
vasectomy. 

M.  testified 

   

  

116. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26e,  that  respondent  commented  to 

students  that  his  wife  did  not  need  to  get  him  a  gift  for  any  occasion  because  respondent 
already  knew  what  he  would  be  getting,  implying  that  he  would  be  getting  sex.  For  example, 

G.  testified  that  respondent  said  his  wife  did  not  need  to  give  him  a  gift  because  she 

could  pleasure  him  sexually. 

117. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26f,  that  respondent  told  his  students 

that  his  wife  was  a  virgin  when  they  got  married.  This  finding  is  based  on  testimony  by 

—_ 

F.  and 

C.T.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  respondent  told  his 

students  that  he  stayed 

with  his  wife  because  he  wanted  to  take  her  virginity. 

118. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26g,  that  respondent  described  himself 
as  a  "player"  and  as  having  been  with  a  lot  of  women  before  he  was  married.  This  finding  is 
based  on  student-witness  testimony.  For  example, 
described  himself  as  a  "party  boy"  in  college,  drinking,  and 
M.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  parties  in  college,  women,  and  doing  drugs. 

F.  testified  that  respondent 
sleeping  with  women. 

M.  testified  respondent  said  he  was  a  "player,"  meaning  that  he  dated  multiple 

women,  and  also  commented  that  college  girls  were  "hot."  According 
respondent  said  he  was  a  "player"  in  college  and  he  smoked  weed. 
respondent  called  himself  a  "player,"  which  she  took  to  mean  that  when  he  was  younger,  "the 
girls  were  all  up  on  him." 
was  in  college,  girls  wanted  him  because  of  how  he  was  in  bed  (sexually). 
testified  that  respondent  said  he  was  a  "player,"  which  meant  he  dated  several  women  at  a 
time. 

H.V.  testified  that  respondent  told  students  that  when  he 

T.  testified  that 

M., 

G. 

to 

 

  

119. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26h,  that  respondent  repeatedly 
discussed  his  prior  girlfriends  with  his  classes.  It  was  not  established  that  respondent 
discussed  having  dated  women  of  various  ethnicities.  It  was  established  by  the  testimony  of 

T.  that  respondent  told  his  students  he  dated  a  rich  older  woman  who  bought  him 

It  was  established  by  the  testimony  of via 

his  first  car. 
respondent  told  his  students  that  he  dated  a  woman  with  one  breast.  But  the  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  respondent  said  he  "fucked"  a  woman  with  one  breast.  According  to  the 
witness  testimony,  respondent  "spoke"  of  a  woman  with  one  breast  when  recounting  the 
multiple  women  he  dated  during  his  days  as  "a  player."  No  evidence  was  presented  to 
establish  the  District's  allegations  in  Charge  26h(iii)  and  Charge  26h(iv). 

F.  and im  M.  that 

120. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  261,  that  in  referring  to  the  classroom 
computer  used  to  project  images  to  the  class,  respondent  alluded  to  having  sexually  explicit 
images  saved  in  the  same  location  as  personal  images  he  was  displaying  for  students,  by 
stating  words  to  the  effect  "I  can't  let  you  see  those  photos"  or  "oh,  those  are  pictures  of  my 
wife  I  can't  show  you."  Testimony  by  Ya  T.  established  that  respondent  made  jokes 
and  warnings  about  photos  on  the  computer.  He  said  he  had  private  pictures  of  his  wife  and 
would  scroll  past  them. 

121. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26),  that  respondent  commented  to 
his  classes  about  receiving  pornographic  emails  in  his  personal  email  account  when  students 
were  near  his  computer  or  when  he  received  a  new  email  alert.  For  example,  respondent 
made  comments  to  the  effect  "oh  that's  my  porn”  and  "don’t  look  at  my  porn." 

(B) 

R.  testified  that  respondent  used  the  computer  to  show  photos  to  the 

not  say  what  was  on  his  computer,  but  told  students,  "I  don’t  want  to 

class.  Respondent  did 
show  you  my  porn."  s  |  R.  thought  respondent  was  joking. 
respondent  joked  about  what  was  on  his  computer.  Respondent  said  he  might  need  to  change 
R. 
his  password  because  students  might  see  something  dirty  or  pornographic. 
testified  that  respondent  showed  photos  from  his  computer  but  would  say  he  can't  scroll 
down  because  there  are  photos  he  can't  show  the  class. 
thought  he  might  have 
porn.  Respondent  did  not  say  he  had  pornography.  Many  students  thought  he  had  porn  on 
the  computer.  Respondent  said  in  a  joking  way  he  can't  scroll  down  because  there  were 
things  that  students  shouldn't  see.  According  to 

,  the  students  assumed  it  was  porn. 

M.  testified  that 

mz 

ll 

   

(C) 

|  M.  testified  that  respondent  let  students  use  the  classroom 

computer.  Respondent  joked  around  with  students  using  the  computer  and  he  would  say 
don't  go  near  the  computer  because  you're  going  to  see  my  porn. 
H.V.  testified  that  respondent  joked  about  what  was  on  his 
respondent  was  joking. 
computer.  He  said  there  were  inappropriate  pictures  or  videos,  which  she  thought  meant 
porn. 
C.T.  testified  that  respondent  said  there  was  porn  on  his  phone,  not  on  the 
computer. 
computer,  respondent  said  there  were  some  pictures  students  were  not  allowed  to  see. 

C.  testified  that,  when  showing  videos  and  images  to  the  class  from  his 

M.  thought 

   

    

  

  

    

 
)
w
i

)
P
o

(D)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that,  during  lunch  time,  he  1s  on  the 

computer  surrounded  by  three  to  five  students.  He  would  delete  Spam  emails  from  his 
District  email  account.  Students  asked  why  he  deleted  emails  without  opening  them. 
Respondent  told  the  students  it  might  be  pornographic  material.  Respondent  testified  he 
never  showed  pornography  or  pornographic  materials  in  class. 

mm 

122. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26k,  that,  despite  prior  directives, 
respondent  continued  to  make  comments  and  references  to  the  size  of  his  penis.  Testimony 
by  via  F.  and 
M.  established  that  respondent  made  comments  and  references  to 
Black  men  having  larger  penises  than  other  men.  1 
M.  testified  that  respondent  said 
Asian  men  have  small  penises.  She  also  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  his  penis  and 
7  R.,  respondent  talked  about  his  penis  and  would 
said  it  was  "huge."  According  to 
say  "Shut  the  fuck  up  or  I'll  put  it  in  your  mouth."  i  M.  testified  that  respondent  joked 
around  with  students,  back-and-forth,  and  he  would  say  his  penis  was  bigger  than  the 
student's. Yr  T.  testified  that  respondent  talked  about  his  penis  and  would  say  words  to 
the  effect  "mine  is  bigger  than  yours."  Ma  H.V.  testified  that  respondent  compared  his 
penis  to  two  male  students’  penises  and  said  that  his  penis  was  bigger  than  their's. 
C.T.  testified  that  when  respondent  and  two  male  students  argued  about  whose  penis  was 
bigger,  the  class  just  sat  and  watched  them  argue. 

(B)  At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  the  two  male  students  talked 
about  their  penises  in  class  (1.e.,  whose  was  bigger).  Respondent  testified  he  did  not  talk 
about  his  penis  with  the  two  male  students.  Respondent  testified  that  it  was  the  students  who 
brought  up  the  racial  stereotypes  that  Black  men  have  large  penises  and  Asians  have  the  best 
brains.  Respondent  testified  he  did  talk  about  penises  and  racial  stereotypes.  Respondent 
testified  that,  when  the  students  brought  up  big  Black  penises  and  small  Asian  penises,  he 
shut  down  that  discussion.  Respondent  claimed  he  shut  down  any  discussion  that  was 
offensive. 

(C)  The  evidence  did  not  establish  the  remaining  allegations  of  Charge  26k, 

specifically  subparagraphs  (1)  and  (11),  and  subparagraph  (iv)(2),  (4). 

123. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  26/,  that  respondent  discussed  with  his 

students  the  possibility  that  he  would  need  a  rectal  exam  and  stated  that  he  wanted  his  "butt 
to  stay  a  virgin"  or  words  to  that  effect.  V7  M.  testified  that  respondent  told  the  class 
he  did  not  want  to  have  a  rectal  exam  because  he  wanted  to  stay  a  virgin  in  that  part  of  his 
body.  az  G.  testified  that  respondent  said  he  did  not  want  a  doctor  to  examine  his  butt. 

Charge  27 

124. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  regularly 

engaged  in  sexually  explicit  and  implicit  conversations  and  conduct  during  his  classes,  as 
alleged  in  Charges  27a,  27d,  27e,  and  27f.  The  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  that 
respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charges  27b  and  27c. 

34

125. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  27a,  that  respondent  engaged  in  vulgar 

commentary  with  students  regarding  "eating  ass." 
M.  testified  that  respondent 
explained  and  demonstrated  "eating  ass"  as  spreading  the  buttocks  and  placing  his  face 
between  the  cheeks. 
R.  testified  that  1f  a  student  disrespected  him,  respondent 
would  say,  "oh,  eat  my  ass." 
students  if  they  liked  to  "eat  ass"  or  did  they  "eat  ass." 
about  "eating  ass"  and  would  say,  for  example,  "imagine  eating  that  ass." 
testified  that  respondent  would  say  "eating  ass"  when  talking  to  and  joking  around  with  two 
male  students. 

M.  testified  that  respondent  would  joke  around  and  ask 
H.V.  testified  respondent  spoke 

C.T. 

126. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  27d,  that  during  the  fall  semester, 

respondent  showed  a  digital  image  of  recent  first  ladies.  However,  it  was  not  established,  as 
alleged  in  Charge  27d,  that  the  images  shown  included  an  image  of  Melania  Trump  naked. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  showed  pictures  of  recent  first  ladies  that  he  found  on  the 
internet,  including  pictures  of  Melania  Trump.  But  he  denied  showing  any  picture  of 
Melania  Trump  naked.  The  evidence  was  insufficient  to  refute  respondent's  testimony. 

127.  . 

and  va  were  two  male  students  in  respondent's  fifth 

|  and  Mia 

&  physiology  class.  Respondent  regularly  joked  around  with 
It  was 
established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  27e,  that  around  the  beginning  of  the  second  semester, 
respondent  encouraged  s 
appeared  that  the  two  male  students  were  going  to  kiss,  respondent  told  them  to  stop  so  he 
could  record  it.  Respondent  stood  directly  in  front  of  the  two  students  and  pretended  to 
record  the  incident  on  his  cell  phone.  Respondent  testified  he  did  not  record  the  incident. 
The  other  students  in  the  class  were  distracted  and  off-task  during  the  incident.  Some 
students  took  out  their  phones  and  recorded  the  incident.  This  finding  was  established  by 
student  testimony  and  the  video  recording  of  the  incident  (Exh.  17). 

to  kiss  one  another  in  the  middle  of  class.  When  it 

and 

period  anatomy 
. 

128. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  27f,  that  during  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  respondent  told  students  in  his  fifth  period  class,  "Shut  the  fuck  up  before  I  stick  my 
finger  in  your  booty"  or  words  to  that  effect. 

Charge  28 

129. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent 

repeatedly  engaged  in  conduct  and  made  statements  objectifying  women,  and  demonstrated  a 
lack  of  respect  for  women  and  gender  equality,  as  discussed  below. 

130. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28a,  that  respondent  frequently 

discussed  the  physical  attributes  he  found  attractive  in  women. 
H.V.  testified  that 
respondent  talked  about  how  women  looked,  mostly  about  their  butts.  She  testified  that 
respondent  commented  on  students'  moms  by  saying,  "dang  I  hit  that,"  which  she  thought 
meant  respondent  will  have  sex  with  the  mom  when  her  student  graduates. 

35

      

  
  

131. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28b,  that  respondent  commented 

to  his  classes  about  all  the  "hot"  women  he  would  want  to  have  sex  with  if  he  was  not 
married.  For  example,  during  his  third  period  class,  a  woman  visited  respondent's  classroom 
and  took  a  photograph  with  him.  Respondent  then  showed  the  class  the  photograph  and 
made  comments  to  the  class  about  how  he  wished  he  could  have  sex  with  the  woman  and 
said  words  to  the  effect  of  "if  I  wasn't  married...  ."  Vii 
respondent's  third  period  class  and  witnessed  this  incident.  Respondent  took  a  photo  with  the 
woman  and  told  her  she  was  good  looking  and  sexy.  Respondent  told  the  class  he  would 
"get  with  her"  if  he  didn't  have  a  wife. 

M.  was a  student  in 

132. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28c,  that  respondent  discussed  with  his 

classes  the  physical  characteristics  about  his  wife  that  attracted  him  to  her,  namely  her  large 
breasts. 

133. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28d,  that  respondent  commented  on 

the  physical  appearance  of  women  and  female  students.  This  finding  was  established  by  the 
student-witness  testimony.  Jaclyn  M.  testified  that  respondent  would  say  that  women's 
bodies  were  "hot"  and  he  also  talked  about  students  being  "hot."  Respondent  made 
comments  that  specific  female  students  "had  a  nice  body."  He  also  commented  that  Russian 
girls  are  hairy.  A  R.  testified  that  respondent  said  "fine  ass  mother  fucker"  about 
someone  he  was  attracted  to. 
T.  testified  that  respondent  complimented  female 
students  on  their  appearance,  stating  they  were  "pretty"  or  had  a  "nice  body." Yi  T. 
testified  that  respondent  stopped  the  class  and  asked  a  female  student  to  stand  up;  respondent 
said  she  was  "beautiful"  and  had  her  stand  up  and  turn  around.  Most  of  the  time,  the  female 
students  stood  up. 
H.V.  testified  that  respondent  made  comments  about  students'  moms,  for  example,  "she's  one 
sexy  bitch"  and  "fine  ass  mother  fucker."  Respondent  also  made  these  comments  about 
former  students.  The  comments  made 
respondent  said,  "fine  ass  mother  fucker."  She  does  not  remember  who  he  was  referring  to. 

T.  felt  that  respondent  "checked  out"  the  female  students. 

H.V.  uncomfortable. 

G.  testified 

  

  

134. 

Regarding  Charge  28d,  respondent  testified  that  he  compliments  both  male 

and  female  students  about  their  appearance.  He  tells  students  who  dressed  nicely,  "Wow,  you 
look  good."  Ifa  student  has  new  tennis  shoes,  he  compliments  them.  He  tells  all  students 
they  "look  nice."  He  may  have  said  "pretty,"  "beautiful,"  and  "handsome."  He  told  one 
student  that  his  girlfriend  was  beautiful. 

135. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28f,  that  respondent  made  sexist 

comments  and  communicated  to  his  students,  especially  the  female  students,  that  he  did  not 
consider  men  and  women  to  be  equal.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  student-witness 
testimony.  ia  F.  testified  that  respondent  had  traditional  views  of  men  and  women, 
specifically,  that  men  were  the  breadwinners  and  women  should  do  the  cooking.  She  did  not 
agree  with  respondent's  views.  She  testified  that  respondent  did  not  expressly  say  that 
R.  testified  that  one  time  respondent 
women  were  inferior  to  men,  but  he  implied  it. 
said  women  can't  tell  men  what  to  do. 
M.  testified  that  respondent  made  comments 
      
that  women  are  weaker  than  men.  She  also  testified  that  respondent  said  men  are  superior  to 

36

  

  

women,  and  men  should  work  and  women  should  stay  home. 
respondent  said  men  should 
the  children  and  cook. 
wants  to  become a  police  officer. 
care  of  women,  and  women  should  take  care  of  the  children. 

go  out  and  work  and  women  should  stay  home  and  take  care  of 
T.  did  not  agree  with  respondent's  view  of  the  world.  She 

C.  testified  that  respondent  said  men  should  take 

T.  testified  that 

136. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28¢,  that  respondent  made  numerous 

comments  during  his  second  period  class,  objectifying  and  commenting  on  the  physical 
appearance  and  attractiveness  of  the  translator  assigned  to  his  first  period  class. 
F. 
was  a  student  in  respondent's  second  period  class.  She  testified  that  respondent  talked  about 
the  first  period  translator  and  said  she  was  attractive. 

137. 

  

L.)  had  wide  hips,  and  wide  hips  were  good  looking. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28h,  that  respondent  told  a  student  in 
a  T.  was  a  student  in 

T.  testified  that  respondent  made  comments  that  a  female 
C.T.  was 

his  fifth  period  class  that  her  "hips  are  too  wide  to  run  track." 
the  fifth  period  class. 
student  ( 
another  student  in  the  fifth  period  class. Na  CT  testified  that  respondent  told 
L.,  who  ran  track  at  the  time,  that  her  hips  were  too  wide  to  run  track.  Respondent  testified 
that,  during  a  discussion  about  the  pelvic  area  and  hips,  the  female  student  told  respondent 
she  was  a  runner  and  asked  respondent  if  she  could  beat  a  boy  in  arace.  Respondent 
explained  that  females  have  hips  that  affect  aerodynamics.  Respondent  told  the  student  she 
can  probably  beat  a  boy  in  a  race. 

      

138. 

The  District's  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  allegation  of  Charge 
281  that  respondent  showed  a  student  a  digital  image  of  First  Ladies  that  included  Melania 
Trump  naked. 

139. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28),  that  respondent  had  inappropriate 

discussions  with  students  regarding  his  views  on  abortion.  This  finding  is  based  on  the 
testimony  of  the  student-witnesses.  For  example, 
about  his  views  opposing  abortion.  She  recounted  one  time  when  respondent  said  that  if  his 
son  got  a  girl  pregnant,  he  would  sue  to  prevent  the  girl  from  getting  an  abortion. 
C.T.  testified  that  respondent  said  he  was  against  abortion.  Respondent  said  that  if  his 
daughter  had  sex,  if  she  opened  her  legs  for  sex,  she  must  leave  her  legs  open  to  have  the 
baby. NZ  felt  respondent's  comment  showed  no  respect  for  his  family. aa  G. 
testified  that  respondent  shared  his  views  that  he  was  against  abortion. 

7  R.  testified  that  respondent  talked 

140. 

Regarding  Charge  28),  respondent  testified  that  abortion  is  a  topic  in  anatomy 

class  that  comes  up  twice  in  a  school  year,  during  the  discussion  about  reproduction. 
Respondent  denied  that  he  shared  his  personal  views  on  abortion  with  students.  According 
to  respondent,  he  would  let  the  students  argue  a  bit  about  abortion  but  then  the  class  would 
move  on. 
after  school. 

If  students  wanted  to  discuss  the  issue  further,  he  told  them  they  could  see  him 

/// 

37

  

     

  
  

    

Charge  29 

141. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent 

inappropriately  inserted  himself  into  and  commented  on  students'  romantic  and  sexual 
relationships,  as  alleged  in  Charges  29b,  29c,  and  29e.  However,  no  evidence  was  presented 
to  establish  the  allegations  in  Charges  29a  and  29d. 

142. 

(A)  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  inappropriately  inserted  himself 

into  and  commented  on  students'  romantic  and  sexual  relationships.  For  oy 
F.  testified  that  respondent  asked  students  about  who  they  were  going  out  with. 
M. 
testified  that  respondent  talked  to  students  about  who  they  were  going  out  with  and 
he  would 
imply  that  "he  knows  what  they  do"  (1.e.,  making  out,  sexual  intercourse)  and  he  made 
motions  and  gestures  with  his  hands. 
which  students  were  boyfriend-girlfriend  and  dating,  respondent  sometimes  stopped  the  class 
M.  testified  that  respondent  commented  to  a  male 
and  talked  with  them  about  dating. 
student  in  her  class  that  his  girlfriend  was  too  good  for  him. 
respondent  asked  her,  "Is  he  your  boyfriend?"  She  also  testified  that  respondent  asked  a 
female  student  who  was  a  lesbian  if  she  "ate  out  her  girlfriend  yet." 

R.  testified  that,  when  students  brought  up 

M.  testified  that 

    

   

H.V.  testified  that  respondent  asked  students  about  who  they  were 
(B) 
dating.  He  asked 
H.V.  if  she  was  dating  a  student  from  his  first  period  class,  or  he 
asked  her  questions  about  her  love  life,  how  long  she  was  dating  someone,  if  she  lost  her 
virginity.  Respondent's  questions  made  her  feel  uncomfortable,  because  he  asked  her  those 
questions  in  front  of  other  students.  Ma  H.V.  testified  that  students  sometimes,  by 
themselves,  talked  to  respondent  about  who  they  were  dating.  Respondent  would  engage 
them  in  conversation  if  they  did.  : 
asked  students  about  their  sex  lives. 

G.  testified  that,  a  couple  of  times,  respondent 

(C)  Regarding  Charge  29,  respondent  testified  he  would  talk  to  students  about 

their  relationship  status  only  if  they  brought  it  up.  He  denied  asking  students  if  they  were 
dating.  Respondent  testified  that  he  would  make  the  comment  "cute  couple"  when  students 
introduced  themselves  to  him  that  they  are  dating.  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  talk 
to  students  about  their  sex  lives.  Students  would  try  to  bring  it  up,  but  respondent  would  stop 
them.  He  would  tell  them,  "remember  abstinence."  He  would  tell  them  he  did  not  want  to 
hear  it.  He  testified  that  he  never  asked  students  if  they  lost  their  virginity.  He  testified  he 
did  not  ask  a  female  student  if  she  engaged  in  sexual  acts  with  her  girlfriend. 

Charge  30 

143. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  30a,  that  during  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  respondent  made  female  students  feel  uncomfortable  by  leering  at  their  bodies  and/or 
the  bodies  of  their  female  classmates.  Respondent  also  failed  to  maintain  appropriate 
personal  space  between  himself  and  female  students.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  establish 
the  allegation  in  Charge  30b.

    

144. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  30a,  that  respondent  approached  a 

female  student  who  was  wearing  a  necklace  with  her  name  on  it  and  a  low-cut  shirt. 
Respondent  got  extremely  close  to  the  female  student  as  he  was  looking  at  her  "necklace"  for 
an  extended  period  of  time.  The  student  believed  respondent  were  looking  at  her  breasts  and 
the  interaction  made  her  feel  uncomfortable.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  testimony  of 

T.  She  testified  that  when  she  wore  a  necklace  with  a  gold  chain  and  a  low-cut 

blouse,  respondent  leaned  in  and  put  his  elbows  on  her  desk  and  lifted  the  necklace  off  her 
chest.  This  made Yr  feel  "very  uncomfortable." 
comfortable  with  how  respondent  behaved  with  female  students  and  he  did  not  respect  their 
personal  space. 

G.  testified  she  was  not 

a7 

Charge  31 

145. 

It  was  established  that,  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  made 

degrading  and  demeaning  comments  and  engaged  in  offensive  conduct  regarding  sexual 
orientation  and  gender  identity,  as  alleged  in  Charges  3lc  through  31h  and  31).  However,  no 
evidence  was  presented  to  establish  the  allegations  of  Charges  31a,  31b,  311,  and  31k. 

146. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31c,  that  respondent  asked  students 

who  were  lesbians  "who  1s  the  guy  [in  their  relationship]?"  or  words  to  that  effect. 
M.  testified  that  respondent  asked  a  gay  couple  in  the  class  which  one  is  the  guy  and  which 
one  is  the  girl.  He  also  teased  them  about  being  gay. 

147. 

(A)  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31d,  that  respondent  searched  a 

female  student's  Facebook  page  to  investigate  whether  she  was  gay  and  to  find  pictures  of  the 
student's  girlfriend.  The  evidence  established  that,  during  instructional  time,  respondent 
went  on  Facebook  using  the  classroom  computer.  He  had  asked  a  student  to  show  him  how 
to  block  "friend  requests"  from  his  Facebook  page.  The  student  went  on  her  Facebook  page 
to  show  him,  but  then  respondent  started  going  through  the  student's  profile  and  looking  for 
pictures  of  the  student's  girlfriend.  The  student's  Facebook  page  was  projected  to  the  class  as 
respondent  looked  for  pictures  of  her  girlfriend. 

(B)  Respondent  testified  that  he  went  on  Facebook  so  a  student  could  show 
him  how  to  block  "friend  requests."  The  student  went  on  her  own  Facebook  page  to  show 
him  how  to  block  "friend  requests."  Respondent  testified  he  never  went  through  pictures  of 
the  student's  girlfriend  on  her  Facebook  page. 

148. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  3  le,  that  respondent  referred  to  pairs 
of  students  as  "lovers,"  and  asked  two  students  if  they  were  "lovers."  But  the  evidence  was 
insufficient  to  establish  that  the  students  who  respondent  called  "lovers"  were  same  sex 
students. 

149. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31f,  that  respondent  made  statements 

to  two  male  students  to  the  effect  of  "you  mother  fuckers  are  gay"  and  "stop  being  gay." 

39

G.  testified  that  respondent  joked  around  with  two  male  students,  s  |  and Mag. 

about  being  gay  and  told  them  to  "stop  being  gay." 

150. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31g,  that  during  class  time,  respondent 

answered  a  telephone  call  from  a  salesperson  on  a  speaker  phone.  The  call  was  about 
respondent  winning  a  trip.  Respondent  made  a  joke  of  the  call  and  asked  questions  about  the 
trip  pretending  to  be  a  gay  man.  Respondent  spoke  with  the  salesperson  and  gave  false 
answers.  Respondent  asked  the  salesperson,  "can  I  take  my  boyfriend  with  me?" 
Respondent  denied  that  he  answered  a  call  during  class  time  pretending  to  be  a  gay  man. 

151. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31h,  that  when  a  female  student, 
   
M.,  received  a  text  message  on  her  phone  during  class,  respondent  loudly  asked  her 
if  the  message  was  from  her  boyfriend,  even  though  he  knew  the  student  had  a  girlfriend.  It 
was  not  established  by  the  evidence  whether  the  student  was  embarrassed  or  made  to  feel 
uncomfortable  by  respondent's  comment. 

152. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31),  that  respondent  said  words  to  the 

effect  "1t  would  be  hot  if  two  girls  kissed." 
wanted  hot  lesbian  girls  to  make  out  because  it's  hot.  Respondent  said  he  wanted  all  lesbian 
girls  to  make  out. 

M.  testified  that  respondent  said  he 

mm 

Charge  32 

153. 

(A)  It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent 

exposed  his  students,  who  are  minors,  to  sexually  explicit,  graphic  material  without  parental 
notification  or  permission,  or  educational  necessity.  The  evidence  established  that 
respondent  showed  students  graphic  images  of  worms  coming  out  of  a  man's  penis  (Charge 
32a);  graphic  images  of  someone  defecating  balloons  filled  with  drugs  or  having  the  police 
remove  drugs  hidden  in  a  man's  anus  (Charge  32b);  a  sexually  explicit  video  about  men 
looking  up  a  woman's  skirt  while  she  was  on  a  ladder  (Charge  32c);  graphic  images  of 
jiggers  removal  (Charge  32d);  and  a  video  of  woman  confessing  to  a  man  pretending  to  be 
priest,  the  man  comforts  the  woman  and  later  emerges  without  his  clothes,  with  the  punchline 
being  that  the  man  took  advantage  of  the  woman  (Charge  32e). 

(B)  In  addition,  it  was  established  that  respondent  also  showed  videos  of  a  girl 

doing  a  cartwheel  while  not  wearing  underwear  and  thereby  exposing  her  private  parts;  a 
video  from  China  showing  dogs  being  abused,  skinned,  and  getting  their  heads  chopped  off; 
a  viral  video  showing  someone  stealing  a  lady's  phone;  and,  on  one  occasion,  when  talking 
about  a  disease,  respondent  showed  a  video  of  a  man  with  the  disease  on  his  foot. 

154. 

(A)  Respondent  testified  that  he  showed  the  class  a  video  of  a  penis  with 

jiggers  as  part  of  a  class  lesson  on  venereal  disease.  Respondent  testified  jiggers  is  a  disease 
common  in  tropical  countries,  such  as  East  Africa,  Asia,  Brazil,  and  Nigeria,  West  Africa. 
He  showed  the  video  because  he  got  malaria  during  a  visit  to  Nigeria.  He  was  treated  at 
Kaiser  for  two  weeks,  and  got  the  idea  to  teach  about  diseases  in  Nigeria.  He  thought  jiggers 

40

would  be  a  disease  the  students  would  remember.  Respondent  testified  he  got  the  jiggers 
video  from  YouTube.  Respondent  admitted  that  jiggers  is  not  on  the  class  syllabus,  but  he 
justified  teaching  jiggers  because  diseases  are  part  of  the  curriculum  and  jiggers  is  a  disease. 
Respondent  testified  he  has  to  decide  what  is  best  to  teach  the  students  that  is  also 
meaningful. 

(B)  Respondent  denied  showing  videos  with  sexual  content.  He  denied 

showing  a  video  of  a  woman  climbing  a  ladder  while  a  man  looked  up  her  skirt.  He  denied 
showing  any  video  of  drugs  being  removed  from  a  person's  anus.  Respondent  denied 
showing  a  video  with  worms  coming  out  of  the  penis;  he  claimed  the  video  showed  the 
worms  coming  from  the  skin  around  the  genitalia.  Respondent  denied  showing  a  video  of 
dogs  being  abused  and  killed.  Respondent  testified  he  showed  videos  showing  dead  animals. 
He  explained  that,  before  dissection,  he  talked  to  the  class  about  the  ethical  treatment  of 
animals  (e.g.,  cats,  rats,  frogs,  pigs),  and  that  dead  animals  must  be  treated  ethically. 

(C)  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct 

by  showing  sexually  explicit  and  graphic  images  and  videos  to  his  students.  The 
Commission  notes  that,  as  a  general  matter,  children  nowadays  tend  to  be  attracted  to 
"extremes."  Here,  respondent  selected  extreme  videos  and  images  for  their  shock  value,  so 
he  could  look  "cool"  in  front  of  his  students.  The  videos  and  images  that  respondent  selected 
to  show  to  his  classes  were  unrelated  to  the  curriculum.  The  fact  that  some  students  may 
have  been  entertained  or  enjoyed  the  videos  and  images  did  not  mitigate  or  excuse 
respondent's  inappropriate  conduct. 

Charge  33 

155. 

It  was  established  that  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  failed  to 

utilize  instructional  time  to  maximize  students'  educational  benefit.  It  was  established,  as 
alleged  in  Charge  33a,  that  respondent  regularly  took  telephone  calls  from  his  wife  and 
others  during  instructional  time,  but  1t  was  not  established  by  sufficient  evidence  that  he  had 
those  conversations  on  a  speaker  phone.  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  33b,  that 
respondent  spent  instructional  time  showing  personal  photographs  and  non-educational 
videos  and  memes  from  his  personal  accounts  and  devices,  including  pictures  and  videos  of 
his  friends,  family,  and  trips,  but  1t  was  not  established  by  sufficient  evidence  that  he  spent 
an  "excessive  amount"  of  instructional  time  doing  so. 

156. 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  took  phone  calls  during  class.  He  told  his  classes 
that  he  might  receive  phone  calls  from  his  children's  school,  his  wife,  his  doctor,  or  someone 
from  Nigeria,  but  he  would  not  answer  calls  from  anyone  else.  Respondent  estimated  that, 
during  the  semester,  he  took  phone  calls  in  class  about  nine  times,  with  each  call  lasting  30 
seconds  to  one  minute. 

157. 

Respondent  used  the  classroom  computer  to  show  photographs,  pictures, 

videos,  and  memes,  to  the  class.  He  showed  photos  of  his  family  to  the  class  as  a  way  to 
connect  with  his  students.  He  showed  photos  of  his  family  on  vacation  or  photos  of  his 

Al

family  in  Nigeria.  When  he  returned  from  vacation,  the  students  asked  to  see  his  pictures. 
Respondent  estimated  he  would  show  his  personal  photos  one  or  two  times  in  a  given  month. 
When  he  showed  vacation  photos,  he  would  tell  the  class  what  he  did  on  vacation  and 
describe  the  activity.  The  class  period  was  55  minutes.  Of  that  time,  respondent  estimated 
he  spent  between  two  minutes  to  up  to  10  minutes  showing  pictures  to  the  class. 

Charge  34 

158. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  34  that,  during  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  respondent's  academic  expectations  were  not  applied  equally  to  all  students,  in  that 
respondent  modified  assignments  and  academic  expectations  for  students  involved  in 
athletics  by  giving  those  students  additional  time  to  complete  their  assignments  and 
demonstrate  their  academic  achievements. 

159. 

Respondent  gave  student-athletes  additional  time  to  complete  assignments  and 

rescheduled  tests  for  them. Yr  T.  testified  that  respondent  gave  preference  to  athletes 
in  class  when  their  sport  was  in  season,  for  example,  by  giving  them  extra  time  to  complete 
their  work  or  allowing  them  to  take  a  test  on  another  day.  Although  respondent's  preferences 
were  mostly  for  athletes, Yr  T.  testified  that  she  received  an  extension  to  take a test 
because  of  her  participation  in  a  police  program,  but  she  was  an  exception. 
G. 
testified  that  respondent  gave  extra  credit  to  students  for  their  performance  as  athletes. 

B 

   

G.  played  soccer  in  her  freshman  year,  which  was  the  2014-2015  school  year,  and 

received  extra  credit  in  respondent's  class  because  she  scored  a  goal.  She  testified  that  other 
students  besides  athletes  could  earn  extra  credit  in  respondent's  class. 

160. 

Respondent  testified  he  offered  extra  credit  to  athletes  as  well  as  other 

students.  For  example,  for  students  who  represented  the  school  in  a  good  way  (e.g.,  mock 
trial,  ASB,  etc.),  he  would  give  those  students  extra  time.  Even  so,  the  Commission  finds 
that  respondent  modified  assignments  and  academic  expectations  primarily  for  students 
involved  in  athletics. 

Charge  35 

161. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  35,  that,  during  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  respondent  promised  students  extra  credit  in  exchange  for  donations  to  "Pennies  for 
Patients."  Donations  were  collected  in  students’  fourth  period  classes.  The  fourth  period 
class  that  collected  the  most  donations  received  a  prize,  for  example,  a  pasta  lunch  for  the 
entire  class. 
from  all  of  his  class  periods  because  he  did  not  have  fourth  period  class  but  still  wanted  to 
collect  the  highest  amount  of  donations  as  he  had  in  past  years. 

It  was  established  that  respondent  told  his  students  he  was  soliciting  donations 

162. 

Respondent  offered  extra  credit  to  students  for  other  things  beyond  making 
donations  to  "Pennies  for  Patients."  The  evidence  established  that  respondent  also  offered 
extra  credit  to  students  for  donating  items  they  were  no  longer  using,  such  as  old  cell  phones, 
clothes,  and  shoes.  Respondent  sold  the  donated  items  in  Nigeria.  Respondent  also  offered 

42

          

extra  credit  to  students  who  came  to  Saturday  School.  He  testified  that  he  gave  the  extra 
credit  to  encourage  the  students  to  attend  Saturday  School  so  he  could  give  them  extra  help. 
He  did  not  give  extra  credit  points  to  students  who  attended  Saturday  School  m  order  to 
make  up  absences.  Respondent  testified  that  teachers  who  worked  Saturday  School  got  paid 
so  long  as  15  students  showed  up. 

163. 

The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  offerme  students  extra  credit  for 

donations  of  cash  or  items  was  mappropriate  and  violated  District  policies. 

Testimony  of  Darren  Knowles 

164. 

Darren  Knowles  testified  at  the  hearing.  Mr.  Knowles  has  been  employed  by 

the  District  since  1993.  He  is  familiar  with  the  community  and  surrounding  area.  He  has 
been  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  since  2012.  His  duties  in  that 
position  mclude,  among  others,  bemg  responsible  for  labor  relations,  employee  discipline, 
and  hiring  classified  employees.  Before  becoming  Assistant  Superintendent  m  2012,  Mr. 
Knowles  taught  middle  school  and  alternative  education,  and  has  also  been  an  assistant 
principal,  coach,  and  principal.  The  Commission  found  Mr.  Knowles’  testimony  credible  and 
persuasive. 

165. 

Mr.  Knowles  has  known  respondent  since  1997,  when  they  worked  together  at 

John  Marshall  Middle  School.  In  2002,  respondent  was  transferred  to  Simons  Middle 
School  where  Mr.  Knowles  was  the  principal  and  one  of  respondent's  supervisors. 

166. 

(A)  During  the  2013-2014  school  year,  Mr.  Knowles,  as  Assistant 

Superintendent,  was  made  aware  of  concerns  regarding  respondent's  conduct  at  Pomona 
High  School,  specifically,  that  respondent  made  inappropriate  comments  in  the  classroom. 
Principal  Fasting  sent  Mr.  Knowles  the  2013  Conference  Summary  (Exh.  4).  Mr.  Knowles 
explained  that  respondent's  comments,  as  reported,  were  concerning  to  the  District.  A 
teacher  is  responsible  for  maintaining  a  suitable  learning  environment  in  the  classroom.  It  is 
not  appropriate  for  a  teacher  to  befriend  students  at  them  level. 
inappropriate  topics,  it  is  not  appropriate  for  the  teacher  to  engage  the  students  on  the 
inappropriate  topic.  Based  on  his  experience  as  a  middle  school  teacher,  Mr.  Knowles 
testified  that  students  test  boundaries. 

If  students  bring  up 

(B)  Mr.  Knowles  attended  a  meeting  with  respondent,  his  union  representative 

Mike  Hernandez,  and  Ms.  McCullough.  The  purpose  of  the  mecting  was  to  discuss  the 
District's  concerns  regarding  respondent's  inappropriate  conduct.  During  the  meeting, 
respondent  explamed  that  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky"  was  a  cultural  saying  used  in  Nigeria, 
and  he  did  not  use  tin  asexual  way.  Mr.  Knowles  understood  that  respondent  used  the 
phrase  "sucky  sucky"  in  a  sexual  manner. 
honest  in  this  explanation. 

Mr.  Knowles  did  not  feel  respondent  was  being 

(C)  During  the  meeting,  as  stated  in  the  2013  Conference  Summary, 
respondent  was  given  clear  directions,  which  were  remforced  during  the  mecting. 

45

167. 

In  March  2017,  Mr.  Knowles  was  made  aware  of  other  concerns  regarding 

respondent.  There  was  a  parent  complaint  and  a  student  reporting  to  Principal  Fastmg  about 
respondent's  behavior  and  comments  in  class.  The  vast  majority  involved  inappropriate 
language.  The  District  placed  respondent  on  administrative  leave  pending  the  completion  of 
its  investigation.  At  that  time,  the  site  administrators  at  Pomona  High  School  interviewed 
students.  The  District  became  aware  of  the  severity  of  respondent's  comments  m  the 
classroom,  which  it  was  not  previously  aware  of.  The  District  called  tts  legal  counsel  at  that 
point. 

168. 

Mr.  Knowles  explained  that  the  District  did  not  issue  respondent  a  45-day 

notice  for  unprofessional  conduct  or  unsatisfactory  performance  under  Education  Code 
section  44932.  The  District  did  not  issue  respondent  a  45-day  notice  because,  after 
interviewing  students  and  reading  witness  statements,  the  District  found  respondent's  conduct 
was  “atrocious.”  Mr.  Knowles  believes  that  respondent  persistently  viclated  prior  directives 
over  time,  he  does  not  have  the  proper  temperament  to  teach  in  the  District,  and  he  is  not  fit 
to  teach.  Mr.  Knowles  does  not  believe  respondent  will  correct  his  inappropriate  behavior. 
The  District  has  given  respondent  the  opportunity  to  correct  his  conduct.  Mr.  Knowles 
considered  the  overwhelming  number  of  students  reporting  that  respondent  makes 
inappropriate  comments  (many  of  the  students  like  respondent),  respondent's  denial  that  he 
said  the  comments,  respondent's  failure  to  be  truthful  with  Mr.  Knowles,  and  respondent's 
opportunity  to  correct  the  behavior  in  2013  but  failure  to  do  so.  Mr.  Knowles  reviewed  the 
totality  of  the  charges  and  concluded  that  respondent  violated  numerous  District  and  school 
policies. 

169. 

Mr.  Knowles  testified  that  the  nature  of  respondent's  conduct  affected  students 

in  many  ways.  For  example,  some  students  laughed  and  thought  respondent's  off-handed 
comments  were  funny:  at  the  same  time,  the  comments  traumatically  impacted  other 
students.  Overall,  the  teacher  sets  the  standard  of  behavior  for  students  and  is  responsible  for 
maintaining  a  suitable  learning  environment.  Mr.  Knowles’  opinion  is  that  there  will  be  a 
negative  impact  if  respondent  is  returned  to  the  classroom.  When  teaching  children,  a 
teacher  must  maintain  a  suitable  learning  environment.  After  warnings,  no  corrections,  and 
no  acceptance  of  responsibility  for  his  conduct,  the  District's  position  is  that  respondent's 
inappropriate  behavior  will  continue. 

Testimony  of  Krystana  Watks-Harper 

170. 

Krystana  Walks-Harper  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  28  years.  She 

has  been  the  Director  for  Pupil  and  Community  Services  for  the  past  three  years.  Her  durhes 
mclude  bemg  responsible  for  the  social  welfare  of  students,  parent  education,  how  parents’ 
concerns  relate  to  services,  and  providing  community  services  to  families.  Ms.  Walks-Harper 
is  familiar  with  the  community.  Ms.  Walks-Harper  has  been  a  teacher  and  principal  at  the 
elementary  and  secondary  levels.  She  worked  |S  years  as  an  administrator.  She  has  a 
bachelor's  degree  im  psychology,  a  master’s  in  education,  an  administrative  services 
credential,  and  a  doctorate  im  education.  She  is  trained  in  how  to  maintam  a  healthy 
environment  for  students.  The  Commission  found  Ms.  Walks-Harper's  testimony  credible, 
well-reasoned  and  persuasive. 

A

171. 

Ms.  Walks-Harper  does  not  know  respondent.  During  the  2016-2017  school 

year,  Ms.  Walks-Harper  met  with  both  parents  of  a  female  student  om  L.)  who 
expressed  concern  about  respondent's  comments  in  the  classroom  which  his  daughter  shared 
with  him.  The  parent  reported  to  Ms.  Walks-Harper  that  respondent's  comments  were  about 
sexual  behavior,  comments  about  students  being  "hot,"  girlfriend  is  "hot,"  students'  hips, 
comments  about  genitalia,  and  use  of  the  teacher's  penis.  Ms.  Walks-Harper  testified  she  had 
never  received  complaints  like  this  before.  Ms.  Walks-Harper's  immediate  reaction  was 
surprise,  and  then  concern  for  the  students.  In  her  opinion,  this  type  of  teacher  is  dangerous 
to  students.  The  comments  breach  the  trust  between  teacher  and  students. 

172. 

Ms.  Walks-Harper  met  with  both  parents,  the  female  student,  and  the  student's 

sibling.  During  the  meeting,  the  student's  demeanor  appeared  embarrassed  and  reticent  as 
she  shared  the  information.  After  the  meeting  with  the  student  and  her  family,  Ms.  Walks- 
Harper  sent  an  email  to  the  District's  Human  Resources  office  and  the  site  administrator. 
The  email  set  forth  the  comments  that  were  shared  by  the  female  student  and  her  parents. 
(Exh.  14,  p.  56.)  Ms.  Walks-Harper  also  sent  a  report  to  the  Department  of  Child  and  Family 
Services  (DCFS)  because  she  is  a  mandated  reporter.  The  conduct  she  reported  was  that  the 
teacher  made  comments  that  caused  students  emotional  harm  and  were  abusive.  After 
making  the  DCFS  report,  Ms.  Walks-Harper  took  no  further  action  on  the  matter. 

173. 

Ms.  Walks-Harper  prepared  an  email  that  summarized  respondent's 

m7  L.  Ms.  Walks-Harper  noted  that 

inappropriate  comments,  as  reported  by  student 
respondent  reportedly  told 
that  her  hips  are  too  wide  to  run  track  and  that  she  has  a 
nice  body;  he  told  another  student  that  the  student's  girlfriend  was  "hot";  he  discussed  sexual 
behavior  of  animals  and  of  people;  he  said  he  was  lucky  because  he  has  a  large  penis;  he 
showed  students  a  picture  of  himself  where  he  described  himself  as  high;  he  told  another 
student,  "Shut  the  fuck  up  before  I  put  it  (referencing  his  penis)  in  your  mouth."  He  referred 
to  ladies  in  the  office  as  "those  bitches";  he  referred  to  two  female  students  as  lovers  and 
encouraged  them  to  kiss  one  another;  he  used  gang  letters;  and  he  discussed  pornography  in 
class.  (Exh.  14.) 

174. 

Ms.  Walks-Harper's  opinion  is  that  the  teacher's  comments  impact  safety. 

Students  expect  a  trusting  relationship  with  their  teacher.  These  comments  make  students 
uneasy  and  make  it  hard  to  focus  on  their  studies.  It  can  be  a  form  of  trauma.  The  fact  that 
some  students  laugh  at  the  teacher's  comments  does  not  make  the  comments  less  traumatic 
because  laughing  can  indicate  discomfort.  The  situation  1s  not  mitigated  if  the  teacher  directs 
the  comments  to  a  few  students.  Other  students  may  be  traumatized.  In  Ms.  Walks-Harper's 
experience,  high  school  students  do  not  have  the  maturity  to  discern  what  is  appropriate  and 
not  appropriate.  In  her  experience,  students  do  not  make  complaints  or  reports  against 
teaching  staff  for  various  reasons,  including  peer  pressure  or  fear  of  being  labeled a tattle-tale 
or  snitch.  In  addition,  students  with  family  members  who  are  undocumented  may  hesitate  to 
come  forward.  Also,  some  cultures  presume  that  the  teacher  is  always  correct.  Families 
assume  what  happens  in  school  is  okay.  The  families  trust  the  school,  which  discourages  a 
family  from  coming  forward. 

45

  

175. 

Ms.  Walks-Harper's  opinion  is  that  the  comments  by  respondent  that  were 

reported  to  her  do  not  fulfill  the  California  Teaching  Standards.  A  teacher  must  maintain  a 
safe  learning  environment.  Ms.  Walks-Harper  testified  that  a  line  was  crossed  with  these 
comments.  Based  on  her  experience,  if  a  teacher  engages  in  this  type  of  conduct  year  after 
year,  the  teacher  cannot  be  rehabilitated.  The  California  Teaching  Standards  requires  that  a 
teacher  maintain  a  safe  learning  environment.  If  this  teacher  continues  in  the  classroom,  the 
student  and  the  District  are  left  uncertain  as  to  what  may  happen. 

Other  Findings 

176. 

The  Commission  finds  respondent  has  not  accepted  responsibility  for  his 

conduct.  He  seemed  to  have  an  excuse  for  everything.  His  excuses,  however,  did  not 
mitigate  or  justify  his  inappropriate  conduct.  For  example,  he  denied  making  racial 
comments  and  instead  claimed  that  it  was  the  students  who  made  the  comments  and  he  put  a 
stop  to  them.  Respondent's  justification  that  he  talked  about  certain  topics  because  the 
students  brought  them  up  (e.g.,  abortion)  fails  to  recognize  the  boundaries  of  the  student- 
teacher  relationship.  Just  because  a  student  raises  the  topic  doesn't  mean  respondent,  as 
teacher,  1s  required  to  respond,  particularly  to  topics  that  are  not  within  his  subject  matter 
area. 

177. 

Ms.  Moatakef  testified  that  respondent's  conduct  impacted  the  relationship 

between  students  and  staff.  The  school  was  divided  into  two  camps.  One  camp  loved 
respondent  and  saw  him  as  a  role  model.  The  other  camp  viewed  him  less  favorably.  Ms. 
Moatakef  testified  that  many  students  came  to  see  her  about  respondent's  conduct  in  class, 
but  she  was  not  aware  of  those  students  making  formal  complaints  against  respondent.  Her 
impression  was  that  students  were  scared  that  their  grades  might  be  directly  affected  if  they 
said  anything. 

178. 

Many  of  the  student-witnesses  who  testified  about  respondent's  inappropriate 

conduct  acknowledged  that  they  did  not  make  any  formal  complaint  against  respondent.  The 
lack  of  formal  complaint,  however,  did  not  diminish  the  credibility  of  their  testimony.  As 
explained  by  Ms.  Walks-Harper  and  Ms.  Moatakef,  students  may  be  reluctant  to  make  a 
formal  complaint  against  a  teacher  for  many  reasons  as  stated  above. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944°  and  Factual  Findings  1-4. 

/// 

indicated. 

  

©  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

46

2, 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  m  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(£985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

3, 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  the  grounds  for  dismissal  alleged  by  the 

District  against  respondent  are  for  immoral  conduct  [subdivision  (a)(1}],  dishonesty 
isubdivision  (a)(4)],  evident  unfitness  for  service  [subdivision  (a)(6)|,  and  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  [subdivision  (a}(8)}. 

4A. 

lt  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact——in  this  case  the  three  members  of  the 

Commission—may  "accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even 
though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted."  Grevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973) 9 
Cal.  3d  51,67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  "reject  part  of  the  testimony  of a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected 
material."  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.  App.2d  762, 
767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of a  witness,  even  an  expert,  although 
not  contradicted.  (’oreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the 
testimony  of  "one  credible  witness  may  constitute  substantial  evidence."  (Kearl  v.  Board  of 
Medical  Quality  Assurance,  189  Cal  App.3d  1040,  1052.) 

fimmorai  Conduct 

5. 

Grounds  exist  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1),  for  immoral  conduct.  (Factual  Findings  12-178. 

6. 

The  term  "immoral  conduct"  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of Ed.  of  San  Francisca  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.  App.2d  808,  811.) 

7. 

The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  by  reason 

of  his  regular  use  of  protanity,  his  mappropriate  comments  and  language,  including 
cominents  of a  sexual  nature,  and  his  offensive  and  disparaging  remarks  related  to  race, 
gender,  and  sexual  orientation.  The  Commission  also  finds  respondent  engaged  in  immoral 
conduct  by  the  inappropriate  and  graphic  videos  and  images  he  projected  his  classes,  such  as 
videos  of  dogs  being  abused  or  killed  and  the  removal  of  drugs  hidden  in  a  man’s  anus,  none 
of  which  were  related  to  any  class  lesson. 

Dishonesty 

3. 

Grounds  exist  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a4),  for  dishonesty.  (Pactual  Fidimgs  12-178.) 

47

9. 

Dishonesty  "connotes  a  disposition  to  deceive"  and  "necessarily  includes  the 
element  of  bad  faith."  It  means  "fraud,  deception,  betrayal,  faithlessness,"  and  "denotes  an 
absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray." 
(Midway  School  District  v.  Griffith  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  13.) 

10. 

|The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  dishonesty  by  his  conduct 
and  in  his  statements  to  school  administrators  and  in  his  testimony  to  the  Commission.  He 
engaged  in  dishonesty  by  telling  students  to  conceal  that  they  purchased  food  from  him  if 
asked  by  school  officials.  Respondent  was  dishonest  regarding  the  incident  with  im”  A. 
by  claiming  he  was  merely  retrieving  the  student's  project  from  his  car,  and  not  attempting  to 
drive  the  student  off  campus,  and  that  he  had  permission  from  his  parents  to  give  him  rides. 
Respondent  was  also  dishonest  to  the  Commission  when  he  testified  that  the  four  female 
students  he  drove  to  a  nearby  mall  showed  him  a  lunch  pass.  He  was  also  dishonest  to  the 
Commission  by  claiming,  for  the  first  time  at  the  hearing,  that ,  |  A.  charged  at  him 
with  a  pencil  in  his  hand.  Respondent  engaged  in  dishonesty  in  denying  that  he  uses  the 
phrase  "sucky  sucky"  or  that  he  told  Principal  Fasting  it  was  a  common  Nigerian  expression. 

Persistent  Violation  of  School  Laws  and  Regulations 

11. 

Grounds  exist  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(8),  for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  and  regulations.  (Factual  Findings 
12-178.) 

12. 

(A)  In  Governing  Board  of  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972) 

28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82,  the  court  stated:  "The  word  ‘persistent’  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as 
‘refusing  to  relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
...  constantly  repeated.’  (Webster's  New  World  Dict.  (College  ed.);  see  Webster's  Third 
New  Internat.  Dict.)  And  in  the  judicial  decisions  of  this,  as  well  as  other  states,  the  word 
has  been  interpreted  to  mean  ‘continuing  or  constant.'  [citations  omitted]." 

.  stubborn;  persevering 

. 

(B)  The  court  in  Seaman  further  explained  that  "a  single  violation  of  a  school 
board's  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher  under  subdivision 
(g)  of  section  13403  [now  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)].  The  subdivision  pertains  to 
unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature,  apparently  to 
allow  opportunity  for  a  correction,  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  1s  not  sufficient  to 
warrant  dismissal;  'it  is  the  persistent  disregard’  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is 
designed  to  regulate."  (28  Cal.App.3d  at  84  [citation  omitted].) 

13. 

In  this  case,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent 

engaged  in  a  persistent  violation  of  the  District's  policies  and  school  rules. 
Findings  17-26,  30-33,  34-163.) 

(Factual 

/// 

/// 

48

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

14. 

Grounds  exist  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Factual  Findings  12-178.) 

15. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  "clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies." 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  "connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district." 

(/d.) 

16. 

—_In  this  case,  the  Commission  is  persuaded  that  respondent's  misconduct  is 

caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament  and  non-remediable.  Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  that 
violated  the  directives  and  counseling  he  had  been  given.  He  continued  to  have  physical 
contact  with  students  by  drying  his  wet  hands  on  students  and  hugging  students.  He 
continued  to  use  profanity,  make  sexual  comments,  and  use  the  phrase  "sucky  sucky."  He 
shared  personal  information  of  a  sexual  nature  with  students.  Respondent's  attempt  to  give  a 
ride  to  im”  A.  on  May  11,  2015,  was  in  violation  of  the  directive  given  to  him  after  he 
drove  four  female  students  off-campus  on  April  30,  2015.  He  continued  to  sell  food  to 
students  in  his  classroom,  despite  having  been  counseled  on  the  proper  procedures  for 
obtaining  ASB  and  administration  authorization  for  food  sales.  Respondent  has  been  given 
multiple  opportunities  to  address  his  misconduct  and  correct  his  behaviors.  His  continued 
and  repeated  failure  to  comply  with  his  supervisors’  directives  leads  to  no  other  conclusion 
that  his  misconduct  will  not  be  corrected  if  given  additional  notice  and  opportunities  to  do  so. 

Morrison  Factors 

17. 

Cause  for  discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate  to  his  fitness  to  teach  within 
the  meaning  of  the  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education 
(1969)  |  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  found  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent 
based  on  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation 
of  school  rules.  With  regard  to  those  causes  for  dismissal,  the  Commission  considered  all  the 
factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and  compared  them  to  the  facts  established  above.  Not  all 
Morrison  factors  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be  satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of 
ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis 
need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the 
accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  "When  the  camel's  back  is  broken  we  need  not 
weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which  could  have  done  the  deed."  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1457.) 

18. 

The  Morrison  case  sets  forth  the  following  factors  for  determining  a  teacher's 
fitness  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 
fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 

49

in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  extenuating  or 
ageravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
in  question  will  recur;  and  (8)  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  chilling  impact 
on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of  Education,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  at  229.)  The  Morrison  factors  apply  as  follows: 

(A) 

  

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 
teachers.  Respondent’s  conduct  adversely  affected  students,  teachers  and  administrators. 
Some  students  were  offended  and  made  to  feel  uncomfortable  by  respondent's  comments  and 
conduct.  Respondent's  conduct  created  divisions  among  students,  between  those  who  liked 
respondent's  teaching  style  and  those  who  felt  uncomfortable  and  offended 
but  were  too  timid  or  afraid  to  make  a  formal  complaint.  Respondent  disparaged  teachers 
and  administrators  in  front  of  his  students,  thereby  undermining  their  authority  with  students. 
For  students  who  saw  respondent  as  a  role  model,  they  were  emboldened  to  imitate  and 
repeat  his  inappropriate  conduct  and  language.  Respondent's  conduct  undermined  the 
school's  efforts  to  maintain  a  positive  culture  and  climate  for  all  students  and  staff. 

(B) 

The  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  conduct  caused  great 
  

adversity  to  those  students  who  were  offended,  made  uncomfortable,  or  negatively  impacted 
by  his  conduct.  His  conduct  caused  minimal  adversity,  if  at  all,  to  the  students  who  viewed 
his  conduct  favorably.  Respondent's  conduct  caused  great  adversity  to  administrators  and 
other  employees  whose  authority  with  students  was  undermined  by  his  inappropriate  and 
demeaning  comments  to  students  about  them. 

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent's 
misconduct  at  issue  was  recent,  having  occurred  during  the  approximate  period  of  2013 
through  2017. 

  

(D) 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  Respondent 

holds  the  credential  authorizing  him  to  teach  biology  and  anatomy  &  physiology  at  Pomona 
High  School. 

  

(E) 

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

  

  

surrounding  the  conduct.  The  Commission  finds  there  were  no  extenuating  circumstances 
for  respondent's  misconduct.  For  example,  there  is  no  excuse  or  justification  for  respondent's 
repeated  and  regular  use  of  profanity  and  vulgar  language  and  comments  during  classroom 
instruction  or  his  interactions  with  students.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent's  excuse 
that  he  uses  profanity  as  academic  vocabulary  to  teach  class  concepts  is  not  convincing.  The 
Commission  finds  there  are  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  respondent's  misconduct. 
As  a  defense,  respondent  repeatedly  claimed  in  this  proceeding  that  he  did  not  know,  or  was 
never  told,  that  his  conduct  was  not  permitted  or  inappropriate.  The  Commission  is  not 
persuaded  by  that  defense.  Respondent  has  worked  as  a  teacher  since  1995.  He  has  lived  in 
the  United  States  since  1986.  With  that  background,  respondent  should  know  that,  for 
example,  using  profanity  and  making  racial  and  sexual  comments,  are  not  acceptable 

50

behavior  for  a  classroom  teacher.  The  District  counseled  and  advised  respondent  when  his 
behavior  and  conduct  was  inappropriate  and  unacceptable.  Yet,  respondent  continued  to 
engage  in  the  inappropriate  and  unacceptable  conduct. 

(F) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

  

the  conduct.  The  Commission  finds  there  1s  evidence  that  respondent  had  praiseworthy 
motives  behind  his  conduct.  The  Commission  believes  that,  for  the  most  part,  respondent 
was  not  intentionally  trying  to  harm  students.  He  appears  to  have  a  sincere  desire  to  relate  to 
and  connect  with  his  students.  The  problem  is  that  respondent  focused  on  relating  to  students 
at  their  level  instead  of  relating  to  them  as  their  teacher  and  authority  figure.  Respondent 
acted  and  conducted  himself  with  his  students  as  if  he  were  another  student,  rather  than  as 
their  teacher.  He  ingratiated  himself  with  students  who  had  a  favorable  view  of  his  teaching 
style  and  antics,  but  alienated  those  students  with  a  less  favorable  view.  By  his  conduct, 
respondent  undermined  his  ability  to  create  a  positive  learning  environment  for  all  the 
students  in  his  classes. 

(G) 

  

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  Respondent's 
conduct  at  issue  is  likely  to  recur.  Warnings  and  directives  from  school  administrators  have 
not  helped  in  the  past.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  Commission  believes  there  is  more  than 
a  remote  possibility  that  respondent  would  continue  to  engage  in  the  same  type  of 
misconduct  if  he  1s  allowed  to  return  to  a  classroom. 

(H) 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

  

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Not  applicable. 

  

19. 

Based  on  the  above  Morrison  factors,  the  Commission  finds  that  respondent's 

misconduct  demonstrates  he  is  unfit  for  service  as  teacher  in  the  District. 

Disposition 

20. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach...  ,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

21. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  unanimous  decision  of  the  Commission  in  this 

case  1s  that  respondent  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  District. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

51

Respondent  Osent  friafen  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Pomona 

ORDER 

Unified  School  District. 

September  12,  2018 
DATED:    

September  13,  2018 
DATED:    

September  13,  2018 
DATED:    

oo  DocuSigned  by: 

A 

lag Lda 

Lap 

C/ 

ee  26E456978D1F  409... 

  
RAY  ANDRZEIEWSKI 
Commission  Member 

oot  DocuSigned  by: 

4 

AP  K 

/  a) 

Nee  DOAEQSE22B4  ME... 

  
TOM  HOOD 
Commission  Member 

poo  DocuSigned  by: 

‘Nnanee  7833820A62A44D8.... 

  
ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

52

