BEFORE THE
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
VALLEY CENTER - PAUMA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss:

CHRISTOPHER JAHN,

OAH No. 2017061281

Respondent.

DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on Professional 

Competence in Valley Center, California on October 23, 24, 25, 2017, and in San Diego on 
November 3, and 9, 2017.  The Commission was comprised of the following members:
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Ursula Sack, Ph.D., and Carmen 
Martinez.

Daniel Shinoff, Michelle Pacis, and Jack Sweet, Attorneys at Law, Artiano Shinoff, 

represented Valley Center - Pauma Unified School District.

Jon Cadieux, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, APC, represented

respondent Christopher Jahn, who was present during the hearing.

On November 16, 2017, the Commission met to deliberate and the matter was 

submitted.

CASE SUMMARY 

Mr. Jahn was employed by the district as a school psychologist. Beginning in the 2013-

2014 school year, Mr. Jahn received an unfavorable evaluation.  Thereafter, he was out on 
medical leave and when he returned he was behind in his work. During the 2015-16 and 2016-
17 school years, Mr. Jahn failed to complete student assessments and reports, was unprepared 
for Individualized Education Plan (IEP) meetings, failed to comply with district directives and 
behaved inappropriately. Mr. Jahn was out on several leaves of absence and fell further behind 
in his work.  Mr. Jahn’s actions constituted unprofessional conduct and demonstrated he was 
evidently unfit to serve; and constituted persistent violations or refusals to obey regulations
and district policies. The Commission did not find that Mr. Jahn’s actions constituted
dishonesty, although his statements to his supervisors were misleading. Based upon the 

evidence presented, the Commission concluded that the allegations that were sustained 
warranted Mr. Jahn’s dismissal from the district.

Jurisdictional Matters

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.

Mr. Jahn was employed by the Valley Center - Pauma Unified School District 

as a school psychologist. During the time of the alleged incidents, he primarily worked at 
Valley Center Middle School.

2.

On May 24, 2017, Mr. Jahn was placed on paid administrative leave to allow 

the district to complete its investigation. 

3.

Mark Garner, then the district’s Director of Human Resources, signed the 
Notice of Charges on June 16, 2017, in his official capacity.  The notice set forth the facts
and laws on which Mr. Garner was relying and sought to immediately dismiss Mr. Jahn from 
employment with the district on the grounds of unprofessional conduct (Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(2)), dishonesty (Education Code section 44932, subdivision
(a)(4)), unsatisfactory performance (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5)),1
evident unfitness for service (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6)), and 
persistent violation or refusal to obey regulations and district polices (Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(8)).2

4.

On June 19, 2017, Mr. Garner authored a letter to Mr. Jahn advising him of his
intent to recommend to the Governing Board that it terminate Mr. Jahn’s employment.  Mr. 
Garner enclosed a copy of the Notice of Charges with his letter.  In that notice, the district 
alleged that Mr. Jahn did not complete assessments or reports, was unprepared for meetings, 
was tardy to meetings, and did not comply with district directives.

5.

Mr. Jahn timely appealed the dismissal action, denying that grounds for his 

dismissal from employment existed, and this hearing followed.

1 Mr. Jahn’s motion in limine to strike the cause of discipline for unsatisfactory 

performance (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5)), was granted because the 
district failed to comply with the mandates of Education Code section 44938 that required 
the district to provide Mr. Jahn at least 90 days’ notice of the charge to give him a chance to 
correct his behavior giving rise to the charge.

2 Page 2, line 3, of the notice erroneously referenced Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1), immoral conduct, and neither party objected to that subdivision being 
struck from the notice at the start of the hearing.  The notice was also amended by
interlineation at page 2, line 14, to strike “2017” and insert “2016.”

2

Motions in Limine

6.

The parties filed motions in limine and oppositions3 thereto.  Tentative rulings 

were issued and the parties were allowed to orally argue their positions at the start of trial.
After listening to oral arguments, final rulings were issued. 

As the district’s counsel successfully argued in one of its motions in limine, Mr. Jahn’s 

medical condition should not be considered as a factor in this hearing because Mr. Jahn asserted 
during discovery that he had no medical issues affecting his work performance.  Accordingly,
the Commission made no findings about Mr. Jahn’s medical condition.

Mr. Jahn’s Education and District Employment

7.

After obtaining his Bachelor of Arts degree, Mr. Jahn received an Educational

Specialist degree and a Master’s Degree in Educational Psychology in 2006.  Prior to 
obtaining his masters, Mr. Jahn was required to perform internships.  Mr. Jahn did his 
internship at the district and his supervisor was so impressed with his work that he 
encouraged Mr. Jahn to apply for a position with the district.  During his employment, Mr. 
Jahn worked at every school site with the bulk of his assignments being at the middle 
schools. Although the district asserted as further evidence of Mr. Jahn’s unfitness and 
unprofessional conduct, that Mr. Jahn’s office was in disarray, Mr. Jahn established that he
shared an office with others and that it was used as a meeting room and for storage, making 
that claim unpersuasive.

Mr. Jahn’s 2013-2014 Evaluation

8.

Scott Huffman, Director of Student Support Services, evaluated Mr. Jahn for 

the 2013-2014 school year.  In the “Standards/Assessments” section, Mr. Jahn received 
ratings of “meets standards” in four categories and “partially meets standards” in two 
categories.  Mr. Jahn did not receive any “exceeds standard” ratings.

Standard III evaluated how Mr. Jahn “[i]mplements the IDEA4 consistent with district

procedures and policies regarding the provision of special education services; maintains 
records/files containing all pertinent and legally information [sic] for assigned students.”  Mr. 
Jahn received a “partially meets standards” rating and Mr. Huffman wrote the following 
comment:  “Chris is becoming more aware of updated district procedures and policies 
regarding the provision of special education services; he does a good job with maintaining 

3 The motions in limine, oppositions thereto and the tentative rulings were received in 

evidence as Exhibits 23, 25, and 26.

4 The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) ensures services to children 

with disabilities and governs how states and public agencies provide early intervention,
special education and related services to more than 6.5 million eligible infants, toddlers, 
children and youth with disabilities.

3

records/files containing all pertinent and legally information [sic] for assigned students.  He 
is careful to ask questions to ensure that all documents and procedures are followed as is 
growing [sic] in this area as well.”

Mr. Jahn also received a “partially meets standards” rating for Standard IV which 

evaluated whether Mr. Jahn “[p]rovides consultations and support to parents and staff in the 
areas of intervention, preventative crisis management and students’ social-emotional needs; 
documents all communication regarding STANDARDS, service and progress of assigned
students.”  In the comments section Mr. Huffman wrote:  “Chris is developing in his ability
to provide consultation and support to parents and staff in the areas of intervention, 
preventative crisis management, and students’ social-emotional needs; He learning [sic] to 
document all communication regarding the service and progress of students that he works 
with.  He is working on ways to communicated [sic] and collaborate with staff regarding 
student matters on a daily basis.”

In the District Expectations portion of the evaluation, Mr. Jahn received a “Does Not 
Meet Standard” rating in the “Demonstrates responsibility in duties” category. Mr. Huffman 
wrote:  “Chris is demonstrating increased responsibility with his duties.  He has taken 
seriously his need to manage his time and provide support to school site in a responsible 
manner.  This is an area that Chris is continuing to work on.”  Mr. Jahn also received a “Does 
Not Meet Standard” rating in the “Is punctual” category. Mr. Huffman wrote the
accompanying comment: “Chris is working on being on time to meetings and trainings.”

Mr. Jahn’s Overall Evaluation was “Meets Standards.”  In the Evaluator 

Comments/Recommendations section Mr. Huffman wrote:

Chris is a pleasure to have on the team.  He always [sic] willing 
to grow and learn, as well as improve at his craft.  Chris is 
supportive of systems change and provides valuable insight 
regarding the ways in which we can serve the students of 
VCPUSD.  He a [sic] great depth of knowledge and is a real
asset to the District and the sped team.

I would like to see Chris continue to grow in his ability to
address behavior systems and interventions at his school site.  I 
would also like to see Chris stay in tune with his site team and 
maintain good follow up skills so as to ensure positive outcomes 
for the students he works with.

2016 Letter of Reprimand

9.

On April 8, 2016, Mr. Huffman authored a Letter of Reprimand to Mr. Jahn.

In it, he cited a March 29, 2016, IEP meeting to which Mr. Jahn arrived late, was unprepared, 
and presented himself in an unprofessional manner.  Mr. Huffman referenced prior e-mails
advising Mr. Jahn of the subject of the meeting to refute Mr. Jahn’s claim of not knowing 

4

what he needed for the meeting.  The letter of reprimand mentioned a second meeting that 
was to occur on March 29, 2016.  Allegedly, Mr. Jahn stated he did not have his report 
completed and would “wing it” at the meeting and his supervisor told him that was not 
acceptable. However, Mr. Jahn testified that the word choice “wing it” was his supervisor’s
word choice, not his, stating that when he admitted he did not have a report for the meeting 
she asked him, “What are you going to do, wing it?”  Mr. Jahn also testified that his 
supervisor always made him very anxious, nervous and upset when he interacted with her, 
because he felt that she was bullying him.  However, he never reported those concerns to Mr. 
Huffman or Mr. Garner.

In response to his reprimand, Mr. Jahn authored a letter to Mr. Huffman on April 22,

2016, stating:

Thank you for meeting with me on March 30th and April 8th
2016.  I apologize for unprofessional behavior on my part
occurring on March 29th, 2016.  The unsatisfactory features of 
my work performance on my part occurring on March 29th were
caused by psychiatric, medical and other health factors.  I’ve 
taken actions to remedy the situation, including but not limited 
to medical appointments, psychiatric/psychological
appointments, updating medications, shortening my commute,
consulting clergy, exercising regularly and dietary
modifications.  I have scheduled an appointment to meet with 
you at your office on May 8th at 1:00 p.m.  I have also reviewed 
the board policies and California standards for the teaching 
profession cited in the letter dated April 8th, 2016.  Thank you
for your time and consideration.

Mr. Jahn testified that this letter was his way of saying that if he did something to 

make administration worry, he was sorry, he was trying to be a team player, to go along, and
to not make waves.  However, now that he looks at that letter, he “should have written it 
differently.”

The Commission concluded that the evidence did not establish that Mr. Jahn made the 

“wing it” statement but the evidence did not support Mr. Jahn’s claim of being “bullied” by
his superior.  Instead, his testimony seemed to be little more than excuses for his failure to 
complete his work.  Moreover, Mr. Jahn’s claim that he should have written his letter 
differently was not persuasive and seemed to be an additional attempt to rationalize his
actions.

Allegations and Findings Re: Escondido Union High School Student

10.

On January 21, 2017, the Escondido Union School District Program Specialist,

Renee Steel, sent Mr. Jahn an e-mail advising that he had promised to provide her with “the

5

psych-ed and SCIA5 reports” for a student who had transferred to that district, but she had 
not yet received them.  She noted that her e-mail was “a gentle reminder” that he send those 
reports.  Mr. Huffman, not Mr. Jahn, replied to Ms. Steel’s email, stating that they would get 
the reports to her.

On February 7, 2017, Ms. Steel sent another e-mail advising that the student’s IEP 

meeting had taken place on December 16, 2016, and that she was still waiting for the reports.
Mr. Jahn replied on February 8, 2017, that he would e-mail her the reports “by the end of the 
week.”

On February 8, 2017, Mr. Jahn sent an e-mail to “Ramon Guzman” stating:  “I failed 
to obtain a copy of your report at our last IEP.”  Mr. Jahn asked Mr. Guzman to fax it to him 
and asked if the parents had signed the IEP and if Mr. Jahn could access the student’s 
information in the Special Education Information System (SEIS), an information system that 
tracks all the district’s special education students. 

On February 13, 2017, Ms. Steel advised Mr. Jahn that he could access the student’s 

SEIS information, that the parents had signed the IEP, and asked Mr. Guzman to scan and
send the requested IEP to Mr. Jahn.

The district also alleged that Mr. Jahn acted unprofessionally at this student’s IEP 

meeting. The student’s mother testified in this hearing and disagreed with that claim.  She 
described Mr. Jahn as being alert, engaged and able to articulate his recommendations at IEP 
meetings.  She felt he understood her child’s needs.  She testified that the IEP meetings were 
“large” because representatives of both districts attended and that if Mr. Jahn was unable to 
answer her questions, the other school psychologist “might have the answer.”

The Commission determined that Mr. Jahn failed to provide timely reports to Ms. 

Steel and misled her as to when he would provide them.  Moreover, the student’s mother’s 
testimony did not completely refute the district’s contention that Mr. Jahn was unprepared 
for meetings as she referenced getting the answers from the other school psychologist when 
Mr. Jahn could not provide them. Moreover, the mother’s focus in the meeting would not be 
solely on Mr. Jahn making her testimony about what she observed unpersuasive. 

Allegations and Findings re: February 2017 Staffing Meeting, IEP Meetings and Conduct

11.

Kevin Sunderman, a special education teacher at Valley Center Middle 

School, testified about his interactions with Mr. Jahn regarding IEP students.  During the 
2016-2017 school year, Mr. Sunderman sent many e-mails to, and had many discussions
with, Mr. Jahn regarding the status of assessments and reports that were due.  Although Mr. 
Jahn never told Mr. Sunderman that he would not be able to complete the reports, he seldom
completed them, causing Mr. Sunderman extreme stress because the lack of reports affected 
the IEP Teams’ ability to perform their job.  Mr. Sunderman explained that if Mr. Jahn had 

5 No evidence regarding what that acronym meant was provided at hearing.

6

informed him that he could not get the assessments or reports completed, Mr. Sunderman 
could have made other arrangements; instead Mr. Jahn thanked Mr. Sunderman for “keeping
him on top of things.” Mr. Jahn’s failure to “communicate and be honest” caused Mr. 
Sunderman and the IEP Teams undue stress. This year, with Mr. Jahn gone and his 
replacement hired, the IEP Teams are “running on all cylinders” and the work is getting 
done.

Mr. Sunderman described a series of events involving a suicidal student that occurred 
in February 2017.  There was grave concern for the student’s welfare and a staffing meeting 
was set to determine how best to address the student’s needs.  Mr. Jahn was supposed to 
assess the student and have a report for the IEP Team.  Despite repeated e-mails from Mr. 
Sunderman, Mr. Jahn failed to do so, which put the IEP Team in a “tailspin.”  Mr. Jahn also 
provided “very little input” at the staffing meeting.  Mr. Jahn agreed to have his report 
finished by the IEP meeting which was set to occur after the school break.

However, on the Monday after break, Mr. Jahn still had not completed his report.

The next day, on the morning of the IEP meeting, Mr. Sunderman went to Mr. Jahn’s office 
to find out about the status of the report. When Mr. Jahn opened the door, he appeared
disheveled, mentioned he had fallen, and his office was in disarray with papers on the floor 
and coffee spilled on a $1,000 psychological test kit.  Mr. Jahn was pacing back and forth, 
scratching his forearms, and Mr. Sunderman was “thrown for a loop.”  Mr. Sunderman was 
extremely concerned about Mr. Jahn’s welfare and left to inform the principal.  When Mr. 
Sunderman left Mr. Jahn’s office, the door slammed shut behind him.

After speaking with the principal, Mr. Sunderman returned to Mr. Jahn’s office and it 

was “weird.”  Mr. Sunderman explained that Mr. Jahn opened the door and it was “like the 
prior incident had never happened.”  This “bizarre swing of mood” was “disturbing” to Mr. 
Sunderman.  Mr. Jahn then advised Mr. Sunderman that he would get him the report for the 
meeting.  Thereafter, during fifth period, Mr. Jahn arrived unannounced to Mr. Sunderman’s 
classroom, carrying his computer and his lunch, stating he was there to work on the suicidal 
student’s information.  Mr. Sunderman told Mr. Jahn that he was teaching his class, but Mr. 
Jahn remained, sat among the students, ate his food and worked on his computer.  At one 
point, Mr. Jahn told Mr. Sunderman’s students to be quiet so he could work.  Mr. Sunderman 
was upset that Mr. Jahn disrupted his class and told his students to quiet down.

Later that day at the IEP meeting, Mr. Sunderman “watched Mr. Jahn like a hawk” 

because he was so disturbed by Mr. Jahn’s behaviors earlier that day.  Mr. Jahn did not have 
a report prepared, was eating during the meeting, appeared “giddy,” made inappropriate 
jokes and gestures, including reenacting shooting his arm with a syringe, and making what 
sounded like a comment about signing a death certificate, although he testified at this hearing 
that he could not say for sure if Mr. Jahn actually made that statement but thinks that was 
what he heard Mr. Jahn say. Mr. Sunderman observed the students’ parents looking at each 
other quizzically in response to Mr. Jahn’s statements and presentation.  Further, rather than 
providing the IEP participants with copies of a finished report, Mr. Jahn reviewed his testing 
protocols with the team and the parents, and gave Mr. Sunderman the impression that Mr. 
Jahn did not know what he was reading; it was a very unorganized presentation.  Moreover, 

7

Mr. Jahn did not realize that the student’s father was getting upset because Mr. Jahn was only 
sharing his one copy of the protocols with the mother.  Recognizing this, Mr. Sunderman 
stopped the meeting to switch seats so the father could see the protocols.  Typically at IEP 
meetings, the school psychologist has several copies of a report, not just one copy of test 
protocols, to share with parents and IEP Team members.

Jon Petersen, the former principal at the middle school where Mr. Jahn worked, is 
currently the district’s Chief Business Officer.  He testified that during that February 2017
IEP meeting Mr. Jahn was speaking more slowly than normally, was struggling to find the 
words regarding the student, and appeared to be reading from rating scales that he was 
interpreting at the meeting as opposed to having a prepared report.  However, what was more 
troubling was that Mr. Jahn was continually trying to break the ice by telling jokes which 
caused the parents and one of their representatives to continually look at each other 
quizzically.  Mr. Petersen described Mr. Jahn’s demeanor as “giddy.” Mr. Petersen called 
Mr. Huffman immediately after the meeting, telling him that this was “not normal behavior.”
Mr. Petersen agreed that no parents complained about Mr. Jahn but testified that it was not 
unusual for special education parents not to have complained about Mr. Jahn’s behavior 
because “we rarely have complaints from parents after IEP meetings.”

Mr. Jahn denied telling Mr. Sunderman that he fell in his office, testifying that Mr.

Sunderman’s testimony was simply not true.  Mr. Jahn admitted he did not have a report for 
the February 28, 2017, IEP meeting.  The reason he did not have his report was because he 
had not been able to complete his assessment because the student was absent from school on 
multiple occasions. Mr. Jahn denied doing the student’s assessment in Mr. Sunderman’s 
classroom, although he “could not recall exactly what [he] was doing in Mr. Sunderman’s 
class.” Mr. Jahn also denied making jokes, lethal injection motions or any statement about 
signing a death certificate during that February IEP meeting.

Mr. Jahn testified that he was on medical leave for approximately five or six weeks 

and got a MRSA6 infection.  He was released back to work a few days after leaving the 
hospital following two surgeries.7 When Mr. Jahn returned to work he was still undergoing 
twice a day infusions that he performed at work.  He was “wiped” and his workload had 
piled up.  Although he could perform some of his duties, he could not perform them at “the 
level of competency or efficiency” that he normally did.  He did not feel “100 percent” until 
March 2017, and he did not ask for help because there were other teachers “battling worse
diseases,” he “overestimated his abilities,” and he was “not good at self-advocacy.”  In 
retrospect Mr. Jahn should have asked for help, additional time to complete his reports, and 
more time to get up to speed, especially as he was self-administering antibiotics to himself.
But he thought the district knew he was recovering from a serious illness and that they would 
provide accommodations for him even though he returned to work with no restrictions.  The 

6 MRSA is an abbreviation for Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus, some

bacteria that attacks organisms.

7 The dates of his leaves and returns to work were not made clear at this hearing.

8

district did not hire a replacement to cover his workload and several dozen reports were due 
while he was out on leave.  All but one or two of those reports were still due when he 
returned to work. He explained that once he was behind it was hard to keep up, but he 
planned to do so by working extra hours and over school breaks/holidays. However, things 
piled up.

The student’s mother testified in support of Mr. Jahn.  She claimed that he did not 
make any inappropriate jokes or remarks at the February IEP meeting; that she thought he 
was honest with her when she had questions regarding the medication the psychiatrist was 
recommending for her daughter; that he did not make a needle in his arm injection motion, or
a death certificate comment.  The mother testified that she always felt that Mr. Jahn was very
professional in meetings, that he was compassionate and understanding and she liked him 
much better than his current replacement.  The mother also testified that she received written 
reports, but upon further questioning it was clear that what she considered a report was 
merely the IEP document setting forth her parental rights in the IEP process.

Mr. Huffman admitted that Mr. Sunderman was the only employee who complained 
about Mr. Jahn’s behavior at the February 2017 IEP meeting. Although Mr. Jahn’s attorney
implied in his cross-examinations that Mr. Sunderman was biased against Mr. Jahn, the 
evidence did not support that assertion.  Mr. Sunderman presented as an excellent witness 
with firsthand knowledge of the facts at issue in this case.  His testimony was credible; he 
answered all questions posed to him in a direct manner, gave a credible accounting of his 
observations and concerns, and his answers were persuasive.

The Commission concluded that Mr. Sunderman’s testimony about Mr. Jahn’s bizarre
behavior in his office and in Mr. Sunderman’s classroom was more credible than Mr. Jahn’s 
testimony to the contrary.  Additionally, Mr. Sunderman’s testimony regarding Mr. Jahn’s 
behavior at the IEP meeting where Mr. Jahn appeared giddy, made inappropriate comments, 
and was unprepared and disorganized was more persuasive than Mr. Jahn’s and the student’s 
mother’s testimony. Mr. Sunderman had good reason to specifically focus his attention 
during that IEP meeting on Mr. Jahn because of their earlier encounters that day, as opposed 
to the mother who had no knowledge of those events and whose primary focus would be on 
the needs of her child. However, the Commission was not convinced that Mr. Jahn made 
“syringe in the arm” gestures, although he may have been doing something with his arms 
because of the IV injections he was giving himself for his MRSA infection.  The
Commission was also not convinced that Mr. Jahn made a death certificate comment because
Mr. Sunderman admitted while testifying that he was unsure if Mr. Jahn made that statement.

Allegations and Findings re:  Mr. Jahn’s March 1, 2017, E-mail

12.

On March 1, 2017, Mr. Jahn e-mailed Ashlee Salmon, a district education 

specialist, and sent copies to eight district employees, including his site principal, informing 
Ms. Salmon that he would not be able to make their 1:00 p.m. meeting because he needed to 
leave for a doctor’s appointment.  Mr. Jahn wrote:

9

My  primary  care  doctor  is  annoying  in  several  ways.  He  makes 
ine  see  him  once  a  month  on  the  pretense  of| _= 

but  I 

: 
believe  the  actual  function  of  this  mandated  monthly 
appointment  affords  him  an  outlet  to  rant  to  me  about  global 
political  and  economic  conspiracy  theories  which  he  vehemently 
espouses  and  is  deeply  concerned  about  despite  obvious 
disinterest  from  me.  Also,  his  office  hours  are  abysmal.  He 
opens  his  office  at  9  am  and  closes  at  4,  so  I  almost  always  must 
take  time  off  work.  I  think  he’s  a  great  doctor,  but  I  need  to  find 
a  new  primary  because  his  schedule  and  discussing  topics  don’t 
work  for  me.  I  apologize  for  the  inconvenience. 

The  Commission  found  that  this  e-mail  was  unprofessional  and  provided  extremely 

detailed  and  unnecessary  information  to  a  colleague. 

Allegations  and  Findings  re:  March  3,  2017,  IEP  Meeting 

13. 

Mr.  Sunderman  described  a  March  2017  IEP  meeting  regarding  another 
student  during  which  Mr.  Jahn  “just  walked  in  and  sat  down”  even  though  he  was  not 
scheduled  to  attend  the  meeting  and  Mr.  Sunderman  did  not  know  why  Mr.  Jahn  was  there. 
Moreover,  Mr.  Jahn  arrived  late  to  the  meeting,  did  not  say  anything  during  the  meeting,  and 
appeared  “to  be  in  REM  with  his  eyes  open.”  Mr.  Sunderman  observed  one  of  Mr.  Jahn’s 
eyes  to  be  moving  left  and  right,  back  and  forth,  and  the  other  one  to  be  rolling  back  in  his 
head,  as  though  he  were  “in  a  REM  state  of  sleep  but  with  his  eyes  open.”  Mr.  Sunderman 
nudged  Mona  Stroud,  the  vice  principal  attending  the  meeting,  who  nudged  Mr.  Jahn  who 
“snapped  out  of  it.”  Mr.  Sunderman  observed  Mr.  Jahn  exhibit  this  behavior  again  later  in 
the  meeting  and  was  very  concemed.  Following  the  meeting  Mr.  Sunderman  was  “adamant” 
that  Mr.  Jahn  not  drive  home  given  his  condition.  Mr.  Sunderman  and  Ms.  Stroud  met  with 
Mr.  Jahn  and  Mr.  Sunderman  “was  not  backing  down”  regarding  refusing  to  let  Mr.  Jahn 
leave  campus  and  drive  home.  Eventually,  Mr.  Jahn  allowed  Mr.  Sunderman  and  Ms.  Stroud 
to  drive  him  home. 

The  student’s  mother  who  was  at  the  March  3,  2017,  IEP  meeting  testified  at  this 

hearing  and  attempted  to  refute  the  district’s  assertion  that  Mr.  Jahn  was  not  alert  and/or  was 
falling  asleep.  She  testified  that  Mr.  Jahn  did  not  act  unprofessionally  at  the  meeting  and 
answered  all  of  her  questions.  She  admitted  that  Mr.  Jahn  had  red  eyes  at  the  meeting  and 
“coughed  a  number  of  times,”  but  she  attributed  that  to  “allergies.”  However,  no  evidence 
was  introduced  by  Mr.  Jahn  that  he  had  “allergies.”  The  student’s  mother  also  referenced  the 
bullying  her  son  endured  during  his  three  years  at  middle  school  and  that  it  was  Mr.  Jahn 
who  assisted  her  and  helped  her  son  when  no  other  employees  at  the  district  would  do  so. 
The  student’s  mother  also  testified  that  Mr.  Jahn  worked  with  her  daughter  who  has  an  IEP 
and  she  was  satisfied  with  his  services. 

10

Mr. Jahn denied falling asleep in the March 3, 2017, IEP meeting, explaining that he 

did not close his eyes for any longer than a “slow blink.”  He also refuted the district’s 
contention that he appeared at a meeting that he was not supposed to attend, testifying that
the case manager asked him to attend because she was unable to go to the meeting and a 
third-party contract therapist had also asked him to attend.  The night before the March IEP 
meeting, Mr. Jahn’s girlfriend was in the hospital all night with appendicitis and, although he 
was exhausted, he thought it would cause more problems if he stayed home from work and 
thought he could get through the day. The student’s parents and therapists were thankful that 
Mr. Jahn attended the IEP meeting because he had been able to successfully engage the 
student and was able to provide information during the meeting.  Mr. Jahn also denied 
needing to be driven home following the IEP meeting, testifying he still does not believe it 
was necessary for staff to drive him home.

After Mr. Garner was informed by the assistant principal that staff had to drive Mr. 

Jahn home, he placed Mr. Jahn on administrative leave.  Mr. Sunderman was asked to create 
a spreadsheet of all Mr. Jahn’s IEP students and the assessments or reports needed. Mr.
Sunderman testified that doing so made him realize the extent of the work Mr. Jahn had not 
completed and that was when the district “hit the panic button.”

Mr. Jahn testified that he was not given advance notice of this forced leave of 
absence; he had no time to organize his files or tell others where his reports were located, and
he had no communication with anyone at the district before being placed on leave.  Mr. Jahn 
denied telling Mr. Huffman that the missing reports were completed and on his laptop; he 
recalls telling Mr. Huffman that “they might be on my laptop if they are anywhere,” and
testified, “I did not believe I communicated in any unequivocal way that they were there [on 
my laptop].”  He further explained that his power cord was at the office, he told staff that he 
was unable to access documents on his computer, and he was instructed not to do any work
while on his leave of absence. Mr. Jahn asked a coworker to bring his laptop to the district 
and his coworker did.

The Commission concluded that Mr. Sunderman’s account of the March IEP meeting 
and the need to drive Mr. Jahn home afterwards was more credible than Mr. Jahn’s testimony
and that of the student’s mother.  Again, as a parent she would have no reason to be 
specifically observing Mr. Jahn.  Moreover, she acknowledged his “red eyes” but attributed 
them to allergies.  That explanation was not persuasive.  Finally, it is highly unusual for staff 
to be so concerned about a colleague that they insist on driving the colleague home, thereby
lending further credence to Mr. Sunderman’s testimony about Mr. Jahn’s condition. The
Commission did not find that Mr. Jahn’s statements were dishonest; for whatever reason, he 
truly believed he had done the work.

2017 Notice of Unprofessional Conduct

14.

On April 20, 2017, district Superintendent Mary Gorsuch, in her official 

capacity, issued a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct to Mr. Jahn for his “behavior during the 
Spring 2017 school semester.” Superintendent Gorsuch referenced Education Code section 

11

44932, subdivision (a)(2),8 which “requires the employee be given 45 calendar days to 
correct his or her faults and to overcome the grounds for the charge.” Superintendent
Gorsuch wrote:  “This formal notice is designed to give you the opportunity to correct your
behavior and overcome the basis for this Notice.” Superintendent Gorsuch identified the 
“Incident of Unprofessional Conduct” as being Mr. Jahn’s failure to timely assess a student 
before a February 17, 2017, meeting; his lack of being prepared at the February 17, 2017, 
meeting; his failure to prepare the report as promised by February 27, 2017; his interactions 
with another teacher to whom he promised the assessment “ASAP”; his disruption of that 
teacher’s instructional time when Mr. Jahn appeared and began assessing a student during 
class; and his inappropriate behavior during the student’s IEP meeting, including making a 
joke about signing a death certificate and gesturing as if he were injecting something in his 
arm. Superintendent Gorsuch also referenced Mr. Jahn’s inappropriate e-mail to staff 
wherein he provided “a very detailed explanation regarding your criticisms of your medical 
doctor” and his odd behavior at a March 3, 2017, IEP meeting for another student that led to
staff driving him home because staff did not think he “was in a position to drive.”

Superintendent Gorsuch noted the prior directives issued to Mr. Jahn and his April 22, 

2016, letter in which he “confirmed that [he] reviewed the Board policies and California
standards for the teaching profession and stated that [he was] taking actions to remedy [his]
inappropriate behavior.” Superintendent Gorsuch reiterated Mr. Jahn’s duties to comply
with the California constitution, state laws and board policies, citing to those sources.
Superintendent Gorsuch wrote that Mr. Jahn’s behavior “constitutes inexcusable and 
unprofessional conduct” which led her to issue this Notice pursuant to Education Code 
section 44938. Superintendent Gorsuch directed Mr. Jahn to “reflect upon the seriousness of 
[his] conduct and performance and in order to correct [his] behavior and overcome the basis 
for this Notice.” She identified five directives he was to follow:

1. Comply with all previous directives given to you by site or
District administrators.  Additionally, you are directed to 
comply with any suggestions given to you, by site or District 
administrators, following this Notice to assist you in 
overcoming the above-mentioned deficiencies;

2. Maintain frequent communication (contact at least once 
weekly) with your evaluator/supervisor, Scott Huffman, and 
principal, Jon Petersen, to keep them informed of your progress 
toward improving upon the aforementioned areas and to seek 
guidance/advice and suggestions regarding improving
performance and conduct;

8 It is Education Code section 44938, subdivision (a), that requires that the employee

be given 45 calendar days to overcome the grounds for the charge whenever a district 
charges unprofessional conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(2).

12

3. Be prepared for all staffing meetings, including staffing 
meetings concerning IEP team meetings; submit 
reports/documentation to supervisor prior to the staffing 
meetings;

4. Be prepared for all staffing meetings, including completing 
psychological assessments and reports in a timely manner and 
prior to the day of the IEP team meeting; submit 
reports/documentation to supervisor prior to IEP meeting; and

5. Act in a professional manner when interacting with other 
District and agency contracted employees, students, parents of 
students and representatives of the parents/families.

Superintendent Gorsuch concluded her Notice by advising Mr. Jahn that he had 45 

calendar days to “correct [his] faults and overcome the grounds for the charges” or the matter 
may be referred to the board for dismissal proceedings.9 Superintendent Gorsuch attached 
excerpts from the state constitution, board policies and Mr. Jahn’s May 7, 2017, evaluation.

E-mails after Mr. Jahn Returned from Administrative Leave in Spring 2017

15.

On April 22, 2017, Mr. Jahn sent Mr. Huffman an e-mail advising that he had 
tested a student on Friday “as much as I could” and would “do so again on Monday,” but the 
student’s IEP meeting was “at 8 am on Tuesday.” At this hearing Mr. Huffman agreed that it 
would not be reasonable to expect Mr. Jahn to have assessed the student and written a report 
before the April 25, 2017, IEP meeting given that he had only just returned to work on April 
21, 2017, after being out on administrative leave.

16.

On April 24, 2017, Mr. Huffman sent Mr. Jahn an e-mail confirming what had 

been discussed with him and his site principal following that morning’s IEP meeting. Mr.
Huffman noted that the three of them discussed Mr. Jahn being on time to work, that he 
showed up 14 minutes late to the IEP meeting, and that he appeared sleepy and closed his 
eyes during the IEP meeting.  Mr. Huffman stated that his behavior was unprofessional.  Mr. 
Huffman directed Mr. Jahn to be awake and alert at meetings, to share his calendar with Mr. 
Huffman, and that as of May 5, 2017, Mr. Jahn was to have all reports to Mr. Huffman five 
days before the meetings so that Mr. Huffman could review them.  Mr. Huffman thanked Mr. 
Jahn for advising him of his inability to complete a report and directed Mr. Jahn to send Mr. 
Huffman weekly updates regarding assessments on which he was working and his timelines
for completion. Mr. Huffman testified that he directed Mr. Jahn to provide his reports five 
days in advance so Mr. Huffman could review them for completion/accuracy to ensure that 
Mr. Jahn looked professional at IEP meetings.

9 The district placed Mr. Jahn on leave before the 45 calendar days lapsed.

13

17.

On April 26, 2017, Mr. Jahn advised Mr. Huffman that he was currently

evaluating a student whose IEP was scheduled for May 1, 2017, and would not be able to 
deliver a report five days before the IEP meeting. Mr. Huffman testified that it was 
reasonable to expect Mr. Jahn to have accomplished assessing and preparing his IEP report 
by the time of this IEP because Mr. Jahn told Mr. Huffman he could do it, and he did not ask 
for support to get it accomplished despite Mr. Huffman repeatedly offering support to him.

18.

On May 1, 2017, Mr. Huffman sent Mr. Jahn an e-mail summarizing their 

meeting “so as to be sure we are on the same page.” Mr. Huffman noted that his expectation 
was that Mr. Jahn plan out his testing/assessment schedule, plan in advance, and have his 
“pre-meeting reports for review with all evaluations from May 25th and on.”10 Mr.
Huffman’s e-mail further directed Mr. Jahn to continue to be on time, to report his absences 
in the system, stay focused on his work, and let Mr. Huffman know if he needed support.
Mr. Jahn replied to that e-mail thanking Mr. Huffman for his “feedback and detailed 
instructions.”  Mr. Jahn advised that he was unable to login to his work computer to retrieve 
a student’s report and had sent in a “tech help ticket.” When Mr. Huffman asked if Mr. Jahn 
had submitted a “help desk ticket,” and Mr. Jahn replied, “No.  I called tech. yesterday.
Melissa suggested and transferred me to Cort.  I left a VM mssg.  Was just looking at help 
desk login.  I’m not sure what my login for that is, so I’m looking for instructions on that.”
In a follow-up e-mail Mr. Jahn wrote: “Done.  My help ticket number is 30368.”

19.

On Monday, May 1, 2017, Mr. Huffman forwarded a spreadsheet entitled,

“Chris and Flora Caseload” to Mr. Jahn asking him to “please be sure to add to this list all 
Psych. Reports that are due until the end of the school year by Wednesday to this list.”  Mr. 
Jahn replied on May 1, 2017, “Thanks. I will.”  On Thursday, May 4, 2017, Mr. Jahn 
e-mailed Mr. Huffman that he had “been working on this and will finish it today.”  He 
advised that he only had “read access” to the list and was requesting “edit access,” and that
he was “finishing a spreadsheet in the format we discussed on Monday with all my
assessments.  That document will be done today, and I will share it with you and Mr. 
Petersen.”

20.

On May 1, 2017, Mr. Huffman sent Mr. Jahn a text advising that he was 

waiting in his office for their appointment.  Mr. Huffman testified that Mr. Jahn then arrived 
for their meeting a few minutes later.

21.

On May 10, 2017, Lelani Osugi, a district principal, copied Mr. Huffman on 

an e-mail she sent to Mr. Jahn “to touch base about a few reports.”  She wrote that she 
needed two reports on two students as they were “getting to wrap up things for the end of the 
year” and asked if he could “get them to Debbie within the next few weeks . . . .” Mr. Jahn
replied, “Thank you for the heads up on those students.  I will take care of that.”  Mr. 
Huffman directed Mr. Jahn to get those reports to Ms. Osugi “by the end of tomorrow.  Let 
me know if that will be a problem.”  Mr. Jahn replied that he would let Mr. Huffman know if 

10 Mr. Huffman acknowledged that Mr. Jahn could not comply with this directive 

because Mr. Jahn was no longer working at the district as of May 25, 2017.

14

that would be a problem. Two days later, on Friday, May 12, 2017, Mr. Jahn e-mailed Mr. 
Huffman and Ms. Osugi asking, “May I please have until the end of day, Monday, May 15,
2017, to deliver these two items?”  Mr. Huffman replied, “Yes.”  On Tuesday, May 16, 2017, 
Mr. Huffman e-mailed Mr. Jahn, asking if he got “those reports to Leilani Yesterday?”  On 
Friday May 19, 2017, Mr. Jahn e-mailed the following to Mr. Huffman and Ms. Osugi:
“Sorry for the delay on these two reports.  I have worked on them, but not finished them.  My 
best confident estimated completion date is Friday 5/26.  I will try to have them before that.”
Mr. Huffman forwarded the string of e-mails to Mr. Garner with the following note:  “Here is 
his response on reports that should have been done long long time ago...”

Mr. Jahn’s May 2017 Evaluation 

22. Mr. Huffman evaluated Mr. Jahn in May 2017. Mr. Garner approved the 

evaluation on May 10, 2017, and Mr. Huffman signed it on May 24, 2017.  The section on 
the form for Mr. Jahn to sign or add comments was blank.  Mr. Garner testified it was blank 
because as of May 24, 2017, Mr. Jahn was on administrative leave.

For Standard I, which measured whether the employee “Identifies and evaluates 

students with a suspected disability; maintains documentation in screening referrals, SST 
logs, evaluation reports, IEP’s and meeting notices,” Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn a “Partially
Meets Standards” score and wrote:

Chris has struggled in the area over the past year in that he has
not been able to organize his documents and reports prior to IEP 
meetings on many occasions.  Furthermore Chris has struggled 
at maintaining documents in an organized fashion.  Specifically,
Chris has been unable to provide staff with students [sic] reports
in a timely manner when requested.  In some instances Chris has 
been unable to find the student assessment reports and has had 
to create them in order to provide to the teams that need them.”

For Standard III, which measured whether the employee “Implements the IDEA 

consistent with district procedures and policies regarding the provision of special education 
services; maintains records/files containing all pertinent and legally [sic] information for 
assigned students,” Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn a “Does Not Meet Standards” score and 
wrote:  “Chris does not implement the IDEA consistent with the district procedures in that he 
does a very poor job at maintaining records and files for out [sic] students in the district.”

For Standard IV, which measured whether the employee “Provides consultations and 

support to parents and staff in the areas of intervention, preventive crisis management and 
students’ social-emotional needs; documents all communication regarding STANDARDs 
services and progress of assigned students,” Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn a “Partially Meets
Standards” score and wrote:  “Chris has made attempts to support school sites when working 
with teams to address students [sic] concerns.  Unfortunately Chris [sic] inconsistent 

15

attendance and participation in team meetings has hindered his ability to follow through with 
teams in this area on a consistent basis.”

For Standard V, which measured “Communicates with students, families, and staff 

about student progress toward IEP STANDARDs,” Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn a “Partially
Meets Standards” score and wrote:  “During the course of the year Chris has been working 
on his ability to maintain effective communication with parents and staff.  Chris has made 
some progress in the area recently, but continues to struggle with setting up effective systems
of communication with teams and families, either through e-mail, in person or over the 
phone to helps [sic] support students and staff within the program.”

In the District Expectations Section Mr. Huffman wrote that Mr. Jahn “Did Not Meet 

Standards” for the following categories and commented as follows:

Communicates effectively with parents:  “Over the 

course of the year Chris has had IEP meetings where parents 
and families have been confused and unclear about what Chris 
is communicating to them in terms of student assessment results 
and social emotional status.”

Demonstrates responsibility in reports:  “Chris has 

consistently struggled with timely and thorough assessment 
reports that are prepared and ready to go for IEP meetings.
There have been a number of times where Chris has been in the 
middle of the IEP meeting and writing the report.  Additionally
[sic] the assessment reports at times are incomplete due to lack 
of follow through on Chris [sic] part in preparing documents 
need [sic] to draft reports.”

Demonstrates responsibility in duties:  “Chris has 

struggled to show that he fully understands his professional 
responsibilities while on the job.  Chris has been lacking in the 
areas of professional communication with staff and parents 
during IEP meeting and after, Chris has struggled with being 
prepared for meeting [sic] after, Chris has struggled with being 
prepared for meetings by having all reports and results ready for
the meetings.  Chris has been late to work many times which has 
led to meetings being delayed, or disjointed in that he has not 
been there to participate in them.”

Demonstrates responsibility in meeting: “Again, Chris 

not being prepared to effectively communicate and share his
completed reports with the IEP teams has demonstrated that he 
lacks responsibility in meetings.”

16

Is punctual: “As of late Chris has been on time to work 

each day.  Prior to the last 3 weeks, Chris has great difficulty
with being at work on time.”

Maintains good attendance:  “Chris has been better with 

his attendance within the past 3 weeks.  Prior to this Chris has 
really struggled with this.” 

Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn “Meets Standard” ratings for the “Demonstrates 
responsibility in supervision of students” category, noting:  “Chris has a great connection 
with students and does an excellent job building positive relationships with them.”

Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn an “Overall Evaluation” of “Unsatisfactory” and referred 

him to Peer Assistance and Review (PAR).  Mr. Huffman wrote the following in the 
Evaluator Comments section: 

At this time it is recommended that Chris participate in PAR.
Chris has struggled over the years to effectively perform his
basic job responsibilities as a school psychologist.

At this [sic] Chris will need to focus on a few key areas in order 
to demonstrate that he fit [sic] to perform his duties on a daily
basis.  Chris will need to develop systems of organization that 
will allow him to create efficient methods of developing timely
and thorough reports for IEP meetings.

He will need to seek out support from the director and site 
administrator and adhere to all directives as it [sic] relates to 
daily organization of his responsibility that are given to him 
[sic].  Furthermore Chris will need to show up to work on time 
each day and check in with the site administration to ensure that 
he is on campus and present.  Chris is expected to be at all 
meetings on time and prepared with all proper materials and 
documents so that he can meaningfully participate with the team 
to support successful student outcomes.

Moving forward Chris will need to show evidence that he has
put systems in place that address timeline compliance with 
reports and assessments that have been conducted.  Specifically,
Chris will need to set up a weekly appointment with the Director 
or Site Principal where he will provide updates about timelines 
and assessments in the form of a google [sic] doc spreadsheet 
that is shared with both administrators.  Additionally, Chris will 
need to share his google [sic] calendar and document his daily
activity as means [sic] of demonstrating advanced planning for 

17

testing, general meetings, IEP meetings and other duties as 
assigned.

Chris is expected to notify site administration and director of 
any absence through e-mail.  He is also expected to use the 
district electronic sub/absences system when he will be out.

It is important to note that as of late Chris has had some 
improvement in being at work on time.  Additionally, Chris has 
demonstrated a willingness to take direction and advise [sic] on 
how to better plan an [sic] prepare for his daily duties and 
responsibilities.

If at any time Chris is unable to perform his daily tasks he will 
need to seek out support from his site administrator and director 
to get guidance on what he should do.

I am hopeful that Chris can develop successful systems and 
methods to perform his job as a school psychologist in Valley
Center-Pauma Unified School District in a professional way
moving forward.

May 2017 Administrative Leave

23.

On May 24, 2017, less than 45 days after Superintendent Gorsuch issued her 

notice of unprofessional conduct, Mr. Garner issued a letter to Mr. Jahn advising him that on 
May 23, 2017, Mr. Jahn was placed on paid administrative leave.  The purpose of the leave 
was to allow the district to “investigate allegations of misconduct.” Accordingly, Mr. Jahn 
was unable to follow up on any of the directives contained in his May 2017 evaluation.  It 
was unclear from the evidence why the district did not give Mr. Jahn an opportunity to
comply with the directives contained in his 2017 evaluation, participate in PAR, or allow the 
45 days to run.

Exemplar Psycho-Educational Report

24.

The district introduced a January 7, 2016, Psycho Educational Report 

Individual Summary of Assessment prepared by Mr. Jahn.  The report noted that it was a 
triennial report.  The district alleged that it was sparse, insufficient, and did not conform to 
the templates the district had provided Mr. Jahn.  However, the templates were not 
introduced in evidence and the Commission was not persuaded that this report was 
insufficient or fell below accepted standards.

//

18

Spreadsheets of Mr. Jahn’s Unfinished or Incomplete Reports

25.

The district introduced two spreadsheets documenting Mr. Jahn’s unfinished 

assessments and reports.  Mr. Jahn did not dispute the information contained in the 
spreadsheets; rather, he asserted that other school psychologists also had missing reports.
His testimony was not persuasive and the fact that other psychologists may or may not have 
had missing reports did not absolve him of his responsibility to complete his work on time.
Witness Testimony 

26. Mark Garner, now the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, testified

about the role of school psychologists, the 2014 grant the district received to assist special 
education students, how school psychologist caseloads are determined in the district and the
“crucial role” school psychologists play on the special education team. In the fall of 2016, 
Mr. Garner learned that Mr. Jahn was out on medical leave and that the school psychologists
at other sites performed his work.  Mr. Garner did not speak with Mr. Jahn when he returned 
to work and Mr. Jahn did not reach out to Mr. Garner to request support.

Before Christmas 2016, Mr. Huffman and Mr. Garner discussed Mr. Jahn’s 

incomplete reports and other issues; many of which were documented in the records 
introduced at this hearing. Margaret Williams was hired to work Mr. Jahn’s caseload when 
he went on medical leave in the spring of 2017 and “from all indications all was being 
managed.”  Mr. Jahn returned to work with no restrictions, all his work was up to date, 
having been performed by Ms. Williams, and the district paid to have Ms. Williams remain 
on staff for one week after Mr. Jahn returned to help him transition back to work.  Mr. Jahn 
never claimed that he was unable to perform his job when he returned.

Mr. Garner and Mr. Huffman had discussions in the spring of 2017 regarding Mr. 

Jahn’s poor work performance. Mr. Jahn’s caseload at this time was “significantly less” than 
other school psychologists by almost 30 to 50 percent. The district performed an audit of 
Mr. Jahn’s caseload and discovered numerous missing evaluations, assessments and reports.
Mr. Garner was very concerned about this because it exposed the district to serious liability
because of its failure to meet IDEA requirements. Mr. Garner described the district’s duty to
provide a free and public education (FAPE) to students in the district and he recommended 
that Mr. Jahn be dismissed from the district because the district would “not be doing our job 
if we allowed him to continue his employment because he was not completing his job and he 
was letting our families down.” However, Mr. Garner admitted that the district has received 
no complaints from any families regarding Mr. Jahn.

Mr. Garner’s testimony was consistent with the documents introduced at hearing but 

established that he had little to no firsthand knowledge of the acts alleged making his
testimony not very persuasive.

27.

Scott Huffman, the district’s Director of Student Support Services, testified

consistent with the documents, describing his interactions with Mr. Jahn and the many efforts
he made to help Mr. Jahn succeed.  Mr. Huffman was hired by the district in 2013 and

19

described his duties, including his work implementing SEIS, the district’s special education 
tracking system.11 When Mr. Huffman asked Mr. Jahn about missing evaluations and 
reports, Mr. Jahn variously claimed that the documents were on his computer, had been 
uploaded, had been written in, or were being completed.  However, there are several reports 
that the district still cannot locate.12 Mr. Huffman described the importance of the school 
psychologist’s report because it memorializes the information and helps the IEP team 
participate meaningfully at the IEP meeting and going forward.  Mr. Huffman explained the 
laws regulating special education services for students and the purpose of the IEP meetings, 
describing both the procedural and substantive problems that occur when there is no school 
psychologist report. Without a report, the district is out of compliance with applicable laws 
and it is unprofessional.

Mr. Huffman described the various duties of the IEP team members and the “very

demanding” and time-consuming work a school psychologist performs.  Mr. Huffman had 
“concerns early on” regarding Mr. Jahn’s job performance and ability to meet deadlines, but 
was hopeful they could work through them.  As a new director, Mr. Huffman was trying to 
look at his staff as individuals, looking at their strengths and having discussions with them 
on areas that required improvement.  Mr. Jahn always had an issue with being on time, but 
Mr. Huffman was hopeful that he could support Mr. Jahn and work on keeping him on track.
Mr. Huffman had discussions with Mr. Jahn regarding his lack of reports and behavior at 
meetings, including instructing him to be alert, to actively participate and not to have slurred 
speech during meetings.  Mr. Huffman testified that he received several calls from site 
administrators asking where Mr. Jahn was and when Mr. Huffman spoke with Mr. Jahn
about these issues, he came to believe that this was a bigger issue than what he had originally
thought.  Mr. Huffman was concerned about Mr. Jahn, he wanted him to be successful, and
he offered him support.

Mr. Huffman and the special education team developed templates during the 2013-14

school year for the school psychologist’s reports that were made available on Google 
documents.  Mr. Jahn claimed that he did not have the templates, so Mr. Huffman re-shared
them through Google attachments. On the Thursday before Mr. Jahn returned from leave in 
April 2017, Mr. Huffman, Mr. Garner, Mr. Shinoff, Mr. Cadieux, and Mr. Jahn all met.
During that meeting, Mr. Huffman shared his concerns regarding Mr. Jahn’s work 
performance and the missing reports that were still needed, testifying that it was about this 
time that he started to realize the extent of Mr. Jahn’s missing reports.  Before the meeting,
Mr. Jahn told Mr. Huffman that he would provide the reports; at the meeting Mr. Jahn said
the reports were on his computer; and after the meeting Mr. Jahn said that he could not get 
them off his computer because he did not have a charger cord or plug.  Mr. Huffman told Mr. 
Jahn to bring the computer to the district so that they could retrieve the documents. During
the Thursday meeting Mr. Huffman also told Mr. Jahn that he would meet with him as 

11 During Mr. Jahn’s internship and initial employment, the district did not have SEIS. 

12 Mr. Jahn acknowledged that this may be true, explaining that he thought he had 

uploaded the reports, performed the evaluations, or written the reports.

20

frequently as possible so that Mr. Jahn would have all the support he needed when he 
returned to work.

Mr. Jahn returned to work on Monday, April 24, 2017, and was scheduled to attend 

an IEP meeting that morning. Mr. Huffman also attended the IEP meeting. Despite the
many directives given to him, Mr. Jahn showed up late for the meeting, claiming he had gone 
to the teacher’s classroom and not the conference room where the meeting was being held.
Because others had reported that Mr. Jahn fell asleep during IEP meetings, Mr. Huffman 
watched him during the meeting and it looked as though Mr. Jahn was falling asleep.  During 
his testimony, Mr. Jahn explained that he did arrive to work on time but went to the wrong
location because the morning IEP meetings were typically held in the teacher’s classroom, 
and not the conference room.  Thus, he went to the teacher’s classroom and not the 
conference room which made him late to the meeting.  The Commission found Mr. Jahn’s
explanation for being tardy to the IEP meeting credible.

Mr. Huffman testified that the district kept Ms. Williams on staff for one week after 

Mr. Jahn returned to work to help him transition.  Thereafter, Mr. Jahn never asked the 
district for any additional support and when asked about his workload Mr. Jahn replied that 
he was “comfortable to take it on.”  However, during the spring 2017 Mr. Jahn continued to 
fall behind in the completion of his reports, repeatedly asking for extensions of time. 
Although Mr. Jahn was always respectful and willing to make changes, he never asked for 
help or support, instead saying that he would “work on it.”  Mr. Jahn continued to have other 
difficulties as well, including struggling to stay awake at meetings with Mr. Huffman.

After Mr. Jahn returned to work in April 2017, there were still missing reports for IEP 
meetings conducted before he went on leave, as well as there being IEP meetings where Mr. 
Jahn merely reported on information but did not have reports.  Those reports were not 
completed at any time before Mr. Jahn was placed on his final leave from the district.
Currently the district is still missing reports for nine students and Mr. Huffman had to 
recently notify the State of California when it conducted its audit that the district does not 
have reports for those students.  Mr. Huffman testified that he had previously reported to the 
state that the district was 100 percent compliant with its special education requirements but 
has now found that not to be the case.

Mr. Huffman testified that Mr. Jahn was unfit for his position because he had lied to 
Mr. Huffman about completing his reports and consistently exhibited an inability to “pull it 
all together” to get his work done, to perform in a timely manner and to do his job despite 
“all the supports around him.”  Mr. Huffman testified that the district had more supports in 
place for Mr. Jahn than any other school psychologist. However, despite those supports, Mr. 
Jahn could not comply with the directives given to him.

28.

Superintendent Gorsuch testified that although he was a very nice person and 
great with students, she recommended Mr. Jahn be dismissed from the district because “the 
work was not getting done and I had to stop that.”  She admitted that she did not witness any

21

of the alleged incidents; she merely documented what was reported to her. As such, her 
testimony, like Mr. Garner’s, was unpersuasive.

29.

Ashlee Salmon testified that she was the case manager for 12 or more IEP 
meetings with Mr. Jahn during the 2016-17 school year.  At one IEP meeting, Mr. Jahn 
worked on his assessment report during the meeting and did not appear as knowledgeable 
about the subject matters he was presenting as other school psychologists with whom she has 
worked. Ms. Salmon described other meetings with Mr. Jahn where his reports were not 
available. Mr. Jahn said he would get them to Ms. Salmon after the meetings, but never did.
Ms. Salmon contacted her supervisors regarding Mr. Jahn’s failure to provide reports
because she was concerned about looming IEP deadlines. Ms. Salmon’s supervisors told her 
that they were aware of the issues with Mr. Jahn and were working to help him. Ms. Salmon 
received the May 1, 2017, e-mail from Mr. Jahn regarding his primary physician, but she did 
not have a problem with it other than thinking “his word choice was interesting.”

30. Margaret “Maggie” Williams was retained to cover Mr. Jahn’s caseload when 

he was on leave in the spring of 2017. Ms. Williams described the missing information in 
Mr. Jahn’s reports and the spreadsheet she created regarding all his pending reports.  There 
were reports and assessments she was unable to locate. Both Ms. William and Mr. Garner 
testified that Ms. Williams completed Mr. Jahn’s reports and assessments such that his 
caseload was fully caught up when he returned to work.  Mr. Jahn refuted that testimony,
claiming there were reports immediately due upon his return.  The evidence in this regard 
was unclear and the Commission concluded that the district did not prove that Ms. Williams 
completed all of Mr. Jahn’s work while he was on leave.

Ms. Williams remained on staff for one week after Mr. Jahn returned from 

administrative leave in April 2017 to provide him any needed assistance.  When he returned, 
Ms. Williams provided Mr. Jahn with an exemplar of her schedule to assist him with time 
management.  On May 10, 2017, Ms. Williams e-mailed Mr. Jahn a copy of her “general 
daily routine” to assist him with planning his days and Mr. Jahn thanked her, stating her note 
was “very helpful.”  Ms. Williams was surprised at the amount of input Mr. Jahn needed
prioritizing his workload.  She thought perhaps his issues in that regard were due to the leave 
he had taken, which she assumed was medically related.

31.

Lawrence Gediman has worked with Mr. Jahn for approximately 10 years and
has attended approximately 100 IEP meetings with him.  Mr. Gediman never observed Mr. 
Jahn falling asleep at meetings, nor did he attend meetings where Mr. Jahn had not assessed
the student.  There never was a time that Mr. Gediman could not do his job because Mr. Jahn 
had not done his work. However, Mr. Gediman was out on leave for 18 months beginning in 
April 2016, returning for the 2017-2018 school year.  Thus, the last time Mr. Gediman 
attended an IEP meeting with Mr. Jahn was in March 2016; he did not attend any IEP
meetings with Mr. Jahn during the 2016-2017 school year and could provide no information 
regarding the meetings at issue in this hearing. Accordingly, Mr. Gediman’s testimony did 
little more than establish that prior to the 2016-17 school year Mr. Jahn did not display the
behaviors and poor job performance that he exhibited during the 2016-17 school year.

22

Mr. Jahn’s Testimony

32. Mr. Jahn disputed the accuracy of some of the district’s letters to him.  He now 
believes that he should have addressed those inaccuracies, but at the time, he did not want to 
be looked at in an even more negative light which is “something I need to work on, to 
advocate for myself.” He stated that he should refute “allegations with superiors when I do 
not think they are correct.”

During his testimony, Mr. Jahn repeatedly stated that he completed reports “to the 

best of my ability.”  He testified:  “I did the very best assessments I can”; “If I do not have all 
the pieces to make an assessment I’ll stall for more time, I will not do it without all the 
pieces, I ask for more information or testing”; “I am a stickler for protocol, not the pieces of 
paper protocol, but for how test takers say how to take or give the test.”  When asked about 
all his missing reports and failed deadlines, Mr. Jahn repeatedly testified that he should have 
advocated more for himself, should have advocated in a stronger manner, and was not good 
at self-advocating.  He testified that he “did not recall making a conscious decision not to 
complete the psychological reports,” explaining that he knew he had to do them, that it was 
the best practice, and that he tried to complete them.  To the best of his knowledge, there 
were not any reports in the 2016-17 school year that he was not able to complete, although he 
acknowledged he was not sure if he had done all of the reports that the district listed on its 
spreadsheets as missing.

Mr. Jahn “really worked hard,” even working at home to complete his work, and Mr. 
Huffman never advised him that he would be fired, as he was under the impression that Mr. 
Huffman liked him and that he was doing his job and “all [was] good so far.”  When asked 
about his 2013-14 evaluation performed by Mr. Huffman after he had been newly hired in 
the district, Mr. Jahn explained that he sometimes felt there was a disconnect because his 
prior bosses had been trained as school psychologists, as opposed to Mr. Huffman who did 
not have that background, and Mr. Jahn felt that there were “finer intricacies of the job or 
certain processes that [Mr. Huffman] was not aware of.”  Mr. Jahn “was flabbergasted” that 
anyone thought he did a poor job at an IEP meeting and he felt that he was being “punished 
for doing a good job at a meeting.”

When Mr. Jahn returned to work in April 2017, he was given a number of directives 

and “I complied with them to the best of my ability, I was extremely worried.”  When he 
returned most of his work was still incomplete and there were assessments and reports due.
Mr. Jahn disputed that Ms. Williams completed all of his work while he was on leave.  He 
was not aware of any reports that Ms. Williams did for him.  When he returned, Ms. 
Williams, the principal and Mr. Jahn went over a spreadsheet of reports and their due dates.
All his assessments had not been completed while he was out on leave and there were several 
open assessment plans pending.  Mr. Jahn did “the most thorough job possible to” complete 
the assessments.  Thereafter, despite being given a notice of unprofessional conduct that 
advised him that he had 45 days to comply, he was placed on leave before he could comply.
When asked about e-mails in which he told district employees that he would get reports to 
them, Mr. Jahn denied misleading anyone; rather he believed that he could get the tasks 

23

accomplished. The Commission determined that the evidence did not establish that Mr. Jahn
was dishonest; rather it was further evidence in support of the Commission’s findings that he 
could not perform his job and that he acted unprofessionally.  His mistaken belief that he 
performed work he had not performed was concerning and showed that the district could not 
rely on him to do his job.

Mr. Jahn’s Failure to Return to the Hearing After the Lunch Break

33.

On Friday, November 3, 2017, the fourth day of hearing was held at the Office 

of Administrative Hearings - San Diego.  The hearing recessed for the lunch break with the 
parties scheduled to return at 1:30 p.m.  However, Mr. Jahn did not return and did not 
respond to his attorney’s repeated telephone calls.  At 2:30 p.m. the hearing was reset for 
November 9, 2017, and the matter was recessed until then.  When the hearing reconvened on 
November 9, 2017, Mr. Jahn testified that on November 3, 2017, after getting his lunch from
a drive-thru, he drove to his boat at the marina but discovered he did not have his keys to get 
into the marina parking lot.  He parked on the street, ate his lunch in his car, and fell asleep.
The next thing he knew, he had been awakened by his attorney knocking on his car window.

The district introduced the declaration of Superintendent Gorsuch documenting that 

after the parties were dismissed at 2:30 p.m. on November 3, 2017, she “ran along the 
harbor” and came upon Mr. Jahn’s parked vehicle with him sleeping inside.  Mr. Jahn was 
leaning onto the passenger seat. Superintendent Gorsuch contacted Mr. Shinoff who 
contacted Mr. Cadieux. Superintendent Gorsuch remained at the scene until Mr. Cadieux 
arrived.  While she was waiting, Superintendent Gorsuch observed Mr. Jahn sit up, stretch 
his arms, lean onto the driver’s side window, and go back to sleep.

Applicable Code Sections Regarding Dismissal Actions 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44934 and 44944.)

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 

permanent employee.  Subdivision (a)(2) authorizes dismissal for unprofessional conduct.
Subdivision (a)(4) authorizes dismissal for dishonesty. Subdivision (a)(6) authorizes 
dismissal for evident unfitness for service.  Subdivision (a)(8) authorizes dismissal for 
persistent violation or refusal to obey regulations and district polices.

3.

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the process 

for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and sets forth the 
Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision.

24

4.

Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing board 

must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent employee.

Burden and Standard of Proof

5.

The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the trier of 

fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its nonexistence.
(Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.) The district 
has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee.

6.

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of 
the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 
1035, 1039-1040.)  A preponderance of the evidence means that the evidence on one side of 
an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, the evidence on the other side of 
the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in the convincing effect the 
evidence has on those to whom it is addressed.  In other words, the term refers to evidence 
that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.  (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union
Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Applicable Laws and District Regulations re: IEPs and Reports

7.

Title 20 United States Code section 1414(b)(4), titled “Determination of 

Eligibility and Educational Need,” states:

Upon completion of the administration of assessments and other 
evaluation measures

(A) the determination of whether the child is a child with a 
disability as defined in section 1401 (3) of this title and the 
educational needs of the child with a disability shall be made by
a team of qualified professionals and the parent of the child in 
accordance with paragraph (5); and 

(B) a copy of the evaluation report and the documentation of 
determination of eligibility shall be given to the parent.

Mr. Garner acknowledged in his testimony that federal law does not contain a 

deadline for when these documents must be provided to parents.

8.

Education Code section 56043 states in part:

The primary timelines affecting special education programs are 
as follows:

25

(a) A proposed assessment plan shall be developed within 15 
calendar days of referral for assessment. . . . 

(b) A parent or guardian shall have at least 15 calendar days
from receipt of the proposed assessment plan to arrive at a 
decision. . . .

[¶] . . . [¶]

9.

The district’s Administrative Regulation, AR 6164.4, provides:

Before the initial provision of special education and related 
services to a student with a disability, the district shall conduct a 
full and individual initial evaluation of the student.  (Education
Code 56320; 34 CFR 300.301)

Upon receipt of a referral of any student for special education 
and related services, a proposed evaluation plan shall be 
developed within 15 days, not counting days between the 
student’s regular school sessions or terms or days of school 
vacation in excess of five school days, unless the 
parent/guardian agrees, in writing, to an extension.  If the
referral is made within 10 days or less prior to the end of the 
student’s regular school year or term, the proposed evaluation 
plan shall be developed within 10 days after the beginning of the 
next regular school year work term.  (Education Code 56043, 
56321)

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

Before conducting an initial evaluation, the district shall provide 
the parent/guardian with prior written notice in accordance with 
34 CFR 300.503. In addition, as part of the evaluation plan, the 
parent/guardian shall receive written notice that includes all of 
the following information:  (Education Code 56329; 34 CFR 
300.304, 300.504)

3.
A copy of the evaluation report and the documentation of 
determination of eligibility shall be given to the parent/guardian. 

//

26

Board Policy

10.

“Board Policy 4119.21, 4219.21, and 4319.21” sets forth the professional 

standards the board expects of its employees.  As noted, the board expects district employees
to “maintain the highest ethical standards, follow district policies and regulations,” and their 
“conduct should enhance the integrity of the district and advance the goals of the educational 
program.”  The board further expects its employees to “exercise good judgement and 
maintain professional standards and boundaries.” 

Relevant Judicial Authority

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

11.

The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.  There the Supreme Court held that where charges of 
unprofessional conduct are raised in teacher dismissal cases, the applicable standard is 
whether the person is fit to teach. The factors outlined in Morrison must be analyzed to 
determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.
(Id. at p.229.)

12.

Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by the

Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach.  (Board of Education v. Jack M. (19 70) 
19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697; Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 
Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-1174.)

DISHONESTY

13.

In Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12,

the Supreme Court required application of the Morrison factors to the determination of 
“dishonesty.” As the Court noted:  “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest fib to the 
most flagrant lie.  Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, and 
not every falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.”  (Ibid.)

14.

In an often-cited definition, the court stated in Hogg v. Real Estate Commissioner

(1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717:

Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad faith.  As
defined in the dictionaries and in judicial decisions, it means 
fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness.  [Citations.]  As put by
the court in Alsup v. State, 91 Tex. Cr. 224, ‘dishonesty denotes an 
absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud; 
deceive and betray.’

27

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

15.

The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases is 

whether the person is fit to teach.  “Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact.  (Board of 
Education v. Commission on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 555, 560-
561.)

16.

“Evident” is defined as “clear to the vision and understanding.”  “Unfit” is 

defined as “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; incapable; incompetent; and 
physically or mentally unsound” and “unsuitable, incompetent and not adapted for a 
particular use or service.” (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. 
Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)

17.

In Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, the court noted the two parallel, yet contradictory,
lines of cases regarding “unfit for service.”  One line of cases equated that term with 
“unprofessional conduct” and the other line of cases distinguished the two definitions.  In 
deciding that the latter line of cases was the correct way to evaluate “unfit to serve,” and 
complied with the rules of statutory construction.  The Woodland court concluded that 
“unprofessional conduct” and “evident unfitness for service” do not mean precisely the same 
thing.  Although conduct constituting “evident unfitness for service” will often constitute 
“unprofessional conduct,” the converse is not always true.  Evident unfitness for service 
requires that unfitness for service be attributable to defect in temperament, which is not 
necessary for a finding of unprofessional conduct.  Nevertheless, lower courts may not
disregard the criteria for unfitness set out in Morrison where that court concluded that 
“unprofessional conduct” meant conduct showing a teacher was unfit to teach.  These criteria 
must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the conduct indicates unfitness 
for service.  If it does, the next step is to determine whether the “unfitness” is “evident”; i.e., 
whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.  (Id. at pp.1442-1445.)
A finding of “unfit to serve” can be made if the evidence, taken in the aggregate, shows that 
retaining the employee would pose a significant danger of psychological harm to students 
and fellow teachers.  (Id. at p.1456.)

18.

An employee can be dismissed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either 
students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.  The 
inquiry is whether any adverse inferences can be drawn from the teacher’s conduct as to his 
teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity surrounding the past conduct may in 
and of itself substantially impair his function as a teacher.  (Morrison, supra, at p. 235.)

19.

To establish a teacher is unfit to teach, Morrison requires a nexus between 

government employment and alleged employee misconduct stemming from the principle that 
“[n]o person can be denied government employment because of factors unconnected with the 
responsibilities of that employment.”  (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th1454, 1463.)

28

20.

“Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a 

fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 
conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district.’”  (San Diego Unified 
School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2013) 214 Cal.App.4th 1120, 
1142-43.)

21.

An employee’s actions on a given day may suggest a lack of judgment and 

discretion, or may be an isolated act precipitated by an unusual accumulation of pressure and 
stress.  An absence of any other incidents in the employee’s teaching career suggestive of 
lack of judgment or discretion can further distinguish the aberrant character of the act at 
issue.  In such a case, a fact finder could reasonably conclude that the isolated incident of 
poor judgment was overweighed by years of demonstrated teaching competence, and that on 
balance the employee possessed the qualities of character necessary for teaching fitness.
(Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal. 3d 691, 696-701.)

22.

In determining whether the teacher’s conduct indicated unfitness to teach, such 
matters as (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow 
teachers, (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated, (3) the proximity or remoteness in time 
of the conduct, (4) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 
conduct, (5) the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, and (6) the notoriety
and publicity accorded the teacher’s conduct may be considered.  (Jack M., supra., at p.702, 
fn. 5.)

23.

The nexus between an employee’s conduct and his fitness to teach is 

established when the conduct is detrimental to the mission and functions of the employer.
Factors to consider are whether the acts demonstrate a serious lapse in good judgment, the 
teacher failed to recognize the seriousness of his misconduct, the teacher attempted to shift 
blame to parents and students who might access his posting, his principal had lost confidence 
in his ability to serve as a role model based upon the posting, or, most noteworthy, the 
teacher’s testimony that he did not think his postings would have any impact on his ability to
teach his students if any of them had viewed his post and that he did not view his posting as 
immoral.  The conduct itself, together with the teacher’s failure to accept responsibility or
recognize the seriousness of it, given his position as a teacher and role model, demonstrates 
evident unfitness to teach.  (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-66.)

24.

One act does not alone demonstrate the unfitness of the teacher, but is simply

one of the factors to be considered.  (Board of Education v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 561-62.)

25.

There must be a nexus between the teacher’s conduct and his usefulness to the 

school district and only when so construed can grounds to dismiss for immoral conduct or 
unfitness to serve be constitutionally applied.  (Board of Trustees v. Judge (1975) 50 Cal. 
App. 3d 920, 929.)

29

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF OR REFUSAL TO OBEY LAWS

26.

A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7), must also be 

established by reference to the Morrison factors.  If unfitness to teach is shown, then the district 
must further establish that the employee’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was 
“persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.”  (San Dieguito Union High School District v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.)  Isolated 
incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally
considered “persistent.”  (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 
Cal.App.3d 317.) 

27.

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent;
continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly
repeated.”  (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) Education Codes section 44932, subdivision (7) pertains to 
unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature has decreed that 
a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal, apparently to allow for correction; “it 
is the persistent disregard” of school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate.  (Id. at 
p.84.)

Morrison Factors 

28.

In Morrison, supra, the Supreme Court suggested seven factors to consider 
when evaluating whether the school employee should be dismissed:  (1) the likelihood that 
the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the degree of such adversity;
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of teaching certificate 
held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances and
publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the 
motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
and (7) the extent that the discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the 
constitutional rights of the teacher.

29.

The Morrison factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate.  When a 

camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load to see which 
one could have done the deed.  A trier of fact is entitled to consider the totality of the 
offensive conduct.  (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.)

30.

Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed.  (Broney v. 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.)

Other Disciplinary Considerations

31.

An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt regarding the 

educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that may be considered.

30

(San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.)

32.

The Commission is vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee even if 
grounds for discipline exist.  (Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 
209.)

Evaluation of the Charges

33. Mr. Jahn was successfully employed as a school psychologist until the 2013-14

school year when the district hired Mr. Huffman as the Director of Student Support Services.
Based upon the evidence introduced at hearing, Mr. Huffman’s issues seemed to begin soon 
after Mr. Huffman arrived at the district.  In 2013-14 Mr. Huffman gave Mr. Jahn an
evaluation documenting that Mr. Jahn partially met and did not meet various district standards.
Mr. Huffman presented as a very “no nonsense” supervisor and it was evident that his 
management style clashed with Mr. Jahn’s laid back, relaxed demeanor.

Although the dates were not clearly identified at hearing, sometime during the 2016-17

school year, Mr. Jahn was out on medical leave for five to six weeks.  Mr. Jahn’s medical 
condition was not disclosed at this hearing other than his testimony about his MRSA infection.
He offered no explanation for his failure to perform his job duties other than the “snowball 
effect” that resulted when he returned from leave and had pending evaluations to perform and 
reports to write. However, his “snowball explanation” did not address all of the issues raised in
this hearing. Further, although Mr. Jahn’s counsel asserted during closing argument that Mr. 
Jahn should undergo a medical evaluation, that argument was speculative and presumed that 
Mr. Jahn had a medical condition that prevented him from performing his work but no evidence 
of a medical condition was presented in this regard. As ALJ Matyszewski ruled during the 
motions in limine, Mr. Jahn’s medical condition could not be considered in this hearing because 
Mr. Jahn asserted during discovery that he had no medical issues affecting his work 
performance. Thus, the Commission made no findings regarding Mr. Jahn’s medical condition.

The overwhelming evidence demonstrated that, for reasons not made clear at this 

hearing, in the spring of 2016 Mr. Jahn’s poor work performance was so egregious that he 
received a letter of reprimand.  In the fall of 2016 he was out on medical leave and when he 
returned to work he was unable to meet the demands of his position.  However, rather than
seeking accommodations or requesting help, Mr. Jahn continued to inform his supervisors that 
he could complete his job tasks even when it became evermore increasingly clear that he was 
unable to do so. His inability to perform his duties increased his colleagues’ workloads and 
caused them undue stress. Although it was not established that all of Mr. Jahn’s work was 
completed by others while he was on leave, as when he returned from leave he had reports and 
assessments almost immediately due, Mr. Jahn continued to advise his colleagues that he could 
accomplish his tasks and did not seek help or support.

Even more concerning than these failures was Mr. Jahn’s present inability to

acknowledge the issues presented at this hearing.  He testified that he did not need to be driven 

31

home following a March 2017 IEP meeting despite convincing evidence to the contrary and he 
attributed his repeated failure to perform his job duties to his inability to self-advocate. None of 
these excuses were sufficient.  Further, his failure to return from lunch during this hearing, 
because he fell asleep for several hours in his car, was clear evidence that substantiated the
district’s concerns about his current behavior.  This is not to say that Mr. Jahn could not 
someday perform the work of a school psychologist, or could not be employed as a school 
counselor or other type of therapist. In fact, based upon his excellent reviews regarding his 
positive interactions with students, Mr. Jahn seems best suited for a school counselor 
position.  However, Mr. Jahn is presently incapable of performing the work of a school
psychologist and must be dismissed.

Cause Exists to Dismiss Mr. Jahn

34.

Cause exists to dismiss Mr. Jahn pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(2), because the evidence established that Mr. Jahn engaged in unprofessional
conduct.

35.

Cause exists to dismiss Mr. Jahn pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6), because the evidence established that Mr. Jahn was evidently unfit for
service.

36.

Cause exists to dismiss Mr. Jahn pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8), because the evidence established that Mr. Jahn persistently violated
district polices and regulations.

Cause Does Not Exist to Dismiss Mr. Jahn for Dishonesty

37.

Cause does not exist to dismiss Mr. Jahn pursuant to Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(4), because the evidence did not establish that he was dishonest.

//

//

//

//

32

ORDER

Mr. Jahn’s appeal of his dismissal from employment with the Valley Center-Pauma

Unified School District is denied.  The district’s request to dismiss Mr. Jahn is granted.  Mr. 
Jahn shall be dismissed from the district.

DATED: _____________________

December 12, 2017

DATED: _____________________

December 13, 2017

DATED: _____________________

December 13, 2017

2SC-B 

14E DSF 104B2  .. 

____________________

DocuSigned  by: 

Carmen  Martine 

CARMEN MARTINEZ
Commission Member

(Ursula Sack 

_
URSULA SACK, PH.D.
Commission Member

________________________

oa 

ae  aN

______________________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

33

