BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FALLBROOK  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Proceeding  to  Dismiss: 

CYNTHIA  OSHIRO, 

OAH  No.  2017060569 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Fallbrook, 

California  on  October  25,  2017,  through  November  1,  2017,  and  on  November  14,  2017, 
through  November  15,  2017.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the  following  members: 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Debra  D.  Nye-Perkins,  Daniel  Leonard,  and  Cheryl  Lynch. 

Daniel  Shinoff  and  Michelle  Pacis,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Artiano  Shinoff,  represented 

Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool  &  Wax,  APC, 

represented  respondent,  Cynthia  Oshiro,  who  was  present  during  the  hearing. 

On  December  1,  2017,  the  Commission  met  to  deliberate  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

CASE  SUMMARY 

Ms.  Oshiro  was  employed  by  the  district  for  26  years  primarily  at  Potter  Junior  High 

School  where  she  taught  English.  Beginning  in  the  2016-17  school  year  Ms.  Oshiro  was 
transferred  from  Potter  Junior  High  School  to  San  Onofre  School  to  teach  seventh  and  eighth 
grade  math.  Ms.  Oshiro  received  seven  letters  of  reprimand  during  the  2016-17  school  year. 
During  the  2016-17  school  year,  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  grade  student  assignments,  failed  to  utilize 
a  clear  lesson  plan  or  sequence  tn  her  classes,  and  failed  to  comply  with  district  directives.  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  actions  constituted  persistent  violations  or  refusals  to  obey  regulations  and  district 
policies.  The  Commission  did  not  find  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  actions  constituted  evident 
unfitness  for  service  or  immoral  conduct.  Based  upon  the  evidence  presented,  the 
Commission  concluded  that  the  allegations  that  were  sustained  warranted  Ms.  Oshiro’s 
dismissal  from  the  district.

Jurisdictional  Matters 

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

1. 

Ms.  Oshiro  was  employed  by  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District 

as  a  seventh  and  eighth  grade  school  teacher.  During  the  time  of  the  alleged  incidents,  she 
worked  at  San  Onofre  School  (San  Onofre). 

2. 

On  May  12,  2017,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  suspended  without  pay  from  her  position  at 

the  district. 

3. 

Bill  Billingsley,  the  district’s  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  signed  the 

Notice  of  Charges  on  May  12,  2017,  in  his  official  capacity.  The  notice  set  forth  the  facts 
and  laws  on  which  the  district  was  relying  and  sought  to  immediately  dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro 
from  employment  with  the  district  on  the  grounds  of  unprofessional  conduct  (Education 
Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2)),  immoral  conduct  (Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(1)),  unsatisfactory  performance  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(5)),'  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)), 
and  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  and  district  polices  (Education  Code 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)).” 

4. 

In  the  Notice  of  Charges,  the  district  alleged  that  during  the  2016-17  school 

year  Ms.  Oshiro:  had  poor  instruction  techniques,  had  poor  discipline  of  students,  repeatedly 
failed  to  follow  the  district-adopted  lesson  plans  and  pacing  guides,  failed  to  teach  math  as 
required  during  her  classes,  failed  to  create  lesson  plans,  failed  to  post  daily  standards  and 
objectives  for  each  math  class,  failed  to  routinely  check  homework,  failed  to  have  a  clear 
lesson  structure  and  sequence,  failed  to  implement  a  student’s  IEP  correctly  during  class, 
humiliated  a  disabled  child  in  front  of  his  peers  as  a  form  of  discipline,  utilized  poor 
disciplinary  techniques  humiliating  students,  failed  to  keep  student  information  confidential 
as  required,  restricted  students  from  recess  and  food  as  a  form  of  discipline,  and  failed  to 
build  a  positive  classroom  environment. 

  

!  By  Order  dated  November  30,  2017,  Ms.  Oshiro’s  motion  to  dismiss  the  charges  of 

unsatisfactory  performance  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)),  and 
unprofessional  conduct  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2))  was  granted 
because  the  district  failed  to  comply  with  the  mandates  of  Education  Code  section  44938. 

°  Page  2,  line  1,  of  the  notice  only  referenced  Education  Code  section  44932, 
subdivisions  (a)(1),(2),(5),  and  (6).  However,  page  2,  lines  8  to  12,  specifically  assert  that 
Ms.  Oshiro  has  repeatedly  violated  and  refused  to  obey  school  and/or  district  rules  and 
directives,  which  constitutes  an  allegation  of  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey 
regulations  and  district  polices  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(8).  Ms.  Oshiro  never  argued  that  she  was  not  on  notice  of  that  allegation.

5, 

Ms.  Oshire  timely  appealed  the  dismissal  action,  denying  that  grounds  for  her 

dismissal  from  employment  existed,  and  this  hearmg  followed. 

6. 

The  parties  filed  motions  in  imine  and  oppositions  thereto.  Tentative  rulings 
were  issued  on  October  24,  2017,  and  the  parties  were  allowed  to  orally  argue  their  positions 
at  the  start  of  trial.  After  listening  to  oral  arguments,  final  rulings  were  issued  consistent 
with  the  tentative  rulmgs. 

Motions  in  Limine 

Motion  to  Dismiss 

7, 

By  Order  issued  November  30,  2017,  the  respondent’s  motion  to  dismiss  the 

charges  for  unsatisfactory  performance  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(3)),  and 
unprofessional  conduct  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2})  was  granted 
because  the  district  failed  to  comply  with  the  mandates  of  Education  Code  section  44938. 
Accordingly,  this  decision  addresses  the  remaining  charges  in  the  Notice  of  Charges. 

Ms,  Oshira’s  Education  and  District  Employment 

8. 

After  obtaining  her  Bachelor's  degree  in  1985,  Ms.  Oshiro  received  a  Master's 

Degree  in  Teaching  in  2007.  As  of  1985,  she  hoids  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential 
and  a  supplemental  credential  to  teach  math.  Ms.  Oshiro  also  holds  a  bilingual  certification 
allowing  her  to  teach  Spanish.  Additionally,  she  has  taken  some  additional  classes  from 
Califorma  State  University  regarding  the  incorporation  of  technology  in  the  classroom.  Prior 
to  beginning  employment  with  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  in  1991,  Ms. 
Oshiro  worked  full-time  for  five  years  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  teaching 
third  and  fifth  prade  classes.  Ms.  Oshiro  was  hired  in  1991  by  the  Fallbrook  Unified 
Elementary  School  District  to  work  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  where  she  taught  until  the 
2016-17  school  year  when  she  was  transferred  to  San  Onofre.  During  the  25  years  she  taught 
full-time  at  Potter  Junior  High  School,  Ms.  Oshiro  taught  seventh  and  eighth  grade  subjects 
of  science,  English  language  development,  and  study  skills. 

Ms.  Oshiro’s  Transfer  to  San  Onofre 

9. 

After  the  end  of  the  2015-16  school  year,  Ms.  Oshire  was  involuntarily 

transferred  from  Potter  Junior  High  School  (Potter)  to  San  Onofre.  She  first  learned  of  her 
transfer  on  May  6,  2016.  Ms.  Oshiro  appealed  the  transfer  but  her  appeal  was  denied  on  the 
basis  of  “program  need.”  When  she  worked  at  Potter,  Ms.  Oshiro’s  commute  to  work  was 
about  20  minutes  each  way.  After  her  transfer  to  San  Onofre,  her  conmmute  to  and  from  work 
was  about  two  hours  each  way  causing  her  hardship.  Durmg  her  time  working  at  Potter,  Ms. 
Oshiro  never  received  any  letters  of  reprumand.  During  the  2016-17  school  year  at  San 
Onofre,  Ms.  Oshiro  taught  two  seventh  grade  math  classes,  two  eighth  gerade  math  classes, 
and  one  elective  class.

2016  -17  School  Year  at  San  Onofre 

10. 

On  August  10,  2016,  Ms.  Oshiro  first  met  with  the  principal  of  San  Onofre, 

Lillian  Perez,  to  prepare  for  the  2016-17  school  year  which  began  on  August  15,  2016.  Ms. 
Oshiro  discussed  with  Ms.  Perez  the  curriculum  for  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  at  San 
Onofre.  Ms.  Oshiro  informed  Ms.  Perez  that  she  had  completed  the  University  of  California 
Irvine  Math  Project  (IMP)°  training  for  the  seventh  grade,  but  had  not  done  so  for  the  eighth 
grade.  Ms.  Perez  ensured  Ms.  Oshiro  that  it  was  not  a  problem  that  she  had  not  completed 
IMP  training  for  eighth  grade  math.  After  their  conversation  that  day,  Ms.  Oshiro  went  to 
her  classroom  to  set  it  up  for  the  first  day  of  school.  Later  that  day,  Ms.  Oshiro  suffered  a 
health  related  incident  at  the  school  and  was  transferred  by  ambulance  to  the  hospital.  As  a 
result  of  this  incident,  Ms.  Oshiro  missed  meetings  on  August  11  and  12  regarding 
preparation  for  the  school  year  and  a  “meet  and  greet”  with  parents.  However,  she  returned 
for  the  first  day  of  school. 

11. 

On  September  12,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  sent  an  email  to  Ms.  Oshiro  following  Ms. 

Perez’s  observation  of  one  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  classes.  The  email  stated  that  Ms.  Perez  did 
not  see  a  “standards  based  lesson,  clearly  defined  objective,”  or  alignment  to  the  IMP 
scheduled  math  lesson  for  that  day.  Ms.  Perez  further  instructed  in  the  email  that  Ms.  Oshiro 
should  follow  the  “math  scope  and  sequence”  daily,  have  “clearly  defined  objectives,  with 
student  work  ‘tied’  to  the  math  objective  being  taught”,  and  that  “‘IMP’  math  lessons  should 
be  the  ‘bulk’  of  your  instruction.” 

September  23,  2016,  Letter  and  September  26,  2016,  email   

12. 

On  September  23,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  provided  a  letter  to  Ms.  Oshiro  following  a 

conference  with  her  to  discuss  Ms.  Perez’s  observation  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  on  September 
21,  2016,  and  concerns  regarding  Ms.  Oshiro’s  use  of  instructional  time  and  failure  to  follow 
the  required  instructional  framework  in  her  classes.  In  the  letter  Ms.  Perez  summarized  the 
discussion  at  the  conference  with  Ms.  Oshiro,  which  included  Ms.  Perez’s  questions 
regarding  Ms.  Oshiro’s  use  of  a  handwriting  worksheet  in  class,  a  “magic  circle”  exercise  in 
class,  and  failing  grades  of  students.  The  letter  further  provided  that  all  future  lessons  should 
contain: 

 
=
N

Clearly  outlined  objectives  for  each  grade  level  math  block. 

.  Following  IMP  Lessons  scheduled  by  you  and  school 

TOSA*  in  Lessoneer”  from  start  to  finish  with  re-teach  when 
necessary. 
  

*  University  of  California  Irvine  Math  Project  or  IMP  is  a  method  of  teaching 

mathematics  utilized  by  the  Fallbrook  Elementary  Unified  School  District  for  their 
mathematics  curriculum. 

*  The  acronym  TOSA  refers  to  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment  and  refers  to  an 

instructional  coach  for  teachers  who  is  an  expert  on  the  instructional  framework  utilized  by

13. 

On  September  26,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  sent  an  email  to  Ms.  Oshiro  after  having 

observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  that  day.  The  email  provided  in  part  as  follows: 

3. 

Please  continue  to  update  Lessoneer  monthly  and  share  with 
admin. 

We  also  agreed  that  Maria  Flaherty  would  provide  you  with 
another  day  of  co-teaching  and  co-planning  for  7°/8"  math 
so  you  could  specifically  focus  on  the  instructional 
framework.  I  will  provide  feedback  on  my  walk  throughs 
and  follow-up  with  you  as  needed. 

I  am  checking  in  with  you  today  regarding  your  lesson.  I  do  not 
believe  the  lesson  I  observed  today  during  my  brief  walk 
through  followed  the  guidelines  we  agreed  on.  When  we  met 
last  Friday,  Sept.  23,  2016,  we  agreed  on  the  following  items 
regarding  the  us  [sic]  of  instructional  time: 

a.  Maximize  math  instructional  time  each  Math  Period 
b. 

Standards/Objective  driven  versus  activity 

1. 

i. 

Following  Lessoneer  from  start  to  finish/with  re- 
teach  when  necessary 
Please  continue  to  update  Lessoneer  monthly  and 
share  with  admin 

Ms.  Oshiro’s  Medical  Leave 

14. 

Ms.  Oshiro  was  out  on  medical  leave  from  October  3,  2016,  through  October 

14,  2016,  during  which  a  substitute  teacher  taught  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  classes. 

October  18,  2016,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  1 

15. 

On  October  18,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  provided  a  letter  of  reprimand  to  Ms.  Oshiro 
after  observing  Ms.  Oshiro’s  period  5  math  class  on  September  26  and  27,  2016.  Ms.  Perez 
wrote  that  during  her  observation  she  “did  not  observe  the  lesson/objective  listed  in 
Lessoneer  and  there  was  not  a  clear  objective  being  taught  and  website  listed  on  the  projector 
was  from  the  British  Math  Council.”  She  further  wrote: 

  

the  district.  A  STEM  (science,  technology,  engineering,  and  mathematics)  TOSA  named 
Maria  Flaherty  provided  coaching  to  teachers  at  San  Onofre  during  the  2016-17  school  year, 
including  Ms.  Oshiro. 

>  Lessoneer  refers  to  an  on-line  program  accessible  by  teachers  of  the  district  that 

provides  objectives  and  standards  to  be  met  for  lessons  utilized  by  the  district.

Your  repeated  failure  to  adhere  to  CTSP  Standard  4  Planning 
and  Designing  Learning  Experience  has  led  to  meffective 
introduction  of  7th/S8th  grade  math  concepts  in  Units  1-2  and 
you  have  viclated  our  agreement  on  9/23/16  to  adhere  to  the 
grade  level  objectives  and  Standards  Based  Lessons  and  pacing 
outlmed  in  Lessoneer. 

Your  failure  to  follow  the  district  pacing  guide  and  Standards 
Based  Lesson  plans  has  caused  ineffective  and  inconsistent 
delivery  of  math  standards,  confusion  amongst  students  who 
have  come  to  complain  and  several  parents  complamis 
regarding  math  mstruction  and  not  knowing  how  to  support  their 
children. 

In  the  assistance  plan 

Effective  immediately  you  will  adhere  to  the  assistance  plan 
outlined  in  the  next  section  of  this  letter. 
(pe  2)  you  will  have  to  have  Lessoneer  updated  daily  to  comcide 
with  your  math  lessons,  clear  standard/objective  posted  for  each 
math  class  and  weekly  feedback/communication  with  parents 
regarding  math  progress  and  discontinue  giving  student 
discipline  paragraph.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  requirement 
will  result  in  a  further  disciplinary  action  by  the  district. 

16. 

On  November  1,  2016,  Ms.  Oshiro  responded  to  the  October  18,  2016,  letter  of 

reprimand  with  a  letter  wherein  she  stated  that  she  hoped  to  “clear  up  misconceptions  of 
what  is  being  taught  in  my  Math  class.”  Ms.  Oshiro  wrote  she  was  “under  the  impression 
that  students  would  use  McGraw-Hill,  IMP,  and  technology  together  in  Math  instruction” 
and  she  “followed  the  year-at-a-glance  teaching  California  state  standards,  but  not  always 
using  IMP  alone.”  Ms.  Oshiro  wrote  “the  objectives  were  written  on  the  front  whiteboard” 
and  because  her  students  struggled  with  decimals  she  provided  several  “reteach”  lessons  on 
decimals,  which  she  understood  was  not  a  seventh  or  eighth  grade  standard.  Ms.  Oshiro 
wrote  that  on  9/23/16  about  “half  of  the  8th  grade  students  were  still  completing  the  iReady 
Diagnostic  Assessment,  while  |Ms.  Oshiro]  conducted  an  engaging  activity  (not  IMP}  which 
mcluded  vocabulary  from  our  lessons.”  She  wrote  that  the  activity  “was  a  paper  foldmg 
activity  [learned  at  a  Math  conference.”  She  further  wrote  that  “[ijfl  had  continued  with  the 
pacing  guide,  several  students  would  have  missed  out  on  imstruction.”  Ms.  Oshiro  wrote  that 
with  regard  to  her  lesson  on  9/26/16  she  had  the  class  objective  printed  im  150  size  font 
posted  at  the  front  of  the  room  and  that  the  lesson  she  taught  “was  the  same  as”  Lesson  | 
in 
Lessoneer,  but  was  using  a  website  that  was  “meant  to  be  more  engaging”  and  “meorporate 
technology  into  [the]  lesson.”  Ms.  Oshiro  included  photographs  from  her  classroom  of  the 
objective  written  in  large  font  on  paper  and  posted,  as  well  as  screenshots  from  Lessoneer. 
Ms.  Oshiro  concluded  in  her  letter: 

6

I  can  and  will  follow  the  IMP  lessons  in  Lessoneer  as  directed. 
I  have  found  a  few  errors  and  lessons  with  sections  missing,  but 
I  will  do  my  best  to  stick  to  it,  and  support  my  students. 

October  19,  2016,  Classroom  Observation  Report   

17. 

Ms.  Cindy  Guerrettaz,  assistant  principal  of  San  Onofre  during  the  2016-17 
school  year,  observed  one  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  seventh  grade  classes,  on  October  19,  2016,  as 
part  of  her  duties  as  assistant  principal.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  summarized  her  observations  in  a 
report  and  testified  at  the  hearing  regarding  those  observations.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  wrote  with 
regard  to  the  seventh  grade  class,  that  she  entered  the  class  42  minutes  after  it  had  started  and 
Ms.  Oshiro  did  not  have  an  objective  posted  on  the  board.  After  Ms.  Guerrettaz  entered  the 
classroom,  Ms.  Oshiro  wrote  the  objective  on  the  board  and  read  it  to  the  class.  Ms. 
Guerrettaz  testified  that  prior  to  her  observations  that  day,  she  was  aware  that  Ms.  Oshiro  had 
shown  inconsistencies  with  posting  objectives  in  her  class,  and  as  a  result,  Ms.  Guerrettaz 
had  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  template  for  objectives  sometime  in  early  October  2016. 
Ms.  Guerrettaz  further  summarized  her  observation  of  the  seventh  grade  class  and  wrote, 
.  there  was  no  evidence  of  gradually 
“there  was  no  clear  Lesson  Structure  and  Sequence .  . 
releasing  the  students  towards  mastery  of  the  objective.”  Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  this 
meant  that  the  students  did  not  show  that  they  understood  the  lesson  before  Ms.  Oshiro 
released  them  to  perform  the  tasks  alone.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  wrote  that  when  students  provided 
an  incorrect  response,  no  correctives  were  given  and  there  were  no  adjustments  to  the  lesson. 
She  also  wrote  that  the  students  were  not  engaged  and  several  students  were  observed  to  be 
off-task  and  not  participating  in  the  lesson.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  wrote  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was 
observed  asking  three  students  what  their  names  were  despite  the  fact  that  those  students 
have  been  enrolled  in  the  class  all  year. 

November  4,  2016,  Instructional  Conference  Summary   

18. 

On  November  4,  2016,  both  Ms.  Perez  and  Ms.  Guerrettaz  conducted  a  formal 

observation  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classroom  and  summarized  their  findings  in  an  Instructional 
Conference  Summary  reviewed  and  signed  by  Ms.  Oshiro  during  a  conference  with  her  to 
discuss  the  observation.  Ms.  Perez  testified  that  after  her  observation  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class 
she  was  concerned  because  Ms.  Oshiro’s  lessons  were  missing  key  components  and  the 
students  were  never  given  a  strong  model  on  how  to  perform  the  assigned  tasks  and  were 
never  able  to  master  the  objective  taught.  In  the  summary,  Ms.  Perez  and  Ms.  Guerrettaz 
wrote  in  part  as  follows: 

Throughout  several  observations  in  your  classroom,  we  continue 
to  have  the  same  concern  with  the  level  of  instruction.  There 
does  not  appear  to  be  a  well  planned,  thoughtful  attempt  at  a 
Lesson  Structure  and  Sequence.  The  District  Instructional 
Framework  has  a  well  outlined  process  to  follow  to  ensure  our 
students  are  provided  with  a  strong  first  model  in  their  initial 
teaching  during  the  Input/Model  phase.  A  model  was  never

observed  during  this  lesson.  Students  were  clearly  able  to  self- 
teach  throughout  the  lesson  and  although  they  navigated  the 
papers  well,  it  wasn’t  observed  that  you  were  able  to  provide 
feedback  or  instruction  in  this  lesson. 

It  is  critical  for  our  student’s  [sic]  success,  that  you  schedule  an 
additional  co-plan/co-teach  with  our  site  TOSA  for  additional 
support  in  the  area  of  Lesson  Structure  and  Sequence. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  San  Onofre  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  support  from  the  school 
TOSA,  Ms.  Flaherty,  co-teaching  and  a  co-plan  as  well,  but  despite  those  efforts,  Ms.  Oshiro 
never  showed  improvement.  Ms.  Perez  also  testified  that  she  began  receiving  several  parent 
complaints  that  their  students  were  falling  behind  in  math  due  to  poor  instruction  by  Ms. 
Oshiro. 

Alleged  Incident  Involving  Student  I.M. 

19. 

|  On  November  7,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  first  received  student  and  parent  complaints 
that  during  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class,  student  I.M.  was  humiliated  by  Ms.  Oshiro.  Specifically,  Ms. 
Perez  testified  that  three  students  came  to  her  office  and  were  very  upset.  Ms.  Perez  stated 
that  these  were  very  bright  children  who  had  never  come  to  her  with  complaints  in  the  past. 
Ms.  Perez  testified  that  each  of  the  three  students  told  her  separately  without  the  other 
students  present  that  Ms.  Oshiro  singled  out  student  I.M.  during  class  and  made  him  stand  up 
and  repeat  the  instructions  to  homework  or  assignments  she  had  provided  to  him.  When  I.M. 
stood  in  class  he  was  not  able  to  repeat  the  instructions  and  was  crying  and  upset.  Each 
student  told  Ms.  Perez  that  Ms.  Oshiro  then  told  I.M.  while  the  entire  class  listened  “I  don’t 
care  if  you  have  ADHD.”  The  students  further  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro  searched  I.M.’s 
backpack  in  front  of  the  class  and  made  I.M.  turn  his  desk  around  to  face  the  wall  while 
instruction  happened  behind  him  thereby  humiliating  the  student.  Ms.  Perez  also  testified 
that  student  I.M.  has  a  504  plan®  because  of  his  anxiety. 

20. 

After  receiving  the  student  complaints  and  the  parent  complaint  on  November 

7,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  wrote  an  email  to  Ms.  Oshiro  regarding  them  and  expressing  that  the 
students  and  parent  were  very  upset  and  that  the  students  stated  that  they  do  not  feel  safe  in 
the  classroom.  Ms.  Oshiro  responded  to  this  email  and  denied  that  she  ever  said  the  phrase, 
“T  don’t  care  if  you  have  ADHD,”  denied  ever  searching  the  backpack,  and  stated  that  she 
did  not  know  I.M.  had  ADHD. 

/// 
  

°  A  504  plan  is  an  educational  plan  utilized  for  students  with  special  needs,  such  as 

anxiety,  to  accommodate  the  special  needs  of  that  student.

21. 

At  about  7:30  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  November  8,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  met  with 

Ms.  Oshiro  and  Ms.  Oshiro’s  FETA’  site  representative,  Cheryl  Bliss  to  discuss  the 
allegations  regarding  student  ILM.  Ms.  Perez  summarized  that  conference  in  a  memo 
provided  to  Ms.  Oshiro.  Ms.  Perez  also  testified  about  this  meeting.  According  to  Ms. 
Perez,  when  questioned  about  whether  she  had  I.M.  stand  in  front  of  the  class  to  repeat  the 
instructions,  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  she  did  so  and  also  stated  that  she  had  other  students  do  the 
same.  Ms.  Perez  asked  Ms.  Oshiro  to  refrain  from  having  students  stand  and  repeat 
instructions.  With  regard  to  searching  the  student’s  backpack,  Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that  she 
removed  the  backpack  and  took  it  to  the  front  of  the  class  because  I.M.  was  distracted  by 
something  in  his  backpack.  With  regard  to  the  alleged  statement,  “I  don’t  care  if  you  have 
ADHD,”  Ms.  Oshiro  denied  making  that  statement  and  told  Ms.  Perez  that  she  was  unaware 
that  I.M.  had  a  504  plan  and  never  knew  that  he  had  a  disability.  Ms.  Perez  summarized  that 
Ms.  Oshiro  told  her  that  I.M.  had  been  acting  like  he  could  not  talk  and  felt  sick. 
Accordingly,  Ms.  Oshiro  sent  him  to  the  school  nurse.  Ms.  Perez  testified  and  summarized 
in  her  letter  that  upon  return  to  the  class  from  the  nurse,  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  to  turning 
I.M.’s  desk  to  face  the  wall  while  instruction  was  happening  behind  him.  Ms.  Perez  asked 
Ms.  Oshiro  to  refrain  from  turning  any  student’s  desk  to  the  wall  to  avoid  humiliating 
students.  Ms.  Oshiro  testified  that  she  did  not  admit  to  Ms.  Perez  that  she  turned  I.M.’s  desk 
to  face  the  wall  and  she  denied  doing  so  at  this  hearing.  Ms.  Bliss  testified  she  recalled  Ms. 
Oshiro  admitting  at  their  meeting  that  she  turned  I.M.’s  desk  to  face  the  back  wall  while 
instruction  happened  behind  him. 

22. 

Later,  on  November  8,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  attended  a  504  plan  review  meeting 

for  student  I.M.  with  the  San  Onofre  Special  Education  teacher,  Ms.  Gautreux,  I.M.’s  science 
teacher,  the  school  psychologist,  the  school  resource  specialist  and  I.M.’s  parents.  Ms.  Perez 
summarized  portions  of  the  meeting  in  a  letter  dated  November  8,  2016,  sent  to  Ms.  Oshiro. 
Ms.  Perez  wrote  that  I.M.’s  parents  expressed  concern  that  Ms.  Oshiro  “was  not  treating 
[their]  son  fairly”  and  I.M.  has  come  home  from  school  very  upset  and  expressed  he  does  not 
want  to  go  back  to  school  because  he  does  not  want  to  go  to  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  class.  Ms. 
Perez  offered  to  set  up  a  meeting  with  I.M.’s  parents  and  Ms.  Oshiro,  but  the  parents  did  not 
want  to  meet  with  Ms.  Oshiro.  Ms.  Perez  further  wrote  that  she  asked  Ms.  Gautreux  to  move 
I.M.’s  desk  to  the  back  of  the  class  where  Ms.  Gautreux  sits  so  she  may  assist  him  moving 
forward  with  a  special  education  assignment  and  putting  the  504  plan  in  place. 

23. 

Leonard  Rodriguez  has  worked  for  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School 
District  for  12  years,  and  he  was  the  principal  of  Potter  Junior  High  School  for  five  years 
from  2010  to  2015.  After  that  position  he  was  promoted  to  the  position  of  Director  of 
Student  Services  and  Instructional  Technology,  where  his  duties  included  investigating 
various  issues  related  to  student  discipline.  Through  this  position,  Mr.  Leonard  was  tasked 
by  the  district  to  investigate  Ms.  Oshiro’s  treatment  of  students.  He  began  his  investigation 
on  March  29,  2017,  concluded  it  on  April  24,  2017,  and  summarized  his  findings  in  a  report 
dated  April  28,  2017.  Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  about  his  investigation  and  his  report  mirrored 
  

"FETA  is  an  acronym  of  unknown  origin.  However,  evidence  established  that  FETA 

is  a  teacher’s  union.

his  testimony.  Mr.Rodriguez  interviewed  multiple  parents,  students,  Ms.  Trudeau,  Ms. 
Gautreaux,  and  I.M.  and  concluded  that  none  of  the  students  in  the  class  recalled  Ms.  Oshiro 
saying  to  I.M.,  “I  don’t  care  if  you  have  ADHD,”  and  Mr.  Rodriguez  could  not  confirm  Ms. 
Oshiro  made  those  remarks. 

November  18,  2016,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  2 

  

24. 

On  November  18,  2016,  Lillian  Perez  provided  a  second  letter  of  reprimand  to 

Ms.  Oshiro  after  their  meeting  on  November  8,  2016.  The  letter  stated  in  part: 

During  the  conference,  the  following  was  discussed: 

Students  being  humiliated  in  class  —  Students  were  asked 
to  stand  up  in  front  of  classmates  and  repeat  directions 
when  not  on  task  which  you  admitted  is  your  current 
practice. 
Student  was  moved  to  have  his  desk  face  the  wall,  which 
you  validated. 
Students  reported  feeling  unsafe  in  the  classroom  and 
unclear  on  classroom  expectations. 

[f]... 

( 

Effective  immediately,  I  am  providing  you  with  the  following 
directives: 

You  are  to  refrain  from  singling  out  students  or  having 
them  stand  to  repeat  instructions  as  mentioned  in 
meeting  on  11/7/16. 
You  are  to  refrain  from  isolating  students  from  the  rest  of 
the  classroom  to  repeat  directions,  please  work  with  Mrs. 
Gautreux  on  how  to  engage  students  with  specific 
learning  disabilities. 
You  are  to  work  on  building  a  positive  classroom 
environment  which  means  you  have  clear/concise 
classroom  behavioral  expectations  that  are  consistent  for 
all  students.  Students  should  be  given  constructive 
feedback,  positive  praise  and  recognition  for  staying  on 
task  and  completing  assignments. 
You  are  to  have  a  process  chart  for  each  focus  standard 
in  IMP  so  that  students  can  follow  the  metacognitive 
process  when  solving  a  math  problem. 

10

25. 

Ms.  Oshiro  testified  that  the  November  18,  2016,  letter  of  reprimand  was 
changed  by  Ms.  Perez  from  the  language  cited  above  before  the  letter  was  given  to  Ms. 
Oshiro  because  Ms.  Oshiro  did  not  admit  to  that  allegation  that  she  turned  the  student’s  desk 
to  face  the  wall.  Specifically,  she  stated  that  Ms.  Perez  struck  through  the  second  bullet 
point  stating  “Student  was  moved  to  have  his  desk  face  the  wall,  which  you  validated”  and 
put  her  initials  next  to  that  strike  through.  Ms.  Oshiro  produced  the  same  document  with  a 
line  through  that  statement  and  the  initials  LP  next  to  the  line.  Ms.  Perez  testified  she  never 
made  such a  strike  through  on  the  document,  that  was  not  her  handwriting,  and  that  Ms. 
Oshiro  did  admit  that  she  turned  the  student’s  desk  to  face  the  wall. 

December  14,  2016,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  3 

26. 

From  November  16,  2016,  to  December  12,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  received  several 

parent  and  student  complaints  about  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  class,  including  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s 
students  had  poor  performance  and  were  failing  Benchmark  Assessments,  Ms.  Oshiro  was 
not  checking  students’  work  and  that  she  gave  her  students  her  daughter’s  old  stuffed  animals 
to  reward  them  for  high  scores. 

27. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  after  the  first  semester,  about  80  to  90  percent  of  Ms. 

Oshiro’s  eighth  grade  math  class  students  received  a  D  or  F  grade.  Ms.  Perez  stated  this  was 
astounding  to  her  because  these  students  are  typically  high  academic  achievers  and  the  scores 
from  San  Onofre  are  typically  much  higher.  Additionally,  with  regard  to  the  seventh  grade 
students  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  class,  about  60  to  70  percent  of  them  were  failing  the  class, 
which  was  also  an  astoundingly  high  number.  Ms.  Perez  testified  that  her  observations  of 
Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  classes  reflected  the  poor  student  grades  and  that  the  students  were  not 
getting  what  they  needed  in  math  class  to  progress.  Ms.  Perez  was  very  concerned.  Because 
of  this  sense  of  urgency,  Ms.  Perez  assigned  Ms.  Trudeau  to  co-teach  with  Ms.  Oshiro.  Ms. 
Perez  knew  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was  familiar  with  the  math  concepts  and  Ms.  Trudeau  “had  the 
rest”  so  that  the  students  could  progress.  Ms.  Perez  stated  that  she  had  never  before  given 
this  level  of  co-teaching  support  to  a  veteran  teacher  such  as  Ms.  Oshiro  but  she  had  also 
never  before  felt  this  type  of  urgency  to  do  so.  Ms.  Perez  also  continued  to  provide  support 
to  Ms.  Oshiro  by  providing  the  STEM  TOSA,  Ms.  Flaherty,  to  assist  her. 

28. 

On  December  14,  2016,  Ms.  Perez  provided  a  third  letter  of  reprimand  to  Ms. 

Oshiro  wherein  she  summarized  “the  complaints  that  [Ms.  Perez  has]  received  from  ten 
parents/students  from  [November  11  to  December  12],  concerning  the  Benchmark  tests  sent 
home,  poor  student  performance  and  continued  complaints  regarding  instruction.”  Ms.  Perez 
testified  consistent  with  her  letter  in  which  she  wrote: 

In  summary,  these  are  the  following  recurring  complaints: 

e 

Failing  benchmark  scores  for  Trimester  |  in  7th/8th 
grade  Math  Classes. 

11

6 

e 

@ 

Students  confused  during  instruction  and  not 
understanding  classwork. 
Teacher  showing  videos  or  TV  claps  that  are  irrelevant  to 
objective  bemg  taught. 
Classwork/Homework  not  explained,  corrected  or 
returned  to  show  student  progress. 

The  ten  student/parent  complaints  demonstrate  poor  planning 
and  ineffective  instructional  delivery  of  the  standards  and 
objectives  students  are  expected  to  learn.  Your  failure  to 
explam,  correct,  and  provide  immediate  feedback  to  students  on 
class  work  also  demonstrates  a  lack  of  understanding  and 
application  of  the  District’s  instructional  framework  in  which 
you  have  been  trained.  Your  failure  to  provide  students  with 
process  steps  for  each  objective  has  also  led  to  the  students  [sic] 
lack  of  understanding  and  progress.  As  a  result  of  this  you  are 
currently  “ineffective”  in  the  CSTP  3-  Understanding  and 
Organizing  Subject  Matter  for  Student  Learning. 

We 

Effective  immediately,  |  am  providing  you  with  the  following 
directives: 

® 

e 

6 

e 

e 

e 
e 

You  are  to  turn  in  lesson  plans  with  7th/Sth  grade 
objectives  and  process  steps  by  8:00  am.  Monday 
morning  for  the  week  (ahgned  to  the  FUESD 
Mathematics  Units  of  Study  Curriculum  Map  in 
EdCaliber). 
Hach  lesson  should  have  an  appropriate  engagement 
strategy  to  increase  your  ability  to  assess  student 
understanding  of  the  learnme  objective(s)  during  the 
lesson. 
Weekly  3-10  question  formative  assessment  on 
objectives  taught  for  that  week. 
Weekly  assessment  grades  inputted  into  Infinite  Campus 
by  the  following  Tuesday. 
All  written  communication  to  parents  must  be  provided 
to  the  principal  or  assistant  principal  in  advance,  and 
approved  for  distribution. 
Continue  the  Assistance  Plan  attached  to  this  letter. 
Continue  to  work  with  site-based  instructional  coach 
(STEM  TOSA)  for  support  with  mstruction.

29. 

On  an  unknown  date  Ms.  Oshiro  responded  to  the  December  14,  2016,  letter  of 

reprimand  with  a  letter  to  Ms.  Perez.  In  her  letter,  Ms.  Oshiro  wrote  in  part: 

These  letters  of  Reprimand  are  in  error. 
in  CSTP-3. 

I  am  not  “ineffective” 

(.--  [9] 

I  have  made  every  effort  to  follow  all  directives  given.  In 
September,  when  I  mentioned  that  I  had  not  been  to  any  8th 
grade  IMP  trainings,  you  said  this  was  no  problem.  ...  In 
October  when  I  returned  from  medical  leave,  and  was  told  to  do 
only  IMP  lessons,  I  did  that.  . 
missing  materials,  some  materials  are  in  the  wrong  places,  an 
assessment  was  missing,  and  there  are  many  errors  on  work 
pages,  answer  sheets,  and  even  tests...  .  Regarding  student 
complaints,  except  for  needing  time  to  visit  the  restroom,  what 
was  mentioned  did  not  happen.  .. 
I  will  do  as  directed,  with 
building  students’  skill  and  confidence  foremost  in  mind. 

..  Some  of  the  lessons  were 

. 

January  12,  2017,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  4 

  

30. 

On  January  12,  2017,  Ms.  Perez  observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  seventh  grade  math 
class  for  45  minutes.  Thereafter,  Ms.  Perez  had  a  meeting  with  Ms.  Oshiro  regarding  her 
observations  and  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  fourth  letter  of  reprimand,  which  was 
consistent  with  Ms.  Perez’s  testimony  regarding  her  observations  that  day. 
in  part  as  follows: 

The  letter  stated 

Your  Assistance  Plan  dated  12/6/16,  states  that  you  will  have  a 
clear  standard  and  objective  posted  for  each  math  class, 
however  I  did  not  see  a  [sic]  that  in  today’s  observation  1/12/17. 
In  1/12  observation  from  9:00-9:45  am  in  Period  2  math  class 
with  7th  graders,  I  observed  the  following:  Incomplete 
objective  posted  without  the  “By”  statement.  The  objective 
posted  for  7th  grade  was  “Students  will  solve  linear  equations 
and  inequalities.” 

During  today’s  meeting  we  discussed  the  incomplete  objective 
and  confusion  noted  by  students.  The  assistance  plan  states  that 
you  must  start  each  lesson  with  a  grade  level  objective.  These 
are  developed  at  the  weekly  meetings  held  on  Wednesday  with 
our  STEM  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment. 

I  discussed  the  fact  that  students  are  still  confused  when  you 
cover  a  lesson  because  there  isn’t  a  sequence  in  the  math 

13

instruction  and  the  objective  drives  the  lesson.  When  the 
objective  is  incomplete  than  [sic]  the  lesson  is  confusing.  I  have 
emails  from  parents  that  continue  to  be  concerned  when  you 
teach  the  math  lesson. 

We  discussed  the  need  for  you  to  continue  to  work  with  our 
STEM  TOSA  to  refine  your  objectives  and  planning  time  with 
TOSA  will  help  you  solidify  your  weekly  lessons.  These 
lessons  will  occur  every  Wednesday  during  your  hour  of  prep.  I 
also  informed  you  that  failure  to  comply  with  these  directives 
could  result  in  administrative  leave. 

January  30,  2017,  Mid-Year  Feedback  Form  and  February  7,  2017,  Formal 
Observation  and  Summary 

  

31. 

On  January  30,  2017,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  seventh  and 

eighth  grade  math  classes  and  provided  her  feedback  on  areas  they  had  agreed  upon  would 
be  the  areas  of  concentration  for  Ms.  Oshiro’s  formal  observation,  which  would  take  place  on 
an  agreed  upon  date  with  Ms.  Oshiro.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  two  Mid- 
Year  Feedback  forms  after  the  January  30,  2017,  observation  to  evaluate  her  with  four 
possible  marks:  Ineffective,  Developing,  Effective  and  Highly  Effective.  Ms.  Guerrettaz 
testified  that  the  form  was  accurate  regarding  her  observations.  The  first  form  evaluated 
“Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective  Environments  for  Student  Learning”  and  Ms.  Oshiro 
received  “Ineffective”  marks  for  three  of  the  seven  areas  listed,  including  “uses  instructional 
time  to  optimize  learning,”  “creates  a  rigorous  learning  environment  with  high  expectations 
and  appropriate  support  for  all  students,”  and  “creates  physical  or  virtual  learning 
environment  that  promotes  student  learning,  reflects  diversity,  and  encourages  constructive 
and  productive  interactions  among  students.”  For  the  remaining  five  areas  of  observation, 
Ms.  Oshiro  only  received  “Developing”  marks. 

The  second  form  evaluated  “Assessing  Student  Learning”  and  Ms.  Oshiro  received  a 

mark  of  “Ineffective”  for  “uses  assessment  data  to  establish  learning  goals  and  to  plan, 
differentiate  and  modify  instruction,”  and  “uses  assessment  information  to  share  timely  and 
comprehensible  feedback  with  students  and  their  families.”  Ms.  Oshiro  received 
“Developing”  as  a  mark  for  five  other  areas,  and  she  received  the  mark  “Effective”  for  one 
area  of  “applies  knowledge  of  the  purposes,  characteristics,  and  uses  of  different  types  of 
assessments.” 

Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  on  January  30,  2017,  she  was  not  satisfied  by  what  she 

was  observing  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classroom  and  she  believed  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was  not  effective 
as  ateacher.  Ms.  Guerrettas  also  stated  that  she  had  agreed  with  Ms.  Oshiro  that  she  would 
conduct  a  formal  observation  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classroom  on  February  7,  2017,  a  date  and 
time  chosen  by  Ms.  Oshiro  for  the  formal  observation. 

14

32. 

On  February  7,  2017,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  conducted  that  formal  observation.  She 

testified  about  her  observations  and  summarized  them  in  an  Instruction  Conference 
Summary.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  after  her  observation  Ms.  Oshiro  told  her,  “I  was  not 
prepared  for  the  lesson,”  despite  the  prior  notification  of  the  observation.  The  document, 
which  was  signed  by  Ms.  Oshiro  and  Ms.  Guerrettaz  provided  a  summary  of  Ms. 
Guerrettaz’s  observations  as  follows: 

Through  our  reflection  conversation  of  this  lesson,  it  was  clear 
that  you  were  not  prepared  for  the  lesson  that  was  observed. 
The  overall  objective  and  standard  of  the  lesson  were  not 
connected  to  the  lesson  as  it  was  presented  to  the  students.  The 
bulk  of  the  lesson  was  focused  on  the  “Dead  Mice  Smell  Bad” 
for  division  steps  which  is  a  4th  grade  standard.  It  is  essential 
that  our  students  receive  instruction  that  is  accurately  and  tightly 
aligned  to  their  grade  level  appropriate  standards.  With  the 
support  of  an  additional  teacher  in  your  classroom,  and  the 
weekly  meetings  for  planning  with  the  TOSA  and  Admin,  it  is 
the  expectation  that  you  are  fully  prepared  for  your  lessons 
including  work  problems  in  advance  to  ensure  teaching  it 
correctly  to  the  students  for  the  best  first  teach.  Please  let  us 
know  if  you  need  any  further  support  in  this  area. 

Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  she  was  shocked  by  her  observations  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s 

classes  that  day  because  the  students  were  clearly  confused  and  were  being  taught  a  4th 
grade  standard,  not  the  lesson  Ms.  Oshiro  had  previously  discussed  with  the  STEM  TOSA. 
Ms.  Guerrettaz  was  very  concerned  for  the  students  and  discussed  those  concerns  with  Ms. 
Perez.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  stated  that  Ms.  Oshiro  never  requested  any  additional  support,  but  that 
there  was  no  further  support  available  to  give  her  because  she  was  already  receiving  the 
maximum  amount  of  support  possible.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  stated  that  while  Ms.  Oshiro 
understands  the  math,  she  fails  to  grasp  the  concept  of  lesson  structure,  pacing,  and 
framework. 

February  10,  2017,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  5 

33. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro  met  every  Wednesday  with  Ms.  Flaherty, 

Ms.  Trudeau  (the  co-teacher  for  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classes)  and  Ms.  Perez.  Ms.  Perez  testified 
that  she  had  to  attend  those  Wednesday  meetings  because  “the  dynamics  between”  Ms. 
Trudeau  and  Ms.  Oshiro  were  difficult.  Ms.  Perez  stated  that  Ms.  Oshiro  had  some 
animosity  towards  Ms.  Trudeau  because  Ms.  Oshiro  wanted  to  teach  alone,  but  Ms.  Perez  felt 
that  having  Ms.  Trudeau  was  necessary  for  the  students.  Ms.  Perez  stated  that  Ms.  Trudeau 
would  teach  the  “essential”  classes  and  Ms.  Oshiro  would  teach  the  “non-essential”  classes  to 
ensure  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  would  follow  the  pacing  guide.  In  the  Wednesday  meetings 
Ms.  Flaherty  would  create  a  schedule  for  which  days  each  teacher  would  teach  the  class.  Ms. 
Perez  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro  would  frequently  “sabotage”  the  schedule  by  deciding  the  day 

15

before  the  class  she  was  scheduled  to  teach  to  change  the  subject  matter  thereby  causing  Ms. 
Trudeau  to  scramble  the  next  day  because  the  required  subject  had  not  been  taught. 

34. 

On  February  10,2017,  Ms.  Perez  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  filth  letter  of 

reprimand.  The  letter  summarized  that  during  a  meeting  on  December  14,  2016,  an 
Assistance  Plan  was  put  in  place  based  upon  Ms.  Oshiro’s  failure  to  adhere  to  the  weekly 
lesson  plan  thereby  causing  student  and  co-teacher  confusion,  and  a  loss  of  standards  based 
imstructional  time.  T 
provided  in  part: 

On  February  1,  2017,  you  chose  to  “play”  a  Bingo  game  with 
the  students  m  both  8th  grade  periods  instead  of  introducing  the 
new  unit  which  was  agreed  upon  during  the  planning  day.  Your 
failure  to  adhere  to  the  lesson  plan  that  was  designed  yesterday 
and  teach  a  multiplication  Bingo  resulted  in  the  students  falling 
behind  on  the  standards  based  lesson  and  confusion  for  the 
students  and  teachers  in  the  classroom.  As  a  result  of  this  you 
are  currently  “ineffective”  in  the  CSTP-3  Understanding  and 
Organizing  Subject  Matter  for  Student  Learning.  You  were 
previously  informed  on  9/21,  11/8,  and  12/8,  that  your  conduct 
negatively  impacts  the  learning  environment  in  the  classroom. 
Your  conduct  also  has  caused  continuous  parent/student 
complaints.  [  mformed  you  that  your  conduct  negatively 
iunpacts  the  learning  environment  because  the  schedule  has  all 
the  standards  that  need  to  be  taught  before  CAASPP  on  a  tight 
timeline  and  by  missing  a  lesson  the  students  are  falling  behind. 
It  is  inpportant  to  stay  on  the  instructional  pacing  guide  and 
maximize  academic  learning  time. 

Effective  immediately,  |  am  providing  you  with  the  following 
directives: 

e 

@ 

You  are  to  turn  in  lesson  plans  with  7th/sth  grade 
objectives  for  the  lessons  you  are  teaching  every 
Monday  by  8:00  am. 
Weekly  Lesson  plans  must  be  followed  daily  and 
changes  to  the  schedule  or  lesson  need  to  be 
communicated  on  Wednesday  planning  meetings. 
Any  changes  made  to  the  daily  schedule  should  be 
standard  driven  or  for  re-teach  purposes  only. 

{  /  / 

16

March  15,  2017,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  6 

35. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  on  February  15,  2017,  she  gave  Ms.  Oshiro  two 

“release  days”  for  her  to  work  exclusively  with  the  STEM  TOSA  to  plan  the  remainder  of  the 
semester.  On  February  16,  2017,  Ms.  Perez  had  received  numerous  parent  complaints  that 
Ms.  Oshiro  had  not  graded  student  homework  or  quizzes  and  had  not  updated  the  student 
database  with  those  grades.  As  a  result  Ms.  Perez  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  an  additional 
“release”  day  to  do  grading.  Ms.  Perez  emailed  Ms.  Oshiro  on  February  16,  2017,  to  request 
a  meeting  at  4:00  p.m.  that  day  “to  see  what  you  have  graded  by  the  end  of  the  day  and  be 
sure  to  update  as  many  scores  as  you  can.” 

36. 

On  March  9,  2017,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classroom.  Ms. 

Guerrettaz  testified  regarding  her  observations  and  also  sent  Ms.  Oshiro  an  email  regarding 
her  observations  and  her  concerns.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  wrote  in  the  email  in  part  as  follows: 

...  [T]here  was 

I  was  unclear  of  what  the  students  were 

When  you  began  to  teach  there  was  no  objective  posted  or 
reviewed  with  the  class. 
learning  and  I  was  unable  to  follow  the  lesson. 
clear  confusion  on  [the  student’s]  faces  as  they  were  unsure. .  . 
Very  few  students  participated.  It  is  essential  that  an  objective 
be  posted  for  every  lesson,  every  day.  In  addition,  I  was 
concerned  that  I  noticed  a  student  completing  a  “Thinking 
About  My  Behavior”  Sheet  during  the  time  that  instruction  was 
occurring...  .  We  will  meet  to  address  how  discipline  should  be 
handled,  as  we  have  previously  discussed  this  concern  in  your 
classroom  and  I  am  not  seeing  progress  in  this  area  either. 

37. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  on  March  9,  2017,  a  student’s  parents  complained  to 

her  that  during  a  parent/teacher  conference  with  Ms.  Oshiro,  Ms.  Oshiro  shared  other 
students’  grades  with  those  parents.  Additionally,  Ms.  Perez  continued  to  get  parent 
complaints  about  their  students’  performance  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  class,  and  about  improper 
discipline  Ms.  Oshiro  gave  to  her  students,  specifically  keeping  an  entire  math  class  in  at 
recess  because  of  the  behavior  of  some  students.  Ms.  Perez  wrote  an  email  to  Ms.  Oshiro  on 
March  10,  2017,  regarding  the  parent  complaint  that  she  showed  other  students’  grades  to 
those  parents,  and  admonished  Ms.  Oshiro  for  doing  so. 

38. 

On  March  15,  2017,  Ms.  Perez  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  sixth  letter  of 

reprimand  after  a  conference  Ms.  Perez  had  with  Ms.  Oshiro  on  March  12,  2017,  discussing 
the  issues  in  the  sixth  letter  of  reprimand.  The  letter  stated  in  part  as  follows: 

I  received  several  parent  complaints  regarding 

On  10/4-17  [sic] 
their  concern  [sic]  with  classroom  instruction  and  this  was 
documented  in  our  meeting  on  10/18/16  with  the  FETA  rep, 
Cheryl  Bliss,  when  we  met  to  discuss  this  and  develop  your 
Assistance  Plan.  The  first  letter  of  reprimand  was  given  to  you 

17

on  11/18/16  with  specific  support  assigned  to  help  your 
mstruction, 

On  11/8/17  [sic],  we  met  agam  regarding  student  and  parent 
complaints  that  were  filed  concerning  instruction  in  the 
classroom  and  a  student  being  humiliated  m  the  classroom.  ... 

Again  on  March  9,  2017,  durmg  parent/teacher  conferences  | 
received  multiple  parent  complaints.  First  it  was  reported  by 
parents  that  (1)  you  allowed  them  to  take  a  picture  of  the 
teachers  computer  screen  which  displayed  confidential  student 
data  and  (2)  parents  were  shown  several  students  grades  along 
with  their  own  child.  [Parents]  filed  a  complamt  regarding  their 
son’s  grades  being  shown  to  other  parents.  Parents  contimue  to 
have  concern  and  lack  of  confidence  in  your  skills,  and 
professionalism.  As  a  professional  educator,  it  is  expected  that 
Student  records  and  grades  remain  confidential  and  only  shared 
with  legal  custodians,  guardians,  or  parents.  Under  the 
Fallbrook  Union  District  Board  Policy  it  states  the  following: 

e 

e 

Parents/guardians  shall  have  the  opportunity  to  work 
with  schools  in  mutually  supportive  and  respectful 
partnership  and  to  help  their  children  succeed  im  school. 
(Education  Code  51100) 
The  Governing  Board  recognizes  the  importance  of 
keeping  confidential  mformation  confidential.  Staff  shall 
maintain  the  confidentiality  of  information  acquired  in 
the  course  of  their  employment.  Confidential/privieged 
mformation  shall  be  released  only  to  the  extent 
authorized  by  law. 

As  addressed  in  10/18/16,  11/8/16,  12/15/16,  1/25/17,  and  most 
recently  3/9/17  parent  relationships  are  fractured  due  to  the  lack 
of  confidence  they  have  in  your  instruction,  breach  of 
confidentiality  and  thei  child’s  lack  of  success.  Your  conduct 
has  caused  fractured  relationships  with  parents...  You  are 
directed  to  keep  all  student  records  confidential  and  private, 
only  to  be  shared  with  the  legal  guardian.  This  includes  grades, 
disabilities  and  any  information  that  is  part  of  a  student’s  record. 
Failure  to  comply  with  this  directive  will  result  in  an 
administrative  leave  of  absence. 

39. 

Ms.  Oshiro  provided  an  undated  written  response  to  the  March  14,  2017,  letter 

of  reprimand  and  wrote  m  part  as  follows:

I  wish  I  could  reduce  the  time  spent  on  these  issues.  This  school 
year  started  off  misguided.  The  teaching  expectations  were  not 
clearly  communicated,  so  as  these  changed,  student  expectations 
and  experiences  changed  also.  Though  mostly  solid,  the  IMP 
program  in  Lessoneer  has  gaps  and  errors.  Many  students  and 
parents  complain  about  not  understanding  IMP  lessons.  To 
better  support  [sic]  student,  I  have: 

posted  standards  and  objectives, 
created  process  charts  as  requested, 
used  IMP  lessons  and  tests  as  written, 
used  sentence  starters  from  IMP, 
created  algebra  tiles  before  they  were  purchased,  to  keep 
lesson  order 
used  the  McGraw  Hill  text  book, 
used  Engage  NY  lessons  for  scaffolding, 
encouraged  students  to  use  iReady  and  printed  out  their 
strengths  and  needs, 
posted  a  Weekly  Overview  of  lessons  &  homework  on 
my  teacher  web  page, 
helped  out  with  after  school  tutoring, 
provided  assistance  before  school,  at  break  time,  and 
during  lunch, 
collaborated  with  others  for  planning, 
adjusted  lessons  for  student  needs, 
provided  printed  copies  of  notes  for  students  who  need  it, 
communicated,  posted,  and  reinforced  class  procedures 
for  class  management, 
participated  in  school  door  decorating  for  special  days 
with  student  input 
dressed  for  school  spirit  days,  flag  days,  and  school 
events 
donated  books  for  the  library  book  exchange  &  gave 
away  tickets  to  students 
provided  a  chess  club/knitters  club 
tried  to  provide  a  positive  class  environment  to 
encourage  students 
lately,  making  copies  of  homework  pages  for  student 
[sic]  who  lost  their  books. 

I  know  many  students  miss  Mr.  Floto,  and  wish  for  his  return. 
These  are  great  students  with  so  many  talents,  but  some  are  low 
in  operations  with  decimals  and  fractions.  I  wish  I  could  give 

19

retakes  for  test  and  quiz  [sic|  as  I  did  at  the  start  of  the  year, 
especially  for  those  students  who  are  most  frustrated  and  need 
lessons  in  smaller  chunks.  My  aim  has  been  to  build  confidence 
in  students,  by  incorporating  mini  lessons  in  our  daily  work  and 
warm  up  problems.  Currently  I  am  told  there  is  no  time  for  this, 
and  last  week,  I  was  locked  out  of  our  google  docs  planning 
page.  So,  I  use  what  I  have,  to  do  my  best,  and  keep  moving 
forward.  ... 

I  believe  most  of  the  student  issues  are  misunderstandings.  As  I 
wrote  in  an  email  dated  11-7-16,  I  never  searched  a  student’s 
backpack.  I  never  said,  nor  would  I  say  a  statement  “that”  to  a 
student. 

... 

I  did  not  allow a  parent  to  take  a  photo  of  my  computer,  and  I 
did  not  show  grades  of  other  students  to  any  parent.  At  the 
Spring  Parent  Conference,  I  shared  a  printed  page  of  “mean 
average  growth”  in  iReady,  from  Fall  to  Mid-year.  These  mean 
scores,  not  actual  scores,  are  not  calculated  in  student  grades  at 
all.  One  parent,  so  surprised  and  proud  that  her  daughter  was 
doing  so  well,  asked  if  she  could  take  a  photo  with  her  phone,  to 
share  with  her  husband  who  could  not  attend.  I  originally  said 
no,  but  she  was  persistent.  Since  these  were  not  grades,  and  no 
names  were  visible,  I  allowed  it. 

... 

In  the  last  incident,  a  student  drew  a  curly  haired  stick  person, 
and  held  it  up  to  show  students  from  other  tables.  At  first,  I 
reminded  the  other  tables  to  be  on  task.  Then  I  noticed  the 
notebook,  again,  held  near  the  student’s  face.  This  was  unusual, 
so  I  asked  for  the  notebook  and  spoke  to  the  student  about  it 
after  class.  Ordinarily  this  is  a  responsible,  hard  working 
student,  so  I  just  took  the  page  and  did  not  issue  a  consequence. 
My  mistake  was  showing  a  glimpse  of  this  to  a  student  who 
frequently  needs  behavior  reminders.  Though  I  needed  to  speak 
to  him  again,  I  was  praising  him  for  his  progress  in  improving 
his  behavior.  I  showed  half  of  the  page,  and  I  did  not  show  the 
name. 

I  have  tried  to  do  all  that  was  asked,  and  what  is  right  for  the 
students. 

March  21,  2017,  Letter  of  Reprimand  Number  7  and  Administrative  Leave 

  

AO. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  that  on  March  20,  2017,  she  received  another  parent 

complaint  regarding  improper  discipline  of  her  daughter  by  Ms.  Oshiro.  Specifically,  the 

20

parent  complamed  that  her  daughter  had  been  drawing  a  doodle  of  a  stick  figure  in  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  class  and  Ms.  Oshiro  took  the  drawing,  made  the  student  sign  her  name  on  the 
drawing  and  kept  it.  Thereafter,  the  student  received  reports  from  students  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s 
next  math  class  that  Ms.  Oshiro  held  up  the  drawing  with  the  student’s  name  on  it  to  show  to 
the  class  and  tell  them  that  they  are  better  bchaved  than  the  previous  class  because  they  only 
want  to  doodle.  The  parent  was  upset  that  Ms.  Oshiro  had  used  the  drawing  to  embarrass  her 
daughter  through  her  peers  45  a  mechanism  to  control  her  class  through  mtrmnidation  and 
coercion. 

Al. 

On  March  21,  2017,  Ms.  Perez  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  seventh  letter  of 

reprimand,  which  stated  im  part  as  follows: 

On  the  following  dates,  9/23/16,  11/8/16,  1/27/17,  2/16/17, 
3/9/17,  and  3/20/17  meidents  cluding  parents/students 
complaints  were  received  regarding  punitive  discipline  on 
Students  and/or  public  humiliation  of  students.  ... 

On  3/21/17,  [parent]  filed  another  complaint  stating  that  Mrs. 
Oshiro  used  “intimidation  and  coercion  as  she  used  our 
daughter’s  paper  in  another  class  period  to  embarrass  [student] 
through  her  peers.”  ...  One  student  stated  that  they  saw  the 
paper  was  [student’s]  (her  name  and  date  was  written  at  the  top 
in  red  pen)  and  approached  [student]  during  lunchtime.  Another 
student  confirmed  the  drawing  was  shown  to  him.  The  other 
five  students  who  were  kept  during  their  nutrition  break  also 
claimed  that  only  one  of  the  students  was  “playing  with  his 
shirt”  and  they  felt  it  was  unfair  to  lose  their  recess  because  they 
werent  learning  anything  and  it  was  “downtime.”  ... 

i Wie  called  you  into  a  brief  meeting  at  1:45  p.m.  on  March  20, 
2017  with  Mrs.  Ezell,  FETA  rep,  Mrs.  Guerrettaz,  Assistant 
Principal,  and  myself,  to  inform  you  of  the  parent  “allegation” 
and  that  we  would  be  investigating  the  compliant.  You  stated 
(1)  that  vou  bid  the  student's  name  on  the  paper  when  you 
showed  some  students  (2)  Ms.  Trudeau  wasn’t  m  the  class  at 
that  time  and  (3)  you  told  5"  period  when  showing  the  student 
paper  “at  least  you  weren’t  doodling.”  A  student  confirmed 
they  had  seen  the  paper  with  the  student’s  name.  Ms  Trudeau 
was  present  during  3  period.  Students  who  were  restricted 
from  recess  stated  that  they  heard  you  accuse  [student]  of 
drawing  a  picture  of  you  (the  teacher).  There  were  several 
mconsistencies  im  your  recollection  of  the  events.  ... 

Effective  immediately  you  are  to  adhere  to  the  Assistance  Plan, 
#7,  which  states  you  must  have  Clear  and  Consistent  Classroom 

21

Behavioral  Expectations  listed  in  San  Onofre  Playbook  Section 
5  titled  School  Culture. .  . 

. 

e 

e 

You  are  to  refrain  from  singling  out  students  publicly  or 
in  isolation. 
You  are  to  work  on  building  a  positive  classroom 
environment  which  means  you  have  clear/concise 
classroom  behavioral  expectations  that  are  consistent  for 
all  students. 

o 

Students  should  be  given  constructive  feedback, 
positive  praise  and  recognition  for  staying  on  task 
and  completing  assignments. 

e 

You  will  not  restrict  students  from  recess  without 
consulting  with  administration. 

Failure  to  comply  with  these  directives,  may  lead  to 
administrative  leave.  ... 

42. 

—_ By  letter  dated  March  28,  2017,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  placed  on  paid  administrative 
leave  from  her  position.  The  letter  stated  that  she  was  “to  refrain  from  being  present  on  any 
property  of  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District”  and  to  refrain  from  contact  with 
fellow  employees  other  than  her  FETA  representative.  The  letter  was  signed  and  dated  by 
someone  from  the  school  district  but  Ms.  Oshiro  refused  to  sign  the  letter. 

Investigation  of  Ms.  Oshiro  by  the  District 

  

43. 

The  district  conducted  an  investigation  of  the  parent  and  student  complaints  of 

Ms.  Oshiro  beginning  on  March  29,  2017.  Specifically,  Mr.  Rodriguez  conducted  an 
investigation  as  part  of  his  responsibilities  from  March  29,  2017,  to  April  24,  2017,  and 
summarized  his  findings  in  a  report  dated  April  28,  2017.  Mr.  Rodriguez  also  testified  at  the 
hearing.  He  reviewed  parent  complaints  and  interviewed  witnesses.  Mr.  Rodriquez 
concluded  that  Ms.  Oshiro  did  not  use  her  instructional  time  effectively  and  the  students  did 
not  perform  well  on  benchmark  tests.  As  a  result,  Ms.  Oshiro  would  punish  the  entire  class 
or  single  out  students  as  a  form  of  discipline  that  was  unprofessional  and  unfair.  Mr. 
Rodriguez  also  testified  that  he  was  not  able  to  confirm  that  Ms.  Oshiro  told  a  student,  “I 
don’t  care  if  you  have  ADHD.”  Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  that  his  findings  showed  that 
although  Ms.  Oshiro  had  been  given  many  directives  regarding  her  classroom  instruction  and 
discipline,  Ms.  Oshiro  never  followed  those  directives. 

Witness  Testimony 

44. 

—_  Leonard  Rodriguez,  now  the  Executive  Director  of  Pupil  Personnel  Services 

for  the  district,  testified  about  his  experience  with  Ms.  Oshiro  as  her  principal  at  Potter 
during  the  2013-14  to  2015-16  school  years.  He  also  testified  about  his  investigation  of 

22

student  and  parent  complaints  regarding  Ms.  Oshiro  during  the  2016-17  school  year  at  San 
Onofre. 

Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  that  in  May  2013,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  teaching  developmental 

reading  classes  for  students  who  were  two  or  more  years  below  grade  level  and  was  provided 
a  teaching  coach  to  help  her  with  new  structural  framework  and  implementing  new 
standards.  During  this  time,  Ms.  Oshiro  repeatedly  deviated  from  the  curriculum  and  was 
not  teaching  the  curriculum  with  fidelity.  Additionally,  Mr.  Rodriguez  stated  that  Ms. 
Oshiro  was  issuing  a  large  number  of  referrals  of  students  to  go  to  the  princrpal’s  office, 
which  is  an  issue  of  classroom  management.  Ms.  Oshiro  was  not  teaching  math  at  all  in  the 
2013-2014  school  year  despite  requests  to  do  so.  Mr.  Rodriguez  did  not  have  Ms.  Oshiro 
teach  math  because  “she  had  not  been  demonstrated  to  be  effective  in  teaching  math”  and  he 
had  stronger  teachers  and  wanted  to  use  Ms.  Oshiro’s  credentials  elsewhere. 

Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  regarding  his  observations  of  Ms.  Oshiro  during  the  2014-15 
school  year  when  she  was  assigned  to  teach  English  Language  Development  (ELD),  a  class 
for  primarily  Spanish-speaking  students  to  develop  reading  skills  in  English,  a  study  skills 
class  and  a  math  class.  Ms.  Oshiro  had  seven  ELD  classes  that  year  and  she  had  math  added 
to  her  responsibilities  that  year  with  smaller  ELD  classes.  Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  that 
during  this  year  Potter  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  an  instructional  coach  because  they  were 
concerned  about  her  straying  from  curriculum.  Additionally,  she  was  still  issuing  a  high 
number  of  referrals,  even  though  the  number  had  dropped  from  the  previous  year.  Mr. 
Rodriguez  provided  Ms.  Oshiro  with  a  formal  evaluation  of  her  teaching  in  the  year  2014-15. 
Her  formal  evaluation  from  April  24,  2015,  showed  that  she  received  marks  of  “Effective”  in 
Li  areas  of  review  and  “Developing”  in  three  areas  of  review.  The  overall  performance 
summary  for  Ms,  Oshiro  was  “Effective.”  Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  that  the  2014-15  school 
year  was  his  last  as  principal  of  Potter. 

Mr.  Rodriguez's  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  his  testumony  was  credible. 

45. 

 Willham  Billingsley,  Assistant  Supermtendent  of  Human  Resources  and 

Communication  for  the  district,  testified  that  he  is  responsible  for  all  recruiting,  hiring,  risk 
management,  administration  of  budget  for  human  resources,  and  public  relations.  Mr. 
Billingsley  testified  regarding  the  circumstances  of  the  transfer  of  Ms.  Oshiro  from  Potter  to 
San  Onofre.  He  stated  that  the  math  teacher  at  San  Onofre,  Mr.  Floto,  had  a  high  degree  of 
mierest  mn  STEM  and  was  a  very  effective  math  teacher.  He  was  serving  a  smaller  number  of 
students  at  San  Onofre  (approximately  80)  and  the  district  wanted  him  to  reach  more  students 
so  he  was  transferred  to  Potter,  which  had  approximately  800  students.  By  comparison,  Ms. 
Oshiro  was  teaching  new  students  at  Potter  who  had  lamited  English  skills  and  were  the 
district's  most  vulnerable  students.  Mr.  Billingsley  stated,  “We  had  our  worst  performing 
teacher  in  the  district  serving  in  the  classroom  with  our  most  vulnerable  students  and  it  was 
shameful.”  The  district  made  the  decision  to  transfer  Ms.  Oshire  to  San  Onofre  because  she 
“was  struggling  with  teaching  and  San  Onofre  was  much  smaller  and  manageable”  and  San 
Onofre  “would  be  able  to  accommodate  her  deficiencies  m  mstruction.”  Mr.  Billingsley

stated  that  transferrmg  Ms.  Oshiro  to  San  Onofre  was  a  “win-win”  because  it  would  allow 
Mr.  Floto  to  umpact  many  more  students  and  would  allow  Ms.  Oshiro  to  get  a  fresh  start  and 
be  successtul. 

Mr.  Billingsley  stated  that  he  was  aware  of  the  longer  travel  time  Ms.  Oshiro  would 
have  to  get  to  San  Onofre  and  that  was  taken  into  consideration.  The  district  only  informed 
Ms.  Oshiro  that  the  reason  for  the  transfer  was  “program  need.”  Mr.  Billingsley  did  not  want 
to  inform  Ms.  Oshiro  that  part  of  the  reason  for  the  transfer  was  also  her  poor  job 
performance,  and  he  did  not  do  so. 

Mr.  Billingsicy  also  testified  that  he  was  aware  of  and  typically  reviewed  all  letters  of 
reprimand  issued  to  Ms.  Oshiro.  Mr.  Billingsley  discussed  all  the  issues  raised  regarding  Ms. 
Oshire’s  performance  with  Ms.  Perez  during  the  school  year.  Mr.  Billingsley  admitted  that 
there  was  no  documentation  m  Ms.  Oshiro’s  personnel  file  for  the  time  she  was  at  Potter 
stating  that  she  was  the  worst  performing  teacher  in  the  district. 

Mr.  Billingsley’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  his  testimony  was  credible. 

46. 

Lillian  Celina  Perez,  the  principal  of  San  Onofre,  testified  regarding  Ms. 

Oshiro’s  work  during  the  2016-17  school  year.  Ms.  Perez  has  been  with  the  district  for  21 
years  with  the  last  four  years  as  principal  of  San  Onotre  Junior  High  School.  San  Onofre 
Junior  High  School  is  currently  being  rebuilt,  is  not  operational  during  the  2017-18  school 
year,  and  teachers  have  been  relocated  to  other  schools  based  on  their  credentials. 

Ms.  Perez  testified  regarding  her  interactions  with  Ms.  Oshiro  during  the  2016-17 

school  year  consistent  with  the  findings  above.  Ms.  Perez  was  not  aware  of  any  performance 
issues  with  Ms.  Oshiro  prior  to  her  transfer  to  San  Onofre.  Ms.  Perez  stated  that  she  made 
every  effort  to  provide  support  to  Ms.  Oshiro  so  that  she  would  be  a  successful  teacher  at  San 
Onofre,  including  providing  the  school  TOSA,  Ms.  Flaherty,  as  support,  as  well  as  having  a 
co-teacher,  Ms.  Trudeau,  placed  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classroom.  Ms.  Perez  recerved  over  38 
parent  and  student  complaints  regarding  Ms.  Oshiro  during  the  2016-17  school  year  and  had 
deep  concerns  regarding  Ms.  Oshtro’s  failure  to  follow  the  math  curriculum  desptte 
numerous  letters  of  reprimand  and  directives  to  do  so.  Additionally,  Ms.  Oshiro  had  great 
difficulty  disciplining  students  mm  a  proper  manner.  Despite  all  her  efforts  to  provide 
assistance  and  guidance  to  Ms.  Oshiro,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  never  able  to  follow  the  proper 
sequence  of  lessons  and  never  followed  the  curriculum  appropriately. 

Ms.  Perez’s  testunony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing  and 

her  testimony  was  credible. 

47, 

Cyndy  Guerrettaz  is  currently  the  principal  of  Mesa  View  Elementary  School 

in  the  Romoland  School  District  where  she  has  worked  for  the  past  month.  Prior  to  this 
position,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  worked  as  the  Assistant  Principal  of  San  Onofre  for  two  years.  Ms. 
Guerrettaz  was  responsible  for  providing  support  to  Ms.  Oshiro  and  for  providing 

24

evaluations  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  performance  while  she  worked  at  San  Onofre.  Ms.  Guerrettaz 
testified  regarding  her  evaluations  of  Ms.  Oshiro  and  her  interactions  with  Ms.  Oshiro 
consistent  with  the  findings  above.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  despite  instructing  Ms. 
Oshire  to  provide  her  with  lesson  plans  for  her  classes,  Ms.  Oshiro  never  provided  ber  with  a 
written  lesson  plan.  Instead,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  stated  that  on  some  occasions  Ms.  Oshiro  would 
print  out  a  pre-generated  [MP  lesson  plan  from  the  district’s  on-line  lesson  plan  program  and 
submit  that  as  a  lesson  plan. 

Ms.  Guerrettaz  stated  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  2016-17  school  year  she  met  with 

Ms.  Oshiro  to  discuss  the  California  standards  for  which  she  would  be  evaluated.  Ms.  Oshiro 
selected  a  standard  and  Ms.  Guerrettaz  selected  a  standard  on  which  Ms.  Oshiro  would  be 
evaluated.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  also  explained  the  deadiines  and  due  dates  for  the  formal 
observations  and  feedback. 

Ms.  Guerrettaz  testified  that  during  her  observations,  Ms.  Oshiro  did  not  provide  a 

written  objective  for  each  class,  her  students  were  often  confused  and  not  engaged  in  the 
class,  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  follow  a  lesson  structure  and  sequence,  and  Ms.  Oshiro  had  very 
little  classroom  management.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  explained  that  effective  teaching  using  the 
district’s  Direct  Interactive  Instruction  (DH)  requires  that  the  teacher  model  the  lesson  to 
show  the  students  how  to  perform  the  work,  process  steps  should  be  posted  to  guide  the 
students  in  them  thinking,  and  then  the  students  should  be  gradually  released  toward  an 
objective  so  that  they  can  perform  the  work  on  their  own.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  never  observed 
Ms.  Oshiro  follow  those  steps  despite  extensive  coaching  and  support.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  had 
tremendous  concerns  regarding  Ms.  Oshiro’s  teaching  and  discipline  of  students.  Despite  all 
of  the  support  provided  to  Ms.  Oshiro,  Ms.  Guerrettaz  did  not  see  amy  improvement  in  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  teaching  over  the  2016-17  school  year.  Ms.  Guerrettaz  discussed  these  issues,  as 
well  as  the  parent  and  student  complaints  with  Ms.  Perez  and  Mr.  Billingsley. 

Ms.  Guerrettaz’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  her  testimony  was  credible. 

48. 

Maria  Flaherty  has  been  employed  by  the  district  for  34  years.  For  the  past 
three  years  she  has  been  a  STEM  coach  or  STEM  TOSA  (teacher  on  special  assignment) 
providing  instructional  coaching,  co-planning,  and  co-teaching  for  teachers  in  the  district. 
Ms.  Flaherty  explamed  that  the  district  teaches  by  Direct  Interactive  Instruction  (DID  which 
mcludes  a  method  to  gauge  how  well  the  instruction  is  bemg  delivered  and  understood.  Ms. 
Flaherty  aiso  explained  that  the  elements  of  DU  are  first  for  the  teacher  to  provide  a  model  (1 
do),  second  for  the  students  and  teacher  to  perform  an  interaction  together  (we  do},  and 
finally  a  gradual  release  when  the  students  are  released  to  do  the  task  on  their  own  or  with  a 
partner  (you  do).  She  further  explained  that  process  charts  are  utilized  showing  the  thinking 
steps  posted  in  the  classroom  to  assist  the  students  with  the  process.  Ms.  Flaherty  also  stated 
that  the  IMP  model  of  teaching  was  required  by  the  district  and  that  in  most  cases  the  IMP 
model  fit  into  the  DH  model,  but  not  always.

Ms.  Flaherty  was  assigned  to  provide  teaching  support  to  Ms.  Oshiro  during  the  2016- 

17  school  year.  Durmg  that  time,  Ms.  Flaherty  coached  Ms.  Oshiro  to  follow  the  district’s 
current  curriculum  for  math,  but  Ms.  Oshiro  did  not  feel  that  her  seventh  and  eighth  grade 
students  bad  a  firm  grasp  on  decimals  and  fractions,  which  are  subjects  covered  in  the  third 
grade.  As  aresult,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  spending  time  re-teaching  third  grade  material  to  her 
seventh  and  eighth  grade  students  making  Ms.  Oshiro  far  behind  in  the  curriculum  pacing 
chart  because  she  was  not  teaching  seventh  and  eighth  grade  curriculum.  Ms.  Flaherty  tried 
to  emphasize  to  Ms.  Oshiro  that  her  focus  should  be  on  the  seventh  and  eighth  grade 
curriculum  because  doing  so  is  very  tmportant,  particularly  because  the  student’s  proficiency 
in  eighth  grade  math  determines  placement  in  high  school.  Ms.  Flaherty  stated  that  early  in 
the  school  year  she  would  assist  Ms.  Oshiro  im  lesson  plan  development,  but  Ms.  Oshiro 
would  waste  instructional  time  in  the  class  with  other  topics,  such  as  hygiene,  and  as  a  result 
the  students  would  fall  behind  in  the  pacing  guide.  According  to  Ms.  Flaherty,  Ms.  Oshiro 
also  had  problems  with  classroom  management  and  discipline.  Ms.  Flaherty  would  observe 
that  Ms.  Oshiro  would  sit  at  the  front  of  the  class  during  the  entire  class  and  Ms.  Flaherty 
suggested  that  she  walk  around  the  class  and  observe  students  to  keep  them  on  task. 
However,  she  never  observed  Ms.  Oshiro  do  so. 

Ms.  Flaherty  met  with  Ms.  Oshiro  on  a  weekly  basis  on  Wednesday  for  one  hour. 

When  Ms.  Trudeau  was  added  as  a  co-teacher  to  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class,  the  three  of  them  would 
meet.  Ms.  Fiaherty  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro  and  Ms.  Trudeau  had  issues  between  them  and 
frequently  Ms.  Flaherty  would  play  the  role  of  mediator.  Ms.  Flaherty  believed  that  Ms. 
Oshiro  was  knowledgeable  in  math,  whereas  Ms.  Trudeau  was  not.  However,  she  believed 
that  Ms.  Trudeau  was  a  more  effective  teacher  than  Ms.  Oshiro  and  that  the  students 
performed  better  when  Ms.  Trudeau  was  in  the  class.  Ms.  Flaherty  was  very  concerned 
about  Ms.  Oshiro’s  teaching  because  her  students  were  performing  poorly  based  on 
benchmark  tests.  Ms.  Flaherty  stated  that  she  provided  more  support  to  Ms.  Oshiro  than  any 
other  teacher  m  the  district.  Ms.  Flaherty  believed  that  Ms.  Oshiro  had  good  intentions  and 
was  knowledgeable  of  math.  However,  Ms.  Flaherty  never  saw  Ms.  Oshiro  follow  the  lesson 
and  pacing  structure,  and  felt  that  she  did  not  handle  student  discipline  appropriately.  Ms. 
Flaherty  asserted  that  Ms.  Oshiro  could  not  follow  the  lesson  plan  and  structure  provided  to 
her  and  while  she  had  the  requisite  knowledge,  Ms.  Oshiro  simply  “could  not  teach  1.” 

Ms.  Flaherty’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  her  testimony  was  credible. 

49, 

Gabrielle  Trudeau  is  currently  a  kindergarten  teacher  at  Fallbrook  Street 

school  where  she  has  worked  since  the  beginning  of  the  2017-18  school  year.  Prior  to  this 
position,  she  worked  at  San  Onofre  as  a  reading  intervention  teacher  and  as  a  substitute 
teacher.  She  began  co-teaching  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  classes  in  December  2016  and 
continued  to  do  so  until  Ms.  Oshiro  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave  and 
subsequently  suspended  without  pay.  Thereafter,  Ms.  Trudeau  taught  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classes 
until  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

26

Ms.  Trudeau  testified  that  after  she  started  co-teaching  with  Ms.  Oshirc,  she  would 
have  weekly  meetings  on  Wednesday  with  Ms.  Flaherty,  Ms.  Oshiro  and  sometunes  Ms. 
Perez,  to  discuss  the  lessons  that  must  be  taught  that  week  pursuant  to  the  curriculum.  Ms. 
Flaherty  would  prepare  the  agendas  for  the  meeting  with  input  from  Ms.  Oshiro  and  Ms. 
Trudeau.  Ms.  Trudeau  would  be  responsible  for  teaching  some  classes  and  Ms.  Oshiro 
would  be  responsible  for  teaching  others,  and  Ms.  Flaherty  would  put  together  the  schedule. 
Ms.  Trudeau  and  Ms.  Oshiro  would  disagree  on  certain  issues,  specifically  with  regard  to 
homework  and  review  of  homework.  Ms.  Trudeau  believed  homework  should  be  credit/no 
credit  and  there  should  be  a  review  of  homework.  In  contrast,  Ms.  Oshiro  was  collecting 
homework  and  grading  i  later,  if  at  all.  Ms.  Trudeau  felt  that  did  not  provide  sufficient 
feedback  to  the  students.  Additionally,  Ms.  Trudeau  stated  that  Ms.  Oshiro  would  give 
students  detention  over  their  lunch  break  for  failing  to  do  homework.  Ms.  Trudeau  disagreed 
with  this  disciplinary  technique  and  beheved  the  students  should  not  miss  their  lunch  for 
failure  to  do  homework.  Ms.  Trudeau  testified  that  she  first  got  access  to  the  grades  of 
students  after  Ms.  Oshiro  left  San  Onofre.  At  that  pomt  she  discovered  that  some  of  the 
homework  had  been  graded  and  some  of  it  had  not. 

Ms.  Trudeau  stated  that  she  knew  that  Ms.  Oshiro  would  use  a  bingo  game  to  teach 
decimals  and  fractions  in  her  class,  which  was  not  seventh  or  eighth  grade  level  instruction. 
As  a  result,  when  Ms.  Oshiro  did  so  it  would  push  back  the  lesson  structure  and  pacing  of  the 
class  and  change  the  sequence  of  instruction  m  the  class.  Ms.  Trudeau  stated  that  Ms.  Oshiro 
would  sometimes  teach  the  lesson  assigned  to  Ms.  Trudeau  without  her  knowledge  thereby 
frustrating  Ms.  Trudeau.  As  a  result  Ms.  Perez  required  that  there  must  be  communication 
regarding  any  changes  in  the  lesson  plan  during  the  Wednesday  meetings.  Ms.  Trudeau 
stated  that  the  experience  of  co-teaching  with  Ms.  Oshiro  was  awkward. 

Ms.  Trudeau’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  her  testimony  was  credible. 

S50. 

Jule  Gautreaux  is  currently  a  special  education  teacher  at  Mary  Farth 

Hanmulton  Elementary  School  in  the  district  teaching  kindergarten  and  third  grade  students 
where  she  has  worked  since  the  beginning  of  the  2017-18  school  year.  Prior  to  that,  she 
worked  as  a  special  education  teacher  at  San  Onofre.  Ms.  Gautreaux  provided  special 
education  for  students  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  seventh  and  eighth  grade  math  classes  during  the 
2016-17  school  year.  Her  role  was  to  provide  support  to  special  education  students  im  a 
general  education  classroom  by  making  sure  they  are  behaviorally  focused  and  taking  notes. 

Ms.  Gautreaux  was  concerned  about  the  students  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  math  classes 
because  Ms.  Oshiro  was  spending  too  much  time  on  games  for  multiplication,  decimals  and 
fractions  and  other  third  grade  level  subjects.  Ms.  Gautreaux  felt  that  Ms.  Oshiro  spent  far 
too  much  time  re-teaching  those  subjects  rather  than  moving  forward  with  the  seventh  and 
eighth  grade  curriculum.  Ms.  Gautreaux  was  also  concerned  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was  not 
reviewing  homework  at  all  and  when  she  confronted  Ms.  Oshiro  about  it,  Ms.  Oshiro  told  her 
that  she  did  not  have  time  for  that.  As  a  result,  Ms.  Gautreaux  felt  her  students  were  not 
understanding  the  lesson  before  Ms.  Oshiro  moved  on  to  something  else,  thereby  causing 

a7

contusion.  Ms.  Gautreaux  stated  that  these  concerns  continued  throughout  the  2016-17 
school  year,  and  she  spoke  to  Ms.  Perez  about  her  concerns. 

Ms.  Gautreaux  also  had  concerns  about  Ms.  Oshiro’s  student  discipline.  Specifically, 

there  was  a  student  named  iM.  whom  she  frequently  saw  sitting  outside  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s 
class  doing  homework  or  filling  out  a  “my  inappropriate  behavior  sheet”  during  mstruction. 
She  once  saw  this  student  outside  of  class  filling  out  an  “inappropriate  behavior  sheet”  and 
crying.  Ms.  Gautreaux  was  concerned  about  this  student  and  would  sometimes  try  to  talk  to 
him,  but  he  was  not  very  communicative  and  did  not  want  attention  drawn  to  him.  Student 
LM.  was  not  a  special  education  student  at  that  time  and  not  assigned  to  Ms.  Gautreaux.  Ms. 
Gautreaux  was  very  concerned  about  1.M.  because  he  was  frequently  outside  of  class  and  not 
getting  instruction.  On  one  occasion,  Ms.  Gautreaux  witnessed  Ms.  Oshiro  give  a  direction 
to  LM.  and  then  ask  him  im 
respond,  Ms.  Oshiro  made  him  stand  in  front  of  the  class  and  again  asked  him,  “What  did  I 
just  say?”  The  student  did  not  respond  for  a  very  long  time,  was  very  nervous,  and  started  to 
cry  in  front  of  the  class.  All  the  students  in  the  class  were  looking  at  him,  the  student 
completely  shut  down,  and  Ms.  Oshiro  finally  told  him  to  sit  back  down.  Ms  Gautreaux  was 
worried  about  LM.  and  Ms.  Oshiro’s  treatment  of  him.  Ms.  Gautreaux  stated  that  she  never 
saw  IM.  sitting  in  a  desk  facing  the  wall  away  from  instruction,  but  she  did  see  him  im  a  desk 
up  front  typically  used  by  Ms.  Oshiro  for  students  who  needed  additional  redirection.  Ms. 
Gautreaux  was  concerned  about  students  being  humiliated  by  sitting  in  that  desk  or  by  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  negative  treatment  of  students. 

front  of  the  class,  “What  did  Tjyust  say?”  When  1M.  did  not 

Overall,  Ms,  Gautreaux  was  extremely  concerned  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was  wasting  time 

performing  tasks  outside  of  the  curriculum  during  her  classes.  Ms.  Gautreaux  stated  that  she 
was  also  concerned  about  students  being  shamed  and  humiliated  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  and 
she  was  particularly  concerned  about  student  1.M. 

Ms.  Gautreaux’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing 

and  her  testimony  was  credible. 

Ms,  Oshiro’s  Testimony 

Si. 

Ms.  Oshiro  has  been  a  teacher  in  the  district  for  26  years.  During  that  time  she 

has  taught  seventh  and  cighth  grade  classes  of  Science,  English  Language  Development, 
Study  Skills,  and  Math.  She  testified  that  during  that  tune  she  never  received  a  letter  of 
reprimand  until  September  2016.  Ms.  Oshiro  first  learned  about  her  involuntary  transfer  to 
San  Onofre  on  May  6,  2016,  on  the  night  ofa  FETA  dinner.  Ms.  Oshiro  was  upset  and 
emotional  upon  bearing  the  news  of  her  transfer,  which  she  appealed.  Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that 
she  was  never  provided  any  reason  for  her  transfer  other  than  “program  need.” 

During  her  testimony,  Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that  during  the  2016-17  school  year  she 
posted  the  objective  for  each  class  written  im  150  font  on  paper  posted  to  a  pinup  board  and  it 
was  her  custom  to  change  that  paper  every  day  to  reflect  the  objective  for  the  class. 
However,  she  did  admit  to  not  having  the  objective  posted  for  one  class.  She  repeatedly 

28

testified  that  she  denied  the  allegations  she  did  not  have  a  clear  lesson  structure  and  sequence 
to  her  classes,  did  not  have  effective  mstruction  delivery,  did  not  have  a  routine  to  check. 
homework,  and  did  not  adjust  ber  lesson  to  explain  mocorrect  responses  as  observed  by  Ms. 
Guerrettaz  and  Ms.  Perez.  Ms.  Oshiro  repeatedly  testified  that  she  addressed  the  criticisms 
of  Ms.  Guerrettaz  and  Ms.  Perez  by  “disagreeing  with  the  criticisms.”  Ms.  Oshiro  also 
imsisted  that  she  complied  with  the  directives  provided  by  Ms.  Perez  in  the  multiple  letters  of 
reprimand,  but  that  planning  lessons  was  difficult  because  the  [MP  materiais  were  lacking 
and  sometimes  incorrect.  Ms.  Oshiro  testified  that  despite  multiple  letters  of  reprimand 
criticizing  her  for  failing  to  submit  weekly  lesson  plans,  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  that  she  never 
discussed  this  criticism  with  Ms.  Perez  and  that  she  disagreed  with  the  criticism  because  she 
claimed  she  did  submut  weekly  lesson  plans.  Ms.  Oshiro  asserted  that  she  printed  those 
lesson  plans  and  provided  them  or  she  emailed  them.  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  that  she  was 
challenged  to  keep  up  with  the  grading  of  her  students  in  both  homework  and  tests.  She 
admitted  that  she  failed  to  keep  pace  with  homework  grading.  She  blamed  the  IMP 
curriculum  for  not  having  homework,  having  incorrect  answers  provided,  and  having  gaps  as 
a  reason  for  her  failure  to  provide  timely  grades.  Ms.  Oshiro  testified  several  times  she 
simply  did  not  agree  with  the  criticisms  in  the  multiple  letters  of  reprimand,  and  she  stated 
she  believed  that  she  adhered  to  the  curriculum  and  that  her  students  were  not  confused.  Ms. 
Oshiro  stated  that  she  did  not  stray  from  the  curriculum  but  that  the  curriculum  had  gaps  and 
she  merely  supplemented  the  curriculum  rather  than  stray  from  it.  While  Ms.  Oshiro  testified 
that  her  students  were  not  confused,  she  later  testified  that  Ms.  Trudeau’s  presence  in  her 
class  “caused  more  confusion”  to  her  students.  She  also  testified  that  she  heard  her  students 
tell  her  that  they  were  confused,  but  Ms.  Oshiro  claims  that  the  students  did  not  say  her 
lessons  were  confusing,  but  rather  “they  were  confused  by  the  IMP  worksheets.”  She  stated 
that  she  “remembers  things  differently”  than  Ms.  Perez  or  Ms.  Guerrettaz  and  she  did  not 
believe  some  of  their  observations  of  her  classroom  were  truc. 

Ms.  Oshiro  insisted  that  she  followed  the  curriculum  pacing  guidelines  for  IMP  and 

admitted  that  she  did  use  some  time  in  her  classes  to  do  bingo  games  related  to  fractions  and 
decimals,  but  only  did  so  on  one  day  and  did  not  go  off  pace  from  the  curriculum  as  a  result. 
She  admitted  to  using  the  “magic  circle”  activity  in  her  class  but  did  so  only  while  some  of 
her  students  caught  up  on  IREADY  diagnostic  testing  so  that  the  entire  class  could  finish  it. 
Ms.  Oshiro  continued  to  insist  that  she  did  not  stray  from  the  required  curricuhim  with  these 
activities,  but  mstead  was  simply  augmenting  the  curriculum.  Ms.  Oshiro  also  testified  that 
her  students’  performance  on  benchmark  tests  showed  that  the  results  of  those  tests  were 
higher  than  the  average  score  for  the  district.  However,  Ms.  Perez  informed  her  that  San 
Onofre  typically  attains  much  higher  scores  than  the  district  average  and  these  scores  were 
much  lower  than  what  is  typically  seen  for  San  Onofre. 

With  regard  to  the  alleged  meident  regarding  1.M.,  Ms.  Oshiro  repeatedly  denied  ever 

saying  to  i.M.,  “I  don’t  care  that  you  have  ADHD.”  She  stated  that  she  would  never  make 
such  a  statement  to  a  student.  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  that  it  was  her  practice  to  ask  different 
students  to  repeat  directions  given  in  class.  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  to  asking  1.M.  to  repeat  the 
directions,  but  denied  asking  him  again,  “What  did  I  just  say?”  Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that  1M. 
acted  like  he  could  not  speak  so  she  sent  him  to  the  school  nurse,  but  denied  ever  humiliating 

29

LM.  and  denied  that  1.M.  was  crying  in  her  class.  Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that  on  one  day  LM.  was 
not  bis  normal  self  and  he  told  Ms.  Oshiro  that  his  puppy  died.  She  told  hum  he  could  go 
outside  of  class  to  get  a  drink  of  water  and  sit  and  he  decided  to  do  so.  Ms.  Oshiro  denied 
turning  1.M.’s  desk  to  face  the  back  wall  and  she  denied  demonstrating  that  to  Ms.  Perez. 
Ms.  Oshiro  stated  that  when  she  first  discussed  the  meident  with  1M.  with  Ms.  Perez,  she 
denied  touching  1.M.’s  backpack.  However,  Ms.  Oshiro  admitted  that  she  did  take  I.M.’s 
backpack  because  he  was  distracted  by  it  and  she  simply  put  it  at  the  front  of  the  room  and 
never  rammaged  through  it.  Ms.  Oshiro  testified  that  with  regard  to  the  second  letter  of 
reprimand  regarding  the  1.M.  incident,  the  bullet  pot  of  “Student  was  moved  to  have  his 
desk  face  the  wall,  which  you  validated”  was  crossed  out  by  Ms.  Perez  and  her  muitials  placed 
by  that  cross  out.  Ms.  Oshiro  testified  that  Ms.  Perez  made  that  cross  out  because  Ms. 
Oshiro  denied  moving  the  students’  desk  to  face  the  wall  and  because  Ms.  Oshiro  did  not 
validate  that  pomt.  Ms.  Oshiro  denied  demonstrating  to  Ms.  Perez  and  Ms.  Bliss  how  she 
turned  the  student’s  desk. 

With  regard  to  the  student  who  drew  the  stick  figure  doodle  in  her  classroom,  Ms. 

Oshiro  admitted  to  confiscating  the  drawing  and  having  the  student  write  her  name  and  date 
on  the  drawing.  Ms.  Oshiro  did  show  the  drawing  to  another  class,  but  she  covered  the 
Student’s  name  with  her  finger  when  she  did  so.  Ms.  Oshiro  denied  ever  attempting  to 
embarrass  or  coerce  students  and  asserted  that  her  discipline  techniques  were  consistent  with 
district  policies. 

Ms.  Oshiro  denied  that  she  allowed  parents  to  take  a  photo  of  her  computer  screen 

with  student’s  names  and  grades  on  it.  Instead,  she  stated  that  one  parent  was  surprised  that 
her  daughter  was  doing  so  well  in  math  class  and  wanted  to  take  a  photo  of  the  IREADY  list 
of  measured  growth,  which  were  not  student  grades,  to  show  her  husband.  Ms.  Oshiro  stated 
that  she  allowed  the  parent  to  take  a  photo  of  the  screen,  but  she  “covered  the  names”  other 
than  the  student  at  issue. 

Ms.  Oshiro’s  testimony  was  not  always  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at 
hearing,  and  conflicted  with  the  testimony  of  multiple  other  witnesses  with  regard  to  certain 
issues  in  dispute.  During  her  testimony,  Ms.  Oshiro  frequently  avoided  providing  direct 
answers  to  questions  asked  making  her  testimony  generally  less  credible, 

Character  Witness  Testimony 

$2. 

Five  witnesses  testified  at  the  hearing  im  support  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  character. 

One  witness,  Ms.  Castaneda,  worked  as  the  playground  supervisor  at  Potter  im  2015  and  had 
also  been  a  student  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  during  middie  school.  Ms.  Castaneda  testified  she 
learned  math  from  Ms.  Oshiro,  who  was  also  a  mentor  to  her.  Ms.  Castaneda  admitted  that 
she  never  observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  class  at  San  Onofre.  She  stated  that  she  had  never  seen  Ms. 
Oshiro  embarrass  a  student  and  believed  she  was  a  good  teacher. 

The  second  witness,  Ms.  Edwards,  works  as  a  substitute  teacher  and  has  known  Ms. 

Oshiro  since  2005  as  a  result  of  their  children  being  friends.  Ms.  Edwards  received  her 

30

teaching  credential  in  2007  and  observed  Ms.  Oshiro’s  classes  from  2007  to  2009  in  order  to 
get  her  teachme  credential.  Ms.  Edwards  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro  is  very  generous, 
professional  and  positive  and  emphasized  that  Ms.  Oshiro  is  very  respectful  to  students. 

The  third  witness,  Mr.  Sherman,  1s  a  retired  math  teacher  from  the  district  who  taught 

for  22  years  and  has  known  Ms.  Oshiro  for  20  years.  Ms.  Sherman  was  a  substitute  teacher 
at  Potter  for  seventh  and  eighth  grade  math,  but  never  substituted  for  Ms.  Oshira’s  class.  Mr. 
Sherman  has  never  seen  Ms.  Oshiro  embarrass  a  student  and  believes  her  to  be  professional 
and  honest. 

The  fourth  witness,  Ms.  Amarh,  has  a  daughter  who  was  im  Ms.  Oshiro’s  Digital 
Literacy  class  during  the  2016-17  school  year  at  San  Onofre,  but  her  daughter  was  not  im  one 
of  Ms.  Oshire’s  math  classes.  Ms.  Amarh  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro  helped  tutor  her  daughter 
in  math  and,  as  a  result,  her  daughter  now  loves  math. 

The  final  witness  was  Ms.  Amarh’s  daughter,  who  is  currently  Ll  years  old  and  in  the 

seventh  grade.  She  testified  she  was  in  Ms.  Oshiro’s  elective  class  and  also  attended  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  knitting  club  before  school  and  during  lunch.  She  stated  she  struggled  with  math 
before  working  with  Ms.  Oshiro.  Ms.  Amarh’s  daughter  enjoyed  her  time  with  Ms.  Oshiro 
and  thought  she  was  a  good  teacher.  She  never  saw  Ms.  Oshiro  embarrass  any  student. 

Allegations  and  Findings  Re:  improper  Discipline  and  Humiliation  of  Students 

§3. 

The  district  alleged  that  on  November  7,  2016,  Ms.  Oshiro  asked  student  ILM. 

to  stand  up  in  class  and  repeat  the  homework  assignment  aloud,  but  1.M.  stated  he  did  not 
know  the  homework  assignment  and  that  he  had  a  headache.  The  district  alleged  that  Ms. 
Oshiro  then  said,  “I  don’t  care  if  you  have  ADHD”  or  words  to  that  effect  and  sent  I.M.  to 
the  nurse’s  office.  The  district  further  alleged  that  1.M.  returned  from  the  murse’s  office 
without  a  note  and  began  rummaging  through  his  backpack.  Afferwards,  Ms.  Oshiro  took  his 
backpack  and  searched  it,  upsetting  1.M.  to  the  point  that  he  began  to  cry.  The  district 
alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  conduct  was  immoral  because  it  humiliated  IM.  im  front  of  his 
peers.  The  district  further  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro  turned  the  student’s  desk  to  face  the  wall 
further  humuliating  him. 

The  district  further  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro  improperly  disciplined  a  student  by 

throwing  away  that  student’s  rubber  bracelet,  and  by  showing  a  drawing  of  a  stick  figure 
made  by  a  student  with  the  student’s  name  on  it  to  that  student’s  peers  in  an  effort  to  publicly 
ridicule  and  humiliate  the  student.  The  district  also  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro  improperly 
disciplined  students  by  restricting  them  from  recess.  The  district  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s 
conduct  was  mamoral. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Oshiro  made 
the  “I  don’t  care  if  you  have  ADHD”  statement  to  student  I.M.,  and  did  not  establish  that  Ms. 
Oshiro  turned  the  student’s  desk  to  face  the  wall.  The  Commussion  found  that  the  evidence

did  support  that  Ms.  Oshiro  asked  students  to  stand  and  repeat  directions,  but  this  conduct 
was  not  immoral, 

The  Commission  determmed  that  the  evidence  did  not  establish  Ms.  Oshiro  threw 

away  a  student’s  rubber  bracelet.  Furthermore,  the  Commussion  found  that  while  the 
evidence  did  support  that  Ms.  Oshiro  showed  a  student’s  drawing  to  her  peers,  the  evidence 
was  not  suificient  to  establish  that  her  conduct  was  immoral. 

Allegations  and  Findings  Re:  Instructional  Directives  and  Classroom  Observations 

54. 

‘The  district  alleged  that  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  follow  multiple  instructional 

directives  and  failed  to  follow  the  district’s  curriculum  and  pacing  guides  in  her  classrooms 
during  the  2016-17  school  year.  Specifically,  the  district  alleged  that  despite  multiple 
directives,  Ms.  Oshiro  wasted  instructional  tune  with  instruction  not  related  to  the  seventh  or 
eighth  grade  curriculum,  failed  to  submit  lesson  plans,  failed  to  post  objectives  for  each 
class,  failed  to  have  a  clear  lesson  structure  and  sequence,  and  failed  to  check  students’  work 
inatimely  manner.  The  district  alleges  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  poor  instructional  techniques 
caused  her  students  to  have  poor  performances  on  benchmark  tests  and  that  they  were 
frequently  confused. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  the  evidence  established  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  follow 
the  instructional  directives  and  assistance  plans  provided  to  her  by  the  district  in  each  of  the 
seven  letters  of  reprimand.  Instead,  the  evidence  demonstrated  Ms.  Oshiro  merely  repeatedly 
disagreed  with  the  assessments  of  her  performance  instead  of  making  substantive  efforts  to 
abide  by  the  directives  provided  to  her.  Testimony  of  Ms.  Perez,  Ms.  Guerrettaz,  Ms. 
Trudeau,  and  Ms.  Flaherty  established  that  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  follow  the  district’s 
curriculum  and  pacing  guide,  failed  to  provide  timely  grades  and  feedback  to  students,  and 
failed  to  submit  lesson  plans  despite  multiple  directives  to  do  so. 

Allegations  and  Findings  Re:  Disclosure  of  Student  Confidential  Information 

55. 

The  district  alleged  Ms.  Oshiro  breached  the  confidentiality  of  students  by 
allowing  students  to  take  photographs  of  her  computer  screen  showing  multiple  students’ 
confidential  information,  mcluding  grades. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  the  evidence  was  msuffictent  to  establish  Ms.  Oshiro 

breached  student  confidentiality  as  alleged.  The  district  provided  no  evidence  of  these 
photographs  and  Ms.  Oshiro  denied  the  alleged  actrvity  took  place. 

{  /  / 

 
s
U

r
b

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections  Regarding  Dismissal  Actions 

1. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44934  and  44944 ) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 
permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (a)(1)  authorizes  dismussal  for  immoral  conduct. 
Subdivision  (a)(2)  authorizes  dismissal  for  unprofessional  conduct.  Subdivision  (a)(5) 
authorizes  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance.  Subdivision  (a\(6)  authorizes  dismissal 
for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Subdivision  (a)(8)  authorizes  dismissal  for  persistent 
violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  and  district  polices. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process 

for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and  sets  forth  the 
Commissions’  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing  board 

must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent  employee. 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

5. 

The  “burden  of  proof”  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.  App.3d  E121,  1128.3  The  district 
has  the  burden  of  proof  to  establish  cause  to  dismiss  tts  employee. 

6. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  CaLApp.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  iis  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincmg  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal App.4th  1349,  1567.) 

Board  Policy  and  Administrative  Regulation 

7. 

District  Board  Policies  0410,  4119.21,  3137,  5144,  and  5145.3  set  forth  the 

professional  standards  the  board  expects  of  its  employees.  As  noted,  the  board  expects 
district  employees  to  “provide  equal  opportunity  for  all  imdividuals  in  education,”  “to 
maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  exhibit  professional  behavior,  follow  district  policies 
and  procedures,  abide  by  state  and  federal  laws,  and  exercise  good  judgment  when 
interacting  with  students,”  “providief  an  orderly,  caring,  and  nurturing  educational  and  social 

 
S
N
U

2
G

environment  in  which  all  students  can  feel  safe,”  and  “provide  a  positive  school  environment 
[conducive  to  learning].”  District  Administrative  Regulation  5144  establishes  site-level  rules 
for  discipline  consistent  with  district  policies  wherein  the  principal  shall  solicit  participation 
from  the  school  and  develop  disciplinary  rules  for  the  school  site.  The  Code  of  Ethics  of  the 
Education  Profession  section  4119.21  sets  out  ethical  standards  of  educators  as  adopted  by 
the  District. 

Relevant  Judicial  Authority 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

  

8. 

The  seminal  case  for  teacher  dismissals  is  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 
immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct  or  evidence  unfitness  for  service  are  raised  in 
teacher  dismissal  cases,  the  applicable  standard  is  whether  the  person  1s  fit  to  teach.  The 
factors  outlined  in  Morrison  must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether 
the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (/d.  at  p.229.) 

9. 

Immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  1s  hostile  to  the  welfare 

of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with 
rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be 
conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of  Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School 
District  v.  Weiland  (19  60)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

  

10. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determinative  test  in  teacher  dismissal  cases  is 

whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  “Fitness  to  teach”  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560- 
561.) 

11. 

“Evident”  is  defined  as  “clear  to  the  vision  and  understanding.”  “Unfit”  is 

defined  as  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable;  incompetent;  and 
physically  or  mentally  unsound”  and  “unsuitable,  incompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a 
particular  use  or  service.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  v. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

12. 

In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  the  court  noted  the  two  parallel,  yet  contradictory, 
lines  of  cases  regarding  “unfit  for  service.”  One  line  of  cases  equated  that  term  with 
“unprofessional  conduct”  and  the  other  line  of  cases  distinguished  the  two  definitions.  In 
deciding  that  the  latter  line  of  cases  was  the  correct  way  to  evaluate  “unfit  to  serve,”  and 
complied  with  the  rules  of  statutory  construction.  The  Woodland  court  concluded  that 

34

“unprofessional  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  sare 
thing.  Although  conduct  constituting  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute 
“unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is  not  always  true.  Evident  unfitness  for  service 
requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not 
necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not 
disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in  Morrison  where  that  court  concluded  that 
“unprofessional  conduct”  meant  conduct  showing  a  teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria 
must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness 
for  service.  [fit  does,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”;  Le., 
whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.  Ud.  at  pp.  1442-1445.) 
A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  can  be  made  if  the  evidence,  taken  in  the  aggregate,  shows  that 
retaining  the  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to  students 
and  fellow  teachers.  Ud.  at  p.1456.) 

13. 

Anemployee  can  be  dismissed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 
showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either 
Students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.  The 
inquiry  is  whether  any  adverse  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the  teacher’s  conduct  as  to  his 
teaching  ability,  or  as  to  the  possibility  that  publicity  surrounding  the  past  conduct  may  in 
and  of  itself  substantially  impair  his  function  as  a  teacher.  (Morrison,  supra,  at  p.  235.) 

14. 

To  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a  nexus  between 

government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from  the  principle  that 
“Info  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of  factors  unconnected  with  the 
responsibilities  of  that  employment.”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  vy.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal  App.4thi4S4,  1463.) 

15. 

“Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a 

fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fais  to  meet  the  expectation  of  the  employing  school  district.°”  (San  Diego  Unified 
School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  2013)  214  Cal  App.4th  1120, 
1142-43.) 

16. 

Anemployee’s  actions  on  a  given  day  may  suggest  a  lack  of judgment  and 

discretion,  or  may  be  an  isolated  act  precipitated  by  an  unusual  accumulation  of  pressure  and 
stress.  An  absence  of  any  other  incidents  in  the  employee's  teaching  career  suggestive  of 
lack  of judgment  or  discretion  can  further  distinguish  the  aberrant  character  of  the  act  at 
issue.  Tn  such  a  case,  a  fact  finder  could  reasonably  conclude  that  the  isolated  incident  of 
poor  judgment  was  overweighed  by  years  of  demonstrated  teaching  competence,  and  that  on 
balance  the  employee  possessed  the  qualities  of  character  necessary  for  teaching  fitness. 
(Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696-701.) 

17. 

In  determinimg  whether  the  teacher’s  conduct  indicated  unfitness  to  teach,  such 
matters  as  (1)  the  hkelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers,  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  im  tine 

 
S
t

s
s

of  the  conduct,  (4)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct,  (5)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  (6)  the  notoriety 
and  publicity  accorded  the  teacher’s  conduct  may  be  considered.  (Jack  M.,  supra.,  at  p.702, 
fn.  5.) 

18. 

The  nexus  between  an  employee’s  conduct  and  his  fitness  to  teach  is 

established  when  the  conduct  is  detrimental  to  the  mission  and  functions  of  the  employer. 
Factors  to  consider  are  whether  the  acts  demonstrate  a  serious  lapse  in  good  judgment,  the 
teacher  failed  to  recognize  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct,  the  teacher  attempted  to  shift 
blame  to  parents  and  students  who  might  access  his  posting,  his  principal  had  lost  confidence 
in  his  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  based  upon  the  posting,  or,  most  noteworthy,  the 
teacher’s  testimony  that  he  did  not  think  his  postings  would  have  any  impact  on  his  ability  to 
teach  his  students  if  any  of  them  had  viewed  his  post  and  that  he  did  not  view  his  posting  as 
immoral.  The  conduct  itself,  together  with  the  teacher’s  failure  to  accept  responsibility  or 
recognize  the  seriousness  of  it,  given  his  position  as  a  teacher  and  role  model,  demonstrates 
evident  unfitness  to  teach.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1465-66.) 

19. 

—  One  act  does  not  alone  demonstrate  the  unfitness  of  the  teacher,  but  1s  simply 

one  of  the  factors  to  be  considered.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.  App.3d  555,  561-62.) 

20. 

There  must  be  a  nexus  between  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  his  usefulness  to  the 

school  district  and  only  when  so  construed  can  grounds  to  dismiss  for  immoral  conduct  or 
unfitness  to  serve  be  constitutionally  applied.  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Judge  (1975)  50  Cal. 
App.  3d  920,  929.) 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  LAWS 

21. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the  district 
must  further  establish  that  the  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 
“persistent,”  1.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.)  Isolated 
incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally 
considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.) 

22. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Education  Codes  section  44932,  subdivision  (8)  pertains  to 
unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that 
a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it 

.  stubborn;  persevering  . 

. 

. 

36

is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  reguiate.  (Ud.  at 
p.84.) 

Morrison  Factors 

23. 

 [n  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  to  consider 

when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity; 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  im  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  teacher:  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  pratseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

24. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When  a 

camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  im  its  load  to  see  which 
one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the 
offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  foint  Unified  School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

25. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal  App.4th  462,  476.) 

Gther  Disciplinary  Considerations 

26. 

An  administrator’s  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 

educator’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered. 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal  App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

27. 

The  Commussion  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee  even  if 
grounds  for  discipline  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal. 3d 
209.) 

Evaluation  of  the  Charges 

28. 

Ms.  Oshiro  was  successfully  ervployed  as  a  teacher  im  the  district  until  the  2016- 

17  school  year  when  the  district  involuntarily  transferred  her  to  San  Onofre.  Based  upon  the 
evidence  introduced  at  hearing,  Ms.  Oshiro’s  issues  seemed  to  begin  soon  after  she  arrived  at 
san  Onofre.  in  the  2014-15  school  year  Mr.  Rodriguez  pave  Ms.  Oshiro  an  evaluation 
documenting  that  Ms.  Oshiro  had  an  overall  performance  as  “elfective.”  Despite  this 
documented  evaluation,  Mr.  Rodriguez  testified  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  performance  as  a  teacher 
while  at  Potter  was  poor.  Additionally,  Mr.  Billingsley  testified  that  while  teaching  at  Potter, 
Ms.  Oshiro  was  “the  poorest  performing  teacher  in  the  district.”  However,  the  assertions  of 

37

poor  performance  from  Mr.  Rodriguez  and  Mr.  Billingsley  were  never  documented  and 
provided  to  Ms.  Oshiro  prior  to  her  transter  to  San  Onofre.  Mr.  Billingsley  testified  that  he 
purposely  attempted  to  hide  from  Ms.  Oshiro  the  poor  performance  issucs  asserted  to  be  part 
ofthe  reason  for  ber  transfer  to  San  Onofre. 

After  her  transfer  to  San  Onofre,  Ms.  Oshiro  soon  became  the  subject  of  complaints 

from  students  and  teachers  based  upon  the  poor  performance  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  students  on 
benchmark  tests.  Additionally,  observations  by  Ms.  Guerrettaz  and  Ms.  Perez  during  Ms. 
Oshiro’s  classes,  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was  failing  to  adhere  to  the  math  curriculum  and 
pacing  guidelines  and  was  wasting  instructional  time  teaching  other  things.  The  overwhelming 
evidence  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  poor  work  performance  was  so  egregious  that  she 
received  seven  letters  of  repromand.  The  district  provided  extensive  support  and  help  to  Ms. 
Oshiro  with  the  STEM  TOSA  and  the  co-teacher,  to  no  avail.  In  each  letter  of  reprimand  the 
district  provided  her  with  directives  regarding  her  instruction  in  her  classes.  Rather  than  abide 
by  those  instructional  directrves,  Ms.  Oshiro  simply  chose  to  disagree  with  the  findings  and 
allegations  in  the  letters  and  contmued  to  fail  to  adhere  to  the  curriculum  and  pacing  guidelines 
for  her  math  classes,  resulting  in  poor  student  performance  and  student  confusion.  The 
evidence  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Oshiro  failed  to  post  objectives  in  each  class,  failed  to  submit 
lesson  plans  as  directed,  failed  to  timely  provide  grades  and  feedback  to  students,  and  failed  to 
follow  the  curriculum  and  pacing  guidelines.  The  unfortunate  result  of  Ms.  Oshiro’s  failure  to 
abide  by  the  directives  given  to  her  m  those  seven  letters  of  reprimand  was  the  poor 
performance  of  her  students.  Based  on  Ms.  Oshiro’s  persistent  refusal  to  follow  district 
directives,  she  must  be  dismissed. 

Although  it  was  not  established  that  Ms.  Oshiro  engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  as 
inappropriate  and  humiliating  discipline  of  students,  Ms.  Oshiro  did  admit  to  some  disciplinary 
techniques,  such  as  making  students  stand  to  repeat  directions  and  filling  out  behavior  forms 
during  class,  that  the  district  alleged  was  inappropriate.  However,  the  Commission  did  not  find 
that  these  disciplinary  techniques  rose  to  the  level  of  immoral  conduct  or  violated  district 
policies. 

The  Commission  did  not  find  that  Ms.  Oshiro’s  conduct  in  disciplining  her  students  or 
in  failing  adhere  to  instructional  directives  provided  by  Ms.  Perez  and  the  district  was  a  fixed 
character  trait  or  a  temperamental  defect  rendering  her  not  fit  or  unsuttable  for  teaching 
altogether.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  any  such  fixed  character  trait  of  Ms.  Oshiro. 

Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro 

29, 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a8),  because  the  evidence  established  that  Ms.  Oshiro  persistently  violated 
district  polices,  regulations  and  school  directives.

Cause  Does  Not  Exist  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro  for  Evident  Unfitness  for  Service  or  Immoral 
Conduct 

30. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  because  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Oshiro  was 
evidently  unfit  for  service. 

31.  |  Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  because  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Oshiro 
engaged  in  immoral  conduct. 

ORDER 

Ms.  Oshiro’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Fallbrook  Union 

Elementary  School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  Ms.  Oshiro  is  granted. 
Ms.  Oshiro  shall  be  dismissed  from  the  district. 

March  9,  2018 

DATED:     [Ca  Upc 

March  8,  2018 
DATED:    

March  9,  2018 
DATED:    

BSsOD402410C441... 

  
CHERYL  LYNCH 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Dail  (Lonard 

BCAZ89DSR0C4415... 

  
DANIEL  LEONARD 
Commission  Member 

DoacuSigned  by: 

Debra,  Ny—Purkiias 

F3AD8CH82D0DE420... 

  
DEBRA  D.  NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

39

