BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
OXNARD  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

CHRISTIAN  DAVEY, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.:  2017050038 

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  Oxnard  School  District,  County  of  Ventura,  State  of  California  (Commission),  in 
The  Commission  consists  of  the 
Oxnard,  California,  on  October  10, 
following  members: 

12,  and  13,  2017. 

11, 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Chairperson 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Martha  S.  Romero,  Ed.D.,  Member 
Selected  by  the  Governing  Board 

David  W.  Rodgers,  Member 
Selected  by  Respondent 

Janet  Ly  and  Nitasha  K.  Sawhney,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Oxnard  School 

District  (District). 

Robert  A.  Bartosh  and  Juan  M.  Higuera,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Christian  Davey 

(Respondent),  who  was  present  throughout  the  proceedings. 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  Respondent  on  grounds  of  evident  unfitness  for  service  and 
persistent  refusal  to  obey  school  laws.  Respondent  disputed  some  of  the  factual  allegations  and 
argued  that  grounds  for  dismissal  do  not  exist.

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was  submitted 

for  decision  on  October  13,  2017. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional  Findings 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

2. 

15, 

On 

2017, 

March 

Ed.D., 
recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  Respondent’s  dismissal 
The  Governing  Board  approved 
pursuant  to  Education  Code'  sections  44932  and  44934. 
Superintendent  Morales’s  recommendation,  and  on  March  24,  2017,  the 
District  notified 
Respondent  of  the  Governing  Board’s  decision. 

Superintendent 

(Morales), 

Morales 

Cesar 

3. 

On 

March 

24, 

2017, 

the 

District 

filed 

a 

Statement 

of  Charges 

Recommendation  for  Dismissal  (Accusation),  seeking  Respondent’s  dismissal. 
thereafter  requested  a  hearing,  and  the  instant  proceedings  followed. 

and 
Respondent 

4. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent’s  Background  and  Employment  with  the  District 

5. 

Respondent  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  Degree  in  Molecular  Biology  from 
California  State  University,  Channel  Islands,  and  a  Master  of  Arts  Degree  in  Education  from  the 
University  of  Southern  California,  which  he  obtained  in  2012.  He  holds  a  single  subject  (science) 
credential.  He  started  teaching  at  the  District  in  the  2013-2014  school  year,  and  teaches  science 
classes  at  Freemont  Intermediate  School  (Freemont). 

6. 

Respondent  has  received  training  from  the  District,  primarily  during  staff  meetings. 
As  it  pertains  to  the  matters  alleged  in  Accusation,  during  a  staff  meeting  in  late  2015  former 
District  school  principal  Wayne  Sadler  (Sadler)  provided  training  about  dealing  with  students  who 
were 
During  the 
presentation,  Sadler  stated  that  it  was  acceptable  to  touch  a  student’s  backpack  as  a  way  to  redirect 
Except  for  this  training  from  Sadler,  Respondent  did  not  receive  any  training  in 
the  student. 
dealing  with  disruptive  students  or  in  disciplining  students. 

fighting,  which  included  techniques  to 

de-escalate 

situations. 

conflict 

// 

// 

  

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

Pertinent  School  Rules 

7. 

As  established  by  the  testimony  of  several  witnesses,  Respondent  included,  the 
District  expects  teachers  not  to  touch  students,  except  to  prevent  students  from  harming 
themselves,  others,  or  District  property. 

8. 

Students  are  required  to  have  a  pass  in  order  to  walk  on  campus  during  class  time. 
A  teacher  who  learns  that  a  student  does  not  have  a  pass  is  expected  to  tell  the  student  to  return  to 
class,  and,  if necessary,  to  report  the  matter  to  an  administrator  or  to  a  campus  supervisor. 

February  11,  2016  Incidents’ 

9. 

The  first  two  incidents  on  which  the  District  relies  to  seek  Respondent’s  discharge 
occurred  on  February  11,  2016. 
On  that  day,  Respondent  was  standing  outside  his  classroom 
during  his  preparation  period,  the  period  after  lunch,  when  he  observed  an  eighth  grade  student, 
J.V2,  walking  across  the  courtyard.  Respondent  started  walking  toward  the  student,  and  said,  in  a 
raised,  firm  tone  of  voice,  “J.V.,  you  need  to  go  to  class;  you’ve  been  skipping  your  Math  class.” 
J.V.  did  not  respond  and  continued  to  walk  in  the  direction  of the  nearby  boys’  restroom. 

10. 

Respondent  observed  two  to  four  campus  supervisors  outside  the  restroom,  but  they 
did  not  inquire  about  J.V.’s  reason  for  not  being  in  class  or  make  any  effort  to  try  to  stop  the 
student  from  walking  on  campus  during  class  time. 

11. 

Respondent  followed  J.V.,  and  repeated  his  request  for  the  student  to  go  to  class. 
J.V.  said  he  was  going  to  the  restroom.  Respondent  asked  J.V.  for  his  hall  pass,  and  the  student 
did  not  produce  one.  Respondent  told  J.V.  he  could  not  be  outside  the  classroom  without  a  pass, 
but  J.V.  continued  to  walk  into  the  restroom. 

12. 

Another  student  who  was  walking  to  the  restroom  from  another  direction,  MLS., 
observed  part  of  the  exchange.  M.S.,  who  plays  football  with  J.V.,  described  Respondent’s  tone  of 
voice  when  he  first  heard  it  as  loud  and  angry.  On  cross-examination,  he  described  Respondent’s 
tone  of  voice  as  lower  than  the  yelling  tone  used  by  the  football  coaches. 

13. 

In  order  to  redirect  J.V.,  Respondent  grabbed  the  loop  at  the  top  of  the  student’s 
backpack.  J.V.  testified  that  Respondent  pulled  his  backpack  from  behind,  causing  him  to  stumble 

  

*  The  facts  regarding  the  incidents  that  led  to  District  action  are  essentially  undisputed. 
Material  differences  in  testimony  are  discussed  in  the  findings  as  necessary.  Respondent  had 
specific  recollection  of  the  events,  presented  good  demeanor,  and  his  testimony  has  been 
generally  credited. 

*  Initials  have  been  used  to  protect  the  privacy  of  the  students,  who  are  minors.  The 

same  designations  were  used  in  the  Accusation.

J.V.  was  thereafter  able  to  “wiggle”  out  of  the  backpack.  MS. 
and  almost  fall  to  the  ground. 
similarly  testified  that  Respondent  pulled  on  the  backpack,  causing  J.V.  to  lose  his  balance  but  not 
to  fal.  The  students’  testimonies  are  mutually  corroborative  and  are  credited. 

i4, 

JV.  did  not  appreciate  Respondent  grabbing  his  backpack,  and  retorted,  mm  a  loud 
voice,  “you  can’t  touch  me.”  Respondent  replied,  also  in  a  loud  voice,  “you  need  to  go  back  to 
class.” 
As  MLS.  credibly  testrfied, 
Respondent  then  lowered  his  voice  and  said  “let's  pust  go  to  the  office.”  Respondent,  I.V.,  and 
M.S.  walked  to  the  office,  where  Respondent  left  the  students  and  the  backpack. 

M.S.  told  Respondent  he  could  not  grab  J.V.’s  backpack. 

iS, 

JV.  remained  in  the  office  for  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  reported  the  mcident  to 
J.V.  was  not  disciplined  for  not  having  a  pass,  and  he  retrieved  his 

school  administration. 
backpack  before  going  home  at  the  end  of the  day. 

i6. 

Respondent  denied  touching  J.V.,  and  testified  that  he  only  touched  his  backpack, 
which,  based  on  the  comments  made  by  Sadler  at  a  staff  meeting,  he  thought  was  permitted,  His 
testimony  was  not  contradicted  and  is  credited. 

17, 

As  he  was  walking  back  to  his  classroom,  Respondent  observed  another  student, 
In  a  loud,  authoritative  voice,  Respondent  maquired 
J.W.,  walking  in  the  courtyard  toward  him. 
where  she  was  going. 
J.W.  replied  she  was  gomg  to  the  restroom  and  continued  to  walk  in 
Respondent's  direction.  Respondent  asked  to  see  her  pass.  J.W.  did  not  react  well,  and  raised  her 
voice  inresponse.  Respondent  also  raised  his  voice,  and  the  exchange  continued  in  a  loud  manner 
for  one  or  two  minutes. 

18. 

The  exchange  occurred  outside  Room  806,  and  it  was  loud  enough  for  the  teacher 
in  the  room,  Roxanne  Miranda  (Miranda),  to  hear  Respondent  tell  J.W.  to  go  to  class  through  the 
closed  door.  Miranda  came  outside  and  heard  J.W.,  also  ta  loud  voice,  say  she  would  not  go  to 
Miranda  described  Respondent’s  tone  of  voice  as 
class,  that  she  was  poimg  to  the  restroom. 
“assertive,  and  the  volume  of  both  as  “escalating.”  They  were  about  one  foot  from  each  other. 
Miranda  then  pulled  J.W.  to  the  side  and,  in  a  calm  voice,  told  her  she  needed  to  get  a  pass  to  go  to 
the  restroom. 

19. 

—  Irma  Lopez  (Lopez),  the  teacher  m  Room  705,  which  is  across  the  courtyard  from 
Room  806,  stepped  outside  her  classroom  when  she  heard  loud  voices  outside. 
She  saw 
Respondent  talking  mn  aloud  voice  to  a  disrespecthil  student.  Lopez  went  back  to  her  classroom  to 
report  the  incident  to  the  office. 

20. 

Linda  Stevens  (Stevens),  a  teacher  who  teaches  a  class  for  students  with  behavior 
issues,  also  heard  the  loud  exchange,  and  described  both  participants  as  “yelling  and  upset.”  She 
helped  de-escalate  the  situation  by  linking  arms  with  J.W.  and  walking  her  to  the  office. 

21a 

Campus  supervisor  Keith  Ebbs  (Ebbs)  was  walking  im  the  courtyard  when 
he  heard  Respondent  “yell”  at  JW.  Ebbs  has  known  JW.  simce  she  was  six  years  old,  and  knew 

4

she  could  be  difficult.  He  kept  walking  until  he  heard  Respondent  yell  at  him  that  he  should  take 
her  to  the  office.  Ebbs  kept  walking,  and  Respondent  got  closer  to  him,  insisting  im  a  loud  voice 
that  he  (Ebbs)  do  his  job.  Respondent  repeated  for  Ebbs  to  do  his  job,  on  one  occasion  telling 
Ebbs  to  do  his  “f------  job.”  Ebbs  told  Respondent  he  was  not  a  little  kid  for  him  to  speak  hike  that 
and  challenged  Respondent  to  “take  it  outside.”  Respondent  said  he  did  not  mean  it  like  that,  and 
leit  Ebbs. 

b. 

Respondent  explained  that,  i  frustration  about  his  behef  that  campus 
supervisors  did  not  do  enough  to  supervise  the  students,  he  did  say,  in  Epps’  direction,  and  that  “1 
would  not  have  to  do  this  if  you  did  your  “f------’  jobs.”  His  stress  level  had  been  high  when  he 
He  went  to  Epps  later  in  the  day  and  said  he  did  not  mean  the  comment  to  be 
spoke  to  Epps. 
directed  at  him  personally  and  said  he  was  sorry.  Respondent  and  Epps  have  mamtamed  a  cordial 
relationship  followmg  the  imcident. 

22, 

Vice  Principal  Frank  Guerrero  (Guerrero),  Ed.D.,  responded  to  the  incident.  Upon 
arrival,  he  heard  Respondent  “yelling  and  screaming”  at  Ebbs.  He  saw  J.W.  crying,  and  Miranda 
and  Stevens  trying  to  defuse  the  situation.  Respondent  was  directing  profanities  at  Ebbs,  regarding 
Dr.  Guerrero 
the  administration’s  and  the  campus  supervisors’  failure  to  handle  the  kids. 
approached  the  two  men,  and  directed  Ebbs,  who  appeared  calm,  to  leave  the  area. 

Letter  of Reprimand 

23, 

The  incidents  were  brought  to  the  attention  of  Jesus  Vaca  (Vaca),  Ed.D.,  Assistant 
After  describing  the 

Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  who  issued  a  letter  of  reprimand. 
meidents  of February  11,  2016,  the  letter  stated: 

“Your  conduct  on  February  11,  2016,  constitutes  a  “major  infraction’  under  Article  KX] 
Section  b.2  of  the  [Oxnard  Employee  Association  (OEA)|  contract,  which  includes,  “Conduct 
which  endangers  the  health  and/or  safety  of  the  employee  or  other  employees  and/or  students  or 
members  of  the  public.”  Board  Policy  4119.21  states  that,  “The  Board  expects  all  enyployces  to 
exercise  good  judgment  and  maintam  professional  standards  and  boundaries  when  interacting  with 
This  situation  should  have  been  addressed  verbally  or 
students  both  on  and  off  school  property.” 
with  the  assistance  of  administrative  stalf. 

“Your  actions  are  not  consistent  with  the  school’s  mission  of  ‘providmg  a  safe  and  positive 
environment  for  students’  and  could  potentially  lead  to  future  conflicts  or  confrontations  with  this 
Using  physical  force  on  a  student  carries  a  risk  of  injury  to  both  the  student  and  the 
student. 
employee. 
Additionally,  this  type  of  interaction  causes  a  disruption  to  the  learning  of  other 
students  tn  the  class. 

“The  above-referenced  acts  and  omissions  are  unprofessional  and  mappropriate  and  the 
District  wil  not  tolerate  such  treatment  of  its  students  or  stalf.  The  District  hereby  directs  you  to 
take  the  following  actions  to  remediate  your  behavior:

Sho a} 
students  unless  it 
member,  or  District  property. 

You  are  hereby  directed  to  refram  from  any  form of  harmful  physical  contact  with 
is  immediately  necessary  to  prevent  physical  harm  to  another  student,  a  staff 

“b) 

You  are  hereby  directed  to  treat  all  students  with  respect  and  dignity  and  to  refrain 

from  yelling  at,  belittling  or  humiliating  students. 

“c} 

You  are  hereby  directed  to  address  all  concerns  regarding  the  behavior  of  students 
in  an  appropriate  manner,  reporting  all  disciplinary  mcidents  to  the  Principal  or  Assistant  Principal 
as  appropriate.”  (Exh.  2,  at  pp.  66-67.) 

24. 

Dr.  Vaca  discussed  the  contents  of  the  letter  with  Respondent  on  March  15,  2016, 

emphasizing  that  students  need  to  be  treated  with  respect. 

25, 

Respondent  signed  the  fetter  on  March  15,  2016,  but  did  not  receive  a  copy  until  a 

meeting  on  June  10,  2016. 

April  28,  2016  incident 

26, 

On  April  28,  2016,  Respondent  was  preparmg  his  students  for  an  upcoming  frog 
dissection  exercise.  He  was  teaching  his  students  about  laboratory  safety  procedures.  One  of  the 
mstructions  is  never  fo  touch  the  scalpel  unless  wearing  goggles.  As  he  was  discussing  the  safety 
procedures,  Respondent  saw  one  of  the  students,  B.M.,  playmg  with  a  scalpel. 
Respondent 
reminded  the  student  not  to  touch  the  scalpel  yet. 
A  few  minutes  later,  B.M.  was  agam  playing 
with  the  mstrument.  Respondent  told  the  student  to  stop,  and  sent  him  to  the  computer  laboratory 
area  in  the  back  of  the  classroom. 

27, 

A  few  minutes  later,  Respondent  noticed  another  student,  M.M.,  making  stabbing 
motions  in  the  air  with  his  scalpel.  Respondent  said  to  M.M.,  using  a  firm  tone  of  voice,  “Are  you 
kidding?  Go  outside.”  Respondent  went  outside  to  speak  to  M.M.  about  his  conduct,  and  B.M. 
followed. 
[  can’t 
have  you  even  accidentally  stab  another  student.  Why  would  you  do  that?  Respondent  grabbed  a 
chair  for  M.M.  to  sit,  and  told  the  student  that  he  was  not  going  inside.  Respondent  was  in  close 
proximity,  about  two  to  three  feet,  to  the  students  as  he  spoke,  and  made  his  statements  m  rapid 
succession,  not  waiting  for  the  students  to  reply. 

Raising  his  voice  to  M.M.,  Respondent  told  M.M.:  what  were  you  thinking? 

28. 

 Respondent’s  exchange  with  M.M.  was  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  a  group  of 
educators  who  were  approximately  35  yards  away.  District  Project  Director  Deborah  West  (West) 
and  Caryn  Zimmerman,  a  District  science  teacher  and  special  project  coordimator,  were  showmg 
the  eco-friendly  garden  to  three  or  four  visitors  from  another  district. 

29, 

(Brisbine}  to  look  into  the  matter. 

West  reported  the  matter  to  Dr.  Vaca,  who  directed  school  principal  Greg  Brisbine 
Brisbine  spoke  to  the  students  and  to  Respondent  about  the 

6

matter. 
documented  the  counseling  in  a  memorandum  to  Dr.  Vaca. 

On  May  25,  2016,  Brishine  counseled  Respondent  about  yelling  at  students,  and 

30. 

On  June  10,  2016,  Dr.  Vaca  called  Respondent  into  his  office  to  discuss  the 
meident.  Respondent  explained  the  context  in  which  he  had  raised  his  voice  to  the  students.  Dr. 
Vaca  explained  that  there  are  ways  to  correct  student  behavior  that  did  not  involve  yelling  at  therm, 
and  again  directed  Respondent  not  to  engage  m  similar  behavior. 

January  30,  2017  Incident 

31. 

Prior  to  January  30,  2017,  Respondent  heard  that  another  teacher,  Karen  Presburger 
(Presburger},  had  been  accused  by  an  eighth  grade  student  of  making  racist  comments. 
Respondent  knew  Presburger,  and  did  not  believe  she  would  make  racist  statements.  At  the  tume, 
Respondent  did  not  know  who  the  involved  student  was. 

student  who  had  made  the 

On  January  27,  2016,  school  counselor  Viridiana  Rodriguez  (Rodriguez)  decided 
32. 
to  reassign  the 
to 
Respondent's  science  class.  Neither  Rodriguez  nor  Brisbine  spoke  to  Respondent  about  the  new 
student  or  about  the  situation  that  led  to  the  reassignment. 
On  Friday,  January  27,  2017,  at  4.16 
o.m.,  Rodriguez  notified  Respondent  via  email  that  T.P.  would  be  reassigned  to  his  sixth  period 
class,  effective  the  following  Monday,  January  30,  2017. 
Kespondent  read  the  email  at  an 
unspecified  time  during  the  morning  of  January  30,  2017,  before  his  sixth  period  class.  He  did  not 
pay  close  attention  to  the  identity  of  the  student  being  transferred  to  his  class, 

from  Presburger’s  class 

accusation, 

T.P., 

33. 

The  testimony  is  im  conflict  about  whether  Respondent  knew  the  identity  of  the 
transfer  student  on  or  before  10:00  am.  on  January  30,  2017. 
T.P.  testried  that  she  told 
Respondent  on  January  30,  2017,  during  the  10:00  a.m.  nutrition  break  that  she  was  his  new 
student.  Respondent  is  said  to  have  asked  if  she  was  the  student  Mrs.  Presburger  was  talking 
After  an  affirmative  response,  Respondent  said  he  did  not  think  his  class  was  right  for  her 
about. 
and  that  he  would  talk  to  the  principal.  Respondent  denied  talking  to  T.P.  during  the  nutrition 
break,  and  testified  that  he  uses  this  period  to  catch  up  on  his  work  and  to  prepare  for  his  other 
T.P.  did  not  report  the  earlier  encounter  m  a  statement  she  wrote  on  January  30,  2017.  In 
classes. 
light  of  this  omission,  and  Respondent’s  contrary  testimony,  T.P.  testimony  is  msufficient  to 
establish  that  she  spoke  to  Respondent  at  the  nutrition  break. 

34, 

On  January  30,  2017,  at  the  start  of  class,  T.P.  and  a  fnend,  U.P.,  walked  to  the 
front  of  the  class  where  Kespondent  was,  and  asked  if  T.P.  could  sit  next  to  U.P.  Respondent 
approved  the  request.  Desks  in  Respondent’s  class  were  arranged  as  a  three-sided  rectangle,  with 
space  im  the  middle  for  Respondent  to  approach  students  as  needed. 

35, 

After  T.P.  went  to  her  seat,  Respondent  realized  that  she  may  be  the  student  who 
accused  Presburger  mentioned  in  the  late  January  27,  2017  email  from  Rodriguez. 
He  walked 
over  to  the  table  and  asked:  are  you  the  student  who  accused  Mrs.  Presburger  of  being  racist? 
Respondent  asked  the  question  in  part  because  he  believed  Presburger  was  mnocent  and  im  part 

7

because  he  felt  too  many  teachers  were  being  unfairly  accused  and  were  not  receiving  support 
from  the  District. 
Affer  recerving  confirmation,  Respondent  went  on  to  say  that  the  accusations 
were  not  true  and  that  he  felt  uncomfortable  with  her  m  his  class  until  he  could  speak  to  her 
parents.  T.P.  was  quiet  during  Respondent’s  statements. 

36. 

His  naturally 
Up  to  this  pomt,  Respondent  had  been  talking  to  T.P.  at  her  desk. 
loud  voice  was  loud  enough  heard  by  other  students,  and  according  to  another  witness,  a  student 
sitting  two  seats  away  from  T.P.,  V.L.,  about  half  the  class  was  paying  attention  to  the  exchange. 
T.P.  testrhied  Respondent  yelled  at  her,  that  he  raised  his  voice,  and  that  he  was  angry  and  loud. 
V.L.  testified  that  Respondent  was  “kind  of  loud.”  When  asked  to  describe  KRespondent’s  tone  of 
In  light  of  V.L.’s  testimony, 
voice  as  “yelling”  versus  “raising  his  voice,”  V.L.  chose  the  flatter. 
Respondent's  denial  that  he  yelled  at  T.P.,  and  Respondent’s  admitted  loud  tone  of  voice,  it  is 
concluded  that  Respondent  raised  his  voice  when  addressing  T.P.  but  did  not  yell  at  her. 
It  is 
understandable  that  1  may  have  appeared  to  T.P.  that  he  was  yelling,  since  he  was  close  to  her,  she 
was  the  subject  of  his  inquiry,  which  clearly  upset  her,  and  she  was  not  accustomed  to  his  voice. 

37. 

While  speaking  to  T.P.,  Respondent  heard  some  chatter  in  the  room,  and  turned 
He  briefly  spoke  to  the  class  about  racism  and  about  the 

around  to  address  the  students. 
seriousness  of  accusing  somebody of being  a  racist. 

38. 

Taken  aback  by  Kespondent’s  statements,  and  afraid  of  what  might  happen  in  the 
class,  T.P.  turned  toward  the  wall  and  started  crying.  When  Respondent  noticed  that  T.P.  was 
crying,  he  felt  bad.  He  credibly  testified  that  he  wanted  to  make  a  pomt  about  the  seriousness  of 
making  allegations  of  racism,  but  soon  realized  that  he  did  not  raise  the  pomt  in  an  appropriate 
manner.  He  asked  T.P.  to  go  outside  so  they  could  talk.  Once  outside,  Respondent  told  T.P.  that 
he  was  sorry  he  had  made  her  cry,  and  stated  that  he  was  loud.  He  also  said  he  did  not  want  to  be 
dragged  into  a  situation  where  he  would  be  wrongly  accused.  He  repeated  his  request  fo  speak  to 
her  parents  before  returning  to  class.  He  offered  to  prepare  some  assignments  for  T.P.  to  work  on 
in  an  area  of  the  office  known  as  “Falcon  Center,”  and  T.P.  agreed  to  go  there. 

39. 

On  January  30, 

certificated 
employees’  collective  bargainmg  representative,  OLA.  Not  long  after  the  meident,  at  1:52  p.m.,  he 
wrote  an  email  to  Brisbine  and  Dr,  Guerrero  which  stated,  im  part: 

2017,  Respondent  was  a  representative  of  the 

“PYL-  FT  SPRONGLY  condemn  your  decision  to  place  a  student  im  my  class  who  has 
falsely  accused  another  teacher  of  racism.  Especially  without  my  prior  knowledge.  I  explained  to 
that  student  AND  would  like  to  remind  you  both  what  racism  is. 
[t  is  an  extremely  harsh  and 
divisive  accusation;  doubly  so  for  an  educator.  1  don’t  believe  the  student  took  it  well.  She  opted 
to  go  to  the  Falcon  Center. 

“Per  Webster  -  “Racism  -  prejudice,  discrimmation  of  antagonism  directed  against 

someone  of  a  different  race  based  on  the  belief  that  one’s  own  race  is  superior. 

&

“You  need  to  start  defending  your  employees  from  this  sort  of nonsense.  Back  us  up!  This 
practice  of  removal  of  students  upon  their  request  from  certain  classes  has  to  stop  and  stop  now.  If 
they  don’t  get  their  way,  they  will  make  things  up  or  embellish  facts  to  serve  their  own  purposes 
because  there  are  absolutely  no  consequences  for  lying  and  false  accusations.  The  teachers  here 
I  will  be  conterring  with 
are  constantly  looking  over  their  shoulders  and  I  for  one  am  done  with  it. 
my  co-representatives  and  the  OEA  board  on  this  matter.”  (Exh.  3;  emphasis  im  original.) 

Respondent's  Teaching  Performance  and  Evaluations 

40. 

Respondent's  teaching  performance  has  not  been  called  into  question. 

In  cach  of 
his  performance  evaluations  submitted  mto  evidence,  a  Non-Permanent  Teacher  Final  Evaluation, 
Cycle  1,  dated  May  27,  2014,  and  Non-Permanent  Teacher  Final  Evaluation,  Cycle  2,  dated  May 
12,  2015,  Respondent’s  performance  was  found  to  meet  or  exceed  standards. 

is 

a, 

4h. 

[a]  great  pleasure  to  write  this 

His  supervisors  have  provided  recent  letters  of  recommendation.  In  a  letter 
dated  May  10,  2014,  Dr.  Guerrero  wrote: 
letter  of 
“Tt 
recommendation  on  behalf  of  [Respondent|.  [Respondent]  is  a  new  science  teacher  at  our  school. 
He  shows  up  to  work  early  and  usually  is  the  first  teacher  to  arrive  on  campus.  I  have  observed 
his  students  actively  engaged  in  his  lessons  during  admmustrateve  walkthroughs.  The  majority  of 
iRespondent]’s  lessons  have  been  project  based  experiments  which  have  captivated  his  students’ 
It  appears  that  [Respondent]’s  lessons  are  carefully  thought  out.  As  a 
imagination  and  curiosity. 
[  have  also  noted  that  students  that  were  behavior 
result,  he  rarely  refers  students  to  the  office. 
problems  last  year  have  behaved  in  his  class.  He  undoubtedly  has  good  classroom  management.” 
(Exh.  C.} 

b. 

On  May  22,  2016,  Brisbine  wrote: 

“[Respondent]  delivers  engaging 
instruction  to  his  students  in  both  7”  grade  science  classes  and  his  6"  grade  environmental  science 
elective.  He  provides  students  with  hands-on,  project-based  learning  opportunities  that  incorporate 
His  instructional  style  is  energetic  and  this  leads  to  student 
collaboration  and  critical  thmking. 
engagement. 
[Respondent]  routmely  incorporates  technology  mito  his  lessons  and  his  students 
regularly  utilize  thew  iPads  for  a  variety  of  activities.”  (Exh.  D.) 

42. 

Dering  the  2015-2016  school  years,  respondent  received  the  “Fabulous  Falcon 

Award,”  “im  recognition  for  gomg  the  extra  mile  for  Freemont  Students.”  (Exh.  H.) 

Additional  Evidence  Offered  in  Mitigation  and  Rehabilitation 

43. 

Respondent  has  learned  from  the  incidents  and  plans  fo  make  additional  changes  if 
retained.  He  stopped  using  profanity  after  the  first  mecident.  He  has  not  touched  students  or  their 
property  fo  redirect  them  after  February  £1,  2016. 
He  plans  to  be  more  reliant  on  campus 
supervisors  and  administrators.  He  will  be  more  cognizant  of  the  volume  of  his  voice,  and  try  to 
take  steps  to  minimize  tts  effect,  such  as  speaking  to  students  from  farther  away. 
Respondent 
acknowledges  that  he  handled  the  T.P.  transfer  poorly,  and  agrees  that  his  concerns  should  have 

9

been  addressed  to  District  administration.  He  1s  open  to  further  traning  to  improve  his  interaction 
with  students. 

44. 

Respondent  has  volunteered  to  work  as  a  “buddy  teacher”  for  Lopez  and  Stevens. 
A  buddy  teacher  is  used  to  help  calm  disruptive  students  by  temporarily  placing  them  in  a  different 
environment  with  another  teacher. 

Respondent’s  Fitness  to  Teach 

45. 

J.V.  nearly  fell  as  Respondent  redirected  him. 

 Respondent’s  conduct  is  related  to  his  fitness  to  teach,  but  1s  msufficient  to 
constitute  unfitness  to  teach.”  As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  numbers  9  through  39,  Respondent 
touched  the  backpack  of  one  student,  raised  his  voice  to  five  students  in  four  separate  incidents, 
raised  his  voice  to  a  staff  member  in  an  inappropriate  manner,  and  made a  student  cry  in  his  class. 
In  terms  of  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors,  this  conduct  was  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  students 
J.V.  and  J.W.  became 
and  staff,  and  in  fact  did. 
irate  and  replied  in  similarly  loud  tone. 
Epps  took  exception  to  Respondent’s  comments  and 
challenged  him  to  fight. 
T.P.  became  afraid  and  cried.  The  incidents  occurred  in  the  recent  past. 
In  aggravation,  Respondent’s  conduct  was  public,  witnessed  by  others,  and  set  a  bad  example  for 
students.  On  the  other  hand,  Respondent  did  not  receive  any  training  after  any  of  the  incidents  to 
prevent  recurrence  of  additional  incidents.  Respondent  was  well-intentioned,  as  his  conduct  was 
motivated  by  upholding  school  rules  and  ensuring  student  safety,  and  by  teaching  students  not  to 
In  light  of  Respondent’s  changes  in  behavior  after  the 
lightly  accuse  anyone  of  being a  racist. 
letter  of  reprimand,  his  plans  for  additional  changes,  his  acknowledgment  that  he  mishandled  the 
T.P.  situation,  his  apologies  to  T.P.  and  to  Epps,  and  the  lessons  he  has  learned  through  the 
disciplinary  process,  the  questionable  conduct  is  not  likely  to  be  repeated. 

// 

  

*  Courts  require  evaluation  of  a  teacher's  alleged  misconduct  in  terms  of  its  impact  on 
fitness  for  service  utilizing  the  following  criteria  first  enunciated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214  (Morrison):  the  likelihood  that  the 
conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity 
anticipated;  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  party  involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding 
the  conduct;  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 
Not  all  factors  may  apply  in  each  case  and 
only  the  pertinent  ones  need  to  be  examined.  (West  Valley-Mission  Community  College 
District  v.  Conception  (1993)  16  Cal.App.4th  1766,  1777;  Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994) 
28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384  (Haar).)  The  determination  of  fitness  for  service  required  by 
Morrison  is 
a  factual  one.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  698,  fn.  3 
(Jack  M.);  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d.  208,  220-221 
(Fontana);  Haar  (1994),  supra,  28  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  384). 

10

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

i, 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a5),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee  for 
“evident  unfitness  for  service.”  Evident  unfitness  for  service  under  this  provision  is  established  by 
conduct  demonstrating  that  the  teacher  is  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  or  suitable  for  teaching, 
ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School 
District 
1444 
(Woodland).)  As  a  threshold  matter,  the  Morrison  criteria  must  be  examined  to  ascertain  whether 
the  conduct  in  question  indicates  unfitness  for  service. 
“If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the 
next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’  is  ‘evident’;  1.¢.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is 
caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.”  Ud.  at  p.  1445.) 

Commission  on  Prafessional  Campetence  (4992) 

2  CaLApp4th  1429, 

vy. 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  numbers  3  through  39  and  45,  Respondent’s  conduct, 
while  related  to  his  fitness  to  teach  is  insufficient  to  constitute  unfitness  to  teach.  Respondent's 
conduct,  while  of  concern,  does  not  demonstrate  that  he  is  “clearly  not  fit,”  “adapted,”  or 
“suitable”  for  teaching  or  that  any  existing  deficiencies  are  the  result  of  “temperamental  defects  or 
madequacies.” 
The  teacher  m  Woodland,  supra,  tor  mstance,  engaged  in  repeated  acts  of 
contempt  for  fellow  teachers  and  school  administrators  over  an  extended  period.  Respondent,  on 
the  other  hand,  engaged  in  far  fewer  incidents  over  a  relatively  short  period,  none  of  the  mcidents 
demonstrated  evident  contempt  for  students  or  staf,  and  he  made  changes  to  his  behavior  that 
indicate  the  absence  of  a  temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy.  Accordingly,  cause  for  dismissal 
has  not  been  established  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}(5). 

3, 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a7),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent  employee  for 
“persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
A  violation  of  section  44932, 
gzovering  board  of  the  school  district  employing  hum  or  her.” 
subdivision  (a7),  must  also  be  established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors. 
I  unfitness  to 
teach  is  shown,  then  the  District  must  further  establish  that  Respondent's  refusal  to  follow  the  laws 
or  regulations  was  “persistent,”  1e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School 
District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (985)  174  Cal  App.3d  1176, 
1183, 
Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  High  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal  App.3d  77, 
82  (Seaman).)  Isolated  meidents  or  mcidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time 
are  not  generally  considered  “persistent.”  (See,  ¢.2.,  Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  174  Cal. App.3d  317;  Seaman,  supra.) 

4. 

Except  as  quoted  m  the  March  15,  2016  letter  of  reprimand,  the  District  did  not 
mtroduce  ito  evidence  the  “school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governmg  board”  that 
were  allegedly  violated. 
In  closing  argument,  the  District  argued  that  Respondent  did  not  follow 
its  directive  not  to  yell  at  students  found  in  the  letter  of  reprimand  and  the  policy  cited  m  the  letter. 
Assuming  the  letter  is  sufficient  to  meet  the  statutory  requirement  of  “school  laws”  or  “reasonable 
regulations,”  cause  for  discipline  still  has  not  been  established  pursuant  to  section  449372, 
As  set  forth  m  factual  finding  mumbers  3  through  39  and  45,  Respondent's 
subdivision  (a)(7). 

il

In 
conduct,  while  related  to  his  fitness  to  teach  is  insufficient  to  constitute  unfitness  to  teach. 
addition,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  any  stubborn  or  continuing 
disregard  of  its  directive. 
The  evidence  establishes  that  after  receiving  the  letter  of  reprimand 
Respondent  raised  his  voice  in  two  additional  instances,  but  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  he 
“‘velled”  at  any  of  the  students.  Even  if  it  were  concluded  that  these  two  incidents  violated  the 
directive  in  the  letter  of  reprimand,  this  limited  sample  involving  qualitatively  different  events  is 
insufficient  to  establish  a  “‘persistent”  violation  of the  directive. 

5. 

The  Commission  has  discretion,  even  in  cases  in  which  cause  for  dismissal  has 
been  established,  to  conclude  that  dismissal  is  not  warranted. 
(Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  p. 
220).  In  Fontana,  a  commission  on  professional  competence  declined  to  uphold  the  dismissal  of  a 
school  principal  despite  its  finding  that  grounds  for  the  dismissal  existed  on  the  basis  of  dishonest 
conduct,  concluding  that  the  principal’s  misconduct  was  isolated  and  unlikely  to  be  repeated.  The 
Supreme  Court  upheld  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  commission.  In  this  case,  Respondent  has 
discharged  his  teaching  duties  in  a  competent  manner  and  the  conduct  that  led  to  the  charges  is 
unlikely  to  be  repeated.  Retention  is  therefore  appropriate  even  if  cause  for  dismissal  had  been 
established. 

Respondent  Christian  Davey  shall  be  retained  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

ORDER 

Oxnard  School  District. 

DATED: 

December  26,  2017 

DATED: 

December  19,  2017 

DATED: 

December  20,  2017 

DocuSigned  by: 

NarksAMerrrae 
BEFADADEOBIEAGA.. 

  
MARTHA  S.  ROMERO,  Ed.D. 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

[Daud  Roc  (ale 

943EESE1FD4C44F... 

  
DAVID  W.  RODGERS 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

a 

A42CB8F  75488408 

  
SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12

