BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

REGINA  POUDEL, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2017090436 

DECISION 

Howard  W.  Cohen,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  October  30  through  November  3,  and  November  6  and  7, 
2017,  in  Los  Angeles,  California. 

My  T.  Huynh,  Associate  General  Counsel,  and  Cherrie  Moe,  Assistant  General 

Counsel,  represented  complainant  Jose  R.  Cantu,  Ed.D.,  Assistant  Chief  Human  Resources 
Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Tamra  M.  Smith  and  Julie  S.  Alarcon,  Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers, 

LLP,  represented  respondent  Regina  Poudel,  who  was  present. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  November  7,  2017. 

SUMMARY 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  engaged  in  inappropriate  acts  toward  her 

students,  and  that  each  act,  separately  and  together,  constituted  egregious  misconduct. 
Respondent  admitted  some  of  the  allegations  and  denied  others,  and  denied  that  any  or  all  of 
her  alleged  acts  constituted  egregious  misconduct,  separately  or  in  the  aggregate.  The 
evidence  supported  the  District’s  allegations  with  respect  to  two  of  the  alleged  instances,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  but  none  of  respondent’s  acts  constituted  egregious  misconduct. 
Respondent’s  dismissal  1s  not  warranted.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  August  18,  2017,  complainant,  in  his  official  capacity,  caused  respondent 

to  be  served  with  a  Notice  of  Board  of  Education  Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on 
Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension,  dated  August  9,  2017,  accompanied  by  a  Statement  of 
Charges  bearing  the  same  date. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  On 

September  14,  2017,  respondent’s  counsel  filed  and  served  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice 
of  Defense. 

3. 

At  a  telephonic  trial  setting  conference  on  September  18,  2017,  1n  which 

counsel  for  both  parties  participated,  the  matter  was  set  for  hearing.  On  October  5,  2017, 
complainant,  in  his  official  capacity,  filed  and  served  an  Accusation. 

The  District’s  Charge  Against  Respondent 

4. 

In  the  Accusation  against  respondent,  complainant  claims  there  is  cause  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  her  employment  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 
District  for  egregious  misconduct,  and  only  egregious  misconduct,  under  Education  Code 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1).! 

5. 

Complainant’s  egregious  misconduct  charge  is  based  on  allegations  of  various 

acts  and  omissions  occurring  in  the  2014-2015  and  2015-2016  school  years. 

Respondent’s  Background 

6. 

During  the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  taught  fourth  grade  for  the 

District  at  Florence  Griffith-Joyner  Elementary  School  (Griffith-Joyner).  For  10  years, 
through  the  2014-2015  school  year,  respondent  taught  at  the  District’s  Aurora  Elementary 
School  (Aurora).  She  has  a  bachelor’s  degree  from  California  State  University,  Long  Beach, 
and  a  master’s  degree  in  administration  leadership  from  California  State  University, 
Dominguez  Hills.  She  has  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential. 

7. 

Respondent  was  under  personal  stress  due  to  her  brother’s  illness  and  death  in 

November  and  December  2015. 

/I/ 

/I/ 

/I/ 

/I/ 

  

'  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  otherwise  specified.

The  2014-2015  School  Year 

8. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  1)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November 

6,  2014,  respondent  kicked  student  eC  E.’  on  the  foot  and  grabbed  his  arm. 

a. 

i!  did  not  testify  at  hearing,  nor  did  any  witnesses  to  the  alleged 
incident.  Evidence  that  can  support  a  finding  consists  of  statements  respondent  made  to  Eva 
Rodriguez-Chavez,  the  former  principal  at  Aurora  Elementary  School  who  supervised 
respondent  from  December  2011  to  June  2015,  when  respondent  left  the  school,  and 
respondent’s  testimony  at  hearing. 

b. 

In  an  email  to  Rodriguez-Chavez  on  November  8,  2014,  respondent 

wrote  that,  on  November  6,  ii”  and  other  students  were  reading  on  the  floor  and  that 
she  tripped  over  him  and  nearly  fell  when  he  stuck  his  legs  out.  In  a  conference 
memorandum  of  December  5,  2014,  summarizing  a  conference  with  respondent  on 
December  3,  Rodriguez-Chavez  wrote  that  she  discussed  with  respondent  the  allegation  that 
respondent  had  kicked 
“had  tripped  and  kicked  his  foot  when  she 
arm,  and  that  she  never  put  her  hands  on . 
alleged  incident. 

and  grabbed  his  arm.  She  wrote  that  respondent  said  she 
got  up,”  that  she  did  not  think  she  grabbed  his 

implicitly  referring  to  the  day  of  the 

C. 

Not  strictly  pertinent  to  this  allegation,  respondent  also  wrote  in  her 

November  8  email  that  on  November  7,  when  _  refused  to  get  to  the  back  of  the 
lunch  line  after  returning  from  the  administration  office,  she  “tried  to  take  his  hand  and  lead 
him  to  the  back  of  the  line.  He  said  get  my  hands  off  of  him.  He  fell  down  to  the  ground.  I  let 
. 
go  and  he  ran  inside  of  the  lunch  room.  . 
number.”  (Ex.  102.)  Rodriguez-Chavez  wrote  in  her  conference  memorandum  that 
respondent  acknowledged  taking  Cm”  :  hand  on  a  subsequent  day  to  lead  him  to  the  end 
of  the  line  when  he  refused  to  follow  her  directions. 

.  for  hi[s]  mother’s  phone 

I  went  to  the  office  . 

. 

. 

d. 

Testimony  at  hearing  was  largely  consistent  with  the  email  and  the 

conference  memo,  and  on  the  whole  does  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  the 
alleged  conduct. 

9. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  2)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  November 
|  on  the  foot,  then  grabbed  him  by  the  hand  and 

10,  2014,  respondent  kicked  student 
slammed  his  hand  on  the  floor.  Although  the  District  alleged  this  as  an  incident  separate  from 
that  alleged  in  the  previous  charge,  the  evidence  showed  that  iz  and 
E.  were 
one  and  the  same,  and  that  this  is  the  same  alleged  incident.  As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  8, 
the  District  did  not  establish  that  the  incident  occurred  as  alleged. 

_— 

  

2  Only  students’  first  names,  or  first  names  and  last  initials,  are  used,  in  order  to 

protect  their  privacy  rights.  The  parties  stipulated  to  redact  all  exhibits  to  reflect  the  same, 
and  the  ALJ  ordered  the  court  reporters  to  refer  to  students  only  by  first  name  and  last  initial.

       

  

The  2015-2016  School  Year 

10. 

=‘ The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  3)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  yelled  at  student  mm  B. im  did  not  testify; 
unsupported  hearsay  evidence  was  offered  in  support  of  the  allegation. 

11. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  4)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  gave  students  candy  in  exchange  for  their  secrecy 
regarding  her  use  of  profanity  in  the  classroom.  No  admissible  evidence  was  offered  to  show 
that  respondent  told  students  she  was  buying  their  secrecy;  one  student, iy 
P.,  speculated 
in  testimony  that  respondent  may  have  been  doing  that.  In  light  of  nearly  unanimous  student 
witness  testimony,  supporting  respondent’s  testimony,  that  respondent  sometimes  gave 
candy 
to  children  for  good  work  or  excellent  behavior  and  not  for  an  improper  purpose, 
Am  testimony,  besides  constituting  inadmissible  speculation,  was  not  credible. 

12.‘ 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  5)  that,  during  the  2015-2016  school  year, 

respondent  (a)  grabbed  student Am  P.’s  wrist  and  pulled  her  out  of  line,  causing 
pain,  and  (b)  pushed  Ag. 

The  District  established  that  respondent  grabbed  As  wrist,  but  not 
a. 
that  she  caused Am  pain. iy 
wrote  in  a  statement  to  the  school  principal,  and  testified 
at  hearing,  that  on  one  occasion  respondent  grabbed  her  hand  or  wrist,  pulled  her  out  of  line, 
and  told  her  to  walk  with  her.  Respondent  offered  inconsistent  versions  of  what  happened. 

was  in  the  wrong  place  in  line  and  was  talking  and  did  not  appear  to  hear  respondent’s 

instructions.  Respondent  wrote  that  she  did  not  grab  As  wrist,  but  testified  that  she 
enclosed  the  girl’s  wrist  in  a  “C-hold”  to  lead  her  out  of  the  line.  Respondent  took Am  to 
the  classroom  door  and  let  her  go  after  everyone  else  went  in. iy 
claimed  her  wrist  hurt 
and  she  told  her  mother  about  it,  but  she  then  forgot  about  it.  In  corroboration,  at  least  one 
other  student, 
and  lead  them  when  they  were  misbehaving  in  line.  He  testified  that,  when  respondent  did  it 
to  him,  it  did  not  hurt;  he  also  saw  respondent  do  it  to  three  other  students,  and  they  said 
nothing  to  indicate  they  were  hurt. 

a7  N.,  testified  that  respondent  would  take  students  by  the  wrist  or  hand 

b. 

The  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  pushed  A.  The  weight 

of  the  evidence  shows  that,  while  on  a  field  trip,  respondent  inadvertently  backed  into . 

year,  respondent  called  student 

disliked  respondent.  She  disciplined  him  for  his  frequent 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  6)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

13. 
2015-2016  school 
to  that  effect. 
misbehavior  in  class  and,  based  on  the  testimony  of  other  children  with  no  apparent  reason  to 
dissemble,  he  did  not  always  tell  the  truth  about  respondent.  He  also  got  in  trouble  at  home 
because  of  respondent’s  reports  to  his  parents.  He  testified  that  he  told  other  students  he  did 
not  like  respondent,  and  that  he  wants  her  to  be  fired.  At  least  two  students  corroborated  this; 
    

say  he  wanted  to  get  respondent  in  trouble,  and 
told  him  he  “fucking  hates”  respondent.  i  told 

C.  testified  she  heard 
N.  testified  that 

H.  “stupid  dumbass,”  or  words 

the  school  principal  about  this  allegation,  among  other  things,  during  the  school’s 

  

  
  

 

investigation  into  another  incident.  His  testimony  about  this  incident  was  not  corroborated. 
His  reason  for  not  reporting  the  name-calling  earlier,  nearer  in  time  to  when  it  happened,  was 
not  convincing.  He  claimed  to  have  told  his  parents  about  the  name-calling  shortly  before  a 
teacher-parent  conference;  his  mother  did  not  mention  the  incident  at  the  conference. 

14. 

—_  The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  7)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  grabbed  and  choked  student 
offered  only  unsupported  hearsay,  the  testimony  of 
told  him  respondent  choked  him. 
grabbed  and  choked  him,  and  denied  telling 
wrote  a  statement  to  the  principal  during  an  investigation  into  another  incident;  the  statement 
made  no  reference  to  grabbing  and  choking.  Other  student  witnesses  testified  that  they  never 
saw  respondent  choke  anyone,  and  respondent  denied  ever  choking  any  student. 

testified  at  hearing,  denied  that  respondent 

N.  The  District 
  

that  respondent  had  done  so. 

H.,  who  claims  that 

  

15. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  8)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  hit  at  least  one  student  on  the  head  with  a  book. 
H.  testified  that  respondent  hit  him  on  the  head  with  a  book  and  hurt  him a  little 
(contradicting  his  deposition  testimony,  wherein  he  testified  that  it  did  not  hurt),  and  that  the 
class  saw  it.  He  also  claimed  that  respondent  hit  ; 

N.  on  the  head  with  a  book. 

a. 

None  of  the  student  witnesses  corroborated  i  claim,  except 

F.  Si.  a  friend  of i  who  did  not  like  respondent  and  in  class  threatened 
with  a  book,  and 

. 
to  get  respondent  in  trouble,  testified  that  she  saw  respondent  hit 
that  respondent  tapped  her  on  the  head  with  a  book  while  saying  “shh.” 
however,  uncertain  whether  the  tap  was  intentional  or  accidental.  When  it  happened,  she  said 
“ow,”  though  she  admitted  it  did  not  hurt.  In  a  statement  she  wrote  to  the  principal,  she  did 
not  mention  the  tap  on  the  head. 

was, 

b. 

a7  N.  denied  that  respondent  had  hit  him  with  a  book  and 

testified  that  he  never  saw  respondent  hit  anyone  on  the  head  with  a  book.  The  other  student 
witnesses  testified  that  respondent  never  hit  them  with  a  book  and  that  ~  never  saw  her  hit 
anyone  else.  7  C.,  who  sat  near 
the  head. 

i.  never  saw  respondent  hit 

|  on 

or 

16. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  9)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  made  the  following  comments  regarding  students  in  her 
class:  (a)  “This  class  is  garbage,”  and  (b)  “This  class  is  a  piece  of  shit.”  The  weight  of  the 
evidence  shows  that  respondent  said  those  or  similar  words,  not  about  the  students,  but  about 
the  unkempt  condition  of  the  classroom.  Only  m7  H.  testified  in  support  of  this 
allegation,  saying  that  respondent  made  these  comments  to  the  whole  class.  No  other 
students  corroborated  it,  however,  either  in  testimony  or  in  written  statements  to  the 
principal.  For  example,  student 
make  sure  there  was  no  trash  on  the  floor  when  they  left  the  classroom;  he  never  heard 
|  C, 
respondent  say  that  the  class  was  a  piece  of  shit.  Neither  did  student 
testified  that  respondent  would  tell  the  students  to  clean  the  classroom  because  it  was  messy; 

V.  testified  that  respondent  would  ask  the  students  to 

mm  T.  Student 

  
  

     

 
  

she  does  not  remember  respondent  ever  calling  the  class  garbage  or  a  piece  of  shit.  Even 

,  who  wants  respondent  fired,  testified  that  respondent  was  talking,  not  about 

students,  but  about  the  classroom  being  dirty.  In  his  statement  to  the  principal,  he  wrote  that 
respondent  said,  “You  leave  this  class  like  [a]  piece  of  shit.”  (Ex.  28.) 

17. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  10)  but  did  not  establish  that,  during  the 

2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  ripped  up  student  work  and  threw  it  in  the  trash.  There  is 
little  or  no  support  in  the  evidence  for  this  allegation;  students  who  testified  on  the  subject 
said  they  never  saw  respondent  engage  in  this  activity. 

18. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  11)  and  established  that,  during  the  2015- 

2016  school  year,  respondent  said  the  following  words  and  phrases  in  the  presence  of 
students:  fuck,  crap,  shit,  stupid,  and  damn.  The  District  alleged  but  did  not  establish  that, 
during  the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  said  the  following  words  and  phrases  in  the 
presence  of  students:  retarded,  shut  up,  dumbass. 

a. 

The  weight  of  student  testimony  and  other  evidence  sufficiently 

demonstrates  that,  at  various  times  during  the  2015-2016  school  year,  respondent  said  fuck, 
crap,  shit,  stupid,  and  damn  in  class.  Respondent  admitted  to  using  some  of  these  terms;  she 
testified,  and  students  largely  corroborated,  that  she  generally  apologized  to  the  class  after 
doing  so. 

b. 

No  admissible  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  respondent  ever 

said  the  word  “retarded”  in  the  presence  of  students  or  told  students  to  “shut  up.”  The 
evidence,  on  the  whole,  did  not  establish  that  respondent  said  “dumbass.” 

H.  and 
M.  testified  that  respondent  called 1  |  M.  a  “dumbass”  during  the  teapot  incident  (see 

testified  that  respondent  called  him  a  “dumbass”  on 

Factual  Finding  19),  and 
another  occasion.  (Factual  Finding  22.) 
given  no  weight,  as  he  was  not  present  at  the  time;  his  testtmony  about  the  other  occasion 
was  uncorroborated  and  lacks  credibility. Hg  B.,  who  was  present  at  the  teapot  incident, 
heard  respondent  say  “damn,”  not  “dumbass,”  and  saw  her  silently  mouth  the  word  “fuck.” 
M.  thought  respondent  said  “dumbass;”  he,  however,  was  understandably  upset  during 

*s  testimony  regarding  the  teapot  incident  is 

the  incident  and  not  as  reliable  as  the  more  disinterested Hg  B.  Respondent  denied  ever 
calling  anyone  “dumbass.” 

19. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  12)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  June  3, 

in  the  chest, 
2016,  respondent,  after  student 
causing  him  to  stumble  backwards,  hit  a  table,  and  fall  on  the  floor,  and  called  him  a  “fuckin’ 
dumbass”  or  words  to  that  effect.  This  allegation  was  the  focus  of  a  significant  portion  of  the 
evidence  at  hearing. 

M.  dropped  and  broke  a  teapot,  pushed , 

a. 

On  Friday,  June  3,  2016,  though  on  family  leave  to  care  for  her  mother, 
respondent  came  to  school  for  part  of  the  day  to  help  with  the  school  play  and  to  administer  a 
reading  test  to 1  |  M.  She  helped  with  the  two  morning  performances  of  the  play.  After 
eating  lunch,  respondent  fetched 1  |  from  the  playground  so  she  could  administer  the  test  to

       

  

  
  

him;  two  other  students  came  back  to  the  classroom  with  her  and im.  the  other  students 
were  with  the  substitute  teacher  at  the  afternoon  performance  of  the  play. 

b. 

Respondent  began  administering  the  test  to  i.  Two  boys  entered  the 

room  carrying  some  props  when  the  play  ended.  The  boys  asked  to  play  with  some  pool 
noodles  (soft,  flexible  foam  sticks  used  primarily  by  children  as  a  swimming  aid)  they  saw  in 
the  classroom;  respondent  allowed  it,  thinking  the  boys  would  take  the  noodles  outside. 
Instead,  they  started  play  fighting  with  the  noodles.  Meanwhile, Hg  B.  and  another  student 
entered  the  classroom.  Respondent  left 1  |  to  attend  to  the  two  boys. 

C. 

Respondent’s  deceased  brother  had  given  her  the  teapot,  which  she 

allowed  to  be  used  as  a  prop  in  the  school  play  performed  that  day.  She  asked , 
the  teapot  when  she  approached  the  two  boys,  fearing  that  they  would  hit  the  teapot  with  the 
noodles.  While  respondent  talked  to  the  boys  and  took  the  noodles, 1  |  accidentally 
dropped  the  teapot,  and  it  broke  on  the  floor.  Respondent  turned  around  and  saw  the 
shattered  teapot. 

to  hold 

d. 

Respondent  said  “damn,”  mouthed  the  word  “fuck,”  and  began  quietly 

cr 

,  with  her  hands  covering  her  face.  She  hit  or  tapped 1  |  with  the  noodle,  and  said 
, ‘how  could  you  do  that?”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

e. 

1  |  felt  bad  about  breaking  the  teapot  and  causing  respondent  to  cry. 
He  tried  to  sweep  the  teapot  up  with  a  broom;  respondent  told  him  to  leave  it  and  to  tell  the 
substitute  to  summon  the  janitor  to  sweep  the  classroom.  At  some  point,  respondent  made 
physical  contact  with 
,  causing  him  to  bump  into  a  desk  with  his  leg.  The  contact  was 
accidental. 1  |  did  not  fall;  he  continued  walking  and  left  the  classroom. 

f. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  the  truth  of  the  allegation  that 

respondent  pushed 1  |  in  the  chest,  causing  him  to  stumble  backwards,  hit  a  table,  and  fall 
on  the  floor,  and  that  respondent  called  him  a  “fuckin’  dumbass”  or  words  to  that  effect.  y 
himself  provided  contradictory  versions  of  his  story.  Respondent,  student  witnesses,  and  the 
principal  who  took  student  reports  about  the  incident  testified  at  hearing;  there  were 
numerous  conflicts  in  their  testimony.  Some  but  not  all  of  those  conflicts  are  as  follows: 

1. 

1  |  testified  at  hearing  that  respondent  pushed  him, 

deliberately,  with  both  hands  on  his  shoulders.  When  he  reported  the  incident  to  the  principal 
three  days  after  it  occurred,  however,  he  did  not  say  respondent  put  her  hands  on  his 
shoulders  and  pushed  him;  he  said  she  hit  him  in  the  stomach  with  the  noodle.  On  June  6, 
Elizabeth  Martin,  the  school’s  Community  Program  Coordinator,  overheard 1  |  telling 
friends  that  respondent  had  hit  him  with  a  noodle.  Ms.  Martin  told  Akida  Kissane-Long, 
Ph.D.,  the  school  principal,  who  summoned 1  |  to  her  office. , 
hit  him  1n  the  belly  with  the  noodle. 

told  her  respondent  had 

il. 

|  testified  that  he  viewed  the  incident  from  a  hallway, 

looking  through  a  classroom  door.  He  testified  that  no  other  students  were  present,  that 
dropped  the  teapot,  that  respondent  pushed
respondent  screamed  “my  vase!”  when , 

was  sweeping  the  broken  glass  under  a  carpet,  that 
with  both  hands  into  a  desk  while 
1  |  left  the  room  crying,  and  that 
told  him  about  the  incident  before  leaving  school 
that  day  and  showed  him a  blue  and  purple  bruise  on  his  side.  is  testimony  is  not 
credited;  the  weight  of  the  evidence  established  that  i  was  not  present  during  the 
*s  testimony  contradicts  i  on  important  points,  including,  among 
incident. 
other  things,  ms  testimony  that  he  got  up  off  the  floor,  left  the  room,  and  went  home 
without  talking  to  anyone. 

lil. 

,  |  testified  that,  when  respondent  pushed  him,  he  fell  against 

a  desk,  hurting  his  side,  and  then  fell  onto  the  floor.  But  he  also  testified  that  his  father 
picked  him  up  right  after  the  incident  and  that  he  did  not  mention  the  incident  to  his  father  or 
mention  being  hurt. Hg  testified  respondent  accidentally  touched  the  back  of  ms 
shoulder  as  they  passed  each  other,  and  ms  leg  hit  a  chair  but  he  did  not  fall  on  the  floor. 

Hg  testified  that  respondent  did  not  appear  to  be  looking  at 1  |  and  the  contact  was 

probably  accidental. 

20. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  13)  but  did  not  establish  that,  on  June  3, 

on  his  head. . 

first  reported  this  alleged  hand-twisting  incident  on 

H.’s  hand  and  twisted  it,  causing  him  pain,  and 

2016,  respondent  grabbed  student s 
hit 
Wednesday,  June  8,  in  a  written  statement  he  provided  to  Dr.  Long;  he  made  no  mention  of  it 
when  he  gave  a  statement  to  Dr.  Long  on  Monday,  June  6.  In  the  June  8  statement, 
made  other  allegations  against  respondent,  such  as  that  she  choked  ; 
class  “stupid,”  that  are  contradicted  or  not  corroborated  by  other  witnesses.  As  for  the  charge 
that  respondent  hit =  the  head,  again,  none  of  the  student  witnesses  corroborated 
    
F.,  a  friend  of i  who  did  not  like  respondent.  (See 

*s  claim  except 

and  called  the 

Factual  Finding  15.) 

21. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  14)  that  respondent,  when  she  engaged  in 
acts  established  by  the  evidence,  violated  District  policies,  including  the  District’s  Code  of 
Conduct  with  Students,  Child  Abuse  Policy,  Policy  on  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment, 
and  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  despite  having  received  training  about  those  policies  and 
having  been  directed  by  school  administrators  on  December  3,  2014,  April  25,  2016,  and 
December  8,  2016,  to  comply  with  those  policies.  Because  violation  of  District  policies  is  not 
relevant  to  a  charge  of  egregious  misconduct,  which  is  defined  by  statute  without  reference 
to  such  policies  (see  Legal  Conclusions  6  through  11),  no  determination  is  made  as  to 
whether  the  evidence  established  this  allegation. 

22. 

The  District  alleged  (Accusation,  §  15)  as  fact  what  is,  instead,  a  legal 

conclusion,  that  the  alleged  acts,  separately  and  in  any  combination,  constitute  cause  for 
respondent’s  dismissal. 

// 

//

         

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

i. 

The  ALJ  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  tn  this  matter  under  section  44944.  1. 

Jurisdiction 

(Factual  Findings  |  through  5.) 

Burden  of  Proof 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  simce  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  District  must  prove  its 
case  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardiner  v.  Commission  on  Prof.  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1040.) 

Statutory  Ground for  Dismissal 

3, 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  m  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  are 
established.  In  the  Accusation,  the  District  alleged  one,  and  only  one,  of  those  enumerated 
causes:  egregious  misconduct.  (Factual  Findings  4  &  5.) 

4. 

The  Accusation  charged  that  various  alleged  acts  and  omissions,  separately 
and  together,  support  an  egregious  misconduct  cause  for  dismissal.  By  electing  to  charge 
respondent  with  egregious  misconduct  only,  the  District  has  waived  any  right  to  charge 
respondent  with  other  causes  for  discipline,  such  as  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness 
for  service,  or  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  or  regulations,  based  on  the  same  acts.  (§§ 
449341,  44944.1,  subd.  (b).) 

5, 

The  ALJ  has  examined  each  allegation  to  determine  whether  it  was  proven, 

and  for  those  proven  has  determined,  as  set  forth  below,  whether  the  acts,  considered 
separately  and  together,  constituted  egregious  misconduct. 

Eegregious  Misconduct 

6. 

“Egregious  misconduct,”  a  subset  of  the  “immoral  conduct”  statutory  ground 

for  dismissal,  “is  defined  exclusively  as  immoral  conduct  that  is  the  basis  for  an  offense 
described  in  Section  44010  or  44011  of  this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6, 
inclusive,  of  the  Penal  Code.”  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)\(1).)} 

7. 

8. 

section  44010  lists  various  criminal  sex  offenses.  Section  44011  lists  crimimal 

controlled  substance  offenses.  The  District  did  not  allege  either  of  those  types  of  offenses. 

Penal  Code  sections  11165.2  through  11165.6  are  part  of  the  Child  Abuse  and 

Neglect  Reporting  Act  (CANRA).  (Pen.  Code,  9  11164,  subd.  (a).)  Penal  Code  section 
11165.2  defines  “neglect”  as  the  “negligent  treatment  or  maltreatment  ofa  child...  under 
circumstances  mdicating  harm  or  threatened  harm  to  the  child’s  health  or  welfare.”  Penal 
Code  section  11165.3  refers  to  situations  m  which  a  person  “willfully  causes  or  permits  any

child  to  suffer,  or  inflicts  thereon,  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental  suffering”  or 
“willfully  causes  or  permits  the  person  or  health  of  the  child  to  be  placed  in  a  situation  in 
which  his  or  her  person  or  health  is  endangered.”  Penal  Code  section  11165.4  pertains  to 
“situation[s]  where  any  person  willfully  inflicts  upon  any  child  any  cruel  or  inhuman 
corporal  punishment  or  injury  resulting  in  a  traumatic  condition.”  Penal  Code  sections 
11165.5  and  11165.6  encompass  the  preceding  offenses  to  the  extent  they  result  in  “physical 
injury  or  death  by  other  than  accidental  means.” 

9. 

Cases  decided  under  Penal  Code  sections  273a  and  273d,  which  are  criminal 

child  abuse  statutes,  guide  the  interpretation  of  the  pertinent  CANRA  statutes,  as  the 
CANRA  language  was  borrowed  from  those  child  abuse  statutes. 

10. 

To  constitute  child  abuse  under  Penal  Code  section  273a,  the  conduct  must  be 

willful  and  “committed  ‘under  circumstances  or  conditions  likely  to  produce  great  bodily 
harm  or  death.’”  (People  v.  Odom  (1991)  226  Cal.App.3d  1028,  1032.)  The  statute  is 
“mtended  to  protect  a  child  from  an  abusive  situation  in  which  the  probability  of  serious 
injury  is  great.”  (People  v.  Cockburn  (2003)  109  Cal.App.4th  1151,  1160.)  Child  abuse  under 
Penal  Code  273d  “requires  the  defendant  to  inflict  a  cruel  or  inhuman  corporal  punishment  or 
injury  upon  a  child”  where  “the  actual  result  1s  an  injury  resulting  in  a  traumatic  condition.” 
(Id.  at  p.  1160.) 

11. 

‘In  contrast,  certain  touching  is  exempt  from  liability  under  Penal  Code  section 
11165.3.  “A  teacher  shall  not  be  subject  to  criminal  prosecution  or  criminal  penalties  for  the 
exercise,  during  the  performance  of  his  duties,  of  the  same  degree  of  physical  control  over  a 
pupil  that  a  parent  would  be  legally  privileged  to  exercise  but  which  in  no  event  shall  exceed 
the  amount  of  physical  control  reasonably  necessary  to  maintain  order,  protect  property,  or 
protect  the  health  and  safety  of  pupils,  or  to  maintain  proper  and  appropriate  conditions 
conducive  to  learning.”  (§  44807;  see  Austin  B.  v.  Escondido  Union  School  Dist.  (2007)  149 
Cal.App.4th  860,  874-875.)  This  does  not  permit  corporal  punishment,  an  element  of  which 
is  the  willful  inflicting  of  physical  pain.  Ud.  at  p.  875.)  The  CANRA  does  not  define  corporal 
punishment,  but  the  term  is  defined  in  section  49001,  subdivision  (a),  to  mean  “the  willful 
infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of,  physical  pain  on  a  pupil.”  Section  49001 
was  enacted  in  1986.  Penal  Code  section  11165.4,  was  enacted  one  year  later,  in  1987,  and 
refers  to  section  49001.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the  Legislature,  when  enacting  a  statute,  was 
aware  of  existing  related  laws  and  intended  to  maintain  a  consistent  body  of  rule. 
(Apartment  Ass’n  of  Los  Angeles  County,  Inc.  v.  City  of  Los  Angeles  (2009)  173  Cal.App.4th 
13,  21.)  Based  on  this  general  principle  of  statutory  construction,  1t  may  be  assumed  that  the 
definition  of  corporal  punishment  contained  in  section  49001  is  similarly  used  in  Penal  Code 
section  11165.4,  including  “the  infliction  of...  physical  pain.”  Interestingly,  the  same 
definition  is  used  in  the  District’s  policy  against  corporal  punishment. 

12. 

Ofthe  alleged  acts,  the  ALJ  found  that  respondent  grabbed Am  P.’s  wrist 

(though  not  that  she  caused Am  pain),  and  said  the  following  words  and  phrases  in  the 
presence  of  students:  fuck,  crap,  shit,  stupid,  and  damn.  (Factual  Findings  12a  &  18.) 

10

13. 

The  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  these  acts,  separately  or  im  combmation,  constitute  egregious  misconduct 
within  the  meaning  of  section  449372,  subdivision  (a)(1}.  (See  Legal  Conclusions  6-11.) 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

4. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (969)  |  Cal.3d  214,  235  (Morrison), 

the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching 
profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger 
of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions 
as  a  teacher.”  The  Court  concluded  that  a  teacher's  conduct  cannot  abstractly  be 
characterized  as  “unprofessional”  unless  the  conduct  indicated  that  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach. 
Ud.  at  p.  229.)  The  court  set  forth  factors  to  consider  in  determiming  whether  the  conduct  in 
question  indicated  unfitness. 

1S. 

ft  is  only  necessary  to  discuss  the  “Morrison  factors”  as  they  relate  to  acts  that 

the  ALJ  has  found  occurred  and  constituted  egregious  misconduct.  Because  there  was  no 
finding  of  egregious  misconduct,  there  is  no  ground  for  considering  the  Morrison  factors. 

DISPOSITION 

16. 

Complainant  did  not  establish  that  respondent’s  dismissal  is  warranted  based 
on  a  charge  of  egregious  misconduct  only.  (Factual  Findings  4-22  and  Legal  Conclusions  I- 
16.)  The  ALJ  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  acts  that  do  not,  separately  or  together, 
constitute  egregious  misconduct  as  that  term  is  defined  in  the  Education  Code.  Whether 
respondent’s  acts  were  inconsistent  with  the  reasonable  expectations  society  places  upon 
teachers  to  act  as  exemplars  who  model  proper  adult  conduct  to  the  students  they  teach,  and 
whether  her  acts  constitute  immoral  conduct  other  than  egregious  misconduct,  or 
unprofessional  conduct,  or  persistent  violation  of  District  policies,  are  matters  beyond  the 
scope  of  the  AL's  jurisdiction,  which  is  limited  by  the  single  charge  in  the  Accusation. 
Within  the  scope  of  the  District’s  pleading,  grounds  do  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent. 

ii

ORDER 

The  Accusation  and  Statement  of  Charges  against  respondent  Regina  Poudel  are 

dismissed.  Respondent’s  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  is  not 
terminated. 

DATED:  —  February  7,  2018 

po DocuSigned  by: 

Howard  W,  Cohen 

“same  D44CS6A3CB054C5.... 

  
HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

