BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JOSHUA  BARNEY,  Respondent 

OAH  No.  2017090130.1 

DECISION  AFTER  REMAND 

PROCEDURAL  HISTORY 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High 

School  District  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  on  January  29,  30,  31  and  February  1, 

2018,  in  El  Cajon,  California. 

The  Commission  included  Charles  Mendoza,  Ron  Lardizabal,  and  Vallera 

Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  who  served  as  chairperson. 

Ingrid  Meyers,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  the  law  firm  of  Dannis  Woliver  Kelley, 

represented  Julie  Mottershaw,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  of  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Fern  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool,  &  Wax,  represented 

Joshua  Barney,  Respondent .

The  matter  was  submitted  on  February  2,  2018.' 

The  Commission  issued  its  Decision,  dated  March  5,  2018,  terminating  Joshua 

Barney's  employment  from  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

Following  issuance  of  the  Decision,  Joshua  Barney  filed  a  petition  seeking  a  writ 

of  mandamus  in  the  Superior  Court  of  California,  County  of  San  Diego,  Case  No.  37- 

2018-00022455-CU-WM-CTL. 

On  April  10,  2019,  Superior  Court  Judge  Ronald  L.  Styn  granted  the  petition, 

remanded  the  matter  to  the  Commission,  and  ordered  the  Commission  to  vacate  the 

Decision,  issued  on  March  5,  2018,  and  to  determine  if  the  Commission  would  have 

reached  the  same  decision,  and/or  imposed  the  same  penalty,  without  an  adverse 

finding  on  the  unprofessional  conduct  charge. 

On  July  3,  2019,  the  administrative  law  judge  issued  an  order  setting  oral 

argument  for  July  16,  2019,  and  providing  that  the  parties  may  file  briefs  on  or  before 

July  12,  2019. 

On  July  16,  2019,  the  Commission  heard  oral  argument. 

John  P.  Martin,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  at  the  remanded 

hearing.  Respondent  was  present  during  oral  argument. 

  

'  The  hearing  concluded  on  February  1,  2018.  The  record  remained  open  for  the 

Commission  members  to  deliberate,  which  occurred  on  February  2,  2018. 

On  February  2,  2018,  the  record  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted.

Ms.  Meyers  represented  the  District  at  oral  argument  on  remand. 

The  Decision,  issued  on  March  5,  2019,  is  vacated.  The  following  Decision  After 

Remand  is  issued. 

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

1, 

Joshua  Barney  (Respondent)  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  (District).  He  holds  special  education,  health  and 

physical  education  credentials. 

Respondent  described  his  career  with  the  District.  In  1992,  he  began  at 

Chaparral  High  School  as  a  campus  supervisor  in  a  classified  position.  He  commenced 

his  career  as  a  certificated  employee  with  the  District  in  1999.  Between  1999  and  2016, 

he  taught  special  education  at  Helix  High  School  (one  year),  Granite  Hills  High  School 

(10  years),  Steele  Canyon  High  School  (one  year),  returned  to  Granite  Hills  High  School 

(one  year),  Santana  High  School  (two  years),  Chaparral  High  School  (one  year)  and 

IDEA  Center  High  School.  During  the  2016-2017  school  year,  he  taught  physical 

education  at  IDEA. 

2. 

Chaparral,  IDEA  and  Merit  Academy  are  physically  located  on  the  same 

campus.  The  administrators  for  all  three  schools  are  the  same  and  are  located  on  the 

campus  of  IDEA.  In  January  2017  and  on  the  dates  of  hearing,  the  principal  was  David 

Napoleon;  there  were  two  vice-principals,  and  one  of  the  vice-principals  was  Dawn 

Cuizon.  In  addition,  the  campus  resource  officer  was  Darren  Ehlers,  and  the  school 

nurse  was  Lonnie  Raimond.

Chaparral  is  a  continuation  school;  the  students  who  attend:  (1)  are  on 

expulsion  from  the  District  or  enrolled  in  schools  outside  the  District,  or  (2)  need 

special  education  services  or  a  smaller  environment. 

IDEA  is  an  “alternative  school  choice”  which  means  that  any  student  within  the 

District  can  apply  to  attend.  IDEA  provides  project-based  learning.  The  focus  is  on 

restorative  practices  and  competency-based  grading.  It  is 

a  smaller  school 

environment.  The  school  tends  to  attract  students  who  come  from  home  schools  or 

charter  schools  or  who  are  on  campus  because  they  are  anxious  about  going  to  a  large 

school.  At  IDEA,  there  are  smaller  classrooms;  students  demonstrate  their  knowledge 

by  doing  projects  or  presentations  as  well  as  using  technology.  In  addition,  at  IDEA, 

career  pathways  programs  are  available  to  students,  such  as  construction,  cooking  and 

floral  design. 

On  the  class  schedule  is  a  class  entitled  “Maverick  Hour.”  Mr.  Napoleon 

described  Maverick  Hour  as  a  combination  of  homeroom  and  tutorial,  a  bit  of  a 

teacher-student  mentorship.  The  class  is  divided  into  grade  levels;  so,  there  is  ninth 

grade  Maverick  Hour,  tenth  grade  Maverick  Hour,  etc.  It  is  a  time  and  place  for  some 

student  counseling,  to  talk  to  a  specific  group  of  students,  and  for  the  students  to  get 

additional  help.  Tutorials  are  held  two  days  a  week.  Students  can  go  to  other 

classrooms  if  the  teachers  in  the  classrooms  arrange  this,  for  example  to  take  a  test  or 

to  complete  a  science  laboratory.  At  IDEA,  during  the  day,  typically,  even  if  a  student 

has  completed  a  class  (for  example  science)  project,  the  student  does  not  typically 

leave  the  class  to  go  to  another  class,  unless  there  is 

a  valid  reason  to  do  so. 

3. 

On  August  10,  2017,  the  Statement  of  Charges  for  Dismissal  and 

Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension  was  filed  with  the  District's  governing  board.  On  that 

date,  Ms.  Mottershaw,  in  her  official  capacity,  recommended  to  the  board  that

Respondent  be  dismissed  from  employment  and  suspended  without  pay.  Her 

recommendations  were  approved  by  the  board.  The  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  actionable  conduct,  as  set  forth  in: 

e 

California  Education  Code?  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  [immoral 

conduct]; 

e 

e 

e 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2)  [unprofessional  conduct]; 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)  [evident  unfitness  for  service]; 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)  [persistent  violation  of  or 

refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 

prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state 

board  or  by  the  District's  governing  board;  and 

e 

Code  section  44933  [unprofessional  conduct]. 

Respondent's  immoral  conduct  authorized  immediate  suspension  under  Code 

section  44933. 

On  the  same  date,  by  letter,  Ms.  Mottershaw  informed  Respondent  of  the 

foregoing  and  his  right  to  a  hearing. 

4. 

On  August  21,  2017,  Respondent  filed  a  request  for  hearing  and  raised 

affirmative  defenses  that  included: 

  

stated.

2  Hereinafter  all  reference  is  to  the  California  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to  constitute 

“cause”  for  dismissal  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932. 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to  establish 

that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Code 

sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939. 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to  establish 

that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  pursuant  to 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2). 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to  establish 

that  Respondent  was  unfit  for  service  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6). 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to  establish 

that  Respondent  engaged  in  persistent  violations  of  or  refusal  to  obey 

the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for 

the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  the 

District's  governing  board  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(8). 

The  District  suspended  Respondent  without  pay  but  failed  to  allege 

any  legal  basis  that  would  support  such  action;  Respondent  sought 

retroactive  pay,  retirement  contributions,  lost  fringe  benefits  and/or 

medical  cost  reimbursements  according  to  proof. 

The  District  failed  to  provide  Respondent  with  evidence  upon  which  it 

relied  in  making  its  decision  as  is  required  by  law.

e 

Under  Government  Code  section  11506,  subdivision  (a)(2),  the  Notice 

did  not  state  facts  or  omissions  on  which  the  District  may  dismiss 

Respondent. 

e 

Under  Government  Code  section  11506,  subdivision 

(a)(3),  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  so  indefinite  or 

uncertain  that  Respondent  could  not  identify  the  specific 

grounds  for  dismissal  nor  prepare  his  defense. 

5. 

District  Board  Policy  No.  4119.21  sets  forth  the  District’s  fundamental 

expectations  of  its  certificated  employees  and  provides:  “The  Governing  Board  expects 

District  employees  to  maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  to  follow  District  policies 

and  regulations,  and  to  abide  by  state  and  national  laws.  Employee  conduct  should 

enhance  the  integrity  of  the  District  and  the  goals  of  the  educational  program. 

6. 

Also,  the  District  has  policies  prohibiting  discrimination,  intimidation, 

harassment  and  bullying  for  all  of  its  educational  programs  and  activities.  (Board  Policy 

Nos.  0410,  4119.11,  5131.2,  and  5145.7.°) 

  

>  In  addition  to  the  Board  policies  cited  in  this  finding,  the  District  cited  a 

criminal  statute  (Penal  Code  section  243.4),  Board  policy  and  Board  administrative 

regulation  that  are  not  relevant  to  this  proceeding  and  therefore  not  included. 

Penal  Code  section  243.4,  subdivision  (d),  is  a  criminal  statute,  and  the  District 

has no  jurisdiction  to  file  or  to  enforce  criminal  charges. 

A  copy  of  Board  Policy  4011  was  not  included  among  the  exhibits  attached  to 

the  Statement  of  Charges.as  part  of  Exhibit  B.

7. 

District  Board  Policy  No.  5137  “Positive  School  Climate”  explains  that, 

“The  Governing  Board  desires  to  enhance  student  learning  by  providing  an  orderly, 

caring,  and  nurturing  educational  and  social  environment  in  which  all  students  can  feel 

safe  and  take  pride  in  their  school  and  their  achievements.  The  school  environment 

should  be  characterized  by  positive  interpersonal  relationships  among  students  and 

between  students  and  staff.” 

8. 

District  Policy/Administrative  Regulation  No.  4119.11  “Sexual  Harassment 

states:  “The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  is  committed  to  having  a  positive 

learning  and  working  environment  for  its  students  . 

. 

.  [and]  prohibits  unwelcome 

sexual  harassment  of  .. 

.  students  by  any  employee.”  Moreover,  District  policy  provides 

relevant  examples  of  sexual  harassment,  including  “unwelcome  graphic  verbal 

comments  about  an  individual's  body,  unwelcome  touching,  patting,  pinching, 

stroking,  squeezing,  tickling,  or  brushing  against  a  person,  ...  rating  a  person's 

sexuality  or  attractiveness  ..  .  [and]  [s]exist  or  stereotyped  comments.” 

9, 

In  January  2017,  for  two  quarters,  Student  B.P.  was  in  Respondent's 

Maverick  Hour.  He  “gave  her  a  bad  vibe”  from  the  first  day  of  class.  Typically,  she 

reported  to  Maverick  Hour  in  Respondent's  classroom,  and  he  authorized  her  to  go  to 

Amy  Reid's  Maverick  Hour.  (Ms.  Reid  was  another  teacher  on  campus.)  On  January  23 

and  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  attended  Respondent's  physical  education/weight  training 

class. 

  

students,  not  certificated  personnel.

Board  Policy  No.  5145.3  and  Administrative  Regulation  No.  5145.3  are  related  to 

10. 

In  January  2017,  Students  N.H.  and  T.S.  were  in  Respondent's  physical 

education  class. 

11. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  reported  to  Ms.  Raimond  that 

Respondent  had  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  and  behavior.  After  Student  B.P. 

reported  this  information,  Ms.  Raimond  called  on  the  “site  only”  radio  for  an 

administrator.  Ms.  Cuizon  responded  to  the  site’s  nurse's  office.  Ms.  Cuizon  entered 

the  nurse’s  office.  Ms.  Raimond  asked  Student  B.P.  to  repeat  her  statement  to  Ms. 

Cuizon.  Student  B.P.  did  so.  Because  Ms.  Raimond’s  radio  call  was  unusual,  Officer 

Ehlers  responded  as  well.  However,  Ms.  Cuizon  waived  Officer  Ehlers  off,  indicating 

that  he  should  not  enter  the  office. 

While  outside  the  office,  Officer  Ehlers  observed  that  Student  B.P.  was  visibly 

upset  (her  eyes  were  red  and  blurry;  she  was  wiping  her  eyes  and  trembling,  as  if  she 

had  been  crying)  while  she  talked  to  Ms.  Cuizon  and  Ms.  Raimond.  Initially,  he  did  not 

get  involved.  Officer  Ehlers  explained  how  the  “school  and  police  relationship”  is 

supposed  to  work  on  campus;  initially  the  administration  does  the  investigation  until 

the  administrator  identifies  possible  criminal  activity. 

Thereafter,  Ms.  Cuizon  took  the  student  into  her  office,  asked  Officer  Ehlers  to 

join  them  and  asked  Student  B.P.  to  repeat  her  statement  in  Officer  Ehlers’s  presence. 

Student  B.P.  complied;  she  described  and  demonstrated  how  Respondent  touched  her. 

  

“  Officer  Ehlers  described  the  physical  setup  of  the  nurse's  office.  It  was 

temporary  quarters  for  a  number  of  offices,  including  the  nurse's  office  and  was 

located  in  the  learning  resource  center.  The  nurse’s  office  had  a  thick  glass  window, 

making  it  visible  to  the  outside.

Officer  Ehlers  instructed  Student  B.P.  to  write  out  a  statement  on  school  forms.  In  the 

meantime,  as  part  of  protocol,  Officer  Ehlers  contacted  the  El  Cajon  Police  Department. 

He  did  so  for  two  reasons;  in  his  opinion,  the  conduct  alleged  could  constitute  child 

abuse;  further,  he  knew  Student  B.P.  (he  interacted  with  all  students  at  the  school),  and 

he  knew  Respondent  (as  a  teacher  and  a  football  coach).  Officer  Ehlers  wanted a  fair 

and  unbiased  investigation  conducted  by  someone  who  did  not  know  either  of  them. 

12. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  completed  two  separate  statements. 

Both  were  provided  to  Officer  Ehlers  at  different  times. 

The  first  statement  was  drafted  at  11:50  a.m.,  was  provided  to  Officer  Ehlers  at 

1:40  p.m.,  and  stated: 

Barney  had  me  workout  my  arms  [on  Monday,  January  23, 

2017],  and  when  I  came  to  school  the  next  day  [he]  was 

touching  the  top  of  my  chest  asking  me  how  my  muscles 

felt,  then  [he]  went  and  grabbed  under  my  butt  and  told  me 

it  was  time  to  workout  my  “booty”  then  repeatedly  told  me 

that  the  bar  when  I'm  doing  a  bench  press  needed  to  come 

down  and  touch  my  “titty”  or  “nipple”  [svc]  This  has  been 

going  on  for  a  couple  of  days.  I've  been  in  his  maverick  for 

almost  two  qutors  [s/c]  and  he  has  always  gave  [s/q  me a 

bad  vibe  [svc]  but  it  was  just  recently  that  he  started 

touching  me.  “Your  body  is  going  to  look  so  amazing  in  a 

bikini  this  summer”  he  said  that  to  me  while  I  was  working 

out  my  abs.  In  maverick  hour,  he  asked  me  “do  you  have  a 

boyfriend?”  While  I  said  “no”  he  continued  to  ask  me 

questions  about  what  guys  at  school  liked  me,  and  when  I 

10

told  him  what  guys  I  think  might  like  me,  he  sounded  like  a 

jealous  boyfriend  then  asked  me  if  I  drove  yet  and  when I 

said  “no”  he  said  “good  ...  oh  I  was  going  to  help  you  find 

a  job.”  It  made  no  sense. 

The  second  statement  was  drafted  by  Student  B.P.  on  the  same  date  at  2:35 

p.m.  and  stated: 

I  was  wearing  jeans  with  a  rip  [s/c]  and  he  was  trying  to  rub 

the  rip  off  the  right  side  of  my  leg.  He  got  really  close  to  my 

vagina,  but  I  didn’t  think  anything  of  it  at  the  time,  and  he 

didn't  touch  my  vagina,  so  I  didn’t  think  anything  of  it. 

I 

kinda  just  let  it  go.  It  was  about  last  Thursday  that  it  had 

happen  [s/c],  no  I  did  not  give  him  permission  to  touch  me 

in  anyway  shape  or  form. 

13. 

On  that  date,  after  Student  B.P.  reported  Respondent's  alleged 

misconduct  and  behavior,  Ms.  Cuizon  contacted  Principal  Napoleon.  He  contacted 

Gary  Schwartzwald,  the  District's  Director  of  Human  Resources.  The  District  took  the 

allegations  seriously  and  placed  Respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave.  Mr. 

Schwartzwald  instructed  the  site  administrators  to  interview  other  students.  Ms.  Cuizon 

interviewed  and  obtained  statements  from  three  other  students.  She  selected  students 

that  she  believed  would  be  honest.  She  did  not  interview  any  of  the  students  who  were 

in  the  physical  education  class  with  Student  B.P. 

14. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Detective  Ted  Mansour,  of  the  El  Cajon  Police 

Department,  arrived  at  the  campus  at  or  about  2:00  p.m.  He  met  with  Officer  Ehlers 

and  discussed  Student  B.P.’s  statements.  Detective  Mansour  instructed  Officer  Ehlers 

11

to  interview  other  students.  By  the  time  that  Detective  Mansour  arrived,  the  District 

had  placed  Respondent  on  administrative  leave.  A  criminal  investigation  was 

conducted,  and  no  criminal  charges  were  filed  against  Respondent. 

15. 

On  January  25,  2017,  Student  N.H.  drafted  and  submitted  the  following 

statement: 

So  I  have  noticed  this  for  a  while  but  didn’t  think  about 

reporting  it  until  now.  Coach  Barney  has  a  tendency  to 

touch  female  students  inappropriately.  He  would  touch 

them  around  the  shoulders  and  boob  area  then  make 

comments  about  our  body's  [s/d  and  stare  at  my?  boobs 

and  butts.  I  do  not  feel  comfortable  around  him.  He 

sometimes  grabs  their  thighs  and  asks  if  they  are  sore.  1am 

99.9%  sure  he  touched  B.P.’s  boob  on  Monday.  He  makes 

comments  about  our  bodies  in  bikinis  and  stuff. 

16. 

On  January  27,  2017,  Student  T.S.  provided  the  following  written 

statement: 

Coach  Barney  Is  a  good  person  &  coach.  He  ALWAYS  asks  if 

he  can  touch  you  to  fix  your  form  or  show  you  what 

muscles  you  are  working.  When  doing  this  activity,  you  can 

ask  all  of  his  students  [sc]  and  they  will  agree  with  what  I 

sald. 

  

>  N.H.  testified  that  she  should  have  written  “their”  and  not  “my.” 

12

17. 

On  February  17,  2017,  the  District  met  with  Respondent  to  get  “his  side 

of  the  story.”  Present  at  the  meeting  were  Respondent,  Respondent's  attorney, 

Principal  Napoleon,  Ms.  Cuizon,  Mr.  Schwartzwald,  Holly  Scarella  (Mr.  Schwartzwald’s 

assistant)  and  an  attorney  who  represented  the  District.  With  the  exception  of  the 

attorneys  and  Ms.  Scarella,  the  same  individuals  testified  during  the  hearing.  During 

this  meeting,  Respondent  admitted  the  following: 

e 

He  touches  students  when  providing  exercise  instruction  instead  of 

modeling  proper  technique. 

e 

He  touches  students  on  the  hamstring  which is  just  below  the 

buttocks. 

e 

He  uses  two  fingers  and  touched  student  B.P.  along  and  just  below 

the  collar  bones,  a  few  inches  above  her  breasts. 

e 

He  makes  statements  such  as:  “Work  your  booty,  tighten  your  booty, 

you  can  have  the  best  booty  ever”  and  “Bring  the  bar  down  to  your 

nipples”  or  something  similar  to  that  effect  rather  than  using 

anatomic  terms. 

e 

e 

He  does  not  teach  students  the  names  of  muscles,  or  muscle  groups. 

He  emphasizes  the  importance  of  exercise  to  improve  appearance  as 

opposed  to  improving  health  and  fitness. 

e 

He  touches  students  when  providing  exercise  instruction  instead  of 

modeling  proper  technique. 

13

18. 

Prior  to  filing  charges  in  this  case,  on  May  23,  2017,  Ms.  Mottershaw  and 

Mr.  Schwartzwald  met  with  Student  B.P.  At  that  time,  Student  B.P.  retold  her 

interactions  with  Respondent.  Student  B.P.  described  and  demonstrated  on  her  body 

how  Respondent  had  touched  her.  Ms.  Mottershaw  found  Student  B.P.'s  statements  to 

be  consistent  with  her  prior  statements  and  to  be  credible  and  trustworthy. 

19. 

Upon  completion  of  the  investigation,  the  District  determined  that  cause 

existed  to  dismiss  Respondent,  and  filed  the  Notice  and  Statement  of  Charges. 

20. 

In  order  to  ascertain  whether  Respondent  inappropriately  touched 

Student  B.P.  and  other  students  and/or  made  inappropriate  statements  in  the 

classroom,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  evidence. 

21. 

Student  N.H.  testified  as  a  witness  in  this  proceeding.  She  explained  that 

she  was  uncomfortable  in  Respondent's  class  but  did  not  think  to  report  it  until  she 

provided  her  written  statement.  Overall,  her  testimony  was  consistent  with  her  written 

statement,  with  one  exception.  In  the  written  statement,  she  said:  “He  would  touch 

them  around  the  shoulders  and  boob  area  and  then  make  comments  about  our  body's 

[s/c]  and  stare  at  my  boobs  and  butts.”  She  testified  that  she  should  have  said:  ”... 

then  make  comments  about  their  bodies  and  stare  at  their  boobs  and  butts.” 

22. 

 Inhis  testimony,  Respondent  explained  how  he  taught  weight  training 

classes.  He  had  machines  and  free  weights  in  his  classroom.  When  students  were  new 

to  the  class,  over  a  two  to  three-day  period  of  time,  he  would  demonstrate  how  to  use 

the  machines  or  weights,  talk  the  students  through  the  movements  and  then  have  the 

students  demonstrate.  When  he  taught  bench  press,  Respondent  told  the  students  to 

bring  the  bar  to  the  nipple  or  nipple  line.  He  explained  that  he  did  so  because,  earlier 

in  the  year,  he  told  the  students  to  bring  the  bar  to  their  chest;  one  student  did  so  and 

14

was  injured;  so,  he  used  more  specific  language.  Further,  Respondent  explained  that 

when  doing  a  bench  press,  there  needs  to  be  a  “spotter,”  someone  who  stands  behind 

the  student  to  make  sure  the  person  can  lift  the  weight  or  help  if  the  student  is  having 

a  hard  time  with  the  weight  or  to  protect  the  student  from  injury. 

Respondent  testified  that  his  greatest  concern  was  the  safety  of  the  students. 

He  touched  students  in  order  to  assure  that  the  students  were  not  injured. 

23. 

 Inhis  testimony,  Respondent  denied  that,  on  January  19,  2017,  or  any 

date,  he  had  a  conversation  with  B.P.  about  the  jeans  she  was  wearing.  He  had  no 

memory  of  whether  she  wore  ripped  jeans  on  that  date.  Respondent  denied  that  he 

wiped  dirt  off  B.P.’s  jeans.  He  denied  that  he  ever  placed  his  hand  on  her  thigh,  near 

her  vagina. 

24. 

The  District's  investigation  was  not  optimal.  The  District  did  not  question 

the  students  who  were  present  in  the  physical  education  class  or  the  Maverick  Hour 

during  the  time  that  Student  B.P.  alleged  the  misconduct  occurred.  There  was  some 

inconsistency  in  testimony;  for  example,  Mr.  Napoleon  testified  that,  on  January  24, 

2017,  he  was  present  on  campus  and  in  the  meeting  when  Respondent  was  placed  on 

paid  administrative  leave.  In  fact,  he  was  not.  Mr.  Schwartzwald  did  not  ensure  that  the 

investigation  was  done  properly  and  that  the  notes  were  taken  accurately  during  the 

meetings.  There  was  some  question  about  whether  Student  N.H.  was  present  in  class 

on  the  date  that  Student  N.H.  alleged  that  she  observed  Respondent  touch  B.P.’s 

breasts. 

Nevertheless,  regarding  the  most  salient  issues,  Student  B.P.’s  statements  to  Ms. 

Raimond,  Ms.  Cuizon,  Officer  Ehlers  and  Ms.  Mottershaw  were  consistent.  Her  oral 

statements  and  testimony  were  consistent  with  her  written  statements.  Most 

15

significantly,  despite  some  inconsistencies,  the  statements  of  B.P.  and  N.H.  were 

consistent  with  Respondent's  statements. 

25. 

On  January  23,  2017,  Student  B.P.  attended  Respondent's  second  period 

weight  training  class  for  the  first  time.  She  was  not  enrolled  in  that  class.  He  instructed 

her  to  make  arrangements  to  be  enrolled  in  his  class. 

On  this  date,  he  had  Student  B.P.  work  on  her  upper  body.  Respondent  taught 

her  how  to  use  the  bench  press.  He  had  a  student  demonstrate.  Student  B.P.  did  not 

do  it  properly.  Respondent  described  her  as  uncoordinated;  she  brought  the  bar  to  her 

ribs.  Respondent  told  her  “to  bring  the  bar  to  your  nipples  and  then  back  up.” 

26. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  returned  to  the  physical  education 

class. 

27. 

On  this  date,  Student  B.P.  told  Respondent  that  she  was  hurt,  and  he  told 

her  that  he  believed  that  she  was  sore.  Respondent  testified  that  they  discussed  the 

issue  and  she  insisted  that  she  was  hurt,  not  sore.  He  asked  her  to  do  an  exercise,  and 

she  said  that  she  was  not  able  to  do  so.  He  talked  to  her  about  checking  to  see  if  she 

was  sore  or  injured,  explained  how  he  would  do  so  and  asked  her  permission  to  do  so; 

according  to  Respondent,  she  authorized  him  to  touch  her.  Respondent  took  two 

fingers  on  his  right  hand,  poked  the  front  of  her  shoulder,  in  the  upper  chest  and  at 

her  collar  bone.  He  was  trying  to  determine  if  the  muscle  had  knotted  or  if  there  was  a 

pulled  muscle.  Based  on  his  assessment,  Respondent  explained  to  Student  B.P.  that 

she  was  sore,  not  hurt  and  that  the  soreness  comes  from  lactic  acid  buildup;  he  told 

her,  to  get  rid  of  the  soreness,  she  needed  to  stretch  and  to  drink  lots  of  water. 

In  Respondent's  opinion,  he  was  qualified  to  assess  Student  B.P.  because  he  had 

worked  as  a  coach  for  26  years  and  worked  with  a  college  trainer.  However,  he 

16

acknowledged  that  he  had  no  formal  education  or  training  to  assess  a  student  for 

injury. 

According  to  Respondent,  he  assessed  Student  B.P.  rather  than  send  her  to  the 

nurse's  office  for  evaluation  because  of  a  discussion  that  occurred  at  a  staff  meeting 

he  attended.  Both  the  nurse  and  the  principal  said  that  too  many  students  were  going 

to  the  nurse's  office,  and  the  students  needed  to  be  checked  before  being  sent  to  the 

nurse's  office.  Though  Ms.  Raimond  and  Mr.  Napoleon  testified  as  witnesses,  neither 

confirmed  Respondent's  interpretation  of  this  meeting. 

28. 

Onher  second  day  in  class,  Respondent  had  Student  B.P.  work  her  lower 

body.  Among  other  things,  he  had  her  work  on  donkey  kicks.  He  had  another  student 

demonstrate,  and  Respondent  instructed  Student  B.P.  However,  Student  B.P.  did  it 

wrong.  Respondent  testified  that  he  went  down  on  his  right  knee,  put  his  hand  on  her 

shoelace  on  top  of  her  shoe  with  his  right  hand;  he  told  her  to  tighten  her  hamstring; 

she  did  not  and  asked  what  was  a  hamstring;  he  explained  that  it  was  on  the  back  of 

her  leg;  he  took  two  fingers,  closed  his  fist  and  tapped  it.  He  told  her  to  tighten  it  and 

could  see  the  hamstring  contract.  Then  he  raised  her  leg  with  his  right  hand  twice  and 

told  her  to  do  it.  She  did  it  correctly. 

29. 

Onthe  same  date,  Respondent  admitted  that  he  told  Student  B.P.  that 

she  had  a  strong  core.  He  explained  that  he  did  so  because  she  demonstrated  that  she 

was  “strong”  when  she  performed  a  series  of  exercises;  he  told  the  students  when  they 

were  strong;  if  they  were  weak,  he  told  them  the  areas  that  could  use  some 

improvement  and  gave  exercises  they  could  do  to  help  that  issue. 

30. 

Respondent  admitted  that,  in  his  class,  he  used  the  word  “booty”  and 

said,  “you  are  going  to  look  so  amazing  this  summer  in  a  bikini.”  He  explained  that  he 

17

did  so  to  motivate  the  students.  He  asked  students  what  their  goals  were  in  the  class. 

One  student  said  that  she  wanted  a  better  “booty”  and  another  student  said  that  she 

wanted  to  look  good  in  a  bikini  during  the  summer.  Another  reason  was  it  was  his  way 

of  telling  the  students  to  dress  appropriately  for  class  the  next  day  because  the 

students  did  not  have  lockers.  On  January  23,  2017,  he  said,  “we  will  work  our  booties 

tomorrow.”  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  direct  the  language  to  Student  B.P. 

Nevertheless,  Student  B.P.  felt  that  he  did. 

Respondent  described  teaching  physical  education  as  his  dream  job.  Both  Ms. 

Raimond  and  Officer  Ehlers  agreed  that  Respondent  was  motivating  his  students. 

31. 

Respondent  did  not  dispute  that  he  had  a  conversation  with  Student  B.P. 

about: 

e 

e 

e 

e 

Whether  she  had  a  boyfriend? 

What  guys  liked  her  at  school? 

Did  she  have  a  driver's  license? 

Did  she  have  a  job? 

He  was  going  to  help  her  find  a  job. 

Respondent  explained  that  he  asked  about  her  boyfriend  because  she  and 

another  boy  in  the  class  appeared  to  be  flirting;  he  did  not  want  to  pair  them  in  the 

class  if  they  had  a  relationship.  He  asked  about  what  guys  liked  her  at  school 

because  he  was  getting  to  know  her  as  he  had  been  instructed  to  do  during 

Maverick  Hour.  He  had  been  instructed  to  get  to  know  students  so  that  if  they  had 

a  particular  problem  that  needed  counseling  the  student  could  receive  assistance. 

18

He  asked  about  whether  she  drove  and  if  she  had  a  job  because  a  former  athlete 

that  he  knew  asked  if  he  could  recommend  anyone  for  a  job;  he  felt  that  she  would 

qualify  because  she  was  a  senior  and  had  good  class  attendance. 

32. 

Teaching  physical  education  is  Respondent's  dream  teaching  position.  He 

established  that  he  motivated  some  of  his  students.  He  treated  other  students  in  the 

same  manner  as  he  did  Student  B.P.  He  touched  his  students  because  of  his  concern 

about  injury  for  the  students.  According  to  Respondent,  staff  (including  Principal 

Napoleon,  Ms.  Cuizon,  Officer  Ehlers  and  Ms.  Raimond)  observed  him  teach  students, 

observed  him  touch  students,  and  heard  him  speak  to  the  students  in  the  manner  he 

described.  However,  the  evidence  did  not  support  his  testimony,  and,  in  fact,  was  to 

the  contrary.  Principal  Napoleon  testified  that,  though  sometimes  he  worked  out  with 

the  students,  he  did  not  hear  Respondent  use  such  language  in  his  classes  or  observe 

him  touch  students.  However,  based  upon  Respondent's  admissions,  in  Principal 

Napoleon's  opinion,  Respondent  behaved  inappropriately. 

33. 

Zachery  Peck,  a  retired  teacher,  testified  as  a  witness  in  this  proceeding 

regarding  the  duties  and  obligations  of  a  physical  education  teacher.  He  worked 

between  September  1985  and  June  2015.  Between  2004  and  2014,  he  taught  physical 

education,  including  weightlifting.  Typically,  he  demonstrated  the  exercise  but  might 

have  a  student  who  was  proficient  demonstrate  the  exercise.  One  of  his  concerns  were 

things  that  could  negatively  affect  a  student's  back,  spine  or  neck.  If  he  saw  students 

doing  something  in  that  area,  he  would  touch  them,  push  their  back  in,  straighten 

them.  Mr.  Peck  did  not  remember  touching  the  students  a  lot  for  purposes  of 

instruction.  When  a  student  complained  of  being  sore,  he  did  not  touch  the  student's 

collar  bone  and/or  shoulder  because  he  did  not  have  the  ability  or  knowledge to  judge 

19

that  the  student  was  sore  based  on  touching  the  student;  so,  he  would  not  have  done 

that. 

When  he  taught  weight  training,  Mr.  Peck  did  not  touch  students  as 

Respondent  admitted  he  touched  his  students.  When  Mr.  Peck  taught  weight  training, 

he  did  not  use  the  language  that  Respondent  admitted  he  used  in  class. 

34. 

Despite  Respondent's  denials,  Student  B.P.'s  version  of  the  events  that 

transpired  was  more  credible  than  Respondent's  version 

35. 

The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  lifted  Student  B.P.’s  shirt,  “play 

punched”  her  twice  and  told  her  that  “she  had  a  nice  core.” 

36. 

The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  helped  Student  B.P.  squat, 

stood  behind  her  and  placed  his  hands  on  her  lower  hips  as  she  squatted. 

37. 

Based  on  N.H.'s  testimony  as  well  as  Respondent's,  it  was  established 

that  Respondent  touched  females  inappropriately;  he  touched  them  around  their 

shoulders  and  “boob”  areas;  he  made  comments  about  their  bodies  and  stared  at  their 

“boobs  and  butts.”  He  grabbed  “thighs”  and  asked  if  they  were  sore.  He  made 

comments  about  female  students’  bodies  and  “stuff.”  Respondent  caused  N.H.  to  feel 

uncomfortable  in  his  class. 

38. 

Based  on  the  facts,  it  was  established  that  Respondent's  misconduct  and 

inappropriate  statements  violated  the  Board's  policy  that  set  forth  its  expectation  of 

certificated  employees.  (Board  Policy  No.  4119.21).  Respondent  repeatedly  violated 

this  Board  policy. 

39. 

Based  on  the  facts,  it  was  established  that  Respondent's  misconduct  and 

inappropriate  statements  violated  the  Board's  policies  that  prohibit  discrimination, 

20

intimidation,  harassment  and  bullying  (Board  Policy  Nos.  0410,  4119.11,  5131.2, 

5145.3,  AR5145.3,  and  5145.7).  He  repeatedly  violated  these  Board  policies. 

40. 

In  accordance  with  the  Superior  Court's  order,  the  Commission 

disregarded  factual  allegations  that  occurred  more  than  four  years  ago  as  detailed  in 

the  Statement  of  Charges  and  during  the  hearing. 

41. 

|  During  the  hearing,  Respondent  provided  an  explanation  for  his  acts 

and  statements  during  the  2016-2017  school  year  (until  January  24,  2017).  At  no 

time  did  he  appear  to  understand  that  his  conduct  or  statements  could  be 

misconstrued.  At  no  time  did  he  express  appreciation  for  the  wrongfulness  of  his 

misconduct.  Respondent  expressed  remorse  for  his  misconduct  because  it  resulted  in 

discipline,  not  because  it  was  inappropriate  or  because  of  the  impact  it  had  on 

colleagues  or  students. 

42. 

The  District's  administrators  have  lost  confidence  in  Respondent's  ability 

to  meet  the  expectations  of  teachers  in  the  District. 

43. 

In  briefs  and  during  oral  argument,  the  parties  made  factual  and  legal 

arguments  in  support  of  their  positions.  After  consideration  of  the  foregoing,  the 

Statement  of  Charges,  the  exhibits  presented  during  the  hearing,  and  relevant  sections 

of  the  record  of  the  proceeding,  the  Commission  rejected  the  factual  arguments  made 

by  Respondent. 

21

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Statutory  Authority 

1, 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Cal.  Educ.  Code,  &§  44934  and  44944.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  specifies  the  permissible  causes  for 

termination  of  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the 

process  for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  and 

sets  forth  the  Commission's  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing 

board  must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  teacher  for 

unprofessional  conduct  or  unsatisfactory  performance. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a),  states: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act 

upon  any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least 

45  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or 

its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee 

against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the 

unprofessional  conduct,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with 

such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such 

particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to 

22

correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds 

for  the  charge.... 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

6. 

The  “burden  of  proof”  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the 

trier  of  fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its 

nonexistence.  (Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm's  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121, 

1128.) 

7. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that 

the  evidence  on  one  side  of  an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than, 

the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of  the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or 

quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the  evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is 

addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force 

than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171 

Cal.APP.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Grounds  for  Dismissal 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

8. 

The  term  “immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to 

the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  The  term  “immoral 

conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative 

of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless 

conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the 

23

community,  and  as  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

“Immoral  conduct”  is  not  confined  to  sexual  matters.  It  includes  an  inconsiderate 

attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  is  sometimes  synonymous  with 

“dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of  Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified 

School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d.  808,  811,  noting  that  no  other  California 

cases  had  previously  defined  the  term  “immoral  conduct.”) 

9. 

“Immoral  conduct”  is  conduct  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public 

and  is  not  confined  to  sexual  matters.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission 

on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466) 

10. 

Immoral  conduct  cannot  be  considered  in  the  abstract.  It  must  be 

considered  in  the  context  in  which  the  Legislature  has  considered  it,  as  conduct  which 

is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public;  more  specifically,  conduct  which  is 

hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  school  community.  In  providing  standards  to  guide  school 

boards  in  placing  restraints  on  conduct  of  teachers,  the  Legislature  is  concerned  with 

the  welfare  of  the  school  community.  Its  objective  is  the  protection  of  students  from 

corruption.  This  is 

a  proper  exercise  of  the  power  of  a  state  to  abridge  personal  liberty 

and  to  protect  larger  interests.  But  reasonableness  must  be  the  governing  criterion. 

(Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  224.)  The  phrase  “immoral 

conduct”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Education  Code  denotes  immoral  or 

unprofessional  conduct  or  moral  turpitude  of  the  teacher  that  renders  the  teacher 

unfit  to  teach.  (Jb/d/.  at  p.  225.) 

11. 

“As  between  a  teacher  and  his  student,  ‘(a)n  important  part  of  the 

education...  is  the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to 

necessary  discipline.  Lessons  are  learned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.’ 

(Citation)  ‘A  teacher...  in  the  public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and 

24

pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be  followed 

by  the  [students]  coming  under  [his]  care  and  protection  ...  The  teaching  by  example 

as  well  as  precept,  of  obedience  to  properly  constituted  authority  and  discipline 

necessary  to  a  well-ordered  society,  is  an  important  part  of  education.’”  (Watson  v. 

State  Bd.  of  Education  (1971)  22  Cal.App.3d  559,  565.) 

12. 

“The  calling  of  an  educator  is  so  intimate,  its  duties  so  delicate,  the  things 

in  which  a  teacher  might  prove  unworthy  or  would  fail  are  so  numerous  that  they  are 

incapable  of  enumeration  in  any  legislative  enactment.  The  educator's  ability  to  inspire 

children  and  to  govern  them,  his  power  as  an  educator,  and  the  character  for  which  he 

stands  are  matters  of  major  concern  in  an  educator's  selection  and  retention...  An 

educator  in  the  public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  light 

of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  students 

coming  under  his  care  and  protection.”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v. 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1463-64.) 

13. 

The  governing  board  of  a  district  is  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the 

schools  under its  jurisdiction,  their  standards  of  education,  and  the  moral,  mental,  and 

physical  welfare  of  the  pupils  during  school  hours.  An  important  part  of  the  education 

of  any  child  is  the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to 

necessary  discipline.  Lessons  are  learned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.  “Book 

learning”  is  only  a  phase  of  the  important  lessons  a  child  should  learn  in  school.  (Pa/o 

Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967, 

970-71.) 

14. 

Rejecting  statutory  terms,  such  as  “immorality,” 

oo 

“unprofessional  conduct, 

uf 

or  “moral  turpitude”  as  overly  broad  to  use  as  grounds  for  discipline  of  public  school 

teachers,  the  Morrison  court  created  a  seven-part  test  to  assess  whether  a 

25

misbehaving  teacher  is  fit  to  teach.  (Broney  v.  California  Comm.  on  Teacher 

Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  466.)  “Because  such  terms  as  ‘immoral,’ 

‘unprofessional,’  or  ‘involving  moral  turpitude’  are  too  broad  and  amorphous  to  be 

used  as  a  basis  for  the  termination  of  a  professional  license,  it  must  be  shown  the 

conduct  in  question  indicates  an  unfitness  to  engage  in  the  profession.”  (/d.  at  pp. 

473-74.) 

15. 

Since  the  term  “immoral  conduct”  is  vague  and  broad,  whether  the 

conduct  demonstrates  an  unfitness  to  teach  must  be  measured  against  seven  criteria 

set  forth  in  Morrison.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  Unified  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994) 

28  Cal.App.4th  369,  383.)° 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

16. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determinative  test  in  teacher  dismissal  cases 

is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  “Fitness  to  teach”  is  probably  a  question  of 

ultimate  fact.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980) 

102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560-561.) 

17. 

“Evident”  is  defined  as  “clear  to  the  vision  and  understanding.”  “Unfit”  is 

defined  as  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable;  incompetent;  and 

physically  or  mentally  unsound”  and  “unsuitable,  incompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a 

particular  use  or  service.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  v. 

Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

  

later  in  this  Decision. 

6  The  Morrison  factors  (sometimes  also  referred  to  as  criteria)  are  discussed 

26

18. 

In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.  App.4th  1429,  the  court  noted  the  two  parallel,  yet 

contradictory,  line  of  cases  regarding  “unfit  for  service.”  One  line  of  cases  equated  that 

term  with  “unprofessional  conduct,”  and  the  other  line  of  cases  distinguished  the 

definition  of  the  two.  In  deciding  that  the  latter  line  of  cases  was  the  correct  way  to 

evaluate  “unfit  to  serve,”  and  complied  with  the  rules  of  statutory  construction.  The 

Woodland  court  concluded  that  “unprofessional  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for 

service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same  thing.  Although  conduct  constituting  “evident 

unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute  “unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is 

not  always  true.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be 

attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not  necessary  for  a  finding  of 

“unprofessional  conduct.”  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not  disregard  the  criteria  for 

unfitness  set  out  in  Morrison  where  that  court  concluded  that  “unprofessional 

conduct”  meant  conduct  showing  a  teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria  must  be 

analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness 

for  service.  If  it  does,  the  next  step  was  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is 

“evident”,  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament. 

(Jd.  at  pp.  1442-1445.)  A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  can  be  made  if  the  evidence,  taken 

in  the  aggregate,  shows  that  retaining  the  employee  would  pose a  significant  danger 

of  psychological  harm  to  students  and  fellow  students.  (/a!  at  p.  1456.) 

19. 

To  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a  nexus 

between  government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from 

the  principle  that  “[no]  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of 

factors  unconnected  with  the  responsibilities  of  that  employment.”  (San  Diego  Unified 

School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th 

1454,  1463.).  “Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes 

2/7

a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that 

one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectation  of  the  employing  school  district.’”  (San 

Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 

Cal.App.4th  1120,  1142-43.) 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  LAWS 

20. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  ..  .  stubborn;  persevering  ...  constantly 

repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 

Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  pertains  to  unintentional  as 

well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that  a  single 

violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it  is 

the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate. 

(Jd.  at  p.84.) 

21. 

Aviolation  of  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then 

the  District  must  further  establish  that  employee's  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or 

regulations  was  “persistent,”  i.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 

School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 

1176,  1183.)  Isolated  incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period 

of  time  are  not  generally  considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.) 

MORRISON  FACTORS 

22. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  identified  seven  factors  to 

consider  when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the 

28

likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the 

degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 

the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 

aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 

praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 

likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 

discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of 

the  teacher. 

23. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate. 

When  a  camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load 

to  see  which  one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the 

totality  of  the  offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  Schoo!  Dist.  v.  Commission 

on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

24. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  476.)  The 

pertinent  Morrison  factors  are  considered  in  this  decision. 

Other  Disciplinary  Considerations 

25. 

An  administrator's  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt 

regarding  the  educator's  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that 

may  be  considered.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

29

Evaluation 

26. 

In  making  the  legal  conclusions  in  this  case,  as  ordered  in  the  writ  of 

mandate,  the  Commission  did  not  consider  the  evidence  that  was  four  years  or  more 

before  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  filed.  Nor  did  the  Commission  consider  the 

alleged  cause  for  dismissal  of  unprofessional  conduct,  . 

27. 

In  making  legal  conclusions,  the  Commission  considered  the  legal 

arguments  made  by  the  parties  in  their  briefs  and  during  closing  argument.  The 

Commission  did  not  find  Respondent's  legal  arguments  persuasive. 

28. 

The  evidence  must  not  only  be  sufficient  to  support  a  finding  that 

Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  but  also  a  finding  that  his  misconduct  met  the 

criteria  for  grounds  for  dismissal. 

29. 

While  working  as  a  physical  education  teacher,  in  his  weight  training 

class,  Respondent  engaged  in  the  following  conduct: 

e 

He  touched  students  when  providing  exercise  instruction  instead  of 

modeling  proper  technique. 

e 

He  touched  students  on  the  hamstring,  which is  just  below  the 

buttocks. 

e 

He  used  two  fingers  and  touched  student  B.P.  along  and  just  below 

the  collar  bones,  a  few  inches  above  her  breasts. 

e 

He  made  statements  such  as:  “Work  your  booty,” 

Wo 

“Tighten  your 

booty,” 

Wo 

“You  can  have  the  best  booty  ever”  and  “Bring  the  bar  down 

30

to  your  nipples”  or  something  similar  rather  than  using  anatomic 

terms. 

e 

e 

He  did  not  teach  students  the  names  of  muscles  or  muscle  groups. 

He  emphasized  with  his  students  the  importance  of  exercise  to 

improve  appearance  as  opposed  to  improving  health  and  fitness. 

28. 

Atno  time  has  Respondent  expressed  true  remorse  for  his  misconduct. 

At  no  time  did  Respondent  accept  responsibility  for  his  actions.  Instead,  he  sought  to 

justify  his  conduct  that  occurred  during  the  2016  —  2017  school  year  (until  January  24, 

2017).  There  was  no  evidence  presented  that  Respondent  appreciated  the 

wrongfulness  of  his  acts  or  his  bad  judgment. 

29. 

Respondent's  misconduct  and  inappropriate  language  evidence  his 

disregard  for  the  District's  primary  goals  and  expectations  that  come  with  the  teaching 

profession.  His  touching  and  making  inappropriate  and  unprofessional  comments, 

negatively  impacted  the  work  and  educational  environment.  Respondent's  conduct 

was  detrimental  to  the  District  and  its  students.  Respondent  was  fully  to  blame  for  his 

conduct.  He  is  not  a  model  of  good  behavior.  He  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  act  morally 

and  to  uphold  the  responsibilities  of  a  public  educator.  Respondent  has  no 

appreciation  for  the  wrongfulness  of  his  acts  and  misconduct;  as  such,  if  allowed  to 

retain  his  position,  it 

is  likely  that  he  will  engage  in  the  same  or  similar  misconduct 

again. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  it  was  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 

Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

31

30. 

The  facts  and  the  law  have  been  analyzed  to  determine  whether  it  was 

established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher  in  the  District. 

Specifically,  Respondent's  sexualizing,  harassing,  touching  and  inappropriate 

comments  and  actions  toward  female  students,  in  particular,  toward  Student  B.P.  have 

been  considered.  He  demonstrated  no  remorse  or  comprehension  that  his  conduct 

during  the  2016  -  2017  school  year  was  wrong  or  that  he  should  not  touch  students 

along  the  collarbone,  hips,  or  buttocks.  He  did  not  establish  that  he  learned  from  the 

experience  or  that  his  conduct  would  change  if  he  returned  to  the  classroom. 

Nevertheless,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent  was  evidently  unfit  to  teach.  The 

testimony  provided  by  Student  N.H.  was  vague,  and  the  timeline  was  limited  in  scope. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish 

that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(6),  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

31. 

The  facts  and  the  law  have  been  analyzed  to  determine  whether 

Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  rules  governing  his 

employment. 

Respondent  knew  or  should  have  known  of  the  Governing  Board's  policies  and 

expectations  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  including  Board  Policy  Nos. 

0410,  4119.11,  4119.21,  5131.2,  5137,  and  5145.7.  The  District  attached  copies  of  the 

foregoing  to  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Having  reviewed  the  foregoing  Board  policies 

and  the  facts,  it  was  determined  that  Respondent  repeatedly  violated  Board  Policy 

Nos.  0410,  4119.11,  4119.21,  5131.2,  5137,  and  5145.7. 

32

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  it  was  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 

Respondent  pursuant  to  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (8),  persistent  violation  or 

refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  of  the  District. 

32. 

|  Upon  the  filing  of  the  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  placed 

Respondent  on  immediate  unpaid  suspension.  In  his  Notice  of  Defense,  Respondent 

seeks  retroactive  pay,  retirement  contributions,  lost  fringe  benefits  and/or  medical  cost 

reimbursement  according  to  proof.  The  parties  disagree  regarding  the  procedure  that 

must  be  followed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939  and  whether  the 

Commission has  jurisdiction  to  issue  an  order  compelling  the  District  to  provide  back 

pay  and  benefits.  Respondent  offered  no  evidence  of  his  back  pay  or  benefits  during 

the  hearing.  The  Commission  determined  that  the  charges  support  dismissal  of 

Respondent  on  the  basis  of  immoral  conduct.  As  such,  he  is  not  entitled  to 

reinstatement  of  his  salary  and  benefits.  Thus,  it  is  not  necessary  to  address  the 

arguments  related  to  the  appropriate  procedure  to  file  pursuant  to  Code  section 

44939. 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

33

ORDER 

Joshua  Barney’s  appeal  of  his  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Grossmont 

Union  High  School  District  is  denied.  The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District's 

request  to  dismiss  Joshua  Barney  is  granted.  Joshua  Barney  is  dismissed  from 

employment  with  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District.  The  Notice  of  Intent  to 

Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  filed  against  Joshua  Barney  is  affirmed. 

DATED:  August  9,  2019 

DATED:  August  10,  2019 

DATED:  August  12,  2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

Kow  lardinabal 
RON  LARDIZABAL 

Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Charles  Mendoza 

CHARLES  MENDOZA 

A2— 

Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Vallera  Nolursow 

QA464I4EC5D26444— 

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Commission  Member 

34

BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JOSHUA  BARNEY, 

OAH  No.  2017090130 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School 

District  heard  this  matter  on  January  29,  30,  31,  and  February  1,  2018,  in  El  Cajon, 
California. 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  included  Charles  Mendoza,  Ron 

Lardizabal,  and  Vallera  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  who  served  as  chairperson. 

Ingrid  Meyers,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  the  law  firm  of  Dannis  Woliver  Kelley, 
represented  Julie  Mottershaw,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  of  the 
Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

Fern  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool,  &  Wax,  represented 

Joshua  Barney. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  February  2,  2018.' 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Joshua  Barney  (Respondent)  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  (District).  He  testified  that  he  holds  special 
education,  health  and  physical  education  credentials. 
  

'  The  hearing  concluded  on  February  1,  2018.  The  record  remained  open  for  the 

commission  members  to  deliberate,  which  occurred  on  February  2,  2018. 

On  February  2,  2018,  the  record  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted.

Respondent  described  his  career  with  the  District.  In  1992,  he  began  at  Chaparral 

High  School  as  a  campus  supervisor  in  a  classified  position.  He  commenced  his  career  as  a 
certificated  employee  with  the  District  m  1999.  Between  1999  and  2016,  he  taught  special 
education  at  Helix  High  School  (one  year),  Granite  Hills  High  School  (10  years),  Steele 
Canyon  High  School  (one  year),  returned  to  Granite  Hills  High  School  (one  year),  Santana 
High  School  (two  years),  Chaparral  High  School  (one  year)  and  [DEA  Center  High  School. 
During  the  2016-2017  school  year,  he  taught  physical  education  at  IDEA. 

2. 

Chaparral,  [DEA  and  Merit  Academy  are  physically  located  on  the  same 

campus.  The  administrators  for  all  three  schools  are  the  same  and  are  located  on  the  campus 
of  IDEA.  In  January  2017  and  on  the  date  of  hearing,  the  principal  was  David  Napoleon; 
there  were  two  vice-principals,  and  one  of  the  vice-principals  was  Dawn  Cuizon.  In 
addition,  the  campus  resource  officer  was  Darren  Ehlers,  and  the  school  nurse  was  Lonnie 
Rannond. 

Chaparral  is  a  continuation  school:  the  students  who  attend: 

(1)  are  on  expulsion 
from  the  District  or  enrolled  in  schools  outside  the  District,  or  (2)  need  special  education 
services  or  a  smaller  environment. 

IDEA  is  an  “alternative  school  choice”  which  means  that  any  student  within  the 
District  can  apply  to  attend.  IDEA  is  project-based  learning.  The  focus  is  on  restorative 
practices  and  competency  based  grading.  [tis  asmaller  school  environment.  The  school 
tends  to  draw  students  who  come  from  home  schools  or  charter  schools  or  who  are  on 
campus  because  they  are  anxious  about  going  to  a  large  school.  At  IDEA,  there  are  smaller 
classrooms;  students  demonstrate  their  knowledge  by  doing  projects  or  presentations  as  well 
as  using  technology.  In  addition,  at  IDEA,  career  pathways  programs  are  available  to 
students,  such  as  construction,  cooking  and  floral  design. 

On  the  class  schedule  is  a  class  entitled  “Maverick  Hour.”  Mr.  Napoleon  described 

[tis  a  time  and  place  for  some  student  counseling,  to  talk  to 

Maverick  Hour  as  a  combination  of  homeroom  and  tutorial,  a  bit  of  a  teacher-student 
mentorship.  The  class  is  divided  into  grade  levels;  so,  there  is  ninth  grade  Maverick  Hour, 
tenth  grade  Maverick  Hour,  etc. 
a  specific  group  of  students,  and  for  the  students  to  get  additional  help.  Tutorials  are  held 
two  days  a  week.  Students  can  go  to  other  classrooms  if  the  teachers  im  the  classrooms 
arrange  this,  for  example  to  take  a  test  or  to  complete  a  science  laboratory.  At  IDEA,  durmg 
the  day,  typically,  even  ifa  student  has  completed  a  class  Cor  example  science)  project,  the 
student  does  not  typically  leave  the  class  to  go  to  another  class,  unless  there  is  a  valid  reason 
to  do  so. 

3. 

District  Board  Policy  No.  4119.21  sets  forth  the  District’s  fundamental 

expectations  of  its  certificated  employees  and  provides  “The  Governing  Board  expects 
District  employees  to  maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  to  follow  District  policies  and 
regulations,  and  to  abide  by  state  and  national  laws.  Employee  conduct  should  enhance  the 
integrity  of  the  District  and  the  goals  of  the  educational  program.”

4. 

Also,  the  District  has  policies  prohibiting  discrimination,  intimidation, 

harassment  and  bullying  for  all  of  1ts  educational  programs  and  activities.  (Board  Policy 
Nos.  0410,  4119.11,  5131.2,  and  5145.7.’) 

5. 

District  Policy/Administrative  Regulation  No.  4119.11  “Sexual  Harassment 

states:  “The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  is  committed  to  having  a  positive 
learning  and  working  environment  for  its  students  . 
harassment  of...  students  by  any  employee.”  Moreover,  District  policy  provides  relevant 
examples  of  sexual  harassment,  including  “unwelcome  graphic  verbal  comments  about  an 
individual’s  body,  unwelcome  touching,  patting,  pinching,  stroking,  squeezing,  tickling,  or 
brushing  against  a  person,  . 
.  [and]  [s]exist 
or  stereotyped  comments.” 

.  rating  a  person’s  sexuality  or  attractiveness  .. 

.  [and]  prohibits  unwelcome  sexual 

. 

. 

6. 

District  Board  Policy  No.  5137  “Positive  School  Climate”  explains  that,  “The 

Governing  Board  desires  to  enhance  student  learning  by  providing  an  orderly,  caring,  and 
nurturing  educational  and  social  environment  in  which  all  students  can  feel  safe  and  take 
pride  in  their  school  and  their  achievements.  The  school  environment  should  be 
characterized  by  positive  interpersonal  relationships  among  students  and  between  students 
and  staff.” 

7. 

As  of  January  2017,  for  two  quarters,  Student  B.P.  had  been  in  respondent’s 

Maverick  Hour.  He  “gave  her  a  bad  vibe”  from  the  first  day  of  class.  Typically,  she 
reported  to  Maverick  Hour  in  respondent’s  classroom,  and  he  authorized  her  to  go  to  Amy 
Reid’s  Maverick  Hour.  (Ms.  Reid  was  another  teacher  on  campus.)  On  January  23  and  24, 
2017,  Student  B.P.  attended  Respondent’s  physical  education/weight  training  class. 

8. 
education  class. 

In  January  2017,  Students  N.H.  and  T.S.  were  in  Respondent’s  physical 

9. 

On  August  10,  2017,  the  Statement  of  Charges  for  Dismissal  and  Immediate 

Unpaid  Suspension  was  filed  with  the  District’s  governing  board.  On  that  date,  Ms. 
Mottershaw,  in  her  official  capacity,  recommended  to  the  board  that  Respondent  be 
dismissed  from  employment  and  suspended  without  pay.  Her  recommendations  were 

  

*  In  addition  to  the  Board  policies  cited  in  this  finding,  the  District  cited  a  criminal 

statute,  Board  policy  and  Board  administrative  regulation  that  are  not  relevant  to  this 
proceeding  and  therefore  not  included. 

Penal  Code  section  243.4,  subdivision  (d)  is  a  criminal  statute,  and  the  District  has  no 

jurisdiction  to  file  criminal  charges. 

A  copy  of  Board  Policy  4011  was  not  included  as  part  of  Exhibit  B. 

Board  Policy  No.  5145.3  and  Administrative  Regulation  No.  5145.3  are  related  to 

students,  not  certificated  personnel

approved  by  the  board.  The  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  Respondent  engaged  in 
actionable  conduct,  as  set  forth  in: 

California  Education  Code®  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1) 
[immoral  conduct], 

Code  section  44932  subdivision  (a)(2)  [unprofessional  conduct], 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  [evident  unfitness  for 
service], 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)  [persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools 
by  the  state  board  or  by  the  district’s  governing  board; 

All  of  his  conduct  has  been  unprofessional  within  the  meaning 
of  Code  section  44933;  and 

Respondent’s  immoral  conduct  authorized  his  immediate 
suspension  under  Code  section  44933. 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to 
constitute  “cause”  for  dismissal  pursuant  to  Code  section  44932. 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to 
establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  pursuant 
to  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  44939. 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to 
establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct 
pursuant  to  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2). 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to 
establish  that  Respondent  was  unfit  for  service  pursuant  to  Code 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 

On  the  same  date,  by  letter,  Ms.  Mottershaw  informed  Respondent  of  the  foregoing 

and  his  right  to  a  hearing. 

10. 

On  August  21,  2017,  Respondent  filed  a  request  for  hearing  and  raised  the 

affirmative  defenses  that  included: 

  

>  Hereinafter  all  reference  is  to  the  California  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  stated.

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

The  facts  as  alleged  were  insufficient  as  a  matter  of  law  to 
establish  that  Respondent  engaged  in  persistent  violations  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools 
by  the  state  board  or  by  the  District’s  governing  board. 

The  District  suspended  Respondent  without  pay  but  failed  to 
allege  any  legal  basis  that  would  support  such  action; 
Respondent  sought  retroactive  pay,  retirement  contributions, 
lost  fringe  benefits  and/or  medical  cost  rermbursements 
according  to  proof. 

The  District  failed  to  provide  Respondent  with  evidence  upon 
which  it  relied  in  making  its  decision  as  is  required  by  law. 

Under  Government  Code  section  11506,  subdivision  (a)(2),  the 
Notice  did  not  state  acts  or  omissions  on  which  the  district  may 
dismiss  respondent. 

Under  Government  Code  section  11506,  subdivision  (a)(3),  the 
Accusation  was  so  indefinite  or  uncertain  that  Respondent  could 
not  identify  the  specific  grounds  for  dismissal  nor  prepare  his 
defense. 

11. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  reported  to  Ms.  Raimond  that  Respondent 

had  engaged  in  inappropriate  conduct  and  behavior.  After  Student  B.P.  reported  this 
information,  Ms.  Raimond  called  on  the  “site  only”  radio  for  an  administrator.  Ms.  Cuizon 
responded  to  the  site’s  nurse’s  office*.  Ms.  Cuizon  entered  the  nurse’s  office.  Ms.  Raimond 
asked  Student  B.P.  to  repeat  her  statement  to  Ms.  Cuizon.  Student  B.P.  did  so.  Because  Ms. 
Raimond’s  radio  call  was  unusual,  Officer  Ehlers  responded  as  well.  However,  Ms.  Cuizon 
waived  Officer  Ehlers  off,  indicating  that  he  should  not  enter  the  office. 

While  outside  the  office,  Officer  Ehlers  observed  that  Student  B.P.  was  visibly  upset 

(her  eyes  were  red  and  blurry;  she  was  wiping  her  eyes  and  trembling,  as  if  she  had  been 
crying),  while  she  talked  to  Ms.  Cuizon  and  Ms.  Raimond.  Initially,  he  did  not  get  involved. 
Officer  Ehlers  explained  how  the  “school  and  police  relationship”  is  supposed  to  work  on 
campus;  initially  the  administration  does  the  investigation  until  the  administrator  identifies 
possible  criminal  activity. 

  

*  Officer  Ehlers  described  the  physical  setup  of  the  nurse’s  office. 

It  was  temporary 
quarters  for  a  number  of  offices,  including  the  nurse’s  office  and  was  located  in  the  learning 
resource  center.  The  nurse’s  office  had  thick  glass,  making  it  visible  to  the  outside.

Thereafter,  Ms.  Cuizon  took  the  student  into  her  office,  asked  Officer  Ehlers  to  join 
them  and  asked  Student  B.P.  to  repeat  her  statement  in  Officer  Ehlers’s  presence.  Student 
B.P.  complied;  she  described  and  demonstrated  how  Respondent  touched  her.  He  instructed 
Student  B.P.  to  write  out  a  statement  on  school  forms.  In  the  meantime,  as  part  of  protocol, 
Officer  Ehlers  contacted  the  El  Cajon  Police  Department.  He  did  so  for  two  reasons;  in  his 
opinion,  the  conduct  alleged  could  constitute  child  abuse;  further,  he  knew  Student  B.P.  (he 
interacted  with  all  students  at  the  school),  and  he  knew  Respondent  (as  a  teacher  and  a 
football  coach).  Officer  Ehlers  wanted  a  fair  and  unbiased  investigation  conducted  by 
someone  who  did  not  know  either  of  them. 

12. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  completed  two  separate  statements.  Both 

were  provided  to  Officer  Ehlers  at  different  times. 

The  first  written  statement  was  drafted  at  11:50  a.m.  and  provided  to  Officer  Ehlers 

at  1:40  p.m. 

Barney  had  me  workout  my  arms  [on  Monday,  January  23, 
2017],  and  when  I  came  to  school  the  next  day  [he]  was 
touching  the  top  of  my  chest  asking  me  how  my  muscles  felt, 
then  [he]  went  and  grabbed  under  my  butt  and  told  me  it  was 
time  to  workout  my  “booty”  then  repeatedly  told  me  that  the  bar 
when  I’m  doing  a  bench  press  needed  to  come  down  and  touch 
my  “titty”  or  “nipple”  [sic]  This  has  been  going  on  for  a  couple 
of  days.  P’ve  been  in  his  maverick  for  almost  two  quarters,  [.sic| 
and  he  has  always  gave  me  a  bad  vibe,  [sic|  but  it  was  just 
recently  that  he  started  touching  me.  “Your  body  is  going  to 
look  so  amazing  in  a  bikini  this  summer”  he  said  that  to  me 
while  I  was  working  out  my  abs. 
“do  you  have  a  boyfriend?”  While  I  said  “no”  he  continued  to 
ask  me  questions  about  what  guys  at  school  liked  me,  and  when 
I  told  him  what  guys  I  think  might  like  me,  he  sounded  like  a 
jealous  boyfriend  then  asked  me  if  I  drove  yet  and  when  I  said 
“no”  he  said  “good  ...  oh  I  was  going  to  help  you  find  a  job.”  It 
made  no  sense.” 

In  maverick  hour,  he  asked  me 

The  second  statement  was  drafted  on  the  same  date  at  2:35  p.m.  Student  B.P. 

and  stated: 

I  was  wearing  jeans  with  a  rip,  [sic]  and  he  was  trying  to  rub  the 
rip  off  the  right  side  of  my  leg.  He  got  really  close  to  my 
vagina,  but  I  didn’t  think  anything  of  it  at  the  time,  and  he  didn’t 
I  kinda  just  let 
touch  my  vagina,  so  I  didn’t  think  anything  of  it. 

  

1:40  p.m.

°  Student  B.P.  wrote  this  statement  at  11:50  a.m.  She  gave  it  to  Officer  Ehlers  at 

It  was  about  last  Thursday  that  it  had  happen  [sic],  no  I 
it  go. 
did  not  give  him  permission  to  touch  me  in  anyway  shape  or 
form. 

13. 

On  that  date,  after  Student  B.P.  reported  Respondent’s  alleged  misconduct  and 

behavior,  Ms.  Cuizon  contacted  Principal  Napoleon.  He  contacted  Gary  Schwartzwald,  the 
District’s  Director  of  Human  Resources.  The  District  took  the  allegations  seriously  and 
placed  Respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave.  Mr.  Schwartzwald  instructed  the  site 
administrators  to  interview  other  students.  Ms.  Cuizon  interviewed  and  obtained  statements 
from  three  other  students.  She  selected  students  that  she  believed  would  be  honest.  She  did 
not  interview  any  of  the  students  who  were  in  the  physical  education  class  with  Student  B.P. 

14. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Detective  Ted  Mansour,  of  the  El  Cajon  Police 

Department,  arrived  at  the  campus  at  or  about  2:00  p.m.  He  met  with  Officer  Ehlers  and 
discussed  Student  B.P.’s  statements.  Detective  Mansour  instructed  Officer  Ehlers  to 
interview  other  students.  By  the  time  that  Detective  Mansour  arrived,  the  District  had  placed 
Respondent  on  administrative  leave.  A  criminal  investigation  was  conducted,  and  no 
criminal  charges  were  filed  against  respondent. 

15. 

On  January  25,  2017,  Student  B.P.  drafted  another  statement  that  was  provided 

to  Ms.  Cuizon  and  Officer  Ehlers  at  9:12  a.m.,  which  stated: 

I  was  standing  there  talking  to  Nicole  or  Moira,  I  can’t 
remember,  but  Barney  lifted  up  my  shirt,  play  punched  me 
twice,  then  told  me  I  have  a  really  nice  core. 

Barney  then  began  to  help  me  squat  yesterday  and  stood  behind 
me,  placed  his  hands  on  my  lower  hips  and  began  to  help  me  go. 

16. 

On  January  25,  2017.  Student  N.H.  drafted  and  submitted  the  following: 

So  I  have  noticed  this  for  a  while  but  didn’t  think  about 
reporting  it  until  now.  Coach  Barney  has  a  tendency  to  touch 
female  students  inappropriately.  He  would  touch  them  around 
the  shoulders  and  boob  area  then  make  comments  about  our 
body’s  [sic]  and  stare  at  my®  boobs  and  butts. 
comfortable  around  him.  He  sometimes  grabs  their  thighs  and 
asks  if  they  are  sore. 
I  am  99.9%  sure  he  touched  B.P.’s  boob 
on  Monday.  He  makes  comments  about  our  bodies  in  bikinis 
and  stuff. 

I  do  not  feel 

Officer  Ehlers  interviewed  Student  N.H.  Ms.  Cuizon  did  not  interview  Student  N.H. 

and  was  not  present  when  Officer  Ehlers  did  so. 

  

°  N.H.  testified  that  she  should  have  written  “their”  and  not  “my”.

17. 

On  January  27,  2017,  Student  T.S.  provided  the  followimg  statement: 

Coach  Barmey  is  4  good  person  &  coach.  He  ALWAYS  asks  if 
he  can  touch  you  to  fix  your  form  or  show  you  what  muscles 
you  are  working.  When  doing  this  activity,  you  can  ask  all  of 
his  students  [sic]  and  they  will  agree  with  what  I  said. 

18. 

On  February  17,  2017,  the  District  met  with  Respondent  to  get  “his  side  of  the 
story.”  Present  at  the  meeting  were  Respondent,  Respondent's  attorney,  Principal  Napoleon, 
Ms.  Cuizon,  Mr.  Schwartazwald,  Holly  Scarella  (Mr.  Schwartzwaid’s  assistant)  and  an 
attorney  who  represented  the  District.  During  this  meeting,  in  response  to  questions, 
Respondent  admitted  the  following: 

@ 

® 

e 

® 

e 

@ 

He  touches  students  when  providing  exercise  instruction  mstead 
of  modeling  proper  technique. 

He  touches  students  on  the  hamstring,  which  is  just  below  the 
buttocks. 

He  used  two  fingers  and  touched  student  B.P.  along  and  just 
below  the  collar  bones,  a  few  mches  above  her  breasts. 

Hermade  statements  such  as:  “Work  your  booty,  tighten  your 
booty,  you  can  have  the  best  booty  ever”  and  “Bring  the  bar 
down  to  your  nipples”  or  something  simular  to  that  effect  rather 
than  using  anatomic  terms. 

He  did  not  teach  students  the  names  of  muscles,  or  muscle 
QLOUPS. 

He  emphasizes  with  his  students  the  importance  of  exercise  to 
unprove  appearance  as  opposed  to  inyproving  health  and  fitness. 

19. 

Prior  to  filling  charges  in  this  case,  on  May  23,  2017,  Ms.  Mottershaw  and  Mr. 
Schwartzwaid  met  with  Student  BP.  At  that  time,  Student  B.P.  retold  her  interactions  with 
Respondent.  Student  B.P.  described  and  demonstrated  on  her  body  how  Respondent  had 
touched  her.  Ms.  Mottershaw  found  Student  B.P.’s  statements  to  be  consistent  with  her  prior 
statements.  Ms.  Mottershaw  found  these  statements  to  be  credible  and  trustworthy. 

20. 

Upon  completion  of  the  mvestigation,  the  District  determimed  that  cause 

existed  to  dismiss  Respondent  and  filed  the  Notice  and  Statement  of  Charges.

2h. 

in  order  to  ascertain  whether  Respondent  mappropriately  touched  Student  BP. 

and  other  students  and/or  made  inappropriate  statements  in  the  classroom,  the  evidence  was 
evaluated, 

The  District's  investigation  was  not  optimal.  The  District  did  not  question  the 
Students  who  were  present  in  the  physical  education  class  or  the  Maverick  Hour  during  the 
time  that  Student  BP.  alleged  the  misconduct  occurred.  There  was  some  inconsistency  in 
testimony;  for  example,  Mr.  Napoleon  testified  that,  on  January  24,  2017,  he  was  present  on 
campus  and  in  the  meeting  when  Respondent  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave.  In 
fact,  he  was  not.  Mr.  Schwartzwald  did  not  ensure  that  the  investigation  was  done  properly 

about  whether  Student  N.H.  was  present  m  class  on  the  date  that  Student  N.H.  alleged  that 
she  observed  Respondent  touch  B.P.’s  breasts. 

Nevertheless,  regarding  the  most  salient  issues,  Student  B.P.’s  statements  to  Ms. 

Ratnond,  Ms.  Cuizon,  Officer  Ehlers  and  Ms.  Mottershaw  were  consistent.  Her  oral 
statements  were  consistent  with  her  written  statements.  Most  significantly,  despite  some 
inconsistencies,  the  statements  of  B.P.  and  N.H.  were  consistent  with  Respondent’s 
Statements. 

Further,  based  on  his  on  testimony,  Respondent  did  not  understand  that  others  might 

misinterpret  his  conduct. 

22. 

Respondent  explained  how  he  taught  weight  training  classes.  He  had 

machines  and  free  weights  in  his  classroom.  When  students  were  new  to  the  class,  over  a 
two  to  three-day  period  of  time,  he  would  demonstrate  how  to  use  the  machines  or  weights, 
talk  the  student  through  the  movements  and  then  have  the  students  demonstrate.  When  he 
taught  bench  press,  Respondent  told  the  student  to  bring  the  bar  to  the  nipple  or  nipple  line. 
He  explained  that  he  did  so  because,  earlier  in  the  year,  he  told  the  students  to  bring  the  bar 
to  their  chest;  one  student  did  so  and  was  injured;  so,  he  used  more  specific  language. 
Further,  Respondent  explained  that  when  doing  a  bench  press,  there  needs  to  be  a  “spotter,” 
someone  who  stands  behind  the  student  to  make  sure  the  person  can  lift  the  weight  or  help  if 
the  student  is  having  a  hard  time  with  the  weight  or  to  protect  the  student  from  injury. 

Respondent  testified  that  his  greatest  concern  was  the  safety  of  the  students.  He 

touched  students  im  order  to  assure  that  the  students  were  not  injured. 

Respondent  described  teaching  physical  education  as  bis  dream  job.  Both  Ms. 

Raimond  and  Officer  Ehlers  agreed  that  Respondent  was  motivating  his  students. 

23. 

On  January  23,2017,  Student  B.P.  attended  Respondent's  second  period 

weight  training  class  for  the  first  tyme.  She  was  not  enrolled  in  that  class.  He  mstructed  her 
to  make  arrangements  to  be  enrolled  in  his  class.

On  this  date,  he  had  Student  B.P.  work  on  ber  upper  body.  Respondent  taught  her 

how  to  use  the  bench  press.  He  had  a  student  demonstrate.  Student  B.P.  did  not  do  it 
properly.  Respondent  described  her  as  uncoordinated;  she  brought  the  bar  to  her  ribs. 
Respondent  told  her  “to  bring  the  bar  to  your  nipples  and  then  back  up.” 

24. 

On  January  24,  2017,  Student  B.P.  returned  to  the  physical  education  class. 

25. 

On  this  date,  Student  B.P.  told  Respondent  that  she  was  hurt,  and  he  told  her 

that  he  believed  that  she  was  sore.  Respondent  testified  that  they  discussed  the  issue  and  she 
msisted  that  she  was  hurt,  not  sore.  He  asked  her  to  do  an  exercise,  and  she  said  that  she  was 
not  able  to  do  so.  He  talked  to  her  about  checking  to  see  if  she  was  sore  or  injured,  explained 
how  he  would  do  so  and  asked  her  permission  to  do  sa;  according  to  Respondent,  she 
authorized  him  to  touch  her.  Respondent  took  two  fingers  on  his  nght  hand,  poked  the  front 
of  her  shoulder,  in  the  upper  chest  and  at  her  collar  bone.  He  was  trying  to  determime  if  the 
muscle  had  knotted  or  if  there  was  a  pulled  muscle.  Based  on  his  assessment,  Respondent 
explained  to  Student  B.P.  that  she  was  sore,  not  hurt  and  that  the  soreness  comes  from  lactic 
acid  buildup:  he  told  her,  to  get  rid  of  the  soreness,  she  needed  to  stretch  and  to  drink  lots  of 
water, 

In  Respondent’s  opinion,  he  was  qualified  to  assess  Student  B.P.  because  he  had 

worked  as  a  coach  for  26  years  and  worked  with  a  college  trainer.  However,  he 
acknowledged  that  he  had  no  formal  education  or  traming  to  assess  a  student  for  injury. 

According  to  Respondent,  he  assessed  Student  B.P.  rather  than  send  her  to  the  nurse’s 

office  for  evaluation  because  of a  discussion  that  occurred  at  a  staff  meeting  he  attended. 
Both  the  nurse  and  the  principal  said  that  too  many  students  were  going  to  the  nurse’s  office, 
and  the  students  needed  to  be  checked  before  being  sent  to  the  nurse’s  office.  Though  Ms. 
Raimond  and  Mr.  Napolcon  testified  as  witnesses,  neither  confirmed  Respondent’s 
interpretation  of  this  meeting  discussion. 

26. 

On  her  second  day  in  class,  Respondent  had  Student  B.P.  work  her  lower 
body.  Among  other  things,  he  had  her  work  on  donkey  kicks.  He  had  another  student 
demonstrate,  and  Respondent  instructed  Student  B.P.  However,  Student  B.P.  did  it  wrong. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  went  down  on  bis  right  knee,  put  his  hand  on  her  shoelace  on  top 
of  her  shoe  with  right  hand:  he  told  her  to  tighten  her  hamstring;  she  did  not  and  asked  what 
was  a  hamstring;  he  explamed  that  it  was  on  the  back  of  her  leg;  he  took  two  fingers,  closed 
his  fist  and  tapped  it.  He  told  her  to  tighten  it  and  could  see  the  hamstring  contract.  Then  he 
raised  her  leg  with  his  right  hand  twice  and  told  her  to  do  it.  She  did  uf  correctly. 

27. 

On  the  same  date,  Respondent  admitted  that  he  told  Student  B.P.  that  she  had  a 

strong  core.  He  explamed  that  he  did  so  because  she  demonstrated  that  she  was  “strong” 
when  she  performed  a  series  of  exercises;  he  told  the  students  when  they  were  strong;  if  they 
were  weak,  he  told  them  the  areas  that  could  use  some  improvement  and  gave  exercises  they 
could  do  to  help  that  issue.

28. 

Despite  his  denials,  for  the  reasons  stated  in  Findings  11  through  27,  Student 

B.P.’s  version  of  the  events  that  transpired  was  more  credible  than  Respondent’s  version. 

29. 

The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  lifted  Student  B.P.’s  shirt,  “play 

punched”  her  twice  and  told  her  she  had  a  nice  core. 

30. 

The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  helped  Student  B.P.  squat,  stood 

behind  her  and  placed  his  hands  on  her  lower  hips  as  she  squatted. 

31. 

Respondent  admitted  that,  in  his  class,  he  used  the  word  “booty”  and  “you  are 
going  to  look  so  amazing  this  summer  ima  bikin.”  He  explained  that  he  did  so  to  motivate 
the  students.  He  asked  students  what  their  goals  were  in  the  class.  One  student  said  that  she 
wanted  a  better  “booty”  and  another  student  said  that  she  wanted  to  look  good  in  a  bikini 
during  the  sammer.  Another  reason  was  it  was  his  way  of  telling  the  students  to  dress 
appropriately  for  class  the  next  day  because  the  students  did  not  have  lockers.  On  January 
23,  2017,  he  said,  “we  will  work  our  booties  tomorrow.”  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not 
direct  the  language  to  Student  B.P.  Nevertheless,  Student  B.P.  felt  that  he  did. 

32. 

 Kespondent  did  not  dispute  that  he  had  a  conversation  with  Student  B.P.  about: 

Whether  she  had  a  boyfriend? 
What  guys  liked  her  at  school? 
Did  she  have  a  driver's  license’ 
Did  she  have  a  job? 
He  was  going  to  help  her  find  a  job. 

 
8

 
$
$

 
®
&

 
$

Respondent  explained  that  he  asked  about  her  boyfriend  because  she  and  another  boy 

in  the  class  appeared  to  be  flirting:  he  did  not  want  to  pair  them  in  the  class  if  they  hada 
relationship.  He  asked  about  what  guys  liked  her  at  school  because  he  was  getting  to  know 
her  as  he  had  been  instructed  to  do  during  Maverick  Hour.  He  had  been  instructed  to  get  to 
know  students  so  that  if  they  had  a  particular  problem  that  needed  counseling  the  student 
could  receive  assistance.  He  asked  about  whether  she  drove  and  if  she  had  a  job  because  a 
former  athlete  that  he  knew  asked  if  he  could  recommend  anyone  for  a  job;  he  felt  that  she 
would  qualify  because  she  was  a  senior  and  had  good  class  attendance. 

33. 

Teaching  physical  education  is  Respondent’s  dream  teaching  position.  He 
established  that  he  motivated  some  of  his  students.  He  treated  other  students  im  the  same 
manner  as  he  did  Student  B.P.  He  touched  his  students  because  of  his  concern  about  injury 
for  the  students.  According  to  Respondent,  staff  Gncluding  Principal  Napoleon,  Ms.  Cuizon, 
Officer  Ehiers  and  Ms.  Raimond)  observed  him  teach  students,  observed  him  touch  and 
heard  him  speak  to  the  students  in  the  manner  he  described.  However,  the  evidence  did  not 
support  his  testimony,  and,  in  fact,  was  to  the  contrary.  Princrpal  Napoleon  testified  that, 
though  sometnnes  he  worked  out  with  the  students,  he  did  not  hear  Respondent  use  such 
language  in  his  classes  or  observe  him  touch  students;  he  thought  his  conduct  and  language 
were  inappropriate. 

ii

34. 

Student  N.H.  testified  as  a  witness  im  this  proceeding.  She  explained  that  she 
was  uncomfortable  in  Respondent’s  class  but  did  not  think  to  report  it  until  she  provided  her 
written  statement.  Overall,  her  testimony  was  consistent  with  her  written  statement,  with  one 
exception.  In  the  written  statement,  she  said:  “He  would  touch  them  around  the  shoulders 
and  boob  area  and  then  make  comments  about  our  body’s  [sic]  and  stare  at  my  boobs  and 
butts.”  She  testified  that  she  should  have  said:  “...  then  make  comments  about  their  bodies 
and  stare  at  their  boobs  and  butts.” 

Based  on  her  testimony  as  well  as  Respondent’s,  it  was  established  that  Respondent 
touched  females  inappropriately,  he  touched  them  around  their  shoulders  and  “boob”  areas; 
he  made  comments  about  their  bodies  and  stared  at  their  “boobs  and  butts”;  Student  N.H.  did 
not  feel  comfortable  around  Respondent.  He  grabbed  “thighs”  and  asked  if  they  were  sore. 
He  made  comments  about  their  bodies  and  “staff,” 

35. 

Zachery  Peck,  a  retired  teacher,  testified  as  a  witness  in  this  proceeding 

regarding  the  duties  and  obligations  of  a  physical  education  teacher.  He  worked  between 
September  1985  and  June  2015.  Between  2004  and  2014,  he  taught  physical  education, 
including  weight  lifting.  Typically,  he  demonstrated  the  exercise  but  might  have  a  student 
who  was  proficient  demonstrate  the  exercise.  One  of  his  concerns  were  things  that  could 
negatively  affect  their  back,  spine  or  neck.  [fhe  saw  students  doing  something  in  that  area, 
he  would  touch  them,  push  their  back  in,  straighten  them.  Mr.  Peck  did  not  remember 
touching  the  students  a  lot  for  purposes  of  instruction.  When  the  student  complained  of 
being  sore,  he  did  not  touch  the  student’s  collar  bone  and/or  shoulder  because  he  did  not 
have  the  ability  or  knowledge  to  judge  that  the  student  was  sore  based  on  touching  the 
student;  so,  he  would  not  have  done  it. 

When  he  taught  weight  traiming,  Mr.  Peck  did  not  touch  students  as  Respondent 

admitted  he  touched  his  students.  When  he  taught  weight  training,  he  did  not  use  the 
language  that  Respondent  admitted  he  used  in  class. 

36. 

Based  on  the  facts,  it  was  established  that  Respondent's  misconduct  and 

inappropriate  statements  violated  the  Board’s  policy  that  set  forth  its  expectation  of 
certificated  employees.  (Board  Policy  No.  4119.21).  Respondent  repeatedly  violated  this 
Board  policy. 

37. 

Based  on  the  facts,  it  was  established  that  Respondent’s  misconduct  and 

inappropriate  statements  violated  the  Board’s  policies  that  prohibit  discrimimation, 
imtimidation,  harassment  and  bullying  (Board  Policy  Nos.  0410,  4119.11,  5131.2,  5143.3, 
ARS  145.3,  and  5145.7).  He  repeatedly  violated  these  Board  policies. 

38. 

This  is  not  the  first  tame  that  Respondent  has  engaged  in  the  type  of  conduct 

described  in  Findmgs  18,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31  and  32. 

On  July  2,  2013,  the  District  provided  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Suspension 
without  Pay,  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  as  a  result  of  his  sexual  harassment  towards 

12 ew

a  collcague,  failure  to  follow  directives  from  administration,  use  of  profanity  and  engaging  in 
inappropriate  interactions  with  students.  More  specifically,  it  was  alleged  im  that  Notice  that, 
during  the  course  of  the  2012-2013  school  year,  Respondent  made  the  following  comments 
and  took  the  following  actions  toward  Bobbi  Salazar,  an  instructional  aide,  and  others. 

(a)  He  repeatedly  referred  to  Ms.  Salazar  as  “Hot  Bobbi”  and 
did  so  with  enough  regularity  that  students  in  his  class  began 
calling  her  “Hot  Bobbi.” 

(b)  On  November  21,  2012,  when  a  student  asked  Ms.  Salazar 
if  she  missed  her  husband  (who  was  out  of  town),  Respondent 
stated:  “What  time  should  |  come  over?”  implying  that  he  and 
Ms.  Salazar  were  having  an  affair.  Respondent  made  this 
comment  in  front  of  students. 

(c})  He  made  comments  toward  Ms.  Salazar  that  her  sisters  were 
“hot”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

(d)  On  December  6,  2012,  during  classroom  instruction, 
Respondent  stopped  teaching  and  told  Ms.  Salazar  that  she 
“looked  good”  that  day. 

(e}  Between  August  and  November  2012,  Respondent  toid 
Lindsay  Connolly,  the  District’s  substitute  instructional  aide, 
that  she  looked  good  in  her  pants  and  that  she  should  wear  them 
more  often. 

()  On  December  12,  2012,  during  a  conversation  with  Ms. 
Salazar,  Respondent  tried  to  excuse  his  inappropriate  actions 
and  comments;  he  said,  “This  class  drives  me  crazy.  They  piss 
me  off,  and  Courtney  (one  of  his  students)  is  a  fucking  cunt,”  or 
words  to  that  effect. 

(z)  Respondent  displayed  mages  of  female  celebrities  (Carrie 
Underwood  and  Katie  Perry)  and,  in  references  to  those  images, 
Respondent  told  his  students  that  the  women  were  “hot.” 

(h)  Respondent  downloaded  images  of  the  Dallas  Cowboys 
cheerleaders  and  the  San  Diego  Chargers  cheerleaders  and 
engaged  in  a  discussion  with  male  students  wherem  he 
compared  their  physical  attributes.  This  conversation  was  held 
im  front  of  female  students.

39. 

Inthe  2013  Notice,  the  District  provided  Respondent  with  specific  directives 

on  how  to  unprove  his  conduct  through  a  “Plan  of  Assistance.”  Relevant  portions  of  this 
“Plan  of  Assistance”  imchuided  the  following: 

(a}  Conduct  yourself  in  appropriate  and  professional  manner  at 
all  times.  At  minimum  you  must  treat  your  students...  with 
fairness,  respect,  consideration,  and  dignity.  You  shall  endeavor 
at  all  times  to  avoid  circumstances  which  may  give  rise  to  the 
appearance  of  improper  behavior. 

(b)  Cease  and  desist  from  all  unnecessary  physical  contact  with 
Students. 

(c)  Do  not  engage  in  any  conversations  or  communications  in 
which  you  make  reference  to  any  student|’s]...  physical 
attributes  or  body  shape.  You  shall  not  refer  to  students...  as 
“sexy”  or  “hot”  or  otherwise  physically  or  sexually  attractive. 

(d)  Do  not  discuss  matters  of  a  sexual  nature  or  make  use  of 
sexual  innuendo  with  any  students...  Do  not  discuss  your 
personal  relationships  or  sexual  proclivities,  or  any  other 
inappropriate  personal  matters  with  any  student. 
compare  the  physical  attributes  of  anyone  with  or  in  the 
presence  of  your  students. 

...  Do  not 

(e)}  You  are  specifically  directed  to  discontinue  any  teaching 
style  in  which  you  have  assumed  or  established  the  role  of 
friend,  peer,  buddy,  or  other  such  inappropriate  relationship  with 
students. 

(4)  Do  not  use  profanity  while  at  work,  or  im  reference  to  any 
student. 

40. 

Ailsa,  the  Plan  of  Assistance  notified  Respondent  that  he  1s  “to  correct  his 

performance  durmg  the  ensuing  45-day  period...  .  [and  followmg]  the  completion  of  the  45- 
day  period,  you  are  further  directed  to  maintain  compliance  with  the  directives  contamed  im 
this  letter  at  all  tunes  im  the  future.”  Further,  he  was  notified  that  ifhe  failed  to  follow  the 
directives  in  the  Plan  of  Improvement,  “the  Board  of  Education  may  imstitute  additional 
disciplinary  action  agaist  you,  up  to  and  including  dismissal.” 

4). 

Respondent  provided  evidence  that,  m  2010  and  after  his  discipline  im  2013,  he 
completed  “Making  Right  Choices:  Educator  Sexual  Misconduct  Training’.  He  was  unable 
to  articulate  what  he  learned,  if  anyihing,  about  whether  he  could  touch  students.  Regarding 
the  discipline  in  2013,  he  testified  that  he  learned  not  to  have  friendships  at  work,  and  that 
the  discipline  occurred  because  a  friend  of  10  years  tumed  on  him. 

i4

42. 

During  the  hearmg,  Respondent  provided  an  explanation  for  his  acts  and 

statements  during  the  2016-2017  school  year  (until  January  24,  2017).  At  no  time  did  he 
appear  to  understand  that  his  conduct  or  statements  could  be  misconstrued.  At  no  time  did 
he  express  appreciation  for  the  wrongfuiness  of  his  misconduct.  At  no  time  did  he  appear  to 
understand  that  his  conduct  and/or  mappropriate  statements  constituted  or  may  have 
constituted  a  violation  of  the  2013  “Plan  of  Assistance.” 

Respondent  expressed  remorse  for  his  misconduct  because  tt  resulted  in  discipline, 

not  because  it  was  inappropriate,  unprofessional  or  because  of  the  impact  it  had  on 
colleagues  or  students. 

43. 

Principal  Napoleon  was  aware  that  Respondent  had  been  previously 

disciplined  by  the  District  and  the  basis  for  discipline.  He  served  as  the  vice-principal  at 
Granite  Hills  High  School  for  four  years,  including  during  the  school  year  that  the  District 
disciplined  Respondent.  Mr.  Napoleon  was  not  involved  in  the  investigation  and/or 
discipline  of  Respondent,  but  he  was  aware  of  the  District’s  action.  Mr.  Napoleon  described 
the  facts  underlying  the  investigation. 

44. 

The  District’s  administrators  have  lost  confidence  in  Respondent’s  ability  to 

meet  the  expectations  of  teachers  in  the  District. 

Statutory  Authority 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

i, 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing  (Cal.  Educ.  Code,  944934  and  44944 ) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  specifies  the  permissible  causes  for  termination 

of  a  permanent  certificated  employee. 

3, 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process 
for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  and  sets  forth  the 
Commission's  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outhnes  the  procedures  the  governing  board 

must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  agaist  a  teacher  for  unprofessional 
conduct  or  unsatisfactory  performance. 

S. 

Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (a)  states: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45 
calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its 

5

authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against  whom 
the  charge  1s  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of 
behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee 
an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the 
grounds  for  the  charge.  ... 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

6. 

The  “burden  of  proof’  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.) 

7. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.  APP.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Grounds  for  Dismissal 

8. 

The  term  “immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has 
been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  inconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  “Immoral  conduct”  is  not  confined  to  sexual 
matters.  It  includes  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  It  1s 
sometimes  synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.  (Board  of Ed.  of San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d.  808,  811,  noting  that  no 
other  California  cases  had  previously  defined  the  term  “immoral  conduct.”) 

Immoral  Conduct 

8. 

“Immoral  conduct”  is  conduct  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  1s 

not  confined  to  sexual  matters.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466) 

9. 

Immoral  conduct  cannot  be  considered  in  the  abstract.  It  must  be  considered  in 

the  context  in  which  the  Legislature  has  considered  it,  as  conduct  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare 
of  the  general  public;  more  specifically,  conduct  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  school 
community.  In  providing  standards  to  guide  school  boards  in  placing  restraints  on  conduct  of 

16

teachers,  the  Legislature  is  concerned  with  the  welfare  of  the  school  community.  [ts  objective  is 
the  protection  of  students  fron:  corruption.  This  is  a  proper  exercise  of  the  power  of  a  state  to 
abridge  personal  liberty  and  to  protect  larger  mterests.  But  reasonableness  must  be  the 
governing  criterion.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214,  224.)  The 
phrase  “immoral  conduct”  withm  the  meaning  of  the  Education  Code  denotes  immoral  or 
unprofessional  conduct  or  moral  turpitude  of  the  teacher  that  renders  the  teacher  unfit  to  teach. 
(bid.  at  p.  225.) 

10. 

“As  between  a  teacher  and  his  student,  “(ayn  umportant  part  of  the  education  .. . 

is  the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to  necessary  discipline.  Lessons 
are  learned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.’  (Citation)  “A  teacher...  im  the  public  school 
system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  heht  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and 
actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  [students]  coming  under  [his[  care  and  protection.  . 
The  teaching  by  example  as  well  as  precept,  of  obedience  to  properly  constituted  authority  and 
discipline  necessary  to  a  well-ordered  society,  1s  an  important  part  of  education.””  (Watson  v. 
State  Bd.  of  Education  (1971)  22  Cal  App.3d  559,  365.) 

.. 

ii. 

“The  calling  of  an  educator  is  so  intimate,  its  duties  so  delicate,  the  things  in 

which  a  teacher  might  prove  unworthy  or  would  fai  are  so  numerous  that  they  are  incapable  of 
enumeration  in  any  legislative  enactment.  The  educator’s  ability  to  inspire  children  and  to 
govern  them,  his  power  as  an  educator,  and  the  character  for  which  he  stands  are  matters  of 
major  concern  in  an  educator's  selection  and  retention.  ...  An  educator  in  the  public  school 
system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  puptis  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and 
actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  students  coming  under  his  care  and  protection.”  (San 
Diego  Unified  School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal App.4",  1454,  1463-64.) 

12. 

The  governing  board  of a  district  is  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  schools 

under  its  jurisdiction,  their  standards  of  education,  and  the  moral,  mental,  and  physical  welfare 
of  the  pupils  during  school  hours.  An  important  part  of  the  education  of  any  child  is  the 
instilling  of a proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to  necessary  discipline.  Lessons  are 
icarned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.  “Book  learning”  is  only  a  phase  of  the  important 
lessons  a  child  should  learn  mm  school.  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of Riverside  County 
v.  Hensey  A970)  9  Cal  App.3d  967,  970-71.) 

13. 

 Rejectme  statutory  terms,  such  as  “immorality,”  “unprofessional  conduct,”  or 

“wmoral  turpitude”  as  overly  broad  to  use  as  grounds  for  discrplme  of  public  school  teachers,  the 
Morrison  court  created  a  seven-part  test  to  assess  whether  a  misbehaving  teacher  is  fit  to  teach. 
(Broney  v.  California  Comm.  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  134  Cal App.4th  462,  466.) 
“Because  such  terms  a8  “immoral,”  ‘unprofessional,’  or  ‘involving  moral  turpitude’  are  too 
broad  and  amorphous  to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  the  termmation  of a  professional  license,  it  must 
be  shown  the  conduct  in  question  indicates  an  unfitness  to  engage  in  the  profession.”  Ud.  at  pp. 
473-74.) 

17

14. 

Since  the  term  “immoral  conduct”  is  vague  and  broad,  whether  the  conduct 

demonstrates  an  unfitness  to  teach  must  be  measured  against  seven  criteria  set  forth  in 
Morrison.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  Unified  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th 
369,  383.) 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

15. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determinative  test  in  teacher  dismissal  cases  is 

whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  “Fitness  to  teach”  is  probably  a  question  of  ultimate  fact. 
(Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d 
555,  560-561.) 

16. 

“Evident”  is  defined  as  “clear  to  the  vision  and  understanding.”  “Unfit”  1s 

defined  as  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable;  incompetent;  and  physically 
or  mentally  unsound”  and  “unsuitable,  incompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a  particular  use  or 
service.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of Riverside  County  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9 
Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

17. 

In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  the  court  noted  the  two  parallel,  yet  contradictory,  line 
of  cases  regarding  “unfit  for  service.”  One  line  of  cases  equated  that  term  with  “unprofessional 
conduct,”  and  the  other  line  of  cases  distinguished  the  definition  of  the  two.  In  deciding  that  the 
latter  line  of  cases  was  the  correct  way  to  evaluate  “unfit  to  serve,’  and  complied  with  the  rules 
of  statutory  construction.  The  Woodland  court  concluded  that  “unprofessional  conduct”  and 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same  thing.  Although  conduct 
constituting  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute  “unprofessional  conduct,”  the 
converse  is  not  always  true.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  requires  that  unfitness  for  service 
be  attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not  necessary  for  a  finding  of  “unprofessional 
conduct.”  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not  disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in 
Morrison  where  that  court  concluded  that  “unprofessional  conduct”  meant  conduct  showing  a 
teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria  must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter, 
whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  If  it  does,  the  next  step  was  to  determine 
whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”,  1.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in 
temperament.  (/d.  at  pp.  1442-1445.)  A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  can  be  made  if  the  evidence, 
taken  in  the  aggregate,  shows  that  retaining  the  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of 
psychological  harm  to  students  and  fellow  students  (/d.  at  p.  1456.) 

18. 

To  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a  nexus  between 

government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from  the  principle  that 
[no]  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of  factors  unconnected  with  the 
responsibilities  of  that  employment.”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1463.) 

19. 

“Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed 
character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to 

18

meet  the  expectation  of  the  employing  school  district.’”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1120,  1142-43.) 

In  determining  whether  the  teacher’s  conduct  indicated  unfitness  to  teach,  such 

(1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 

20. 
matters  as: 
fellow  teachers,  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct,  (4)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding 
the  conduct,  (5)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  (6)  the 
notoriety  and  publicity  accorded  the  teacher’s  conduct  may  be  considered.  (Jack  M.,  supra, 
at  p.702,  fn  5.) 

Persistent  Violation  of  or  Refusal  to  Obey  Laws 

  

21. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Subdivision  (7)  pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional 
transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient 
to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of 
school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  Ud.  At  p.84.) 

.  stubborn;  persevering  . 

. 

. 

22. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the  District 
must  further  establish  that  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was  “persistent,” 
1.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.)  Isolated  incidents  or  incidents 
involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally  considered  “persistent.” 
(Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.) 

Morrison  Factors 

23. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  identified  seven  factors  to  consider  when 

evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the 
conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the 
proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the 
teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity  if  any, 
surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting 
in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that 
the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
teacher.  Those  factors  are  considered  in  this  decision. 

24. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When  a 

camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which  one 
could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the  offensive 

19

conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1992)  2  CaLApp.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

25. 

Only  the  pertment  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (roney  v.  California 

Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal  App.4th  462,  476.) 

Other  Disciplinary  Considerations 

26. 

An  admuustrator’s  loss  of  confidence  tn  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 

educator’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered.  (San 
Diego  Unified  School  District  v. 
Cal  App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (201  1)  194 

Evaluation 

27. 

The  evidence  must  not  only  be  sufficient  to  support  a  finding  that  Respondent 
engaged  in  the  misconduct  but  also  a  finding  that  his  misconduct  met  the  criteria  for  grounds 
for  dismussal. 

28. 

While  working  as  a  physical  education  teacher,  tn  his  weight  training  class, 

Respondent  engaged  in  the  followmsg  conduct: 

e 

® 

e 

® 

® 

@ 

He  touched  students  when  providing  exercise  instruction  instead 
of  modeling  proper  technique. 

He  touched  students  on  the  hamstring,  which  is  just  below  the 
buttocks. 

He  used  two  fingers  and  touched  student  B.P.  along  and  just 
below  the  collar  bones,  a  few  inches  above  her  breasts. 

He  made  statements  such  as:  “Work  your  booty,”  “Tighten  your 
booty,”  “You  can  have  the  best  booty  ever”  and  “Bring  the  bar 
down  to  your  nipples”  or  something  similar  to  that  eflect  rather 
than  using  anatomic  terms. 

He  did  not  teach  students  the  names  of  muscles,  or  muscle 
RLOUDPS. 

He  emphasized  with  his  students  the  importance  of  exercise  to 
unprove  appearance  as  opposed  to  improving  health  and  fitness. 

29. 

In  2012  Respondent  engaged  in  similar  misconduct.  Among  other  things,  he 

(1)  made  mnappropriate  comments  towards  a  colleague  in  the  presence  of  students,  (2) 

20

displayed  images  of  female  celebrities,  in  reference  to  these  images,  he  told  his  students  the 
women  were  “hot”:  (3)  downloaded  mages  of  National  Football  League  cheerleaders,  and 
engaged  in  a  discussion  with  the  male  students,  coniparing  the  physical  attributes  of  the 
women  in  the  presence  of  fernale  students. 

In  July  2013,  the  District  provided  Respondent  with  a  Plan  of  Assistance  that  mcluded 

among  other  things,  very  specific  directives,  including:  (1)  to  cease  and  desist  all 
unnecessary  physical  contact  with  students,  (2)  not  to  engage  in  conversations  or 
communications  in  which  he  referenced  a  student’s  physical  attributes  or  body  shape,  (3)  not 
fo  discuss  any  inappropriate  personal  matters  with  students.  In  the  Plan  of  Assistance, 
Respondent  was  informed  to  correct  his  performance  during  the  ensuimg  45-day  period; 
following  the  45-day  period,  he  was  directed  to  maimtain  compliance  with  the  directives  at  all 
times  in  the  future. 

In  October  2010  and  again  following  the  issuance  of  the  Plan  of  Assistance, 
Respondent  took  a  semimar  entitled  “Making  Right  Choices:  Educator  Sexual  Misconduct.” 
The  course  dealt  with  appropriate  touching  of  colleagues  and  students. 

Despite  attending  the  seminar  on  two  separate  occasions,  the  conduct  that  occurred 
during  the  2016-2017  school  year  (Gintil  January  24,  2017)  was  similar  to  the  conduct  that 
occurred  in  2012  and  that  was  prohibited  by  the  directives  in  the  District’s  Plan  of  Assistance 
and  also  prohibited  by  District  expectations  and  policies. 

38. 

Atno  time  has  Respondent  expressed  true  remorse  for  his  misconduct  in  2012 
or  2017.  Atno  time  did  Respondent  accept  responsibility  for  his  actions.  Instead,  he  blamed 
his  colleague  involved  in  the  2012  incident  and  sought  to  justify  his  conduct  that  occurred 
during  the  2016  —  2017  school  year  (until  January  24,  2017).  There  was  no  evidence 
presented  that  Respondent  appreciates  the  wrongfulness  of  his  acts  or  his  bad  judgment. 

39, 

 Kespondent’s  misconduct  and  inappropriate  language  evidence  his  disregard 
for  the  District’s  primary  goal  and  expectations  that  come  with  the  teaching  profession.  His 
pattern  and  habit  of  touching,  and  making  inappropriate  and  unprofessional  comments, 
negatively  impacted  the  work  and  educational  environment.  Respondent’s  conduct  was 
detrimental  to  the  District  and  its  students.  Respondent  was  fully  to  blame  for  his  conduct. 
He  is  not  a  model  of  good  behavior.  He  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  act  morally  and  uphold  the 
responsibilities  of  a  public  educator.  Respondent  has  no  appreciation  for  the  wrongfulness  of 
his  acts  and  misconduct;  as  such,  if  allowed  to  retain  his  position,  it  is  likely  that  he  will 
engage  in  the  same  or  similar  misconduct  agaim. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  it  was  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 
Respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(ay). 

40. 

By  letter,  dated  July  2,  2013,  the  District  provided  Respondent  with  a  Notice 

of  Unprofessional  Conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44938.  The  Notice 

21

delineated  Respondent’s  unprofessional  conduct  and  provided  hin  with  specific  directives 
for  improvement  and  directed  him  to  stop  bis  conduct.  Respondent’s  acts  and  misconduct 
during  the  2016-2017  school  year  (until  January  24,  2017)  established  that  he  failed  to 
comply  with  the  directives  as  to  how  to  improve  his  conduct,  m  particular,  in 
communications  to  and  about  students  and  colleagues,  and  to  stop  his  sexually  harassing, 
touching,  unprofessional  and  completely  inappropriate  behavior. 

Despite  the  directives,  training  and  assistance,  Respondent  failed  to  improve  his 

conduct  to  a  professional  level. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  for  unprofessional 

conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a\{(2). 

41. 

‘The  facts  and  the  law  have  been  analyzed  to  determine  whether  it  was 

established  that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher  in  the  District. 

In  2013  Respondent  was  disciplined  by  the  District  for  sexual  harassment  of a 
colleague  and  making  inappropriate  comments  in  the  presence  of  colleagues  and  students. 
The  District  instructed  Respondent  on  how  to  appropriately  interact  with  teachers,  students 
and  colleagues;  to  not  harasses  students  or  touch  them  in  a  sexual  manner;  to  be  respectful 
towards  students  and  colleagues;  to  not  make  mappropriate  and  derogatory  comments  to  and 
about  students  and  colleagues,  and  to  execute  his  job  duties  in  a  professional  manner. 
Nevertheless,  Respondent  engaged  in  the  same  or  similar  conduct  during  the  2016  and  2017 
school  year  (until  January  24,  2017).  Respondent  provided  no  evidence  to  establish  that  he 
has  learned  from  the  experience  or  that  his  conduct  would  change  in  the  future  if  returned  to 
the  classroom.  The  District  structed  Respondent  on  how  to  appropriately  interact  with 
teachers,  students  and  colicagues;  to  not  harasses  students  or  touch  them  im  a  sexual  manner; 
to  be  respectful  towards  students  and  colleagues:  to  not  make  inappropriate  and  derogatory 
comments  to  and  about  students  and  colleagues;  and  to  execute  his  job  duties  in  a 
professional  manner.  Respondent’s  conduct  showed  that  he  has  a  defect  of  temperament  or 
an  inadequacy  that  is  a  fixed  character  trait,  irremediable,  and  that  renders  him  evidently 
unfit  to  teach. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  it  was  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 
Respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (4)(6),  evident  unfitness 
for  service. 

42. 

The  facts  and  the  law  have  been  analyzed  to  determine  whether  Respondent 

persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  rules  governing  bis  employment. 

Respondent  knew  or  should  have  known  of  the  Governing  Board’s  policies  and 

expectations  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  including  Board  Policy  Nos.  0410, 
4119.11,  4119.21,  $131.2,  5137,  and  5145.7.  The  District  attached  copies  of  the  foregomg  to 
the  Statement  of  Charges.  Having  reviewed  the  foregoing  Board  policies  and  the  facts,  it

was  determined  that  Respondent  repeatedly  violated  Board  Policy  Nos.  0410,  4119.11, 
4119.21,  5131.2,  5137,  and  5145.7. 

Based  on  the  facts  and  the  law,  it  was  established  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 
Respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (8),  persistent  violation 
or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  of  the  District. 

43. 

Upon  the  filing  of  the  Statement  of  Charges,  the  District  placed  Respondent  on 

immediate  unpaid  suspension.  In  his  Notice  of  Defense,  Respondent  seeks  retroactive  pay, 
retirement  contributions,  lost  fringe  benefits  and/or  medical  cost  reimbursement  according  to 
proof.  The  parties  disagree  regarding  the  procedure  that  must  be  followed  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44939  and  whether  the  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  issue  an  order 
compelling  the  District  for  back  pay  and  benefits.  Respondent  offered  no  evidence  of  his 
back  pay  or  benefits  during  the  hearing.  The  Commission  determined  that  the  charges 
support  dismissal  of  Respondent  on  the  basis  of  immoral  conduct.  As  such,  he  is  not  entitled 
to  reinstatement  of  his  salary  and  benefits.  Thus,  it  is  not  necessary  to  address  the  arguments 
related  to  the  appropriate  procedure  to  file  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939. 

ORDER 

The  appeal  of  Joshua  Barney’s  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Grossmont 

Union  High  School  District  is  denied.  The  request  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School 
District  to  dismiss  Joshua  Barney  is  granted.  Joshua  Barney  is  dismissed  from  employment 
with  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District.  The  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and 
Statement  of  Charges  filed  against  Joshua  Barney  is  affirmed. 

Dated:  March  4,  2018 

Dated:  March  4,  2018 

Dated:  March  5,  2018 

DocuSigned  hy: 

Low  (ardinabal, 

RON  LARDIZABAL 
Commission  Member 

DecuSigned  by: 

Charter  Mendoza 

CAABB4348129412 

CHARLES  MENDOZA 
Commission  Member 

Dec usigned  by: 

vallura  joluson 

24161  1FCS028411... 

- 
VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

23



  

