BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of : 

JASON  CAMP, 
A  Permanent  Certified  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.:  2017050275 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  consisting  of  complainant’s  designee, 

Alfredo  Tarin,  respondent’s  designee,  Norberto  Perez,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge 
Jennifer  M.  Russell,  from  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Los 
Angeles,  California  on  October  30  and  31  and  November  1,  2,  and  3,  2017.  The  record 
closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  of  February  9,  2018.' 

Enrique  M.  Vassallo,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District  (LAUSD  or  District).  David  Craig  Bernstein,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 
respondent  Jason  Camp,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

The  District  alleges  that  respondent  engaged  in  conduct  warranting  his  dismissal.  The 

District  charges  respondent  with  issuing  grades  to  two  student  athletes”  who  were 
academically  ineligible  to  play  football  and  who  were  not  officially  enrolled  during  a  July  28 
through  August  12,  2016  period  as  students  at  Canoga  Park  High  School  (Canoga  Park)  or 
Owensmouth  Continuation  High  School  (Owensmouth),  the  two  schools  involved  in  this 
matter,  in  order  to  improve  the  two  students’  eligibility  status.  The  District  further  charges 
respondent  with  enrolling  the  two  student  athletes,  on  September  6,  2016,  in  a  seventh  period 
class  at  Owensmouth  that  overlapped  with  the  two  students’  sixth  period  class  at  Canoga 

  

'  In  accordance  with  a  November  6,  2017  Post-Hearing  Order,  the  record  remained 

open  for  the  parties’  submission  of  written  closing  arguments.  Complainant’s  Closing  Brief 
is  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  42.  Respondent’s  Closing  Brief  1s  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  A. 

*  Pursuant  to  a  September  27,  2017  Stipulation  and  Protective  Order,  student  records 
admitted  as  exhibits  were  placed  under  seal  pursuant  to  protect  confidentiality  and  privacy.

Park  and  with  issuing  grades  for  instruction  the  two  students  did  not  receive.  Respondent 
disputes  the  charges.” 

Conduct  does  not  occur  in  a  vacuum.  Conduct  occurs  in  a  particularized  context, 

which  in  turn  imbues  conduct  with  its  significance  and  meaning.  To  determine  whether  the 
District  meets  its  burden  of  establishing  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  the  allegations  that 
respondent  engaged  in  conduct  warranting  dismissal,  a  detailed  explication  of  the  particular 
context  animating  respondent’s  conduct  is  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  Based  on  these 
Factual  Findings  and  governing  legal  principles  set  forth  in  the  Legal  Conclusions,  the 
District  has  failed  to  meet  its  evidentiary  burden,  and  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  is 
dismissed. 

Respondent’s  Employment  with  the  District 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  District  employed  respondent  for  20  years  until  the  February  27,  2017 

recommendation  for  his  dismissal  by  Board  of  Education  (Board)  for  the  District. 
Respondent  has  an  undergraduate  degree  in  political  science  and  a  graduate  degree  in 
educational  administration.  He  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  Social 
Studies  and  a  Certificate  of  Eligibility  for  an  Administrative  Services  Credential. 
Respondent’s  leadership  positions  include  his  two  terms  of  service  as  President  of  Senior 
High  School  Options  Principals  Organization  and  his  service  as  Vice  President  of  the 
Associated  Administrators  Los  Angeles  (AALA). 

2. 

While  serving  as  principal  for  Independence  Continuation  High  School, 

respondent  piloted  Recovery  +  Intervention=Graduation  (RIG),  a  program  to  help  students 
attending  comprehensive  high  schools  to  make  up  failed  courses  at  a  continuation  high 
school,  and  respondent  was  recognized  for  his  efforts.  In  2015,  respondent  received  the 
Continuation/Educational  Options-Administrator  of  the  Year  Award,  an  honor  bestowed  by 
the  Association  of  California  School  Administrators. 

  

°  During  the  preparation  of  the  Decision,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  observed  that 
a  Notice  of  Defense  was  not  filed  in  connection  with  this  matter  notwithstanding  the  fact  that 
respondent  contests  the  charges.  In  addition,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  noted  that  the 
Accusation  and  Request  for  Hearing  were  not  marked  for  identification  or  entered  in 
evidence.  Government  Code  section  11523  provides  for  judicial  review,  which  a  petitioner 
initiates  by,  among  other  things,  requesting  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  to  prepare 
a  complete  record  of  the  proceedings.  Section  11523  provides  that  “[t]he  complete  record 
includes  the  pleadings|.|’  Thus,  to  preserve  a  complete  record  of  the  proceedings  in  this 
matter,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  marked  the  Accusation  and  Request  for  Hearing  as 
Exhibit  OAH2,  which  has  been  entered  in  evidence,  thereby  rendering  the  jurisdictional 
documents  or  pleadings  a  component  of  the  complete  record.

3. 

In  early  February  2016,  respondent  “shared”  with  Vivian  Ekchian,  the  then- 

Superintendent  for  Local  District  Northwest,  his  ambitions  to  be  promoted.  Respondent  felt 
that  all  of  his  skills  were  not  fully  utilized  at  Independence  Continuation  High  School.  At 
the  administrative  hearing  Ekchian  explained  that  there  were  no  vacancies  for  promotion.  As 
respondent’s  mentor  and  supervisor,  Ekchian  advised  respondent,  “Let’s  look  for 
opportunities  for  you  to  be  able  to  receive  a  variety  of  experiences  so  that  you  can  put  that  on 
your  resume,  and  when  the  time  comes  for  a  promotion,  you  will  be  even  more  ready  than 
you  are  today.” 

4. 

Ekchian  presented  respondent  with  offers  to  serve  as  principal  for  Stony  Point 

High  School  or  Zane  Grey  High  School.  Respondent,  however,  declined  both  offers 
explaining  that  he  aspired  to  be  the  Local  District  Northwest  Director  of  Educational  Options 
Schools—a  position  Nadar  Delnavaz  occupied,  and  was  therefore  not  vacant.  In  the 
presence  of  other  District  administrators  including  Delnavaz,  respondent  informed  Ekchian 
that  he  “didn’t  feel  that  the  schools  were  being  served  properly,  that  Mr.  Delnavaz  didn’t 
possess  the  capacity  in  educational  options  to  lead  the  schools  that  we  had  in  Local  District 
Northwest,  and  [he]  felt  that  [he]  could  do  the  job  more  effectively.” 

5. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  2016  spring  semester,  Ekchian  again  offered 

respondent  an  opportunity  to  move  laterally—this  time  to  Owensmouth,  which  1s  adjacent  to 
Canoga  Park,  a  comprehensive  high  school.  Ekchian  explained  that  “Canoga  Park  was  one 
of  our  two  high  schools  that  was  least  achieving”  and  that  “the  opportunity  to  expand  a  credit 
recovery  program  and  [help]  students  really  graduate  college  and  career  ready  existed  at 
[Canoga  Park].”  According  to  Ekchian,  Owensmouth  was  “a  perfect  place  for  the  Canoga 
Park  students  to  go  either  full  time  or  pass  back  and  forth.”  Ekchian  additionally  considered 
Ownensmouth  a  “wonderful  opportunity”  for  respondent,  whom  she  characterized  as  “an 
experienced  gentleman  who  wanted  a  promotional  opportunity.”  Respondent  accepted  the 
offer. 

6. 

Three  weeks  prior  to  the  recommendation  to  dismiss  him  from  the  District,  on 

February  4,  2017,  the  Association  of  California  School  Administrators  again  awarded 
respondent  the  Continuation/Educational  Options-Administrator  of  the  Year  Award.  On 
February  21,  2017,  the  LAUSD  Daily  published  an  article  titled,  Wooden,  Owensmouth  earn 
state  honors  as  Model  Continuation  High  Schools,  which,  among  other  things,  features 
respondent  and  touts  Owensmouth  as  a  model  continuation  high  school  for  motivating  and 
helping  struggling  students  to  reach  their  full  potential.  (See  Exh.  21.) 

Plans  to  “Passport”  Students  between  Canoga  Park  High  School  and  Owensmouth 
Continuation  High  School 

7. 

In  June  2015,  the  District  introduced  credit  recovery,  an  initiative  intended  to 

boost  student  graduation  rates  and  to  foster  college  and  career  readiness.  Among  other 
  

*  Throughout  this  Decision  quoted  testimony  is  taken  from  hearing  transcripts,  which 

the  parties  lodged  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings.

features,  credit  recovery  enables  students  with  failing  grades  who  are  attending  the  District’s 
traditional  comprehensive  high  schools  to  “passport”  to  a  continuation  high  school  to  retake 
a  failed  course.  As  set  forth  in  the  District’s  Memorandum  titled  Credit  Recovery  Program 
Opportunities  and  dated  January  20,  2017,’  credit  recovery  opportunities  and  pathways 
include  blended  and  virtual  online  courses  (Edgenuity  and  APEX),  independent  study, 
Performance  Assessment  Student  Support  (PASS),  RIG,  adult  education,  community  college 
courses,  summer  term,  and  fifth-year  high  school  for  specific  students  and  school-designed 
opportunities. 

8. 

According  to  the  District’s  Credit  Recovery  Program  memorandum,  “School 

sites  are  responsible  for  designing  or  selecting  the  credit  recovery  programs  that  best  meet 
It  encourages  students  receiving  a  “D”  to  retake  the 
the  needs  of  their  students.”  (Exh.  7.) 
course  for  a  higher  grade  in  order  to  be  competitive  when  applying  to  universities.  Thus,  it 
provides  that  priority  should  be  given  to  seniors  and  juniors  who  have  received  at  least  one 
“—D”  or  a  failing  grade.  (/bid.)  The  District’s  Credit  Recovery  Program  memorandum 
instructs  that  “As  students  complete  the  credit  recovery  programs,  the  course  and  final  grades 
for  individual  students  may  be  entered  directly  into  the  student’s  transcript  by  the  counselor, 
scheduling  administrator  or  office  manager.”  (/bid.) 

9. 

As  Superintendent  for  Local  District  Northwest,  Ekchian’s  responsibilities 

included  supervision  of  instructional  programs.  She  supervised  those  instructional  directors 
working  with  instructional  teams,  including  school  principals,  to  implement  credit  recovery 
programs.  At  the  administrative  hearing,  Ekchian  explained  “the  idea  of  passporting” 
stating,  “Many  students  hesitate  to  attend  a  continuation  school  full-time  because  they  do  not 
want  to  be  separated  from  the  comprehensive  high  school  for  a  variety  of  reasons. 
Sometimes  they  believe  there’s  a  stigma  attached  to  moving  from  one  school  to  the 
other....  The  idea  of  passporting  is  that  if  there’s  a  particular  subject  area  that  you  need 
credit  recovery  in,  you  can  spend  part  of  the  day  in  that  continuation  high  school,  but  still 
remain  a  student  at  Canoga  Park  and  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  the  elective,  the  sports,  and 
the  other  programs  the  continuation  school  can’t  offer,  but  the  comprehensive  high  school 
can. 
So,  it’s  for  students  who  can  take  advantage  of  both—both  the  program  at  the 
comprehensive  high  school  and  the  offerings  at  the  continuation  school.” 

10. 

=  In  April  or  May  2016,  respondent  first  encountered  the  term  “I-Canoga”  when 

Ekchian  summoned  him  to  a  meeting  at  Canoga  Park  principal  Robert  Garcia.  Respondent 
understood  that  Garcia  “had  been  in  discussions  with  Local  District  Northwest  about  an  idea 
he  had  called  I-Canoga.  If  I’m  not  mistaken,  he  was  trying  to  pattern  it  after  something  at 
Granada  Hills  High  School  called  I-Granada.  [Garcia]  had  a  piece  of  paper  with  some  ideas 
It  was  going  to  be  online.  It  was  going  to  be  using  computers.  There  were  going  to 
on  it...  . 
be  Apex  and  Edgenuity  classes  offered  through  it...  .  He  also  wanted  to  offer  advanced 
placement  classes  online.” 

  

>  This  memorandum  bearing  number  MEM-6733.1  updates  and  replaces  an  earlier 

memorandum  identified  with  the  same  number.  (See  Exh.  7.)

Li. 

ivan  Moreno,  a  Dean  of  Students  and  the  head  football  coach  at  Canoga  Park, 

did  not  attend  the  April  or  May  2016  meeting,  but  he  recalled  observing  respondent 
“spending  time  at  the  campus  in  the  spring  working  with  Mr.  Garcia,”  and  he  understood  that 
they  were  “laying  the  ground  work”  for  “a  new  thing’ --i-Canoga.  Moreno  understood  that  I- 
Canoga  would  “use  football  and  sports  and  extracurricular  activities  to  motivate  kids  to  stay 
in  school  and  graduate.”  Students  would  be  “going  to  Owensmouth,  taking  classes,  and  still 
bemeg  enrolled  at  Canoga  Park  High  School.” 

12. 

On  June  1,  2016,  Ekchian  introduced  respondent  to  the  staff  and  faculty  at 

Owensmouth  as  their  new  principal.  Garcia  and  several  members  of  Local  District 
Northwest,  including  Deinavaz,  who  served  as  the  Instructional  Director  for  Owensmouth, 
and  Joseph  Nacordia,  the  Instructional  Director  for  Canoga  Park,  were  also  present.  Ekchian 
discussed  credit  recovery. 

13. 

Respondent  credibly  recalled  Ekchian  describing  credit  recovery  to  meeting 
attendees  as  a  “seamless  transition  of  students  from  one  campus  to  another”  at  that  June  |, 
2016  meeting.  “Students  would  be  taking  courses  during  the  day  and  the  evening  hours  on 
both  campuses.  My  students  would  go  to  Canoga  Park  High  School,  and  Canoga  Park 
students  would  come  to  mine.  It  would  be  difficult  to  tell  which  campus  the  student  was 
actually  on.  There  was  just  going  to  be  a  partnership.  A  sharing  of  facilities  was  discussed. 
My  continuation  high  school  at  Owensmouth  ...  has  a  facilities  issue,  particularly  when 
you're  talking  about  PE.  There  are  no  PE  facilities.  We're  very  limited  on  what  we  can 
teach  because  of  the  number  of  teachers  we  have.  So,  this  was  supposed  to  be  a  wonderful 
opportunity  for  students  at  Canoga  Park  High  School  to  remain  at  Canoga  Park  High  School 
and  receive  credit  under  the  umbrella  of  Options.  And  it  was  a  good  opportunity  for  my 
students  to  travel  to  Canoga  Park  High  School  to  take  PE,  because  we  don’t  have  any  PE 
facilities  or  credentialed  PE  teachers.” 

i4. 

After  the  June  1,  2016  meeting  occurred,  on  a  subsequent  day,  respondent, 

Garcia,  Delnavaz,  Nacordia,  and  the  Canoga  Park  plant  manager  got  together  and  they 
“walked  the  facilities  and  talked  about  the  pilot  program.”  As  they  walked  the  facilities  there 
was  a  brief  encounter  with  Moreno  and  Kevin  Carlsen,  who  served  as  assistant  football 
coach  at  Canoga  Park.  Garcia  introduced  respondent  to  Moreno  and  Carlsen.  Niceties  were 
exchanged  and  the  group  talked  a  little  bit  about  the  pilot  program  before  Moreno  and 
Carisen  departed. 

15. 

At  the  administrateve  hearmg,  Carlsen  recalled  encountering  Garcia  and 

respondent  on  a  walk-through  and  discussing  a  program  about  sharing  students.  Carlsen 
understood  that  the  program  was  intended  to  target  students  with  bad  grades  or  in  need  of 
credits.  “Because  |  was  m  football,  it  was  more  football-based  as  to  how  it  could  help 
football  players  or  the  rest  of  the  athletes  at  Canoga  High  School.” 

16. 

The  walk-through  continued,  and  respondent,  Garcia,  Delnavaz,  and  Narcordia 

continued  their  discussion  about  how  to  implement  “passporting.”  Respondent  explained, 

rye

also  three  rooms  that  had  been  used  for  ROTC,  and  they  were  really  in  bad  shape.  [Those 
were]  the  three  rooms  we  wanted  to  use  for  the  I-Canoga  portion.  There  was  supposed  to  be 
some  construction  in  those  rooms  ...  over  the  summer.  The  classrooms  were  supposed  to  be 
moved  and  expanded.  There  was  [sic]  a  couple  of  off-campus  groups  using  some  rooms,  and 
they  were  supposed  to  leave  so  that  the  rooms  could  be  prepared.” 

17. 

The  group  discussed  the  bell  schedules.  Respondent  explained,  “It  was 

Superintendent  Ekchian’s  charge  that  we  passport  students  during  the  day.  The  current  bell 
schedule  certainly  was  not  going  to  make  that  happen.  We  hadn’t  at  that  time  figured  out 
what  the  bell  schedule  was  going  to  be,  but  we  knew  we  had  to  change  it.”  Respondent 
requested  Delnavez  to  delay  certification  of  the  bell  schedule  for  the  2016/2017  academic 
year.  Respondent  explained,  “In  order  to  get  this  pilot  program  off  the  ground,  we  had  to 
synchronize  the  bell  schedules,  and  that  was  obviously  not  a  problem  for  Canoga,  but  it  was 
a  problem  for  Owensmouth.  Traditionally  speaking,  you  only  need  180  minutes  a  day  for  a 
continuation  high  school.  So,  a  lot  of  continuation  high  schools  ended  the  day  at  12:30.  I 
was  never  really  a  big  fan  of  that,  so  I  was  more  than  happy  to  bump  the  bell  schedule  up... . 
I  took  a  look  at  Robert  [Garcia’s]  bell  schedule.  At  first,  I  was  just  going  to  match  it,  but  the 
So,  I  looked  at  it  and  tried  my  best  to  coincide  some 
teachers  weren’t  happy  with  that  idea. 
periods.  ...  Since  1t  had  never  been  done  before,  the  difficulty  was  trying  to  figure  out  how 
to  match  it  up  with  their  school.  In  a  comprehensive  high  school,  you  traditionally  have  six 
periods.  They  have  50,  60  teachers,  so  you  have  conference  periods  scattered  throughout  the 
day. 
scatter  conferences  throughout  the  day  because  you  would  have  no  place  to  put  the  students. 
So,  I  figured  out  where  we  could  get  six  classes  in  to  about  2:00,  and  then  I  would  give  my 
conference  period,  if  a  teacher  desired  it,  from  about  2:10  to  3:15,  and  that  would  be  a 
regular  school  day.  ... 
I  was  able  to  closely  match  first  and  second  period  to  Canoga  Park 
High  School’s  first  and  second  periods.  But  then  with  their  five-minute  lapse  between  class 
and  their  nutrition  breaks  and  lunch,  it  just  didn’t  work  until  we  got  to  Canoga  Park  High 
School  fifth  and  sixth  period.  I  could  match...  my  sixth  period  with  Canoga  Park  High 
school  fifth  period,  and  then  my  seventh  with  Canoga  Park  High  School  sixth  period.  So 
when  we  discussed  the  issues,  we  called  it  six/seven—Canoga  Park  High  School’s  sixth 
period  with  Owensmouth  High  School’s  seventh  period.” 

In  a  continuation  high  school  where  you  only  have  four,  five,  six,  teachers,  you  don’t 

18. 

| Respondent  encountered  a  “plethora  of  problems”  as  he  prepared  for  the 

upcoming  2016/2017  academic  year.  The  bell  schedule  was  certified  and  locked  in  place.  “I 
don’t  recall  all  the  details,  but  I  remember  getting  a  call  from  MiSiS°  saying  that  they  could 
no  longer  change  the  bell  schedule.  It  was  already  programed  for  the  new  year. 
contacted  my  supervisor  downtown.  His  name  is  Scott  Braxton.  He  worked  on  the  issue  for 
me  downtown.  Eventually,  they  called  and  said  they  couldn’t  switch  the  bell  schedule— 
whatever  the  bell  schedule  was,  it  was  in  place. 
maneuver  throughout  the  day  and  the  windows  in  MiSiS  and  take  roll  properly.  Their  day 

So,  then  I  got  my  teachers  to  agree  to 

I  then 

  

°  MiSiS  is  the  database  system  and  application  for  recording  student  enrollment, 

course  schedules,  grades,  and  academic  history.

previously  had  ended  at  12:40;  so,  you  could  see  it  was  a  problem.  But,  they  agreed  to  work 
with  me  on  it.” 

19. 

‘There  was  a  problem  with  properly  accounting  for  the  average  daily 

attendance  (ADA)  “because  ADA  can  only  be  collected  by  one  school,  but  we  were 
attempting  to  merge  two  schools  together[.]  Only  one  school  can  capture  ADA.” 
Respondent  explamed  at  the  administrative  hearing,  “If  their  students  came  to  my  school, 
and  we  took  roll  on  MISES,  we  weren't  sure...  whether  it  would  show  Canoga  Park  or 
Owensmouth.  So,  we  had  a  problem.” 

Summer  2016  Football  Programs  at  Canoga  Park  High  School 

20. 

Both  the  Boys  and  Girls  Club  and  the  District  offered  football  programs  at 

Canoga  Park  in  summer  2016.  Canoga  Park  football  coaches,  including  Moreno  and 
Carisen,  supervised  and  managed  both  programs.  As  m  previous  years,  aspirants  from 
several  high  schools,  including  Canoga  Park  students,  participated.  According  to  Carlsen, 
“They  call  it  testing  the  waters.”  Carlsen  explained  at  the  administrative  hearing  that  “pretty 
much  anybody”  participates  in  the  Boys  and  Girls  Club’s  football  program,  and  that  many  of 
those  participants  are  “ineligible  grade-wise.”  “A  lot  of  kids  would  come  to  us  because  they 
were  ineligible,  and  [ask],  “What  can  I  do?’”  Typically,  Moreno  and  Carlsen  advised  how  to 
gai  eligibility,  including  taking  Apex  or  other  online  classes. 

21. 

The  District’s  football  program  ts  limited  to  students  enrolled  at  Canoga  Park, 

and  who  meet  the  eligibility  requirement.  Historically,  students  intending  to  transfer  to 
Canoga  Park  to  play  football,  but  who  are  not  yet  enrolled  as  students  at  Canoga  Park, 
presented  a  challenge.  No  staff  responsible  for  enrolling  students  at  Canoga  Park  is  present 
at  the  school  im  the  summer  when  the  District’s  football  program  is  in  session.  Carlsen 
explamed,  “It’s  kind  of  up  in  the  air  at  that  pomt  what  you  do  with  those  students.”  That  was 
the  case  in  summer  2016,  Students  intending  to  transfer  to  Canoga  Park,  regardless  of 
eligibility  status,  participated  in  the  District’s  football  program  along  with  students  who  were 
already  enrolled  at  Canoga  Park. 

22. 

There  were  10  to  15  meligible  student  participants  in  the  District-sanctioned 

summer  2016  football  program.  Carlsen  immediately  thought  about  the  new  program  he 
previously  discussed  with  Garcia  and  respondent.  Carlsen  explained  his  thinking:  “EL  was 
excited  about  the  program  because  tt  would  really  help  Canoga  High  School.  As  long  as  I’ve 
been  there  we've  had  ineligible  students,  and  it  sounded  to  me  like  it’s  a  really  great  program 
to  get  these  kids  where  they  needed  to  be,  and  so  |  was  very  encouraged  by  the  program.  Me 
.  just  to  have 
being  a  football  coach,  you  lose  certain  kids  that  can  make  your  team  better,  .. 
a  bigger  team.  Every  year  it  seems  Ikke  our  team  gets  smaller  and  smaller.  We  used  to  have 
50  kids.  Now  we're  only  at  32.  You  lose  kids  every  year,  and  it  makes  it  more  and  more 
difficult.”  Carlsen  suggested  to  Moreno,  “Let’s  take  them  over  there  [meaning 
Owensmouth]|  to  see  what  we  can  do.  Maybe  we  can  get  it  to  work.” 

~
~

23. 

Carlsen  and  Moreno  required  students  intending  to  transfer  from  other  schools 

to  Canoga  Park  to  produce  a  report  card  for  review.  “Whenever  we  get  any  kids  from  any 
other  schools  that  want  to  transfer  in  the  first  thing  we  ask  them  for  1s  their  report  card 
because  we’ve  learned  the  hard  way  that  you  ask  kids  for  their  grades—‘How  are  your 
grades?’  ‘Oh,  good.’—and  then  you  find  out  that  they  have  all  fails.”  Carlsen  and  Moreno’s 
review  of  students’  report  cards  revealed,  for  example,  that  some  students  required  a  math 
class,  others  required  a  history  class,  and  still  others  required  a  physical  education  class  to 
obtain  eligibility. 

24. 

Carlsen  recalled  that  he  and  Moreno  referred  or  accompanied  multiple 

different  groups  of  students  to  Owensmouth  on  several  different  occasions  during  a  two- 
week  dead  period  before  the  2016/2017  academic  year  commenced.  According  to  Carlsen, 
“*T  believe  [for]  some  kids  there  weren’t  any  classes  that  they  could  take  to  try  to  help  them 
....  Some  we  were  able  to  work  out  ....  We  were  trying  to  work  out—to  figure  out—how 
we  can  get  these  kids  eligible;  so,  1t  was  kind  of  a  combination  trying  to  work  together  to 
figure  out  how  we  can  do  it.” 

25. 

Atthe  administrative  hearing,  Carlsen  could  not  state  definitively  respondent’s 
involvement  in  the  process  of  sorting  out  which  students  would  be  able  to  take  which  classes 
at  Ownesmouth.  Regarding  respondent’s  involvement  in  the  sorting  process,  Carlsen 
testified,  “I  think  it  was  more,  you  know,  on  us  in  trying  to  figure  out  what—I  mean  he  could 
only,  you  know,  do  what  he  could  to  provide  for  the  kids. 
try  to  help  you  or—you  know.  And I  don’t  even  know  at  that  time  if  he  had  teachers.” 

So,  it  was  either  I  can,  you  know, 

  

26. 

Nor  could  Carlsen  state  definitively  respondent’s  involvement  in  any 

instructions  rendered  to  any  students  needing  classes  offered  at  Owensmouth.  In  response  to 
the  query,  who  was  going  to  teach  the  physical  education  class,  Carlsen  testified,  “I  don’t 
know  how  that  part  works.  I  don’t  know  if  he  was  going  to  teach  it,  or  how  that  whole,  you 
know,  that  part,  works  with  the  sharing  of  the  students,  or  how  that  part  works.” 

27. 

Ultimately,  four  students  were  identified  as  suitable  to  enroll  in  a  physical 

education  class.  Carlsen  testified  that  he  understood  that  “we  were  going  to  ty  to  get  these 
kids  a  class,  a  PE  class,  because,  I  think,  Mr.  Camp,  was  credentialed  in  PE.  .. 
.  [W]e  were 
trying  to  get...  a  PE  class  going  so  they  could  take  PE  right  away.”  The  physical  education 
class,  however,  did  not  commence  immediately  after  the  determination  that  there  was  a  need 
for  the  class  because  unresolved  funding  issues  delayed  implementation.  Carlsen 
remembered  texting  respondent  inquiring,  “When  can  we  get  this  class  started?” 

The  Four  Students 

28. 

. 

H.  was  already  enrolled  at  Canoga  Park  where  he  had  completed  ninth, 

tenth  and  eleventh  grade.  He  earned  an  A  in  Advanced  Physical  Education  1A  the  fall 
semester  of  the  ninth  grade  and  an  A  in  Varsity  Boys’  Soccer  in  the  spring  semester  of  the 
ninth  grade,  and  he  received  a  total  of  10  credits.  He  earned  an  A  in  Varsity  Boys’  Soccer  in 
the  fall  semester  of  the  tenth  grade  and  A’s  in  Junior  Varsity  Boys’  Soccer  and  Varsity  Boys’

Soccer,  both  taken  in  the  spring  of  the  tenth  grade,  and  he  received  a  total  of  15  credits.  He 
earned  A’s  in  Varsity  Boys’  Soccer  taken  in  the  fall  and  spring  of  the  eleventh  grade  and  he 
earned  a  total  of  10  credits.  In  sum,  his  35  physical  education  credits  satisfied  the  20-credit 
physical  education  requirement  needed  for  high  school  graduation.  His  athletic  eligibility 
GPA  was  1.833.  (Exh.  2  at  p.  5.) 

29. 

M.  completed  the  ninth  grade  at  Chula  Vista  High  School,  the  tenth 
grade  at  Chatsworth  Charter  High  School  and  the  eleventh  grade  at  William  Tell  Aggeler 
Opportunity  High  School.  He  earned  A’s  in  Advance  Physical  Education  in  the  ninth  grade 
and  received  a  total  of  10  credits.  He  earned  A’s  in  Varsity  Football  in  tenth  grade,  and  he 
received  a  total  of  10  credits.  In  sum,  his  20  physical  education  credits  satisfied  the  20-credit 
physical  education  requirement  need  for  high  school  graduation.  His  athletic  eligibility  GPA 
was  0.600.  (Exh.  |  at  p.  2.) 

30. 

Y  completed  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  grades  at  San  Fernando 

High  School  (San  Fernando)  where  he  participated  in  both  basketball  and  football.  While  at 
San  Fernando,  he  earned  A’s  in  Boys’  Basketball  in  both  semesters  of  the  ninth  grade  and 
received  a  total  of  10  credits.  He  earned  A’s  in  Junior  Varsity  Boys’  Basketball  in  both 
semesters  of  the  tenth  grade  and  received  an  additional  total  of  10  credits. 
physical  education  credits  satisfied  the  20-credit  physical  education  requirement  needed  for 
high  school  graduation.  His  athletic  eligibility  GPA  was  1.500.  (Exh.  2  at  p.  2.) 

In  sum,  his  20 

31. 

During  the  July  28  through  August  12,  2016  dead  period, 

   
H., 
and  i  Y.,  worked  out  in  the  weight  room  at  Canoga  Park  by  themselves,  and  they 
maintained  weight  lifting  logs  Carlsen  provided  to  them.  They  also  wrote  essays  about 
famous  athletes.  According  to  Carlsen,  “Because  we  were  hoping  the  class  was  going  to  go, 
so  they  had  the  kids  already  start  working  on,  you  know  papers  that  they  were  writing,  and 
that  kind  of  stuff.  We  tried  to  help  them  get  going  ahead  of  time.  . 
school  year  started  . 
football.” 

.  they  would  do  it  during  sixth  period  because  they  can’t  practice 

.  And  then  when  the 

M 

. 

. 

°) 

32.  im  H.  completed  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  grades  at  Birmingham 

Community  Charter  High  School  (Birmingham)  where  he  was  a  member  of  the  school’s 
football  team.  While  at  Birmingham  in  the  ninth  grade,  he  earned  an  A  in  Fresh/Soph 
Football  in  the  fall  semester,  a  C  in  Varsity  Football  in  the  spring  semester  and  a  B  in 
Advance  Physical  Education  1B  also  in  the  spring  semester.  He  received  a  total  of  15 
physical  education  credits.  In  the  tenth  grade,  he  earned  an  A  in  Fresh/Soph  Football  in  the 
fall  semester  and  a  B  in  Fresh/Soph  Football  in  the  spring  semester  for  a  total  of  10 
additional  physical  education  credits.  In  sum,  his  25  physical  education  credits  satisfied  the 
physical  requirement  needed  for  high  school  graduation.  His  athletic  eligibility  GPA  is  noted 
as  1.667.  (Exh.  41.) 

33. 

At  the  conclusion  of  each  season im  H.  played  on  the  Birmingham  football 

team,  his  coach  declined  to  play  him  in  the  playoffs  telling  him,  “You  have  next  Year.” 

H.  was  frustrated  with  hearing  the  “You  have  next  year”  refrain,  and  he  determined  at

  
  

the  conclusion  of  his  junior  year  to  leave  Birmingham  to  play  football  at  Paraclete  High 
School  (Paraclete). 
turn  informed  the  Birmingham  football  coach  about im  H.’s  decision.  From im  H.’s 
perspective,  the  coach  responded  by  assigning  him  failing  grades  in  Football,  Study  Skills, 
Geometry,  Physical  Geology 
coaches  at  Birmingham. 

B,  and  History,  all  of  which  are  courses  taught  by  other  football 
H.’s  mother  testified,  however,  that  at  least  with  respect  to 

H.  told  another  teammate  about  his  decision,  and  the  teammate  in 

H.’s  football  class,  the  coach  at  Birmingham  informed  her  that 

H.  “did  no  work” 

and  “wouldn't  lift.”  Because  of  these  failing  grades,  Paraclete,  which  required  a  2.5  grade 
point  average  for  matriculation,  was  eliminated  as  a  viable  option  for 
considered  attending  Chatsworth  High  School,  but  even  after  completing  four  weeks  of 
classes  during  the  2016  summer  session  at  Birmingham  he  was  unable  to  raise  his  GPA  to 
meet  Chatsworth’s  academic  standards. im  H.’s  mother  preferred  her  son  to  complete  his 
senior  year  at  Birmingham,  and im  H.  resigned  himself  to  the  fact  of  remaining  at 
Birmingham  even  if  it  meant  he  would  no  longer  play  football  there. 

H. im  H.  next 

34. 

Throughout  summer  2016,  Moreno  and  Carlsen  engaged im  H.  in 

discussions  about  playing  football  at  Canoga  Park. im  H.  was  friendly  with  members  of 
the  Canoga  Park  football  team  and  he  was  acquainted  with  the  team’s  coaches.  One  day,  a 
H.’s  situation 
friend  on  the  Canoga  Park  football  team  who  was  knowledgeable  about 
  
at  Birmingham  texted 
H.  objected  telling  his  friend  that  he  did  not  want  to  attend  Canoga  Park. 
gave 
Canoga  Park’s  football  team.  According  to im  H.,  Coach  Moreno  “text[ed]  me  every  day 
and  was  like,  “Come.  We’ll  help  you.  It’s  better  over  here.’  He  kept  telling  me,  ‘Just  come. 
Just  come.’”  Both im  H.  and  his  mother  regarded  these  contacts  as  recruitment. 

H.  inviting  him  to  join  the  football  team  at  Canoga  Park. 

mm  H.’s  phone  number  to  Moreno,  who  in  turn  texted 

H.’s  friend 
H.  inviting  him  to  join 

  

35. 

On  August  8,  2016,  instruction  resumed  at  Birmingham,  and im  H.  returned 
there,  but  his  attendance  was  sporadic—he  attended  classes  the  entirety  of  the  first  week,  two 
or  three  days  the  second  week,  and  stayed  at  home  the  third  week.  During  the  second  week, 
Moreno  and  Carlsen  traveled  to  Birmingham  to  meet  with im  H.  to  review  his  academic 
transcript.  Moreno  and  Carlsen  informed im  H.  that  in  order  for  him  to  join  the  football 
team  at  Canoga  Park  he  had  to  make  up a  class,  and  they  proposed  that  he  do  so  by  writing 
“some  essays”  and  by  taking  a  weightlifting  class. 
administrative  hearing,  “I  know  they  said  they  [were]  going  to  help  him  get  into  a  credit 
recovery  class  in  order  to  be  eligible  to  play  football.” 

H.’s  mother  recalled  at  the 

Enrolling  Transferring  Students  at  Canoga  Park  High  School 

36. 

August  10,  2016,  was  the  start  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year  at  Canoga 

Park.  Nuria  Steinhauer  is  a  guidance  counselor  at  Canoga  Park,  whose  responsibilities 
include,  among  other  things,  conducting  a  “graduation  check”  of  senior  students’  academic 
history  to  ensure  their  completion  of  required  courses  and  credits,  identifying  which  students 
need  “to  make  up  classes  that  they  failed  in  the  past”  with  credit  recovery,  and  directing 
students  to  Donna  Finkelstein,  the  Canoga  Park  credit  recovery  coordinator. 

10

  

      
  

37. 

 Stemhauer  is  the  counselor  who  enrolled 

Y.,  who  was  transferring 

from  San  Fernando,  and 

H.,  who  was  transferring  from  Birmingham,  at  Canoga  Park. 

H.’s  mother  was 

present  during  Steinhauer’s  enrollment  of 

H. 

It  was  not 

Y.’s  parents  were  present  during  Steinhauer’s  enrollment  of 

established  whether 
Y. 

38. 

Steinhauer  conducted  a  graduation  check  of  both  students’  academic  records 
and  she  determined  that  both  students  had  satisfied  the  physical  education  requirement  for 
graduation.  Steinhauer  also  referred  both  students  to  Finkelstein  for  credit  recovery  because 
she  determined  that  both  students  “were  in  need  of  a  required  class  to  graduate.” 
not  specify  the  required  class. 

She  did 

39.  im  H.  was  assigned  to  Moreno’s  sixth  period  class  at  Canoga  Park,  which 

the  evidence,  Moreno  instructed 

mm  H.  to  write  about  “sports  or  football 

was  populated  with  students  ineligible  to  play  football  at  Canoga  Park.  On  a  date  not 
established  by 
players.”  =  H.  wrote  four  one-page  essays.  Moreno  instructed im  H.  to  complete  logs 
used  for  documenting  several  types  of  exercises,  including  bench  press,  row,  pulldown,  and 
triceps  extensions,  which  were  purportedly  performed  over  a  five-week  period  on  Mondays, 
Wednesdays,  and  Fridays  during  “off-season”  in  the  summer  of  2016. 
H.  completed 
the  logs  with  numbers  he  obtained  “from  the  top  of  [his]  head.” im  H.  explained  at  the 
administrative  hearing,  “That’s  false  information.”  He  fabricated  the  numbers  “because 
Moreno  told  me  to  just  write  anything  there.”  He  performed  none  of  the  exercises 
documented  as  occurring  at  Canoga  Park  during  summer  2016. im  H.  justified  his 
compliance  with  Moreno’s  directive  stating,  “I  just  wanted  to  play  football.” 

“Passporting”  Students  between  Canoga  Park  High  School  and  Ownesmouth  Continuation 
High  School  in  the  2016/2017  Academic  Year 

40. 

On  August  16,  2016,  instruction  began  at  Canoga  Park.  On  August  23,  2016, 
Garcia,  Canoga  Park’s  principal,  commenced  a  meeting  to  discuss  the  pilot  program,  which 
he  feared  had  fallen  off  the  radar.  Respondent,  Delnavas,  Nacorda,  Finkelstein,  Brian  York, 
the  Title  One  Coordinator  for  Canoga  Park,  and  an  unidentified  gentleman  from  the  Local 
District  office  attended.  Moreno,  Ivet  Diaz-Swayer,  an  assistant  principal  at  Canoga  Park, 
and  others  popped  in  for  unspecified  lengths  of  time,  but  did  not  stay  for  the  entire  meeting, 
which,  according  to  respondent,  was  very  long. 

41. 

Respondent  testified,  “I  don’t  recall  everything  in  order,  but  I  knew  (sic)  we 
talked  about  funding,  which  was  one  of  the  biggest  issues.  We  didn’t  know  how  to  secure 
funding  at  that  point,  I  believe.  ...  We  talked  about  staffing.  We  talked  about  sharing 
facilities.  We  talked  about  the  classes  that  we  would  offer  in  the  evening.  We  talked  about 
classes  we  could  offer  in  the  day.  We  specifically  talked  about  our  first  crack  at  sharing  kids 
during  the  day  was  going  to  be  the  period  six/seven.  ...  We  talked  about  the  bells,  and  I 
explained  that  I  had  somewhat  overcome  the  hurdle.... 
brought  to  my  attention  that...  a  PE  teacher  was  carrying  the  roster  for  the  football  team  in 
the  spring...  at  Canoga  Park  High  School,  and  it  was  shared  that—I  don’t  know  what 

It  had  been  previously  been 

11

    

  

happened  between  the  teacher  and  the  football  coaches—but,  I  guess  he  gave  a  lot  of  Ds  and 
Fs  to  the  kids. 
So,  we  talked  about  that  being  an  opportunity  because  the  kids  had  all  been  in 
Mr.  Moreno’s  summer  weightlifting  class,  and  he  had  already  had  them  in  a  weightlifting 
program.  At  that  time,  we  were  about  one  week  into  school,  and  the  kids  were  all  in  Mr. 
Moreno’s  period  six  lifting  weights.  They  couldn’t  practice  football  because  they  were 
ineligible,  and  there  was  (sic)  that  class,  it’s  a  comprehensive  high  school,  they  can’t  recover 
the  credit  until  December.  So,  what  we  decided  to  do  was  use  his  facilities  for  weightlifting. 
We  would  put  the  class  in  period  seven  under  Owensmouth  High  School  umbrella.  Ms. 
[Rebecca]  Loiacono  had  carried  a  roster  before,  so  we  would  use  her  as  the  teacher.  We  also 
chose  her  because  she  was  running  the  online  Apex  and  Edgenuity  for  me.  ... .  Donna 
[Finkelstein]  would  put  anybody  in  the  class  who  had  failed  the  spring  course.  Whatever 
kids  that  she  discovered  had  failed  the  spring  course,  she  would  look  and  see,  number  one, 
did  they  need  PE  credit  or  did  they  need  electives  credits.  PE  is  one  to  the  few  classes  you 
can  take  over  and  above  the  PE  requirements  because  it  can  be  used  as  an  elective. 
So,  ifa 
student  failed  something  or...  had  already  completed  PE,  [and]  if  [the]  student  were  still 
taking  football,  [PE]  would  typically  be  used  as  an  elective.” 

42. 

Respondent  was  excited  about  the  combined  period  six/seven  class  because  it 

meant  that  students  enrolled  at  Owensmouth  would  have  access  to  Canoga  Park’s  physical 
education  facilities,  including  its  weight  room.  Owensmouth  lacked  the  necessary  facilities 
to  offer  any  physical  education  courses.  “All  we  can  have  our  kids  do  is  walk  and  do  push- 
ups  and  sit-ups.  ...  You  can’t  give  traditional  PE  classes  in  a  school  that  doesn’t  have  the 
facilities.  We  typically  require  our  kids  to  do  some  type  of  writing  assignments.  We  do 
some  type  of  physical  activity,  and  then  they  always  take  the  California  fitness  exam  every 
single  year.”  Respondent  suggested  that  the  six/seven  class  should  consist  of  both  a  physical 
activity  component  and  a  writing  component.  Moreno  agreed. 

43. 

After  that  August  23,  2016  meeting,  there  was  a  concerted  effort  to  implement 

the  pilot  program  for  “passporting”  students  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth.  On 
August  29,  2016,  at  approximately  12:48  p.m.  Finkelstein  sent  a  text  to  respondent  informing 
him  that  she  met  with  Moreno  and  other  Canoga  Park  counselors,  and  that  she  “need[ed]  to 
make  some  changes.”  Finkelstein  asked  respondent  if  she  could  stop  by,  and  at  1:00  p.m., 
respondent  answered,  “Absolutely!”  Twenty  minutes  later,  Carlsen  texted  respondent 
informing  him,  “Kids  will  be  coming  over  to  your  6th  [sic]’  period  with  Ivan  [Moreno].  Do 
you  only  have  PE?”  To  which  respondent  texted,  “Just  spoke  to  Donna  [Finkelstein]  and  she 
said  not  yet,  they  aren’t  ready  to  enroll  them.”  Then  in  response  to  the  question,  “How  long 
do  you  think  it  will  take?”  Respondent  texted,  “Idk.  By  Friday  I  hope.” 

44. 

Notwithstanding  Finkelstein’s  request  for  temporary  forbearance,  on  August 

29,  2016,  Moreno  took  . 
Owensmouth  to  discuss  the  parameters  of  the  combined  period  six/seven  class.  Since  it  was 
  

H.  to  respondent  at 

Y.,  and 

  

  

M.., 

H. 

> 

’  Carlsen’s  reference  to  “your  6th  period”  appears  to  be  an  error  in  light  of  the 
competent,  credible  evidence  that  a  feature  of  the  combined  period  six/seven  class  was  sixth 
period  at  Canoga  Park  and  seventh  period  at  Owensmouth. 

12

  

previously  decided  at  the  August  23,  2016  meeting  that  those  students  enrolled  in  Moreno’s 
six  period,  who  were  also  enrolled  in  Moreno’s  summer  weightlifting  class,  would  recover 
credit,  respondent  instructed  Moreno  “to  please  keep  all  the  work  that  was  done.” 

45. 

It  is  typical  for  continuation  high  school  students  to  complete  a  course’s 

requirements  at  any  time  during  the  academic  year.  Consequently,  at  continuation  high 
schools  all  teachers  keep  folders  of  completed  work  as  proof  of  completion  in  the  event  that 
they  are  audited  to  determine  whether  the  grade  1s  justified.  Moreno  objected  to  keeping  any 
folders  containing  students’  completed  work,  and  he  assured  respondent  that  he  (Moreno) 
had  a  roll  book.  Respondent  offered  to  create  and  maintain  the  folders  for  students  in  the 
combined  period  six/seven  class  in  his  office. 

46. 
M.., 

|  Moreno  informed  respondent  that  the  accompanying  four  students— Sa 

H., 

Y.,  and 

mm  H.—were  enrolled  in  the  combined  period  six/seven  class. 
The  four  students  handed  over  weightlifting  logs  to  respondent.  Respondent  asked  Moreno 
about  additional  enrollees,  and  Moreno  informed  respondent  that  Finkelstein  would  be 
“putting  them  in  [MiSiS]  eventually.” 

47. 

Respondent  obtained  four  manila  folders  from  his  desk  drawer;  one  for  each  of 

the  four  students.  He  then  realized  that  he  did  not  have  the  proper  paperwork  for  the 
students.  At  the  administrative  hearing  respondent  explained,  “Traditionally  speaking,  when 
.  they  have  a  checkout  form. 
a  student  comes  over  and  we  accept  paperwork  in  progress,  . 
If  it’s  in  the  middle  of  the  semester,  they  have  the  current  classes  that  they  are  taking  [and| 
they  have  the  grades  of  the  current  classes.  This  had  never  been  done  before,  and  we  didn’t 
have  the  proper  paperwork.”  Respondent  pulled  out  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
Complementary  Report  slips  from  his  desk  drawer.  According  to  respondent,  “I  said,  ‘Well, 
we  ll  record  the  work  that  I’m  collecting  that  was  done  under  your  supervision  during  the 
summer  outside  of  the  fall  class.’  ... 
course  is  finished  in  the  fall  but  there’s  work  from  the  summer,  .. 
document  what’s  happening.” 

If  we  got  audited  and  somebody  wanted  to  see  it,  if  the 

.  you’d  have  to  try  to 

. 

Two  of  the  four  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  Complementary  Report 

48. 
slips—for 
Y.  and im  H.—were  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing.  (Exh.  9  at  p. 
69.)  Both  slips  identify  the  school  as  “Owensmouth  HS,”  the  class  as  “PE  2B,”  and  the  class 
activity  as  “summer  weight  program.”  In  the  comment  section  of  each  slip  the  following 
appears:  “AEE  final  grade  July  28-Aug  12  2016.”  Respondent’s  signature  appears  above  the 
words  “Teacher’s  signature.”  “Principal”  appears  over  the  words  “Principal’s  signature.” 
(Exh.  9  at  p.  69;  hereinafter  “summer  weight  program  slips”.) 

49. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  respondent  explained  the  circumstances 

surrounding  his  creation  of  the  summer  weight  program  slips  as  follows:  “I  put  a  location 
code  that  the  work  takes  place.  I  put  down  the  names  of  the  kids  he  was  telling  me  about.  I 
put  down  the  high  school  that’s  handling  the  umbrella  of  credit  recovery.  [Moreno]  told  me 
that  all  the  kids  had  taken  the  summer  weightlifting  program  during  summer  school.  Canoga 
Park  High  School  did  have  summer  school.  He  told  me  that  they  had  all  taken  his  course  and 

13

  

So  he  said  they  all  got  a  summer  school 
received  A’s.  This  work  began  during  that  class. 
grade  of  AEE,  so  I  put  down  AEE  for  the  final  grade  they  got  in  their  summer  course.  He 
told  me  that  their  work  was  outstanding.  I  wrote  down  that  this  was  my  summer  credit 
record—that  it  was  a  summer  weightlifting  program.  I  wrote  down  the  date  summer  ended, 
and  I  wrote  down  the  dates  that  he  said  the  course  began.  He  couldn’t  remember  exactly,  but 
he  told  me  he  believed  it  was  between  July  28  and  August  12. 
down,  and  I  signed  it  as  a  principal  that  I  was  authorizing  the  acceptance  of  work.” 

So  I  put  that  information 

50. 

After  he  filled  out  the  summer  weight  program  slips  with  the  information 

Moreno  provided  him,  respondent  placed  a  slip  for  each  of  the  four  students  in  folders 
bearing  their  names.  The  summer  weight  program  slips  were  intended  only  to  keep  track  of 
the  work  each  student  completed  under  Moreno’s  supervision  before  the  fall  semester 
started.  The  weightlifting  logs  respondent  received  from  the  four  students  were  also  placed 
in  each  respective  student’s  folder. 

51. 

|  Respondent  explained,  “We  began  the  program,  both  night  and  day,  before 

anybody  was  enrolled  in  MiSiS.  Donna  [Finkelstein]  was  having  a  very  difficult  time  with 
MiSiS,  so  we  started  the  class.”  “It  was  my  understanding  that  they  were  enrolled  in  period 
six  football  with  Mr.  Moreno  and  they  were  lifting  weights  every  single  day  [prior  to 
September  6,  2018].” 

Moreno  Provides  Names  of  Students  “Passporting”  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth 
to  Finkelstein  for  Enrollment  in  MiSiS 

52. 

On  September  6,  2016,  Moreno  handed  Finkelstein  a  folder  containing  the 
academic  transcripts  of  students  who  would  be  “passporting”  between  Canoga  Park  and 
Owensmouth  for  credit  recovery.  From  those  transcripts,  Finkelstein  created  a  list  of  the  18 
students’  names. 
M., 

H..  Moreno  instructed  Finkelstein  to  input  these  four 

p.  1.)  The  first  four  students’  names  on  the  list  are  . 

(Exh.  2  at 
Y.,  and 

H., 

students’  names  in  MiSiS  as  enrollees  in  a  seventh  period  class  at  Owensmouth.  Finkelstein 
recalled  at  the  administrative  hearing,  “I  was  told  that  they  were  kids  sitting  in  a  football 
class  [who]  are  not  eligible  to  play  football,  and  rather  than  just  sit  around,  they  might  as 
well  take  a  class  and  get  credit  for  it.”  Following  Moreno’s  instruction,  Finkelstein  placed 
mm  M.,  ia  Y.,  and im  H.’s  names  in  MiSiS  as  enrollees  in  PE  2A  at 

H., 

Owensmouth.  MiSiS  automatically  identified  Rebecca  Loiacono  as  the  teacher  of  record  for 
the  PE  2A  course  at  Owensmouth. 

53. 

Loiacono,  who  has  been  teaching  at  Owensmouth  for  the  past  seven  years, 

holds  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential  with  a  Cross-cultural 
Language  and  Academic  Development,  or  CLAD,  emphasis  and  Art  supplementary.  At  the 
administrative  hearing,  Loiacono  explained  how  her  credentials  permit  her  to  teach  physical 
education.  “So,  with  a  continuation  high  school  or  any  type  of  contained  environment  where 
.  and  that 
there’s  any  type  of  intervention,  I  have  the  credentials  to  teach  multiple  subjects  . 
will  include  PE,  but  not  [as]  a  single  subject.  For  instance,  I  have  taught  intervention  with  all 

. 

14

core  subjects.  But  I  cannot  teach  specifically  PE  as  a  core  subject...  . 
PE  as  a  subject  alone.” 

I  [have]  never  taught 

54. 

After  Finkelstein  input  the  four  students’  names  in  MiSiS  as  enrollees  in  PE 

2A  at  Owensmouth,  the  students  were  expected  to  check  in  with  Elida  Perez-Rubalcava,  the 
head  secretary  at  Owensmouth,  whose  responsibilities  included  maintenance  of  students’ 
records  of  enrollment,  attendance,  and  academic  performance.  Perez-Rubalcava  creates  and 
maintains  a  roster  identifying  students  regularly  enrolled  at  Owensmouth  separate  from  a 
roster  identifying  Canoga  Park  students  enrolled  in  the  credit  recovery  program  at 
Ownensmouth.  A  September  2016  Ownensmouth  High  School  Credit  Recovery  Roster 
Perez-Rubalcava  created  was  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing.  (See  Exh.  |  at  pp.  19- 
20.)  The  offered  Credit  Recovery  Roster  did  not  address  enrollment  prior  to  September  7, 
2016,  which  is  the  date  on  ia  Y.  and 
mm 
gain  eligibility  to  play  football  at  Canoga  Park.  (See  Factual  Finding  72.) 

H.  reportedly  completed  the  requirements  to 

55. 

Instructors  teaching  in  the  credit  recovery  program  at  Owensmouth  forwarded 

attendance  sign-in  sheets  to  Perez-Rubalcava,  who  maintains  them  for  audit  purposes. 

H., 

M.,  ia  Y.,  and im  H.’s  names  do  not  appear  on  September  2016 
attendance  or  sign-in  sheets  for  credit  recovery  courses  at  Owensmouth.  (Exh.  |  at  pp.  21- 
39.) 

Moreno  Informs  Respondent  about  “Passporting”  Students’  Completion  of  Period  Six/Seven 
Course  Requirements 

56. 

Onaregular  basis,  Moreno  took  students’  work  product  to  respondent’s  office 

for  inclusion  in  the  students’  folders  maintained  in  respondent’s  office.  Moreno  had  access 
to  the  students’  folders  because  students  completed  the  work  under  his  supervision. 

57. 

On  September  6,  2016,  Moreno  informed  respondent  that  Finkelstein  had 

finally  figured  out  MiSiS  and  that  the  “passporting”  students’  enrollment  was  reflected  in 
MiS1S.  Moreno  additionally  informed  respondent  that 

H., 
      

M 

  

Y.,  and 

°) 

H.  had  completed  the  requirements  for  his  sixth  period  football  course.  Respondent 

had  no  reason  to  doubt  Moreno’s  representation  because  respondent  had  folders  containing 
six  weeks  of  weightlifting  logs  and  students’  work  product. 

58. 

Respondent  communicated  to  Loiacono  that  Moreno  informed  him  that  the 

four  students  completed  the  course  work,  and  that  each  received  AEE  as  a  grade. 
Respondent  instructed  Loiacono  “to  close”  the  course  by  preparing  completion  slips. 
Loiacono  hand-wrote  a  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  Complementary  Report  for 
M..,  ia  Y.,  and im  H.  “Owensmouth  H.S.”  appears  on  the  line 

H., 

above  the  word  “School”  on  each  slip.  Respondent  provided  Loiacono  with  the  information 
appearing  on  the  “work  in”  line,  which  states,  “ADV  PE  2A  AEE.”  (Exh.  3  at  pp.  1,  2,  4, 
and  5;  hereinafter  “course  completion  slips”’.) 

15

59. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Loiacono  explained  that  “to  close”  a  class 

mm  M.,  ia  Y.,  and im  H.  were  not  Loiacono’s  students,  she  did  not  affix  her 

requires  a  final  grade  and  that  the  “completion  slips  are  a  final  grade  at  our  continuation 
school.”  “We  don’t  fill  these  out  until  the  class  is  completed.”  She  explained  also  that  “Adv 
PE  2A  AEE”  “means  that  [a]  student  closed  the  class  with  a  grade  of  AEE.”  Because 
   
H., 
signature  above  the  line  for  “Teacher’s  signature.”  At  the  administrative  hearing,  respondent 
recalled  that  Loiacono  “did  object.”  “She  said  she  didn’t  feel  comfortable  filling  out  an 
Ownensmouth  High  School  course  completion  slip  for  work  that  had  been  done  at  Canoga 
under  somebody  else’s  supervision.  I  agreed,  and  it  was  at  that  point  I  realized  we  had 
another  problem.” 

60. 

Respondent  provided  the  following  explanation  of  the  problem:  “Typically 

speaking,  in  a  continuation  high  school  when a  student  finishes  a  course,  the  teacher  fills  out 
a  course  completion  slip  and  they  keep  one  for  themselves.  They  put  it  in  the  folder  at  work, 
and  they  keep  it  in  their  room.  They  send  the  other  one  to  the  counselor,  and  the  counselor 
inputs  the  grades  and  keeps  it  in  her  folders  in  her  desk.  We  had  never  before  done  this  with 
another  campus.  I  didn’t  want  to  give  Owensmouth  High  School  course  completion  slips  to 
teachers  .. 

.  at  Canoga  Park  High  School  campus.  So,  we  had  a  problem.” 

61. 

After  she  prepared  the  course  completion  slips,  Loiacono  returned  the  slips  to 

respondent,  who  then  placed  them  on  his  desk  in  his  office. 

Difficulty  Inputting  Final  Grades  for  “Passporting”  Students  in  MiSiS. 

62. 

On  September  7,  2016,  respondent  received  multiple  phone  calls  informing 

H., 

mm  M..,  ia  Y.,  and 

inputting  in  MiSiS  final  grades  for  PE  2A  for 
H.  After  the  first  phone  call,  respondent 

him  that  Finkelstein  was  having  difficulty 
. 
suggested  contacting  Pia  Diamonte,  the  head  counseling  coordinator  for  Local  District 
Northwest,  for  directions.  Diamonte  was  unavailable.  After  the  second  phone  call, 
respondent  suggested  contacting  Ivet  Diaz-Sawyer,  an  assistant  principal  at  Canoga  Park. 
Respondent  received  a  third  phone  call.  “They  just  couldn’t  figure  it  out,  and  so  I  tried  to 
explain  it  to  them.  They  kept  asking  me  to  come  over. 
going  to  have  to  come  over.” 

So,  at  that  point,  I  realized  I  was 

63. 

Before  going  over  to  Canoga  Park  to  Finkelstein,  respondent  affixed  his 

signature  to  the  course  completion  slips  Loiacono  prepared  the  previous  day.  He  left  a  copy 
for  each  of  the  four  students  on  his  desk.  He  took  a  duplicate  copy  for  each  of  the  four 
students  with  him  for  Finkelstein.  Respondent  recalled  that  when  he  arrived  at  Canoga  Park, 
I  gave 
“They  were  all  standing  outside  Ms.  Diaz-Sawyer’s  office  trying  to  figure  this  out. 
Ms.  Finkelstein  her  four  copies  for  her  records.  We  then  went  to  her  desk,  and  I  tried  to  do 
it.” 

64. 

Respondent  tried  going  into  Loiacono’s  class  to  input  the  final  grade  AEE  into 

grading  window  four  based  on  Moreno’s  representation  to  him  that  the  four  students 
completed  the  course  requirements.  All  present  realized  for  the  first  time  that  Finkelstein  did 

16

not  have  the  access  privileges  of  a  continuation  high  school  counselor.  This  was  another 
problem  with  the  implementation  of  the  pilot  program—how  to  input  grades. 

65. 

Respondent  resolved  that  Finkelstein  would  seek  guidance  from  Pia  Diamonte. 

Respondent  also  instructed  Finkelstein  to  ask  Canoga  Park’s  principal  Garcia  whether  he 
could  change  her  MiSiS  privileges  to  allow  her  a  higher  level  of  access.  The  alternative  was 
to  wait  until  December  to  input  the  final  grades.  Respondent  anticipated  a  nightmare 
situation  if  they  were  required  to  wait  until  December.  “By  the  time  the  semester  ended,  we 
had  over  100  kids  in  the  program.  Not  just  this  program;  we  had  100  in  the  day  and  evening. 
Some  of  them  finished  multiple  classes.  We  could  have  had  150  to  200  grades.  At  the  end 
of  the  semester,  what  we  would  have  had  to  have  done  is  go  through  each  kid,  take  a  look  at 
their  slips,  go  to  the  kid’s  class  schedule,  find  the  course,  input  the  grade  and  grade  them  in 
window  four. 
If  the  kid  finished  two 
classes  during  that  semester,  and  we  had  100  kids,  that’s  200  grades  we  would  have  to  enter 
in  December.  We  were  having  problems,  serious  problems.”  Finkelstein  assured  respondent 
that  she  would  find  a  resolution,  and  that  she  would  inform  him  about  the  outcome. 

It  automatically  propagates  into  their  transcripts.  ... 

66. 

On  September  9,  2016,  Moreno  and  respondent  approached  Diaz-Sawyer  in 

her  at  her  office  and  requested  her  approval  of  the  course  completion  slips  for 

H., 

mm  M.,  ia  Y.,  and im  H..  (Exh.  3  at  pp.  1,  2,  4  and  5.)  Diaz-Sawyer  recalled  that 

Moreno  and  respondent  communicated  to  her  “that  the  students  had  completed  that  course 
and  that  it  need  to  be  inputted.”  For  each  student’s  course  completion  slip,  Diaz-Sawyer 
signed  “approved  by  Ivet  Diaz  Sawyer.”  Diaz-Sawyer  then  called  Josefa  Rita  Drum,  an  office 
technician,  into  her  office,  gave  Drum  the  course  completion  slips,  and  asked  Drum  to  input 
the  information  for  the  four  students  in  MiSiS. 

67. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Drum  had  a  specific  recollection  of  Diaz- 

  

”  was  missing  and  that, 

H.  in  MiSiS,  but  noticed  that  the  first  name  “* 

H.  Drum  returned  to  her  computer  to  input  the  information 

Sawyer  handing  her  only  two  course  completion  slips  and  that  one  of  the  two  course 
completion  slips  was  for . 
for 
     
although  “8/16  was  there,”  there  was  no  end  date.  Drum  went  back  into  Diaz-Sawyer’s 
office  and  stated  to  all  present—Diaz-Sawyer,  respondent,  and  Moreno—that  “I  need  more 
information.  I  need  the  student’s  name.  I  need  a  beginning  date  and  an  end  date.”  In 
response  to  Drum’s  request,  respondent  wrote  _  on  one  of  the  course  completion  slips 
without SR 
H.’s  complete  name.  At  that  point,  Drum  noticed  that  respondent’s  signature 
was  also  missing  from  the  “Principal’s  signature”  line,  and  she  asked  respondent  to  sign  it, 
which  he  did.  (Exh.  3  at 
M., 
Education  2A,  and  grade—AEE.  Drum  date  stamped  the  course  completion  slips  “2016 
SEP-9  AM  10:11”  as  a  reminder  of  the  date  when  she  worked  on  the  documents. 

p.  3.)  Drum  thereafter  successfully  input  in  MiSiS  . 
H., 
H.’s  names,  grade  levels,  name  of  class—Advance  Physical 

  

Y.,  and 

68. 

Moreno  realized  and  informed  respondent  that  the  wrong  class  was  identified 

on  the  course  completion  slips.  Respondent  relayed  the  error  to  Finkelstein.  “I  told  her, 
‘Could  you  please  change  it  to...  2B.’  She  said  she  would  make  the  correction  to2B...  . 
Respondent  revised  the  copies  of  the  four  course  completion  slips  in  his  office  by  writing  2B 

29 

17

over  2A,  and  he  placed  his  initials 
hereinafter  “revised  course  completion  slips”.)  Respondent  placed  a  revised  course 
completion  slip  for  each  of  the  four  students  in  their  respective  folders  stored  in  his  office. 

next  to  each  revision.  (Exh  9  at  pp.67  and  68; 

“jc” 

oes 

99 

Instruction  to  Input  Grades  from  Summer  Weight  Program  Slips  in  MiSiS 

69. 

Moreno  and  Carlsen  took  the  summer  weight  program  slips  for  ia  Y. 

and  a.  to  Steinhauer’s  office,  and  they  requested  that  Steinhauer  “input  these  records 
into  the  student’s  cumulative  records.”  Steinhauer  noticed  the  words  “final  grade”  on  the 
summer  weight  program  slips.  She  explained  at  the  administrative  hearing,  “I  was  a  little 
hesitant  just  because  that  wasn’t  my  job  at  the  time.  Usually  our  credit  clerk  [Rita  Drum] 
was  the  one  that  inputted  the  grade  in  the  system.  Secondly,  because  we  usually  just  put  the 
final  or  official  transcript  in  the  MiSiS.”  Steinhauer  referred  Moreno  and  Carlsen  to  Drum 
and  then  to  Diaz-Sawyer,  but  neither  Drum  nor  Diaz-Sawyer  were  in  their  respective  offices. 
Ultimately,  Stemmhauer  complied.  She  used  the  information  on  the  summer  weight  program 
slips  provided  to  her  by  Moreno  and  Carlsen  to  input  in  MiSiS a  final  grade  of  AEE  for 
Advance  PE  2B  for 
Y.  and im  H.  Moreno  represented  to  Steinhauer  that  she 
would  be  receiving  a  copy  of  the  official  transcripts  for  the  two  students. 

  

  

California  Interscholastic  Federation  Inquires 

70. 

—  Carlsen  testified,  “Somewhere  in  September,  we  got  word  that 

Ss 

ie 

  

  

mm  M.,  ia  Y.,  and im  H.]  had  finished.”  Grades  were  submitted,  and  paperwork 
was  transmitted  to  California  Interscholastic  Federation  (CIF)  Los  Angeles  City  Section  for 
H.  At  some  point  in  time  not  established 
eligibility  determination  for 
by  the  evidence,  it  was  determined  that  the  entire  time  SH.  was  an  eligible  athlete  able 
to  play  football.  For  reasons  not  established  at  the  administrative  hearing, 
not 

football.  Consequently,  there  was  no  request  for  a  CIF  eligibility  determination  for 

     

M.  could 

Y.  and 

play 

H.  and 

mm  M. 

football  at  Canoga  Park. 

71. 

On  September  13,  2016,  CIF  declared  ia  Y.  and im  H.  eligible  to  play 

72. 

Lori  Jiacopuzzi  is  the  athletic  director  at  Canoga  Park  whose  responsibilities 

include  obtaining  eligibility  determinations  for  student  athletes’  participation  in  a  chosen 
sport.  At  the  administrative  hearing,  Jiacopuzzi  recalled  receiving  “a  report  card  or 
report”  with  just  “an  end  date,”  which  she  initially  identified  as  “9/7/16,”  for 

progress 
Y.  and 

H.  Jiacopuzzi  identified  the  documents  she  received  as  the  revised  completion  slips, 

which  she  submitted  to  CIF.  After  Jiacopuzi  obtained  an  eligibility  clearance  from  CIF, 
Jiacapuzzi  was  confronted  with  questions  about  the  dates  on  which  the  physical  education 
class  started  and  ended.  Jiacopuzzi  sought  answers  from  the  coaches. 

73. 

 Jiacopuzzi  recalled  that  Carlsen  provided  her  with  “updated  forms,”  from 

which  she  determined  that  the  start  date  was  August  16,  2016.  Jiacopuzzi’s  testimony 
explaining  how  she  made  that  determination  was  confusing.  Jiacopuzzi  testified,  on  one 

18

  

hand,  that  she  sought  and  obtained  an  answer  from  either  “the  coaches”  or  “the  counselors.” 
She  testified  on  the  other  hand,  however,  that  she  obtained  the  answer  for  ia  Y.  from 
MiSiS  and  the  answer  for im  H.  from  the  “updated  forms.”  Jiacopuzzi  had  Diaz-Sawyer 
check  the  “updated  forms”  she  obtained  from  Carlsen.  Diaz-Sawyer  told  Jiacopuzzi,  “It  was 
okay.’”  Jiacopuzzi  also  conversed  by  telephone  with  respondent  about  the  matter. 
Respondent  reportedly  told  Jiacopuzzi  that  “he’s  the  principal  and  he  can  open a  class 
because  he  has  a  PE  credential,  and  as  long  as  they  fulfill  the  requirements  of  the  class,  then 
they  can  get  credit  for  the  class.” 

74. 

~~  Jiacopuzzi  informed  CIF  that  the  start  date  for  the  Advance  PE  class  was 

August  16,  2016.  On  September  15,  2016,  CIF  retracted  its  determination  that  ia  Y, 
H.  were  eligible  to  play  football  at  Canoga  Park.  CIF  noted  that  the  August  16, 
and 
2016  start  date  for  the  physical  education  class  was  the  first  day  of  instruction  at  Canoga 
Park  High  School.  CIF  informed  Jiacopuzzi  that  “you  can’t  be  enrolled  in  PE  at 
Owensmouth  and  at  Canoga  at  the  same  time.” 

75. 

At  5:48  p.m.  on  September  15,  2016,  Carlsen,  aware  of  the  CIF  retraction,  sent 

the  following  text  message,  which  is  reproduced  here  in  an  unedited  form,  to  respondent: 

So  sorry  to  bother  you  at  home.  What  to  give  you  a  heads  up: 
City  section  called  back  at  4pm  today  and  said  they  need  the  transcript  to  have 
end  date  before  8/10  or  something  so  it  reads  as  summer  class  for[H.]  and 
[Y.] 

Respondent  replied: 

Carlsen  texted  in  return: 

Respondent  again  replied: 

I  can’t  do  that. 
offer  a  transcript for fall  classes. 

I  did  not  have  registered  summer  school  program.  I  can  only 

They  said  that  the  class  just  need  to  be  finished  before  August  16. 

Is  that  possible? 

Sorry  but  no.  Owensmouth  HS  did  not  have  a  registered  summer  school 
program.  There  is  no  teacher  of  record  that  could  issue  the  grade.  All 
teachers  first  day  of  class  started  august  15  and  the  first  day  of  instruction 
began  august  16.  All  misis  classes  under  the  employee  number  can  go  back 
prior  to  the  first  day  of  instruction. 

Why  are  they  refusing  to  allow  the  class  with  the  current  dates?  It  is  not  a 
new  course/original  credit.  It  is  recovery  for  a  previously  taken  course. 

/// 

19

  

  

That’s  what  we  are  trying  to  figure  out.  They  cleared  the  kids  Tuesday  and  called 
back  at  4pm  today. 

Carlsen  responded: 

(Exh.  8  at  pp.  12-15.) 

LAUSD  Administrative  Investigation 

76. 

_Delnavaz  was  notified  of  the  CIF  inquiry  by  a  September  28,  2016  phone  call 
and  follow-up  email  attaching  the  summer  weight  program  slips  for  ia  Y.  and  an. 
Delnavaz  accessed  MiSiS  and  reviewed 
which  indicated  that  both  enrolled  at  Canoga  Park  on  September  6,  2016,  that  both  received 
credit  for  a  summer  class  designated  Advanced  PE  2B  from  Owensmouth,  and  that 
Y.  had  completed  his  physical  education  requirements  in  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh 
  
at  San  Fernando  High  School  when  he  was  a  basketball  and  football  player  there. 
complete  transcripts  were  not  available  in  MiSiS  for  Delnavaz’s  review. 

Y.  and im  H.’s  records  and  transcripts, 

grades 
H.’s 

  

77. 

On  September  29,  2016,  Delnavaz,  accompanied  by  Narcorda,  met  with 
Y.  At  the  administrative  hearing,  Delnavaz  claimed  that  ia  Y.  told  him  that 

during  summer  2016  football  practice  ended  at  9  o’clock  in  the  mornings,  at  which  time  “Mr. 
Camp  would  be  on  the  field  at  that  time,  and  the  student  understood  that  to  be  the  beginning 
of  the  class.”  Delnavaz  claimed  that  ia  Y.  identified  respondent  as  the  instructor  and 
that  respondent’s  instruction  took  place  on  the  field. 

78. 

Y.’s  alleged  statements  to  Delnavaz  were  not  credible.  Canoga  Park 

football  coaches,  Moreno  and  Carlsen,  were  unequivocal  that  respondent  never  coached 
football  at  Canoga  Park  in  summer  2016. 

79. 

H.  was  not  present  in  his  designated  class  when  Delnavaz  and  Narcorda 
attempted  to  meet  with  him  on  September  29,  2016.  They  made  no  additional  effort  to  meet 
with 

H. 

80. 

Delnavaz  and  Narcorda  next  met  with  Steinhauer,  who  at  the  time  of  their 

meeting  possessed  the  yellow  copies  of  the  summer  weight  program  slips  for  ia  Y.  and 

im  H.  Delnavaz  testified  that  he  obtained  no  explanation  from  Steinhauer  about  the 

circumstances  surrounding  her  receipt  of  the  two  summer  weight  program  slips.  He  believed 
that  Steinhauer  told  him  she  entered  the  information  on  the  summer  weight  program  slips  in 
MiSiS  when  ia  Y.  and  an.  enrolled  as  transfer  students  at  Canoga  Park  on 
September  6,  2016. 

81. 

After  their  meeting  with  Sternhauer,  Delnavaz  and  Narcorda  met  with  Garcia, 

who  was  already  aware  of  the  CIF  inquiry.  Delnavaz  recalled  Garcia  only  stating  that  he 
would  notify  the  students’  parents  that  the  course  was  “not  valid”  and  “will  not  be  calculated 
into  the  student’s  GPA  for  athletic  eligibility.” 

  
  

20

  

  

82. 

On  September  30,  2016,  Delnavaz,  accompanied  by  Steven  Munoz,  the  lead 

  

Operations  Coordinator  for  Local  District  Northwest,  met  with  respondent.  Asked  about 
Y.  and  an.  respondent  told  Delnavaz  and  Munoz  that  Moreno  introduced  the 
   
two  students  along  with  an  additional  13  to  15  students  who  needed  credit  recovery  to  him, 
and  that  only  these  two  students  completed  the  Advance  Physical  Education  2B  course. 
Delnavaz  claimed  respondent  stated  that  he  (respondent)  “took  the  students  to  a  weight  room 
at  Canoga  Park.  He  mentioned  that  he  was  doing  weight  training  with  them.”  Delnavaz’s 
claim  is  not  credible.  Competent,  credible  evidence  establishes  that  respondent  did  no 
weight  training  at  Canoga  Park.  Respondent  had  denied  engaging  in  such  activities.  Canoga 
Park  football  coaches  Moreno  and  Carlsen,  both  of  whom  supervised  and  trained  football 
students,  have  corroborated  that  respondent  was  not  involved  in  any  such  activities. 

83. 

According  to  Delnavaz,  he  asked  respondent  “why  Owensmouth  issued  grades 
during  the  period  of  time  that  there  was  no  summer  school  anywhere,”  and  Delnavaz  claimed 
respondent’s  “response  at  the  time  was  that  he  had  flexibility  because  it  was  a  continuation 
school,  so  continuation  schools  have  flexibilities,  and  he  mentioned  that  if  he  has  over  so 
many  students  or  under  so  many  students,  he  could  act  as  the  teacher  of  the  course.  He 
mentioned  that  the  other  students  that  Mr.  Moreno  had  brought  him,  the  other  13  or  15, 
etcetera,  students,  they  needed  credit  recovery  in  other  subject  areas,  such  as  history,  and  he 
provided  them  laptops  of  some  sort  for  online  access,  but  those  students  never  completed, 
and  they  didn’t  come  back.  But  these  two  students  had  finished  the  course  and  had  earned 
the  grade.” 

84. 

—_  In  October  2016,  Delnavaz  and  Munoz  met  with  Moreno  at  Canoga  Park. 

According  to  Delnavaz,  Moreno  provided  “very  little”  information.  “He  did  not  know  of  any 
13  to  15  students  that  he  had  brought  to  Mr.  Camp,  he  said.  He  didn’t  remember  these 
students  being  part  of  that.  He  did  say  they  were  practicing  during  summer  time,  and  it  was 
...  through  Boys  and  Girls  Club  at  Canoga  Park,  and  he  didn’t  recall  anything  to  the  effect 
that  these  students  needed  PE.  It  was  very  little  information  in  terms  of  what  Mr.  Camp  had 
provided  to  us.” 

85. 

Delnavaz  and  Munoz  elicited  superficial  and  incomplete  information  from 

Moreno.  Moreno’s  recruitment  of im  H.,  Moreno’s  role  in  the  summer  2016  football 
programs  at  Canoga  Park,  and  Moreno’s  active  participation  identifying  and  selecting  student 
athletes  for  “passporting”  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth  are  important  for 
consideration  in  any  comprehensive  and  complete  investigation.  Delnavaz  and  Munoz  were 
apparently  unsuccessful  eliciting  that  information  from  Moreno  or  others. 

86. 

Delnavaz  and  Munoz  checked  the  attendance  sign  in  and  sign  out  records  the 
Boys  and  Girls  Club  maintained  for  participants  in  their  summer  2016  program.  Delnavaz 
testified,  “And  so,  I  got  to  the  part  where  it  was  relevant  to  the  dates  July  28  to  August  12, 
and  I  flipped  through  all  the  pages  and  went  through  every  single  name  to  find  out  if 
[Y.]  or  i  [H.]  had  signed  in  for  any  particular  day.  ...  There  was  no  evidence  of 
[H.’s]  signature  or  sign-in/sign-out  on  any  day.  i 
time  period.” 

[Y.]  had  signed  in  one  day  in  that 

      

  

21

  

&7. 

he  July  28  to  August  12,  2016  period  is  known  as  a  dead  period.  The  Boys 

and  Girls  Club  does  not  operate  a  football  program  durimg  that  period. 

838. 

With  assistance  from  Kirsten  Murphy,  a  Staff  Relations  Administrator  whose 
responsibilities  include  representing  the  District  in  disciplinary  matters,  Delnavaz  prepared  a 
draft  Interoffice  Correspondence  with  his  findings.  Delnavaz  testified  that  the  document  was 
intended  to  bring  to  respondent’s  attention  “the  series  of  events  that  had  happened  regarding 
these  students,  [and  that]  he  was  being  notified  that  basically  as  a  school  admunustrator,  as  the 
principal  of  the  school,  there  was  some  wrongdoing  here...  in  dealing  with  these  students.” 

89. 

On  November  10,  2016,  accompanied  by  Murphy  and  Steve  Quon,  an  AALA 
Representative,  Delnavaz  had  a  conference  with  respondent  at  the  Local  District  Northwest 
offices  and  provided  respondent  with  the  draft  Interoffice  Correspondence.  According  to 
Murphy,  at  this  November  10,  2016  conference,  respondent  “did  not  make  a  statement” 
regarding  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the  conference.  “His  AALA  representative  said 
that  they  were  declining  to  make  a  statement  and  that  they  would  not  make  a  statement.” 

90. 

Delnavaz.  on  the  other  hand,  claimed  that  at  this  November  10,  2016 

conference,  respondent’s  “description  of  what  had  happened  had  changed.”  According  to 
Delnavaz,  respondent  “produced  another  set  of  report  card  type  document.  They  were 
scratched,  and  2B  was  changed  to  ZA  or  2A  to  2B....  I  had  never  seen  [them]  before.”  At 
the  administrative  hearing,  these  documents  were  identified  as  the  revised  completion  slips. 
Delnavaz  testified  that  respondent  stated  the  revised  completion  slips  “were  for  his  own 
records,”  and  ““E  think  [Moreno]  stole  them  from  my  desk’  or  ‘[Moreno]  took  them  from  my 
desk  without  permission.’” 

91. 

 Delnavaz  provided  respondent  with  several  directives,  which  were  attached  to 

the  draft  Interoffice  Correspondence,  and  which  included  the  District’s  Emplovee  Code  of 
Ethics,  District  Policy  Bulletins  Criteria  for  Granting  Instructional  Credit  in  Secondary 
Schools,  Marking  Practices  and  Procedures  in  Secondary  Schools,  and  Enroliment  in 
Continuation  High  Schools. 

92. 

The  November  10,  2016  meeting  is  memorialized  in  a  November  15,  2016 

Interoffice  Correspondence. 

93. 

On  December  1,  2016,  respondent  provided  Delnavaz  with  an  eight-page 

written  response  to  the  November  15,  2016  Interoffice  Correspondence.  Respondent  denied 
engaging  m  any  misconduct. 

94. 

Ata  December  15,  2016  conference  attended  by  Murphy,  Delnavaz,  and 

Quon,  the  District  issued  two  notices,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Act(s)  of 
Admunistrative  /Supervisory  Certificated  Employee  and  a  Notice  of  Suspension  of 
Certificated  Employee  —  Administrative/Supervisory,  both  of  which  attach  the  November  15, 
2016  Interoffice  Correspondence.

98. 

According  to  Murphy,  at  this  December  15,  2016  conference,  respondent 

“stated  that  the  grade  slips  im  question,  the  summer  credit  recovery  from  July  28  to  August 
12,  that  he  had  created  those  for  CIF  and  that  those  were  never  intended  to  go  to  any  school 
campus-—-that  he  had  created  them  just  for  CIF.” 

96. 

On  December  15,  2016,  respondent  commenced  a  Grievance  Procedure  for 

AALA  Represented  Employee  secking  “Rescission  and  removal  of  the  Notice  of 
Unsatisfactory  Acts,  fifteen  (15)  days  Suspension  and  Dismissal  of  recommendation  from  ail 
District  files  and  records.” 

97. 

On  January  23,  2017,  a  Skelly/Administrative  Review  occurred  at  Ekchian’s 

office.  Respondent,  represented  by  legal  counsel,  Murphy,  and  My  Huynh  from  the 
District’s  general  counsel  office  attended. 

98. 

By  letter  dated  January  31,  2017,  Ekchian  informed  respondent  that,  “Based 

upon  all  the  mformation  available  to  me,  |  have  concluded  that  the  proposed  dismissal 
recommendation  should  be  forwarded  to  the  Board  of  Education  for  disposition.”  At  the 
administrative  hearing,  Ekchian  elaborated  on  the  imformation  that  was  available  to  her  and 
on  which  she  based  her  conclusion  regarding  respondent’s  dismissal.  “I  carefully  reviewed 
the  investigation  reports  that  revealed  that  Mr.  Camp’s  recall  of  what  had  happened  over 
time  changed  dramatically  from  the  first  interaction  with  staff  that  interviewed  him  that  he 
said,  “[  made  a  mistake.  What  do  you  want  me  to  do  about  it?”  to  “I’ve  had  nothing  to  do  with 
I  don’t  even  know  what  you're  talking  about’  to  “Someone  stole  the  papers  off  my 
this. 
desk.  [I  don’t  know  who  the  person  was  that  stole.’ 
So  what  I  recall  is  that  his  testimony 
changed  dramatically  over  time,  and  |  was  hoping  that  durmg  the  Skelly  he  would  tell  me  the 
truth  so  that  based  on  the  fact  that  [knew  him  and  I  had  respected  him  as  a  professional,  | 
could  take  all  of  that  into  consideration  to  say  that  if  he  had  made  a  mistake,  he  would  tell  me 
that  he  had  made  a  mistake,  and  I  would  be  able  to  honor  that  as  people  make  mistakes,  but 
then  we  can  address  it  properly.  But,  im  the  absence  of  his  response  to  me,  the  investigation 
clearly  revealed  that  every  time  be  met  with  a  group  of  people  that  were  following  up  on  the 
investigation,  his  story  changed,  which  led  me  to  believe  that  |  needed  to  continue  and  use 
the  results  of  the  investigation  for  my  decision.” 

99, 

In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  a  collective  bargaining  agreement 

between  AALA  and  the  District,  respondent  appealed  the  proposed  recommendation  for  his 
dismissal  from  the  District.  On  February  23,  2017,  an  informal  meeting  convened.  Murphy, 
who  was  tm  attendance,  recalled  respondent  stating  that  the  summer  weight  program  slips 
“were  his  personal  notes  that  he  had  taken,  that  the  football  coach  at  Canoga  Park  High 
school  bad  asked  him  to  give  grades  for  classes  that  took  place  in  the  summer,  and  that  he 
did  not  want  to  do  that,  but  that  these  were  his  personal  notes  and  they  were  stolen  from  his 
office.” 

100. 

After  the  February  23,  2017  mformal  meeting,  by  letter  dated  February  27, 
2017,  Alma  Pena-Sanchez,  Chief  of  Staff,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  informed 

e
 w

i

h

respondent  of  her  decision  to  submit  the  proposed  recommendation  for  bis  dismissal  to  the 
Board  of  Education. 

LOL. 

By  letter  dated  April  19,  2017,  the  Board  notified  respondent  that  he  was 

suspended  without  pay  and  of  its  intention  to  dismiss  hun  30  days  from  the  date  of  the  letter. 
Accompanying  the  letter  is  a  Statement  of  Charges  setting  forth  the  specific  instances  of 
conduct  alleged  to  constitute  respondent’s  mmioral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct, 
dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  persistent  refusal  to  obey  the  Board’s  regulations 
for  the  District  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause. 

102. 

On  May  3,  2017,  respondent  requested  a  hearing  on  the  charges  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44943.  On  Jime  28,  2017,  the  District  filed  and  served  an 
Accusation  incorporating  the  Statement  of  Charges  contamed  in  the  April  19,  2017  notice. 
Thereafter,  these  dismissal  proceedings  ensued. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

I. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  that  a  permanent,  certificated 

employee  shall  not  be  dismissed  except  for,  among  other  causes,  immoral  conduct, 
unprofessional  conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  or  persistent  violation  of, 
or  refusal  to  obey,  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

2. 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  generally  as  “that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to 
sexual  matters,  but  inchides  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
mdecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  a  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showimeg  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  ofrespectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  meconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco 
Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811.) 

3. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  is  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a 

profession  or  conduct  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  Board  of 
Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal. 2d  546,  353.)  The  conduct  m  question  must  mdicate  an 
unfitness  to  teach  m  order  to  amount  to  “unprofessional  conduct.”  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal  App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

4, 

““Tishonesty  connotes  a  disposition  to  deceive.  [Citation.|  It...  denotes  an 
absence  of  integrity,  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud[.]”  (Gee  v.  California  State 
Personnel  Bd.  (1970)  3  Cal.  App.3d  713,  718-719.)  Courts  understand  integrity  to  mean 
“soundness  of  moral  principle  and  character,  as  shown  by  a  person’s  dealings  with  others,  im 
the  making  and  performance  of  contracts,  m  fidelity  and  honesty  in  the  discharge  of  trusts. 
In  short,  itis  used  as  a  synonym  for  probity,  honesty,  and  uprightness  im  business  relations

with  others.””  (See  in  re  Estate  of  Gordon  (1904)  142  Cal.  125,  132,  quoting  i  re  Bauguier 
(1891)  88  Cal.  307.) 

5. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 
unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  vy.  Conimission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal  App.4th  1429,  1444) 

6. 

“Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  schoal  district  ermploying  him  or  her”  as  cause  for 
dismissal  requires  more  than  a  single  violation  of  a  school  board's  rules  by  a  permanent  school 
teacher.  (Oakdale  Union  Scheol  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.  App.3d  77,  rehearing  denied  28 
Cal  App.3d  77.)  Tn  addition,  persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  a  district’s  governing 
board’s  reasonable  regulations  requires  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to 
cooperate.”  (San  Diego  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  174  Cal App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

7. 

Abstract  characterizations  of  conduct-—for  example,  as  “immoral”  or 

“unprofessional’——-are  msufficient  grounds  for  removal  from  the  teaching  profession,  (See 
Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.)  A  rational  connection  or  nexus 
must  exist  between  alleged  misconduct  and  competence  or  ability  to  teach  effectively.  The 
determinative  test  is  whether  conduct  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (See  Board  of 
Education  v.  fack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal. 3d  691.)  Fitness  to  teach  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact. 
Ud.  at  p.  698,  fn.  3.) 

8. 

Morrison  identifies  several  factors  relevant  to  determining  unfitness  to  teach: 

the  likelihood  that  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students,  fellow  teachers,  or  the 
educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  the  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person 
involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may 
inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person 
involved,  or  other  certified  persons;  and  the  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

9, 

All  Morrison  factors  need  not  be  present  to  reach  a  determination  of  unfitness 

to  teach.  In  other  words,  an  item  by  item  analysis  of  each  established  individual  fact  is  not 
required.  Rather,  Morrison  calls  for  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  accumulated 
established  facts.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  vy.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.  App.4th  at  1457.3 

 
o
b

a
w

10. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 

cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  permanent 
certificated  employee,  from  the  District.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  “‘Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  (Citations.)  . 
[T]he  sole  focus  of  the  legal  definition  of  ‘preponderance’  in  the  phrase  ‘preponderance  of 
the  evidence’  is  the  guality  of  the  evidence.  The  quantity  of  the  evidence  presented  by  each 
side  is  irrelevant.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Company  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314,  324- 
325;  italics  in  text.)  In  meeting  the  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  the 
complainant  “must  produce  substantial  evidence,  contradicted  or  un-contradicted,  which 
supports  the  finding.”  (Un  re  Shelley  J.  (1998)  68  Cal.App.4th  322,  339.) 

. 

. 

11. 

a.  In  this  dismissal  proceeding,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of 

witnesses  in  accordance  with  the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the 
demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witness  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the 
capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty, 
the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or 
inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness 
testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the  proceedings. 

b.  The  manner  and  demeanor  of  a  witness  while  testifying  are  the  two  most 

important  factors  the  Commission  considered  when  judging  credibility.  (See  Evid.  Code,  § 
780.)  The  carriage,  mannerisms,  tone  of  voice  and  hesitation,  eye  contact,  and  facial 
expressions  of  a  witness  are  “wordless  language,”  which  although  difficult  to  describe  in 
such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly  understands  what  caused  the  Commission  to  believe  or 
disbelieve  a  witness,  were  part  of  the  evidence  for  consideration  as  well  as  evidence  on 
which  the  Commission  made  factual  determinations.  (See  Dyer  v.  MacDougall  (2d.  Cur., 
1952)  201  F.2d  265,  268-269.) 

c.  “On  the  cold  record  a  witness  may  be  clear,  concise,  direct,  untmpeached, 

uncontradicted—but  on  a  face  to  face  evaluation,  so  exude  insincerity  as  to  render  his 
credibility  factor  nil.  Another  witness  may  fumble,  bumble,  be  unsure,  uncertain,  contradict 
himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  a  written  transcript  be  hardly  worthy  of  belief.  But  one  who 
sees,  hears  and  observes  him  may  be  convinced  of  his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  reliability.” 
(Meiner  v.  Ford  Motor  Co.  (1971)  17  Cal.App.3d  127,  140.)°® 

d.  The  Commission  was  mindful  that  it  is  permitted  to  “accept  part  of  the 
testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part 
accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke,  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  Commission  was 
mindful  also  that  it  may  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though  not  directly 
contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or  inferences  from  the 
  

*  As  observed  in  Broadcast  Music  v.  Havana  Madrid  Restaurant  Corp.  (24.  Cir., 

1949)  175  F2.d  77,  80,  the  best  and  most  accurate  record  or  hearing  transcript  is  like  a 
dehydrated  peach;  it  has  neither  the  substance  nor  the  flavor  of  the  fruit  before  it  was  dried. 

26

testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected  material.”  (/d.,  at 
pp.  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762,  777.)  The 
Commission  is  permitted  even  to  reject  testimony  that  is  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  & 
Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.) 

e.  “Although  impeaching  evidence  in  the  nature  of  contradictions  or  otherwise 

has  been  received,  it  is  still  the  right  as  well  as  the  duty  of  the  [Commission  members]  to 
determine  to  what  extent  they  believe  or  disbelieve  the  testimony.  [Citations.]  [The 
Commission  members|  may  likewise  give  credence  to  a  witness.  . 
.  [citation]  whose 
testimony  contains  contradictions  or  inconsistencies.”  (Hansen  v.  Bear  Film  Co.  (1946)  28 
Cal.2d  154,  184.) 

12. 

Admunistrators,  teachers,  and  staff  testifying  at  the  administrative  hearing— 

Diaz-Sawyer,  Canoga  Park  assistant  principal;  Steinhauer,  Canoga  Park  guidance  counselor; 
Drum,  Canoga  Park  office  technician;  Loiacono,  Owensmouth  teacher;  Finkelstein, 
Owensmouth  credit  recovery  coordinator;  and  Perez-Rubalcava,  Owensmouth  head 
secretary—observed  or  participated  in  the  enrollment  of  students  and  input  of  grades  in 
MiSiS.  They  possessed  limited  or  no  knowledge  of  the  myriad  of  factors  animating  a 
student’s  enrollment  or  the  creation  of  the  student  grades  they  processed.  Generally,  during 
the  course  of  their  testimony  when  unable  to  recall  specific  details  of  conversations  and 
occurrences  they  admitted  that  they  were  unable  to  do  so.  The  Commission  accorded 
significant  weight  to  their  testimony  due  to  their  forthrightness. 

13. 

|The  Commission  regarded  as  credible im  H.’s  testimony  recounting  Moreno 

and  Carlsen’s  efforts  to  recruit  him  and  explaining  Moreno’s  instruction  for  his  completion 
of  weight  lifting  logs. im  H.  was  not  benefited  by  his  testimony.  If  anything, 
implicated  himself  in  wrongdoing  by  answering  directly  and  truthfully  questions  which 
exposed  the  extent  of  his  own  questionable  conduct  in  pursuit  of  a  more  desirable  football 
team  membership.  The  Commission  accorded  significant  weight  to  his  testimony. 

H. 

14. 

Carlsen  made  every  attempt  to  answer  all  questions  honestly  and  to  the  best  of 

his  ability.  He  willingly  disclosed  information.  He  remained  neutral  during  his  testimony. 
The  Commission  accorded  significant  weight  to  his  testimony. 

15. 

During  the  course  of  his  testimony,  Moreno  was  initially  unguarded  in  some  of 
his  answers.  As  his  testimony  progressed,  however,  he  developed  a  convenient  memory.  He 
could  not  recall  facts  and  occurrences  impugning  his  conduct.  He  presented  as  defensive 
when  questioned  about  a  number  of  topics.  He  attempted  to  be  credible,  but  his  priority  was 
protecting  himself.  The  Commission  accorded  moderate  weight  to  his  testimony. 

16.  | Delnavaz  could  have  been  biased  due  to  respondent’s  expressed  interest  in 

Delnavaz’s  position  as  the  Local  District  Northwest  Director  of  Educational  Options  School. 
Despite  this  potential  for  bias,  Delnavaz  demonstrated  none.  Nonetheless,  the  Commission 
did  not  find  Delnavaz  a  credible  witness  because  he  was  mistaken,  if  not  totally  wrong,  about 
material  events.  During  the  course  of  the  LAUSD  administrative  investigation,  among  other 

27

things,  he  failed  to  interview  certain  percipient  witnesses,  including im  H.  and  assistant 
coach  Carlsen,  and  he  failed  to  conduct  a  probing  interview  of  coach  Moreno,  a  central 
character  integral  to  achieving  the  investigative  objective  of  an  accurate  and  complete 
account  of  what  occurred.  Additionally,  Delnavaz’s  testimony  failed  to  address  his  personal 
knowledge  about  and  involvement  in  efforts  to  implement  the  pilot  program  for 
“passporting”  students  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth  in  the  2016/2017  academic 
year.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  accorded  diminished  weight  to  his 
testimony. 

17. 

|  Ekchian  attempted  to  answer  questions  truthfully,  but  her  answers  were 

colored  by  evident  bias.  Ekchian  presented  as  disappointed  by,  if  not  angry  with,  respondent 
for  what  she  perceived  as  his  failure  to  acknowledge  “the  mistakes  that  he  had  made”  and  the 
“huge  burden  that  he  had  imposed  upon  the  system.”  This  bias  was  reflected  in  her 
testimony,  and  under  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  accorded  some,  but  not 
significant,  weight  to  her  testimony. 

18. 

At  the  outset  of  his  testimony,  respondent  presented  as  eager  to  explain  what 

happened—“Everybody  keeps  telling  me,  “Don’t  speak.  Don’t  speak.’  I  need  to  speak.”  The 
Commission’s  initial  concern  was  that  respondent’s  eagerness  shaded  his  credibility.  As 
respondent’s  testimony  progressed,  however,  he  gained  credibility  because  other  independent 
evidence—witnesses’  testimony  and  contemporaneous  text  messages—corroborated 
probative  facts  disclosed  in  respondent’s  detailed  testimony.  Respondent  did  not  evade 
challenging  questions  posed  to  him;  rather,  he  answered  questions  directly  and  in  a  forthright 
manner.  The  Commission  accorded  significant  weight  to  his  testimony. 

19. 

Applying  the  above  principles,  the  District  has  failed  to  produce  substantial, 

credible  evidence  to  satisfy  its  burden  of  establishing  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  the 
conduct  alleged  in  the  Accusation’  constitute  cause  for  respondent’s  dismissal. 

/I/ 

/I/ 

  

”  Government  Code  section  11503,  subdivision  (a),  provides  in  pertinent  part  that 

.  shall  be  a  written  statement  of  charges  that  shall  set  forth  in  ordinary 

[t]he  accusation  .. 
and  concise  language  the  acts  or  omissions  with  which  the  respondent  is  charged,  to  the  end 
that  the  respondent  will  be  able  to  prepare  his  or  her  defense.”  At  the  administrative  hearing, 
the  District,  and  respondent,  offered  testimony  and  documents  necessary  to  explicate  the 
broader  context  within  which  respondent  conducted  himself.  The  accusation  in  this  matter, 
however,  alleges  certain  specific  acts  or  omissions  as  conduct  constituting  cause  for 
respondent’s  dismissal.  The  accusation  therefore  delineates  the  legal  boundaries  of  the 
Commission’s  deliberation,  which  is  limited  to  only  those  acts  or  omissions  specifically 
alleged.  (See  Manning  v.  Watson  (1952)  108  Cal.App.2d  705,  710-712.) 

28

l. 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  August  12,  2016  and  ending  on 
   
its  and final  grades  of  "AEE"  in 
Y.,  respectively  stating  in  writing 
July  28,  2016  and  August  12,  2016  as 

or  about  September  16,  2016, 
Advanced  PE  2B  to  students 
that  the  class  was  completed  between  the  dates  of 
"summer  credit  recovery,”  despite  the  facts  that: 

MP  issued  fiv 
['°]  H.  and 

    

a.  neither  vy 

nor  =  were  enrolled  as  a  student  at  Owensmouth  CHS; 

b.  Owensmouth  CHS  was  not  authorized  to  offer  classes  during  the  period  of  July 
28,  2016  through  August  12,  2016; 

c.  Owensmouth  CHS  did  not  offer  summer  credit  recovery;  and 

d.  neither im  nor  vy 
this  time. 

were  given  instruction  in  Advanced  PE  2B  during 

2. 

     
H.  at  Owensmouth  CHS  in  period  7  Advanced  PE  2A  from  2:00-2:53  p.m.,  despite  the  fact  that 
they  were  enrolled  in  6"  period  Football  at  Canoga  Park  HS from  2:18-3:12  p.m. 

On  or  about  September  6,  2016,  CAMP  enrolled  students 

Y.  and 

3. 

On  or  about  September  6,  2016,  CAMP  authorized  a  Grading  Period  I  grade 

H.  and 

I  Y.,  respectively  for  period  7  Advanced  PE 

of  “AEE”  to  be  issued  to 
2A,  despite  the  fact  that: 

a.  both  =  and  yy 
2016; 

b.  both  =  and  vy 
2A;  and 

were  enrolled in  the  class  on  that  same  day  ,September  6, 

had  not  received  any  instruction  in  period  7  Advanced  PE 

    

c.  both 
time  that  the  Advance 

and 

were  enrolled  in  another  class  at  another  school  during  the 
:A  class  was  scheduled  to  meet. 

4. 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  July  28,  2016  and  ending 

September  16,  2016,  CAMP  failed  to  follow  the  LAUSD  policy  Criteria  for  Granting  Credit 
in  Secondary  Schools  when  he  granted five  instructional  credits  each  to 
Y."'  for  Advanced  PE  2B  without  the  required  60  hours  of  instruction. 

H.  and 

vy 

5. 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  July  28,  2016  and  ending 

September  16,  2016,  CAMP  failed  to  follow  the  LAUSD  policy  Marking  Practices  and 
Procedures  in  Secondary  Schools  when  he  issued final  grades  of  “AEE”  respectively  to 

H.  and  my.’ ?  for  Advanced  PE  2B  without: 

  

'°  This  miss-spelling  of im  appears  throughout  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

"!  ‘Vii 
references  should  be  to 

H.  and 

Y.”  are  incorrect  references  appearing  in  the  accusation.  The 
Y.  and im  H 

2  See  footnote  10. 

29

  

a.  recording  a  minimum  of  one  performance  mark  reflecting  progress  toward 
mastery  of  standards  for  every  five  class  hours  of  instruction; 

b.  recording  grades  for  any  classwork,  homework,  or  other  assignments; 

c.  recording  any  progress  grades  for  any  grading  periods  other  than  the  final  grading 
period;  or 

d.  providing  a  computer-generated  report  card for  the  final  grading  period. 

6. 

During  the  period  commencing  on  or  about  July  28,  2016  and  ending 

September  16,  2016,  CAMP  failed  to  follow  the  LAUSD  policy  Enrollment  in  Continuation 
High  Schools  when  he  granted five  instructional  credits  and  grades  of  “AEE”  respectively  to 
H.  and  =  Y.”°  for  Advanced  PE  2B  taken  at  Owensmouth  CHS  without: 

a.  receiving  a  referral  for  enrollment from  the  students’  schools  of  residence; 

b.  holding  an  intake  conference  with  the  students  and  their  parents; 

c.  reviewing  the  students’  academic  progress,  setting  goals,  and  developing  a  plan  to 
achieve  the  goals;  or 

d.  receiving  check-out  marks,  transcripts,  and  a  Pupil  Attendance  Report  and/or 

electronic  transfer  of  records. 

7. 

On  or  about  December  2,  2016,  CAMP  was  dishonest  when  he  provided  a 

written  response  to  the  conference  memo  of November  15,  2016  stating  that: 

a.  he  had  never  issued  grades  for  the  two  students  in  question  during  the  period  of  time 
stated  in  the  complaint; 

b.  he  submitted  a  revised  “complementary  report”  that  reflected  the  students  having 
taken  Advanced  PE  2A  but  crossed  it  out,  changed  it  to  Advanced  PE  2B,  and  then 
initialed  the  report;  and 

c.  at  no  time  was  the  “complementary  report”  issued for  work  completed from  July  21, 
2016,  to  August  12,  2016,  to  be  used  as  a  final  grade. 

8. 

As  a  result  of  the  investigation  into  the  above-referenced  students’  eligibility,  and 

the  determination  that  CAMP  gave  invalid  grades  for  coursework  not  completed  during  an 
unapproved  instructional  time,  the  students’  parents  were  issued  letters  from  the  Canoga  Park 
High  School  principal  advising  them  that  the  grades  and  classes  purported  during  the  July  28 
to  August  12,  2016  period  at  Owensmouth  CHS  were  invalid,  and  that  the  students  remained 
ineligible  for  the  football  season. 

9. 

The  above  conduct  violates  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District, 
including,  but  not  limited  to:  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of Ethics,  Criteria  for  Granting  Credit  in 

  

'3  See  footnote  10. 

30

Secondary  Schools,  Marking  Practices  and  Procedures  in  Secondary  Schools,  Enrollment  in 
Continuation  High  Schools. 

10. 

The  above  conduct  likely  violated  California  Government  Code  Section  6200, 

Tl. 

The  above  Charges,  separately,  and  in  any  combination,  support  CAMP’s 

subd.  (c). 

dismissal from  the  District. 
(Exh.  OAH  1.) 

20. 

The  District  and  respondent’s  differing  perception,  interpretation,  and 

understanding  of  the  events  occurring  at  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth  in  the  summer  and 
fall  of  2016  were  fully  presented  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Testifying  witnesses 
communicated  their  particular  memories  of  what  they  personally  experienced  and  believed 
was  occurring  at  the  time  when  actual  events  unfolded.  Each  individual  witness’s 
recollection  therefore  reflected  not  just  his  or  her  partial  experiences,  but  also  a  partial  truth. 
The  Parable  of  the  Blind  Men  and  the  Elephant  and  its  message  that  one’s  subjective 
experience  while  true  may  not  be  the  whole  truth  are  apropos  to  analysis  of  the  established 
facts  in  this  matter. 

21. 

Credible  evidence  of  the  whole  truth  emerging  after  combining  bits  of 
competent  testimony  and  reasonable  inferences  drawn  from  testimony  establishes  that 
respondent  has  a  history  of  successful  implementation  of  a  credit  recovery  program  for 
which  he  was  esteemed.  Respondent  arrived  at  Owensmouth  as  its  new  principal  with  the 
expectation  that  he  would  achieve  a  similar  success  there.  Multiple  meetings  occurring  both 
before  and  after  commencement  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year  contemplated  the 
implementation  of  a  broadly  conceived  pilot  program  for  “passporting”  Canoga  Park  and 
Owensmouth  students  back  and  forth.  Specific  details  regarding  student  enrollment,  class 
time,  structure  and  content,  and  course  requirements  were,  however,  unsettled.  Respondent 
exercised  his  best  judgment  to  resolve  these  and  other  issues  unique  to  “passporting”  as  they 
materialized.  On  the  fly,  respondent  addressed  reallocation  of  certain  space  within  each 
school’s  facility,  creation  of  a  period  six/seven  course,  synchronization  of  the  two  schools’ 
bell  schedules,  enrollment  of  “passporting”  students,  accounting  for  “passporting”  students  in 
each  school’s  average  daily  attendance,  and  documentation  of  the  work  product  required  to 
complete  the  newly  created  period  six/seven  course.  As  evinced  by  language  in  the  District’s 
Credit  Recovery  Program  Opportunities  memorandum  addressing  a  myriad  of  credit 
recovery  opportunities  and  empowering  schools  to  design  programs  that  best  meet  the  needs 
of  their  students,  the  District  apparently  anticipated  the  probability  that  administrators  such 
as  respondent  would  have  to  innovate  to  manage  emergent  situations. 

22. 

Moreno  and  Carlsen  selected  and  introduced  students,  including im  H.  and 

Y.,  to  respondent  as  Canoga  Park  students  suitable  for  “passporting”  to 

Owensmouth  via  the  newly  created  period  six/seven  course.  Attempts  to  enroll  those  Canoga 
Park  students  “passporting”  through  Owensmouth  were  met  with  unanticipated  technical 
difficulties,  which  were  subsequently  resolved  through  agreement  among  Canoga  Park, 

31

Owensmouth,  and  District  administrators  that  “passporting”  would  entail  crediting  Canoga 
Park  students  in  Moreno’s  sixth  period  weight  lifting  class  for  course  work  already 
commenced  in  Moreno’s  summer  weight  lifting  program.  Creation  of  the  summer  weight 
program  slips  to  document  and  reflect  Moreno’s  representation  that,  between  July  28,  2016 
and  August  12,  2016, im  H.  and  ia  Y.  completed  the  requirements  for  Advanced  PE 
2B  under  his  (Moreno’s)  supervision  and  that  he  (Moreno)  issued  a  final  grade  of  AEE  to 
each  student  is  one  exemplar  of  respondent’s  innovation  implementing  the  pilot  program  for 
“passporting”  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth. 

23. 

The  charge  that,  on  September  6,  2016,  respondent  enrolled  ia  Y.  and 

im  H.  in  seventh  period  Advanced  PE  2A  at  Owensmouth  was  not  established  by  the 

credible  evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing.  The  credible  evidence  established 
that  Moreno  provided  Finkelstein  with  a  folder  containing  the  academic  transcripts  of 
students  who  participated  in  Moreno’s  2016  summer  weight  lifting  program,  and  from  which 
Finkelstein  created  a  list  identifying,  among  others, 
directed  Finkelstein  to  enroll . 
     
2A,”  which  notation  was  subsequently  corrected  to  “Advanced  PE  2B.” 

Y.  and 
Y.  and im  H.  in  the  course  noted  as  “Advanced  PE 

     

H.  Moreno 

24. 

On  September  6,  2016,  Moreno  also  represented  to  respondent  that 

Y. 
H.  completed  the  course  requirements  for  Advanced  PE  2A  and  that  each  earned  an 

and 
“AEE”  grade.  Based  on  Moreno’s  representation,  respondent  instructed  Loiacono  to  close 
the  course  with  the  preparation  of  course  completion  slips.  Respondent  reasonably  presumed 
that  Moreno  conducted  himself  with  the  integrity  expected  of  the  teaching  profession. 
Considered  in  the  context  of  respondent’s  implementation  of  the  pilot  program  for 
“passporting”  students  between  Canoga  Park  and  Owensmouth  and  accounting  for  the 
combined  six/seven  period  specifically  designed  to  implement  the  pilot  program,  it  is  not 
established  that  respondent’s  authorization  of  the  course  completion  slips  for  a  final  grade 
and  closure  of  the  course  constitute  conduct  warranting  respondent’s  dismissal. 

25.  —  District  Policy  Bulletin  Criteria  for  Granting  Instructional  Credit  in 

Secondary  Schools  set  forth  guidelines  requiring,  among  other  things,  60  hours  of  instruction 
per  term  to  grant  five  instructional  credits.  Competent,  credible  evidence  established  that 
credit  recovery  programs  have  their  own  programing  requirements  and  processes.  At  the 
administrative  hearing,  respondent  explained  that  students  are  not  only  permitted  to  work  and 
complete  course  or  instructional  requirements  at  their  own  pace,  they  may  also  do  so  in  less 
time  than  the  traditional  instructional  hours.  Corroboration  is  found  in  the  District’s  Policy 
Bulletin  Credit  Recovery  Program  Opportunities,  which  provides  for  the  entry  of  individual 
students’  final  grades  as  a  course  is  completed.  The  District  offered  no  refutation  evidence. 
It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent  failed  to  follow  the 
guideline  requiring  60  hours  of  instruction  per  term  to  grant  five  instructional  credits. 

26.  —  It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent  failed  to 

follow  guidelines  in  District  Policy  Bulletin  Marking  Practices  and  Procedures  in  Secondary 
Schools.  Moreno,  representing  that  he  supervised 
Advanced  PE  2B,  issued  final  grades  of  “AEE”  to 

Y.’s  completion  of 
Y.  As  the  principal 

   

H.  and 
H.  and 

32

  

  

of  Owensmouth,  respondent  provided  instruction  for  inputting  the  final  grades  in  MiSiS. 
The  marking  practices  and  procedures  set  forth  in  this  District  Policy  Bulletin  are  directed  to 
District  personnel  acting  in  the  capacity  of  classroom  teachers.  While  this  District’s  Policy 
Bulletin  provides  that  school  principals,  which  would  include  respondent,  have  responsibility 
for  its  implementation,  the  evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  did  not  establish 
respondent’s  obligation  as  principal  or  whether  as  principal  he  was  obligated,  but  failed,  to 
record  performance  marks  reflecting  progress;  grades  for  classwork,  homework,  or  other 
assignments;  or  grades  for  interim  grading  periods,  or  to  provide  computer-generated  report 
card  for  the  final  grading  period. 

27. 

District  Policy  Bulletin  Enrollment  in  Continuation  High  Schools  sets  forth 
guidelines  for  students  enrolling  in  and  attending  Continuation  High  Schools.  Ekchian’s 
testimony  explaining  the  “idea  of  passporting,”  and  respondent’s  testimony  identifying  a 
potential  problem  counting  the  average  daily  attendance  or  ADA  suggests  this  District  Policy 
Bulletin  has  limited  or  no  applicability  to  the  novel  situation  where  students  remain  enrolled 
at  a  traditional  District  high  school—such  as  Canoga  Park—as  they  “passport”  through  a 
continuation  high  school—such  as  Owensmouth—for  classes  providing  credit  recovery 
opportunities.  As  Ekchian  explained,  “Many  students  hesitate  to  attend  a  continuation  school 
full-time  because  they  do  not  want  to  be  separated  from  the  comprehensive  high  school  for  a 
variety  of  reasons.  Sometimes  they  believe  there’s  a  stigma  attached  to  moving  from  one 
school  to  the  other.  . 
.  The  idea  of  passporting  1s  that  if  there’s  a  particular  subject  area  that 
you  need  credit  recovery  in,  you  can  spend  part  of  the  day  in  that  continuation  high  school, 
but  still  remain  a  student  at  Canoga  Park  and  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  the  elective,  the 
sports,  and  the  other  programs  the  continuation  school  can’t  offer,  but  the  comprehensive 
high  school  can. 
the  comprehensive  high  school  and  the  offerings  at  the  continuation  school.”  Ekchian’s 
explanation  clarifies  that,  at  least  with  respect  to  “passporting,”  students  taking  a  course  for 
credit  recovery,  although  enrolled  in  the  course  at  Owensmouth  because  the  course  is  offered 
there,  remains  an  enrolled  student  at  Canoga  Park.  Otherwise,  as  respondent  noted,  there  is  a 
problem  with  the  proper  accounting  of  the  ADA.  Only  one  school  can  capture  the  ADA. 
How,  if  at  all,  this  District  Policy  Bulletin  applied  to  “passporting”  was  not  actually  litigated. 
It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent  failed  to  follow 
District’s  Policy  Bulletin  Enrollment  in  Continuation  High  Schools. 

So,  it’s  for  students  who  can  take  advantage  of  both—both  the  program  at 

28. 

It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent  was 

dishonest  in  his  December  2,  2016  response  to  the  November  15,  2016  conference 
memoranda.  Respondent  was  truthful  when  he  stated  that  he  never  issued  grades  for im  H. 
and  ia  Y.  Moreno  issued  grades  for  these  students.  Respondent  was  truthful  when  he 
stated  that  he  corrected  the  revised  course  completion  slips  changing  Advanced  PE  2A  to 
Advanced  PE  2B  and  initialed  the  correction.  Respondent  was  truthful  when  he  stated  that 
the  summer  weight  program  slip  was  not  intended  to  be  used  as  a  final  grade. 

29. 

It  is  not  disputed  that  Canoga  Park  principal  Garcia  issued  letters  to im  H. 

and  ia  Y.’s  parents  advising  them  that  grades  and  classes  purported  during  the  July  28 
to  August  12,  2016  period  at  Owensmouth  were  invalid.  It  is  disputed  and  unsupported  by 

33

competent,  credible  evidence,  however,  that  respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  warranting 
Garcia's  action. 

30. 

Government  Code  section  6200,  which  addresses  crimes  relating  to  the 

removal,  destruction,  or  falsification  of  public  records,  documents,  and  certificates,  provides, 
“Every  officer  having  the  custody  of  any  record,  map,  or  book,  or  any  paper  or  proceeding  of 
any  court,  filed  or  deposited  in  any  public  office,  or  placed  in  his  or  hands  for  any  purpose,  is 
punishable  by  imprisonment  pursuant  to  subdivision  (h)  of  Section  1170  of  the  Penal  Code 
for  two,  three,  or  four  years  if,  as  to  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  record,  map,  book,  paper  or 
proceeding,  the  office  willfully  does  or  permits  any  other  person  to  do  any  of  the  following: 
(a)  Steal,  remove,  or  secrete.  (b)  Destroy,  mutilate,  or  deface.  (c)  Alter  or  falsify.”  The 
charge  alleging  a  “likely”  violation  of  section  6200  is  without  merit  because  that  statutory 
provision  is  inapplicable  to  the  facts  of  this  matter.  Government  Code  6200  governs  the 
conduct  of  public  officials.  Respondent  is  not  a  public  official.  Student  records  are  not 
public  records. 

31. 

None  of  the  charges  alleged  in  the  Accusation,  separately  or  im  any 

combination,  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  to  support  respondent’s 
dismissal  from  the  District. 

Hf 

Hf 

Hl 

Hl 

Hl 

Hl 

Hf

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATE: 

May  17,  2018 

DATE: 

May  17,  2018 

DATE: 

May  16,  2018 

oo  DocuSigned  by: 
Be 
- 
too 

Nae  C2CF 22333046434... 

  
JENNIFER  M.  RUSSELL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

on  DocuSigned  by: 

 Mrburte  Pury 

ane  SHASASIOZAFTA5A 

  
NORBERTO  PEREZ 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

eo  DocuSigned  by: 

|  lindo  Tarw 

eee  327  DESBC4AGB435.. 

 
ALFREDO  TARIN 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

