BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
JURUPA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

RHONDA  FULLER, 

OAH  No.  2017061004 

Respondent.      

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  in  Jurupa  Valley,  California  on  December  11,  12,  and  13,  2017.  The  Commission 
was  comprised  of  the  following  members:  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Mary  Agnes 
Matyszewski,  Steve  Parker,  and  Dan  Crookham. ' 

Kerrie  McNally,  Adams,  Silva,  &  McNally,  represented  the  Jurupa  Unified  School 

District. 

Carlos  Perez,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  respondent  Rhonda  Fuller,  who  was 

present  throughout  the  hearing. 

On  December  14,  2017,  the  Commission  met  to  deliberate  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

CASE  SUMMARY 

Ms.  Fuller  was  employed  by  the  district  as  an  agriculture  teacher.  In  February  2017, 

district  students  participated  in  the  national  “Day  Without  Immigrants”  protest.  Later  that  same 
day,  Ms.  Fuller  posted  a  reply  on  a  district  colleague’s  Facebook  post  about  the  protest.  The 
district  alleged  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  demonstrated  that  she  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and 
was  unfit  to  serve.  After  considering  all  of  the  evidence  presented,  the  Commission  concluded 
that  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  did  not  constitute  immoral  conduct,  did  not  demonstrate  that  she  was  unfit 
to  serve,  and  did  not  warrant  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  district.  The 
Commission  dismissed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges. 

  

'  The  matter  was  continued  on  August  30,  2017,  the  date  originally  set  for  hearing 

when  the  district’s  motion  to  disqualify  respondent’s  designated  panel  member  was  granted. 
Respondent  elected  a  new  panel  member  and  the  matter  was  reset  for  December  11-14,  2017.

Jurisdictional  Matters 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Ms.  Fuller  was  employed  by  the  Jurupa  Unified  School  District  as  an 

agriculture  teacher.  At  all  relevant  times  Ms.  Fuller  taught  at  Rubidoux  High  School  (RHS). 

2. 
Facebook  page. 

On  February  16,  2017,  Ms.  Fuller  made  a  Facebook  post  on  a  fellow  teacher’s 

3. 

On  February  17,  2017,  the  district  placed  Ms.  Fuller  on  paid  administrative 

leave  pending  the  outcome  of  its  investigation. 

4. 

On  May  1,  2017,  the  district  served  Ms.  Fuller  with  a  Draft  Notice  of  Intent  to 

Dismiss  and  Immediately  Suspend  Without  Pay,  advising  her  of  the  district’s  intent  to 
dismiss  her  from  employment.  The  notice  also  informed  her  of  her  right  to  a  Skelly  hearing, 
and  set  a  date  for  that  proceeding.” 

5, 

On  May  11,  2017,  Dave  Doubravsky,  the  district’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of 

Educational  Services,  sent  Ms.  Fuller  a  letter  titled  “Skelly  Officer  Decision.”  Mr. 
Doubravsky  informed  Ms.  Fuller  that  “after  carefully  reviewing”  the  charges,  a  letter  of 
support,  and  the  Petition  to  Allow  Mrs.  Fuller  Back  to  RHS,  he  determined  that  there  was  “a 
reasonable  basis  to  sustain  the  recommendation  that  you  be  terminated  from  your 
employment  with  the  District.”  The  letter  also  confirmed  Ms.  Fuller’s  decision  to  decline  a 
Skelly  hearing.  On  that  same  date,  Tamara  Elzig,  the  district’s  Deputy  Superintendent, 
Personnel  Services,  advised  Ms.  Fuller  that  the  Skelly  officer’s  recommendation  was  to 
suspend  and  terminate  Ms.  Fuller’s  employment  and  that  Ms.  Elzig  would  be  making  that 
recommendation  to  the  governing  board. 

6. 

On  May  15,  2017,  the  district’s  governing  board  met  to  decide  whether  to 

issue  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Immediately  Suspend  without  Pay;  and  Statement 
of  Charges  against  Ms.  Fuller.  The  governing  board  voted  4-1  to  adopt  the  Notice  of  Intent 
to  Dismiss  and  Immediately  Suspend  without  Pay;  and  Statement  of  Charges,  placed  Ms. 
Fuller  on  unpaid  suspension  effective  May  16,  2017,  and  authorized  the  superintendent  or  his 
designee  to  serve  a  copy  of  the  charges  on  Ms.  Fuller. 

  

*  In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering  disciplinary 
action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “preremoval  safeguards,” 
including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a  copy  of  the  charges  and 
materials  upon  which  the  action  1s  based,  and  the  right  to  respond,  either  orally  or  in  writing, 
to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The  Supreme  Court’s  directive  gave  rise  to  an 
administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly  hearing,  in  which  an  employee  has  the 
opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon  which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based.

7. 

On  May  15,  2017,  Ms.  Elzig  signed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and 

Immediately  Suspend  without  Pay;  and  Statement  of  Charges  in  her  official  capacity.  The 
notice  sought  to  immediately  dismiss  Ms.  Fuller  from  employment  with  the  district  on  the 
grounds  of  immoral  conduct  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1))  and  evident 
unfitness  for  service  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)). 

8. 

On  July  11,  2017,  an  administrative  law  judge  granted  Ms.  Fuller’s  Motion  for 

Immediate  Reversal  of  Suspension.  The  district  was  ordered  to  make  Ms.  Fuller  whole  for 
any  unpaid  wages,  benefits,  and  compensation.  She  remains  on  paid  suspension. 

9. 

Ms.  Fuller  timely  appealed  the  dismissal  action,  denying  that  grounds  for  her 

dismissal  from  employment  existed,  and  this  hearing  ensued. 

Motions  in  Limine 

10. 

‘The  parties  filed  several  motions  in  limine,  objections  and  oppositions  thereto. 

Tentative  rulings  were  issued,  and  the  parties  were  allowed  to  orally  argue  their  positions, 
after  which  final  rulings  were  issued. 

Ms.  Fuller’s  Education  and  Employment  History 

11. 

Ms.  Fuller  is  a  1983  graduate  of  RHS.  She  obtained  her  Bachelor  of  Science 

Degree  in  Agriculture  Science  from  Cal-Poly  Pomona  with  a  concentration  in  Animal 
Science.  She  obtained  her  Master’s  Degree  in  Agricultural  Education  from  Cal-Poly 
Pomona.  Ms.  Fuller  holds  a  clear  Single  Subject  Agriculture  Credential  and  an  Agriculture 
Specialist  Credential.  She  began  teaching  in  1989.  In  addition  to  classroom  instruction,  Ms. 
Fuller  spends  a  lot  of  time  with  students  outside  the  classroom  at  fairs,  shows,  conferences, 
and  on  the  RHS  farm.  She  has  never  had  a  negative  evaluation  or  review  and  has  never  been 
disciplined.  Ms.  Fuller  has  received  several  peer-  and  student-nominated  awards  at  RHS, 
and  at  the  county  and  state  levels.  Ms.  Fuller  also  serves  on  the  Future  Farmers  of  America 
(FFA)  advisory  board,  a  position  she  still  holds. 

February  16,  2017,  Day  Without  Immigrants  Protest  and  Facebook  Posts 

12. 

On  February  16,  2017,  several  hundred  RHS  students  participated  in  the 

nationwide  “Day  Without  Immigrants”  protest.  The  protest  was  designed  to  demonstrate  the 
contributions  immigrants  make  to  our  country  and  the  impact  their  absence  would  cause. 
Ninety-one  percent  of  the  student  body  at  RHS  is  Hispanic  and  many  of  the  students’  parents 
are  immigrants.  On  February  16,  2017,  RHS  experienced  an  abnormally  high  absence  rate; 
the  typical  absence  rate  is  two  to  three  percent  but  on  February  16,  2017,  approximately  15- 
18  percent  of  RHS  students  were  absent.” 

  

absences.

>  357  students  were  absent  on  February  16,  2017;  286  of  whom  had  unexcused 

13. 

On  the  afternoon  of  February  16,  2017,  Geoffrey  Greer,  at  the  time  an  RHS 

teacher,  posted  the  following  message  on  his  Facebook  page: 

Well.  A  day  without  immigrants.  Perhaps  the  missing  workers 
in  all  the  various  industrics  out  there  had  the  intended  inxpact 
and  sent  the  desired  message.  |  don’t  know.  As  for  the  public 
school  system,  having  my  class  size  reduced  by  50%  all  day 
long  only  served  to  SUPPORT  Trump’s  imitiatives  and  prove 
how  much  better  things  might  be  without  all  this  overcrowding. 

That's  what  you  get  when  you  jump  on  some  sort  of  bandwagon 
cause  as  an  excuse  to  be  lazy  and/or  get  drunk.  Best  school  day 
ever. 

In  response  to  Mr.  Greer’s  post,  Ms.  Fuller,  three  other  RHS  teachers,  and  one 
counselor,  posted  messages  on  Mr.  Greer’s  Facebook  page.  Twenty-eight  minutes  after  Mr. 
Greer’s  first  post,  Ms.  Fuller  posted  the  following  message: 

Same  here!  Small  classes,  trouble  makers  were  gone  fantastic 
day! 

Several  people  posted  messages  after  Ms.  Fuller's  message  criticizing  the  teachers 

and  the  counselor  for  their  posts.  Ms.  Fuller’s  testimony  regarding  her  post  is  summarized  as 
follows:  she  was  home  that  evening  and  was  “discouraged  I  had  small  class  sizes  but  I  got  a 
lot  done,  I  had  fewer  students.”  Ms.  Fuller  was  responding  to  another  teacher’s  post  who 
commented  about  the  small  class  sizes;  she  was  not  replying  to  Mr.  Greer’s  post.  Ms.  Fuller 
made  absolutely  no  mention  of her  “troublemaker”  comment  during  her  direct  exammation. 
Ms.  Fuller's  explanation  that  she  was  “discouraged”  was  difficult  to  understand  given  her 
“fantastic  day”  comment  in  her  post.  Likewise,  her  testimony  that  she  was  not  referring  to 
any  students  or  groups  of  students  when  she  posted  about  “trouble  makers”  being  gone  was 
also  difficult  to  follow. 

Ms.  Fuller  further  testified:  “Clearly  |  made  a  mistake,  and  I  know  that;  |  was 
attempting  to  right  that  wrong  when  I  was  removed,  the  only  way  to  correct  my  mistake  is  to 
put  me  back  in  my  class;  |  am  deeply  regretful;  if | could  change  it  |  would,  you  are  never 
too  old  to  learn  and  I  have;  i  grew  up  im  this  county  siace  [  was  six  years  old;  all  [|  ever 
wanted  to  do  with  my  life  is  serve  these  kids;  I  love  these  kids  so  much  and  miss  them  so 
much.”  Ms.  Puller  explained  that  her  students  are  like  her  children,  how  her  own  children 
have  had  to  share  her  with  her  students,  and  how  her  children  have  many  “siblings”  because 
of  her  students.  Ms.  Fuller  described  how  upset  her  students  were  during  first  period  and 
how  she  spent  class  time  discussing  the  Facebook  posts  and  apologizing  to  them.  She  was 
doing  the  same  thing  durmg  second  period  when  Ms.  Elzig  came  to  her  class  and  told  her  to 
get  her  purse  and  come  to  the  office.  Ms.  Fuller  was  told  at  the  office  that  she  was  being 
placed  on  leave.

At  the  office  Ms.  Elvig  also  asked  Ms.  Fuller  if  she  would  still  be  willing  to 
chaperone  the  agriculture  students  at  the  upcoming  off-campus  event  that  was  set  to  take 
place  the  following  week.  Ms.  Fuller  asked  how  she  could  do  that  if  she  was  being  placed  on 
leave  and  was  told  the  district  would  get  back  to  her.  Later  the  district  mformed  Ms.  Fuller 
that  another  individual  would  chaperone  the  students.  The  Commission  found  that  the 
district's  argument  that  Ms.  Fuller  was  a  danger  to  students  or  the  district  was  unconvincing 
in  light  of  Ms.  Elvig  asking  Ms.  Fuller,  while  placing  her  on  leave,  if  she  would  chaperone 
students  off  campus. 

While  Ms.  Fuller  was  tearful  during  her  testimony  about  her  remorse  and  her 

statements  appeared  sincere,  her  demeanor  greatly  changed  on  cross-examimation  when 
mconsistencies  between  her  hearing  testimony  and  her  deposition  testimony  were  introduced. 
Her  tears  ceased  and  she  became  flippant  in  her  replies  to  district  counsel  as  she  conceded 
the  discrepancies  in  her  responses.  Although  she  was  genuimely  remorseful,  it  was  also  clear 
that  Ms.  Fuller  was  annoyed  with  the  district. 

Reactions  to  the  Facebook  Pasts 

i4. 

Within  minutes,  the  Facebook  posts  went  viral  and  were  reposted  on  several 

social  media  sites.  As  Ms.  Elzig  testified,  the  posts  went  “across  the  United  States  and  back 
within  20  minutes.”  Thereafter,  the  district  was  inundated  with  a  deluge  of  hundreds  of  e- 
mails  and  letters,  several  telephone  calls,  and  multiple  visits  from  parents,  students,  former 
parents  and  former  students,  community  members,  indrviduals  and  press  organizations,  both 
local  and  from  across  the  nation,  as  well  as  international  news  outlets.  Although  a  few 
responses  supported  the  district  employees’  posts,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  them  called 
for  action,  some  advocated  violence  and  others  expressed  outrage  at  the  district  for  hiring 
these  employees  and  condemned  the  employees  for  their  Facebook  posts.  The  next  morning 
on  RHS’s  campus,  the  classrooms  of  two  teachers  who  had  posted  on  Facebook  were 
vandalized;  Ms.  Fuller’s  classroom  was  not  vandalized.  Photographs  of  the  profanity  and 
negative  statements  spray-painted  on  the  walls  outside  of  those  two  classrooms  were 
introduced  at  hearing. 

15. 

 RHS  Principal  Jose  Araux,  Ed.D.,  testified  that  parents  were  very  concerned 

that  “racist  teachers”  were  imstructing  their  children;  students  felt  that  they  “now  knew  those 
teachers’  true  colors,”  and  staff  was  very  upset,  in  fact  one  expressed  her  concerns  about 
being  on  “the  front  le”  of  the  turmoil.  Dr.  Araux  described  the  attempts  he  made  to  address 
the  situation,  to  reassure  students,  staff  and  parents,  and  to  let  the  community  know  that  the 
Facebook  posts  did  not  reflect  the  majority  of  RHS  teachers’  opmions.  Dr.  Araux  sent  and 
replied  to  e-mails,  made  robo-calls  to  parents,  made  announcements  on  campus,  set  up 
mectings  with  staff  and  parents,  spoke  with  students  and  expended  tremendous  time  and 
effort  to  resolve  the  issues  the  Facebook  posts  created. 

Dr.  Araux  described  the  outrage  and  hurt  the  Facebook  posts  caused.  He  was  very 

upset  that  teachers  and  a  counselor  “at  my  school”  would  post  such  negative  and  racist 
comments  “about  my  students.”  Dr.  Araux  believed  Ms.  Fuller's  post  was  just  as  egregious

as  Mr.  Greer’s  post  because  it  was  “a  lie”  as  all  the  students  who  were  absent  on  February 
16,  2017,  were  not  troublemakers.  Dr.  Araux  thought  Ms.  Fuller’s  comments  were  a  broad, 
racist  generalization  about  the  students  who  were  absent.  He  reviewed  Ms.  Fuller’s 
classroom  rosters*  and  confirmed  his  belief  that  the  students  absent  from  her  class  on 
February  16,  2017,  were  not  troublemakers.  Of  the  33  students  who  were  absent  from  Ms. 
Fuller’s  classes,  24  had  no  discipline  other  than  tardies  or  absences;  four  had  no  discipline  at 
all;  and  only  five  had  significant  discipline  issues.  Moreover,  10  of  the  students  in  her 
classes  that  day  who  did  not  participate  in  the  Day  Without  Immigrants  protest  had 
significant  discipline  issues.  Thus,  Dr.  Araux  believed  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  was  false,  “she 
lied,”  it  was  “unfair”  and  “showed  a  lack  of  respect  for  the  students  and  the  community  —  the 
immigrant  and  Hispanic  community.”  Dr.  Araux  admitted  that  no  one  ever  complained  to 
him  specifically  about  Ms.  Fuller  before  the  posts. 

Dr.  Araux’s  testimony  about  the  discipline  records  of  the  absent  students  was  not 

persuasive  as  a  student  could  be  a  “troublemaker”  for  one  teacher  and  not  for  another. 
Moreover,  when  asked  to  describe  the  agriculture  program  at  RHS,  Dr.  Araux’s  answer 
revealed  that  he  possessed  little  knowledge  of  the  program  or  Ms.  Fuller’s  work  on  campus. 
Thus,  his  testimony  about  her  retention  being  detrimental  to  “his  school”  or  the  agriculture 
program  because  of  her  Facebook  post  was  not  persuasive.  The  Commission  also  found  his 
testimony  to  be  overreaching  and  exaggerated  making  it  unconvincing. 

16. 

Dr.  Araux  and  Ms.  Elzig  testified  about  the  student  protest  at  school  the 

morning  after  the  Facebook  posts  which  culminated  in  a  walkout  at  lunch.  Hundreds  of 
students  left  campus  and  marched  through  the  community.  Ms.  Elzig  described  the  anger  she 
observed,  how  the  students  stormed  the  school  fences,  shaking  and  climbing  them,  leading 
Ms.  Elzig  to  order  the  gates  to  be  opened  so  that  students  were  not  harmed.  Ms.  Elzig 
described  the  concern  she  felt  watching  the  students  march  through  the  streets,  attempt  to 
march  on  to  the  local  highway,  and  how  law  enforcement  tried  to  contain  the  students  to 
protect  them  from  injury. 

17 

Ms.  Elzig  described  the  many  efforts  the  district  made  following  the  Facebook 
posts  to  address  the  issues  raised  by  the  posts  and  to  help  RHS  and  the  community  heal.  Ms. 
Elzig  described  the  “standing  room  only”  February  21,  2017,  board  meeting  where  two  and 
one-half  hours  of  public  comments  were  received  and  news  vans  lined  the  street,  including 
ones  from  across  the  country.  None  of  the  public  comments  supported  the  district  employees 
who  made  the  Facebook  posts.  Video  clips  of  four  individuals  who  made  public  comments 
were  shown  at  the  hearing  and  corroborated  Ms.  Elzig’s  testimony  regarding  what  transpired 
at  the  board  meeting. 
  

*  Those  rosters  were  ordered  sealed.  This  sealing  order  governs  the  release  of 

documents  to  the  public.  A  reviewing  court,  parties  to  this  matter,  their  attorneys,  and  a 
government  agency  decision  maker  or  designee  under  Government  Code  section  11517,  may 
review  the  documents  subject  to  this  order,  provided  that  such  documents  are  protected  from 
release  to  the  public.  No  court  reporter  or  transcription  service  shall  transcribe  the 
information  contained  in  the  records.

18. 

Robert  Santiago,  a  math  teacher  at  RHS,  testified  about  the  impact  the 

Facebook  posts  had  on  him,  his  classroom  imstruction,  RHS,  the  district,  and  the  community. 
He  expressed  how  upset  the  posts  made  hum  and  the  backlash  he  received  from  students  and 
the  community.  Mr.  Santiago  believed  that  Ms.  Puller’s  post  gave  “tacit  approval”  to  Mr. 
Greer’s  “lazy/drunk”  comments  and  students  asked  hun  if  he  agreed  with  those  comments. 
Mr.  Santiago  described  the  loss  in  instructional  tune  because  of  the  time  he  spent  discussing 
the  posts  with  students.  His  testimony  established  the  extremely  negative  impact  that  Ms. 
Fuller's  Facebook  post  had  on  the  school  and  the  community.  In  fact,  Mr.  Santiago  was  so 
upset  by  the  backlash  against  teachers  that  he  felt  compelled  to  post  the  following  on  “What 
is  Going  on  in  Jurupa  Valley,”  a  community  Facebook  page: 

My  heart  goes  out  to  you  all.  [know  how  you  feel. 
on  the  receiving  end  when  it  was  more  socially  acceptable  to 
stigmatize  Latinos. 

I  have  been 

I  cannot  easily  explain  what  happened.  I  know  some  of  these 
people;  they  are  my  colleagues.  Their  actions  at  work  do  not 
seem  reflected  by  these  comments.  I  have  witnessed  them  go 
beyond  the  requirements  of  the  job  to  care  for  students.  They 
need  to  answer  for  themselves.  Please  know  that  Rubidoux  is 
filled  with  caring  people.  It  is  privilege  [sic]  for  me  to  work 
there,  and  I  know  that  many  others  share  this  fecling.  (repost) 

Mr.  Santiago  admitted  that  he  was  unaware  of  any  complaints  against  Ms.  Fuller 

before  her  Facebook  post. 

19. 

Daniel  Brooks,  the  district’s  Director  of  Personnel,  described  his  conversations 

with  parents  and  community  members  about  the  Facebook  posts.  He  described  how  upset 
the  parents  and  community  members  were,  how  they  felt  the  Facebook  posts  were 
discriminatory,  and  how  they  demanded  that  the  district  take  action.  Mr.  Brooks  also  spoke 
with  students  about  their  concerns  and  told  them  the  posts  did  not  reflect  the  district’s 
opinions.  Mr.  Brooks  admitted  that  no  one  ever  complained  to  him  specifically  about  Ms. 
Fuller  before  the  Facebook  posts. 

20. 

Two  current  RHS  students  tested  about  the  negative  impact  Ms.  Fuller’s 
posts  had  on  them.  They  explained  how  the  posts  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Fuller  could  not 
serve  as  arole  model,  the  negative  way  her  post  referred  to  Hispanics  and  immigrants,  how 
Ms.  Fuller  wrongly  referred  to  those  who  participated  in  the  Day  Without  Immigrants  protest 
as  “troublemakers,”  and  the  negative  way  that  Ms.  Fuller  viewed  the  students  who  stayed 
home  from  school  in  support  of  the  Day  Without  immigrants  protest.  The  students  did  not 
want  Ms.  Fuller  as  their  teacher  and  they  had  lost  trust  in  her.  Although  one  of  the  students 
admitted  that  Ms.  Fuller  was  a  good  teacher  who  helped  her  students  and  had  not  made  any 
racist  or  discriminatory  comments  in  class,  given  her  Facebook  post,  that  student’s  opmion 
of  Ms.  Fuller  changed  and  she  no  longer  wanted  Ms.  Fuller  as  her  teacher.  The  Commission 
was  not  persuaded  by  these  two  students’  testimony  —  one  had  never  taken  Ms.  Fuller’s  class

and  the  other  had  not  participated  in  many  agriculture  department  or  FFA  activities  and 
admitted  that  Ms.  Fuller  was  a  good  and  fair  teacher.  Thus,  their  criticisms  of  Ms.  Fuller 
offered  at  this  hearing  were  afforded  little  weight. 

21. 

Gale  Hammons,  the  district’s  Communications  and  Communications 

Strategies  independent  contractor,  testified  about  her  assessment  and  monitoring  of  social 
media  sites  for  the  district.  She  described  the  extreme  negative  public  reaction  to  the  2017 
Facebook  posts,  stating,  “the  backlash  was  pretty  fierce.”  In  addition  to  Facebook,  the 
messages  “went  viral”  on  several  social  media  accounts,  including  Twitter,  and  were 
reposted  numerous  times. 

22. 

Several  media  accounts  of  the  Facebook  posts  were  received.  These 

demonstrated  that  the  Facebook  posts  received  widespread  media  coverage  across  the 
district,  the  country  and  internationally.  ° 

23. 

Ms.  Fuller’s  argument  that  the  responses  to  the  Facebook  posts  were  not  about 
Ms.  Fuller  but  were  responses  to  Mr.  Greer’s  posts  was  not  persuasive.  It  was  clear  that  Ms. 
Fuller’s  post  was  included  in  the  backlash  the  district  received  from  all  the  posts. 

Board  Policies 

24. 

The  district  introduced  several  board  policies.  Ms.  Elzig  testified  that  Ms. 

Fuller’s  conduct  caused  the  board  to  be  unable  to  meet  Board  Policy  4000,  which  requires 
the  board  “to  ensure  the  success  of  district  students  and  programs”  and  “establish  safe  and 
supportive  working  conditions  that  will  attract  and  retain  staff  members  who  are  highly 
qualified  and  dedicated  to  the  education  and  welfare  of  students.” 

Ms.  Elzig  testified  that  Ms.  Fuller  violated  Board  Policy  4119.21,  the  code  of  ethics 
and  outlined  the  specific  principles  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  conduct  violated.  Ms.  Elzig  testified 
that  Ms.  Fuller’s  actions  violated  Board  Policy  4119.32  because  her  post  did  not  meet  her 
duty  and  responsibility  of  “maintaining  orderly  conduct.”  Ms.  Fuller’s  conduct  resulted  in 
the  board  being  unable  to  meet  its  goal  to  “maintain  a  safe,  positive  school  environment  and 
student  services  that  promote  student  welfare  and  academic  achievement”  as  set  forth  in 
Board  Policy  5000.  Similarly,  Ms.  Fuller’s  conduct  prevented  the  board  from  meeting  its 
goal  to  “provide  a  safe  school  environment”  as  outlined  in  Board  Policy  5145.3. 

Ms.  Elzig  admitted  there  are  no  board  policies  regarding  a  teacher’s  use  of  social 

media  although  there  are  “guidelines  regarding  acceptable  uses”  of  district  computers. 

  

>  Pursuant  to  the  ruling  on  the  motions  in  limine,  Official  Notice  of  the  existence  of 

news  accounts  was  taken,  but  the  content  of  them  was  subject  to  hearsay  objections.  The 
existence  of  the  articles  was  considered  to  evaluate  factors  outlined  in  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214  and  to  establish  the  notoriety  of  the  conduct  as 
discussed  in  Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  10  Cal.3d  691.

Ms.  Fuller’s  Character  Witnesses’  Testimony 

25.  Om”  i.  a  former  student  who  graduated  from  RHS  in  2011, 

testified  that  Ms.  Fuller  was  her  teacher  and  FFA  advisor.  Ms. 
traveled  with  Ms. 
Fuller  to  competitions  throughout  the  state  and  Ms.  Fuller  acted  as  a  “second  parent.”  She 
described  Ms.  Fuller  as  a  role  model  who  taught  her  “how  to  be  a  responsible  person” and 
taught  her  many  things  outside  of  the  classroom.  Because  of  Ms.  Fuller,  Ms. 
is 
pursuing  a  degree in  agriculture  teaching.  She  feels  indebted  to  Ms.  Fuller,  who  often  Ps 
for  competitions  or  travel  when  she  or  other  students  could  not  afford  it.  Ms. 
would  not  be  where  she  is  today  if  not  for  Ms.  Fuller  and  “a  lot  of  kids  depended 
agriculture  program  to  stay  in  high  school  and  stay  on  track.  I  don’t  know  what  I  would  do 
or  where  I  would  be  if  not  for  Ms.  Fuller.”  Ms.  ii 
is  a  personal  issue  for  me.”  Ms. 
immigrant  or  any  anti-ethnic  remarks.  Ms. 
described  Ms.  Fuller  and  her  impact  on  ve 

is  Latina  and  an  immigrant  so  “this 
never  knew  Ms.  Fuller  to  be  a  racist  or  make  anti- 

became  tearful  while  testifying  as  she 

on  the 

life. 

   

a  ‘a  a  former  student  who  graduated  from  RHS  in  2017,  described 

She  had  four  classes  with  Ms.  Fuller  during  her  junior  and  senior 
| 

Ms.  sie  as  her  “hero.” 
years.  She  was  a  student in  Ms.  Fuller’s  class  when  the  Facebook  posts  occurred.  Ms. 
described  Ms.  Fuller  as  “the  best  teacher  at  [RHS]”  and  stated  that  “to  get  rid  of  her  would  be 
feels  indebted  to  Ms.  Fuller;  referring  to  Ms.  Fuller  as 
the  biggest  mistake  ever.”  Ms. 
testified  that  her  “story  is  not  unique,”  many  students  felt  the 
her  “second  mom.”  Ms. 
same  way  and  called  Ms.  Fuller  “Mama  Fuller.”  Ms.  Fuller  inspired  Ms. ra  to  “follow  in 
her  footsteps”  and  she  is  taking  college  courses  to  become  an  agriculture  teacher.  Ms. 
| 
described  the  hours  long  car  rides  to  competitions  and  conferences  that  Ms.  Fuller  used  to 
teach  students,  for  example  stopping  to  show  them  the  San  Andreas  Fault  line.  Ms.  He 
explained  how  Ms.  Fuller  helped  students  realize  their  full  potential;  she  would  not  let  them 
be  on  their  phones  or  not  participate  in  class;  and  she  encouraged  students  to  get  involved. 
|  believed  that  many  students  supported  Ms.  Fuller  and  that  the  students  who 
Ms. 
protested  against  Ms.  Fuller  did  so  as  a  way  to  get  back  at  her  for  making  them  do  their  work 
or  get  involved in  class.  Ms. He  i is  a  Latina  and  never  knew  Ms.  Fuller  to  make  any  anti- 
immigrant  or  racist  remarks.  Ms. 

|  became  extremely  tearful  while  testifying. 

27. 

Rafael  Mosqueda  is  an  agriculture  teacher  at  Hemet  High  School  who  knows 
Ms.  Fuller  through  the  county  and  state  agriculture  programs.  He  described  Ms.  Fuller  as  a 
role  model  who  is  highly  regarded  in  the  agriculture  profession.  Ms.  Fuller  is  a  “good 
personal  family  friend.”  Mr.  Mosqueda  testified,  “There  are  not  many  words  that  do  her 
justice  as  I  think  the  world  of  her.”  She  is  “a  very  selfless,  wonderful  person  and  I  wish  that 
she  did  not  have  to  go  through  all  of  this;  she  is  one  of  the  most  awesome  persons  and  I  am 
glad  she  came  into  my  life.”  Mr.  Mosqueda  became  choked  up  while  testifying.  He  has 
never  discussed  racial  issues  with  Ms.  Fuller  as  “there  was  no  need.”  He  was  aware  of  the 
Facebook  posts  and  of  the  RHS  walkout  but  the  walkout  “was  not  necessarily  because  of  the 
posts.”  Mr.  Mosqueda  was  not  asked  what  he  thought  caused  the  walkout  if  it  was  not 
because  of  the  Facebook  posts.  Mr.  Mosqueda  is  Latino  and  he  has  never  heard  Ms.  Fuller 
make  disparaging  remarks  regarding  Latinos  or  immigrants  or  make  any  racist  remarks.

    

  

     

28. 

George  Monge,  a  teacher  at  RHS,  who  is  also  the  Eastern  Secondary  Division 
Leader  for  the  teacher’s  union,  testified  about  the  discussions  teachers  had  at  a  staff  meeting 
regarding  ways  they  could  show  support  for  the  six  RHS  employees  who  had  posted  on 
Facebook.  By  “a  show  of  hands,”  the  majority  of  teachers  present  at  the  staff  meeting 
supported  the  six  employees.  Following  their  discussion,  the  teachers  agreed  that  Mr.  Monge 
would  prepare  a  letter  to  be  read  at  the  upcoming  board  meeting.  Teachers  feared  district 
retaliation  if  they  signed  their  names  on  a  petition  but  wanted  the  board  to  know  they 
supported  the  six  employees.  Mr.  Monge  wrote  a  letter  addressed  to  the  board  that  he 
circulated  to  teachers  to  review.  He  read  the  letter  to  the  board  members  and  provided  each 
of  them  with  copies  of  it.  Mr.  Monge  attached  two  petitions’  to  his  letter  that  students  signed 
in  support  of  Ms.  Fuller  and  one  other  Facebook  teacher. 

Mr.  Monge’s  letter,  dated  May  4,  2017,  noted  that  during  a  recent  afterschool 

gathering,  the  teachers  and  support  staff  of  RHS  “voted  by  an  overwhelming  majority  to 
express  their  support”  for  the  six  colleagues  currently  placed  on  administrative  leave.  The 
letter  noted  that  the  Facebook  “comments  were  not  intended  to  cause  harm  to  our  students  or 
to  our  school.  This  is  seen  by  the  apologies  that  were  quickly  posted.”  However,  as  the 
district  correctly  pointed  out,  Ms.  Fuller  did  not  post  any;  in  fact,  she  testified  that  Mr. 
Greer’s  Facebook  account  was  closed  shortly  after  she  posted  her  comment,  so  there  would 
be  no  way  for  her  to  post  an  apology  on  it.’  Mr.  Monge’s  letter  noted  that  although  “the 
district  may  have  some  legitimate  concerns  regarding  the  potential  for  future  disruption  to 
the  learning  environment,”  the  teachers  and  staff  of  RHS  “who  were  interacting  and 
communicating  with  our  students  in  the  immediate  aftermath  and  the  time  since  the  incident 
are  less  worried  about  that  potentiality.” 

The  letter  stated  that  the  day  after  the  Facebook  posts,  and  in  the  days  that  followed, 

many  students  and  multiple  student  groups  communicated  their  desire  to  offer  forgiveness  to 
the  six  district  employees  “to  help  expedite  our  healing  process.”  The  letter  referred  to  the 
sentiment  frequently  expressed  by  students  of  the  notion  that  a  family  member  who  makes  a 
mistake  is  not  kicked  out  of  the  family,  instead  that  family  member  is  counseled  and  coached 
so  that  mistakes  are  not  repeated.  The  letter  noted  that  this  sentiment  was  consistent  with  the 
district’s  mandated  student  discipline  program.  Further,  the  letter  noted  that  the  absence  of 
the  teachers  had  greatly  disrupted  the  learning  environment  and  the  effectiveness  of  several 
important  programs  at  RHS  and  that  students  had  gathered  hundreds  of  signatures  on 
petitions  requesting  the  return  of  the  teachers.  A  petition  seeking  Ms.  Fuller’s  return  to  RHS 
  

°  The  petitions  containing  the  students’  names  were  sealed. 

’  The  district  repeatedly  argued  that  Ms.  Fuller  never  apologized  and  made  much  of 

that  contention,  but  the  Commission  did  not  find  that  to  be  the  case.  Ms.  Fuller  was 
apologizing  to  her  students  the  morning  after  her  February  post  when  she  was  removed  from 
her  classroom.  After  being  placed  on  leave,  her  next  contact  with  the  district  was  during 
various  legal  meetings  such  that  it  would  not  be  unusual  for  her  not  to  apologize  in  those 
settings.  Thus  the  Commission  was  not  swayed  by  the  “no  apology”  argument  put  forth  by 
the  district. 

10

was  attached  to  Mr.  Monge’s  letter.  Mr.  Monge’s  letter  concluded  by  notmg  the  “enormous 
contributions”  the  six  ensployees  had  made  to  the  school,  the  “strongly  positive  relations” 
they  had  established  with  students,  the  numerous  awards  they  had  received,  that  they  were 
“valuable  and  vital  members”  of  the  community,  and  that  “the  pnipact  of  their  permanent  loss 
to  our  students  and  program  would  be  devastating.” 

29. 

Kimberley  Miller,  Ed.D.,  is  an  associate  professor  at  Cal  Poly  Pomona  in  the 

College  of  Agriculture.  She  first  met  Ms.  Fuller  when  Dr.  Miller  helped  judge  FFA 
competitions  at  RHS  as  part  of  Dr.  Miller’s  undergraduate  coursework.  She  later  came  to 
work  with  Ms.  Fuller  as  a  colleague  when  Dr.  Miller  taught  high  school  agriculture  courses. 
Now  as  an  associate  professor  at  Cal-Poly,  Ms.  Fuller  is  on  “the  short  list”  of  agriculture 
teachers  that  Cal-Poly  uses  to  provide  clinical  practice  for  its  students  working  on  their 
teaching  credential.  Dr.  Miller  described  Ms.  Fuller  as  a  “powerful  role  model”  and  a 
“strong  role  model”  who  has  all  the  best  qualities  of  an  agriculture  teacher.  Dr.  Miller's 
student  teacher  who  was  doing  her  clinical  program  in  Ms.  Fuller’s  class  in  February  2017 
told  Dr.  Miller  about  the  post;  Ms.  Fuller  did  not  do  so.  The  student  teacher  contacted  Dr. 
Maller  about  the  posts  and  how  “angry”  the  students  were,  seeking  guidance  on  how  she 
should  respond  as  the  student  teacher.  Dr.  Miller  did  not  review  Ms.  Fuller’s  Facebook  post 
but  was  told  “something  along  the  lines  that  [it  said]  “Today  was  a  pleasant  day.’”  Dr.  Miller 
did  not  discuss  the  post  with  Ms.  Fuller’s  students.  Dr.  Miller  was  shown  the  Facebook  posts 
at  this  hearing  and  admitted  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  varied  from  what  she  had  been  told  but  it 
did  not  change  her  opinion  of  Ms.  Fuller.  Dr.  Miller  admitted  that  she  advises  her  students  to 
be  mindful  of  what  they  post  on  social  media. 

30. 

Jack  Havens  works  for  the  California  Department  of  Education  as  an 

agriculture  consultant.  He  administers  a  grant  program  in  the  Southern  Region  and  the 
Future  Farmers  of  America  (FFA)  program  and  provides  services  to  teachers  and  districts. 
He  testified  that  Ms.  Fuller  is  an  excellent  teacher  who  was  nominated  by  her  peers  for  a 
CATA  Teacher  of  Excellence  award  and  an  Honorary  American  FFA  Degree,  She  is 
“abways  fighting  for  her  students  and  the  program.”  Mr.  Havens  would  recommend  Ms. 
Fuller  for  employment  m  any  district  “without  reservation.”  Mr.  Havens  has  not  spoken  with 
any  of  Ms.  Fuller’s  students  since  the  Facebook  post  and  his  only  interaction  with  her  since 
she  was  put  on  leave  was  when  she  asked  him  to  write  a  letter  of  support/reference  for  her 
that  he  wrote  m  May  2017.  Mr.  Havens  was  not  aware  ofexactly  what  was  posted  on 
Facebook,  people  “referred  to  it  in  generalities.”  Ms.  Fuller  told  him  “she  put  something  on 
Pacebook  on  the  Day  Without  Immigrants”  but  he  did  not  know  what  was  posted  other  than 
“many  people”  told  him  it  was  a  post  that  “class  was  good  because  a  lot  of  students  were  not 
there  that  day.”  No  one  told  him  that  Ms.  Fuller  posted  that  troublemakers  were  not  present 
that  day.  Mr.  Havens  admitted  that  people  should  be  mindful  of  what  they  post  and  that 
posts  can  be  misconstrued.  He  agreed  it  is  “problematic”  for  a  teacher  to  post  that  students 
are  “troublemakers”  but  if  Ms.  Puller  did  that  it  would  not  change  his  option  of  her. 

In  his  letter  of  recommendation,  dated  May  3,  2017,  Mr.  Havens  described  Ms.  Fuller 
as  “an  exemplary  and  outstanding  teacher  since  she  first  entered  the  profession.”  Mr.  Havens 

ii

praised  Ms.  Fuller’s  hard  work,  dedication,  enthusiasm  and  work  growing  the  RHS 
agriculture  program. 

Ms.  Fuller’s  Additional  Letters  of  Reference,  Support  and  Evaluations 

31. 

An  undated  Fabulous  Falcon®  Award  was  presented  to  Ms.  Fuller  for  “soaring 

with  PRIDE  at  [RHS.]”  PRIDE  stood  for:  Perseverance,  Respect,  Integrity,  Dedicated  to 
Excellence. 

32. 

Anundated  certificate  of  appreciation  presented  to  Ms.  Fuller  by  the  RHS 

Associated  Student  Body  (ASB)  commended  her  for  “her  commitment  to  helping  ASB 
prepare  for  school  events  and  for  helping  to  spread  the  FALCON  SPIRIT.  We  are  grateful  to 
you  for  going  out  of  your  way  to  make  this  year’s  events  the  best  they  could  be.” 

33. 

A  document  entitled  “Staff  Fabulous  Falcon  November”  identified  Ms.  Fuller 

as  the  winner  of  the  “Integrity”  award,  noting  it  was  given  for  “adherence  to  moral  and 
ethical  principles;  soundness  of  moral  character;  and  honesty.”  The  document  noted: 

We  come  across  a  small  number  of  people  in  our  lives 
who  exemplify  an  adherence  to  moral  and  ethical  principles. 
Even  fewer  have  gained  our  trust  through  their  honesty.  In  the 
education  field,  finding  someone  who  exemplifies  integrity 
might  be  considered  a  daunting  task.  However,  this  is  not  the 
case  here  at  [RHS].  When  thinking  of  persons  who  demonstrate 
an  adherence  to  moral  and  ethical  values,  many  faculty  here  at 
RHS  come  to  mind.  Another  definition  for  integrity  references 
“the  state  of  being  undiminished”.  [sic]  So  when  thinking  of  a 
person  who  not  only  adheres  to  moral  and  ethical  principles,  but 
has  earned  the  mutual  trust  from  her  co-workers  and  students 
alike,  through  her  honesty,  all-the-while  [sic]  maintaining  the 
“undiminished  success”  of  one  of  Rubidoux’s  largest  and  most 
successful  programs,  Future  Farmers  of  America,  it  1s  easy  to 
understand  why  Rhonda  Fuller  is  one  of  this  month’s  Fabulous 
Falcon  [sic]. 

Ms.  Fuller  is  a  Rubidoux  Alum,  who  has  great  pride  in 

Rubidoux,  and  is  respected  for  honesty  and  integrity.  If  she  says 
she  will  do  something,  it  will  get  done!  If  you  go  to  her 
expecting  an  honest  answer  or  opinion  that  is  precisely  what  you 
will  get! 
have  only  furthered  the  respect  for  [RHS],  allowing  this  campus 
to  SOAR  with  PRIDE. 

All  the  programs  she  has  been  a  part  of  here  at  RHS, 

  

®  The  RHS  school  mascot  is  a  falcon. 

12

34. 

<A 

card  signed  by  several  colleagues  indicated  that  they  missed  Ms.  Puller, 

cared  about  her,  and  could  not  wait  for  her  to  return  to  RHS. 

35. 

Several  cards  and  letters  written  by  Ms.  Fuller’s  students  indicated  how  much 
they  cared  for  ber,  how  much  they  missed  her,  how  much  she  meant  to  their  education,  how 
she  was  their  favorite  teacher,  the  passion  she  exhibited  in  her  classroom,  and  the  positive 
impact  she  had  on  their  lives. 

36. 

Ms.  Fuller's  2015  evaluation  documented  that  she  received  overall  ratings  of 

“meets”  or  “exceeds”  criteria.  The  comments  noted  that  Ms.  Fuller:  “facilitates  learning 
experiences  that  promote  meaningful  mteractions,  and  engages  students  i  problem  solving, 
critical  thinking,  and  other  activities  that  make  subject  matter  comprehensible.”  “Ms.  Fuller 
creates  a  physical  environment  that  engages  all  students  and  promotes  optimal  learning  for 
each  student.”  “She  ensures  that  students’  knowledge  of  the  subject  matter  incorporates 
different  perspectives...”  “Ms.  Fuller  values  her  students’  backgrounds  and  interests  by 
creating  class  discussion  opportunities  that  are  engaging  and  interesting.” 

District’s  Social  Media  Training 

37. 

Joshua  Lewis,  the  district’s  Director  of  Education  Information  Technology, 

testified  about  the  social  media  training  the  district  provided.  Two  programs,  Tech  Fest, 
offered  in  the  fall,  and  Summer  Jam,  offered  when  school  ends,  were  voluntary  trainings  for 
teachers  regarding  how  to  integrate  technology  in  the  classroom  including  the  use  of  social 
media.  The  district  offered  no  evidence  that  Ms.  Fuller  attended  these  voluntary  programs 
and  she  testified  that  she  did  not  attend  either  one  because  they  were  programs  about  ways 
that  teachers  could  integrate  technology  in  ther  classrooms.  Mr.  Lewis  admitted  that  the 
district  docs  not  have  a  Facebook  policy  for  teachers. 

Mr.  Lewis  described  the  digital  citizenship  course  that  all  teachers  were  required  to 

teach  during  their  advisory  class.  Two  of  the  lesson  plans  from  that  course  were  introduced 
at  hearing.  One  course,  entitled,  “Private  Today,  Public  Tomorrow,”  dealt  with  ways  to 
protect  privacy  on  line  and  the  unintended  consequences  of posting  things  on  line.  Another 
lesson  addressed  cyber  bullying.  Ms.  Fuller  submitted  documentation  to  the  district 
verifying  that  she  taught  the  required  digttal  citizenship  course  work  to  her  students.  Ms. 
Puller  explained  that  the  school  provided  Power  Point  slides  for  the  course  and  was  supposed 
to  print  out  the  course  books  for  the  students  but  did  not  do  so.  As  such,  in  her  class  “we  sort 
of  breezed  through  what  we  saw  [im  the  Power  Point}  but  my  students  were  not  able  to  really 
participate.”  Ms.  Fuller  could  not  recall  if  there  was  any  instruction  in  those  Power  Point 
shdes  regarding  the  use  of  social  media. 

The  Commission  determined  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  notice  to  the  district  that  she  taught  the 

digital  citizenship  course  did  not  enhance  the  gravity  of  her  Facebook  post.

Ms.  Fuller’s  August  4,  2017,  Facebook  Post 

38. 

Despite  all  that  has  transpired,  on  the  first  dav  of  school,  August  4,  2017,  Ms. 

Fuller  posted  the  followimg  message  on  her  Facebook  account: 

Today  marks  my  29th  year  teaching.  I  would  never  have 
imagined  that  at  this  point  in  my  career  |  would  be  embroiled  in 
this  horrible  legal  battle  with  the  district  that  Vve  devoted  my 
life  to.  And  to  receive  actual  threats  from  district  admin  last 
night  was  just  the  icing  on  the  cake!  “Doing  what’s  right  is  not 
always  easy,  domg  what's  easy  is  not  always  right”  [sic] 

Below  those  words  Ms.  Fuller  posted  a  photograph  of  her  RHS  Alumm  Lifetime 

Achievement  Award  2012. 

It  was  difficult  to  fathom  why  Ms.  Fuller  would  post  this  message  given  all  the 

turmoil  the  district  and  she  have  endured.  Although  the  Commission  ultimately  concluded 
that  Ms.  Fuller  should  not  be  dismissed  from  service,  the  Commission  felt  that  this  post  was 
extremely  ill-advised  and  indicated  that  Ms.  Fuller  sees  herself  as  the  victim  of  this  “legal 
battle”  and  not  as  the  perpetrator  who  brought  this  all  on  herself  by  her  February  16,  2017, 
post.  Ms.  Fuller  should  realize  that  she  ts  solely  to  blame  for  her  predicament. 

Additionally,  Ms.  Fuller’s  hearing  was  originally  set  to  begin  on  August  30,  2017,  but 

was  continued  on  that  day  because  the  original  panel  member  selected  by  Ms.  Fuller  knew 
the  witnesses  and  the  district's  motion  to  excuse  her  from  serving  on  the  Commission  was 
granted.  As  such,  the  case  was  continued  to  December  11,  2017,  and  Ms.  Fuller  selected  a 
new  panel  member  to  serve  on  the  Commission.  However,  when  Ms.  Fuller  made  her 
August  2017  Facebook  post,  she  did  not  know  that  her  hearing  would  not  proceed  as  set  in 
26  days.  It  was  not  until  the  morning  of  August  30,  2017,  when  the  origmally  designated 
panel  member  notified  the  parties  that  she  knew  the  witnesses,  that  the  district  moved  to 
exclude  that  panel  member  and  Ms.  Fuller’s  case  was  continued.  Thus,  at  the  time  Ms. 
Fuller  posted  her  “icing  on  the  cake”  Facebook  comments  it  was  a  mere  26  days  before  her 
hearing  was  set  to  begin.  Why  she  would  post  a  message  criticizing  the  district  and  implying 
that  she  was  “doing  what’s  right”  was  impossible  to  comprehend.  The  Commussion  strongly 
suggests  that  Ms.  Fuller  refram  from  posting  comments  about  the  district  on  social  media. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections 

I. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (ed.  Code,  §§  44934  and  44944.) 

i4

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 
permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (a) 1)  authorizes  dismissal  for  mmioral  conduct. 
Subdivision  (a)(6)  authorizes  dismissal  for  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearmg,  the  process 

for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and  the 
Commissions’  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

A. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing  board 

must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent  employee. 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

5. 

The  “burden  of  proof’  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.  App.3d  L121,  1128) 

6. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal  App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  tn  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal. App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

fiamoral  Conduct 

7. 

The  term  “immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has 
been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opmions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
mconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  “Immoral  conduct”  is  not 
confined  to  sexual  matters.  It  mcludes  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  [tis  sometimes  synonymous  with  “dishonesty”  or  a  high  degree  of 
unfairness.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal. App.2d  808,  811,  noting  that  no  other  California  cases  had  previously  defined  the  term 
“pamoral  conduct.) 

3. 

“Immoral  conduct”  is  conduct  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and 

is  not  confined  to  sexual  matters.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  vy.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal  App.4th  1454,  1466.)

9, 

Immoral  conduct  cannot  be  considered  in  the  abstract.  It  must  be  considered 

in  the  context  m  which  the  Legislature  considered  it,  as  conduct  which  1s  hostile  to  the 
welfare  of  the  general  public;  more  specifically,  conduct  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the 
school  community.  In  providing  standards  to  guide  school  boards  m  placing  restraints  on 
conduct  of  teachers,  the  Legislature  is  concerned  with  the  welfare  of  the  school  community. 
[ts  objective  is  the  protection  of  students  from  corruption.  This  is  a  proper  exercise  of  the 
power  of  a  state  to  abridge  personal  liberty  and  to  protect  larger  interests.  But 
reasonableness  must  be  the  governing  criterion.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education 
(£969)  |  Cab.  3d  214,  224.)  The  phrase  “immoral  conduct”  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Education  Code  denotes  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  or  moral  turpitude  of  the  teacher 
that  renders  the  teacher  unfit  to  teach.  (bid.  at  p.  225.) 

10. 

There  are  certain  professions  which  impose  upon  persons  attached  to  them 
responsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  m  regard  to  other 
callings.  Public  officials  such  as  judges,  policemen  and  schoolteachers  fall  into  such  a 
category.  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Stubblefield  (1971)  16  Cal.  App.3d  820,  824.) 

li. 

“As  between  a  teacher  and  his  student,  ‘(a)n  important  part  of  the  education 
...  is  the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to  necessary  discipline. 
Lessons  are  learned  from  example  as  weil  as  from  precept.’  (Citation.)  ‘A  teacher...  in  the 
public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose 
words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  [students]  coming  under  [his]  care  and 
protection....  The  teaching  by  example  as  weil  as  precept,  of  obedience  to  properly 
constituted  authority  and  discipline  necessary  to  a  well  ordered  society,  is  an  important  part 
of  education.””  (Watson  v.  State  Bd.  of  Education  (971)  22  Cal.  App.3d  359,  565.) 

12. 

“The  calling  of  an  educator  is  so  intimate,  tts  duties  so  delicate,  the  things  im 

which  a  teacher  might  prove  unworthy  or  would  fail  are  so  numerous  that  they  are  incapable 
of  enumeration  im  any  legislative  enactment.  The  educator’s  ability  to  mspire  children  and  to 
govern  them,  his  power  as  an  educator,  and  the  character  for  which  he  stands  are  matters  of 
major  concern  in  an  educator's  selection  and  retention....  An  educator  in  the  public  school 
system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and 
actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  students  coming  under  his  care  and  protection. 
(Citation.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(2011)  194  Cal  App.4th  1454,  1463-643 

13. 

The  governing  board  of a  district  is  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  schools 

under  its  jurisdiction,  their  standards  of  education,  and  the  moral,  mental,  and  physical 
welfare  of  the  pupils  durmg  school  hours.  An  important  part  of  the  education  of  any  child  is 
the  istilmg  ofa  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to  necessary  discipline.  Lessons 
are  learned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.  “Book  learnmg”  is  only  a  phase  of  the 
unportant  lessons  a  child  should  learn  in  aschool.  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of 
Riverside  County  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.  App. 3d  967,  970-71.) 

16

14. 

Rejecting  statutory  terms,  such  as  “mmmorality,”  “unprofessional  conduct,”  or 
“snoral  turpitude’  as  overly  broad  to  use  as  grounds  for  discipline  of  public  school  teachers, 
the  Morrison  court  created  a  seven-part  test  to  assess  whether  a  misbehaving  teacher  is  fit  to 
teach.  (Broney  vy.  California  Com.  on  Teacher  Credentialing  2010)  184  Cal  App.4th  462, 
466.)  “Because  terms  such  as  ‘immoral,’  ‘unprofessional,’  or  “‘mvolving  moral  turpitude’  are 
too  broad  and  amorphous  to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  the  termination  of  a  professional  license,  it 
must  be  shown  the  conduct  in  question  mdicates  an  unfitness  to  engage  m  the  profession.” 
Ud.  at  pp.  473-74.) 

18. 

 Simee  the  term  “mumoral  conduct”  is  vague  and  broad,  whether  the  conduct 

demonstrates  an  unfitness  to  teach  must  be  measured  against  seven  criteria  set  forth  im 
Morrison.  (Governing  Board  of ABC  Unified  School  District  v.  Haar  A994)  28  Cal  App  4th 
369,  383.) 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

16. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determimative  test  in  teacher  dismissal  cases  ts 

whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  “Fitness  to  teach”  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (Board  of 
Education  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.  App.3d  555,  560- 
561.) 

17. 

“Evident”  is  defined  as  “clear  to  the  vision  and  understanding.”  “Untit”  is 

defined  as  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable:  incompetent;  and 
physically  or  mentally  unsound”  and  “unsuitable,  mcompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a 
particular  use  or  service.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  y. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal  App.3d  967,  972.) 

18. 

In  Wooadland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.  App.4th  1429,  the  court  noted  the  two  parallel,  yet  contradictory, 
lines  of  cases  regarding  “unfit  for  service.”  One  line  of  cases  equated  that  term  with 
“unprofessional  conduct”  and  the  other  line  of  cases  distinguished  the  two  definitions.  In 
deciding  that  the  latter  lime  of  cases  was  the  correct  way  to  evaluate  “unfit  to  serve,”  and 
complied  with  the  rules  of  statutory  construction.  The  Woodland  court  conchided  that 
“unprofessional  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same 
thing.  Although  conduct  constitutmg  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  will  offen  constitute 
“unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is  not  always  true.  Evident  unfitness  for  service 
requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not 
necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not 
disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in  Morrison  where  that  court  concluded  that 
“unprofessional  conduct’  meant  conduct  showing  a  teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria 
must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness 
for  service.  [fit  does,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”;  1e., 
whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.  Ud.  at  pp.  1442-1445.) 
A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  can  be  made  if  the  evidence,  taken  im  the  aggregate,  shows  that 

17

retaining  the  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to  students 
and  fellow  teachers.  Ud.  at  p.1456.) 

19. 

Anermployee  can  be  dismissed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 
showme  that  bis  retention  mn  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either 
students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.  The 
inquiry  is  whether  any  adverse  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the  teacher's  conduct  as  to  his 
teaching  ability,  or  as  to  the  possibility  that  publicity  surrounding  the  past  conduct  may  in 
and  of  itself  substantially  impair  his  function  as  a  teacher.  (Morrison,  supra,  at  p.  235.) 

20. 

To  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a  nexus  between 

government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from  the  principle  that 
“Inlo  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of  factors  unconnected  with  the 
responsibilities  of  that  employment.”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal  App.4th  1454,  1463.) 

21. 

“Unlike  “unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a 

fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectation  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (San  Diego  Unified 
School  District  vy.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  2013)  214  Cal  App.4th  1120, 
1142-43.) 

22. 

 Anemployee’s  actions  on  a  given  day  may  suggest  a  lack  of judgement  and 

discretion,  or  may  be  an  isolated  act  precipitated  by  an  unusual  accumulation  of  pressure  and 
Stress.  An  absence  of  any  other  mcidents  in  the  employee's  teaching  career  suggestive  of 
lack  of judgment  or  discretion  can  further  distinguish  the  aberrant  character  of  the  act  at 
issuc.  In  such  a  case,  a  fact  finder  could  reasonably  conclude  that  the  isolated  incident  of 
poor  judgment  was  outweighed  by  years  of  demonstrated  teaching  competence,  and  that  on 
balance  the  employee  possessed  the  qualities  of  character  necessary  for  teaching  fitness. 
(Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (A977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696-701) 

23. 

in  determinme  whether  the  teacher's  conduct  indicated  unfitness  to  teach,  such 
matters  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers,  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversily  anticipated,  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  m  time 
of  the  conduct,  (4)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct,  (5)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  (6)  the  notoricty 
and  publicity  accorded  the  teacher’s  conduct  may  be  considered.  Wack  M.,  supra.,  at  p.702, 
fa  3.) 

24, 

The  nexus  between  an  employee’s  conduct  and  his  fitness  to  teach  is 

established  when  the  conduct  is  detrimental  to  the  mission  and  functions  of  the  ernployer. 
Factors  to  consider  are  whether  the  acts  demonstrate  a  serious  lapse  in  good  judgment,  the 
teacher  failed  to  recognize  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct,  the  teacher  attempted  to  shift 
blame  to  parents  and  students  who  might  access  his  social  media  postmg,  his  principal  had 
lost  confidence  in  his  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  based  upon  the  posting,  or,  most 

IS

noteworthy,  the  teacher's  testimony  that  he  did  not  think  his  postings  would  have  any  unpact 
on  his  ability  to  teach  his  students  if  any  of  them  had  viewed  his  post  and  that  he  did  not 
view  his  posting  as  immoral.  The  conduct  itself,  together  with  the  teacher’s  failure  to  accept 
responsibility  or  recognize  the  seriousness  of  it,  given  his  position  as  a  teacher  and  role 
model,  demonstrates  evident  unfitness  to  teach.  Gan  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Cammission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal  App.4th  1454,  1465-66.) 

25. 

One  act  does  not  alone  demonstrate  the  unfitness  of  the  teacher,  but  is  simply 

one  of  the  factors  to  be  considered.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Campetence  (1980)  LO2  Cal.  App.3d  555,  561-62.) 

26. 

There  must  be  a  nexus  between  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  his  usefulness  to  the 

school  district  and  only  when  so  construed  can  grounds  to  dismiss  for  immoral  conduct  or 
unfitness  to  serve  be  constitutionally  applied.  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  fudge  (1975)  30  Cal. 
App.  3d  920,  929.) 

Morrison  Factors 

27. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  to  consider 

when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1}  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity, 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  m  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher.  Those  factors  were  considered  in  this  decision. 

28. 

The  Morrison  tactors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When  a 

camel’s  back  1s  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  im 
one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entrtled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the 
offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal  App  4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

its  load  to  see  which 

29. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Bronevy  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal  App.4th  462,  476.) 

Other  Discipline  Considerations 

30. 

An  admmustrator’s  loss  of  confidence  m  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 

educator's  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered. 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal  App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

19

31. 

The  notoriety  and  publicity  accorded  a  teacher's  conduct  may  properly  be 

considered.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  A977)  19  Cal.3d  691,  701,  in.  5.)  fthe 
teacher’s  conduct  is  sufficiently  notorious  that  the  students  know  or  are  likely  to  learn  of i, 
and  ifthe  teacher  continues  to  model  his  past  conduct,  the  Commission  may  infer  that  the 
teacher’s  conduct  may  result  in  student  ernulation,  but  such  an  inference  is  disputable.  Cd., 
at  p.  699  and  fn.  4.) 

32. 

Where  it  can  reasonably  be  inferred  that  the  salient  facts  at  issue  reached  the 

attention  of  many  persons  in  the  community,  it  may  also  be  imferred  that  the  educator’s 
conduct  attained  a  degree  of  timely  notoriety  among  persons  -  students,  teachers,  parents,  and 
others  -  interested  in  the  high  school.  (Comings  v.  State  Bd.  of  Education  A972)  23 
Cal  App.3d  94,  105-6.) 

33. 

An  educator  may  be  dismissed  ifthe  conduct  has  gained  sufficient  notoriety  so 
as  to  mmopair  his  or  her  on-campus  relationships.  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Stubblefield  (A971)  16 
Cal.  App.3d  820,  826;  Watson  v.  State  Bd.  of  Educ.  (1971)  22  Cal.  App.3d  359,  562.) 

34. 

The  Commussion  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee  even  if 
grounds  for  discipline  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d 
209.) 

Evaluation 

35. 

Ms.  Fuller’s  2017  Facebook  post  negatively  impacted  students,  the  school,  the 

district  and  the  community.  However,  having  considered  all  of  the  evidence,  the 
Commission  did  not  find  that  the  district  proved  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  Facebook  post  constituted 
umoral  conduct  or  demonstrated  that  she  was  evidently  unfit  to  serve. 

Whuile  there  can  be  no  question  that  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  was  unwise,  it  did  not 
demonstrate  that  she  was  corrupt,  depraved,  or  lacked  respect  for  her  community.  Contrary 
to  the  district’s  assertions,  calling  students  “troublemakers”  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of 
mmoral  conduct  as  that  term  is  defined  in  the  case  law.  Nor  did  her  post  demonstrate  that 
she  was  racist.  Although  the  posts,  Ms.  Fuller’s  post  included,  negatively  impacted  the 
community,  that  negative  impact  appears  to  have  abated  as  evidenced  by  the  lack  of  any 
persons  attending  the  hearing  who  were  opposed  to  Ms.  Fuller.  Indeed,  the  courtroom  was 
filled  with  individuals  who  strongly  supported  her.  Furthermore,  her  post  cannot  be 
considered  im  the  abstract,  but  must  be  looked  at  in  the  context  m  which  it  was  made:  she 
was  replying  to  another  teacher's  post  about  the  small  classroom  sizes  and  lack  of  students  at 
school  and  not  to  Mr.  Greer’s  post  specifically.  In  that  context,  her  post  was  not  immoral. 
Even  if  one  were  to  conchide  that  her  post  was  directly  responding  to  Mr.  Greer’s  post,  the 
words  that  Ms.  Fuller  used  m  her  post  would  still  not  rise  to  the  level  required  to  establish 
“pamoral  conduct.” 

As  a  teacher,  Ms.  Fuller  is  required  to  set  an  example,  and  she  did  not  set  a  good  one 

with  this  post,  but  tm  light  of  all  of  the  evidence  presented,  her  post  did  not  constitute 

20

immoral  conduct.  Quite  the  contrary,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Ms.  Puller  has  set  an 
excellent  example  at  RHS,  as  evidenced  by  the  awards,  distinctions,  2015  evaluation,  letters 
ofreference,  and  testimony  introduced  at  this  hearing. 

Similarly,  the  district  aiso  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Fuller  is  evidently  unfit  to  teach. 
While  her  post  was  in  poor  taste,  her  single  act  of  bad  judgment  by  posting  her  comments  on 
Facebook  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of  demonstrating  that  she  was  unsuitable,  incapable, 
incompetent  or  unfit  te  teach.  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  Ms.  Fuller  suffers  from 
a  defect  in  temperament,  or  a  fixed  character  trait,  nor  did  1  demonstrate  that  retaining  Ms. 
Fuller  as  an  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to  students  and 
fellow  teachers.  In  fact,  the  undisputed  evidence  proved  that  even  while  placing  Ms.  Fuller 
on  suspension,  Ms.  Elzig  asked  Ms.  Fuller  to  travel  off-campus  with  students  and  chaperone 
the  agricultural  event  taking  place  the  following  week.  Ifthe  district  truly  felt  that  Ms.  Fuller 
posed  arisk  of  harm  to  students,  1  would  never  have  asked  her  to  chaperone  that  event.  That 
request  to  chaperone  undercut  the  district's  argument.  In  addition,  the  evidence  established 
that  Ms.  Fuller  is  remorseful,  is  capable  of  change,  deeply  regrets  her  actions,  and 
desperately  desires  a  return  to  the  classroom  so  that  she  can  make  amends.  In  fact,  she  was 
making  amends  when  she  was  pulled  from  her  classroom,  even  before  she  was  fully  aware  of 
the  community  outrage  to  her  post.  Thus,  it  was  not  established  that  she  was  incapabie  of 
remediation.  Rather,  her  post  was  an  aberrant,  isolated  act  in  an  otherwise  distinguished 
teaching  career.  On  balance,  Ms.  Fuller  possesses  the  “qualities  of  character  necessary  for 
teaching  Trtness”  and  the  likelihood  that  she  would  ever  post  such  comments  again  is 
extremely  remote. 

The  district  did  establish  the  notoriety  given  to  the  posts  and  the  extremely  negative 

impact  they  initially  had  on  the  community.  However,  based  upon  the  totality  of  the 
evidence  presented,  especially  the  petitions,  letters,  cards  and  testimony  in  support  of  Ms. 
Fuller,  as  well  as  her  testimony,  accepting  responsibility  for  her  post  and  expressing  deep 
remorse,  it  was  not  established  that  she  is  evidently  unfit  to  serve  in  the  district.  The 
Commission  conchided  that  the  evidence  established  that  it  was  in  in  the  best  interests  of  the 
students  that  Ms.  Fuller  be  returned  to  her  classroom. 

Cause  Boes  Not  Exist  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Fuller 

36. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Fuller  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  because  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Fuller  engaged  im 
gnmoral  conduct. 

37. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Fuller  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  because  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Puller  was 
evidently  unfit  for  service. 

21

ORDER 

Ms.  Fuller’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Jurupa  Unified  School 

District  is  granted.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  Ms.  Fuller  is  denied.  Ms.  Fuller  shail 
not  be  dismissed  from  her  employment  with  the  district.  The  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and 
Statement  of  Charges  filed  against  Ms.  Fuller  are  hereby  dismissed. 

DATED:  January  12,  2018 

DATED:  January  12,  2018 

DATED:  January  12,  2018 

oo  DocuSig  ned  by: 

o 

™~ 

_ 

Svenanans  JADZBDS8CDA6483 

MARY  AGNES  MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

b 
& 
‘ 
t 

h 

b 
& 
b 
b 
& 
‘ 
t 
h k 

    

Neen  DA/76594C5C6746E  _. 

STEVE  PARKER 
Commission  Member 

oon  DocuSigned  by: 

anne HEA  AOBIBBREBCABS_ 

DAN  CROOKHAM 
Commission  Member

