BEFORE A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE JURUPA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

CHARLES BAUGH,

OAH No. 2017061013

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION

On October 12, 13, and 16, 2017, a Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) heard this matter in Jurupa Valley, California.  The Commission consisted of 
the following members: Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH); Gregory Nicholas; and Michael Apffel.

Kerrie McNally, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Adams, Silva & McNally,
LLP, represented complainant, Tamara Elzig, Deputy Superintendent of Personnel Services, 
Jurupa Unified School District (JUSD).

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Reich, Adell & Cvitan,
represented respondent, Charles Baugh, who was present throughout the hearing.

The record was held open to permit the committee to deliberate and reach a decision.

The record was closed and the matter submitted on October 27, 2017.

Did Mr. Baugh’s February 16, 2017, post on a Facebook thread or choice of 

Halloween costume on October 30, 2015, constitute immoral conduct or evident unfitness for 
service, warranting his dismissal?

Although Mr. Baugh could have used better judgement before posting a comment on 

Facebook on February 16, 2017, and in selecting a Halloween costume depicting a popular 

ISSUE

SUMMARY

1

television show character, neither incident constituted immoral conduct or evident unfitness 
for service. Accordingly, applicable law does not permit his dismissal.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Procedural Background

(RHS).

1.

Mr. Baugh is a science teacher currently assigned to Rubidoux High School 

2.

On February 17, 2017, complainant placed Mr. Baugh on paid administrative 
leave.  She provided him with written notice that he was under investigation due to “concerns
that [he] may have violated school regulations, Board policies, or state laws.”

3.

On May 1, 2017, complainant provided Mr. Baugh with a Draft Notice of Intent 
to Dismiss and Immediately Suspend Without Pay and the corresponding Statement of Charges.
The letter attached to the above-referenced documents provided Mr. Baugh with information 
concerning his right to a Skelly conference.

4.

On May 9, 2017, Mr. Baugh declined to participate in a Skelly conference, but 

did provide certain documentary evidence to the district to consider prior to rendering a decision 
on whether he should be terminated.

5.

On May 11, 2017, Dave Doubravsky, the Assistant Superintendent of 

Educational Services for the JUSD, wrote a letter to Mr. Baugh stating that the district had
considered the documentation he provided but would still be seeking termination of Mr. 
Baugh’s employment.  On that same date, complainant provided Mr. Baugh with a letter stating 
she would be presenting the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Suspend Without Pay and
corresponding Statement of Charges to the District Governing Board (board) on May 15, 2017.

6.

On May 15, 2017, complainant presented the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 

Suspend Without Pay and corresponding Statement of Charges to the board.  The board voted 4 
to 1 to approve the proposed disciplinary action.

7.

On May 15, 2017, complainant signed the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 

Immediately Suspend Without Pay and corresponding Statement of Charges, alleging that Mr.
Baugh is subject to termination for immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service, in 
violation of Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (a)(6).

8.

The Notice of Intent to Dismiss and other jurisdictional documents were 

served on Mr. Baugh, who timely filed a demand for hearing on May 22, 2017.

9.

Mr. Baugh subsequently filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension
(motion) with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, alleging that the Notice of 

2

Intent to Dismiss did not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension.1 Under
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), review of a motion filed pursuant to this 
section is limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the Notice of Intent 
to Dismiss, if true, would be sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension.

10.

On July 11, 2017, Administrative Law Judge Adam L. Berg granted Mr. 

Baugh’s motion.  Mr. Baugh was taken off unpaid administrative leave and placed on paid 
administrative leave pending the outcome of the hearing.

The Protest Event

11.

On February 16, 2017, a protest event called “A Day Without Immigrants” 

was held throughout the country.  The protest event was meant for persons who were 
immigrants, or who supported immigrants, to stay home in order to show what impact 
immigrants have, economically, on society.  It was a nationwide protest event and was not 
limited to any particular profession.

12.

RHS has approximately 1,600 students.  Approximately 90 percent of the 
students are Hispanic.  According to the principal of RHS, Jose Araux, a “robocall” was 
made to parents prior to the protest event urging them to have their students attend school.
Tamara Elzig, the Deputy Superintendent, also testified that a posting was placed on the 
district’s website informing parents about the importance of having their students attend
school on February 16, 2017.  Nonetheless, about 355 students, or 22 percent of the student 
body, were absent on the day of the protest event.  Dr. Araux conceded that there was no way
of knowing precisely what the reason was for each absence, but presumably, many were
attributable to the protest event.

The Facebook Thread

13.

On February 16, 2017, several teachers at RHS – Geoffrey Greer, Robin 
Riggle, Charles Baugh, Patricia Crawford, and Allen Umbarger, posted comments on a 
Facebook thread started by Mr. Greer on his public Facebook page.  The original post by Mr. 
Greer read as follows:

Well.  A day without immigrants.  Perhaps all the missing 
workers in all the various industries out there had the intended 
impact and sent the desired message.  I don’t know.  As for the 
public school system, having my class size reduced by 50% all 

1 Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states, that a school district may
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District . . . .”

3

day long only served to SUPPORT Trumps initiatives and prove 
how much better things might be without all the overcrowding. 

That’s what you get when you jump on some sort of bandwagon 
cause as an excuse to be lazy and/or get drunk.  Best school day
ever.

Several other individuals posted comments on Mr. Greer’s Facebook thread about 

absences in their class, and the pleasant classroom conditions that day because of the same.
Eventually, Mr. Baugh posted the following free-standing comment (i.e. not in reply to any
particular post): “I had 49. Quieter classes, more productive – let’s do this more often.”

That single comment was the only comment posted by Mr. Baugh on the Facebook 

thread.

It is unknown overall, how many people continued to comment on the Facebook 

thread, or if the reproduction of the Facebook thread provided in the exhibits was a full and 
complete copy of all the comments on the thread.  Nonetheless, the exhibit provided 
contained the comment of Mr. Baugh.

Eventually, Mr. Greer deleted the original post, as he explained, to “mitigate any

further damage,” and posted a public apology in its place, apologizing for the “harsh tone” 
and “hurtful structure” of the original post, which he understood came across in an 
unfortunate manner.

The Facebook Thread Goes Viral

14.

It did not take long for the entire Facebook thread to “go viral.”  Aside from 

the numerous comments people made on Facebook, an individual by the name of “Marina,” 
tweeted the link to the Facebook thread on her Twitter page.  The Facebook thread and 
comments were shared by individual Facebook users and spread about various social media 
platforms.  Eventually, Mr. Greer deleted the Facebook thread, as he explained, to “mitigate” 
any damage and apologize for the “hurtful structure” of the post.  However, because the 
original content of the Facebook thread had been captured in screenshots and reproduced so 
many times, deleting the posts did nothing to stop the continuing viral spread.

In the ensuing days, the story would be covered on most local news stations as well as 

Univision, a Spanish language news station.  Local newspapers covered the story; some of 
the news articles simply reported the facts of what occurred; other articles used less-neutral
headlines and editorialized the articles to express the belief that the Facebook posts were 
racist or anti-immigrant, which certainly could have added fuel to an already out-of-control
firestorm.2 Daniel Brooks, the Director of Personnel for the JUSD, said his office – which

2 For example, one article from the Huffington Post was simply entitled, “Riverside 
Teachers Put on Paid Leave Over Immigrant Protest Comments.”  Another article from the 

4

usually does not receive phone calls from angry parents – received a “couple dozen” phone 
calls. The district and RHS received angry e-mails from students, parents, community
members, individuals who had no affiliation or personal interest in the district, and some who 
lived across the country.  The American Civil Liberties Union, Department of Justice3, Anti-
Defamation League, and various immigrant organizations wrote to the district regarding their 
concern after learning of the comments on the Facebook thread.  Some of the angry
communications were directed solely towards Mr. Greer.  Others were directed at all the 
teachers whose comments appeared on the Facebook thread.  In many of the e-mail
communications, it was unclear if the writers were reacting to the actual posts, the 
representation in the news regarding the posts, or what they had read from others regarding 
their opinions of what the posts contained.  Nonetheless, it was not disputed that many
people from all walks of life were upset for a variety of reasons about the comments 
contained on the Facebook thread.

The Aftermath

15.

On February 17, 2017, the district had extra personnel on the RHS campus in 

case any problems arose.  Two classrooms, one belonging to Mrs. Riggle and the other 
belonging to Mr. Greer, had been vandalized overnight, with messages stating “fuck you” 
and “fuck your opinion” spray-painted outside the front of the classrooms.

16.

Jose Araux is the principal of RHS.  Dr. Araux’s testimony is summarized as
follows: RHS has approximately 1,578 students.  Approximately 90 percent of the students 
are Hispanic, two percent are black, two percent are white, and the rest are “other.”  Dr. 
Araux is aware that some of the students at the school have parents who are immigrants. Dr.
Araux reviewed the comments made on the Facebook thread and said he could not believe 
the comments were made by his teachers and a counselor.  He was “upset, angry, and hurt” 
and felt the comments were “racist and discriminatory.”

When Dr. Araux went to RHS on February 17, 2017, his primary goal was to ensure 

the “physical, psychological, and emotional well-being” of the students.  That day, there 
were also many extra people on campus from the district to help provide support.  Dr. Araux 
read a message over the school public address system acknowledging the reaction to the 
Facebook thread and letting students know that the district was committed to investigate and 
“take appropriate action.”  He responded to over 200 e-mail complaints from parents and
people across the country.  Dr. Araux also set aside additional time to meet with parents,
should they want to do so.  RHS received many calls regarding the Facebook thread.  Talking 
points were provided to teachers to help them deal with any situations that might arise in the 
classroom.

Washington Post, however, was entitled, “These California Teachers Mocked Students For 
Skipping School On Immigrant Boycott Day.”

3 It was never made clear in testimony whether it was the California Department of 

Justice or the federal Department of Justice.

5

A student forum was scheduled for 2:20 p.m. in the gymnasium, however, they were
not able to hold the forum because there was a student walkout following lunch.  Dr. Araux 
estimated less than 300 students left the campus.  Teachers and administrators tried to get the 
students to go back to their classrooms, but they would not.  When they approached a 
perimeter fence, one student went over the fence.  Other students began to push on it.  Dr. 
Araux said he made the decision to open the gate because he did not want anyone to get hurt.
Some students came back to the campus, but many did not.  As for the majority of students 
who did remain on campus, Dr. Araux made the decision to keep them in their fifth period 
class rather than proceed like normal, and they were eventually dismissed from fifth period.

On February 18, 2017, Dr. Araux received an e-mail from a student notifying him 
about a potential second student walkout planned for February 21, 2017.  The student was 
very “disappointed” with the actions of the other students who walked off the campus on 
February 17, 2017, and concerned about the safety of students and staff members at RHS 
should the second walkout have occurred.  Dr. Araux sent out an e-mail to all staff with a 
modified schedule for that day in order to avert a second walkout.  Dr. Araux sent a 
notification to parents warning them of the safety concerns should a second walkout occur 
and also telling them that the school day would be modified on February 21, 2017.  The 
message, however, did not encourage parents to tell their students to remain in class and 
refrain from participating in the second walkout. At least one media outlet reported on the 
planned second walkout. Nonetheless, the second walkout never occurred.

Dr. Araux has observed Mr. Baugh in the classroom and has never seen Mr. Baugh do 

anything to make him think Mr. Baugh is “anti-immigrant.”

17.

Complainant also testified about the student walkout.  She added that the 

students crowded the flagpole prior to walking off campus and tried to take down the 
American flag and replace it with a Mexican flag.  The students “flooded” onto a four-laned
road.  Police were blocking intersections trying to anticipate where the students were going 
in order to keep everyone safe.  Although complainant testified that she believed the student 
walkout was because of the Facebook thread, she provided deposition testimony on a prior 
date where she stated that the student’s frustration was with the Trump administration.
During the student walkout, the students were chanting “fuck Trump” and “fuck your 
opinions.”

Complainant corroborated Dr. Araux’s testimony about the second potential walkout.

She said notifications were sent to parents in order to try and avoid a difficult situation.

Complainant testified that at a February 21, 2017, board meeting, they took 37 public 

comments and that there was a large crowd. There were members of the media present.
There were students, parents, and activist groups.  There was tension in the air.  People were 
generally unhappy.  A short video was shown regarding the board meeting, but the video 
showed calm speakers clearly presenting their views; the video did not show a tense, angry
crowd, nor did it show media present.  Complainant said the media were asked to move away 
from the board members, and that was why they were not depicted on the video.

6

18.  Miia  =.  a  current  student  at  RHS,  testified  that  the  Facebook  posts 

made  her  feel  “insecure” 
“actually  the  opposite.”  Ms. fe 
specifically  that  Mr.  Baugh’s  post  offended  her,  and  agreed  that  the  post  did  not  state 
anything  about  immigrants. 

|  never  had  Mr.  Baugh  as  a  teacher.  She  did  not  state 

because  the  thread  referred  to  “us”  as  “lazy  and  drunk”  and  we  are 

19.  Ra  A  is  a  student  at  RHS  and  testified  that  he  had  Mr.  Baugh  his 
freshman  year  for  science  and  that  it  was  a  “good  class.”  He  said  he  is  also  on  the  RHS 
soccer  team  and  Mr.  Baugh  is  the  announcer.  He  likes  the  way  that  Mr.  Baugh  says  “goal” 
and  imitated  the  goal  call  he  said  Mr.  Baugh  uses,  which  sounds  like  the  famous  call  used  in 
the  World  Cup.  Mr.  A  said  he  saw  the  Facebook  thread  and  felt  “disappointed” 
because  he  perceived  the 
more  productive.  Mr. 
he  was,  he  would  not  disrespect  Mr.  Baugh.  He  felt  other  students  might  disrespect  Mr. 
Baugh  if  he  were  returned  to  the  classroom.  Mr.  A  agreed  that  some  of  the  posts  were 
more  offensive  than  others. 

posts  to  implicitly  say  that  without  “us”  classroom  time  would  be 

said  he  would  no  longer  want  to  be  in  Mr.  Baugh’s  class,  but  if 

a7 

20. 

is  a  student  at  RHS  and  testified  that  she  does  not  know  Mr. 
testified  that  Mr.  Greer’s  post  made  her  feel  “disheartened  and 

Baugh  personally.  Ms. 
offended”  and  she  felt  that  Mr.  Baugh’s  post  was  agreeing  with  what  Mr.  qi  said.  She 
testified  she  would  not  want  to  be  assigned  to  Mr.  Baugh’s  class  because  she  feels  if 
“someone  has  prejudice  it  will  affect  people”  and  “if  you  are  a  teacher  that  works  with  a  lot 
of  Hispanic  students  it  is  going  to  affect  how  you  perceive  and  grade  them.” 

Testimony  of Josh  Lewis 

21. 

Josh  Lewis  is  the  Director  of  Information  Technology  at  the  JUSD.  His 

primary  duty  is  to  oversee  the  networks.  Mr.  Lewis  testified  about  two  voluntary  events  the 
district  hosts,  Techfest  and  Summerjam,  held  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  school  year, 
tespectively.  These  events  relate  to  the  use  of  information  technology  in  the  classroom.  No 
testimony  provided  showed  that  the  events  provide  direction,  policy,  or  other  information 
concerning  how  teachers  should  interact  on  social  media  on  their  own  time  after  school 
hours.  Mr.  Lewis  also  testified  that  all  teachers  are  required  to  teach  digital  citizenship  to 
their  students.  Exhibits  provided  showed  the  content  of  the  curriculum,  which  generally 
instructs  students  about  proper  conduct  online  in  a  variety  of  situations.  Mr.  Baugh  did 
provide  the  digital  citizenship  curriculum  to  his  students  during  the  2016-2017  school  year. 
The  curriculum  documents  did  not  provide  any  guidance  to  teachers  regarding  their  use  of 
social  media. 

School  District  Policies 

22. 

Multiple  documents  containing  various  policies  and  procedures  of  the  district 

were  provided.  Complainant  said  she  believed  Mr.  Baugh  violated  some  of  these  policies. 
Specifically,  complainant  believed  Mr.  Baugh’s  Facebook  post  violated  Board  Policy  4000, 
which  describes  personnel  “concepts  and  roles.”  However,  this  policy  talks  about  what  the

governing board must do, not teachers.  This policy is not one that can be violated by a 
teacher.

Complainant also believed Mr. Baugh’s Facebook post violated the Code of Ethics, 

contained in Board Policy 4119.21.  However, the Code of Ethics speaks of teacher’s 
responsibilities in the classroom – not activities engaged in during their personal time.
Moreover, the broad language complainant referred to as being violated came from the 
preamble of the document, which cannot be violated.4

Complainant also believed Mr. Baugh’s Facebook post violated Board Policy

4119.32, having to do with the duties and responsibilities of teachers.  Again, this policy
explains what teachers must do in the classroom and in their job as educators; nothing in the 
policy states what a teacher may and may not do outside the classroom with respect to social 
media.

Complainant also believed Mr. Baugh’s Facebook post violated Board Policy 5000,

having to do with concepts and roles of teachers.  Again, like Board Policy 4000, this policy
sets forth responsibilities of the governing board and explains the commitment of the 
governing board to students.  It cannot be violated by teachers.

Complainant also believed that Mr. Baugh’s Facebook post violated Board Policy

5145.3, concerning harassment and discrimination.  This policy applies to activities on 
campus as well as off campus that create a hostile environment at the school. It is unclear, 
however, how Mr. Baugh’s single Facebook post violated this policy given that his comment 
merely stated how many absences he had and did not disparage any student or contain any
racially inappropriate or discriminatory language.  It is also unclear how the comment could 
be construed as being racially motivated, given that the students who participated in the 
protest event were Hispanic; but those who remained were also predominantly Hispanic.

Complainant confirmed on cross-examination that the district has no policies, 
procedures, or guidance regarding teachers’ use of social media outside of their employment.

//

4 The Code of Ethics contains a clause at the end stating that the code governs the 

profession and any violations will be considered “unprofessional.”  The clause goes on to say
that in order to constitute grounds for discipline, the violation must endanger students, 
evidence malice, indicate serious incompetency, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad 
judgement.” Interestingly, complainant stated the Code of Ethics was violated, but did not 
charge Mrs. Riggle with unprofessional conduct.  A reasonable inference, then, can be drawn 
that the district did not believe Mr. Baugh did anything that constituted a danger to students, 
and his conduct did not involve provable malice, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad 
judgement.

8

Mr.  Baugh’s  October  2015  Halloween  Costume 

23. 

Mr.  Baugh  did  not  dispute  that  on  October  30,  2015,  he  came  to  school 

dressed  as  Walter  White,  a  character  from  the  popular  television  show  “Breaking  Bad.”  Mr. 
Baugh  testified  that  he  came  dressed  as  that  character  because  he  looks  identical  to  the 
character.  Mr.  Baugh  is  correct  —  based  on  courtroom  observations  and  a  photograph 
provided  of  Mr.  Baugh  when  he  was  dressed  as  Walter  White,  he  does  look  identical  to  that 
character.  Mr.  Baugh  testified  that  because  the  character  was  a  high  school  science  teacher, 
he  believed  the  costume  to  be  “clever  and  funny.”  The  character  is  also  a  drug  dealer;  Mr. 
Baugh  brought  blue  rock  candy  to  school  to  simulate  methamphetamine,  which  the  television 
character  manufactured.  He  handed  the  candy  out  to  teachers  and  staff,  but  did  not  hand  the 
candy  out  to  students.  Students  may  have  been  in  a  position  to  see  him,  but  no  students 
testified  that  they  observed  Mr.  Baugh  handing  out  the  rock  candy.  Mr.  Baugh  said  his 
students  loved  his  costume.  Dr.  Araux  testified  that  when  Mr.  Baugh  was  told  to  go  home 
and  change  because  it  was  felt  that  his  costume  was  inappropriate,  he  agreed  to  do  so. 

24. 

Mr.  Baugh  was  never  formally  disciplined  for  his  choice  of  Halloween 

costume  on  that  date,  and  no  similar  incidents  have  occurred. 

Evidence  Presented  by  Mr.  Baugh 

CHARACTER  WITNESSES 

25. 

| 

7  was  a  RHS  student  who  graduated  in  2010.  Mr. 

|  had  Mr. 

said  Mr.  Baugh  was  a  “great  teacher.”  Mr. 

Baugh  for  drama  in  his  junior  and  senior  year.  He  said  they  put  on  two  plays  during  those 
years.  Mr.  : 
anything  offensive  or  inappropriate  about  immigrants.  Mr. 
classes  when  he  attended  RHS  were  filled  with  Hispanic  students.  Mr. 
Baugh  really  cares  about  students.  He  added  that  if  the  students  needed  anything,  Mr.  Baugh 
was  always  there  for  them  on  a  personal  basis.  Mr. :  |  has  stayed  in  contact  with  Mr. 
Baugh  since  graduating  in  2010. 

said  he  never  said  or  did 

noted  that  most  of  his 

i”  said  Mr. 

26. 

|  _  is  a  former  student  of  RHS  who  graduated  in  2013.  She  had 

Mr.  Baugh  as a  teacher  for  geophysical  science  and  theater.  Ms.  ce 
testified  that  Mr. 
Baugh  was  very  nice,  knew  of  some  personal  problems  she  was  having  at  home,  and  if  she 
needed  help,  he  would  help  her.  She  has  kept  in  touch  with  Mr.  Baugh  following  graduation. 
In  the  time  she  has  known  Mr.  Baugh,  she  has  not  heard  him  say  anything  racist.  She  said  he 
is  passionate  about  his  work  and  loves  teaching  students.  Ms. qi”  said  Mr.  Baugh 
made  things  better  in  class  and  made  high  school  memorable  for  her. 

27. 

| 

mm  is  a  former  student  of  RHS  who  graduated  in  2010.  Ms. 

was  the  valedictorian.  She  was  in  the  after  school  theater  club,  which  had  Mr. 

Baugh 
was  a 

as  the  advisor.  She  also  had  Mr.  Baugh  for  drama  class.  Ms. 
great  teacher  and  he  was  there  for  all  his  students,  even  if  the  problems  were  personal. 
Ms.  =  said  Mr.  Baugh  made  everyone  feel  as  if  they  had  a  place  at  RHS.  Mr.  Baugh

mm  said  Mr.  Baugh 

never expressed an opinion about immigrants.  She has maintained contact with Mr. Baugh 
and wanted to testify on his behalf because it is the right thing to do.  Mr. Baugh “really
cared” about his program and has a passion for teaching.  Ms. J
 said Mr. Baugh 
“really cares about kids” and about “engaging students.”  She sees him as a role model and 
said he is the “kind of teacher [she] hopes every kid can have.”

28.

Douglas Morrill is a friend who has known Mr. Baugh since the seventh grade.

Mr. Morrill is now retired.  Prior to retiring, he served as a sworn police officer with the 
Garden Grove Police Department for 31 years and then as a sworn investigator for a county 
agency for 11 years.  Mr. Morrill and Mr. Baugh ride motorcycles together, meet for lunch, 
and generally socialize with each other.  Mr. Morrill described Mr. Baugh as an honest 
person and said Mr. Baugh has never made any comments that he felt were inappropriate.
Mr. Baugh has never said anything to indicate that he does not like immigrants; Mr. Morrill 
has never known Mr. Baugh to disparage anyone regarding culture or race.

29.

Terri Spencer is the librarian at RHS.  She recalled February 17, 2017, when 

some of the students walked off campus.  She said the walkout was not peaceful.  As she and 
other teachers tried to get the students to go back to class, many told the authority figures to 
“fuck off” because it was still their lunchtime.  Some students went to the flagpole and tried 
to remove the American flag and replace it with a Mexican flag.  After that, the “mob” made 
their way towards the parking lot.  Ms. Spencer said there has not been another walkout of 
that magnitude since that date.  She recalled that within the first few weeks after the student 
walkout, people wanted teachers fired.  However, after time passed, she feels a majority of
the students want him to come back.  She does not think Mr. Baugh did anything wrong and 
feels that he and the other teachers would be “welcomed back.”

MR. BAUGH’S MOST RECENT EVALUATIONS

30. Mr. Baugh submitted two evaluations. Both evaluations show he met or 

exceeded standards in all areas and were completed by his superiors at RHS.  Some of the 
commentary on his evaluations are as follows:

Mr. Baugh creates a physical environment that engages all 
students. . . .  He maintains order in his classroom by reminding
students of appropriate behavior expectations, class routines, 
and is consistent upholding classroom rules.

Mr. Baugh addresses his students’ varied learning needs by
planning for activities that support an array of learning modality
preferences.  He values his students’ backgrounds and interests 
by creating class discussion opportunities that are engaging and 
interesting. . . .

Mr. Baugh connects learning goals to students’ prior 
knowledge, life experience and interests. . . .  He creates 

10

frequent opportunities for classroom discussions and allows for 
students to ask questions related to topics that are of particular 
interest to them.  These activities promote autonomy,
interaction, and choice. . . .

Mr. Baugh promotes a climate of fairness and respect.

Mr. Baugh draws on and values students’ backgrounds, interests 
and developmental needs. 

LETTER FROM GEORGE MONGE

31. Mr. Monge is an Advanced Placement Government & Politics teacher who is 

the head of the Social Studies Department at RHS.  Mr. Monge wrote a letter, on behalf of 
the teachers and staff of RHS, dated May 4, 2017, to the JUSD administration.  Pertinent 
excerpts from his letter are:

[T]he district may have some legitimate concerns regarding the 
potential for future disruption to the learning environment.  But 
those of us who were interacting and communicating with our 
students in the immediate aftermath and the time since the 
incident are less worried about that potentiality.

On the very next day, many of our students were speaking of the 
need to maintain our unity as a school community.  In the days
that followed, multiple student groups communicated to 
teachers and School administration their desire to offer 
forgiveness to these teachers to help expedite our healing 
process.  A sentiment which was frequently expressed by
students, was the idea that within a family, you may have a 
member that says or does something wrong, But you don't kick 
them out of the family - instead you counsel and you coach 
them and you continue to work with them, so that mistakes are 
aren’t repeated. This process all starts with some level of 
forgiveness. We would also know that such a position if taken, 
would be consistent with the philosophy behind PBIS, which is 
the district's mandated student discipline program.

On the issue of disruption, the absence of these teachers has 
greatly disrupted the learning environment and effectiveness
within many of our most important programs such as AVID,
FFA, Guidance and AP.  Our students have attempted to 
maintain their progress while working with a series of mostly
inexperienced substitutes. In response to the situation students 
have gathered hundreds of signatures on petitions (see attached 

11

pages) requesting the return of these teachers and the students 
have communicated these views with school administration.

Over the course of their careers, these teachers have made 
enormous contributions to our school, established strongly
positive relations with our students and are considered valuable
and vital members of the wider Rubidoux community. Within
this group of educators are multiple teacher of the year
recipients, teachers who have earned statewide recognition and 
awards for their work with our students, they have inspired 
students and have helped hundreds, perhaps thousands of
students earned admission to universities and gained meaningful
careers.

We know Charles Baugh, Patricia Crawford, Rhonda Fuller, Jeff 
Greer, Robin Riggle and Allen Umbarger. We know them to be 
caring and courageous educators that have devoted their lives to 
the students of this community. These educators are immensely
talented and the impact of their permanent loss to our students 
and programs would be devastating.

We hope that you will take our thoughts into consideration. . . .

MR. BAUGH’S TESTIMONY

32. Mr. Baugh’s testimony is summarized as follows:

Mr. Baugh holds an Associate of Arts degree in Theater Arts, a Bachelor of Arts in 

Liberal Studies, and a Master of Arts in Earth Science.  He has spent 20 years in the teaching 
profession; 10 of those years have been at RHS. Mr. Baugh is also a veteran of the United 
States Army and served three years in Vietnam.

Mr. Baugh is employed as a science teacher, but has taught drama in the past.
Currently he has an earth science credential but has also held a supplemental drama 
credential.

Mr. Baugh said that his classes were much quieter than normal on February 16, 2017.

He knew it was the date of the protest event.  When he got to campus that day he could see 
the difference from a normal day.  Because of the absences, he changed his lesson for the day
because on February 16, 2017, he had a mandatory test preparation that the students needed 
to complete in order to be ready for a test at the end of the week.  He changed the lesson 
because the students who were missing would not have been permitted to make up the work 
that day – and would have missed the test preparation.

12

When he got home from school that day, he saw Mr. Greer’s Facebook post and the 

thread that contained comments from other teachers.  He saw that another teacher, Robin 
Riggle, had posted that she had 50 absences that day and that it was a pleasant day.  Mr. 
Baugh said his post regarding quieter classrooms was in direct response to Mrs. Riggle’s 
post.  After he added his comment, he got off Facebook and made dinner.

The next morning, Mr. Baugh found out the Facebook thread went viral.

Complainant placed him on administrative leave and told him to “turn over his keys.”  He 
said that interaction was “not even five minutes.”  Mr. Baugh said he has not returned to
campus since February 17, 2017, but was permitted to enter his classroom to retrieve 
personal belongings, or what was left of them, after the school year ended.

Mr. Baugh said he loves teaching science.  He has never been accused of being racist 

and has never expressed any anti-immigrant sentiments.  He feels immigrants are simply
trying to get a better life by attending school and he would never do anything to interfere 
with that.  Mr. Baugh has even taken trips to Peru and Mexico to work with kids and build 
houses for families living in poverty.  He has brought his professional telescope to 
orphanages in Tijuana because many of the children have never seen the moon through a 
telescope.  Mr. Baugh said seeing them experience looking at the sky through a telescope for
the first time “makes it all worthwhile.”

Mr. Baugh does not think he should be terminated because he is a “very good teacher 
with enthusiasm,” a role model, and his comment on Facebook was misconstrued.  It was not 
his intent to say anything anti-immigrant.  He believes the district and administration, by
their actions, did not give him or the other teachers any support.  He said if there were social 
media rules he would follow whatever rule or policy he is directed to follow.  Mr. Baugh said 
if he had known all that happened would occur he never would have posted anything on 
Facebook.

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a preponderance 

of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.)

2.

“‘Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more convincing 

force than that opposed to it.’  [Citations.]”  (Glage v. Hawes Firearms Company (1990) 226 
Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325)  The sole focus of the legal definition of ‘preponderance’ in the 
phrase ‘preponderance of the evidence’ is on the quality of the evidence.  The quantity of the 
evidence presented by each side is irrelevant.”  (Ibid., italics emphasis in original.)

13

Applicable Law

3.

4.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on 

Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may 
not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction.
(Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

5.

A permanent certificated teacher may not be dismissed except for, among 

other things, immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. 
(a)(1) and (a)(6).)

Applicable Case Law 

6.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the Supreme 

Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 
school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  The court 
delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he or 
she is not fit to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students 
or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood 
of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may
inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.  (Id., at pp. 229-230.)

7.

In Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the Supreme Court 

detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach. In addition to the 
Morrison factors, the court provided additional factors that may be considered to determine if 
there is a nexus between the conduct and a teacher’s fitness to teach: (1) likelihood of 
recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 
any; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ 
relationships; (5) disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness
in time of conduct.  (Id., at fn. 5.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT

8.

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in

the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California Teachers Association v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:

14

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, 
or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 
808, 811.)

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 

conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach.  (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.)

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

9.

Unfitness for service means “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; 

incapable; incompetent; and physically or mentally unsound.” (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.)
As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria are examined to ascertain whether the conduct in 
question indicates is related to the teacher’s fitness to teach. In reaching a conclusion that 
grounds exist to dismiss a certificated employee on the basis of evident unfitness for service, 
not all Morrison factors need be examined, only the pertinent ones.  (Governing Board v. 
Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.)  In this sense, the purpose of examining the Morrison
criteria is to establish a nexus between the proven conduct and fitness to teach.

However, even if the Morrison analysis shows a nexus between the conduct and fitness 
to teach, it must also be determined that the alleged conduct shows evident unfitness for service.
(Morrison, supra, at p. 1445 [emphasis added].) “Evident unfitness for service” means clearly
not fit for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies; it 
connotes fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 
one’s conduct fails to meet expectations of the school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified
School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 
[emphasis added].)

Evaluation and Conclusion

10.

The district focused its case almost entirely on the viral nature of the posts, 

and how various people – from school administrators to community members – “felt” about 
the thread and the ensuing disruption on campus the day after the Facebook thread went 
viral. There was also evidence to the contrary, both by way of character testimony, e-mails,
the letter from Mr. Monge, and other letters in the submitted exhibits, that showed support 
for the teachers who commented on Mr. Greer’s Facebook thread. The evidence definitely
showed that reasonable minds may differ as to the nature of Mr. Baugh’s post. However,
reaching a decision in this matter does not mean looking at how many people felt his

15

comment was inappropriate versus how many people did not.  Nor does it require 
determining which version has more supporters. Rather, the question in this case is whether 
Mr. Baugh’s single Facebook comment on Mr. Greer’s Facebook thread on February 16,
2017, and his choice of Halloween costume on October 30, 2015, constituted immoral
conduct or evident unfitness for service, warranting his dismissal.  For the reasons discussed 
below, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Baugh’s conduct on either 
occasion constituted immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

11.

Once the Facebook thread was discovered, it went viral.  Parents, students, 
teachers, immigrant groups, civil rights organizations, and community members became 
upset about the overall content of the Facebook thread.  The incident also gained widespread 
media attention. Eventually, Mr. Greer deleted the original post, as he explained it, to
“mitigate any further damage,” and posted a public apology in its place, apologizing for the 
“harsh tone” and “hurtful structure” of the original post, which he understood came across in 
an unfortunate manner.

Shortly after the Facebook thread went viral, the district began receiving e-mails and 

phone calls from a variety of individuals expressing their anger about the Facebook thread.
Two classrooms were vandalized.

On February 17, 2017, the day after the Facebook thread went viral. The district

ensured there was a large presence of administrators and teachers on the RHS campus to 
alleviate any potential problems.  Counselors were made available to students and staff.
Talking points were distributed to staff in order to allay any potential problems.
Nonetheless, school district operations were interrupted by a student walkout from regularly
scheduled classes after lunch.  During the walkout, several hundred RHS students left the 
campus without permission.  They blocked streets and almost damaged a school gate. They
tried to replace the American flag with a Mexican flag.  They pushed on a perimeter gate 
with such force that administrators felt they had no choice but to open the gates to let the 
students into the street to continue their march.  A majority of the students who comprised 
the approximately 1,600 total student body at RHS, however, remained on campus and did 
not partake in the disruption.  Most certainly, the reaction to the Facebook thread affected 
both the school and the district’s ability to provide educational services on February 17,
2017.

However, the impact of the conduct alone does not determine whether a teacher is 

unfit to teach.  Rather, what matters is whether the conduct meets the legal criteria for 
evident unfitness for service. As a threshold matter, the factors mentioned in Morrison and
Jack M. must be considered to determine whether there is a nexus between the conduct and 
fitness to teach.

There was a lot of notoriety surrounding this incident and there was an impact on the 

students because of the overall Facebook thread – which Mr. Baugh was a part of.  Mr. Baugh’s 

16

comment could be construed as adversely affecting students and teachers to the extent that his 
comment was contained in a Facebook thread that contained other questionable comments 
directed against immigrants.  Teachers and district personnel were also affected because they
had to modify their schedules to tend to the problems that arose following the Facebook 
incident.  Given the demographics of the district, Mr. Baugh should have anticipated some 
backlash about commenting on a Facebook thread that contained arguably insensitive remarks 
about immigrants, or at least against persons participating in the protest event.  There were no 
aggravating circumstances or bad motives; to the contrary, Mr. Baugh’s credible testimony
established he did not intend to say anything other than what the conditions were like in his 
class that day.  Mr. Baugh is a science teacher; political issues are unlikely to arise in his class.
Mr. Baugh’s testimony showed he learned from this incident, and had he known of the 
repercussions that would follow, he would not have posted his comment on the Facebook 
thread. Enough of the criteria in Morrison and Jack M. are satisfied to show a nexus between 
Mr. Baugh’s conduct (the posting of a Facebook comment) and fitness to teach.

 noted Mr. Baugh’s passion for teaching and that he made high school memorable 

 said Mr. Baugh’s class was a “good class.” M
 F

 G
 described Mr. Baugh as a “great teacher.”  L  

However, the analysis does not stop after finding a relationship between the conduct 
and fitness to teach. Evident unfitness for service must be demonstrated – and here, it was 
not. Mr. Baugh has been teaching for over 20 years. He acts as the announcer for the school 
soccer games and football games. He has had no formal discipline his entire career.5 R
A
he taught science class. J
G
for her.  E
have.  None of his students ever heard him say anything inappropriate concerning 
immigrants.  To the contrary, his most recent evaluations stated that he promotes a “climate 
of fairness and respect” and “draws on and values students’ backgrounds, interests and 
developmental needs.” His evaluations contained glowing commentary and show Mr. Baugh 
either met or exceeded the professional standards of a teacher. There was no evidence that 
Mr. Baugh has treated any group of students differently than other students at any time in his 
career, or otherwise engaged in discrimination or maltreatment of students in his classroom.

 described Mr. Baugh as the kind of teacher every student should 

 said she liked the way

 J

Mr. Baugh made a single post on a Facebook thread, which did contain some other 

arguably derogatory comments. His comment, however, was made on his personal time, on 
his personal computer, on his private Facebook account, after school hours.  His comment 
did not disparage any student.  It did not comment on any student activities.  It did not 
comment on student race. It did not express agreement with any inappropriate comments.
His comment did not contain strong language or other questionable material that showed an 
inappropriate temperament, an undesirable character trait, corruption, depravity, moral

5 The district attempted to raise what it alleged were examples of poor judgement that 
were not alleged in the Statement of Charges and fell outside the scope of the four-year rule 
set forth in Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A), in order to show a pattern 
of poor judgement.  Respondent objected based on the four-year rule.  The objection was 
sustained and questioning regarding anything that pre-dated the Statement of Charges by four
years was not permitted.

17

indignation for any class of persons, or contain any material that suggest Mr. Baugh is unfit 
to teach science or drama. Nothing in his comment expressed racism or discrimination.6

Simply put, while several of the factors set forth in Morrison and Jack M. arguably may

have been satisfied, thus establishing a nexus between the comments and the fitness to teach, 
ultimately, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Baugh’s single comment 
on the Facebook thread were attributable to a temperamental defect, inadequacy, or a fixed 
character trait not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet 
expectations of the school district.  In other words, he was not shown to be unfit, not adapted 
to a purpose, unsuitable, incapable, incompetent, or physically or mentally unsound to continue 
teaching. Thus, his comment did not constitute evident unfitness for service.

12.

Similarly, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Baugh’s 
choice of Halloween costume on October 30, 2015, constituted evident unfitness for service.

In looking at the factors set forth in Morrison and Jack M., there is not a nexus 
between Mr. Baugh’s choice of Halloween costume and his fitness to teach.  Although there 
was a likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers 
because it glorified a character that was known for illicit drug activity, no evidence showed 
that any students were exposed to Mr. Baugh handing out the rock candy.  Although Mr. 
Baugh should have anticipated that his costume on a high-school campus would not be well-
received, it appeared that the only people who did not like his costume were the 
administrators; the students were familiar with the character and liked his costume.  There 
were also no extenuating or aggravating circumstances and Mr. Baugh’s testimony did not 
establish any improper motive.  The costume did not interrupt the educational process, did 
not achieve notoriety or publicity, did not impair teachers’ and students’ relationships, and 
did not disrupt the educational process. Even if the Morrison and Jack M. factors did show a 
nexus between the conduct and fitness to teach, however, the conduct still did not constitute 
evident unfitness for service for the reasons discussed below.

The Walter White character Mr. Baugh depicted was notorious in popular culture at 
the time and easily identifiable based on his appearance. Mr. Baugh is the spitting image of
the character, which people on campus had pointed out to him. Although he had rock candy
that simulated an illicit drug, he passed the candy out to other adults, and there was no 
evidence that the rock candy was ever seen by students. There was no evidence that it was 
inappropriate for a RHS teacher to dress up for Halloween, or that he violated any district
policy by wearing a costume.  Although dressing up as a character who is a drug dealer 
reflected questionable judgment on Mr. Baugh’s part, the fact that Mr. Baugh physically

6 Merriam-Webster defines “racism” as “a belief that race is the primary determinant
of human traits and capacities and that racial differences produce an inherent superiority of a
particular race.”  Merriam-Webster defines “discrimination as “the act of making or 
perceiving a difference.”  Despite the characterization of Mr. Baugh’s single comment about 
class size on February 16, 2017, by several witnesses as “racist” and “discriminatory,” the 
plain language of the comment contained no racist or discriminatory language.

18

resembled the character and was also a high school science teacher provides some 
explanation for why Mr. Baugh thought the costume was appropriate.  When told to go home 
and change because the school felt it was promoting drug use, Mr. Baugh did. In sum, a
preponderance of the evidence did not establish that the conduct surrounding his choice of 
costume was attributable to a temperamental defect, inadequacy, or a fixed character trait not 
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet expectations of the 
school district.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

13.

A preponderance of the evidence also did not establish that Mr. Baugh’s 

comments constituted immoral conduct.  Again, while he may have used poor judgement in 
participating in a Facebook thread that contained other questionable comments, for the same 
reasons discussed above, his decision to post his single comment about conditions in his 
classroom on February 16, 2017, was not flagrant, shameless, inconsistent with public 
decency, or reflective of a moral indifference to the opinions of others.

14.

Similarly, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Mr. Baugh’s 
choice of Halloween costume on October 30, 2013, constituted immoral conduct. Certainly,
given the impressionable youthful population present in Mr. Baugh’s place of employment,
choosing to portray a character that violates the law was not in keeping with the good 
judgement expected of professional educators.  Mr. Baugh thought the costume was clever 
and creative, and it was – for a Halloween party or some location other than a high school 
campus.  Notwithstanding his questionable judgement, however, Mr. Baugh’s conduct 
surrounding his choice of costume was not flagrant, shameless, inconsistent with public 
decency, or reflective of a moral indifference to the opinions of others, and that is what must 
be proven to sustain a charge of immoral conduct.

Conclusion

15.

The academic environment brings students and teachers together from a

variety of personal, professional, and political backgrounds.  Inevitably, students will have 
classes with teachers who may disagree with them personally, politically, and professionally.
Given the diverse and multicultural population of any school district, and the unique position 
a teacher holds in society, it is important for teachers to be cognizant of the impact their 
personal speech outside the classroom may have on the population they serve.  With respect 
to social media, teachers need to use discretion and good judgment should they decide to 
engage in social media interactions. The same principle applies to a choice of Halloween 
costume, should a teacher decide to partake in on-campus Halloween festivities.

The choice the district gave the Commission was to dismiss Mr. Baugh from his 

employment or dismiss the charges entirely. There was no room to choose a suspension or 
other remedial measure. Given that a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that
Mr. Baugh’s conduct was either immoral or rendered him evidently unfit to serve, cause does 

19

not exist to dismiss Mr. Baugh pursuant to Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions 
(a)(1) or (a)(6).

The Statement of Charges against Charles Baugh is dismissed.

ORDER

DATED:

November 16, 2017

DATED:

November 16, 2017

DATED:

November 16, 2017

Po  DocuSigned  by: 

wn.  rBQ  thst  Le 

 
,
s
e
m
r
r
e
e
e
r
c
—

___________________________________
GREGORY NICHOLAS
Science/STEM Coordinator and Certificated
Science Teacher and Administrator
Riverside County Office of Education

uve  DocuSigned  by: 

Harbhe  Bo€Cel 

_______________________________________
MICHAEL APFFEL
Teacher on Special Assignment/Certificated
Science Teacher
Hemet Unified School District

wows  DocuSigned  by: 

bimbertu  Pelue done
___________________________________
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

20

