BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
CARUTHERS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

KELLI  KUMA, 

OAH  No.  2017120685 

  

Respondent.    

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (CPC  or  Commission)  in  Caruthers,  California  on  April  23,  24,  and  25,  2018.  The 
Commission  was  comprised  of  Mitchell  Brown,  Katharine  Cuttone,  and  Administrative  Law 
Judge  Erin  R.  Koch-Goodman. 

Jason  C.  Parkin,  Attorney  at  Law,  Fresno  County  Superintendent  of  Schools, 

represented  the  Caruthers  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Joshua  F.  Richtel,  Attorney  at  Law,  Tuttle  &  McCloskey,  represented  Kelli  Kuma 

(respondent),  who  was  present  at  hearing. 

The  Commission  met  to  deliberate  on  April  26,  and  May  17,  and  by  stipulation  of  the 

parties,  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Commission’s 
deliberations  on  May  17,  2018. 

SUMMARY 

From  September  2016  through  October  2017,  respondent  submitted  monthly 
timesheets  to  the  District,  verifying  she  provided  Home  and  Hospital  Instruction  (HHI)  for 
four  students:  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE.!  Respondent  claimed  and  recetved  HHI  compensation 
for  five  hours  per  student  per  week.  By  her  own  admission,  respondent’s  timesheets  were 

  

'  The  names  of  respondent’s  students,  as  well  as  those  of  their  family  members,  have 
been  replaced  with  initials,  as  set  forth  in  the  Confidential  Names  List.  A  Protective  Order 
has  been  issued  for  the  Confidential  Names  List  anf  Exhibit  13,  a  transcript  of  IS.

not  a  true  accounting  of  her  time  spent  on  HHI  duties.  Repeatedly  submitting  false  HHI 
timesheets  to  the  District  constitutes  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  and  an  evident  unfitness 
for  service  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(1),  (4), 
and  (6),  and  44939.”  Based  upon  the  evidence,  the  Commission  concluded  that  respondent’s 
conduct  warrants  her  dismissal  from  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  as  a  teacher  since  2003.  At  all 

times  relevant,  respondent  was  employed  as  a  teacher  at  MARC  Continuation  High  School 
(MARC)  in  Caruthers.  In  addition  to  her  regular  teaching  assignment,  respondent  also 
provided  HHI  for  students  with  temporary  disabilities. 
In  2016  and  2017,  respondent 
provided  HHI  services  to  four  students,  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE,  who  were  all  MARC  students. 

2. 

On  October  23,  2017,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 

#2017-17  Accepting  a  Verified  Statement  of  Charges  in  Support  of  Dismissal,  Notice  of 
Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Immediate  Suspension  Without  Pay,  alleging  respondent  repeatedly 
submitted  fraudulent  HHI  timesheets  to  the  District.  More  specifically,  the  Statement  of 
Charges  contends  respondent  falsely  recorded  her  HHI  time  by  either  greatly  inflating  or 
totally  fabricating  her  hours;  thereby  committing  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  and  evident 
unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  subds.  (a)(1),  (4),  and  (6),  and  44939).  The  Board 
directed  that  notice  be  given  to  respondent  of  its  intention  to  dismiss  her,  pursuant  to  section 
44930  et  seq.,  at  the  expiration  of  thirty  (30)  days  from  the  date  of  service  of  the  Statement  of 
Charges.  The  District  served  the  Statement  of  Charges  on  respondent  on  October  24,  2017. 
On  November  2,  2017,  respondent  timely  returned  her  Demand  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of 
Defense. 

Policies  and  Procedures 

3. 

In  March  2000,  the  District  adopted  Administrative  Regulation  (AR)  6183, 

entitled  Home  and  Hospital  Instruction,  which  states,  in  part: 

A  student  with  a  temporary  disability  which  makes  school 
attendance  impossible  or  inadvisable  shall  receive  individual 
instruction  in  the  student’s  home  or  in a  hospital  or  other 
residential  health  facility,  excluding  state  hospitals.  This 
instruction  applies  to  students  incurring  a  physical,  mental  or 
emotional  disability  after  which  they  can  reasonably  be 
expected  to  return  to  regular  day  classes  or  an  alternative 
education  program  without  special  intervention.  It  does  not 
apply  to  students  identified  as  individuals  with  exceptional 

  

*  Unless  otherwise  indicated,  all  further  statutory  references  will  be  to  the  Education 

Code.

needs  pursuant  to  Education  Code  56026  (Education  Code  [§| 
48206.3) 

Home  or  hospital  instruction  shall  be  provided  only  by  teachers 
with  valid  California  teaching  credentials  who  consent  to  the 
assignment.  (Education  Code  [$}  44863) 

The  district  shall  offer  at  least  one  hour  of  instruction  for  every 
day  of  instruction  offered  by  the  district  in  the  regular  education 
program.  No  student  shall  be  credited  with  more  than  five  days 
of  attendance  per  calendar  week  or  credited  with  more  than  the 
total  number  of  calendar  days  that  regular  classes  are  offered  by 
the  district  in  any  fiscal  year.  Giducation  Code  [$$]  48200, 
48206.3) 

Insofar  as  possible,  the  teacher  providing  home  or  hospital 
instruction  shall  consult  with  the  student’s  current  classroom 
teacher(s)  so  as  to  provide  a  continuity  of  instruction  that 
enables  the  student  to  stay  abreast  with  the  regular  school 
program. 

4. 

The  District  implements  AR  6183  as  follows:  once  a  student is  designated  as 
HHI  eligible,  the  District  secks  out  a  certified  teacher  willing  to  take  on  the  HHI  assignment. 
On  a  weekly  basis,  the  HHI  teacher is  expected  to:  contact  the  student's  classroom  teachers; 
collect  all  assigned  work;  transport  assignments  to  the  student's  home  or  hospital  room:  offer 
at  least  one  hour  of  instruction  for  every  day  of  mstruction  offered  by  the  District;  retrieve 
completed  assignments;  and  deliver  the  completed  work  back  to  the  student’s  classroom 
teachers.  HHI  duties  occur  outside  the  regular  school  day,  unless  the  student  is  assigned  to 
the  HHI  teacher’s  classroom.  Then,  the  time  taken  to  prepare.  assign,  and  grade  the  student’s 
work  is  already  compensated  for  in  the  teacher’s  annual  salary,  and  HHI  time  would  only  be 
clanmed  for  the  weekly  instruction  time,  and  dropping  off  and  picking  up  the  student’s  work. 
An  HHI  teacher  is  also  responsible  for  completing  and  submitting  monthly  timesheets.  The 
District  HHI  timesheets  have  five  columns:  Date,  Duties  Performed,  Time  In,  Tume  Out,  and 
Total  Hours,  as  well  as  a  signature  block  for  the  teacher  and  the  supervisor.  HHI  teachers 
can  claim  up  to  five  hours  per  student  per  week,  with  at  least  one  hour  per  week  spent 
visiting/imstructing  the  student. 

MARC  Continuation  High  School 

8. 

MARC  provides  high  school  students  with  an  alternative  to  the  comprehensive 
Caruthers  High  School  (Caruthers  HS)  experience.  Typically,  MARC  students  are  in  danger 
of  not  graduating  from  a  traditional  high  school.  While  the  requirements  to  graduate  are  the 
same  at  Caruthers  HS  and  MARC,  MARC  offers  students  flexible  scheduling  to  earn  credits 
at  a  quicker  pace.  In  general,  MARC  instruction  and  learning  is  offered  online  via 
Odysseyware  (Periods  3,  4,  and  6),  classroom  instruction  in  English  and  Math  (Period  1)  and

Leadership  (Period  5),  and  outside  instruction  and  participation  in  Physical  Education 
(Period  2).  The  English,  Math,  and  Physical  Education  classes  are  taught  by  Caruthers  HS 
teachers  and  Leadership/Prodigy  is  taught  by  a  Caruthers  HS  counselor,  with  respondent  as 
the  teacher  of  record.’  Students  are  not  required  to  participate  in  classroom  instruction  in 
English,  Math,  Leadership,  and  Physical  Education,  and  instead,  can  complete  all  core 
subjects  using  Odysseyware.  Odysseyware  offers  students  material  to  read  and  provides 
quizzes,  tests,  and  projects  to  complete.  MARC  also  requires  Odysseyware  students  to 
complete  one  page  of  notes  on  each  lesson.  Overall,  Odysseyware  requires  little  grading  by 
the  assigned  teacher. 

6. 

In  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  was  the  only  credentialed  full-time 

teacher  at  MARC.  Each  day,  respondent  had  students  in  her  classroom  Periods  3,  4,  5,  and  6; 
she  was  the  assigned  teacher  for  Leadership  (Period  5).  Periods  3,  4,  and  6  were  Credit 
Recovery,  during  which  respondent  monitored  a  classroom  of  students  using  Odysseyware  at 
individual  computer  terminals,  and  graded  their  assignments  as  needed. 

Conduct  at  Issue 

7. 

At  all  times  relevant,  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE  were  students  at  MARC.  KS,  IS, 
AA,  and  AE  were  completing  all  required  coursework  online  via  Odysseyware.  If  KS,  IS, 
AA,  and  AE  had  attended  classes,  respondent  would  have  been  their  assigned  classroom 
teacher.  In  2016-2017,  respondent  volunteered  to  be  the  HHI  for  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE. 
Almost  uniformly,  respondent  claimed  five  hours  per  student  per  week  for  every  week  she 
was  their  assigned  HHI  teacher.*  Each  month,  respondent  completed  and  submitted  her  HHI 
timesheets  to  the  District.  Under  Date,  respondent  circled  all  numbers  (1  through  31) 
representing  Monday  through  Friday.  Under  Duties  Performed,  she  listed  “prep”  or  “visit” 
or  words  to  that  effect,  next  to  the  Monday  through  Friday  days  circled.  Under  Time  In  and 
Time  Out,  she  would  enter  specific  times  (e.g.,  3:30  to  4:30  p.m.  or  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.)  next  to 
the  “prep”  or  “visit”  description.  Respondent  then  totaled  the  hours  to  five  per  student  per 
week  or  20  hours  per  student  per  month.  From  September  2016,  through  October  2017, 
respondent  claimed  648  hours  of  HHI  time. 

8. 

Stella  Ybarra,  District  Business  Office  Technician,  processes  HHI  timesheets 
for  the  District.  In  December  2016,  Ms.  Ybarra  began  to  find  “errors”  on  respondent’s  HHI 
timesheets.  Ms.  Ybarra  wrote  directly  onto  respondent’s  HHI  timesheets,  placing  a  question 
mark  next  to  all  days  on  which  respondent  recorded  time,  but  the  District  schools  were  not  in 
  

>  Geographically,  MARC  and  Caruthers  HS  are  a  school  yard  apart. 

*  On  occasion,  respondent  claimed  more  than  five  (5)  hours  a  week;  often  when  the 
school  week  straddled  two  pay  periods.  For  example,  respondent  claimed  six  (6)  hours  for 
KS  and  six  (6)  hours  for  IS  for  the  school  weeks  that  included  February  27  and  28,  and 
March  1,  2,  and  3,  2017.  In  addition,  respondent  claimed  nine  (9)  hours  for  KS,  nine  (9) 
hours  for  IS,  and  eight  (8)  hours  for  AA  for  the  school  weeks  that  included  November  28,  29, 
and  30,  and  December  1,  and  2,  2016.

session  or  respondent  was  on  approved  leave.  But  for  two  hours,  all  of  the  HHI  time 
respondent  claimed,  while  school  was  not  in  session,  she  delineated  as  preparation  time.”  On 
more  than  one  occasion,  Ms.  Ybarra  shared  her  concerns  regarding  respondent’s  HHI 
timesheets  with  the  District,  asking  several  District  administrative  staff®  whether  respondent 
should  be  paid  for  the  questionable  HHI  time.  Ms.  Ybarra  was  always  told  to  pay  respondent 
for  the  HHI  time  claimed,  with  the  exception  of  the  September  2017  tmesheets.  From 
December  2016,  through  September  2017,  Ms.  Ybarra  noted  and  reported  the  following 
errors: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

On  December  20,  21,  22,  27,  28,  29,  2016,  and  January  4,  5,  and  6,  2017, 
respondent  claimed  39  hours  of  HHI  time  for  KS  (13  hours),  IS  (13  hours), 
and  AA  (13  hours).  December  19,  2016,  through  January  6,  2017,  was 
winter  break  for  the  District  and  school  was  not  in  session. 

On  January  16,  2017,  respondent  claimed  three  (3)  hours  of  HHI  time  for 
KS  (1  hour),  IS  (1  hour),  and  AA  (1  hour).  January  16,  2017,  was  Martin 
Luther  King,  Jr.  Day,  and  school  was  not  1n  session. 

On  February  13,  and  20,  2017,  respondent  claimed  four  (4)  hours  of  HHI 
time  for  KS  (2  hours)  and  IS  (2  hours).  January  13,  2017,  was  Presidents 
Day  and  February  20,  2017,  was  Abraham  Lincoln’s  birthday,  and  school 
was  not  in  session  on  either  day. 

On  April  10  through  14,  and  17,  2017,  respondent  claimed  24  hours  of 
HHI  time  for  KS  (6  hours),  IS  (6  hours),  AA  (6  hours),  and  AE  (6  hours). 
April  10  through  17,  2017,  was  spring  break  for  the  District  and  school 
was  not  in  session. 

On  May  29,  2017,  respondent  claimed  four  (4)  hours  of  HHI  time  for  KS 
(1  hour),  IS  (1  hour),  AA  (1  hour),  and  AE  (1  hour).  May  29,  2017,  was 
Memorial  Day  and  school  was  not  in  session. 

On  September  14,  15,  and  18,  2017,  respondent  claimed  six  (6)  hours  of 
HHI  time  for  KS  (3  hours)  and  IS  (3  hours).  However,  on  September  14 
through  18,  2017,  respondent  was  on  pre-approved  leave,  travelling  to 
Georgia  with  her  daughter  for  a  visit  to  the  University  of  Georgia.  A 
substitute  teacher  covered  respondent’s  classroom  duties  on  September  14, 
15,  and  18,  2017. 

  

>  On  January  6,  2017,  respondent  claimed  one  hour  of  “call/visit”  with  KS  from  4:00 

to  5:00  p.m.  On  January  4,  2017,  respondent  claimed  one  hour  of  “conf[erence]”  with  AA 
from  6:00  to  7:00  p.m.  January  4  and  6,  2017  occurred  during  winter  break. 

°  Ms.  Ybarra  spoke  to  Deborah  Haney,  her  supervisor;  Monica  Ibarra,  MARC 
Secretary;  Tod  Thompkins,  MARC  Principal;  and  Susan  McCoy,  Superintendent  Secretary.

PREPARATION  TIME 

9, 

Between  August  2016  and  September  2017,  respondent  claimed  a  total  of  535 

hours  im  HHI  preparation  for  KS  (179  hours),  US  (175  hours),  AA  (137  hours),  and  AH  (40 
hours).  The  District  provided  an  Odysseyware  Login/Logout  Times  Report  (Report)  listing 
respondent's  Odysseyware  activity.  In  sum,  respondent’s  Odysseyware  activity  does  not 
match  with  the  preparation  times  she  recorded  on  her  HHI  timesheets.  For  example: 

a. 

Save  for  one  day,  on  all  days  respondent  recorded  preparation  time  and 
District  schools  were  not  in  session  or  respondent  was  on  approved  leave 
(December  20,  21,  22,  27,  28,  29,  2016,  and  January  4,  5,  6,  and  16, 
February  13,  and  20,  April  10  through  14,  and  17,  May  29,  and  September 
14,  £5,  and  18,  2017),  respondent  did  not  log  into  Odysseyware.  On 
December  20,  2016,  respondent  logged  inte  Odysseyware  from  10:19  a.m. 
to  12:35  p.m.  for  two  hours  and  fifleen  minutes. 

b.  From  Monday,  October  31,  through  Wednesday,  November  2,  2016: 

October  31:  respondent  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  10:55  a.m. 
to  11:55  am.  Respondent  claimed  HHI  preparation  time  for  [S 
from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.,  KS  from  3:00  to  6:00  p.m.,  and  AA  from 
7:00  to  8:00  p.m. 
November  1:  respondent  did  not  log  into  Odvsseyware. 
Respondent  claimed  HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  7:00  to  8:00 
p.m.,  KS  from  6:00  to  7:00  p.m.,  and  AA  from  5:00  to  6:00  p.m. 
November  2:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  11:06 
a.m.to  12:31  pam.,  and  1:22  p.m.  to  3:32  p.m.  Respondent  claimed 
HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  7  to  8  p.m.,  KS  from  6:00  to  7:00 
p.m.,  and  AA  from  3:00  to  6:00  p.m. 

c.  From  Monday,  March  27,  through  Wednesday,  March  29,  2017: 

8 

& 

March  27:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  10:14 
am.  to  b):40am.,  [0:52  am.  to  12:10  p.m.,  12:28  p.m.  to  2:02 
p.m.  and  1:10  p.m.  to  2:12  pm.  Respondent  claimed  HHI 
preparation  tune  for  [S  from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.,  KS  from  5:00  to 
6:00  p.m.,  AA  from  6:00  to  7:00  p.m.,  and  AE  trom  7:00  to  8:00 
p.m. 
March  28:  respondent  was  logged  mto  Odvsseyware  from  10:18 
a.m.  to  12:35  pam.  and  12:59  p.m.  to  4:06  p.m.  Respondent  claimed 
HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.,  KS  from  3:00 
to  6:00  o.m.,  AA  from  6:00  to  7:00  p.m.,  and  AE  from  7:00  to  8:00 
p.m. 

6

e 

e 

e 

e 

March  29:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  10:21 
a.m.  to  12:31  p.m.  and  1:19  p.m.  to  4:05  p.m.  Respondent  claimed 
HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.,  KS  from  5:00 
to  6:00  p.m.,  AA  from  6:00  to  7:00  p.m.,  and  AE  from  7:00  to  8:00 
p.m. 

d.  From  Monday,  September  11,  through  Wednesday,  September  13,  2017: 

September  11:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  7:55 
a.m.  to  9  a.m.  and  12:33  p.m.  to  2:25  p.m.  Respondent  claimed 
HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.  and  KS  from 
5:00  to  6:00  p.m. 
September  12:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  8:14 
a.m.  to  9:19  a.m.,  9:58  a.m.  to  12:32  p.m.,  1:19  p.m.  to  3:51  p.m., 
and  2:51  p.m.  to  4:10  p.m.  Respondent  claimed  HHI  preparation 
time  for  IS  from  4:00  to  5:00  p.m.  and  KS  from  5:00  to  6:00  p.m. 
September  13:  respondent  was  logged  into  Odysseyware  from  9:32 
a.m.  to  10:33  a.m.,  9:50  a.m.  to  12:46  p.m.,’  and  2:59  p.m.  to  4:09 
p.m.  Respondent  claimed  HHI  preparation  time  for  IS  from  4:00  to 
5:00  p.m.  and  KS  from  5:00  to  6:00  p.m. 

VISIT  TIME 

10. 

Between  August  2016  and  September  2017,  respondent  claimed a  total  of  116 

hours  in  HHI  visits  to  KS  (39  hours),  IS  (40  hours),  AA  (29  hours),  and  AE  (8  hours). 
Respondent  never  provided  in-home  instruction  to  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE.  She  did  make  home 
visits  to  deliver  assignments  and  collect  completed  assignments.  Most  often,  respondent 
would  provide  assignments  on  a  jump  drive  and  receive  completed  assignments  on  another 
jump  drive. 

11. 

|  KS  was  designated  as  a  HHI  student  in  August  2016.  IS  was  designated  as  a 

HHI  student  in  September  2016.  KS  and  IS  are  brothers  who  reside  together  with  their 
mother,  JS.  From  August/September  2016,  through  October  2017,  respondent  physically 
visited  the  KS/IS  home  on  approximately  14  occasions.  The  first  visit  lasted  approximately 
45  minutes.  The  second  visit  lasted  approximately  30  minutes.  The  third  and  fourth  visits 
each  lasted  approximately  15  minutes.  The  remaining  eight  to  ten  visits  lasted  five  to  ten 
minutes  each.  At  all  other  times,  respondent  and  KS/IS  would  not  see  each  other  each  week; 
instead,  respondent  and  KS/IS  would  leave,  and  pick-up,  jump  drives  via  Ms.  Ibarra,  MARC 
Secretary,  or  Ryan  Acevedo,  Resource  Specialist  Program  (RSP)  Teacher. 

  

’  A  teacher  can  login  on  two  or  more  computers  at  the  same  time,  thereby  creating 

multiple  sessions  that  can  show  overlapping  times.

12. 

AA  was  designated  as  a  HHI  student  from  October  2016  through  May  2017.° 

AE  was  designated  as  a  HHI  student  from  March  through  May  2017.  Respondent  physically 
visited  AE  at  home  five  or  six  times,  with  each  visit  lasting  approximately  30  seconds. 
Otherwise,  respondent  would  leave  assignments  for  AE  on  the  front  door  stoop  of  her  house 
or  in  the  mailbox.  On  occasion,  AE  would  pick  up  her  assignments  from  the  MARC  office. 

Interactions  with  Administration 

13. 

In  March  2016,  Mark  Fowler,  Caruthers  HS  Principal,  completed  the  proposed 

2016-2017  Master  School  Schedule  (Master  Schedule)  for  Caruthers  HS  and  MARC.  The 
Master  Schedule  included  a  proposed  change  to  respondent’s  schedule,  adding  a  Period  for 
respondent  to  manage  all  HHI  students  and  Independent  Study  students  at  both  Caruthers  HS 
and  MARC.  Mr.  Fowler  provided  the  Schedule  to  Tod  Tompkins,  MARC  Principal,  and 
asked  him  to  inform  respondent  of  the  proposed  change. 

14. 

From  September  1,  through  October  10,  2017,  respondent  emailed  Mr. 

Tompkins  and  Mr.  Fowler  with  questions  about  Independent  Study  students.  Respondent 
raised  concerns  about  their  failure  to  attend  class  or  timely  complete  assignments  and  the 
threshold  for  dropping  students. 

15. 

|  Onor  about  September  7,  2017,  at  respondent’s  request,  Mr.  Fowler  met  with 

respondent  and  Jennifer  Tweedy,  respondent’s  acting  union  representative.  Respondent 
raised  concerns  about  her  new  responsibilities  and  the  addition  to  her  schedule  of  a  dedicated 
Period  to  manage  all  HHI  students  and  Independent  Study  students  at  Caruthers  HS  and 
MARC.  Respondent  informed  Mr.  Fowler  that  her  workday  was  already  full  and  did  not 
allow  for  an  additional  Period  of  responsibilities.  Mr.  Fowler  walked  respondent  through  her 
class  schedule,  identifying  three  Periods  respondent  had  no  teaching  responsibilities:  Periods 
1  (English/Math),  2  (Physical  Education),  and  5  (Leadership).  As  such,  Mr.  Fowler  viewed 
respondent’s  schedule  as  two-thirds  and  not  full-time.  With  the  additional  teaching  Period, 
monitoring  HHSs  and  Independent  Study  students,  respondent’s  schedule  was  full-time. 
Respondent  informed  Mr.  Fowler  that  she  was  the  teacher  of  record  for  Period  5  — 
Leadership,  and  as  such,  she  was  responsible  for  teaching  students  in  Periods  3,  4,  5,  and  6. 
Mr.  Fowler  indicated  he  would  review  her  schedule  again  and  get  back  to  her. 

16. 

Mr.  Fowler  reviewed  respondent’s  schedule  and  confirmed  she  was  the  teacher 

of  record  for  Period  5  —  Leadership,  giving  her  four  Periods  of  teaching  and a  full-time 
schedule.  On  or  about  September  11,  2017,  Mr.  Fowler,  respondent,  and  Ms.  Tweedy  met 
again.  Mr.  Fowler  told  respondent  that  he  confirmed  her  full-time  teaching  schedule,  and  her 
2017-2018  schedule  would  remain  “status  quo”  with  no  additional  Period  for  HHSs  or 
Independent  Study  students. 

17. 

On  September  14,  2016,  Veronica  Villareal  sent  an  email  clarifying  for  staff 
that  “[IS]  is  remaining  on  Independent  Study  for  the  semester.”  The  same  day,  respondent 

  

*  AA  did  not  testify  at  hearing.

sent  an  email  to  Ms.  Villareal  and  Mr.  Tompkins,  seeking  help  in  setting  a  time  to  meet  with 
KS  and  for  permission  to  reclassify  [S  from  an  independent  Study  student  to  a  HHI  student. 
Respondent’s  email  stated: 

Lam  meeting  with  KS  on  Thursday  this  week  and  on 
Wednesdays  other  weeks.  So  if  she  [JS]  is  taking  him  to  the 
school  will  anyone  be  there  [at  home]  for  me  to  see  KS.  I  also 
spoke  to  Tod  [Tompkins]  fast  night  and  with  [JS]  this  moming 
regarding  getting  all  his  [IS]  homework  and  servicing  him  [IS] 
at  his  house  when  I  service  [KSE  I  must  have  spoke  [sic]  with 
her  [JS]  first  because  she  didn’t  mention  having  spoke  [sic]  with 
you.  Mom  [JS]  had  said  it  would  be  a  lot  easier  and  would 
guarantee  him  [IS]  dome  the  work  knowing  |  am  coming  to  pick 
it  up  and  check  on  him.  Since  dr  [sic]  did  write  a  notlel  for 
getting  them  [KS  and  IS]  their  work  and  making  sure  they  [KS 
and  IS]  complete  it  each  week.  [sic]  Can  we  go  ahead  and  do 
that?  [  had  already  made  IS  a  folder  and  have  weekly 
homework  templates  made  out  for  him  [IS]  anyway  because  En] 
Speaking  [sic]  with  [JS]  the  last  couple  weeks  that  was  the  plan. 
Let  me  know  as  I  will  be  going  out  to  see  KS  tomorrow  and 
need  to  know  whether  or  not  to  take  IS  work  or  not. 

You  wil  have  to  speak  with  the S  family  regarding  someone 
being  home  for  your  meeting  with  KS.  As  the  home  hospital 
teacher  you  schedule  the  time  with  the  family  for  your  |  hour 
weekly  meetings. 

Mr.  Tompkins  will  follow-up  with  you  regarding  IS. 

18. 

The  same  day,  Ms.  Villareal  replied,  sending  an  email  to  respondent,  copied  to 

Mr.  Tompkins  and  Mr.  Fowler.  The  email  read: 

Respondent's  Contentions 

DISCRIMINATION  AND  RETALIATION 

19. 

Respondent  has  been  a  full-tune  teacher  with  the  District  for  13  years.  Prior  to 

her  fulltume  work,  respondent  was  employed  by  the  District  for  two  years  as  a  part-time 
teacher  at  the  Adult  School.  Overall,  she  believes  the  District  has  treated  her  quite  poorly, 
perpetrating  multiple  acts  of  intimidation  and  discrumimation  agamst  her.  Respondent 
pointed  to  several  examples.  Furst,  in  2010,  without  cause,  she  was  reassigned  from  her 
teaching  responsibilities  at  Caruthers  HS  to  Caruthers  Elementary  School  for  the  2010-2011 
school  year.  In  addition,  in  December  2010,  without  cause,  she  was  removed  as  the  coach 
for  the  Caruthers  HS  girls’  softball  team.  Respondent  believes  she  was  transferred  to 
Caruthers  Elementary  School  and  stripped  of  her  coaching  duties  because  she  publically

criticized  the  District  for  fading  to  comply  with  Title  IX  of  the  Education  Amendments  Act 
of  1972.  In  Fall  2010,  respondent  spoke  at  several  District  meetings,  secking  a  girls’  softball 
field  on  the  Caruthers  HS  campus,  imstead  of  being  forced  to  practice  and  play  in  the  park 
across  the  street  from  the  school.  Respondent  noted  that  Caruthers  HS  has  two  boys’ 
baseball  fields  and  no  girls’  softball  fields.  Respondent  did  not  file  an  appeal  or  grieve  her 
reassignment  to  Caruthers  Elementary  School  or  her  removal  from  coaching. 

20. 

Second,  in  2017,  the  District  attempted  to  change  her  teaching  schedule 
without  notice.  Respondent  first  learned  of  the  schedule  change  (.e.,  her  new  Period 
managing  HHI  and  Independent  Study  students  at  both  Caruthers  HS  and  MARC)  three 
weeks  into  the  Fall  2017  semester.  When  respondent  learned  of  her  new  responsibilities,  she 
requested  a  meeting  with  Mr.  Fowler.  Respondent  asked  Mary  Bettschild,  union  president, 
to  attend,  but  Ms.  Bettschild  was  unavailable  and  Ms.  Tweedy  came  in  her  stead. 
meeting,  Mr.  Fowler  threatened  respondent,  telling  her  she  was  a  two-thirds  teacher,  and  to 
remain  employed,  additional  responsibilities  had  to  be  added  to  her  schedule.  Mr.  Fowler 
rescinded  the  proposed  schedule  change  after  respondent  informed  him  she  was  the  teacher 
of  record  for  the  Period  5  —  Leadership  class,  and  therefore,  already  had  a  full  schedule. 

In  the 

21. 

Third,  in  October  2017,  after  respondent  was  dismissed,  Caruthers  HS  became 
an  uncomfortable  environment  for  respondent’s  daughter  SK.  Respondent  removed  SK.  from 
Caruthers  HS  and  placed  her  at  Washington  Union  HS  in  the  Washington  Unified  School 
District.  SK  is  an  avid  and  competitive  softball  player,  with  pending  college  scholarships; 
because  of  her  school  change,  the  California  Interscholastic  Federation  (CIF)  rules  precluded 
Sk.  from  playing  softball  for  Washington  Union  without  an  exemption.  5K  applied  for  the 
CIF  exemption,  but  Mr.  Fowler  challenged  the  exemption  three  times,  Ultimately,  SK  was 
granted  the  exemption  and  allowed  to  play  softball  at  Washington  Union.  Fourth,  in  Fall 
2017,  respondent's  ex-husband,  DK.  was  informed  he  would  no  longer  be  a  coach  for  the 
Caruthers  HS  boys’  football  team  or  the  local  Pop  Warner  team  either. 

THE  DISTRICT  DOES  NOT  FOLLOW  POLICY 

22. 

Respondent  believes  the  District  routinely  does  not  follow  proper  policy. 

First,  respondent  testified  that  she  had  no  knowledge  of  a  District  HHI  policy.  She  was  never 
given  such  a  policy  and  was  not  trained  on  such  apclicy.  The  District  either  has  no  such 
policy  or  provides  no  guidance  for  teachers  to  follow  such  a  policy.  Respondent  does  not 
believe  she  should  be  punished  for  the  District’s  failures  to  inform  and  tram  staff. 

23. 

second,  the  District  encouraged  respondent  to  falsify  her  Independent  Study 

student  attendance,  in  violation  of  the  Education  Code.  In  September  2017,  respondent 
attempted  to  educate  the  District  about  Independent  Study  attendance  requirements, 
mcluding  dropping  a  student  from  the  Independent  Study  program  afler  two  absences; 
respondent  refused  to  sign  attendance  logs  recording  more  than  two  absences  for  an 
Independent  Study  student.  Mr.  Fowler  informed  respondent  that  he  would  decide  when  to 
drop  a  student  from  the  Independent  Study  program.  In  the  end,  Mr.  Fowler  took

responsibility  for  signing  the  Independent  Study  attendance  logs  and  respondent  simply 
recorded  student  attendance  and  transferred  the  information  to  bim. 

HHI  TIMESHEETS 

24. 

Respondent  has  provided  HHI  since  2008.  The  District  has  never  informed 

respondent  that  her  HHI  timesheets  contained  accounting/reportmg  errors  or  needed 
corrections,  nor  has  the  District  ever  provided  mstruction  on  how  to  complete  HHI 
timesheets.  In  2008,  while  teaching  at  Caruthers  HS,  respondent  volunteered  to  be  a  HHI 
teacher.  Janette  Poraz,  Caruthers  HS  Secretary,  provided  respondent  a  blank  HHI  timesheet 
and  said:  “you  are  to  receive  five  hours  each  week.”  Ms.  Poraz  provided  no  other 
mstruction  to  respondent  on  how  to  fill  out  the  HHI  timesheet.  Respondent  was  never  told  to 
provide  a  weekly  hour  of  instruction  to  cach  HHI  student. 

25. 

Respondent  never  believed  the  accuracy  of  her  HHI  timesheets  mattered, 

because  of  the  direction  provided  by  Ms.  Poraz.  As  such,  respondent  uniformly  compicted 
her  HHI  timesheets  by  listing  five  hours  per  student  per  week:  four  hours  of  preparation  and 
one  hour  for  visit  time.  Furthermore,  Orm  Hirschkorn,  Caruthers  HS  Principal  m  2008, 
signed  respondent’s  HHI  timesheets  each  month  and  never  raised  any  concerns  with  her.  As 
such,  respondent  continued,  until  her  dismissal,  completing  her  HHI  timesheets  in  the  same 
manner  she  had  since  2008.  In  2016-2017,  Mr.  Tompkins  signed  respondent's  HHI 
timesheets  cach  month  and  he  never  raised  any  concerns  with  her.  Respondent  is  willing  to 
make  changes  to  how  she  completes  HHI  timesheets,  but  she  was  never  given  the 
opportunity  to  do  so. 

26. 

Respondent  acknowledged  claiming  HHI  preparation  time  during  winter 

break.  SK  would  have  to  come  to  school  for  soccer  practice  and  respondent  would  work  in 
her  classroom  on  Odysseyware  until  practice  was  over.  Respondent  knew  Mr.  Tompkins 
allowed  Odysseyware  to  be  left  open  during  winter  break,  so  students  could  continue  to  work 
on  assignments.  Respondent  also  acknowledged  claiming  HHI  preparation  and  visit  time  im 
September  2017,  while  she  was  in  Georgia  with  her  daughter  for  a  college  visit,  indicating 
she  worked  on  Odysseyware  during  her  trip,  specifically,  in  the  airport. 

27. 

Notwithstanding  the  above,  respondent  always  completed  her  HHI 

responsibilities,  spending  more  than  five  hours  per  student  per  week  committed  to  HHI 
duties.  KS,  TS,  AA,  and  AE  never  fell  behind  in  their  classwork,  completed  all  credits 
assigned,  and  AE  graduated  on  time.  In  fact,  respondent  indicated  KS  completed  80  to  90 
credits  and  IS  completed  120  credits  in  2016-2017:  “the  most  ever  carned”  im  a  vear. 
Further,  respondent  always  made  herself  available  to  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE  by  cellular  phone. 
On  the  other  hand,  KS,  1S,  AA,  and  AE  were  not  always  ready,  willmg,  and  able  to  see 
respondent  or  provide  her  with  their  completed  assignments.  On  several  occasions, 
respondent  arrived  at  the  KS/IS  home  and  no  one  was  home  or  she  was  not  invited  in 
because  both  KS  and  IS  were  in  bed  asleep  or  they  had  not  completed  their  weekly 
assignments.  In  addition,  KS  and  (IS  frequently  cancelled  their  home  visits  without 
rescheduling.  Further  stil,  respondent  was  frightened  by  the  10  pound  Chihuahua  mix 

ii

canine  owned  by  KS/IS,  who  bit  respondent  when  she  came  for  one  of her  first  visits; 
respondent  did  not  report  the  bite  to  anyone.  Finally,  Mr.  Tompkins  approved  the  exchange 
of pump  drives  through  Ms.  Ibarra  and/or  Mr.  Azavedo,  meaning  the  practice  was  acceptable 
to  the  District.  For  AA  and  AE,  respondent  visited  both  on  a  weekly  basis,  noting  the 
students  would  have  fallen  behind  on  assignments  if  she  had  not  provided  weekly 
assignments  to  them.  Respondent  did  not  keep  a  log  of  her  home  visits  for  any  students,  and 
acknowledged  her  visits  with  KS,  IS,  AA,  and  AE  were  short;  lasting  about  five  to  10 
minutes  each  visit.  She  also  acknowledged  that  once  KS/IS  delivered  a  jump  drive  to  school 
each  week,  she  made  no  home  visits  thereafter. 

28. 

Ultimately,  respondent  describes  the  MARC  teaching  appointment  as 

challenging.  MARC  students  required  a  great  deal  of  individualized  attention:  personalized 
subjects,  customized  lessons,  and  modified  curriculum.  Some  MARC  students  were 
assigned  classroom  teaching  in  English  and/or  Math  and  outside  time  for  Physical  Education, 
but  most  were  assigned  online  learning  via  Odysseyware.  Much  of  respondent’s  time  was 
spent  monitoring  and  grading  in  Odysseyware;  with  one  to  10  units  in  a  subject,  one  to  20 
lessons  in  a  unit,  a  page  of  notes  to  grade  following  each  lesson,  and  reassignment  of  any 
quiz  or  test  to  a  student  scoring  below  60  percent.  Yet  respondent  was  the  only  credentialed, 
full-time  teacher  at  MARC.  Overall,  MARC  resources  were  often  limited.  For  example, 
MARC  had  to  share  a  guidance  counselor  with  Caruthers  HS;  and  the  counselors  only  visited 
MARC  once  every  six  weeks,  even  though  they  were  required  to  visit  once  a  month.  In  the 
interim,  respondent  had  to  contact  the  counselors  by  email,  because  the  counselors  had  no 
direct  telephone  line.  At  all  times  relevant,  respondent  believes  she  completed  her  teaching 
responsibilities  and  HHI  duties,  often  spending  far  more  time  than  the  regular  work  day  to 
complete  her  teaching  responsibilities  and  more  than  five  hours  per  student  per  week  for  HHI 
duties. 

Gther  District  HHI  Teachers 

JENNIFER  PWEEDY 

29. 

Ms.  Tweedy  is  the  Agriculture  teacher  at  Caruthers  HS.  Ms.  Tweedy  provided 
HHI  in  February  2015  for  one  student  (TM)  for  six  weeks.  Ms.  Poraz  provided  Ms.  Tweedy 
with  the  HHI  timesheet  and  told  her:  “you  can  claim  no  more  than  five  hours”  or  words  to 
that  effect.  Ms.  Tweedy  was  given  no  further  instructions  on  how  to  fill  out  the  HHI 
timesheet,  nor  was  she  told  she  had  to  provide  one  hour  of  weekly  instruction  te  TM.  TM 
was  not  an  Odysseyware  student  and  Ms.  Tweedy  had  to  pick-up  and  drop-olf  assignments 
for  TM.  After  respondent’s  termination,  the  District  sent  an  emai  to  all  staff  regarding  HHI, 
reminding  teachers  to  report  actual  time  on  timesheets  and  to  offer  HAI  students  one  hour  of 
wstruction  per  week.  At  this  time,  Ms.  Tweedy  would  not  volunteer  for  another  HHI 
assignment,  giver  What  happened  to  respondent  and  the  admonitions  included  in  the  District 
email  about  HHI  requirements  gomg  forward.

MARTHA  MARTINEZ 

30. 

Ms.  Martinez  is  a  Science  teacher  at  Caruthers  HS.  Ms.  Martmez  began 

providing  HHI  in  2014;  she  continues  today.  Ms.  Poraz  provided  Ms.  Martmez  with  the  HHI 
timesheet  and  told  her:  “you  can  claim  up  to  five  hours  per  student  per  week”  or  words  to 
that  effect.  Ms.  Martinez  was  given  no  further  instructions  on  how  to  fill  out  the  HHI 
timesheet,  nor  was  she  told  she  had  to  provide  one  hour  of  weekly  instruction  to  HHI 
students.  In  2015-2016,  Ms.  Martinez  submitted  monthly  HHI  timesheets  for  one  HHI 
student:  November  2015  -  six  (6)  hours,  December  2015  —  three  and  three-quarter  (3.75) 
hours,  January  2016  —  three  and  one-half  (3.5)  hours,  and  February  2016  —  17.85  hours. 
Recently,  Ms.  Martmez  received  a  District  email  with  instructions  for  HHI  timesheets, 
indicating  an  HHI  student  should  receive  a  minimum  of  one  hour  of  instruction  time  cach 
week  and  no  more  than  four  hours  should  be  claimed  for  preparation  time  each  week. 

SELLA  GARCIA 

31. 

Ms.  Garcia  is  a  Special  Education  teacher  at  Caruthers  HS.  Ms.  Garcia  has 

provided  HHI  for  multiple  school  years,  beginning  i  2013-2014,  for  one  student  (CR).  For 
her  HHI  timesheet,  Ms.  Garcia  was  told  to  record  up  to  four  hours  preparation  time  and  one 
hour  visit  time.  Without  further  instruction,  Ms.  Garcia  sought  additional  guidance  from  her 
Department  Chair.  Ms.  Garcia  has  only  claimed  the  actual  time  she  has  dedicated  to  HHI,  up 
to  five  hours  a  week.  In  2015-2016  and  2016-2017,  Ms.  Garcia  submitted  monthly  HHI 
timesheets:  February  2016  —  eight  and  one-half  (8.5)  hours,  March  2016  —  27.5  hours,  April 
2016-17  hours,  August  2017  —  13  hours,  September  2017  —  20  hours,  October  2017  —  19 
hours,  November  2017  —  16  hours,  and  December  2017  —  eight  (8)  hours.  CR  is  a  special 
education  student  and  Ms.  Garcia  has  to  modify  his  weekly  assignments  for  his 
skilis/abilities. 

District’s  Contentions 

32. 

The  District  denies  discriminating  or  retaliating  against  respondent.  First,  the 

District  reassigned  multiple  Caruthers  HS  teachers  in  2010-2011,  because  of  low  student 
enrollment  and  the  recession.  The  District  chose  to  eliminate  positions  at  Caruthers  HS  and 
to  reassign  those  teachers  to  Caruthers  Elementary  School,  because  the  Elementary  School 
had  received  a  Quality  Education  Investment  Act  (QEIA)  grant  requiring  smaller  class  sizes 
and  more  teachers.  At  the  time,  respondent  was  teaching  a  Life  Skills  class  at  Caruthers  HS. 
The  District  eluminated  the  Lite  Skills  class  and  merged  the  subject-matter  ito  the  Science 
class  curriculum.  The  District  then  reassigned  respondent  to  the  Elementary  School.  In 
addition,  in  2010,  the  District  received  a  signed  petition  from  the  girls’  HS  softball  team 
requesting  respondent  not  coach  their  team  goimg  forward.  The  District  acted  on  the  petition 
by  mforming  respondent  she  would  not  be  asked  to  coach  next  season.  Second,  the  District 
proposed  a  2017-2018  schedule  change  for  respondent  because  her  teaching  assignment 
appeared  to  be  less  than  full-time.  She  was  a  tenured  teacher  who  required  a  full-time 
schedule.  When  Mr.  Fowler  learned  that  respondent  did  indeed  have  a  full-time  schedule, 
the  proposal  was  rescinded.

33. 

Next,  the  District  makes  every  effort  to  follow  policy.  First,  Independent 

Study  students  may  be  dropped  after  two  absences,  but  are  not  required  to  be  dropped  after 
two  absences.  Additionally,  Mr.  Fowler  took  responsibility  for  signing  the  Independent 
Study  students’  attendance  roster  because  respondent  was  no  longer  assigned  to  manage 
them.  Second,  the  District  has  a  HHI  policy,  including  AR  6183.’  Teachers  volunteer  for 
HHI  duties  and  can  claim  up  to  five  hours  per  student  per  week  of  actual  time  spent. 
Teachers  must  offer  one  hour  of  instruction  per  week  to  each  student.  Teachers  cannot  claim 
time  for  collecting  or  grading  work  for  their  own  classroom  students.  Teachers  submit  a 
monthly  HHI  timesheet  and  the  District  trusts  teachers  to  record  and  submit  only  the  hours 
actually  worked.  District  supervisors  do  not  question  HHI  timesheets  for  accuracy.  The 
District  did  not  question  respondent’s  HHI  timesheets  until  respondent  claimed  HHI  time 
while  she  was  on  leave  and  out-of-state.  As  a  result,  the  District  began  an  investigation  and 
found  a  plethora  of  fabrications  on  respondent’s  2016-2017  HHI  timesheets.  The  District  did 
not  provide  respondent  with  notice  or  an  opportunity  to  correct  her  behavior  because  her 
conduct  showed  blatant  dishonesty.  At  hearing,  the  District  believes  respondent  continued  to 
display  a  propensity  to  lie: 
(1)  respondent  understood  her  HHI  duties  were  compensated  on 
an  hourly  basis,  hence  the  monthly  timesheet  requiring  hours  to  be  specifically  documented, 
and  not  paid  as  a  flat-rate,  like  her  softball  coaching  stipend;  (2)  she  clarmed  IS  completed 
120  units  in  2016-2017,  when  his  transcript  only  shows  74  units  completed;  and  (3)  she 
claimed  extensive  Odysseyware  preparation  time,  but  the  Report  does  not  corroborate  her 
claims. 

Discussion 

34. 

Respondent  admits  she  uniformly  logged  five  hours  per  student  per  week  on 
her  HHI  timesheets,  regardless  of  the  amount  of  time  she  spent  providing  HHI.  She  did  not 
alter  her  recording  practices  when  school  was  not  in  session,  continuing  to  record  five  hours 
per  student  per  week  through  school  holidays  and  breaks  and  personal  leave.  She  created  her 
recording  practice  in  2008,  based  upon  the  one-sentence  instruction  of  the  MARC  Secretary. 
Respondent  blames  the  District  for  neglecting  to  notify  her  of  a  need  to  correct  her 
timesheets  and  failing  to  provide  adequate  HHI  training  for  teachers.  She  denies  any 
personal  responsibility. 

35. 

Insum,  respondent’s  testimony  lacked  credibility.  First,  respondent’s  HHI 

timesheets  are  wholly  inaccurate.  During  school  holidays  and  breaks  and  approved  time  off 
(22  days),  respondent  logged  80  hours  of  HHI  or  Odysseyware  preparation  time.  However, 
the  Report  shows  respondent  did  not  log  into  Odysseyware  except  for  two  hours  and  fifteen 
  

”  While  not  at  issue  here,  the  Commission  would  encourage  the  District  to  develop 

policies,  procedures,  and  training  for  all  programs,  including  voluntary  programs  like  Home 
Hospital  Instruction,  to  ensure  clarity  of  responsibilities  and  accountability,  as  well  as  to 
prevent  misunderstandings  and  conflicting  interpretations.  For  example,  AR  6183  says: 
“The  district  shall  offer  at  least  one  hour  of  instruction  for  every  day  of  instruction  offered  by 
the  district  in  the  regular  education  program.”  However,  Superintendent  Hirschkorn 
described  the  HHI  District  policy  to  require  one  hour  of  instruction  per  week  per  student. 

14

minutes  on  one  day.  She  claimed  79  hours  of  HHI  visit  time  for  KS  and  [S  for  the  2016- 
2017  school  year.  However,  KS,  US,  and  JS  testified  at  hearing,  and  recounted  only  14  home 
visits  throughout  the  2016-2017  school  year,  with  10  visits  lastme  five  to  10  minutes  cach,  at 
most.  Respondent  recorded  cight  (8)  hours  of  HHI  visit  time  with  AE  from  March  through 
May  2017.  However,  AF  testified  at  hearing,  and  recalled  five  or  six  visits,  each  lasting 
approximately  30  seconds.  Furthermore,  KS,  1S,  AA,  and  AE  were  alf  students  assigned  to 
respondent's  classroom,  requiring  her  to  prepare  and  grade  their  work  as  a  part  of  her  daily 
job  duties  and  annual  compensation. 

36. 

Second,  her  failure  to  understand  the  obligation  to  be  honest  when  submitting 

a  timesheet  to  her  employer  is  a  death  knell.  Her  mability  to  see  the  harm  in  untformly 
logging  five  hours  per  student  per  week  as  well  as  making  up  the  times  she  completed  the 
work  is  problematic.  Her  contention  that  how  she  recorded  her  time  did  not  matter  because 
she  always  worked  more  than  five  HHI  hours  per  student  per  week  is  nnprobable.  Asa  13 
year  tenured  teacher,  respondent  should  have  understood  the  necessity  to  honestly  record  the 
hours  she  worked,  because  in  exchange,  the  District  would  provide  her  payment  for  those 
exact  hours.  Further,  respondent  knew  the  difference  between  a  flat-rate  stipend  and  an 
hourly  wage.  For  her  softball  coaching,  she  received  a  stipend  and  was  not  required  to 
submit  a  monthly  timesheet  (.e.,  the  flat-rate  stipend  was  the  same  no  matter  how  many 
hours  she  dedicated  to  softball},  versus  an  hourly  wage  that  required  a  timesheet  and  an 
accounting,  and  then  she  was  paid  based  upon  the  exact  number  of  hours  she  worked. 

37. 

Third,  respondent  criticized  the  District  for  failing  to  accurately  record 

Independent  Study  attendance,  and  vociferously  refused  to  sign  her  name  to  an  Independent 
Study  student  attendance  roster,  but  respondent  felt  no  remorse  for  signing  her  name  to  a 
blatantly  false  HHI  timesheet.  Fourth,  respondent’s  ardent  reliance  on  a  single  sentence 
instruction  in  2008  1s  nonsensical  and  self-serving.  Other  District  HHI  teachers  also  received 
limited  instruction  for  completing  HHI  timesheets  from  Ms.  Poraz,  however,  at  least  three 
other  District  HHI  teachers  understood  the  instruction  to  be  “up  to  five  hours”  per  student  per 
week,  and  not  “you  get  five  hours.”  Jennifer  Tweedy,  Martha  Martinez,  and  Selia  Garcia  all 
testified  at  hearing  and  recalled  the  direction  to  be  “up  to  five  hours.”  Instead,  respondent 
asks  the  Commission  to  believe  that  she  would  blindly  follow  a  one-sentence  direction, 
regardless  of  her  personal  knowledge  and  experience,  and  repeatedly  act  in  a  fraudulent 
manner,  without  secking  any  guidance  from  the  District  or  finding  the  District  policy  at 
issue.  Her  compulsive  dishonesty  displays  an  inherent  character  tratt. 

38. 

Respondent  is  an  educated  and  credentialed  teacher.  She  is  intelligent  and 

capable;  at  hearing,  she  opined  on  Federal  and  State  laws,  as  weil  as  on  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  employment  for  tenured  teachers.  Based  on  her  testimony,  respondent  was 
aware  of  the  finer  points  of  providing  HHI  duties  and  the  total  hours  allowable  each  week. 
Por  example,  the  one-sentence  instruction  in  2008  did  not  direct  respondent  to  record  four 
hours  of  preparation  tune  and  one  hour  of  visit  time  to  total  five  hours  per  week,  as  the 
District  policy  states;  yet  every  HHI  timesheet  respondent  submitted  included  exactly  that 
accounting,  except  during  school  breaks,  when  respondent  would  record  only  preparation 
time.  Respondent's  “accounting”  was  not  without  thought.  In  addition,  as  recently  as 

5

September  14,  2016,  in  an  email  from  Ms.  Villareal,  respondent  was  reminded  of  her  HHI 
obligations:  “As  the  home  hospital  teacher  you  schedule  the  time  with  the  family  for  your  | 
hour  weekly  meeting.”  Respondent  did  not  reply  to  Ms.  Villareal  with  shock  or  disbelief 
regarding  her  required  one  hour  weekly  visits  to  HHI  students. 

Morrison  Criteria 

39. 

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44944  create  the  statutory  framework  for 
this  proceeding.  The  statutes  give  discretion  to  both  the  District  and  the  Commussion.  The 
District  has  the  right  to  determine  when  to  seek  disciplinary  action  against  a  teacher  and  what 
discipline  to  seek.  The  Commission,  however,  is  not  bound  by  the  District’s  choice.  It  has 
broad  discretion  m  disciplinary  matters.  [ts  role  is  not  limited  to  determining  whether 
charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  it  must  also  decide  whether  that  conduct  demonstrates 
unfitness  to  teach  when  measured  against  the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 
Education  (1969)  |  Cab.  3d  214,  229-30.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  vy.  Burman  (Fontana) 
(£988)  45  Cal.  3d  208,  219-22.)  In  exercising  its  discretion  in  this  matter,  the  Commission 
determines  whether  dismissal  is  warranted  by  the  facts  established  at  the  hearing. 

40. 

Before  a  decision  can  be  made  as  to  whether  respondent’s  conduct  was 

immoral  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)\(1}},  dishonest  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a4), 
and/or  constituted  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a}(6)),  the 
Commission  must  determine  whether  respondent’s  conduct  demonstrated  she  was  unfit  to 
teach  using  the  Morrison  criteria.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  A977)  19  Cal.  3d  691, 
696.)  The  Morrison  criteria  are: 
(1)  the  likelihood  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 
students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party 
involved;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct; 
(6)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  to  which 
disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education, 
supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  p.  229.3 

LIKELIHOOD  CONDUCT  MAY  HAVE  ADVERSELY  AFFECTED  STUDENTS  OR  TEACHERS 

41. 

Respondent’s  conduct  risked  depriving  students  with  temporary  disabilities  of 
mandated  interaction  and  instruction,  risking  their  knowledge  and  understanding  of  required 
subjects.  Respondent’s  timesheets  also  risked  funds  allocated  to  the  District  for  the  delivery 
of  educational  services  to  students  with  temporary  disabilities.  Further,  respondent's  failure 
to  provide  mstruction  and  assistance  to  HHI  students  risked  classroom  teachers  having  to 
spend  more  time  with  HHI  student  when  they  returned  to  class  with  inadequate  knowledge 
and  understandmg  of  the  previous  lessons, 

 
e
s

 
,
e
m

 
,
m
e

16

PHE  DEGREE  OF  THE  ADVERSE  EFFECT 

42. 

Respondent  acted  as  no  more  than  a  courier  and  provided  no  benefit  to 

students  m  need  of  instruction  and  guidance.  Her  HHI  students  will  be  forever  deprived  of 
the  learning  associated  with  the  assignments  respondent  should  have  supervised  and 
instructed  upon.  In  addition,  after  respondent's  dismissal,  the  District  sent  emails  to  all 
teachers  about  HHI  duties,  requiring  at  least  one  hour  of  instruction  per  student  per  week  and 
a  chilling  effect  on  teachers,  who  are 
the  necessity  to  record  actual  time  worked.  The  result: 
no  longer  interested  in  volunteering  for  HHI  assignments;  and  a  potential  for  concern  among 
teachers  about  District  policies  and  procedures. 

PROXIMITY  OR  REMOTENESS  IN  TIME  OF  THE  CONDUCT 

43. 

While  respondent  submitted  HHI  timesheets  to  the  District  in  2008,  at  issue 
here  are  2016-2017  and  2017-2018  HHI  timesheets  respondent  completed  and  submitted  to 
the  District. 

PYPE  OF  TEACHING  CERTIFICATE 

44. 
experience. 

Respondent  is  a  Multt-Subject  Credentialed  teacher  with  15  years  of  teaching 

EXTENUATING  AND  AGGRAVATING  CIRCUMSTANCES 

45. 

The  HHI  assignment  requires  a  credentialed  teacher.  The  position  is 

voluntary.  The  District  has  HHI  regulations,  which  are  guided  by  the  Education  Code. 
Whule  the  District  does  not  provide  traming  on  HHI  policy,  the  District  can  provide  any  and 
all  guidance  upon  request. 

46. 

Respondent  volunteered  as  a  HHI  teacher  for  four  students  m  2016-2017. 

Respondent  asked  no  questions  of  the  District  regarding  HHI  policies  and  procedures. 
Instead,  she  assumed  the  District  would  inform  her  of  any  relevant  policies  and  procedures 
and/or  when  her  conduct  violated  any  such  policies  and  procedures.  In  other  words, 
respondent  assumed  the  District  would  know  about  her  failure  to  spend  an  hour  per  week 
with  each  student,  even  though  they  were  not  present  and  respondent  recorded  an  hour  of 
visit  time  per  student  per  week  on  her  timesheet;  or  that  the  District  would  know  that  a 
credentialed  teacher  would  enter  untrue  information  onto  a  timesheet  and  submit  it. 
in  this 
case,  the  onus  is  on  respondent:  she  alone  controls  her  actions,  omissions,  and  submissions 
and  only  she  can  measure  them  against  the  District  policy.  The  District  is  left  to  trust  its 
credentialed  teachers  to  make  good  choices  and  seck  assistance  when  needed. 

47, 

At  all  times  relevant,  respondent  had  a  responsibility  to  be  familiar  with  the 
policies  and  procedures  affecting  her  duties  or  to  seek  out  information  from  the  District  to 
ensure  her  conduct  was  within  the  rules;  she  did  neither  and  should  have  known  better. 
In 
the  end,  respondent  was  motivated  by  the  substantial  sums  of  money  she  recetved  via  her 

17

falsified  HHI  timesheets,  for  little  to  no  additional  work  than  was  required  by  her  regular  job 
duties.  Respondent’s  duties  as  a  MARC  teacher  included  the  instruction  of  KS,  [S,  AA,  and 
AF,  whether  designated  as  HHI  students  or  not.  Yet,  respondent  clanmed  five  HHI  hours  per 
student  per  weck.  Respondent’s  behavior  was  egregious  and  blameworthy.  Without  insight, 
respondent  defended  her  behavior  to  the  end,  alleging  she  was  followimg  the  one-sentence 
direction  given  i  2008  by  a  MARC  secretary.  Given  respondent's  inability  to  see  the 
obvious,  her  conduct  would  have  contmued  if  left  unchecked;  raising  legitimate  concerns 
about  respondent's  overall  character  and  her  ability  to  make  trustworthy  decisions. 

LIKELIHOOD  OF  RECURRENCE 

48. 

More  likely  than  not,  respondent  was  aware  of  the  HHI  policy  and  procedure, 
but  chose  not  to  follow  it  because  she  substantially  benefitted  from  her  recording  practices. 
Ulumately,  respondent  had  no  personal  incentive  to  cease.  Left  unchecked,  respondent 
showed  no  sign  of  stopping;  in  general,  her  decision-making  is  gravely  suspect. 

49. 

—_  In  addition,  respondent  takes  no  personal  responsibility  for  her  fraudulent 

conduct,  and  she  expressed  no  feelings  of  remorse.  Respondent  knew  or  should  have  known 
her  method  of  recording  HHI  time  was  untruthful  and  displayed  a  complete  lack  of  integrity. 
She  knew  or  should  have  known  to  seek  assistance  from  the  District  as  to  whether  her  HHI 
timesheets  were  compliant.  Her  failure  to  seek  any  assistance  while  continuing  to  uniformly 
document  five  hours  per  student  per  week  is  evidence  of  a  nefarious  motive:  to  ensure  she 
continued  to  receive  her  HHI  paychecks.  Respondent’s  acts  were  deliberately  designed  to 
defraud  the  state  and  the  District  and  were  essentially  criminal  in  nature.  (See  Board  of  Fd. 
of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  vy.  Weiland  (Weiland)  (1960)  179  Cal  App.2d  808, 
812.) 

ADVERSE  IMPACT  OR  CHILLING  EFFECT  UPON  THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHTS  OF  THE 

‘PEACHER  INVOLVED  OR  OTHER  TEACHERS 

50. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  dismissing  respondent  would  inflict  an  adverse 

mnpact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  respondent  or  other  teachers. 

Si. 

After  considermg  the  Morrison  factors  outlmed  above,  the  evidence 

established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

CONCLUSION 

Causes  of Action 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

S52. 

In  general,  the  term  “immoral”  is  defined  as  “that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined 
to  sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude  or  mdicative  of  corruption, 

IS

indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant  or  shameless  conduct  showing 
moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  commumity,  and  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Weiland,  supra,  179 
Cal  App.2d  at  p.  811.)  The  immoral  conduct  of  a4  teacher  has  been  compared  to  the 
unprofessional  conduct  or  moral  turpitude  of  an  attorney.  “Moral  turpitude  is  sometimes 
used  synonymously  with  dishonesty  or  a  high  degree  of  unfairness.”  (bid.) 

DISHONESTY 

53. 

Dishonesty  mdicates  a  lack  of  honesty;  a  disposition  to  le,  cheat,  or  steal 

Cwww.dictionary.com);  or  to  deceive.  (Widway  District  of Kern  County  v.  Griffeath  (1946)  29 
Cal.  2d  13,  18.)  “Dishonesty  necessarily  includes  the  clement  of  bad  faith.”  (Smuth  v.  Smith 
(1971)  16  Cal  App.3d  450,  456.)  “[f}t  means  fraud,  deception,  betrayal,  faithlessness;  an 
absence  of  integrity,  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray.”  (Ubid.) 
“Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smallest  fib  to  the  most  flagrant  lie.  Not  every 
impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,  and  not  every  falsehood  will 
constitute  “dishonesty”  as  a  ground  for  discipline.”  Grontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman 
(Fontana)  1998)  45  Cal.  3d  208,  220,  fr.  £2.). 

54. 

“Where  dishonesty  ts  involved,  notice  “would  not  serve  the  purpose  of § 

44938,  which  is  to  allow  a  permanent  employee  the  chance  to  correct  his  or  her  conduct  and 
thus  overcome  grounds  for  the  charge."”  (Bassett  Unified  Schoal  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1988)  201  Cal  App.3d  1444,  1447.)  “EN]Jotice  would  serve  no 
useful  purpose  in  cases  of  dishonesty:  ‘It  is  rather  clear  that  the  stigma  of  recognized 
mnmorality,  known  dishonesty,  conviction  of  a  felony  or  of  a  crime  involving  moral 
turpitude,  or  of  guilt  of  criminal  syndicalism  or  sedition  could  not  be  removed  by  ninety 
days’  good  behavior.”  (Fresno  City  #8.  Dist.  v.  De  Caristo  A939)  33  Cal  App.2d  666,  674- 
675.) 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

55. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies. 
Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character 
trail,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet 
the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Woodland)  (1992)  2  Cal  App. 4th  1429,  1444.) 
The  Morrison  criteria  must  be  analyzed  as  a  threshold  matter  to  determine  uf  the  conduct 
mdicates  unfitness  for  service.  Ud.  at  p.  1445.)  Uf  the  Morrison  criteria  are  met,  the  next  step 
is  to  determine  if  the  teacher's  unfitness  is  “‘evident’;  1.¢.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is 
caused  by  a  detect  in  temperament.”  Ubid.) 

56. 

 Insum,  the  Commission  finds  respondent  repeatedly  falsified  her  HHI 

timesheets  by: 
actual  time  she  spent  on  HHI  duties:  (2)  logging  preparation  time  when  she  was  the  teacher 

(1)  uniformly  claiming  five  hours  per  student  per  week  and  not  recording  the 

19

ofrecord  for  KS,  0S,  AA,  and  AE,  and  was,  therefore,  already  compensated  for  preparing  and 
prading  their  class  assignments;  (3)  recording  weekly  visit  time  when  she  did  not  see  the 
students  and/or  her  mteractions  lasted  no  more  than  five  to  10  minutes;  and  (4)  documenting 
preparation  and  visit  time  when  she  was  on  leave/out  of  state.  Overall,  respondent  displayed 
willful,  flagrant  or  shameless  conduct  showing  amoral  indifference.  Her  behavior  was 
deceitful  and  fraudulent,  displaying  corruption,  betrayal,  and  a  fixed  character  trait  of 
dishonesty.  Given  the  above,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent's 
conduct  was  immoral  and  dishonest  and  displayed  an  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

57. 

Finally,  all  arguments  and  evidence  presented  to  support  respondent’s  alleged 

affirmative  defenses  have  been  considered  and  are  rejected. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

i. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44934.) 

Causes  include:  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  and  evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Ed.  Code, 
§$  44932.  subds.  (aj(1),  (4,  and  (6)  and  44939.) 

2. 

A  permanent  employee  served  with  a  Notice  of  Dismissal  is  entitled  to  a  duc 

process  hearing.  (Eid.  Code,  §  44934.)  Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to 
a  hearing,  the  process  for  selecting  the  three-member  CPC,  and  sets  forth  the  CPC’s  authority 
to  issue  a  final  decision.  The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the 
evidence  on  one  side  of  an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than  the 
evidence  on  the  other  side  of  the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  mumber  of  witnesses  or  quantity, 
but  im  the  convincing  effect  the  evidence  has  on  those  to  whorn  it  is  addressed.  In  other 
words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it. 
(People  ex  rel.  Brown  vy.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal  App  4th  1549,  1567.) 

Causes  for  Discipline 

3, 

First,  facts  can  be  evaluated  in  the  aggregate.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to 

consider  the  totality  of  the  offensive  conduct.  (Woedland,  supra,  2  Cal.  App.4th  at  p.  1456- 
1457.)  When  a  camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load 
to  see  which  one  could  have  done  the  deed.  Second,  causes  can  be  consolidated.  “it  is  trae 
that  a  particular  act  or  omussion  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  more  than  one  of  the 
causes  for  his  removal  specified  in  Education  Code  section  13403,  [now  44932)."  Clarguin 
v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1978)  84  Cal. App.3d  231,  260.)  “Acts  that  are 
unprofessional  conduct  may  at  the  same  time  be  evidence  of  evident  unfitness,  1c.  a  fixed 
character  trait  or  temperamental  defect  which  renders  the  teacher  mcapable  of  avoiding  acts 
that  are  unprofessional.”  CUfbid.)  “The  prohibitions  against  immoral,  and  unprofessional 
conduct,  and  conduct  involving  moral  turpitude  by  a  teacher  constitutes  a  general  ban  on 
conduct  which  would  indicate  his  unfitness  to  teach.”  (Morrison,  supra  1  Cal.3d  at  p.  233.) 

20

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  has  been  viewed 
broadly  as  ‘conduct  such  as  to  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.’”  (Perez  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal.App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

4. 

Based  upon  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  cause  exists  to  dismiss 

respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932  and  44939  for  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty, 
and  an  evident  unfitness  for  service  based  upon  her  repeated  submission  of  fraudulent  HHI 
timesheets  to  the  District. 

Discipline 

5. 

Here,  the  Commission  has  only  two  choices:  to  dismiss  or  not  to  dismiss. 

(Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a).)  “The  commission  shall  not  have  the  power  to  dispose  of  [a] 
charge  of  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  other  alternative  sanctions.  The  imposition  of 
suspension  . 
subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44932  or  Section  44933.”  (Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  p.  216.) 

..  shall  be  available  only  in  a  suspension  proceeding  authorized  pursuant  to 

6. 

Based  upon  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  the  District  proved  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence,  respondent  violated  sections  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(1),  (4), 
and  (6),  and  44939,  and  the  conduct  supports  dismissal  of  respondent. 

ORDER 

The  Caruthers  Unified  School  District  dismissal  of  respondent  Kelli  Kuma  from  her 
employment  as  a  teacher  at  MARC  Continuation  High  School  is  UPHELD.  Respondent’s 
appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Caruthers  Unified  School  District  is 
DENIED. 

Dated:  June  18,  2018 

Dated:  June  18,  2018 

Dated:  June  18,  2018 

DocuSigned by: 

(A Gil  oh Youn 

DeocuSigned  by: 

Mitdull  k.  Brown 

Ti4F47SE25Cr4acn... 

  
Mitchell  Brown 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Cae  Che. 
BIFFADAASCSsC4  ae.   
Katharine  Cuttone 
Commission  Member 

ml  (ee  eb 

  
Erin  R.  Koch-Goodman 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

21

