BEFORE A
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
FOR THE JURUPA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Dismissal of:

ALLEN UMBARGER,

OAH No. 2017061019

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Respondent.

DECISION

On November 7, 8, and 9, 2017, a Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) heard this matter in Jurupa Valley, California.  The Commission consisted of 
the following members: Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings (OAH); Scott Richards, Jr.; and Sue Newton.

Kerrie McNally, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Adams, Silva & McNally,
LLP, represented complainant, Tamara Elzig, Deputy Superintendent of Personnel Services, 
Jurupa Unified School District (district).

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law with the law firm of Reich, Adell & Cvitan,
represented respondent, Allen Umbarger, who was present throughout the hearing.

The record was closed and the matter submitted for decision on November 9, 2017.

Respondent is employed by the district as a high school teacher.  A preponderance of 
evidence established that respondent showed full-length popular movies in class, briefly left
his class under the supervision of college tutors while he used the restroom, made two 
inappropriate racially-related comments to students, nicknamed a student “Dimples,” and 
posted a comment to a colleague’s Facebook post that arguably contained some negative 
commentary concerning immigrants and others who supported a national protest event called 
“A Day Without Immigrants.” However, the district did not establish by a preponderance of 
the evidence that respondent’s conduct constituted immoral conduct or evident unfitness for 
service. Accordingly, applicable law does not permit his dismissal on those grounds.

SUMMARY

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Procedural Background

1.

2.

Respondent is a certificated health teacher who was assigned to Rubidoux High 

School (RHS) for the 2016-2017 school year.

On February 17, 2017, complainant placed respondent on paid administrative 

leave.  On May 1, 2017, complainant provided respondent with a Draft Notice of Intent to 
Dismiss and Immediately Suspend Without Pay and the corresponding Statement of Charges.
The letter attached to the above-referenced documents provided respondent with information 
concerning his right to a Skelly conference.

3.
Skelly conference.

On May 9, 2017, respondent, through counsel, declined to participate in the

4.

On May 11, 2017, Dave Doubravsky, the Assistant Superintendent of 

Educational Services for the district, wrote a letter to respondent representing that the district 
had considered a letter of support and student petition, but would still be seeking termination of 
respondent’s employment.  On that same date, complainant provided respondent with a letter 
stating she would present the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Suspend Without Pay and
Statement of Charges (Notice of Intent) to the District Governing Board (board) on May 15,
2017.

5.

On May 15, 2017, complainant signed the Notice of Intent, alleging that 

respondent was subject to termination for immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service, in 
violation of Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (a)(6).1 In support of the 
two charges, complainant alleged the following:

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

From the 2014-2015 through 2016-2017 school years, respondent 
used class time to show full-length feature films that were not 
related to the curriculum or approved for use in the classroom.

In February 2015, respondent left his class unsupervised while he 
used the restroom.

1 At the conclusion of the Notice of Intent, complainant alleged that respondent’s 

conduct constituted immoral conduct, dishonesty, and evident unfitness for service.
Although, dishonesty can serve as an independent basis for dismissal (Ed. Code, § 44932, 
subd. (a)(4)), this section was not listed in the statutory causes for termination.  Therefore, 
dishonesty was not considered as an independent basis for dismissal, although the allegation 
in paragraph 34, wherein complaint alleged respondent was dishonest, was considered in its 
relationship to the enumerated charges of immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.

2

(cid:120) During the 2015-2016 school year, respondent used derogatory

racial slurs to converse with students during class.  For example, 
he used the word “nigger” in class in reference to African-
American students.

(cid:120) During the 2015-2016 school year, respondent made inappropriate 
comments to students regarding their race.  For example, he said 
words to the effect of “[student J.L.] can run fast or jump high 
because he is African-American.”

(cid:120) During the 2016-2017 school year, respondent told several Latino 
students that they were not required to work hard because if 
Donald Trump were elected President, they would be deported.

(cid:120) During the 2016-2017 school year, respondent told AVID tutors 

that they would be required to change their last names to avoid 
deportation if Donald Trump were elected.

(cid:120) During the 2016-2017 school year, respondent told his students 

that Muslims would be deported before Mexicans.

(cid:120) During the 2016-2017 school year, respondent referred to one of 

his ninth grade, female students as “Dimples.”

(cid:120) During the 2016-2017 school year, a fellow RHS teacher posted a 

comment on his Facebook page that criticized students for being 
absent during a National Day Without Immigrants protest.
Respondent posted a comment to the message that insinuated that 
his immigrant students and supporters had poor/failing grades and 
that RHS was more successful due to their absence from class.
Complainant alleged this post violated multiple district policies.

(cid:120)

In an interview with a district administrator on March 21, 2017, 
respondent was dishonest when he asserted that on February 15,
2017, he told his students to participate in the protest event and 
attend school.  Students who were interviewed by district staff 
said respondent told them not to attend school.

6.

The same day, the board voted to approve the proposed disciplinary action. The

Notice of Intent to Dismiss and other jurisdictional documents were served on respondent,
who timely filed a demand for hearing on May 18, 2017.

3

The Day Without Immigrants Protest Event

7.

On February 16, 2017, a protest event called “A Day Without Immigrants” 

was held throughout the country.  The protest event was meant for persons who were 
immigrants, or who supported immigrants, to stay home in order to show what impact 
immigrants have, economically, on society.  It was a nationwide protest event and was not 
limited to any particular profession.

The Facebook Thread

8.

On February 16, 2017, several teachers at RHS – Geoffrey Greer, Robin 

Riggle, Charles Baugh, Patricia Crawford, Rhonda Fuller, and respondent, posted comments 
on a Facebook thread initiated by Mr. Greer on his public Facebook page.  The original post 
by Mr. Greer read as follows:

Well.  A day without immigrants.  Perhaps all the missing 
workers in all the various industries out there had the intended 
impact and sent the desired message.  I don’t know.  As for the 
public school system, having my class size reduced by 50% all 
day long only served to SUPPORT Trumps initiatives and prove 
how much better things might be without all the overcrowding. 

That’s what you get when you jump on some sort of bandwagon 
cause as an excuse to be lazy and/or get drunk.  Best school day
ever.

Ms. Riggle was the first teacher to post a comment.  She wrote, “I had fifty absences
today.”  Mr. Greer responded, “Yup.  And I bet your class went a whole lot more smoothly 
as well,” to which Ms. Riggle replied, “Yes, it was a very pleasant day.”  Respondent was 
next to post the following, “Unfortunately, statistically my cumulative GPA increased today.
Mostly failing students were missing.” That comment was the only comment respondent
posted on the Facebook thread.

The Facebook Thread Goes Viral

9.

Aside from the numerous comments made on Facebook, an individual by the
name of “Marina,” who is a writer and activist with MTV, tweeted the link to the Facebook 
thread on her Twitter page. It did not take long for the entire Facebook thread to “go viral.”
The Facebook thread and comments were shared by individual Facebook users and spread 
about various social media platforms. Gayle Hammons is a communications support 
specialist contractor for the district.  One of her responsibilities is to monitor social media 
postings for various groups in Jurupa Valley for content that could be relevant to the district.
At 5:23 p.m., which was approximately two hours after Mr. Greer posted his comment, Ms. 
Hammons notified district administrators of the post.  She e-mailed screenshots of the 
original post and subsequent comments.  The screenshots showed that the posts were made 

4

after school had ended.  Ms. Hammons noted that Facebook allows users to set security
settings to determine who can view content posted on an individual’s page. Mr. Greer’s 
Facebook page was public, meaning Ms. Hammons and anyone else could access the content 
and read his posts.

10.

Eventually, Mr. Greer deleted from his Facebook account the original post and 

the comments by the other teachers, as he explained, to “mitigate any further damage.” Mr.
Greer posted a public apology in place of the deleted post, apologizing for the “harsh tone” 
and “hurtful structure” of the original post.  Soon after, he deleted or hid his Facebook
profile. However, because the original content of the Facebook thread had been captured in
screenshots and reproduced so many times, deleting the posts did nothing to stop the 
continuing viral spread.

11.

In the ensuing days, the story was covered on most local news stations as well 
as Univision, a Spanish language news station.  Local newspapers covered the story; some of 
the news articles simply reported the facts of what occurred; other articles used less-neutral
headlines and editorialized the articles to express the belief that the Facebook posts were 
racist or anti-immigrant.2 Daniel Brooks, the Director of Personnel for the district, said his 
office – which usually does not receive phone calls from angry parents – received a “couple 
dozen” phone calls.  The callers were upset and wanted the district to take action against the 
teachers involved.

12.

The district and RHS received over 200 e-mails from students, parents, 

community members, individuals who had no affiliation or personal interest in the district, 
and others who lived across the country.  The American Civil Liberties Union, U.S. 
Department of Justice, Anti-Defamation League, and various immigrant organizations 
notified the district of their concerns after learning of the comments on the Facebook thread.
Some of the angry communications were directed solely towards Mr. Greer.  Others were 
directed at all the teachers whose comments appeared on the Facebook thread.  In many of
the e-mail communications, it was unclear whether the writers were reacting to the actual 
posts, the representation in the news regarding the posts, or what they had read from others 
regarding their opinions of what the posts contained.  Nonetheless, it was not disputed that 
many people from all walks of life were upset for a variety of reasons about the comments 
contained on the Facebook thread.

13.

In response to these e-mails, the district’s superintendent and RHS principal 

sent e-mail replies for each e-mail received.  With a handful of exceptions, the e-mail
responses consisted of the same template, noting the writer’s concern and promising a full 
investigation. District personnel and RHS staff were also inundated with phone calls in the 
following days.  Administrators attempted to return calls from angry parents and members of 

2 For example, one article from the Huffington Post was simply entitled, “Riverside 
Teachers Put on Paid Leave Over Immigrant Protest Comments.”  Another article from the 
Washington Post, however, was entitled, “These California Teachers Mocked Students For 
Skipping School On Immigrant Boycott Day.”

5

the community.  Dr. Jose Araux, RHS’s principal, met personally with eight to 10 parents,
who were angry about the posts.  Dr. Araux sent an e-mail to parents inviting them to meet 
with himself or Dr. Duchon, the superintendent. In sum, the public reaction to the Facebook
posts disrupted the district’s and RHS’s standard daily operations.

Testimony of Dr. Jose Araux

14.

Dr. Araux is in his fifth year as principal of RHS. According to Dr. Araux,

RHS has approximately 1,575 students.  Approximately 90 to 91 percent of the students are 
Hispanic, two to three percent are black, two to three percent are white, and the remainder
identifies as “other.”

15.

Dr. Araux said he was aware of the national A Day Without Immigrants 

protest at the time, but did not think the event would result in any disruption to RHS.
National protest events in previous years did not have a big impact.  Consequently, he did not 
advise teachers to expect large absences and the district did not send notification to parents 
regarding the protest. Dr. Araux said he did not become aware that there were a large 
number of absences until the day after the event took place. Attendance records for that day
showed 357 students were absent, 286 of which were unexcused, which is approximately 18
percent of the student body.

16.

Dr. Araux testified that when he saw the Facebook post and comments by his

teachers and a counselor, he thought they were “inappropriate, offensive to the immigrant 
community, and racist.”  As to respondent’s comment specifically, Dr. Araux said he felt bad 
for the students who were absent from respondent’s classes, who would have perceived that 
it was only the immigrant students who were failing.

17.

On February 17, 2017, the district assigned extra personnel to the RHS campus 

in case any problems arose.  Two classrooms, one belonging to Ms. Riggle and the other 
belonging to Mr. Greer, had been vandalized overnight, with messages stating “fuck you” 
and “fuck your opinion” spray-painted outside the classrooms.

18. When Dr. Araux went to RHS on February 17, 2017, there were many people 

on campus from the district to help provide support.  Dr. Araux read a message over the 
school public address system acknowledging the reaction to the Facebook thread and letting 
students know that the district was committed to investigate and “take appropriate action.”
He responded to over 200 e-mail complaints from parents and people across the country.  Dr. 
Araux set aside additional time to meet with parents, should they want to do so.  RHS 
received many calls regarding the Facebook thread.  Talking points were provided to 
teachers to help them deal with any situations that might arise in the classroom. 

19.

A student forum was scheduled for 2:20 p.m. in the gymnasium; however, the 

forum was not held because there was a student walkout following lunch.  Dr. Araux 
estimated 250 to 280 students left the campus.  Teachers and administrators tried to get the 
students to go back to their classrooms, but the participating students refused to follow 

6

instructions to do so.  When the protesting students approached a perimeter fence, one 
student went over the fence.  Other students began to push on it.  Dr. Araux said he made the 
decision to open the gate because he did not want anyone to get hurt.  Some students returned
to the campus, but many did not.  As for the majority of students who remained on campus, 
Dr. Araux made the decision to keep them in their fifth period class rather than proceed as if 
it were a normal day; students were eventually dismissed from fifth period.

20.

On February 18, 2017, Dr. Araux received an e-mail from a student notifying
him about the possibility of a second student walkout planned for February 21, 2017.  The 
student was very “disappointed” with the actions of the students who walked off the campus 
on February 17, 2017, and was concerned about the safety of students and staff members at 
RHS should the second walkout take place.  Dr. Araux sent an e-mail to all staff that
contained a modified schedule for that day to avert a second walkout. Dr. Araux e-mailed
parents and the district sent a “robo-call” notification that warned them that students would 
face consequences if they walked out of school.  Ultimately, the second walkout never 
occurred.

21.

Dr. Araux has observed respondent in the classroom, but he had never been 

responsible for completing a performance evaluation.  He believed that respondent’s and the 
other teachers’ comments were equally as offensive as Mr. Greer’s comment because they
were part of a racially loaded conversation.  Dr. Araux did not remember if any parent
complained about respondent specifically. Dr. Araux was not involved in the investigation 
or decision to dismiss respondent.  He did not think respondent could continue teaching at 
RHS because he could not be a role model for students.  He said students and parents do not 
trust respondent who has “shown his true colors.”  Dr. Araux said he does not trust 
respondent as a teacher.

Testimony of Tamara Elzig

22.

Complainant, Tamara Elzig, has served as the district’s Deputy Superintendent
for the past three years.  In that position, she oversees all human resource matters.  Ms. Elzig 
thought respondent’s Facebook comment was “appalling” because it implied that as a result 
of Hispanic students being absent, the grade point average (GPA) in his classes increased.
Ms. Elzig said the comment that mostly failing students were missing that day was not 
accurate; in fact, after reviewing respondent’s grade book, which he certified as being 
accurate, of 28 students who were missing from respondent’s classes, only 6 were failing.
According to the district, the GPAs in each of respondent’s four periods only increased by
.27, .28, .18, and .20 respectively.

23.

Ms. Elzig said respondent’s statement and his claim in a subsequent interview 

with her that he had calculated the GPA for that day demonstrated dishonesty.  Ms. Elzig 
believed respondent’s comment was discriminatory and perpetuated stereotypes about 
immigrants.

7

24. Ms. Elzig was at RHS and present for the student walkout the next day.  The 

demonstration began at lunch; students began to move toward Mr. Greer’s classroom
chanting and yelling; some students threw food and objects.  It was obvious that the students 
were upset.  The students then congregated at the flagpole and tried to take down the 
American flag and replace it with a Mexican flag.  The students then moved into the parking 
lot which was blocked by an iron fence.  One student went over the fence, others began 
shaking the gate in an attempt to open it. Ms. Elzig was the first administrator on scene, and 
fearing students would be injured, she directed a custodian to open the gate.  She estimated 
300 students left and began marching down a four-lane road.  Police were blocking 
intersections, trying to anticipate where the students were going.  Ms. Elzig followed the
crowd in a police car.  At one point, the crowd attempted to enter a freeway on-ramp, but
deputies blocked the intersection.  Eventually the crowd disbursed.

Ms. Elzig corroborated Dr. Araux’s testimony about the second potential walkout.

She said notifications were sent to parents in order to try and avoid a difficult situation.

Ms. Elzig testified that at a February 21, 2017, board meeting, there was a large 

crowd and 37 public comments were received. There were members of the media present.
There were students, parents, and activist groups.

25. Ms. Elzig interviewed respondent in March 2017.  She said respondent was 

adamant that his Facebook comment was not problematic and he did not apologize for it.  He 
admitted to calling one of his female students “Dimples” and did not see a problem with it.
She asked him whether he ever referred to an African-American student as “nigger.”
Respondent laughed and said he had used the word “nigga” with a student.  Finally, he said 
he told students that education was important and that he had encouraged them to come to 
school on A Day Without Immigrants.  Ms. Elzig did not remember the exact question she 
asked respondent, but he said he made a point of telling students how important education 
was and they should stay in school.

26. Ms. Elzig did not believe that respondent should continue teaching for the 

district. She believed his post was clearly discriminatory and that he demonstrated a pattern
of poor judgment that impacted the students and the community.  She believed students have
lost trust and confidence in him as a teacher; there is not a school in the district that doesn’t 
know of him. During his interview, Ms. Elzig felt respondent revealed a complete lack of 
remorse and no apparent understanding of what he had done and the impact on parents and
district. She felt respondent was nonchalant, annoyed, and cocky about the whole situation.
He never apologized for his conduct.

Testimony of Josh Lewis

27.

Josh Lewis is the Director of Information Technology for the district.  His 

primary duty is to oversee the networks and technology education.  Mr. Lewis testified about 
two voluntary events the district hosts, Techfest and SummerJam, held at the beginning and 
end of the school year, respectively.  These events relate to the use of information technology

8

in  the  classroom.  No  testimony  provided  showed  that  the  events  provide  direction,  policy,  or 
other  information  concerning  how  teachers  should  interact  on  social  media  on  their  own  time 
after  school  hours.  Mr.  Lewis  also  testified  that  all  teachers  are  required  to  teach  digital 
citizenship  to  their  students.  Several  exhibits  showed  the  content  of  the  curriculum,  which 
generally  instructs  students  about  proper  conduct  online  in  a  variety  of  situations. 
Respondent  was  on  the  committee  that  helped  develop  the  curriculum.  Some  of  the  lessons 
involved  cyber-bullying  and  the  idea  that  anything  posted  online  can  become  public.  The 
lessons  were  intended  to  help  students  make  appropriate  choices  online.  The  district’s 
records  indicated  that  respondent  provided  the  digital  citizenship  curriculum  to  his  students 
during  the  2016-2017  school  year.  The  curriculum  documents  did  not  include  any  guidance 
to  teachers  regarding  their  personal  use  of  social  media.  Mr.  Lewis  admitted  that  the  district 
does  not  have  a  social  media  policy  for  teachers. 

Testimony  of . im  A 

28. 

is  a  16-year-old  student  at  RHS.  Respondent  was  his  ninth  grade 
mi 
AVID?  teacher.  Mr. 
testified  that  respondent  showed  the  movie  “The  Blind  Side”  in 
class.  Respondent  did  not  discuss  the  movie;  there  was  no  apparent  reason  that  he  showed  it. 
He  said  respondent  showed  several  sports-related  movies,  but  “The  Blind  Side”  was  the  only 
one  he  could  recall. 

29. 

Mr. 

said  respondent  frequently  joked  around  with  the  class  and  was 

was  black,  he  could  run  fast  and jump  high.”  Mr. 

laid-back.  One  time,  in  front  of  the  entire  class,  respondent  said  something  to the  effect  of, 
“because  [Mr.  1 
|  said  he  did 
not  respond  because  he  was  surprised  that  a  teacher  would  say  such  a  thing.  Mr. 
respondent  made  several  other  similar  comments  or  jokes  during  the  school  year. ‘= some 
point,  Mr. im  complained  to  respondent  and  told  him  he  did  not  like  it.  Respondent 
stopped  making  the  jokes. 

said 

Testimony  of . a  = 

30. 

= 

|  is  a  16-year-old  student  at  RHS,  currently  in  the  eleventh  grade. 
He  is  Hispanic  and  his  parents  are  immigrants.  Respondent  was  his  teacher  in  both  the  ninth 
and  tenth 
Mr. 
discussing 
to  Mr. 

the  election  and  expressing  their  disappointment  at  the  results.  Respondent  joked 
,  “Oh  it  doesn’t  matter  because  you  are  going  to  be  gone  next  week  anyways.” 

grades.  For  the  2016-2017  school  year,  respondent  was  his  third  period  teacher. 
testified  that  last  year,  after  Donald  Trump  won  the  election,  students  were 

3  AVID  stands  for  Advancement  Via  Individual  Determination.  It  is  a  program 

designed  to  help  students  develop  the  skills  needed  for  college. 

*  The  district  alleged  respondent  showed  several  different  movies,  but  it  did  not  allege 

any  of  these  movies  had  content  that  was  inappropriate  for  high  school  students,  such  as 
having  unsuitable  sexual  or  violent  themes.  Rather,  it  alleged  it  was  inappropriate  for 
respondent  to  have  shown  movies  with  no  educational  value  during  class  time.

Mr.  =  said  he  was  shocked,  and  he  did  not  think  it  was  okay  for  respondent  to  make 
that  type  of  joke  since  they  were  not  close.  He  did  not  say  anything  to  respondent  because 
respondent  was  a  teacher  and  Mr. 
felt  the  statement  was  disrespectful. 

|  did  not  want  to  be  disrespectful,  but  Mr. fe 

Mr. 

Zz! 

said  respondent  frequently  joked  around  with  the  class.  The  comment 

concerning  deportation  was  the  only  instance  when  Mr. 
|  was  offended  by  something 
respondent  said.  Otherwise,  he  said  respondent  was  a  “funny  guy”  and  a  good  teacher.  Mr. 
=  enjoyed  his  class. 

31. 

9  Mr.  i”.  who  was  not  absent  from  school  during  the  protest,  said  he  saw 
the  Facebook  posts  by  the  RHS  teachers  on  February  16,  2017.  He  felt  students  trusted  the 
teachers,  and  respondent  specifically  because  he  “seemed  like  a  cool  guy  and  was  very 
see  “what  kind  of  person  respondent  was”  and  what 
funny,”  but  the  posts  made  Mr. 
he  was  not  specifically  offended  by  respondent’s 
respondent  thought  of  “us”  even  though 
post.  He  said  if  what  respondent  posted  was  true,  then  the  statement  was  factual;  if  it  was 
false,  then  it  is  biased  because  it  appears  he  does  not  like  immigrants. 

Testimony  of - 47 dz” 

32.  A fe 

|  is  a  15-year-old  student  at  RHS.  She  had  respondent  in  ninth 

and  tenth  grades.  Last  year,  she,  like  Mr.  =  had  respondent  for  third  period.  She  said 
tespondent  showed  movies  twice  a  week.  She  said  he  showed a  lot  of  sports  movies.  She 
could  only  recall  the  movie  “Juno”  by  name.  She  said  respondent  never  discussed  the 
movies  after  showing  them. 

was  in  class  the  day  after  the  election.  Students  were  discussing 
made  a  comment  about  the  election.  Respondent  responded, 

Ms. 
33. 
the  results  and  Mr. 
“Don’t  worry  because  next  week  you’ll  be  gone.”  This  comment  made  Ms.  . 
because  she  is  Hispanic  and  thought  respondent  was  being  rude.  The  same  day,  Ms. 
overheard  respondent  talking  to  three  of  the  AVID  tutors’  concerning  Donald  Trump  and 
deportations.  Respondent  was  trying  to  change  the  tutors’  names,  which  were  Hispanic,  to 
sound  more  American. 

After  both  incidents,  Ms. qm  told  respondent  that  she  did  not  feel  it  was  right  for 
respondent  to  say  that  type  of  thing,  and  it  was  offensive.  Respondent  said  it  was  a  joke  and 
his  comments  were  not  meant  to  be  taken  to  heart.  He  never  made  such  comments  again. 

34. 

Ms.  qq 

went  to  school  the  day  of  the  protest.  She  saw  the  teachers’ 

Facebook  posts  the  same  day.  She  said  the  posts  upset  her  and  made  her  angry.  Specifically, 
tespondent’s  post  upset  her  because  she  was  an  “A”  and  “B”  student,  and  she  felt  respondent 
was  referring  to  her.  However,  she  did  not  interpret  the  comment  to  be  racist.  After  seeing 

>  AVID  tutors  are  area  college  students  who  come  to  RHS  to  assist  students  during 

the  class  period. 

10

the post, her opinion of respondent changed; she no longer looked up to him.  In the 
aftermath of the incident, she feels that RHS has become a much closer community and more 
understanding of one another.

Testimony of James Wandrie

35.

James Wandrie is currently a principal at another high school in the district,

but for the last three school years, he was an assistant principal at RHS.  One of his 
responsibilities involved observing teachers in the classroom by performing “walk-
throughs.”  On February 4, 2015, Mr. Wandrie visited respondent’s third period class.
Respondent was not in the classroom and there were no other RHS staff members present,
except for the AVID college tutors.  They told Mr. Wandrie that respondent had gone to the 
restroom.  Mr. Wandrie spoke to respondent about the incident two days later.  Respondent 
agreed not to leave his classroom unsupervised, and Mr. Wandrie instructed him to contact 
the office in order to find someone to cover for him if he needed to use the restroom.  Mr. 
Wandrie did not find formal discipline was required.  As was his practice, he documented the 
counseling session in an e-mail to himself.  He never again observed respondent away from
his classroom.

Testimony of L

 R

36.

L

 R  is an RHS sophomore who had respondent as a teacher last year 

for sixth period.  She said respondent sometimes left the classroom to make coffee in an 
anteroom connected to the classroom.  She said he left the door open and he was able to 
observe the class while he was in that room. She said he would also leave the classroom go 
to the restroom, and on such occasions, either a campus officer or AVID tutor(s) watched the 
class.

37. Ms. R  testified that respondent showed movies when there were substitute 

teachers or on Fridays.  She said she saw “16 Candles” and two football movies.  Respondent 
never stopped the movies to discuss them or explain how they were educationally relevant.

38.

The day before the scheduled A Day Without Immigrants protest, respondent 

was talking to a group of students in his sixth period class about the protest.  Respondent 
said, “I support you guys, go support your people.”  Ms. R  took this to mean that he 
supported students who chose not to attend school the next day.

39. Ms. R  said respondent’s Facebook post affected her more than the posts of 

the other teachers because respondent was her teacher and he always gave her good advice.
She said the AVID students were supposed to have good grades and it bothered her that 
respondent referenced the class GPA.  Ms. R  said she had a 3.6 GPA and did not attend 
school the day of the protest.  She did not believe respondent’s statement about a decrease in 
GPA was true because she had friends who were good students who were also absent. She
was not offended by the comment personally because she had good grades.  She described 
respondent as a role-model.  She said he made the class laugh and was always available to 

11

help; she loved his class.  She said respondent was a good teacher and she learned a lot in 
class.  Respondent never made any racist comments, and she did not believe he was racist.
She would not respect respondent as much if he returned to teaching at RHS.

Testimony of L

 P

40.

L

 P

 is a 15-year-old sophomore at RHS.  Last year she had 

respondent for sixth period AVID.  Respondent’s nickname for her was “Dimples.”  She said 
respondent sometimes showed sports movies during class.  The only title she remembered 
was “16 Candles.”  She said some movies were shown when there were substitute teachers.

41. Ms. P

 was in class on A Day Without Immigrants.  She said 

respondent never mentioned anything about the class size or grades increasing that day.
When she saw the Facebook posts the next day, she was a little offended because she is of 
Mexican descent.  She said she was primarily offended by Mr. Greer’s post. She said her 
opinion of respondent changed a little, but she still sees him as a role-model. She thought 
respondent could return to teaching at RHS.  She said he was a good teacher and she enjoyed
his class.  She signed a petition that requested the district to allow respondent to return to 
RHS.  She did not start the petition, but she knew what she was signing.

Testimony of Mariana Lopez

42. Mariana Lopez graduated from RHS in 2012.  She has several siblings who 
attended or attend RHS.  Her father is an immigrant.  Ms. Lopez never had respondent as a 
teacher, although her brother did.  Ms. Lopez saw the Facebook comments.  She thought 
respondent’s post undermined his students’ contributions because it generalized that 
Hispanic students were failing.  She said the comment could not be taken out of context 
because it was made on A Day Without Immigrants and part of a larger conversation that 
identified Latinos as drunks or lazy.

43.

She said respondent had a reputation as a funny person who was liked by
students.  She said her brother was upset by respondent’s comment because he trusted 
respondent.  She feels that respondent cannot be a good role model and was fearful that 
respondent would retaliate against her brother.

School District Policies

44.

The statement of charges alleged respondent violated two board policies and 

cited three additional board policies, although it did not allege respondent violated those
policies.

Complainant first contended respondent’s Facebook post violated Board Policy 4000,
which describes personnel “concepts and roles.”  However, this policy outlines the governing 
board and superintendent’s responsibilities, not those of a teacher.  Accordingly, the policy is
not one that respondent could have violated.

12

Complainant contended that respondent’s Facebook post violated the Code of Ethics, 

contained in Board Policy 4119.21.  The broad language complainant referred to as being a
basis for a violation came from the preamble of the document, which cannot be violated.
Complainant did not cite any specific violations related to the three other board policies that 
were enumerated.  The Code of Ethics contains a clause at the end providing that the code 
governs the profession and any violations will be considered “unprofessional.”  The clause 
goes on to say that in order to constitute grounds for discipline, the violation must “endanger
students, evidence malice, indicate serious incompetency, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad 
judgement.”  Although not dispositive of whether respondent violated the policy,
complainant did not allege unprofessional conduct as a basis for dismissal. For purposes of 
violating the board policy so as to constitute a grounds of discipline, complainant needed to 
specifically allege how the Facebook comment constituted a danger to students, involved 
provable malice, bad judgement, or a pattern of bad judgement.  The statement of charges 
contained no expressed allegations.

Complainant mentioned Board Policy 4119.32, having to do with the duties and 

responsibilities of teachers, but did not allege a violation of that policy.  Complainant 
contended that because of the Facebook post, respondent is “not a proper role model for 
students.” The policy contained three categories: instruction, pupil supervision, and 
communication.  Policy 4119.32 makes no reference to a teacher being a “proper role-
model.”

Complainant mentioned Board Policy 5000, having to do with concepts and roles of 

teachers.  This policy sets forth responsibilities of the governing board and explains the 
commitment of the governing board to students. The policy cannot be violated by teachers.

Complainant mentioned Board Policy 5145.3, concerning harassment and 

discrimination.  This policy specifically applies to activities on and off campus that create a 
hostile environment at the school.  Complainant alleged respondent’s Facebook comment
and other “racist comments” throughout the years “represent feelings that minorities are 
inferior and demonstrate that Mr. Umbarger does not provide equal opportunities to all 
students.”  Although respondent may have uttered certain remarks perceived to be racially
insensitive, and some may have construed respondent’s Facebook comment as being racially
insensitive, there was absolutely no evidence presented at the hearing that established that
respondent ever suggested that minorities were or are inferior or that he did not provide equal 
opportunities to all students. It is unclear how the Facebook comment could be construed as 
being racially motivated - the students who participated in the protest event were Hispanic,
as were most of those who attended class on the day of the protest.  The Facebook post and
some of respondent’s comments may have been unprofessional and inappropriate, but to
label respondent as a racist is devoid of a factual basis and unnecessarily incendiary.

//

13

Written Statement by a V

 B

45.

The district submitted a written statement from V

, although
the statement was not signed, nor did it contain her name.6 The statement was received as 
administrative hearsay. (Gov. Code, § 11514, subd. (d)).  The statement described incidents 
purportedly taking place in respondent’s class that were not alleged in the statement of 
charges.  The statement did not supplement or explain other evidence; consequently, it was 
given no weight.

 B

Respondent’s Testimony

46.

Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows: Respondent began his 
teaching career in 1998 as a substitute teacher and started teaching for the district in 2004.
At RHS, he was the AVID coordinator and developed a program to tie health curriculum 
with AVID.  He was involved in a number of extracurricular activities such as the senior 
class advisor, was a coach for several different sports, and participated in a number of camps.

47.

Respondent first heard about A Day Without Immigrants on Tuesday,

February 14, 2017.  A couple of his students were talking about a rumor that students would 
not be going to school that day and should plan a party. On Thursday, February 16, 2017, 
respondent noticed a few students were missing during his second period and realized that 
many students were out.  Approximately 30 percent were absent that day.  The only class he
really remembered was his sixth period, and because of the number of absences, he turned it 
into a study hall.  A student in his class, Ms. Plascencia, said it was a nice day because all of 
the troublemakers were gone.  He told Ms. Plascencia that the cumulative GPA of the 
students who were in class was a 3.7; the average GPA for the class was a 2.8 or 3.0. He
calculated the GPA for his sixth period class and skimmed through the other classes. He
testified that he determined the GPA that day had increased because students who were 
present were turning in assignments, and consequently, their GPAs went up, whereas the 
students who were absent did not. Respondent believed there were students who needed to 
be in the class that day because of their substandard grades.

Respondent left the school and was going home when he stopped for gas.  He opened 
his phone and saw Mr. Greer’s post on Facebook.  He could tell Mr. Greer was disappointed 
that students did not go to school.  Respondent posted his comment to Mr. Greer’s post at the 
gas station on his phone. After respondent typed his post, he added the word “unfortunately”
to the beginning in order to express his own feelings that the students who should have been 
in school were not there.  Respondent did not consider that the post might become public; he
felt he was engaged in a conversation amongst educators. He did not know what Mr. Greer’s 
privacy settings were, did not think about who might see the comment, and did not think that 
anyone would be upset by it. He had been on Facebook for approximately five or six years.
Respondent said he did not deliver the digital curriculum instruction to his students, despite a 
record indicating he had.

6 Her name was obtained from complainant’s exhibit list.

14

Later  that  night  respondent  started  getting  text  messages  calling  him  derogatory 
names  and  a  racist.  Respondent  did  not  know  what  was  happening  and  began  “freaking  out.” 
He  called  RHS  assistant  principal  Mr.  Olson  to  report  his  receipt  of  these  text  messages.  Mr. 
Olson  said  he  would  attempt  to  get  some  guidance.  Respondent  did  not  go  to  school  the  next 
day,  but  Ms.  Elzig  called  him  and  told  him  the  district  was  placing  him  on  leave. 
Respondent  said  he  apologized  to  one  student  on  his  Facebook  page,  but  he  was  very  upset 
and  shut  down  his  Facebook  account  that  weekend. 

48. 

Respondent  admitted  he  had  shown  movies  in  class.  He  said  Mondays  and 
Wednesdays  were  the  AVID  tutorials,  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays  were  health;  Fridays  were 
“fun  days”  where  he  would  have  peer-building  activities  or  show  movies.  He  said  the 
movies  had  educational  value  that  he  could  tie  to  the  curriculum  or  themes  appropriate  for 
his  class.  For  example,  he  showed  documentaries  by  Morgan  Spurlock,  such  as  “Supersize 
Me,”  which  was  related  to  health,  and  movies  such  as  “16  Candles,”  which  dealt  with  issues 
of  adolescence.  When  he  started  teaching  health  he  had  many  students  who  were  failing.  It 
was  suggested  to  him  that  he  not  take  it  so  seriously,  and  that  he  should  treat  the  class  more 
as  an  elective  that  should  be  fun  for  students.  RHS  administrators  never  informed  him  it  was 
inappropriate  for  him  to  show  movies,  and  an  assistant  principal  was  even  aware  that  he 
showed  movies.  He  never  received  any  complaints  from  administrators,  parents,  or  students. 

49. 

In  addition  to  Ms. 

,  respondent  had  another  student  named  a 
had  dimples,  as  does  respondent;  he  began 
in  his  class.  Respondent  said  Ms. 
calling  her  “Dimples.”  Ms. 
never  complained.  Had  she  or  an  administrator  asked 
him  to  stop,  he  would  have  done  so.  He  had  no  ill-intent  with  the  nickname  and  does  not  see 
it  as  a  problem. 

50. 

Respondent  testified  about  his  interactions  with  Mr.  i.  Mr. im  was  in 
his  ninth  grade  AVID  class.  They  were  in  class  discussing  the  musculoskeletal  system.  Mr. 
1  eu 
jump 
but  there  was  no  evidence  establishing  this  as  a  fact.  Respondent  said  he  did  not  recall 
making  a  joke  about  it. 

tespondent  that  he  had  heard  that  because  he  was  black  he  could  run  faster  and 

brought  the  topic  up.  Respondent  told  him  there  were  such  studies, 

higher.  Mr.  nq 

51. 

Respondent  said  he  did  not  recall  making  a  comment  to  Mr.  Tm!  about 

being  deported.  He  and  Mr. 
with  Mr.  Tm 
effect,  he  in  no  way  intended  to  offend  Mr. Ci. 

|  joked  around  a  lot,  and  he  had a different  relationship 

than  he  had  with  other  students.  If  he  did  in  fact  say  something  to  that 

52. 

Respondent  had  a  conversation  with  some  of  AVID  tutors  around  the  election. 

Respondent  had  his  prep  period  after  lunch  and  the  tutors  were  in  the  classroom  joking 
around.  They  brought  up  the  topic  of  changing  their  last  names  to  sound  more  American. 
Respondent  joked  about  his  own  name,  and  the  tutors  were  Anglicizing  their  own  names. 
Only  the  college  tutors  were  present.  He  did  not  intend  to  belittle  the  tutors  or  be  offensive. 
He  said  the  tutors  called  him  Mr.  Hamburguesa,  the  Spanish  word  for  hamburger. 

1S

53.

Respondent admitted he left his classroom with the AVID tutors in charge 

when he had to go to the restroom.  He said the AVID tutors were college students from local 
universities who were paid by the district.  He considered it appropriate to allow them to 
supervise the students for the brief period of time he was gone.  When Mr. Wandrie spoke to 
him about the issue, he told Mr. Wandrie that he would not do it again.

54.

Respondent never used the word “nigger” during the 2015-2016 school year as 

alleged.  He admitted that on one occasion, he believed during the 2010 school year, an
African-American student was on the golf team he coached.  He took the student to a fast
food restaurant.  There, the students said something to the effect of, “Coach, you my nigga.”
Respondent responded, “Greg, you’re my nigga, but let’s not use that word again.”  From the 
context, the word was being used as a form of endearment.  Respondent said he considers the 
allegation that he used the word “nigger” as the most serious charge.  He absolutely 
understands why the district would be concerned.

55.

Respondent does not believe he has ever used racial slurs.  He never told 

students that Muslims would be the first to be deported if Donald Trump were elected.  He 
did not intend to make any statements that demeaned students for participating in a Day
Without Immigrants.

56.

Respondent did not remember telling students they should skip school to 

participate in A Day Without Immigrants.  He remembered supporting students involved in 
the event, but he felt leaving school was not an effective form of protest because education 
was something that was important to have and nobody could ever take away. He denied that 
he is racist or in any way discriminates against his Hispanic students.  He loves their food, 
music, and sings songs with his students in class.  He noted that most of the students who 
remained in class during the protest were Hispanic.

57.

Respondent said the impact of the Facebook posts has been devastating.  He 

felt scared and helpless, concerned for his and his family’s safety.  Moving forward, he 
would absolutely comply with the district’s instructions.  He never meant to cause harm or 
for people to be upset.  In hindsight, he understands why so many were upset.  He never 
meant to hurt any of his students.  The hardest part of the process was watching his former 
students testify against him.  He cares about them and the school. He believes he could be an 
effective teacher and is now better able to help himself and his students learn from the 
incident.

Respondent said he is a kind person and loves being a teacher.  He gave up a lot of his 

time to RHS outside of class.  When a student died while playing soccer, he helped plan the 
funeral.  He had a refrigerator that was full of food that was always open for students.  He 
said his car was the first there in the mornings and he had a reputation of being there for 
students.  He loved his students and took pride in what he did.  It hurt him that he gave so 
much time to the school and district and his dismissal was their reaction.

16

Character Witnesses and Letters

TESTIMONY OF JANIECE BAILEY

58.

Janiece Bailey has been an English teacher at RHS since 2010.  She first met 

respondent when she was a substitute teacher.  If she did not have a class, she would 
sometimes sit in his classroom to observe.  She believed he was a highly effective teacher 
because of his rapport with students.  He has a “goofy” personality that students respond to, 
but they also listen to him.  She had many of the same students as he did and never had any
complaints or observed anything inappropriate.  Respondent was involved in many
extracurricular activities.  She said respondent was well-regarded and students with whom
she has spoken want him to return.  Ms. Bailey socialized with respondent outside of school.
She never observed any behavior that would be considered racist.  Ms. Bailey admitted she is 
friends with respondent and does not want to see him lose his job. She said even if the 
allegations against respondent were true, her opinion of respondent would remain the same. 

TESTIMONY OF GEORGE MONGE

59.

George Monge, who has been with the district since 1992, has been a social
studies teacher and department head at RHS since 2009.  He first met respondent in 2009.
Mr. Monge was the union leader at RHS.  He was provided a petition that was signed, by a
rough estimate, by 350 students that stating the AVID program has not been the same since
respondent was placed on leave and respondent should be given a second chance.  Mr. 
Monge said he did not solicit the petition nor did he know who organized it.  Following an 
RHS staff meeting in April, Mr. Monge met with other teachers to discuss union issues.  The 
issue of the suspensions came up and the teachers voted to submit a letter of support to the 
board, although this vote was not formal or counted. Mr. Monge wrote a letter, on behalf of 
the teachers and staff of RHS, dated May 4, 2017, to the district’s board.  Mr. Monge 
believes that RHS students and staff would welcome respondent back.  On cross-
examination, Mr. Monge admitted he was previously an administrator, but denied he was 
demoted.  He felt that even if the allegations against respondent were true, his opinion about 
respondent would be the same. 

TESTIMONY OF MARY TUCKER

60. Mary Tucker, who is African-American, met respondent in 2003 and knows 

him and his family well.  Her impression is that respondent is a loving son, father, and good 
friend.  Ms. Tucker is raising her grandchild, who is half Hispanic, and respondent has been 
instrumental in helping her. She believes respondent is a great person and it hurts her to 
think that he is being considered a racist.

TESTIMONY OF FERNANDA DE LA O

61.

Fernanda De La O is a second year professor at Azusa Pacific University who
runs the speech and debate program.  Respondent was her coach and class advisor, although 

17

she did not have any classes with him.  She has had intermittent contact with respondent 
since graduating in 2012.  She described him as a role-model and “fantastic all-around guy.”
She never saw him do anything offensive or inappropriate.  She felt he was racially blind and 
encouraged students of all backgrounds.

TESTIMONY OF J

H

62.

J

 H

 is an RHS senior.  He described respondent as “the life of the 

school.”  Respondent was very involved and was the senior class advisor.  He believes that 
students would accept respondent if he were to return to RHS.  He felt students have learned 
how to forgive from the incident.  He did not believe respondent treated any student
differently because of race.

LETTER BY FRANKLIN MARMOLEJO, JR.

63.

Frank Marmolejo, Jr. is a counselor at RHS who has known respondent for 10

years.  He echoed most of the other witness’ testimony, and stated that respondent was 
highly visible on campus and involved in student activities.  He described respondent’s 
passion for teaching and described him as someone who would do anything for his students.

Respondent’s Performance Evaluation

64.

Respondent submitted his two most recent performance evaluations from 2015 

and 2013. The evaluations stated respondent met expectations in all categories, except for 
“developing as a professional educator,” in which he exceeded expectations.  The written 
comments were uniformly positive; there were no criticisms or suggested areas of 
improvement.  The evaluations noted respondent enjoyed a strong rapport with his students 
and stated, “There is a climate of fairness and respect between students and teacher.”

Evaluation of the Factual Allegations

MOVIES DURING CLASS

65.

Respondent showed full length movies during class that were not contained in 
his syllabus.  Several students testified there were sports movies.  Complainant did not allege
that any of the movies contained inappropriate content for high school students, such as 
containing inappropriate themes or graphic material.  Instead, complainant alleged the films 
were not related to the curriculum and had not been approved for classroom use.

It was undisputed that the district or RHS administrators never specifically told
respondent that it was inappropriate conduct for a teacher, thus respondent was never placed 
on notice that this was an issue.

The district and RHS maintain no written policies regarding the screening of movies 

in class.

18

LEAVING  CLASS  UNSUPERVISED 

66. 

Respondent  left  his  class  under  the  supervision  of  AVID  tutors  in  February 

2015  in  order  to  use  the  restroom.  Respondent’s  belief  that  it  was  appropriate  for  him  to  do 
so  because  the  AVID  tutors  were  adults  paid  by  the  district  was  reasonable.  However, 
Assistant  Principal  Wandrie  disagreed,  and  admonished  respondent  not  to  do  it  again  in  the 
future.  Respondent  testified  that  he  heeded  this  warning. 

Complainant  did  not  allege  that  respondent  continued  to  leave  his  class  unattended, 
although  there  was  testimony  that  he  went  into  a  backroom  to  make  coffee  and  went  to  the 
restroom  in  2016.  Even  if  true,  the  evidence  showed  that  he  could  still  monitor  what  was 
going  on  in  the  classroom  from  the  backroom.  The  student’s  testimony  that  he  went  to  the 
restroom  was  insufficient  to  impeach  respondent’s  testimony  that  he  stopped  leaving  his 
class  after  being  warned  by  Mr.  Wandrie. 

USE  OF  A  RACIAL  SLUR 

67. 

Complaint  alleged  respondent  used  “derogatory  racial  slurs  to  communicate 
with  his  students  during  class.  For  example,  respondent  used  the  word  ‘nigger’  in  class  in 
teference  to  African-American  students.”  Complainant  presented  no  testimony  to 
substantiate  this  allegation.” 

INAPPROPRIATE  COMMENTS  TO  STUDENTS 

68. 

Complainant  alleged  respondent  told  Mr.  7  that  he  could  run  fast  and 
jump  high  because  he  was  African-American.  Mr.  is  and  respondent’s  testimony 
regarding  this  incident  conflicted.  Mr. 
about  this;  respondent  testified  that  Mr. 
On  one  hand,  despite  the  fact  that  many  other  students  would  have  been  present  in  class,  the 
district  presented  no  corroborating  evidence  of  the  alleged  comment.  Notwithstanding  the 
lack  of  corroboration,  Mr. ims  testimony  was  more  credible  than  respondent’s  testimony 
on  this  issue.  One  clear  pattern  of  conduct  that  was  consistent  throughout  the  testimony  was 
tespondent’s  jocular  relationship  with  his  students.  It  is  more  believable  that  respondent’s 

testified  that  respondent  made  repeated  jokes 
asked  him  this  question  in  relation  to  anatomy. 

7  Respondent,  on  direct  examination,  admitted  to  addressing  a  student  as  his  “nigga” 
in  2010.  The  district,  having  been  aware  of  this  admission  since  March  2017,  did  not  allege 
this  in  the  statement  of  charges.  Education  Code  section  44934,  subdivision  (c),  requires  the 
statement  of  charges  to  “specify  instances  of  behavior  and  the  acts  or  omissions  constituting 
the  charge  so  that  the  teacher  will  be  able  to  prepare  his  or  her  defense.”  Moreover, 
Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (b)(2)(A),  provides  that,  “Testimony  shall  not  be 
given  or  evidence  shall  not  be  introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four 
years  before  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice.”  Here,  the  circumstances  as  described  by 
respondent  are  vastly  different  in  time  and  place  than  what  is  alleged  in  the  statement  of 
charges.  Accordingly,  respondent’s  testimony  on  this  issue  cannot  serve  as  a  basis  for 
dismissal  as  it  was  not  pled  in  the  statement  of  charges. 

19

modus operandi of telling jokes and kidding around with his students resulted in him making 
this comment to Mr. L
flippant interactions with his students, Mr. L
definitely reflective of poor judgement, there was no evidence that the statement was made 
out of malice or with invidious intent.

.  Considering the portrait drawn of respondent’s occasionally

’ testimony was more persuasive. Although

69.

Similarly, Mr. C

’s testimony, as corroborated by Ms. G

, that 

respondent made a joke about him being deported after Donald Trump won the election, was
credible.  Respondent did not specifically deny saying this, only that he did not recall doing
so. Again, considering respondent’s classroom personality, his making such a comment is 
, there was no evidence that respondent 
entirely believable. Like his comment to Mr. L
intended to demean or offend Mr. C

.

70.

The conversation with the AVID tutors about changing their last names was 

less clear.  The only evidence was from a student, who was not involved in the conversation, 
and who reportedly overheard respondent telling the tutors that they needed to change their 
name.  However, none of the AVID tutors testified respondent did so.  Respondent’s 
testimony about the conversation was credible, and while it was established that respondent 
joined in the conversation, complainant did not establish that he actually told the tutors they
would have to change their last names or that he said anything to them that was derogatory or
patently inappropriate.

71.

Although complainant alleged that respondent told his students that Muslims 

would be deported before Mexicans, no evidence was presented to support this allegation.

72.

Finally, it was undisputed that respondent called Ms. P

 “Dimples.”

His testimony that he did this because there were two people in his class with the same name 
and he had dimples was credible.

THE FACEBOOK POST

73.

The underlying facts regarding respondent’s Facebook post were mostly

undisputed.  There is no question that the posts, cumulatively, had a negative impact on the 
district’s operations and resulted in a large public outcry locally and across the country.
District personnel received over 200 e-mails, numerous phone calls, media requests, and 
were forced to devote educational time to the issue.  Additionally, the posts, cumulatively, 
impacted students at RHS and were the primary impetus for a large student walkout the next 
day, which further disrupted the educational environment.

Complainant placed much emphasis on the fact that respondent’s Facebook post –
that statistically his cumulative GPA increased and mostly failing students were missing –
was not true, and this deception was the result of a malicious intent on respondent’s part to 
degrade the students who were absent.  However, the first statement, that the cumulative 
GPA increased, was factually accurate.  Complainant contends that in his deposition 
testimony, respondent claimed to have calculated the GPA for each class and determined the 

20

GPA significantly increased.  Complainant did not offer this deposition testimony as
evidence, so it was unclear exactly what respondent said.  Respondent testified that the GPA 
increased because individuals who were present on the day of the protest turned in 
assignments and individuals who were absent did not.  This explanation was not particularly
compelling or credible.  It is much more likely that respondent made the statement about the 
GPA increasing based on an anecdotal belief that poorer performing students were absent 
that day.  Regardless, the Facebook post on this point was factually accurate, even if the 
increase was very small.

The second point of the post stated that mostly failing students were missing.  Again, 
complainant emphasized that this was in fact false.  Complainant is correct that out of 28 of 
respondent’s students who were absent, six had an “F” and four had a “D.” However, the 
comment does not necessarily show malicious intent on respondent’s part.  He could have 
come to an anecdotal conclusion that the students who were absent, generally, were his
underperforming students.  Using the district’s calculations, the average GPA of his students 
who were absent was a 2.1.  Put another way, the “A” and “B” students who were absent 
were not in the majority.  So while the statement itself was not technically true, it was not 
established that it was made with a discriminatory purpose.

This goes to the next point:  complainant alleges respondent “discriminated against 
students and stereotyped students as failing.” Complainant failed to establish that the post 
was “discriminatory” in any sense of the word.  Nor was it clear how he “stereotyped” the 
missing students.  Complainant repeatedly alleged the post was racist.  However, the 
demographics of RHS belie this assertion.  Of its 1,575 students, RHS is approximately 90
percent Hispanic, which is approximately 1,418 students. There were 286 unexcused
absences on February 16, 2017. Assuming that the only students who had unexcused
absences were Hispanic (because they were at the protest), this leaves 1,132 Hispanic 
students at school or with excused absences, which is approximately 71 percent of the 
student body. Although the students who were absent were mostly Hispanic, so were the 
students who were in school that day.  This is not an insignificant point because complainant 
alleges that respondent belittled and demeaned his Hispanic students who were absent, but it 
ignored the fact that the vast majority of his students who were in class were also Hispanic.

Finally, complainant alleged respondent lied to Ms. Elzig during the March 2017 
interview when he said he told students that they should attend school on A Day Without
Immigrants.  Respondent testified that he did in fact encourage students to come to school 
because education was important.  Complaint’s allegation that this was a lie is based on the 
testimony of Ms. Ruiz, who said she heard respondent tells students the day before, “go 
support your people” in reference to a student saying that he was not going to class.  There 
was no other corroborating evidence regarding this statement, and given the seriousness of 
the accusation that respondent lied, it would be expected that complainant would have sought 
and produced some corroboration.  Moreover, Ms. Elzig could not recall the exact question 
that she asked of respondent during the interview, nor was it entirely clear whether what Ms. 
Ruiz testified to was respondent’s exact words, or her impression of what she thought 

21

respondent meant.  On this record, a preponderance of evidence did not establish respondent 
lied to Ms. Elzig.

Burden and Standard of Proof

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a preponderance 

of the evidence.  (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more 
convincing force than that opposed to it.’  [Citations.]”  (Glage v. Hawes Firearms Company
(1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325)  The sole focus of the legal definition of 
‘preponderance’ in the phrase ‘preponderance of the evidence’ is on the quality of the 
evidence.  The quantity of the evidence presented by each side is irrelevant.”  (Ibid., italics 
emphasis in original.)

Applicable Law

2.

3.

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on 

Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may 
not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction.
(Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)-(3).)

4.

A permanent certificated teacher may not be dismissed except for, among 

other things, immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. 
(a)(1) and (a)(6).)

Applicable Case Law 

5.

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the Supreme 

Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 
school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.”  The court 
delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he or 
she is not fit to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students 
or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood 
of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may

22

inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.  (Id., at pp. 229-230.)

6.

In Board of Education v. Jack M. (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the Supreme Court 

detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach. In addition to the 
Morrison factors, the court provided additional factors that may be considered to determine 
whether there is a nexus between the conduct and a teacher’s fitness to teach: (1) likelihood 
of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (2) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 
any; (3) the effect of notoriety and publicity; (4) impairment of teachers’ and students’ 
relationships; (5) disruption of educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness 
in time of conduct.  (Id., at fn. 5.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT

7.

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in

the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California Teachers Association v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, 
or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 
808, 811.)

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach.  (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.) The
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction with the 
unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed “responsibilities and
limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.” (Board of 
Trustees v. Stubblefield, 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

8.

Unfitness for service means “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; 

incapable; incompetent; and physically or mentally unsound.” (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.)
As a threshold matter, the Morrison criteria are examined to ascertain whether the conduct in 
question is related to the teacher’s fitness to teach. In reaching a conclusion that grounds exist 
to dismiss a certificated employee on the basis of evident unfitness for service, not all 

23

Morrison factors need be examined, only the pertinent ones.  (Governing Board v. Haar
(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) In this sense, the purpose of examining the Morrison criteria
is to establish a nexus between the proven conduct and fitness to teach.

However, even if the Morrison analysis shows a nexus between the conduct and fitness 
to teach, it must also be determined that the alleged conduct shows evident unfitness for service.
(Morrison, supra, at p. 1445 [emphasis added].) “Evident unfitness for service” means clearly
not fit for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies; it 
connotes fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 
one’s conduct fails to meet expectations of the school district.  (Woodland Joint Unified 
School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444
[emphasis added].)

Evaluation and Conclusion

9.

There is no question that the Facebook post by Mr. Greer, and the subsequent 

comments by the four other teachers and counselor, elicited heated reaction from students, 
parents, community members, and many who have no association with the district.  Indeed, 
much of the statement of charges is devoted to capturing the responses by individuals who 
found the posts offensive.  It was undisputed that the viral nature of the posts and the ensuing 
disruption on campus the day after the posts went viral had a significant impact on RHS and 
district operations. Although reasonable minds may differ as to the nature of respondent’s
post, reaching a decision in this matter does not mean looking at how many people felt his
comment was inappropriate versus how many people did not. Rather, the question in this 
case is whether respondent’s Facebook comment on Mr. Greer’s Facebook thread on
February 16, 2017, showing movies in class, leaving the class unattended on one occasion
while he used the restroom, calling a student “Dimples,” and making two inappropriate race-
related “jokes” to student constituted immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service, 
warranting his dismissal.  For the reasons discussed below, a preponderance of the evidence 
did not establish that respondent’s conduct, in isolation or in aggregation, constituted
immoral conduct or evident unfitness for service.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

10.

Once the Facebook thread was discovered, it went viral.  Parents, students, 
teachers, immigrant groups, civil rights organizations, and community members became 
upset about the overall content of the Facebook thread.  The incident gained widespread 
media attention. Shortly after the Facebook thread went viral, the district began receiving 
numerous e-mails and phone calls from a variety of individuals expressing their anger about 
the Facebook thread.  Two classrooms were vandalized.

On February 17, 2017, the day after the Facebook thread went viral, the district

ensured there was a large presence of administrators and teachers on the RHS campus to 
alleviate any potential problems.  Counselors were made available to students and staff.
Talking points were distributed to staff in order to allay any potential problems.

24

Nonetheless, school district operations were interrupted by a student walkout from regularly
scheduled classes after lunch.  During the walkout, several hundred RHS students left the 
campus without permission.  They blocked streets and tried to take the protest on to a 
freeway. A majority of the students who comprised the approximately 1,575 total student
body at RHS, however, remained on campus and did not partake in the disruption.  Most 
certainly, the reaction to the Facebook thread affected both the school and the district’s 
ability to provide educational services on February 17, 2017. 

However, the impact of the conduct alone does not determine whether a teacher is 

unfit to teach.  Rather, what matters is whether the conduct meets the legal criteria for 
evident unfitness for service. As a threshold matter, the factors mentioned in Morrison and
Jack M. must be considered to determine whether there is a nexus between the conduct and 
fitness to teach.

There was a lot of notoriety surrounding this incident and there was an impact on the 

students because of the overall Facebook thread in which respondent participated.
Respondent’s comment could be construed as adversely affecting students and teachers to the 
extent that his comment was contained in a Facebook thread that contained other questionable 
comments directed against immigrants.  Teachers and district personnel were also affected 
because they had to modify their schedules to tend to the problems that arose following the 
reaction to the Facebook posts.  Given the demographics of the district, respondent should have 
anticipated some backlash about commenting on a Facebook thread that contained arguably
insensitive remarks about immigrants, or at least against persons participating in the A Day
Without Immigrants event.  There were no aggravating circumstances or bad motives; to the 
contrary, respondent’s credible testimony established he did not intend to say anything other 
than to express his disappointment that those students who most needed to be in class were not
there. In fact, he prefaced his statement with the word “unfortunately,” which contrasts with 
tone of Mr. Greer’s post. His testimony that he did not think about whether Mr. Greer’s 
Facebook page was public or consider that his comments might be seen by the world was 
credible.

The district emphasized the fact that respondent helped review the digital citizenship 
curriculum provided to students.  However, respondent posted the Facebook comment while 
getting gas and did not give it much thought.  He clearly did not appreciate the consequences at 
the time.  While he did not demonstrate a great deal of remorse, he learned from this incident,
and had he known of the repercussions that would follow, he would not have posted his 
comment on the Facebook thread.

Practically all of the witnesses who testified and were familiar with respondent’s 
teaching style described him similarly – he interacted with students in a light-hearted manner, 
made numerous jokes, and had a gregarious personality.  Although his performance evaluations 
and students recognized that he maintained a good rapport with his students, an overly familiar
and jocular relationship can be problematic, as it was when he made two racially-related
references to students that were flatly inappropriate and ill-advised.  In total, enough of the 
criteria in Morrison and Jack M. are satisfied to establish a nexus between respondent’s fitness 

25

to teach and his conduct (the posting of a Facebook comment and the comments he made to Mr.
L

 and Mr. C

).

However, the analysis does not stop after finding a relationship exists between the 

conduct and fitness to teach. Evident unfitness for service must be demonstrated – and here, 
it was not. Respondent has been in the educational field for almost 20 years. He was
extensively involved in RHS and its extracurricular activities. He has experienced no formal
discipline his entire career. His latest performance evaluations noted he promoted a “climate 
of fairness and respect,” contained comments that were uniformly positive, and characterized
him as an asset to the RHS community. All of the students who testified praised him as a 
teacher and commended his teaching style.  Up until the time when the district’s counsel 
began interviewing his students in the aftermath of the Facebook posts, there was no
evidence that any student had complained to RHS administrators or the district about any
inappropriate comments or racist and discriminatory behavior. There was no evidence that
respondent treated any group of students differently than other students at any time in his 
career, or otherwise engaged in discrimination or maltreatment of students in his classroom.

The Facebook comment was made on his personal time, on his personal phone, on his 
private Facebook account, after school hours.  His comment did not disparage any student.  It 
did not comment on any student activities.  It did not comment on race. It did not express 
agreement with any inappropriate comments.  His comment did not contain strong language 
or other questionable material that showed an inappropriate temperament, an undesirable 
character trait, corruption, depravity, moral indignation for any class of persons, or contain 
any material that suggests respondent is unfit to teach.

While the comments respondent made to Mr. L

 and Mr. C

 were 

inappropriate and unprofessional, they were not malicious or made for an invidious purpose.
Similarly, while calling a student “Dimples” did not reflect best judgment, there was no 
sexual connotation or any improper motive other than some degree of cheekiness. Showing
full-length movies and leaving his class under the supervision of college tutors to use the
restroom was conduct the district disapproved of, nothing more. There was no evidence that 
respondent failed to follow the district’s policies or instructions he knew about or should 
reasonably have known about. Respondent is now aware that what he perceives as being 
light-hearted or funny can be offensive.  There is no reason to believe that he is not capable 
of changing his interactions to comport with appropriate standards or that he is unable to
maintain clear professional boundaries.  In other words, the district failed to establish that his 
behavior is not remediable once he has been placed on notice that his conduct fails to meet 
expectations of the district.  (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist., supra, at p.1444.)

In summary, while several of the factors set forth in Morrison and Jack M. arguably
may have been satisfied, thus establishing a nexus between respondent’s comments and his
fitness to teach, ultimately, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that respondent’s
actions were attributable to a temperamental defect, inadequacy, or a fixed character trait that
was not remediable merely on his receipt of notice that his conduct failed to meet the
district’s expectations.  He was not shown to be unfit, not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable, 

26

incapable, incompetent, or physically or mentally unsound to continue teaching. Thus, his 
conduct did not constitute evident unfitness for service.

IMMORAL CONDUCT

11.

A preponderance of the evidence did not establish that respondent’s conduct
constituted immoral conduct.  Again, while respondent may have used poor judgement in 
participating in a Facebook thread that contained other questionable comments, for the 
reasons discussed above, his decision to post his single comment about his belief that the 
students who were absent should have been in class because they were poorer performing,
was not flagrant, shameless, inconsistent with public decency, or reflective of a moral
indifference to the opinions of others.

12.

Similarly, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that respondent’s

comments to Mr. Lewis and Mr. Castillo, and employing a nickname for a student
constituted immoral conduct.8 Again, the two race-related comments in particular 
constituted a lack of sound judgment and were unprofessional.  However, as previously
noted, in consideration of an absence of malice or invidious intent, the comments were not
flagrant, shameless, inconsistent with public decency, or reflective of a moral indifference to 
the opinions of others, and that is what must be proven to sustain a charge of immoral 
conduct.

Conclusion

13.

Given the diverse and multicultural population of any school district, and the 

unique position a teacher holds, it is important for teachers to be cognizant of the impact 
their personal speech outside the classroom may have on the population they serve.  With 
respect to social media, teachers need to use discretion and good judgment should they
decide to engage in social media interactions. The same principle applies to interactions with 
students.  While respondent has been praised for his teaching style and ability to develop a 
rapport with his students, such interaction is not without boundaries, and it requires measured 
judgment to ensure all students are afforded respect and dignity. The Commission does not 
condone respondent’s conduct and trusts that respondent will consider the effect his conduct
and statements had on his students.

The choice the district gave the Commission was to dismiss respondent from his 

employment or dismiss the charges entirely. There was no room to choose a suspension or 
other remedial measure. Given the turmoil in the immediate aftermath of the Facebook 
posts, the district’s position of electing to terminate all certificated staff involved is 
understandable. However, like most firestorms, this one came in with fury and passed 
quietly.  The district concluded that students and administrators have lost confidence in 
respondent’s ability to teach at RHS.  However, RHS students may be more resilient and 

8 Clearly, showing full-length films in class and leaving the class unattended for a 

brief period while he used the restroom are not immoral conduct.

27

capable of reconciliation than the district gives them credit for.  The academic environment 
brings students and teachers together from a variety of personal, professional, and political 
backgrounds.  Inevitably, students will have classes with teachers who may disagree with 
them personally, politically, and professionally.  The classroom environment can be a 
microcosm of society as a whole, and part of the educational experience is to learn how to 
deal with those who express views that may be contrary to one’s own. Reconciliation can 
have positive educational benefits and lead to greater empathy among all involved.

Ultimately, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish that respondent’s
conduct was either immoral or rendered him evidently unfit to serve, such that cause does not 
exist to dismiss respondent from his employment with the district pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) or (a)(6).

ORDER

Allen Umbarger’s appeal is granted. Jurupa Unified School District’s request to 
dismiss Allen Umbarger is denied. The Statement of Charges against Allen Umbarger is
dismissed.

DATED:

December 27, 2017

DATED:

December 22, 2017

DATED:

December 27, 2017

oe  DocuSigned  by: 
Af 

if 
Lhe  is 

___________________________
ADAM L. BERG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

yooe  DocuSigned  by: 

Susan,  VA.  Mutou 

 
,
s
e
r
r
r
r
e
e
r
o
—
—

_______________________________________
SUSAN V. NEWTON
Commission Member

oon  DocuSigned  by: 

Salt  Kideards,  Av.

___________________________________
SCOTT RICHARDS, JR.
Commission Member

28

