BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
SAN  DIEGO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Proceeding  to  Dismiss: 

JEROME  SHERMAN, 

OAH  No.  2018070008 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  San 
Diego,  California  on  October  16,  2018.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the  following 
members:  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  Debra  D.  Nye-Perkins,  Briana  Raphael,  and 
Michal-Lynn  O’Kelley. 

Kari  D.  Sullivan,  Counsel,  represented  San  Diego  Unified  School  District. 

No  appearance  was  made  on  behalf  of  respondent. 

On  October  16,  2018,  the  Commission  met  to  deliberate  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

CASE  SUMMARY 

Mr.  Sherman  has  been  employed  by  the  San  Diego  Union  School  District  (the  district) 

since  2002,  most  recently  at  Morse  High  School  as  a  physical  education  teacher.  On  June  1, 
2016,  Mr.  Sherman’s  teaching  credential  expired.  On  August  20,  2016,  the  district  placed  Mr. 
Sherman  on  unpaid  leave  after  he  failed  to  provide  the  district  with  a  valid  teaching  credential 
despite  multiple  requests  for  its  production.  The  Commission  found  that  Mr.  Sherman’s 
actions  constituted  persistent  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  by  the  state  board  or  school  district.  Based  upon  the  evidence 
presented,  the  Commission  concluded  that  the  allegations  were  sustained  and  warranted  Mr. 
Sherman’s  dismissal  from  the  district.

Jurisdictional  Matters 

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

1. 

Mr.  Sherman  was  employed  by  the  district  beginning  in  the  2002-03  school 

year  as  a  probationary  I,  full-time  teacher.  Records  from  the  California  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing  (CCTC)  show  that  Mr.  Sherman  first  received  his  preliminary  single 
subject  teaching  credential  authorizing  him  to  teach  the  subject  of  physical  education  in 
grades  12  and  below  on  October  1,  2004,  and  that  it  expired  on  November  1,  2009.  On 
November  1,  2009,  Mr.  Sherman  was  again  issued  a  preliminary  single  subject  teaching 
credential  for  physical  education,  which  expired  on  November  1,  2010.  On  November  1, 
2010,  he  was  again  issued  a  preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential  for  physical 
education,  which  expired  on  November  1,  2011.  On  November  8,  2011,  Mr.  Sherman  was 
again  issued  a  preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential  for  physical  education,  which 
expired  on  December  1,  2012.  On  May  20,  2013,  Mr.  Sherman  was  again  issued  a 
preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential  for  physical  education,  which  expired  on  June 
1,  2014.  On  June  1,  2014,  he  was  again  issued  a  preliminary  single  subject  teaching 
credential  for  physical  education,  which  expired  on  June  1,  2015.  Finally,  on  June  1,  2015, 
Mr.  Sherman  was  again  issued  a  preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential  for  physical 
education,  which  expired  on  June  1,  2016.  On  December  8,  2016,  Mr.  Sherman  was  issued 
an  emergency  30-day  substitute  teaching  permit,  which  expired  on  January  1,  2018. 

2. 

On  August  20,  2016,  Mr.  Sherman  was  placed  on  administrative  leave  without 

pay  from  his  position  at  the  district  for  failing  to  provide  a  valid  teaching  credential  for  his 
position. 

3. 

Acacia  Thede,  the  district’s  Executive  Director  of  Human  Resources,  signed 

the  Notice  of  Charges  on  May  15,  2018,  in  her  official  capacity.  The  notice  set  forth  the 
facts  and  laws  on  which  the  district  was  relying  and  sought  to  immediately  dismiss  Mr. 
Sherman  from  employment  with  the  district  on  the  grounds  of  persistent  violation  or  refusal 
to  obey  regulations  and  district  polices  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(8))  for  his  persistent 
refusal  to  provide  proof  of  a  valid  teaching  credential  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44857. 

4. 

Mr.  Sherman  timely  appealed  the  dismissal  action  on  June  15,  2018, 

contesting  the  charges.  On  June  15,  2018,  Mr.  Sherman  also  updated  his  address  with  the 
district’s  computer  database  self-service  portal  where  Mr.  Sherman’s  contact  information, 
payroll  and  benefits  information  is  stored  to  reflect  his  new  address.  On  August  8,  2018,  the 
Trial  Setting  Order  and  Notice  of  Hearing  for  this  matter  setting  the  date  of  hearing  for 
October  16,  2018,  at  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  in  San  Diego,  was  properly 
served  on  Mr.  Sherman  at  his  new  address  of  record  as  reflected  in  the  district’s  database, 
which  he  updated  on  the  same  date  he  executed  his  request  for  hearing.  Accordingly,  the 
notice  of  hearing  for  this  matter  was  properly  served  on  Mr.  Sherman.

5. 

On  October  16,  2018,  this  matter  was  called  for  hearing  and  no  appearance 

was  made  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Sherman.  This  hearing  followed. 

Testimony  of Acacia  Thede  and  District  Communications  with  Mr.  Sherman 

6. 

Acacia  Thede  is  currently  employed  at  the  district  as  the  Executive  Director  of 

Human  Resources.  Her  duties  include  oversight  of  all  personnel  matters  for  the  district, 
including  hiring,  evaluation,  and  dismissal  of  employees.  Ms.  Thede  is  also  responsible  for 
ensuring  that  all  teachers  in  the  district  have  the  required  valid  teaching  credentials,  which 
must  be  appropriate  for  the  teacher’s  school  and  the  subject  matter  they  teach. 

7. 

Ms.  Thede  explained  that  in  the  process  of  monitoring  all  teachers  in  the 

district  to  ensure  that  they  have  a  valid  teaching  credential  for  the  subject  they  teach,  the 
Human  Resources  department  for  the  district  receives  information  directly  from  the  CCTC 
when  a  teacher’s  credential  1s  about  to  expire,  usually  in  the  form  of  an  email.  Additionally, 
the  Human  Resources  department  monitors  this  information  independently.  She  further 
explained  that  the  district  provides  support  to  help  teachers  obtain  a  clear  valid  teaching 
credential,  by  assisting  them  with  paperwork  to  apply  for  the  credential,  by  recommending 
local  programs  necessary  for  the  teacher  to  obtain  the  credential,  and  by  sending  multiple 
reminders  to  teachers  to  inform  them  that  their  credential  is  about  to  expire.  Ms.  Thede 
stated  that  the  district  checks  on  the  status  of  a  teacher’s  credentials  by  accessing  the 
information  from  the  CCTC’s  secure  website  by  using  the  teacher’s  social  security  number 
and  birthdate. 

8. 

On  June  7,  2016,  the  district  sent  a  letter  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Sherman  to  the 

CCTC  requesting  a  one-year  extension  of  his  preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential. 
The  letter  provided  a  summary  of  the  progress  Mr.  Sherman  had  made  toward  clearing  his 
credential  and  set  forth  what  requirements  remained  for  him  in  this  regard.  Ms.  Thede 
explained  that  this  letter  is  an  example  of  the  ways  in  which  the  district  assists  1ts  teachers  to 
make  sure  they  have  the  required  valid  teaching  credential  necessary  to  maintain 
employment  with  the  district.  On  August  18,  2016,  the  district  received  a  letter  from  CCTC 
regarding  Mr.  Sherman’s  request,  which  provided: 

You  were  advised  in  writing  last  year  with  your  previous 
extension  that  it  was  your  last  and  final  extension  and  no 
additional  would  be  issued  under  any  circumstances.  Below  is 
a  copy  of  what  was  sent  to  you. 

“This  is  the  absolute  final  extension  that  will  be  issued  on  your 
Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential!  No  additional 
extensions  will  be  issued  for  any  reason,  including  medical 
reasons.  You  are  not  eligible  for  a  two-year  extension  because 
you  completed  your  teacher  preparation  program  outside  of 
California  (the  two-year  extension  is  only  available  to  California 
prepared  teachers).”

9. 

Ms.  Thede  testified  that  teachers  with  preliminary  teaching  credentials 

typically  have  up  to  five  years  to  clear  the  credential.  She  stated  that  Mr.  Sherman  never  met 
the  requirements  to  clear  his  teaching  credential  with  CCTC. 

10. 

On  August  29,  2016,  the  district  sent  a  letter  to  Mr.  Sherman  notifying  him 

that  effective  Tuesday,  August  30,  2016,  he  was  placed  on  an  unpaid  administrative  leave  of 
absence  from  his  assignment  as  a  physical  education  teacher  until  he  clears  his  credential. 
The  letter  provided  that  he  “will  need  to  provide  evidence  of  [his]  credential  clearing  to  the 
Human  Resources  Department  in  order  to  return  to  work.” 

11. 

On  February  20,  2018,  the  district  sent  a  letter  to  Mr.  Sherman  by  certified 

mail  wherein  the  district  wrote: 

12. 

On  March  8,  2018,  the  district  again  sent  a  letter  to  Mr.  Sherman  by  certified 

mail  wherein  the  district  wrote: 

On  August  30,  2016,  you  were  placed  on  an  unpaid 
administrative  leave  of  absence  as  a  physical  education  teacher 
by  the  Human  Resources  Services  Division  due  to  not  having  a 
valid  California  Teaching  Credential.  You  were  to  remain  in 
this  status  until  clearing  your  credential  with  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

At  this  time  I  am  requiring  evidence  that  you  have  taken  steps 
towards  clearing  your  credential.  Please  contact  me  by  Monday, 
February  26,  2018  to  provide  the  required  documentation  or  if 
you  have  any  questions. 

On  August  30,  2016,  you  were  placed  on  an  unpaid 
administrative  leave  of  absence  as  a  physical  education  teacher 
by  the  Human  Resources  Services  Division  due  to  not  having  a 
valid  California  Teaching  Credential.  You  were  to  remain  in 
this  status  until  clearing  your  credential  with  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

On  February  20,  2018  I  mailed  you  a  certified  letter  requesting 
evidence  that  you  have  taken  steps  towards  clearing  your 
credential. 

To  date  I  have  not  been  contacted  by  you.  As  a  result,  I  will  be 
proceeding  with  a  recommendation  to  terminate  your 
employment. 

13. 

Ms.  Thede  testified  that  despite  these  letters  and  multiple  requests,  Mr. 

Sherman  never  provided  any  evidence  that  he  had  taken  steps  to  obtain  or  clear  his  teaching

credential.  On  July  2,  2018,  the  district  sent  an  email  to  the  CCTC  requesting  information 
regarding  the  credentialing  history,  status  and  renewal  information  for  Mr.  Sherman’s 
teaching  credentials  in  California.  On  July  20,  2018,  the  CCTC  sent  a  letter  with  attachments 
to  the  district  wherein  Mr.  Sherman’s  complete  credentialing  history  and  status  was 
provided.  The  letter  from  the  CCTC  further  provided  in  part: 

The  highlighted  item  shows  the  last  issuance  of  his  preliminary 
credential,  a  one-year  extension  by  appeal,  which  expired 
06/01/2016.  You  will  note  that  he  has  had  a  30-Day  Emergency 
Substitute  Permit  issued  since  that  time  that  would  authorized 
[sic]  him  to  serve  in  the  capacity  as  a  day  to  day  substitute 
teacher  but  that  document  also  has  now  expired  (01/01/2018). 

14. 

Ms.  Thede  also  testified  that  the  district  last  checked  the  CCTC  secure 

database  to  obtain  the  status  of  Mr.  Sherman’s  teaching  credentials  the  week  prior  to  this 
hearing.  At  that  time  the  CCTC  database  showed  that  Mr.  Sherman’s  teaching  credentials 
were  in  the  same  status  as  that  shown  on  the  July  20,  2018,  letter  from  the  CCTC. 

15. 

Ms.  Thede  stated  that  based  on  the  information  she  received  from  the  CCTC  in 

the  July  20,  2018,  letter,  as  well  as  the  information  obtained  from  the  CCTC  secure  website, 
Mr.  Sherman  does  not  have  a  valid  teaching  credential  to  perform  his  job  as  a  physical 
education  teacher  at  the  district’s  Morse  High  School.  Also,  Mr.  Sherman  has  failed  to 
respond  to  multiple  requests  by  the  district  to  provide  evidence  of  a  valid  teaching  credential 
in  California  to  perform  his  job  as  a  physical  education  teacher.  Accordingly,  the  district 
began  termination  proceedings  to  terminate  his  employment  with  the  district  as  a  physical 
education  teacher. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections  Regarding  Dismissal  Actions 

1. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44934  and  44944.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 

permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (a)(8)  authorizes  dismissal  for  persistent  violation  or 
refusal  to  obey  regulations  and  district  polices. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing.  It  also  sets 
forth  the  process  for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
and  the  Commission’s  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  district’s  governing 

board  must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent  employee.

5. 

Education  Code  section  44857  provides: 

Each  person  employed  by  the  governing  board  of  a  school 
district  for  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall, 
not  later  than  60  days  after  the  date  fixed  by  the  governing 
board  of  the  district  for  the  commencement  of  the  person’s 
service,  register,  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  Section  44330,  a 
valid  certification  document  issued  on  or  before  that  date, 
authorizing  the  person  to  serve  in  the  position  for  which  he  or 
she  was  employed,  and  shall,  not  later  than  60  days  after  the 
renewal  thereof,  register  the  renewed  certification  document  in 
the  manner  prescribed  by  Section  44330.  If  any  person  so 
employed  1s  the  holder  of  a  California  State  University,  or  state 
teachers  college,  diploma  accompanied  by  the  certificate  of  the 
State  Board  of  Education,  or  of  an  educational  or  life  diploma  of 
this  state,  and  has  presented  the  diploma  to,  and  has  had  his  or 
her  name  recorded  by,  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  of 
the  county,  the  person  shall  be  deemed  to  have  registered  the 
diploma  under  Section  44330. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44330  provides: 

Except  where  such  service  is  provided  by  a  school  district 
pursuant  to  Section  44332.5,  each  county  or  city  and  county 
board  of  education  may  provide  for  the  registration  of  any  valid 
certification  or  other  document  authorizing  the  holder  thereof  to 
serve  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  as  an 
employee  of  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  of  such 
county  or  city  and  county  or  of  a  school  district  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  such  county  superintendent  of  schools.  Such 
registration  shall  authorize  the  service  of  the  holder  as  an 
employee  of  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  or  of  any 
school  district  under  his  jurisdiction  in  the  capacity  in  which  and 
for  the  period  of  time  for  which  the  certification  or  other 
document  is  valid. 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

7. 

The  “burden  of  proof’  means  the  obligation  of  a  party  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  district 
has  the  burden  of  proof  to  establish  cause  to  dismiss  its  employee. 

8. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d

1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Relevant  Judicial  Authority 

9. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.'  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the 
district  must  further  establish  that  the  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 
“persistent,”  1.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.)  Isolated 
incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally 
considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.) 

10. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Education  Codes  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  pertains  to 
unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that 
a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it 
is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  (/d.  at 
p.  84.) 

.  stubborn;  persevering  .. 

. 

Morrison  Factors 

11. 

=  In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  to  consider 

when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity; 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

12. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When a 

camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which 
one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the 

  

'  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.

offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

13. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  476.) 

Other  Disciplinary  Considerations 

14. 

Anadmunistrator’s  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 

educator’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered. 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal.App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

15. 

|The  Commission  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee  even  if 
grounds  for  discipline  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d 
209.) 

Evaluation  of the  Charges 

16. 

|  The  evidence  demonstrates  that  Mr.  Sherman’s  preliminary  single  subject 

teaching  credential  authorizing  him  to  teach  physical  education  most  recently  expired  on  June  1, 
2016.  While  Mr.  Sherman  held  an  emergency  30-day  substitute  teacher  permit  from  December 
8,  2016,  to  January  1,  2018,  there  is  no  evidence  he  currently  has  any  valid  teaching  credential 
from  California.  Furthermore,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Mr.  Sherman  ever  provided  any 
evidence  of  a  valid  teaching  credential  to  the  district  despite  multiple  requests  by  the  district  that 
he  do  so.  Mr.  Sherman  was  first  issued  his  preliminary  single  subject  teaching  credential  on 
October  1,  2004,  and  was  given  many  years  in  which  he  could  clear  that  preliminary  credential. 
However,  he  failed  to  do  so,  and  the  final  expiration  of  that  preliminary  single  subject  teaching 
credential  occurred  on  June  1,  2016.  Accordingly,  the  evidence  demonstrates  that  Mr.  Sherman 
has  persistently  refused  to  follow  the  state’s  and  district’s  requirement  that  he  have  a  valid 
teaching  credential  in  the  subject  he  teaches,  namely  physical  education,  and  that  he  provide 
that  teaching  credential  to  the  district.  Mr.  Sherman’s  refusal  to  do  so  is  cause  for  his  dismissal. 

Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss  Mr.  Sherman 

17. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Mr.  Sherman  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  because  the  evidence  established  that  Mr.  Sherman  persistently 
violated  district  polices,  regulations  and  school  directives  by  failing  to  provide  a  valid 
teaching  credential  to  teach  physical  education  despite  multiple  requests  by  the  district. 

//

ORDER 

Mr.  Sherman’s  appeal  of  his  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  San  Diego  Unified 

School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  Mr.  Sherman  is  granted.  Mr. 
Sherman  shall  be  dismissed  from  the  district. 

DATED:  January  22,  2019   

DATED:  January  22,  2019   

DATED:  January  22,  2019 

  

DocuSigned  by: 

BRIANNA  RAPHAEL 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Micheal  lyn  B'eelley 

MICHAL-LYNN  O’KELLEY 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Dubva,  Mye—Purkins 

  

F2-h-P) 
TOAUVOUCOUZDUUDEGSZU... 

EA5.P 

 

DEBRA  D.  NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

