BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
NUVIEW  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Proceeding  to  Dismiss: 

JOSHUA  CAMPBELL, 

OAH  No.  2018010560 

  

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Nuevo, 

California,  on  May  29,  2018,  through  June  1,  2018,  and  on  June  4,  2018,  through  June  6,  2018. 
The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the  following  members:  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ) 
Debra  D.  Nye-Perkins,  Ryan  Gallego,  and  Steve  Sparkman. 

Dean  T.  Adams,  Attorney  at  Law,  Adams,  Silva  &  McNally,  LLP,  represented 

Nuview  Union  School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  Smith,  Steiner,  Vanderpool  &  Wax,  APC, 

represented  respondent,  Joshua  Campbell,  who  was  present  during  the  hearing. 

On  June  22,  2018,  the  Commission  met  to  deliberate  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

CONFIDENTIALITY 

The  names  and  images  of  all  minor  students  referred  to  in  this  matter  are  confidential. 

Several  witnesses  who  testified  were  also  minor  students.  The  documents  received  as  evidence 
in  this  matter  that  contain  the  name  of  a  student  have  been  redacted  to  remove  the  student’s 
name.  No  court  reporter  or  transcription  service  shall  transcribe  the  names  of  the  student 
witnesses  or  student  names  mentioned  in  testimony,  but  shall  instead  refer  to  each  student  by 
that  student’s  first  and  last  initials. 

CASE  SUMMARY 

Mr.  Campbell  was  employed  by  the  district  for  almost  four  years  at  Nuview  Bridge 

Early  College  High  School  (“the  Bridge”)  where  he  taught  Government  and  Economics 
beginning  in  the  2014-15  school  year.  During  the  time  he  worked  at  the  Bridge,  Mr.  Campbell

was  also  a  softball  and  baseball  coach,  and  an  advisor  for  on  multiple  clubs,  including  the  Black 
Student  Union  and  Solar  Cup.  On  September  28,  2017,  during  a  lecture  in  his  class,  Mr. 
Campbell  used  inappropriate,  divisive,  racially  motivated  language  when  he  lectured  his 
students  about  his  opinions  on  highly-sensitive  racial  and  social  issues  unrelated  to  the  district’s 
curriculum.  His  lecture  on  that  day  was  recorded  by  a  student  without  the  district’s  knowledge 
and  disseminated  among  students  at  the  Bridge.  During  the  investigation,  the  district 
discovered  Mr.  Campbell  had  engaged  in  similar  behavior  since  the  2014-15  school  year.  Mr. 
Campbell’s  conduct  was  harmful  to  many  students  and  created  a  divisive  environment  at  the 
Bridge.  The  Commission  found  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  actions  constituted  evident  unfitness  for 
service  and  immoral  conduct.  The  Commission  did  not  find  that  Mr.  Campbell  actions 
constituted  persistent  violations  or  refusals  to  obey  regulations  and  district  policies.  Based 
upon  the  evidence  presented,  the  Commission  concluded  that  the  allegations  that  were 
sustained  warranted  Mr.  Campbell’s  dismissal  from  the  district. 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

1. 

Mr.  Campbell  was  employed  by  the  Nuview  Union  School  District  as  a  high 

school  teacher  in  the  subjects  of  Government  and  Economics  beginning  in  August  2014. 
During  the  time  of  the  alleged  incidents,  he  worked  at  the  Bridge. 

2. 

On  December  19,  2018,  Mr.  Campbell  was  suspended  without  pay  from  his 

position  at  the  district. 

3. 

John  Huber,  the  district’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources, 

signed  the  Notice  of  Charges  on  December  19,  2017,  in  his  official  capacity.  The  notice  set 
forth  the  facts  and  laws  on  which  the  district  was  relying  and  sought  to  immediately  dismiss 
Mr.  Campbell  from  employment  with  the  district  on  the  grounds  of  immoral  conduct 
(Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Education 
Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)),  and  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey 
regulations  and  district  polices  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)). 

4. 

In  the  Notice  of  Charges,  the  district  alleged  that  in  February  2015  during  his 

first  year  of  employment  at  the  Bridge,  the  district  received  a  complaint  from  a  parent 
expressing  concerns  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  “very  political”  instruction  and  his  bias  toward 
the  student  because  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  political  views.  The  district  directed  Mr.  Campbell  to 
present  all  sides  when  presenting  political  issues  to  students.  The  district  further  alleged  that 
on  August  29,  2017,  a  student’s  grandparent,  who  is  also  a  district  board  member, 
communicated  to  the  Bridge  principal  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  “very  political”  in  his 
classroom.  The  district  again  directed  Mr.  Campbell  to  communicate  in  a  neutral  fashion  in 
the  future.  The  district  further  alleged  that  on  September  28,  2017,  a  student  recorded  a 
lecture  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  and  the  recording  was  13  minutes  and  51  seconds  in 
length.  The  recording  showed  Mr.  Campbell  using  volatile,  racially  motivated  language  of

his  opinions  on  highly-sensitive  racial  and  social  issues,  including  kneeling  during  the 
national  anthem,  oppression  of  African-Americans,  the  role  and  responsibility  of  “white 
people”  in  “failing”  African-American  communities,  and  racial  profiling.  The  district 
alleged  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  created  substantially  negative  effects  on  the  school  and 
the  Bridge  students  and  his  conduct  constituted  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  and  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  or  district  policies. 

5. 

Mr.  Campbell  timely  appealed  the  dismissal  action,  denying  that  grounds  for 

his  dismissal  from  employment  existed,  and  this  hearing  followed. 

Motions  in  Limine 

6. 

The  parties  filed  motions  in  limine  and  oppositions  thereto.  Tentative  rulings 
were  issued  on  May  24,  2018,  and  the  parties  were  allowed  to  orally  argue  their  positions  at 
the  start  of  trial.  After  listening  to  oral  arguments,  final  rulings  were  issued  consistent  with 
the  tentative  rulings. 

Mr.  Campbell’s  Background  and  District  Employment 

7. 

Prior  to  his  career  as  a  teacher,  Mr.  Campbell  worked  as  a  sales  manager  at  a 
telecommunications  company.  After  the  telecommunications  company  went  bankrupt,  Mr. 
Campbell  worked  as  a  real  estate  appraiser  and  was  licensed  as  a  real  estate  broker.  After  the 
housing  market  crash  in  2008-09,  Mr.  Campbell  began  substitute  teaching  and  returned  to 
school  at  Brandman  University,  earning  his  Social  Sciences  Single  Subject  Teaching 
Credential.  Mr.  Campbell  and  his  wife,  a  teacher  in  a  different  district,  live  in  Moreno 
Valley,  California.  Mr.  Campbell’s  first  full-time  teaching  job  was  at  the  Bridge  beginning 
in  the  2014-15  school  year  as  a  Government  and  Economics  teacher. 

8. 

During  his  time  teaching  at  the  Bridge,  Mr.  Campbell  has  also  been  the  girls’ 

softball  coach  for  the  school,  as  well  as  a  baseball  coach.  Additionally,  he  has  been  an 
advisor  to  the  Travel  Club,  Garden  Club,  and  the  Solar  Cup.'!  Mr.  Campbell  was  also  the 
faculty  leader  for  the  Black  Student  Union  for  the  Bridge. 

Mr.  Campbell’s  Employment  at  the  Bridge 

9. 

Mr.  Campbell  began  teaching  at  the  Bridge  in  August  2014.  The  Bridge  is  an 

early  college  high  school  that  has  an  early  college  grant  from  the  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates 
Foundation  as  of  about  2004.  Prior  to  having  that  grant,  about  eight  percent  of  students  from 
the  Bridge  attended  college.  Subsequent  to  the  grant,  a  large  percentage  of  students  attended 
college  and  in  2017  about  88  percent  of  students  from  the  Bridge  attended  college. 

  

'  The  Solar  Cup  is  a  joint  venture  program  with  the  Metropolitan  Water  District  where 

42  schools  in  California  compete  to  race  passenger  boats  powered  by  solar  power.  The  race 
boats  are  built  completely  by  the  students  with  the  help  of  faculty  advisors,  and  are  driven  by 
a  student.

Additionally,  approximately  60  to  70  percent  of  Bridge  students  take  college  courses  while  in 
high  school.  About  70  percent  of  students  from  the  Bridge  qualify  for  free  or  reduced  lunch 
and  72  percent  of  the  students  are  low  income.  The  racial  make-up  of  the  Bridge  is 
approximately  70  percent  Hispanic,  20  percent  Caucasian,  4  percent  African-American,  and 
6  percent  “other.”  The  Bridge  has  not  had  a  student  fight  on  campus  in  over  seven  years,  and 
has  very  little  issues  with  drugs,  and  only  a  few  issues  with  social  media.  The  culture  of  the 
Bridge  is  one  of  closeness  between  and  among  the  students  and  staff. 

10. 

=‘  In  February  2015,  Dr.  Jason  Fowler,  Principal  of  the  Bridge,  received  a 

telephone  call  from  a  parent  of  a  student  taught  by  Mr.  Campbell.  The  parent  asserted  that 
Mr.  Campbell  was  biased  and  she  was  concerned  that  her  son’s  grade  in  Mr.  Campbell’s 
class  would  suffer  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  bias.  The  student  had  an  A  grade  in  the 
class,  and  Dr.  Fowler  had  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Campbell  regarding  the  telephone  call. 
Dr.  Fowler  instructed  Mr.  Campbell  verbally  to  remain  neutral  during  his  classes  and  to 
present  both  sides  of  any  issue.  According  to  Dr.  Fowler,  Mr.  Campbell  was  conciliatory 
and  concerned  about  the  complaint.  Dr.  Fowler  did  not  document  this  verbal  conversation. 

11. 

On  August  29,  2017,  during  the  “Back-to-School  Night”  event,  Dr.  Fowler 
was  approached  by  a  district  board  member,  who  was  also  the  grandparent  of  one  of  Mr. 
Campbell’s  students.  The  board  member  informed  Dr.  Fowler  that  her  granddaughter 
thought  Mr.  Campbell  expressed  a  lot  of  “conservative  political  bias”  in  his  classroom  and 
the  granddaughter  felt  uncomfortable  in  the  class.  On  the  morning  of  August  30,  2017,  Dr. 
Fowler  saw  Mr.  Campbell  walking  in  the  door  at  the  Bridge  and  spoke  to  him  about  his 
conversation  with  the  board  member.  Dr.  Fowler  told  Mr.  Campbell  that  he  needed  to  be 
more  neutral  in  the  way  he  presents  information  to  his  students.  According  to  Dr.  Fowler, 
Mr.  Campbell  was  surprised  and  informed  Dr.  Fowler  that  he  would  change  his  practices. 
Dr.  Fowler  did  not  document  this  verbal  conversation. 

12. 

On  September  28,  2017,  during  his  fifth  period  Government  class  and  after 
observing  some  students  discussing  the  issue  of  NFL  players  kneeling  during  the  National 
Anthem,  Mr.  Campbell  gave  a  lecture  to  his  students,  a  portion  of  which  was  recorded  by 
one  of  the  students.  On  September  29,  2017,  David  Pyle,  District  Superintendent,  was 
informed  by  the  same  board  member  with  the  granddaughter  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  that 
Mr.  Campbell  gave  an  inappropriate  lecture  on  September  28,  2017,  and  the  lecture  was 
recorded  by  a  student.  Mr.  Pyle  asked  Dr.  Fowler  to  locate  that  recording  and  he  did.  The 
recording  is  13  minutes  and  51  seconds  in  length  and  was  received  in  evidence  in  this  matter 
along  with  a  transcript  of  the  recording.  The  relevant  portion  and  majority  of  that  recording 
transcript  is  below: 

(Beginning  of  recording) 

Respondent:  |  think  black  people  can  say  whatever  they  want  in 
this  country  right  now.  Matter  of  fact,  they  can  burn  stuff  down 
and  get  away  with  it. 
(Students  Talking)

. 

. 

it. 

I'd  like 

I  think  we’re 

Respondent:  But  if  I  even  say  like,  “Hey  . 
wrong;  I  don’t  think  black  people  are  oppressed”,  I’m  gonna  get 
in  trouble.  I’m  gonna  be  scor-,  I’m  gonna  be  the  scourge  of 
CNN.  I’m  gonna  be  shamed  into  silence.  Think  about  that  for  a 
second.  They’re  protesting  to  have  a  conversation  we  can’t 
have,  because  freedom  of  speech  is  dead.  We  can’t  even  have 
the  conversation  they’re  protesting  to  have.  So  instead,  we’re 
arguing  about  the  flag.  Think  about  that  for  a  second.  So  ’m 
gonna  challenge  you  right  now  and  go  have  that  conversation 
with  yourself,  and  prove  to  me  that  black  people  are  oppressed. 
I  would  like,  I  would  like  to  see  some  proof  that  black  people  in 
America  are  oppressed.  And  if  you  can  show  me  that  white 
people  are  doing  it,  ’'d  be  even  happier.  Let’s  take  on  that 
challenge?  ...  OK?  This  is  what  I'd  like  you  to  do. 
you  to  find  every  major  city,  every  table  gets  one,  that  has 
predominantly  black  people  in 
Unidentified  student:  Chicago  (laughter) 
Unknown:  Who  got  Chicago? 
(Students  talking,  laughing) 
Unidentified  Student:  L.A. 
Respondent:  L.A.  is  probably  more  Hispanic. 
Unidentified  Student:  Detroit 
(i...  (9 
Respondent:  I’m  going  to  throw  out  a  theory,  and  I  don’t  want 
to  say  this  without  proof,  ok?  I  don’t  want  to  make  an 
assumption  that’s  not  true,  but  this  is  my  assumption,  and  I  want 
you  guys  to  prove  it.  This  is  my  assumption.  I  think  Detroit.  . 
. 
parts  of  Michigan,  Flint...  uh,  Cleveland,  Baltimore,  Atlanta.  I 
think  these  cities  are  mostly  African-American.  I  think  the 
mayor  is  African-American.  I  think  the  city  council  is  African- 
American.  I  think  most  of  the  teachers  in  their  schools  are 
African-American.  Ok?  I  think  we  have  African-American 
communities,  that  are  led  by  African-Americans,  that  have  had 
an  African-American  president  for  the  last  eight  years.  And 
somehow,  it  is  still  white  people’s  fault  that  their  communities 
are  having  a  hard  time.  Somehow,  somehow  even  though 
there’s  no  white  people  in  these  communities,  the  oppression  1s 
happening  from  white  people.  Now  I  don’t  know  why  that  is, 
but  I  can  answer  you  this:  Does  anybody  wanna  move  to  one  of 
those  neighborhoods? 
Unidentified  student:  No 
[..  -  (9 
Respondent:  This  is  what  I’m  saying.  In  order  for  a 
community  to  thrive...  people  have  to  want  to  live  there.  In 
order  for  an  economy  to  succeed,  people  have  to  want  to  start

So,  is  a  white  person  gonna  be  very 

businesses  there. 
comfortable  in  the  worst  part  of  Detroit?  Is  a  white  person 
going  to  mortgage  their  house  and  take  the  money  that  they’ve 
saved  their  whole  life  and  go  start  a  business  in  that 
neighborhood? 
Unidentified  student:  No 
Respondent:  No.  We’re  not.  And  it’s  not  because  of  racism; 
it’s  because  it’s  dangerous.  And  it’s  dangerous  for  our  children, 
and  it’s  financially  risky  to  start  a  business  where,  if  somebody 
comes  and  robs  you,  and  then  leaves,  and  the  police  shoot  that 
person,  they’re  gonna  come  and  burn  your  store.  Which  is  what 
happened,  with  Michael.  Let’s  not  forget  his  name.  That’s 
what  happened.  He  went  and  robbed a  store,  left,  the  police  shot 
him,  justified  or  not,  you  make  the  call,  they  rioted  and  went  and 
burned  down  the  guy’s  store.  Now  I’m  not  gonna  take  my  life 
savings  and  start  a  business  in  a  neighborhood  where  that’s 
gonna  happen.  Not  gonna  happen.  And  if  I  won’t  start  my 
business,  and  nobody  else  will  start  my  business,  how  is  a 
neighborhood  gonna  become  more  successful?  How’s  it  gonna 
happen?  Where  are  the  jobs  gonna  come  from?  Where  is  the 
house  appreciation  gonna  take  place  when  nobody  wants  to  live 
there?  And  if  your  house  doesn’t  appreciate  and  you  don’t  build 
equity  over  a  lifetime,  how  are  you  gonna  start  a  business  or 
how  are  you  gonna  have  a  decent  retirement?  You’re  not.  You 
have  to  increase  the  value  of  your  own  community,  and  you 
.  feel  safe  to  live 
have  to  draw  people  in  and  make  them  safe . 
there.  Otherwise  your  community  fails. 
I  live  in  MoVal,  ok?  I 
think  the  breakdown  is  about  50-50.  Probably  40  %  black,  40% 
hispanic,  20%  white...  . 
very  well  at  getting  along.  Ido.  When I  drive  around,  I’m 
gonna  tell  you,  I  don’t  see  any  oppressed  black  people.  I  see 
black  people  in  Escalades,  convertible  Camaros.  I  see  them 
going  to  Moreno  Valley  college.  I  see  “em  going  to  Rancho.  | 
see  successful  people.  My  neighbors,  3,000  square  foot  houses. 
They  have  boats.  They  have  cars.  They’re  successful.  They  go 
to  school  with  white  kids.  And  Hispanic  kids.  With  white 
teachers  and  Hispanic  teachers.  So  wait  a  second.  In  schools 
where’s  there  only  black  teachers  that  black  people 
(unintelligible),  they’re  failing.  But  in  neighborhoods  where 
they’re  (unintelligible)  schools  with  white  teachers  and  Hispanic 
teachers,  and  they  live  with  white  people  and  Hispanic  people, 
they’re  doing  great.  That’s  not  following  the  whole  oppression 
thing  very  well.  Because  apparently  when  they  live  with  us  and 
participate  with  us  in  communities,  everybody  gets  lifted  up. 
That  make  sense?  But  when  they’re  on  their  own,  segregated,

I  think  as  a  community,  MoVal  does 

. 

willingly  or  unwilling,  the  neighborhoods  are  failing.  Why  is 
that?  White  people’s  fault?  The  Hispanic  people’s  fault?  You 
gotta  decide  for  yourself.  But  the  part  that  makes  me  mad,  is, 
nobody  wants  to  have  that  conversation  because  nobody  feels 
safe  having  that  conversation.  And  that’s  not  what  this  country 
is  about.  If  you  don’t  feel  safe  having  a  conversation,  then  your 
freedom  of  speech  is  dead.  And  if  you  can’t  have  a 
conversation,  you  can’t  solve  the  problem.  So  don’t  kneel  down 
during  my  ...  star  spangled  banner,  and  claim  freedom  of 
speech,  when  you  won’t  even  have  the  conversation  without 
calling  me  aracist.  That’s  my  philosophy  on  it.  And  this  is  not 
over.  The  NFL  has,  you  know,  they  ...  Green  Bay  has  already 
said  they  want  all  the  fans  to  unite  and  lock  their  arms,  and  the 
protest  goes  on.  And  it’s  gonna  get  worse.  And  it’s  gonna  be  in 
the  news.  And  it  can  keep  protesting  it  all  you  want.  But  who’s 
gonna  have  the  conversation?  Who’s  gonna  open  that  ball? 
Who’s  gonna  be  the  guy  brave  enough  to  say,  “Alright.  Let’s 
talk  about  it.  Are  black  people  oppressed?  Let’s  prove  it.” 
Because  all  I  see  right  now  is  people  saying,  “We’re  oppressed, 
but  we  don’t  wanna  talk  about  it  or  look  at  statistics,  or  find  out 
why.  We  just  want  you  to  throw  money  at  our  communities. 
Give  us  money.”  Money  doesn’t  solve  problems.  Period.  It 
doesn’t.  When  you’re  doing  your  research,  I  want  you  to  find 
out  how  much  money  is  being  given  to  those  schools.  Because 
you  know  what?  They’re  all  Title  Ix.  Which  means  they  get 
more  money.  They  get  more  money  than  us.  Every  single  one 
of  them.  Title  LX.  So  it’s  not  amoney  problem.  What’s  the 
problem?  ... 
white  people  don’t  wanna  work  in  those  schools.  Because  it’s 
not  safe.  You  guys  are  the  generation  who  have  to  answer  these 
questions.  You  are  the  next  generation.  And  you  can’t  be  afraid 
to  be  politically  incorrect,  and  face  things  head  on.  What  is  the 
problem?  Anybody  know?  Anybody  want  to  proffer  a 
suggestion?  Is  it  racism?  Are  black  people  failing  because 
white  people  are  racist?  You  can  say  it. 
Unidentified  student:  I  feel  like  that  black  people  are 
themselves,  right  row,  a  (unintelligible)  that  guy’s  not 
protesting,  not  focusing  on  the  certain  communities 
.  So  the,  1s  it  Black  Matters  (unintelligible) 
(unintelligible)  .. 
need  to  focus  on  their  own  communities  and  (unintelligible) 
people  might  listen  to  ‘em. 
[..  -  (9 
Respondent:  Nah,  I  mean  the...  problem  is  definitely  violent 
crime  in  black  neighborhoods.  That  is  a  huge  problem.  If  you 
look  at,  statistically  ...  who  here,  I,  ’'m  gonna  say,  I  personally

It’s  not  white  people  not  teaching  them.  Because 

believe  that  black  people  are  treated  worse  than  white  people  by 
police  officers.  I’m  just  gonna  say  that.  I’m  gonna  throw  it  out 
there.  Ok?  I  think  black  people,  on  whole,  are  treated  worse 
than  white  people  by  police  officers.  But  I,  I  think  there’s  a 
reason  for  it.  And  I  don’t  think  that  reason  is  racism.  Ok?  If 
you're  a  police  officer,  and  you  know  that  the  highest  crime 
rates  are  in  black  neighborhoods,  and  you  get  your  belt  on  every 
day,  and  you  get  in  your  car,  and  your  job  is  to  solve  crime,  and 
you  know  that  most  crime  is  committed  in  black  neighborhoods, 
and  you’re  heading  to  a  black  neighborhood,  who  you  gonna 
pull  over? 
Unidentified  student:  Not  the  white  guy. 
Respondent:  Not  the  white  guy.  You’re  just  not.  Right? 
You’re  more,  a  white  person  is  more  likely  to  be  killed  by  a 
black  person  than  a  white  person.  That’s  what  the  statistics 
show.  A  cop  is  more  likely  to  be  killed  by  a  black  person  than  a 
white  person.  That  is  what  the  statistics  show.  If  you’re  a 
police  officer,  right?  Then  it’s  like  the  law  of  motion. 
Something  in  motion  stays  in  motion.  If  you’re  keyed  upon  on  a 
certain  race  as  a  potential  criminal,  and  a  danger  to  you,  then 
that’s  the  way  you’re  gonna  respond.  I  can  tell  you  right  now,  a 
police  officer  pulls  this  face  over,  they  are  not  scared.  There  is 
nothing  about  this  right  here  that  scares  a  police  officer.  Do  I 
look  like  a  threat?  Look  at  this  face.  Do  I  look  like  a  threat? 
Unidentified  student:  Not  even. 
Respondent:  Not  even  close.  And  when  they  pull  me  over, 
both  my  hands  are  on  the  steering  wheel.  Both  of  ‘em.  My 
window  is  rolled  down  because  it’s  tinted  before  they  get  there. 
That’s  the  first  thing  I  do  is  I  roll  my  window  down.  Sometimes 
I'll  even  roll  the  back  one  down,  so  that  they  can  walk  up  and 
look  in  my  car  and  feel  very  comfortable  that  they  got  the  first 
look.  And  then  when  they  come  up,  I’m  like  “What’s  the 
problem  sir?  How  are  you  today?”  That’s  what  I  do.  “Do  you 
need  to  see  my  driver’s  license  and  insurance?  It’s  in  the  glove 
box.  You  mind  if  I  get  it?”  And  P?’m  waiting  for  him  to  say, 
“Yeah,  that’d  be  great.”  Ok.  AndI  get  it.  And,  me?  I  don’t 
even  put  it  in  the  glove  box;  it’s  up  on  the  visor,  where  my 
garage  door  opener  is. 
there’s  no  mistaking  it.  “Here’s  the  two  pieces  of  paper  you’re 
looking  for.  I’m  gonna  get  my  wallet  now.  Here’s  my  driver’s 
license.  Thank  you  very  much.”  Back  on  the  steering  wheel. 
Unidentified  student:  Do  you  get  pulled  over  a  lot? 
Respondent:  I’ve  been,  I’ve  almost  lost  my  license.  Do  you 
know  why  I  drive  a  Honda?  Because  if  I  had  a  fast  car,  my

So  that  I  don’t  have  to  open  anything, 

.  I’m  not  a  slow  driver.  If  my  car  has 

license  would  be  gone.  .. 
power,  then  I’m  all  like  (makes  driving  noise). 
(Students  talking) 
Respondent:  This  is  the  point.  Those  guys,  I  believe  —  and 
don’t  get  me  wrong.  There’s  probably  some  police  officers  out 
there  who  are  racist,  ok?  We  took...I1...there’s  a  test  out 
there  put  on  by  Harvard,  I  gave  it  to  last  year’s  class.  We  all 
took  it,  ok?  And  it  tells  you  if  you’re  a  racist. 
(Students  talking) 
Respondent:  We'll  take  it—  we'll  take  it—  we'll  go... 
(End  of  recording) 

Testimony  of  Students  on  Behalf  of  the  District 

13. 

LS.1is  17  years  old  and  in  the  12th  grade  at  Heritage  High  School.  She 

I.S.  is  the  student  who  recorded 

attended  the  Bridge  from  her  freshman  year  up  to  half-way  through  the  12th  grade  when  she 
transferred  to  a  Heritage  High  School  in  January  2018.  I.S.  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  fifth 
period  Government  class,  as  well  as  in  his  Economics  class. 
Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  on  September  28,  2017,  by  using  her  iPhone.  I.S.  transferred  to 
Heritage  High  School  in  January  2018  in  order  to  “get  away  from  the  situation”  after 
students  at  the  Bridge  learned  she  recorded  that  lecture.  I.S.  described  what  happened  in  Mr. 
Campbell’s  class  the  day  she  recorded  his  lecture.  She  stated  that  on  September  28,  2017, 
when  she  walked  into  class,  there  were  some  students  talking  about  NFL  players  kneeling 
during  the  national  anthem.  Mr.  Campbell  told  the  students  he  wanted  to  talk  about  the  NFL 
players  kneeling.  According  to  LS.,  Mr.  Campbell  told  all  the  students  in  the  class  to  put 
away  their  mobile  phones  and  computers  because  he  “did  not  want  what  he  said  to  get  out.” 
I.S.  described  Mr.  Campbell’s  demeanor  at  the  time  as  frustrated  and  agitated  because  he  was 
pacing  and  moving  his  hands  in  the  air  to  express  himself.  LS.  testified  that  she  decided  to 
record  a  portion  of  the  class  on  her  iPhone  7  because  she  had  felt  uncomfortable  in  the  class 
before  based  on  comments  made  by  Mr.  Campbell  and  she  felt  that  he  was  going  to  say 
something  that  he  should  not  say  and  that  he  did  not  want  heard  by  others.  LS.  stated  that 
after  Mr.  Campbell  made  a  statement  that  “he  did  not  want  to  be  shamed  into  silence,”  LS. 
started  the  recording  by  hitting  the  record  button  on  the  camera  on  her  phone  and  shoving  her 
phone  into  her  binder.  Nobody  asked  I.S.  to  make  the  recording  and  she  did  not  discuss 
making  such  a  recording  with  anyone  prior  to  doing  so. 
of  the  recording  because  she  believed  Mr.  Campbell’s  views  expressed  were  racist. 

I.S.  was  concerned  about  the  content 

After  she  made  the  recording  I.S.  listened  to  the  recording  about  one  week  later,  and 
also  played  it  for  her  mother  and  grandmother.  I.S.  told  student  A.U.  she  had  recorded  the 
lecture,  and  A.U.  asked  for  a  copy  of  the  recording.  I.S.  downloaded  the  recording  using 
google  drive  and  sent  it  to  A.U.,  who  played  it  for  her  grandmother,  a  district  board  member. 
Thereafter,  Dr.  Fowler  contacted  I.S.  and  asked  for  a  copy  of  the  recording  and  I.S.  sent  the 
recording  to  Mr.  Fowler.  IS.  stated  that  she  also  provided  a  copy  of  the  recording  to  another 
student  T.B.  because  T.B.  was  going  to  attend  a  board  meeting  and  wanted  to  hear  the 
recording.  According  to  I.S.,  a  number  of  other  students  confronted  her  regarding  the

recording  and  wanted  to  hear  the  recording.  I.S.  did  not  provide  the  recording  to  those  other 
students  because  she  did  not  want  the  recording  to  “go  any  further.”  I.S.  never  uploaded  the 
recording  to  any  social  media  platform.  At  some  point  during  the  district’s  investigation  of 
Mr.  Campbell,  I.S.  was  interviewed  by  Assistant  Superintendent  Huber  with  Superintendent 
Pyle  in  the  room,  regarding  Mr.  Campbell.  According  to  I.S.,  Mr.  Fowler,  Mr.  Huber  and 
Mr.  Pyle  asked  I.S.  to  maintain  confidentiality  of  the  recording  and  thereafter  I.S.  adhered  to 
that  directive. 

I.S.  testified  that  there  were  a  number  of  occasions  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom 

when  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  made  her  uncomfortable.  Specifically,  during  a  classroom 
lecture  regarding  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  in  Charlottesville,  West  Virginia,  Mr.  Campbell 
stated  that  the  confederate  statues  were  a  part  of  history  and  should  remain  standing  as  a 
reminder  of  how  slavery  was  over.  LS.  felt  that  many  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments 
regarding  protesters  during  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  did  not  reflect  both  sides  of  the  issue. 
Additionally,  Mr.  Campbell  had  made  comments  in  class  about  abortion  and  it  was  clear  he 
had  a  strong  anti-abortion  opinion.  I.S.  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  had  once  in  class  made 
an  analogy  that  slaves  in  the  confederacy  were  treated  well,  like  people  today  treat  their 
mobile  phones.  He  further  stated  in  situations  when  the  slaves  were  loaned  out  to  others,  the 
slaves  were  not  treated  as  well  just  as  if  you  loaned  out  a  phone. 

14. 

MLE.  1s  17  years  old  and  in  the  12th  grade  at  the  Bridge,  where  she  has 

attended  for  four  years.  M.E.  had  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  teacher  in  her  12th  grade  Economics 
class  and  her  11th  grade  AVID?  class.  According  to  M.E.  Mr.  Campbell  would  frequently 
discuss  political  topics  in  those  classes.  M.E.  stated  that  she  became  very  concerned  during 
Mr.  Campbell’s  lectures  when  he  would  begin  discussing  the  topics  of  “Black  Lives  Matter” 
or  Trump  or  Obama.  She  stated  Mr.  Campbell  generally  did  not  believe  that  the  “Black 
Lives  Matter”  movement  was  justified  based  on  his  comments  and  never  presented  the  topic 
from  other  points  of  view  during  his  lectures.  M.E.  was  frequently  uncomfortable  during 
these  lectures  and  some  students  would  speak  in  class  in  support  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  position, 
but  other  students,  who  may  have  opposed  his  position,  never  spoke  up  because  they  did  not 
feel  comfortable  doing  so.  M.E.  testified  she  never  saw  students  take  a  position  contrary  to 
Mr.  Campbell  on  those  subjects  despite  the  fact  that  many  students  disagreed  with  Mr. 
Campbell. 

M.E.  is  familiar  with  the  recording  of  the  September  28,  2017,  lecture  because  she 

learned  about  it  from  T.B.,  and  she  obtained  a  copy  of  the  recording  from  I.S.  by  email  from 
1.S.’s  google  drive.  According  to  M.E.,  she  was  attempting  to  listen  to  the  recording 
obtained  by  T.B.  on  earphones  but  was  not  able  to  hear  it  well.  Accordingly,  T.B.  asked  LS. 
to  send  the  recording  to  both  T.B.  and  M.E.,  individually,  by  email,  and  she  did.  M.E. 
listened  to  the  recording  twice  at  home  after  school  that  day  so  that  she  could  hear  what  was 
said.  M.E.  stated  that  the  contents  of  the  recording  concerned  her  because  Mr.  Campbell  was 
insinuating  that  black  people  could  get  away  with  anything  and  he  was  making  it  seem  as  if 

  

?  AVID  is  a  required  course  at  the  Bridge  aimed  at  providing  additional  support  to 

students  to  encourage  them  to  attend  college. 

10

black  people  do  not  allow  others  to  have  a  voice.  She  was  upset  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  assertion 
that  black  people  are  not  oppressed  and  his  asking  the  class  to  prove  to  him  that  black  people 
are  not  oppressed  was  not  appropriate  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  subject  matter  he  was 
supposed  to  be  teaching.  M.E.  was  also  upset  by  other  portions  of  the  recording,  including 
where  Mr.  Campbell  asked  the  class  to  identify  cities  having  the  most  black  people,  his 
assumption  that  black  people  are  dangerous,  and  his  use  of  “them”  to  describe  black  people 
and  “us”  to  describe  white  people.  M.E.  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  is  too  friendly  with  the 
students  in  his  class  who  agree  with  his  political  positions,  almost  as  if  they  “were  among 
friends”  because  those  who  disagree  with  him  are  too  afraid  to  speak  up.  M.E.  observed  Mr. 
Campbell  in  class  tell  students  they  were  “too  sensitive”  if  they  expressed  an  opinion 
different  than  his. 
In  October  2017,  M.E.  wrote  a  letter  to  the  district  expressing  her 
concerns  regarding  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture.  She  stated  that  she  did  so  because  she  felt  she 
had  to  do  something  about  her  concerns.  M.E.  showed  the  letter  to  T.B.,  who  is  A frican- 
American,  prior  to  giving  it  to  Dr.  Fowler  to  provide  to  the  district  board  members.  M.E. 
wanted  to  show  the  letter  to  T.B.  because  T.B.  is  her  best  friend  and  she  wanted  to  show  T.B. 
that  she  supported  her. 

During  the  district’s  investigation  of  Mr.  Campbell,  some  students  engaged  in  a 

conversation  on  Twitter,  a  social  media  platform,  about  the  September  28,  2017,  lecture. 
M.E.  was  part  of  the  Twitter  conversation.  At  some  point,  M.E.  was  contacted  by  a  reporter 
through  Twitter  requesting  to  interview  her  regarding  the  subject  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture. 
M.E.  spoke  to  Dr.  Fowler  about  the  reporter’s  request,  Dr.  Fowler  instructed  her  not  to  meet 
with  the  reporter,  and  M.E.  did  not  do  so. 

15. 

T.B.  1s  an  18  year-old  African-American  student  in  the  12th  grade  at  the 

Bridge.  She  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  four  years.  She  first  met  Mr.  Campbell  in  her  junior 
year  because  he  was  a  chaperone  in  the  school’s  mock  trial  team  in  which  she  participated. 
T.B.  first  learned  about  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  from  friends  sometime 
during  the  week  it  was  recorded.  T.B.  asked  LS.  for  the  recording  through  Twitter  and  LS. 
sent  it  to  her  through  private  messenger  on  Twitter.  T.B.  listened  to  the  recording  about 
twice  when  she  first  received  it  so  that  she  could  understand  the  points  made  by  Mr. 
Campbell.  T.B.  said  she  was  hurt  by  the  points  Mr.  Campbell  made  during  the  lecture  and 
found  it  very  offensive.  T.B.  stated  that  because  she  is  black,  she  was  particularly  offended 
by  Mr.  Campbell’s  assertion  that  black  people  are  dangerous,  are  criminals,  and  are  not 
oppressed.  T.B.  believes  it  is  wrong  that  Mr.  Campbell  tells  his  entire  class  that  oppression 
of  black  people  is  not  real,  when  she  believes  it  is  very  real.  T.B.  was  also  upset  by  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  regarding  how  he  acts  when  getting  pulled  over  by  a  police  officer 
because  his  comments  are  a  way  of  stating  that  black  people  get  shot  by  police  when  they  are 
pulled  over  because  of  the  way  they  act  and  not  because  they  are  black.  T.B.  stated  that  Mr. 
Campbell  believes  that  black  people  are  dangerous  and  criminals  and  states  his  opinion  to  the 
class  without  allowing  discussion  on  that  assertion. 

The  week  after  she  heard  the  recording,  T.B.  wrote  a  letter  reflecting  her  feelings 

regarding  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  lecture.  T.B.  did  so  because 
she  had  heard  there  was  a  district  board  meeting  regarding  Mr.  Campbell  and  she  wanted  her 

Il

opinion  to  be  heard.  She  learned  of  the  board  meeting  from  an  Instagram  post  by  other 
students  who  supported  Mr.  Campbell  and  had  the  title  of  “Free  Campbell.”  T.B.  told  her 
theater  instructor,  Cassie  Hammond,  how  strongly  she  felt  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  and 
Ms.  Hammond  encouraged  T.B.  to  write  the  letter  to  the  board  informing  them  of  how  she 
felt.  T.B.  stated  that  there  was  a  discussion  among  students  at  the  Bridge  on  Twitter  under 
“#Free  Campbell,”  supporting  Mr.  Campbell  and  T.B.  felt  she  had  to  constantly  “defend 
herself”  because  she  is  black  and  some  students  were  telling  her  that  “black  people  like  to 
stick  to  their  own  kind.”  T.B.  stated  that  she  did  let  other  students  from  the  Theater  group 
listen  to  the  recording  the  same  week  she  received  it,  but  she  did  not  transmit  the  recording  to 
any  other  person.  T.B.  also  encouraged  three  students  to  also  write  letters  to  the  district 
board  regarding  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture. 

16. 

LR.  1is  an  18  year-old  Mexican-American  student  in  the  12th  grade  at  the 

Bridge.  She  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  four  years.  I.R.  had  Mr.  Campbell  for  a  teacher  in 
the  10th  and  11th  grades  for  AVID  class  and  also  in  the  12th  grade  in  both  Government  and 
Economics  classes.  [I.R.  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  during  the  September  28,  2017,  class 
lecture  recorded  by  I.S.  LR.  first  learned  of  the  recording  after  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed 
I.R.  testified  that  during  the 
from  the  class  and  a  substitute  teacher  was  placed  in  the  class. 
September  28,  2017,  lecture  by  Mr.  Campbell,  she  was  “bothered”  by  his  assertions  that 
black  people  are  not  oppressed  because  that  differed  from  what  she  knows  from  the  news  and 
the  experiences  of  some  of  her  friends.  I.R.  stated  that  she  did  not  feel  safe  to  express  her 
views  on  the  issues  during  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  because  “other  students  in  the  class  agreed 
with  Mr.  Campbell”  and  if  she  expressed  a  view  that  was  contrary  to  theirs,  she  “would  get 
yelled  at  and  made  fun  of”  by  other  students.  She  stated  that  students  N.C.  and  C.G.  in  that 
class  supported  Mr.  Campbell’s  views  and  she  had  witnessed  those  students  “yell  at”  and 
“make  fun  of’  other  students  who  expressed  opinions  different  than  Mr.  Campbell’s.  I.R. 
stated  that  while  N.G.  and  C.G.  were  yelling  at  and  making  fun  of  other  students,  Mr. 
Campbell  would  “let  it  happen”  and  would  not  intervene.  I.R.  stated  that  “all  we  talked 
about  in  [Mr.  Campbell’s]  classes”  were  Mr.  Campbell’s  “political  views.”  I.R.  stated  that 
Mr.  Campbell  seemed  biased  during  his  classes.  She  stated  Mr.  Campbell  made  comments 
in  class  regarding  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  in  Charlottesville,  West  Virginia,  and  told  the 
class  that  the  Confederate  monuments  have  great  historical  value  and  should  not  be  removed 
and  opined  that  the  counter-protestors  who  opposed  the  Rally  should  not  have  been  there  and 
should  leave  the  monuments  alone.  According  to  I.R.,  Mr.  Campbell  laughed  about  counter- 
protestors  getting  injured  and  IR.  thought  his  laughter  regarding  those  injuries  was 
“downright  sadistic.”  I.R.  testified  that  during  her  AVID  class  with  Mr.  Campbell,  he 
expressed  his  anti-abortion  opinions  and  did  not  present  pro-choice  viewpoints.  I.R.  also 
stated  that  on  one  occasion  she  stayed  after  class  to  discuss  the  issue  of  Mexican  drug  cartels 
with  Mr.  Campbell  and  I.R.  was  offended  because  Mr.  Campbell  opined  that  the  only  way  to 
get  rid  of  the  cartels  is  for  the  United  States  to  “conquer  Mexico”  and  make  it  part  of  the 
territory  of  the  United  States  and  “colonize”  Mexico,  but  that  Mexican  citizens  would  still 
not  be  considered  United  States  citizens.  Because  I.R.  is  Mexican-American  she  was 
particularly  offended  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments. 

12

IR.  testified  she  felt  that  Mr.  Campbell  treated  his  students  differently  and  “it  was 

always  the  baseball  and  softball  players  first  and  other  students  next.”  She  believed  that  Mr. 
Campbell  would  treat  the  baseball  and  softball  players  better  than  other  students.  In  prior 
years,  I.R.  attempted  to  be  reassigned  to  a  teacher  other  than  Mr.  Campbell  for  her  classes, 
but  was  informed  by  the  school  that  she  was  unable  to  do  so. 
her  parents  but  not  with  Mr.  Campbell.  She  did  not  feel  that  discussions  with  Mr.  Campbell 
would  be  productive,  and  she  did  not  believe  that  the  school  administration  would  believe 
her  description  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  lectures.  I.R.  said  that  her  parents  believed  her,  but 
they  do  not  speak  English  and  would  not  complain. 

I.R.  discussed  these  issues  with 

During  the  district’s  investigation  regarding  Mr.  Campbell,  I.R.  was  interviewed  on 
two  occasions,  once  by  Dr.  Fowler  and  Dr.  Pyle  in  October,  and  again  by  Mr.  Huber.  After 
Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his  classes  by  the  district,  his  Government  and  Economic 
classes  were  assigned  a  substitute  teacher.  According  to  I.R.,  the  substitute  teacher  has  a 
passion  for  teaching  and  has  provided  multiple  viewpoints  to  issues  for  the  students  to 
consider,  unlike  Mr.  Campbell. 

Testimony  of  Teachers  on  Behalf  of  the  District 

CASSANDRA  SHOTT-HAMMOND   

17. 

|  Cassandra  Shott-Hammond  is  currently  employed  as  a  drama  teacher  at  the 

district  at  both  the  middle  school  and  at  the  Bridge.  She  has  taught  at  the  Bridge  since  2006. 
She  has  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  with  emphasis  on  cross-cultural  education  from 
National  University,  and  she  has  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  Leadership  from  California 
State  East  Bay.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  has  had  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  since 
2006,  a  single  subject  English  credential  since  2008,  an  authorization  to  teach  history  in 
middle  school,  and  clearance  to  pursue  an  administration  credential. 

Ms.  Shott-Hammond  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  for  three  years  as  a  colleague  at  the 

Bridge.  She  first  learned  about  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  lecture 
on  the  day  of  the  recording  when  two  of  her  students  told  her  that  there  was  a  discussion  in 
Mr.  Campbell’s  class  that  was  recorded  by  a  student.  Later  the  same  evening,  Ms.  Shott- 
Hammond  was  contacted  by  telephone  by  a  student  who  sought  her  advice  and  informed  her 
that  there  was  a  conversation  happening  on  Twitter  among  students  about  the  recording.  The 
student  told  her  some  students  were  “going  after”  the  student  who  recorded  the  lecture,  and 
others  were  encouraging  that  student  to  post  the  recording  on  Twitter.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond 
told  the  student  that  the  other  student  should  not  post  the  recording  on  Twitter,  but  rather 
take  it  to  the  school  principal  or  superintendent.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  did  not  want  the 
recording  to  become  public,  even  though  she  had  not  yet  heard  the  recording. 

Ms.  Shott-Hammond  first  heard  the  recording  several  days  after  the  discussion  with 
her  student  about  the  Twitter  conversation.  She  stated  she  first  heard  the  recording  after  she 
finished  final  rehearsals  for  a  production  and  was  driving  one  of  her  students  home  that 
night.  She  often  drove  that  student  home  after  a  late  rehearsal  and  the  student  wanted  Ms. 

13

Shott-Hammond  to  hear  the  recording,  which  had  already  been  brought  to  the  attention  of 
school  administration.  The  student  played  the  recording  while  in  Ms.  Shott-Hammond’s  car 
on  the  drive  home.  After  hearing  the  recording,  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  was  very  concerned 
and  troubled  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  remarks,  which  she  found  to  be  racist.  She  was  also  very 
concerned  that  he  presented  his  opinions  as  facts  supported  by  statistics,  when  she  knew  that 
no  such  statistics  existed,  and  that  he  put  the  onus  on  students  to  “prove  him  wrong.”  Ms. 
Shott-Hammond  stated  that  many  of  her  students,  some  of  whom  are  African-American  and 
Hispanic,  are  very  articulate  and  knowledgeable  of  race  issues  and  had  expressed  their 
concern  to  her  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  was  also  very 
concemed  of  the  effect  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  would  have  on  the  Bridge  community  in 
light  of  the  fact  that  it  is  a  small  school  district  and  most  of  the  students  have  known  each 
other  since  grade  school.  She  believes  that  the  comments  give  some  students  with  racist 
inclinations  license  to  make  further  racists  comments  to  students  of  color.  Ms.  Shott- 
Hammond  has  lived  in  the  Nuevo  area  for  31  years  and  1s  very  aware  that  some  of  the 
population  of  the  town  harbor  white-supremacy  viewpoints,  and  she  did  not  want  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  to  cause  a  divide  of  the  community  at  the  Bridge  by  normalizing  racist 
viewpoints. 

Ms.  Shott-Hammond  testified  that  many  of  the  theater  productions  in  her  drama  class 
are  on  “heavy  topics”  and  as  a  result  she  always  has  “emotional  check-ins”  with  her  students. 
She  stated  that  on  September  28,  2017,  when  her  students  brought  the  recording  to  her 
attention,  many  of  her  students  were  very  upset  and  some  of  them  were  so  upset  they  were  in 
tears.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  testified  that  those  students  were  upset  for  several  days  after  the 
recording.  At  some  point  later,  student  T.B.  informed  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  that  other 
students  from  the  Bridge  were  trying  to  get  support  for  Mr.  Campbell  by  soliciting  signatures 
on  a  petition  and  by  encouraging  students  to  appear  at  a  district  board  meeting  on  October 
18,  2017,  to  express  support  for  Mr.  Campbell.  Student  T.B.  was  upset  by  Mr.  Campbell’s 
recording  and  asked  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  what  she  should  do.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond 
encouraged  her  to  go  to  the  October  18,  2017,  district  board  meeting.  When  T.B.  informed 
her  she  could  not  attend  but  still  wanted  to  express  her  concerns,  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  told 
T.B.  she  could  write  a  letter  to  the  board.  T.B.  later  came  to  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  with  about 
four  to  five  letters  from  herself  and  other  students  requesting  her  to  pass  the  letters  to  the 
board.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  passed  those  letters  to  Steven  Smith,  another  teacher  who  also 
had  students  approach  him  regarding  their  concerns  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  recorded  lecture, 
because  she  knew  he  was  going  to  the  board  meeting.  Ultimately,  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  did 
attend  the  October  18,  2017,  board  meeting  to  promote  the  show  her  drama  class  was 
producing.  However,  after  listening  to  a  few  people  at  the  board  meeting  speak  in  defense  of 
Mr.  Campbell,  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  felt  compelled  to  speak  on  behalf  of  her  students  who 
were  upset  by  his  lecture.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  told  the  board  at  that  meeting  that  she  has  a 
diverse  set  of  students,  many  of  whom  were  upset  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments.  She  also 
told  the  board  that  some  of  her  students  had  been  “called  out”  on  Twitter,  criticized,  and 
“treated  badly”  as  a  result  of  the  recording,  their  opinions,  or  their  race.  Some  of  her 
students  of  color  had  been  taunted  by  other  students  and  told  to  stay  with  “their  kind.”  Ms. 
Shott-Hammond  told  the  board  that  she  believed  that  some  students  felt  emboldened  to  make 
such  racist  comments  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  admitted 

14

that  she  never  observed  any  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  classes  and  he  never  said  anything  to  her  that 
would  cause  her  concern.  However,  she  was  very  concerned  by  the  content  of  that  recording 
and  the  fact  that  many  of  her  students  were  so  upset. 

STEVEN  SMITH 

18. 

Steven  Smith  is  currently  employed  at  the  Bridge  as  a  science  teacher  where 
he  has  taught  from  2007  to  2009,  and  again  from  2013  to  the  present.  He  has  a  Bachelor  of 
Science  degree  from  University  of  California  Davis,  and  a  Master’s  degree  in  Teaching  from 
Chapman  University.  He  has  held  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  in  Biology  since  2007 
and  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  in  chemistry  since  2011. 

Mr.  Smith  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  for  three  years  and  has  worked  with  him  in  the 

classroom,  as  well  as  in  extracurricular  activities,  such  as  the  Solar  Cup.  Mr.  Smith  first 
became  aware  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  by  a  student  in  Mr.  Smith’s  applied 
science  class  who  informed  him  that  on  the  recording  Mr.  Campbell  “says  some  bad  things.” 
Mr.  Smith  did  not  actually  hear  the  recording  until  sometime  prior  to  the  October  18,  2017, 
district  board  meeting  when  Mr.  Smith  learned  that  there  were  people  who  had  planned  to 
speak  in  support  of  Mr.  Campbell.  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  gave  Mr.  Smith  several  letters  from 
students  to  give  to  the  school  board  at  the  meeting.  Mr.  Smith  then  asked  Ms.  Shott- 
Hammond  about  the  recording  and  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  indicated  that  one  of  her  students 
played  the  recording  for  her.  Thereafter,  Mr.  Smith  obtained  the  recording  on  a  flash  drive 
from  that  same  student.  Mr.  Smith  listened  to  the  recording  with  another  teacher  on  campus 
and  was  disturbed  by  its  content.  The  other  teacher  was  also  appalled  by  the  recording  and 
felt  1t  was  completely  inappropriate.  Mr.  Smith  stated  that  there  was  school-wide  discussion 
at  the  Bridge  about  the  recording  and  he  would  instruct  his  students  not  to  discuss  the 
recording  because  it  was  not  fair  to  discuss  the  recording  without  Mr.  Campbell  there  to 
defend  himself.  Having  reviewed  the  recording,  Mr.  Smith  stated  he  was  very  concerned 
that  Mr.  Campbell  was  painting  all  black  people  with  a  broad  brush  and  stereotyping  black 
people  as  violent  and  not  playing  by  the  same  rules  as  others.  Mr.  Smith  believes  that  Mr. 
Campbell  was  perpetrating  racial  stereotypes  and  causing  division  within  the  community  of 
the  Bridge. 

Mr.  Smith  spoke  at  the  October  18,  2017,  board  meeting  to  the  board  about  how 

students  of  color  should  be  treated  in  a  fair  and  respectful  manner  and  the  board  should  take 
their  concerns  into  consideration  when  making  a  decision  about  Mr.  Campbell.  Mr.  Smith 
wore  a  t-shirt  to  the  board  meeting  that  had  the  words  “Brown  is  Beautiful”  on  it.  He  stated 
that  the  shirt  made  reference  to  the  Brown  v.  Board  of  Education  legal  case  and  he  wore  the 
shirt  as  a  method  of  letting  his  students  of  color  know  he  supported  them  and  considers  them 
to  be  good  people. 

Mr.  Smith  testified  that  he  had  had  previous  interactions  with  Mr.  Campbell  that 
caused  him  concern.  Specifically,  prior  to  the  November  2016  presidential  election  and 
while  Mr.  Smith  was  in  his  chemistry  class  in  a  lab,  Mr.  Campbell  came  through  his  class 
and  said  that  “when  Obama  is  gone,  people  like  us  would  be  better  off.”  Mr.  Smith  stated 

15

that  he  understood  that  by  “us”  Mr.  Campbell  meant  white,  middle-class  people.  The 
comment  made  Mr.  Smith  very  uncomfortable.  On  another  occasion,  while  not  on  school 
grounds,  Mr.  Campbell  made  a  comment  to  Mr.  Smith  in  the  context  of  a  discussion  about 
treating  drug  abuse  as  a  societal  issue.  Mr.  Campbell  commented  that  people  involved  in  the 
slave  trade  were  not  bad  people  but  simply  operating  under  the  social  norms  of  their  time. 
Mr.  Smith  stated  that  slavery  being  compared  to  drug  abuse  in  that  way  made  him 
uncomfortable. 

MICHELLE  SINGLETON 

  

19. 

Michelle  Singleton  is  currently  employed  at  the  Bridge  as  a  U.S.  History 

teacher,  as  well  as  a  Political  Science  teacher  for  the  dual  enrollment  program,  which  is  a 
program  with  San  Jacinto  Community  College.  She  has  had  a  teaching  credential  in  social 
science  since  2006.  She  was  first  hired  at  the  Bridge  in  2007  and  teaches  primarily  11th  and 
12th  grade  students.  She  has  taught  for  over  11  years.  Ms.  Singleton  described  how  she 
teaches  political  topics  with  her  students,  which  requires  scaffolding  of  the  discussion.  She 
stated  she  prepares  for  the  discussion  by  making  sure  she  first  has  a  discussion  regarding 
decorum  and  the  use  of  evidence-based  inquiry  before  delving  into  controversial  subject 
matter.  She  does  not  focus  on  emotion  or  religion,  but  rather  reference  sources  the  class  has 
already  reviewed  together  prior  to  the  discussion.  Ms.  Singleton  uses  scaffolding  by  being  a 
facilitator  and  setting  a  platform  for  the  topics  and  sources  to  make  sure  she  is  pulling 
information  from  different  perspectives  and  viewpoints.  She  will  give  the  students  an  open 
ended  question  for  them  to  discuss  on  their  own  using  the  scaffolding.  The  length  of  time  to 
set  up  the  scaffolding  depends  on  the  topic.  She  stated  that  the  first  couple  of  discussions  on 
controversial  topics  may  take  a  week  or  two  to  set  up  the  scaffolding,  but  as  the  course 
progresses  and  the  students  are  comfortable  with  the  scaffolding,  the  time  may  be  shorter. 
Because  of  the  controversial  nature  of  the  subject  matter  she  must  ensure  that  she  introduces 
multiple  perspectives  into  the  discussion  and  let  students  reach  their  own  conclusions. 

Ms.  Singleton  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  for  three  years  and  during  Mr.  Campbell’s 
first  year  working  at  the  Bridge,  Ms.  Singleton  would  lesson  plan  with  him.  She  said  there 
are  three  teachers  at  the  Bridge  who  teach  the  subjects  of  Political  Science,  Government,  and 
U.S.  History.  Ms.  Singleton  would  frequently  discuss  similar  students  each  had  with  Mr. 
Campbell,  but  in  2016  this  changed  a  bit  according  to  Ms.  Singleton.  She  testified  that  in 
2016  some  of  the  conversations  she  had  with  Mr.  Campbell  made  her  feel  uncomfortable  and 
she  started  backing  away  from  having  as  many  conversations  with  him. 

Ms.  Singleton  testified  she  1s  aware  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28, 

2017,  lecture  and  has  access  to  the  recording.  However,  she  has  never  listened  to  the 
recording  because  she  feels  a  sense  of  guilt  making  it  difficult  for  her  to  listen  to  it.  She 
stated  that  about  one  year  before  the  September  28,  2017,  lecture,  Ms.  Singleton  had  been 
told  by  some  of  her  students  about  statements  made  by  Mr.  Campbell  in  the  classroom  that 
upset  the  students.  Specifically,  some  Latino  students  told  her  that  Mr.  Campbell  was 
promoting  president  Trump’s  plan  for  a  border  wall  with  Mexico  and  the  students  felt 
intimidated  by  Mr.  Campbell.  Additionally,  Ms.  Singleton  had  two  female  students  in 

16

January  2017  after  the  national  Women’s  March  tell  her  that  Mr.  Campbell  made  comments 
in  his  class  that  the  people  who  attended  that  march  were  “baby  killers.”  Ms.  Singleton  was 
very  uncomfortable  with  these  comments  and  could  see  the  students  reporting  this  to  her 
were  upset.  Ms.  Singleton  felt  a  sense  of  guilt  when  she  heard  about  the  recording  of  Mr. 
Campbell’s  lecture  because  she  knew  students  were  uncomfortable  with  Mr.  Campbell  and 
because  she  was  on  the  hiring  committee  and  a  big  advocate  for  hiring  Mr.  Campbell  at  the 
Bridge.  She  felt  guilty  for  being  part  of  “bringing  this  into  the  classroom.”  Ms.  Singleton 
feels  that  the  comments  on  the  recording  impacted  the  environment  at  the  Bridge  in  a  very 
negative  way  and  caused  an  immediate  division  between  the  students  the  week  after  the 
recording  was  made.  She  believes  that  because  the  district  is  very  small,  the  division  and 
impact  caused  by  the  recording  “trickled  down”  to  all  grade  levels  and  also  caused  a  division 
among  the  staff  and  created  a  very  tense  and  uneasy  atmosphere.  The  division  was  between 
students  who  were  highly  offended  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  remarks  and  other  students  who 
characterized  those  students  as  “too  sensitive”  and  accused  them  of  “throwing  Mr.  Campbell 
under  the  bus.”  Ms.  Singleton  characterized  the  Bridge  as  a  very  tight-knit  school 
community,  almost  like  a  family,  and  this  type  of  division  was  unusual. 

At  the  end  of  the  2017  school  year,  school  counselors  at  the  Bridge  expressed  concern 

to  Ms.  Singleton  regarding  the  type  of  information  being  taught  in  Mr.  Campbell’s 
Government  class  and  the  sources  of  information  Mr.  Campbell  was  using  in  his  class.  Ms. 
Singleton  told  the  counselors  she  had  the  same  concerns,  and  as  a  result,  the  administration 
switched  the  schedules  of  Ms.  Singleton  and  Mr.  Campbell  so  that  she  would  teach  the 
Government  and  Economics  classes  and  Mr.  Campbell  would  teach  U.S.  Government. 
During  the  summer,  while  Ms.  Singleton  was  reviewing  the  curriculum  for  U.S.  History  class 
with  Mr.  Campbell,  he  made  some  comments  to  Ms.  Singleton  that  slavery  was  an  economic 
necessity,  there  were  benefits  to  slavery,  and  some  black  people  benefited  from  slavery.  Ms. 
Singleton  became  very  concerned  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  and  spoke  to  Principal 
Jason  Fowler  and  a  counselor  regarding  her  concerns.  Ms.  Singleton  requested  that  the  class 
assignments  be  switched  back,  and  that  is  what  happened. 

Ms.  Singleton  testified  about  numerous  instances  of  conversations  she  had  with  Mr. 

Campbell  involving  racial  topics  and  abortion,  sometimes  in  front  of  students,  that  made  her 
uncomfortable,  uneasy  and  downright  upset.  She  recalled  one  incident  that  changed  the 
course  of  her  relationship  with  Mr.  Campbell.  In  late  2017,  soon  after  the  August  2017  Unite 
the  Right  Rally  in  Charlottesville,  West  Virginia,  Ms.  Singleton  was  meeting  with  a  few  of 
her  college  class  students.  Mr.  Campbell  walked  into  her  classroom  with  the  students  present 
while  a  conversation  about  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  was  happening.  Ms.  Singleton 
expressed  her  alarm  about  the  behavior  of  white  supremacists  at  the  rally  when  Mr. 
Campbell  became  very  defensive,  loud,  and  aggressive  while  arguing  that  confederate  statue 
need  to  be  protected  as  part  of  our  history.  According  to  Ms.  Singleton,  the  event  ended  with 
Mr.  Campbell  “storming  out  of  the  room.”  Ms.  Singleton  was  rattled  by  the  event  because 
she  had  never  “been  talked  to  that  way”  by  a  colleague  and  certainly  not  in  front  of  students. 
Ms.  Singleton  had  to  remove  herself  from  the  classroom  for  a  moment  to  compose  herself 
before  going  back  in  to  complete  the  college  class.  Ms.  Singleton  stated  that  at  some  point 
later  Mr.  Campbell  came  back  and  apologized  to  her  for  the  incident.  Other  conversations 

17

Ms.  Singleton  had  with  Mr.  Campbell  regarding  birth  control  and  abortion  were  concerning 
to  Ms.  Singleton.  Specifically,  Mr.  Campbell  told  her  he  believed  that  all  young  women 
should  be  put  on  birth  control  by  mandate  because  of  how  frequently  they  trick  men  into 
getting  them  pregnant.  With  regard  to  abortion,  Mr.  Campbell  asserted  to  Ms.  Singleton  that 
the  “pro-choice  argument”  allowed  for  women  to  “have  an  abortion  up  to  the  first  year  after 
the  child  was  born.”  Ms.  Singleton  was  concerned  because  such  assertions  were  totally 
inaccurate  and  his  assertions  were  not  based  on  “factual  scientific  knowledge.” 

Ms.  Singleton  also  relayed  numerous  comments  of  a  racial  nature  from  Mr.  Campbell 

that  concerned  her.  Specifically,  in  passing  Mr.  Campbell  made  a  comment  to  her  about 
black-owned  businesses  of  bar-b-que  restaurants  near  his  home,  and  that  black  business 
owners  needed  to  be  taught  how  to  do  business  because  they  don’t  know  what  they  are 
doing.  Mr.  Campbell  made  a  comment  to  Ms.  Singleton  regarding  the  “current  refugee 
crisis”  that  “we  are  about  to  be  replaced,”  and  “we  will  be  the  minority.”  Ms.  Singleton 
understood  the  “we”  translated  to  “white  people.”  Mr.  Campbell  told  her  that  European 
imperialism  benefited  other  cultures  because  “they  would  not  be  as  far  along  if  it  had  not 
been  for  European  imperialism.”  During  a  nutrition  break,  Ms.  Singleton,  Mr.  Campbell, 
and  other  teachers,  including  a  Latino  teacher,  were  discussing  the  decision  that  teachers  can 
no  longer  use  Clorox  wipes  in  the  classroom.  Mr.  Campbell  commented  to  the  group  of 
teachers,  “Mexicans  are  bringing  in  all  this  disease  into  the  country  and  we  need  to  do  our 
due  diligence  to  make  our  classrooms  clean.”  Ms.  Singleton  noted  that  the  Latino  teacher 
was  highly  offended  by  the  comment.  A  student  told  Ms.  Singleton  that  Mr.  Campbell  told 
him  that  Trump  was  going  to  pay  people  $70  per  hour  to  build  the  border  wall  with  Mexico. 
Ms.  Singleton  confronted  Mr.  Campbell  about  what  the  student  told  her  and  Mr.  Campbell 
laughed  and  said  “that  will  get  them  behind  building  the  wall.” 

Ms.  Singleton  is  currently  running  for  office  in  the  State  Assembly  as  a  Democrat. 
She  testified  the  differences  between  her  and  Mr.  Campbell’s  political  affiliations  had  no 
effect  on  her  testimony  and  was  not  the  reason  her  classes  were  switched  with  Mr. 
Campbell’s.  Ms.  Singleton  also  admitted  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  son  is  currently  a  student  in 
her  U.S.  History  class. 

Testimony  of Administrators  on  Behalf  of  the  District 

JASON  FOWLER 

20. 

Jason  Fowler  was,  at  the  time  of  this  hearing,  the  principal  of  the  Bridge  and 

has  been  for  the  past  six  years.  Dr.  Fowler  submitted  his  resignation  effective  June  30,  2018, 
after  working  at  the  Bridge  for  14  years.  He  began  teaching  at  the  Bridge  in  the  subjects  of 
Economics,  Government,  World  History,  U.S.  History,  and  AVID  in  2004  prior  to  becoming 
Principal.  He  first  started  teaching  in  1996.  Dr.  Fowler  has  a  Doctorate  degree  in  Education 
from  Argos  University,  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  from  New  Mexico  State  University,  a 
Master’s  degree  in  Anthropology  from  New  Mexico  State  University,  and  a  Bachelor’s 
degree  in  Anthropology  from  New  Mexico  State  University.  He  received  his  teaching 
credential  in  History  in  1996  and  his  Administrative  credential  in  2017.  Dr.  Fowler 

18

described  the  Bridge  as  an  early  college  high  school.  When  the  Bridge  was  first  formed,  it 
was  created  by  teachers  who  were  tired  of  bussing  students  from  the  area  to  Perris  High 
School  and  wanted  some  program  to  keep  the  students  in  this  area.  The  school  was 
originally  formed  as  a  “bridge”  from  eighth  grade  to  high  school  for  one  year,  but  the  school 
was  so  popular  that  it  became  a  complete  high  school  with  all  four  grades.  At  some  point, 
the  Bridge  sought  and  gained  an  early  college  grant  from  the  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates 
Foundation  for  the  purpose  of  getting  the  students  prepared  for  college.  After  receiving  the 
grant,  the  school  incorporated  the  AVID  program  required  for  each  student  at  the  Bridge. 
Within  a  couple  of  years  after  the  grant  and  the  AVID  program  implementation,  the  Bridge 
saw  great  increases  in  standardized  test  scores.  Before  the  grant,  the  Bridge  had  a  college 
attendance  rate  for  students  of  only  eight  percent,  and  last  year  the  college  attendance  rate 
was  88  percent.  Dr.  Fowler  stated  that  currently  about  60  to  70  percent  of  the  students  at  the 
Bridge  are  taking  college  classes  while  in  high  school.  He  said  the  Bridge  has  an 
academically  rigorous  program  with  high  expectations  of  its  students.  As  a  result,  the  Bridge 
has  had  a  changing  impact  on  the  community  in  a  positive  way.  Dr.  Fowler  stated  that  that 
Bridge  has  a  close-knit  school  culture  where  the  students  are  connected  to  the  school.  The 
Bridge  has  not  had  a  student  fight  on  campus  in  over  seven  years,  and  has  very  little  drug 
issues  and  few  social  media  issues.  According  to  Mr.  Fowler,  approximately  70  percent  of 
the  students  at  the  Bridge  qualify  for  free  or  reduced  lunch  program.  The  school 
demographics  are  70  percent  Hispanic,  20  percent  Caucasian,  four  percent  African- 
American,  and  six  percent  “other.” 

Dr.  Fowler  explained  that  when  controversial  political  topics  arise  in  classes  at  the 

Bridge,  the  teaching  staff  1s  required  to  provide  multiple  perspectives  of  the  argument  and  to 
remain  politically  neutral  allowing  the  students  to  engage  in  critical  thinking.  While  this  has 
always  been  the  expectation  of  staff  at  the  Bridge,  in  early  December  2016,  school 
administration  released  a  directive  to  the  staff  of  the  Bridge  regarding  this  requirement.  Dr. 
Fowler  explained  that  in  2016  after  the  presidential  election,  students  and  staff  had  strong 
feelings  on  political  issues  and  the  need  to  reinforce  the  requirement  came  to  the  forefront. 
The  directive  was  sent  to  all  teachers,  including  Mr.  Campbell,  by  email,  as  well  as  given  to 
teachers  during  a  staff  meeting  attended  by  Mr.  Campbell. 

21. 

Dr.  Fowler  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  since  August  2014  when  Mr.  Campbell 

started  working  at  the  Bridge.  Dr.  Fowler  has  been  Mr.  Campbell’s  evaluator  for  the  past 
few  years  and  also  worked  with  Mr.  Campbell  with  the  Mock  Trial  team.  Dr.  Fowler 
explained  that  Mr.  Campbell  has  always  received  positive  evaluations  for  his  teaching  and 
lesson  plans.  Dr.  Fowler  observed  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  teaching  on  multiple 
occasions,  including  occasions  where  controversial  topics  were  debated.  Specifically,  Dr. 
Fowler  described  an  occasion  when  Dr.  Fowler  was  observing  Mr.  Campbell  and  Ms. 
Singleton  model  a  debate  on  a  controversial  topic  where  Mr.  Campbell  would  take  the  role  of 
devil’s  advocate  and  give  a  student  the  opposing  position  to  argue.  Dr.  Fowler  stated  that  he 
debate  was  a  good  lesson  that  was  modeled  well  with  the  students  presenting  multiple 
viewpoints  on  the  issues.  However,  during  the  2014-15  school  year,  Dr.  Fowler  did  receive  a 
complaint  from  the  parent  of  a  student  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  asserting  that  Mr.  Campbell 
was  “very  political”  and  biased,  and  she  was  concerned  her  son  would  get  a  bad  grade  as  a 

19

result  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  bias.  Dr.  Fowler  investigated  and  noted  that  the  student  had  an  A  in 
Mr.  Campbell’s  class  and  there  was  no  indication  that  the  student  was  being  targeted  in  any 
way.  Dr.  Fowler  spoke  with  Mr.  Campbell  about  the  complaint  and  the  need  to  be  more 
neutral  and  to  present  all  sides  to  all  issues  in  his  class. 
In  response,  Mr.  Campbell  was 
conciliatory  and  told  Dr.  Fowler  he  “would  work  on  that.”  At  the  beginning of  the  2017-18 
school  year  Dr.  Fowler  was  approached  by  a  district  board  member,  who  was  also  the 
grandparent  of  a  student  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class,  who  told  Dr.  Fowler  that  her 
granddaughter  was  uncomfortable  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  because  Mr.  Campbell  held 
strongly  conservative  political  views  and  there  was  a  lot  of  political  bias  in  his  class.  After 
receiving  that  complaint,  Dr.  Fowler  spoke  to  Mr.  Campbell  the  next  day  to  inform  him  of 
the  complaint  and  the  need  to  be  politically  neutral  in  his  class. 
In  response,  Mr.  Campbell 
was  surprised  and  shocked  because  he  felt  he  had  made  a  good  effort  to  be  neutral  in  class. 
After  this  complaint,  Dr.  Fowler  and  another  administrative  staff  member  made  a  point  of 
stopping  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  classes  the  next  week  on  about  six  occasions.  During  those 
visits,  neither  Dr.  Fowler  nor  the  other  administrative  staff  member  observed  anything  in  Mr. 
Campbell’s  class  that  was  of  concern  to  them. 

Dr.  Fowler  first  learned  about  the  September  28,  2017,  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s 

lecture  on  the  Monday  after  the  recording  was  made.  Superintendent  Pyle  informed  Dr. 
Fowler  of  the  recording  and  requested  that  Dr.  Fowler  obtain  the  recording.  The  next  day 
Dr.  Fowler  obtained  a  copy  of  the  recording  from  student  I.S.  who  told  Dr.  Fowler  that  she 
did  record  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  and  nobody  asked  or  told  her  to  do  so.  After  receiving  the 
recording  from  I.S.,  Dr.  Fowler  listened  to  the  recording  and  was  shocked  and  extremely 
concerned  about  the  impact  Mr.  Campbell’s  statements  had  on  his  students.  Dr.  Fowler  only 
listened  to  the  first  five  or  six  minutes  of  the  13  minute  recording  and  was  so  disturbed  that 
he  immediately  forwarded  the  recording  to  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources 
Huber.  After  forwarding  the  recording  to  Mr.  Huber,  Dr.  Fowler  finished  listening  to  the 
entire  recording.  Dr.  Fowler  testified  he  had  serious  concerns  about  the  recording  and  the 
racially  charged  statements  made  by  Mr.  Campbell,  including  derogatory  statements  towards 
blacks  with  no  supporting  evidence,  and  the  effect  those  statements  would  have  on  students. 
The  next  day,  October  4,  2017,  Dr.  Fowler  and  Mr.  Huber  met  with  Mr.  Campbell  during 
lunch  and  asked  him  about  the  events  in  his  class  on  September  28,  2017,  informed  him  there 
was  a  recording,  asked  him  to  go  home,  and  placed  him  on  administrative  leave.  On  October 
5,  2017,  Dr.  Fowler,  Mr.  Huber  and  Mr.  Pyle  pulled  14  students  who  were  in  Mr.  Campbell’s 
September  28,  2017,  class  and  interviewed  them  as  part  of  their  investigation.  Dr.  Fowler 
selected  the  students  who  were  interviewed  and  did  so  randomly  from a  roster  of  the  class. 
Dr.  Fowler  sat  in  on  most  of  the  interviews  but  did  not  ask  questions  and  Mr.  Huber  took 
notes.  Dr.  Fowler  was  concerned  about  a  number  of  comments  made  by  the  students 
interviewed.  Specifically,  those  students  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  frequently  expressed  his 
political  views  in  class  and  some  students  felt  “shutdown”  or  “uncomfortable.”  On  October 
9,  2017,  Dr.  Fowler  had  a  conversation  with  I.S.  regarding  the  need  to  refrain  from 
circulating  the  recording.  About  one  week  later,  Dr.  Fowler  was  present  at  a  meeting  with 
Mr.  Campbell,  a  union  representative,  the  president  of  the  union,  and  Mr.  Huber  and  the 
recording  was  played  for  the  first  time  for  Mr.  Campbell  to  hear.  Dr.  Fowler  did  not  speak 
during  that  meeting. 

20

About  one  week  after  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Campbell  where  the  recording  was 

played,  Dr.  Fowler  began  preparing  a  draft  of  an  investigational  report  wherein  Dr.  Fowler 
documented  his  own  conclusions  regarding  the  investigation.  Dr.  Fowler  stressed  that  the 
document  was  simply  a  draft  and  had  not  been  completed.  Dr.  Fowler  sent  a  copy  of  the 
incomplete  draft  document  to  Mr.  Huber,  who  then  informed  him  that  Mr.  Huber  would  draft 
the  official  report.  Thereafter,  Dr.  Fowler  took  no  steps  to  complete  the  document.  In  the 
draft  report  started  by  Dr.  Fowler,  he  made  his  own  recommendations  for  disciplinary  actions 
for  Mr.  Campbell,  which  consisted  of  a  letter  of  reprimand,  putting  him  on  a  plan,  and 
requiring  sensitivity  traming.  Dr.  Fowler  admitted  that  disciplinary  actions  for  the  district 
are  not  his  responsibility  and  instead  fall  under  Mr.  Huber’s  responsibilities.  Dr.  Fowler  also 
stated  that  he  no  longer  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell  should  receive  only  those  disciplinary 
consequences  he  wrote  in  his  draft  report.  He  stressed  that  at  the  time  he  proposed  those 
disciplinary  actions,  the  content  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  recording  was  not  well  known,  and  Dr. 
Fowler  believed  that  it  was  possible  to  “groom  Campbell  back  into  the  fold.”  However, 
about  three  weeks  later  after  many  students  had  heard  the  recording,  there  was  a  “huge 
division”  at  the  Bridge  and  the  effects  of  the  recording  were  “toxic.”  Dr.  Fowler  said  those 
effects  continued  for  many  weeks  and  there  was  a  change  in  the  environment  at  the  Bridge, 
including  students  refusing  to  sit  together  at  lunch,  harsh  arguments  on  social  media,  and 
division  of  staff  members.  Dr.  Fowler  received  six  anonymous  letters  from  students 
regarding  the  incident,  and  one  of  those  letters  “broke  my  heart.”  He  said  that  in  that  one 
letter  the  student  expressed  she  had a  trust  relationship  with  Mr.  Campbell  and  after  hearing 
the  recording  she  could  no  longer  trust  him  or  the  school  because  she  felt  targeted  personally. 
Additionally,  a  parent  of  a  black  student  on  the  football  team  informed  Dr.  Fowler  that  the 
student  had  been  called  a  racially  charged  derogatory  name  by  another  student,  who 
happened  to  be  one  of  the  students  in  attendance  at  Mr.  Campbell’s  recorded  lecture.  Dr. 
Fowler  investigated  the  incident,  confirmed  it  happened,  and  talked  to  the  entire  football 
team  and  coaches  about  the  incident.  The  offending  student  openly  apologized  for  the  name 
calling  afterward.  Dr.  Fowler  was  also  aware  of  a  petition  being  circulated  at  the  Bridge 
supporting  the  return  of  Mr.  Campbell.  He  stated  some  students  informed  him  they  signed 
that  petition  simply  to  repair  relationships  with  other  students,  but  did  not  actually  want  Mr. 
Campbell  to  return.  At  some  point  Dr.  Fowler  believed  that  the  culture  at  the  Bridge  was  so 
charged  by  the  conflict  that  he  changed  his  mind  regarding  what  disciplinary  action  was 
appropriate.  Specifically,  he  felt  that  releasing  Mr.  Campbell  from  his  employment  was  the 
only  action  appropriate  for  the  good  of  the  students. 

22. 

On  October  24,  2017,  Dr.  Fowler  held  an  emergency  staff  meeting  with 

teachers  to  discuss  the  students’  concerns  regarding  the  recording  and  to  address  Mr. 
Campbell’s  absence.  In  that  meeting  Dr.  Fowler  instructed  teachers  not  to  talk  about  Mr. 
Campbell  with  the  students  and  to  be  aware  of  the  divide  among  students  on  the  issue.  Dr. 
Fowler  also  addressed  the  entire  student  body  regarding  racism  in  general  at  the  homecoming 
assembly  in  order  to  get  students  “back  on  the  same  page.”  Dr.  Fowler  stressed  a  tone  of 
acceptance  and  mutual  understanding  rather  than  hateful  divisiveness. 

Dr.  Fowler’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing  and 

his  testimony  was  credible. 

21

JOHN  HUBER 

23. 

John  Huber,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  at  the  district,  has 
held  this  position  for  the  past  four  years.  Prior  to  that  position,  he  worked  for  one  year  at  the 
district  as  Chief  Personnel  Officer.  Prior  to  working  at  the  district,  Mr.  Huber  worked  for 
one  year  as  the  Director  of  Human  Resources  for  the  Hemet  Unified  School  District.  Prior  to 
that  position  he  worked  for  nine  years  at  Acacia  Middle  School  as  Principal.  Prior  to  that 
position  he  was  the  Assistant  Principal  for  the  2003-04  school  year  at  a  middle  school  in 
Westminster,  where  he  previously  taught  from  1997  to  2003.  Mr.  Huber  received  his 
teaching  credential  in  History  in  1998.  He  has  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  History  from 
California  State  University  Long  Beach,  and  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  from  California 
State  University  Fullerton.  In  addition  to  his  position  at  the  district,  Mr.  Huber  also  works  as 
an  adjunct  professor  at  Concordia  University  providing  instruction  in  teacher  credentialing 
and  education  administration  and  has  done  so  since  2007. 

Mr.  Huber  explained  that  the  district  consists  of  four  schools:  two  elementary 

schools,  one  middle  school,  and  one  high  school.  The  district  serves  approximately  2,200 
students  and  has  about  100  certified  staff  and  120  classified  staff  members.  The  student 
demographics  for  the  district  are  82  percent  of  students  qualify  for  free  or  reduced  lunch,  and 
75  percent  of  students  are  Hispanic,  13  percent  are  Caucasian,  and  the  remainder  is  a  mix  of 
various  races.  Mr.  Huber  explained  that  the  district  has  an  expectation  of  teachers  who 
engage  students  in  political  discussions.  Specifically,  the  teachers  are  required  to  use  a 
framework  to  guide  the  discussion  and  must  present  all  viewpoints  to  be  evenly  balanced. 
These  requirements  are  communicated  to  the  teachers  through  the  expectation  that  the 
teaching  standards  drive  the  instruction. 

24. 

Mr.  Huber  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  for  about  four  years  when  he  started 

working  at  the  district  in  August  2014.  He  first  learned  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s 
September  28,  2017,  lecture  on  or  about  October  3  or  4,  2017,  when  he  was  contacted  by  Mr. 
Pyle  informing  him  of  its  existence.  Mr.  Huber  received  the  recording  via  email  on  or  about 
October  4,  2017,  and  he  immediately  listened  to  it.  He  was  appalled  and  shocked  by  what  he 
heard  in  the  recording  and  the  impact  he  anticipated  it  would  have  on  students.  Specifically, 
he  said  Mr.  Campbell’s  statements  were  racist,  demeaning  to  black  people,  and  unsupported 
by  factual  data.  Mr.  Huber  was  particularly  disturbed  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  blind  assertion  that 
black  people  are  not  oppressed  and  asking  the  students  to  “prove  him  wrong.”  Mr.  Huber 
was  very  concerned  at  the  impact  Mr.  Campbell’s  statements  would  have  on  students, 
particularly  given  the  position  of  authority,  influence  and  power  teachers  have  over  students. 
Mr.  Huber  was  disturbed  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  tone  in  the  recording,  as  well  as  the  “us”  versus 
“them”  discussion  meaning  “whites”  versus  “blacks,”  which  Mr.  Huber  anticipated  would 
cause  a  divide  among  students. 

After  listening  to  the  recording  two  times,  Mr.  Huber  met  with  Mr.  Campbell  on 

October  4,  2017,  with  Dr.  Fowler  present.  At  the  beginning  of  this  meeting,  Mr.  Huber  told 
Mr.  Campbell  there  was  a  concern  about  statements  he  made  in  the  September  28,  2017, 
class  regarding  a  conversation  regarding  NFL  players  and  the  national  anthem.  Mr.  Huber 

22

asked  Mr.  Campbell  to  respond  to  the  allegation  that  Mr.  Campbell  stated  that  “black  people 
can  get  away  with  whatever  they  want  and  can  burn  stuff  down.”  In  response  to  this 
question,  Mr.  Campbell  immediately  denied  making  any  such  statement,  and  replied  that  if 
he  did  it  was  taken  out  of  context.  Mr.  Huber  then  informed  Mr.  Campbell  that  the  class  had 
been  recorded  and  the  district  was  in  the  process  of  opening  an  investigation.  According  to 
Mr.  Huber,  Mr.  Campbell  became  defensive,  seemed  worried,  and  expressed  that  he  did  not 
think  that  having  such  a  recording  “was  legal.”  Mr.  Huber  then  informed  Mr.  Campbell  he 
was  being  placed  on  administrative  leave  and  he  was  not  to  contact  any  students  during  the 
investigation.  Mr.  Huber  asked  Mr.  Campbell  about  his  lesson  plan  for  September  28,  2017, 
and  he  responded  that  he  was  “doing a  statistical  study”  but  provided  no  further  information. 
Mr.  Huber  kept  notes  of  this  meeting  with  Mr.  Campbell,  which  were  received  into  evidence. 

25. 

On  October  5,  2017,  Mr.  Huber  began  interviewing  students  from  Mr. 

Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  class  along  with  Dr.  Fowler  and  Mr.  Pyle.  Mr.  Huber 
stated  that  he  purposely  avoided  interviewing  the  granddaughter  of  the  district  board  member 
who  had  previously  complained  about  Mr.  Campbell  so  as  to  avoid  the  perception  that  she 
would  be  treated  differently  than  other  students.  Mr.  Huber  testified  that  he  interviewed 
about  13  students  and  asked  the  students  if  they  recalled  the  lecture,  if  they  had  any  concerns 
or  were  uncomfortable  in  class,  and  if  a  student  stated  that  they  either  did  not  recall  the 
lecture  or  had  no  concerns,  then  Mr.  Huber  did  not  ask  follow-up  questions.  Mr.  Huber 
stated  he  also  asked  all  students  to  maintain  confidentiality  of  the  interview  or  the  lecture  and 
not  talk  to  their  friends  about  it.  Mr.  Huber  clarified  with  the  students  that  1t  was  ok  to  talk  to 
their  parents  about  it,  and  their  parents  were  welcome  to  call  with  any  questions.  Mr.  Huber 
took  notes  during  those  interviews,  which  were  received  into  evidence.  Mr.  Huber  was 
extremely  concerned  about  some  of  the  comments  made  by  students  during  these  interviews. 
Specifically,  some  students  felt  very  uncomfortable  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  and 
also  unsafe  to  speak  out  about  it.  Other  students  supported  Mr.  Campbell,  but  Mr.  Huber 
was  also  concerned  about  those  students  because  one  student  stated  that  while  Mr.  Campbell 
is  very  opinionated  they  did  not  believe  he  was  a  racist,  but  the  same  student  would  also 
make  the  unsupported  assertion  that  black  people  were  more  dangerous  than  white  people. 

Mr.  Huber  met  again  with  Mr.  Campbell  on  October  6,  2017,  along  with  Dr.  Fowler, 
Ken  Johnson,  Mr.  Campbell’s  union  representative,  and  Laura  Dimeo,  the  union  president. 
Mr.  Huber  held  this  meeting  to  allow  Mr.  Campbell  to  respond  to  the  recording.  During  the 
Meeting  Mr.  Huber  played  the  recording  for  Mr.  Campbell  to  hear  it  and  would  stop  the 
recording  at  various  spots  to  allow  Mr.  Campbell  to  respond.  Mr.  Huber  played  the  first  15 
seconds  of  the  recording  and  stopped  it  and  asked  Mr.  Campbell  to  respond.  Mr.  Campbell 
stated  that  he  tried  to  give  the  students  a  voice  by  doing  Socratic  seminars  and  that  comments 
had  been  made  that  were  “critical  of  white  people”  and  he  wanted  to  investigate  it,  but  that 
he  “did  not  like  the  way  he  presented  it,”  and  he  “fully  recognizes  that  it  was  an 
inappropriate  tangent”  that  “lacked  factual  data.”  Mr.  Huber  asked  Mr.  Campbell  about  his 
statement  that  “black  people  are  not  oppressed”  and  Mr.  Campbell  admitted  that  his 
statement  was  not  appropriate.  Mr.  Campbell  and  his  union  representative  then  stepped  out 
of  the  room  for  a  caucus  and  returned  to  listen  to  more  of  the  recording.  According  to  Mr. 
Huber,  Mr.  Campbell’s  responses  to  questions  after  that  point  were  much  more  short.  Mr. 

23

Huber  asked  Mr.  Campbell  to  respond  to  his  statement  in  the  recording  regarding  “throwing 
money  at  the  problem,”  and  Mr.  Campbell  responded  that  he  wanted  his  students  to  look  at 
budgets.  Mr.  Huber  asked  Mr.  Campbell  if  his  comments  during  the  recording  were  tied  to 
an  instruction,  and  Mr.  Campbell  responded  that  they  were  tied  to  bias  instruction,  which  is 
in  the  teaching  standard.  According  to  Mr.  Huber,  Mr.  Campbell  acknowledged  in  the 
meeting  that  he  “made  a  mistake”  and  “should  have  shut  his  mouth  before  he  ever  opened 
it.”  Mr.  Huber  asked  Mr.  Campbell  if  he  could  see  how  his  comments  could  be  perceived  as 
racist,  and  Mr.  Campbell  responded  with  an  emphatic  tone  “absolutely.”  Mr.  Huber  testified 
that  during  this  meeting  Mr.  Campbell  never  apologized  for  his  remarks,  nor  did  he  indicate 
he  was  remorseful.  According  to  Mr.  Huber,  Mr.  Campbell  told  him  during  this  meeting 
“this  is  the  longest  14  minutes  of  my  life.”  Mr.  Huber  also  testified  that  at  no  time  during 
either  the  October  4  or  October  6  meetings  with  Mr.  Campbell  did  Mr.  Campbell  request  that 
Mr.  Huber  “secure  the  recording”  from  I.S.  or  others  to  prevent  its  dissemination. 

Mr.  Huber  stated  that  immediately  prior  to  the  October  18,  2017,  district  board 

meeting,  he  received  six  anonymous  letters  from  students  expressing  their  concerns  about 
Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture,  as  well  as  their  concerns  about  students  who  support  Mr.  Campbell, 
characterizing  those  offended  as  “being  too  sensitive”  as  a  mechanism  to  normalize  racist 
comments.  Some  of  the  letters  were  from  students  not  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class,  indicating  to 
Mr.  Huber  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  was  affecting  the  entire  school  community.  Mr. 
Huber  also  received  letters  from  students  and  parents  who  supported  Mr.  Campbell,  but  those 
letters  further  verified  the  statements  made  by  students  who  were  uncomfortable  with  Mr. 
Campbell’s  lecture  because  those  letters  also  stated  that  some  students  were  “too  sensitive” 
and  Mr.  Campbell  supported  “freedom  of  speech”  so  that  students  “could  say  whatever  they 
wanted  in  class  without  reservation,”  and  during  the  lecture  Mr.  Campbell  was  “stating  true 
facts.”  Mr.  Huber  was  very  concerned  about  those  letters  because  they  further  verified  that 
some  students  would  say  whatever  they  wanted,  including  statements  that  hurt  other  students 
without  concern. 

Mr.  Huber  testified  that  he  never  directed  Dr.  Fowler  to  create  a  report  regarding  the 

investigation  of  the  recording,  and  never  instructed  Dr.  Fowler  to  create  a  disciplinary 
recommendation  for  Mr.  Campbell.  Mr.  Huber  was  surprised  when  he  learned  that  Dr. 
Fowler  did  so.  Additionally,  Mr.  Huber  stated  he  was  the  person  in  the  district  responsible 
for  issuing  such  disciplinary  reports,  and  he  was  shocked  when  he  learned  Dr.  Fowler  had 
recommended a  lesser  discipline  than  termination.  Mr.  Huber  testified  that  ultimately  the 
district  decided  that  the  best  course  of  action  was  to  terminate  the  employment  of  Mr. 
Campbell  based  upon  the  racist  comments  he  made  in  the  classroom,  and  the  impact  those 
comments  had  on  students  and  the  Bridge  community.  Mr.  Huber  stated  that  the  ultimate 
decision  was  made  by  Superintendent  Pyle,  after  the  investigation  was  complete  and  based 
on  all  information  obtained  from  the  investigation.  Mr.  Huber  stated  that  the  district  did 
consider  lesser  forms  of  discipline  but  ultimately  determined  that  those  were  not  appropriate 
under  these  circumstances. 

Mr.  Huber  testified  that  the  district  board  met  in  closed  session  on  December  19, 
2017,  to  listen  to  the  recording  and  also  consider  the  evidence  from  the  investigation  and 

24

consider  whether  dismissal  charges  should  be  filed  against  Mr.  Campbell.  Ultimately  the 
district  board  confirmed  that  dismissal  charges  would  be  filed  and  Mr.  Campbell’s  pay  and 
benefits  were  terminated  on  December  20,  2017. 

Mr.  Huber’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  documents  introduced  at  hearing  and 

his  testimony  was  credible. 

JEFFREY  DAVID  SIMMONS 

  

26. 

—  Jeffrey  David  Simmons  1s  the  Chief  Business  Official  for  the  district  and  has 

held  that  position  since  February  2015.  Prior  to  this  position,  Mr.  Simmons  was  the 
Principal  of  the  Bridge  for  one  year,  and  prior  to  that  was  the  Assistant  Principal.  Mr. 
Simmons  has  worked  for  the  district  since  2005  when  he  was  a  teacher  at  the  middle  school, 
as  well  as  the  Assistant  Principal  of  the  middle  school.  Mr.  Simmons  has  had a  single 
subject  teaching  credential  in  math  since  2001,  and  he  first  taught  as  a  teacher  in  1999.  He 
also  holds  an  administration  credential.  Mr.  Simmons  holds  a  Master’s  degree  in 
Administration  from  National  University,  as  well  as  a  Master’s  degree  in  Cross-Cultural 
Teaching  from  National  University. 

Mr.  Simmons  described  the  Bridge  as  a  “school  of  choice”  focused  on  early  college 

education.  He  stated  that  only  about  half  of  the  students  located  in  this  district  attend  the 
Bridge.  He  characterized  it  as  an  excellent  and  safe  school  where  students  can  get  some 
college  classes  and  even  college  degrees  depending  on  how  hard  they  work. 

Mr.  Simmons  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  since  August  2014  when  Mr.  Campbell  was 
hired  at  the  Bridge,  and  has  worked  with  or  observed  Mr.  Campbell  teaching.  Mr.  Simmons 
was  also  the  Skelly  Hearing  Officer?  for  this  matter  and  his  role  was  to  either  uphold  the 
district’s  decision,  to  reverse  it,  or  to  issue  a  lesser  consequence  to  Mr.  Campbell.  He 
testified  that  the  Skelly  hearing  convened  on  December  6,  2017.  During  the  hearing  Mr. 
Campbell  presented  framework  standards  for  his  class,  which  were  from  1998  and  Mr. 
Simmons  testified  those  standards  had  been  updated  since  that  time  and  were  not  applicable 
on  September  28,  2017.  Mr.  Simmons  stated  he  reviewed  the  applicable  framework 
standards  for  that  date  and  they  required  that  the  teacher  provide  multiple  sources  for  the 
instruction  and  citation  to  those  sources  1s  required.  Mr.  Simmons  listened  to  the  recording 
of  the  lecture  after  the  hearing  and  noted  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  did  not  follow  the 
applicable  framework  standards  for  that  class.  Mr.  Simmons  also  noted  that  this  particular 
  

>In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering  disciplinary 
action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “pre-removal 
safeguards,”  including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a  copy  of  the 
charges  and  materials  upon  which  the  action  1s  based,  and  the  right  to  respond,  either  orally 
or  in  writing,  to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The  Supreme  Court’s  directive 
gave  rise  to  an  administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly  hearing,  in  which  an  employee 
has  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon  which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based. 

25

lesson  that  day  was  supposed  to  be  regarding  the  legislative  branch  of  government  and  the 
comments  on  the  recording  did  not  relate  to  that  lesson. 

Mr.  Simmons  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  also  presented  evidence  at  the  hearing  of 

efforts  he  did  to  address  his  conduct.  Specifically,  Mr.  Campbell  attended  a  total  of  1.5 
hours  of  webinars  he  attended  the  day  before  the  Skelly  hearing.  Mr.  Simmons  also  reviewed 
Mr.  Campbell’s  personnel  file  and  noted  that  Mr.  Campbell  had  great  reviews  for  setting  up 
lessons  well.  However,  those  reviews  did  not  match  what  Mr.  Simmons  heard  on  that 
recording,  which  he  characterized  as  a  one-sided  racial  rant  that  did  not  appear  to  be  part  of 
any  lesson.  Ultimately,  Mr.  Simmons  made  the  decision  after  his  review  of  all  the  evidence, 
to  uphold  the  district’s  decision  regarding  the  charges  against  Mr.  Campbell. 

Ms.  Simmons’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  the  other  evidence  introduced  at 

hearing  and  his  testimony  was  credible. 

DAVID  ROSS  PYLE   

27. 

David  Ross  Pyle  is  currently  the  Superintendent  of  the  district  and  has  held 
that  position  for  the  past  six  or  seven  years.  Dr.  Pyle  recently  completed  his  Ph.D.  degree 
from  Azusa  Pacific  University.  He  holds  both  a  teaching  credential  and  an  administrative 
credential.  Prior  to  his  current  position  he  worked  as  the  Principal  of  an  elementary  school  in 
the  district,  and  prior  to  that  he  worked  as  a  teacher  for  eight  years  in  other  districts. 

28. 

Dr.  Pyle  hired  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  teacher  in  August  2014  and  has  observed  his 

teaching  on  few  occasions.  Dr.  Pyle  never  had  any  concerns  regarding  Mr.  Campbell’s 
teaching  from  those  observations.  Dr.  Pyle  first  learned  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s 
September  28,  2017,  lecture  from  a  telephone  call  on  September  29,  2017,  from  a  district 
board  member  who  informed  him  that  her  granddaughter,  who  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class, 
informed  her  that  Mr.  Campbell  went  on  a  “racial  rant”  in  class  and  she  was  concerned  that 
there  may  be  an  audio  recording  of  the  rant  taken  by  a  student.  According  to  Dr.  Pyle  the 
district  board  member  did  not  direct  him  to  the  recording,  but  instead  Dr.  Pyle  called  Mr. 
Huber  and  passed  on  the  information  the  district  board  member  gave  him.  Dr.  Pyle  first 
heard  the  recording  the  following  week  after  Mr.  Huber  had  obtained  the  recording.  Dr.  Pyle 
stated  that  he  ultimately  obtained  the  recording  from  three  different  sources:  Mr.  Huber,  Dr. 
Fowler,  and  student  T.B.  After  receiving  the  recording,  Dr.  Pyle  listened  to  it  in  its  entirety 
and  was  appalled.  Dr.  Pyle  listened  to  the  recording  three  times  that  day  because  he  could 
not  believe  what  he  heard  and  he  was  overwhelmed  by  it  and  wanted  to  make  sure  his 
judgment  was  not  clouded.  Dr.  Pyle  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  voice  on  the  recording  was 
harsh  and  accusatory  and  not  the  tone  of  voice  you  would  have  for  a  class  lesson. 
Furthermore,  Dr.  Pyle  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  made  multiple  offensive,  unsupported 
comments  of  a  racial  nature,  which  Dr.  Pyle  characterized  as  degrading  to  black  people. 

29. 

Dr.  Pyle  also  participated  in  student  interviews  during  the  investigation  of  this 
matter.  He  was  very  concerned  about  the  statements  made  by  students.  Some  students  who 
were  uncomfortable  regarding  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  also  indicated  that  Mr.  Campbell 

26

had  made  many  similar  comments  in  the  past.  Dr.  Pyle  was  most  concerned  by  comments 
from  students  who  supported  Mr.  Campbell  and  who  were  in  the  class  at  issue  and  stated  that 
they  were  “not  concerned”  about  the  comments.  Dr.  Pyle  had  difficulty  believing  that  any 
student  could  sit  through  those  comments  and  not  be  concerned.  Dr.  Pyle  also  reviewed 
student  letters  that  mirrored  the  information  he  obtained  from  the  student  interviews. 

30. 

Dr.  Pyle  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  actions  as  recorded  on  September  28, 

2017,  directly  conflicted  with  multiple  district  policies  and  administrative  regulations. 
Specifically,  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  on  that  recording  violated  a  nondiscrimination 
policy  for  district  programs  and  activities,  professional  standards  and  code  of  ethics,  and 
nondiscrimination  and  harassment  in  the  school  environment. 

Dr.  Pyle  stated  that  he  reviewed  Dr.  Fowler’s  draft  document  where  he  made 
disciplinary  recommendations  and  conclusions  regarding  the  investigation  of  Mr.  Campbell. 
Dr.  Pyle  stated  that  Dr.  Fowler  had  no  authority  or  capacity  in  his  position  to  make  any  such 
disciplinary  recommendations  or  investigational  conclusions.  Dr.  Pyle  testified  that  he  made 
the  decision  to  recommend  to  the  district  board  that  Mr.  Campbell  be  dismissed  from  his 
position.  Dr.  Pyle  also  testified  that  he  made  efforts  to  prevent  the  disclosure  of  the 
recording,  and  he  did  so  by  instructing  Dr.  Fowler  and  others  to  inform  students  to  keep  the 
recording  confidential. 

31. 

—  Dr.  Pyle  also  testified  as  a  rebuttal  witness  in  this  matter  after  Mr.  Campbell’s 
testimony  regarding  his  membership  to  racists  or  xenophobic  groups. 
Dr.  Pyle  testified  that 
on  December  6,  2017,  after  hearing  from  Dr.  Fowler  that  Mr.  Campbell  had  posted  things  on 
his  Facebook  page  of  an  inappropriate  nature,  he  logged  onto  Facebook  under  his  daughter’s 
account.  After  doing  so,  he  looked  up  Mr.  Campbell’s  Facebook  page  and  discovered  that 
Mr.  Campbell  was  listed  as  a  member  of  a  Facebook  group  called  “We  the  People.”  Dr.  Pyle 
then  reviewed  postings  of  the  group,  which  he  characterized  as  racist  and  xenophobic  in 
nature.  Dr.  Pyle  took  screen  shots  of  those  postings  and  printed  those  documents,  which 
were  received  into  evidence.  Dr.  Pyle  testified  that  while  he  had  these  documents  and  this 
information  prior  to  the  district  board’s  closed  meeting  regarding  Mr.  Campbell,  he  never 
provided  this  information  or  those  documents  to  the  board.  * 

Ms.  Pyle’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  other  evidence  introduced  at  hearing  and  his 

testimony  was  credible. 

Expert  Testimony  on  Behalf  of  the  District 

32. 

Dr.  Jeffrey  Duncan-Andrade  is  an  Associate  Professor  of  Latina/o  Studies  and 

Equity,  Leadership  Studies,  and  Instructional  Technologies  at  San  Francisco  State 
University.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  in  Education  with  an  emphasis  in  social  and  cultural 
studies  from  the  University  of  California,  Berkley.  He  also  received  his  Master’s  degree  in 
Education  with  emphasis  in  Language  and  Literacy,  as  well  as  his  Bachelor’s  degree  in 
English  Literature  from  the  University  of  California,  Berkley.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  focused 
his  research  for  his  Ph.D.  degree  on  community  responsiveness  and  school  classroom 

27

cultures  and  climates  for  urban  youth,  which  he  testified  was  an  “outdated”  term  meant  to 
capture  “students  of  color  and  students  living  in  poverty,  but  may  not  be  in  an  urban 
context.”  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  his  Master’s  degree  program  focused  more  on  his 
classroom  practice  as  a  literature  teacher  focused  on  literacy,  whereas  his  Ph.D.  program 
focused  on  how  you  scale  the  classroom  practice  into  climate  and  culture.  Dr.  Duncan- 
Andrade  holds  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  in  English  Literature  in  California,  which 
he  has  held  since  1996. 

33. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  began  working  in  1992  as  a  substitute  public  school 

teacher  and  taught  at  Garfield  High  School  in  East  Los  Angeles  while  pursuing  his  teaching 
credential.  He  worked  there  for  three  years  teaching  English  Literature  and  coaching 
basketball.  Thereafter,  he  taught  at  Oakland  High  School  teaching  English  Literature  and 
coaching  a  number  of  different  sports.  He  taught  there  for  six  to  seven  years.  Dr.  Duncan- 
Andrade  then  finished  his  Ph.D.  degree  and  began  his  post-doctorate  fellowship  for  three 
years  at  the  University  of  California  Los  Angeles  where  he  studied  the  effectiveness  of  five 
different  teachers  in  elementary  secondary  schools  located  in  South  Central  Los  Angeles. 
Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  completed  his  post-doctorate  fellowship  in  2005  in  the  Sociology  of 
Urban  Education.  His  resulting  study  was  published,  and  he  then  went  back  to  Oakland  to 
open  a  district  high  school  in  East  Oakland.  After  spending  one  year  opening  that  high 
school,  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  then  started  teaching  Sociology  at  East  Oakland  Community 
High  School,  where  he  taught  for  seven  years.  During  that  time  he  started  a  program  called 
“East  Oakland  Step  to  College  Program.”  Thereafter,  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  was  hired  as  a 
tenured-track  professor  at  San  Francisco  State  University,  where  he  still  works.  He  also  still 
works  at  Oakland  Community  High  School.  He  stated  that  he  currently  “straddles  those  two 
worlds.”  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  has  received  a  number  of  honors  and  awards,  including  the 
White  House  Distinguished  Educator  Commendation  in  2016.  He  has  published  three  books 
including  one  titled  “Effective  Teachers  in  Urban  Schools:  The  Gangsta,  Wanksta,  Rida 
Paradigm,”  which  explores  the  teaching  and  curriculum  in  high  schools  serving  vulnerable 
students. 

34. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  testified  that  the  most  vulnerable  students  are  those  who 
sit  outside  of  the  social,  political  and  economic  center  of  society,  which  include  students  of 
color,  those  who  live  in  poverty,  girls,  and  those  with  special  needs.  He  testified  that  there  is 
a  highly  accepted  sociological  construct  called  the  “hierarchy  of  needs,”  which  is  a 
foundation  of  needs  that  must  be  met  for  a  person  to  reach  his  or  her  potential.  The  bases  of 
the  hierarchy  are  the  basic  needs  of  food,  clothing,  shelter,  and  safety.  Safety  consists  of 
both  physical  safety  and  identity  safety,  which  means  “are  you  safe  being  who  you  are” 
either  racially,  culturally,  linguistically,  gender  identity,  etc. 
then  anything  above  that  tier  is  unstable.  Above  the  first  tier  on  the  hierarchy  of  needs  is 
love  and  belonging,  in  other  words  do  you  feel  loved  and  that  you  belong.  The  third  tier  is 
self-esteem,  or  do  you  love  yourself  for  who  you  are.  The  fourth  tier  is  self-actualization. 
Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  teachers  play  a  “massive”  role  in  this  hierarchy  of  needs, 
particularly  given  the  influence  they  have  on  the  development  of  young  people  as  a  person  in 
a  position  of  authority.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  neuroscience  also  plays  a  role  in  the 
ability  of  a  student  to  reach  their  potential.  Specifically,  the  impact  of  inequality  on  the  brain 

If  the  base  tier  is  under  threat, 

28

causes  what  is  defined  as  “toxic  stress,”  which  is  defined  as  the  accumulation  of  multiple 
negative  stressors  without  the  resources  to  cope  causing  a  detrimental  effect  to  the  body.  He 
explained  that  if  your  educational  environment  interrupts  your  base  needs  on  the  hierarchy  of 
needs,  then  toxic  stress  can  result.  Toxic  stress  can  result  from  a  socially  toxic  environment 
and/or  a  racially  hostile  environment.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  it  is  well  known  that  a 
racially  hostile  environment  can  trigger  toxic  stress  in  young  people. 

35. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  testified  that  he  listened  to  the  recording  of  the 

September  28,  2017,  lecture  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  and  reviewed  the  transcript  of  that 
lecture,  as  well.  He  was  retained  by  the  district  to  opine  on  how  the  information  he  heard  on 
the  recording  may  impact  young  people  in  the  class,  as  well  as  students  at  the  Bridge  school 
at  large.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  testified  he  was  very  troubled  by  what  he  heard  on  the 
recording,  and  his  research  tells  him  that  what  he  heard  on  that  recording  will  have  a 
negative  impact  on  the  students  at  the  Bridge.  Specifically,  he  stated  that  the  first  lines  of  the 
recording  where  Mr.  Campbell  states  his  belief  that  “black  people  can  say  whatever  they 
want”  and  “burn  stuff  down  and  get  away  with  it”  is  not  only  false,  but  paints  an  entire  group 
of  people  in  a  singular  stroke  as  violent,  disruptive,  and  unchecked.  This  language  used  by  a 
teacher  creates  a  racially  hostile  environment  for  a  group  of  young  people,  who  already 
experience  a  lot  of  racial  hostility.  He  opined  that  it  also  creates  a  socially  toxic  environment 
for  those  non-black  students  who  want  to  tackle  racism  in  this  country,  as  well  as  creating  an 
entitlement  in  those  students  with  racist  sensibilities  to  feel  emboldened  and  entitled  to  do 
racist  things  inside  and  outside  of  class.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  further  opined  that  Mr. 
Campbell’s  statement  of  his  opinion  that  “black  people  are  not  oppressed”  is  not  only 
factually  inaccurate  based  upon  all  available  national  health  and  wellness  data,  but  Mr. 
Campbell  placed  the  onus  on  the  students  to  “prove  him  wrong.”  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade 
explained  that  if  Mr.  Campbell  was  going  to  reasonably  discuss  the  topic  of  racial  inequities 
with  the  class,  he  failed  to  properly  scaffold  that  discussion  as  is  required  by  all  teachers.  In 
order  to  properly  scaffold  a  debate  with  students,  a  teacher  must  first  set  up  such  a  debate 
that  would  need  to  be  connected  to  a  unit  of  study  from  the  curriculum  and  Mr.  Campbell 
would  need  to  describe  the  different  parts  of  the  debate  and  describe  the  part  he  is  going  to 
play  in  that  debate  prior  to  the  discussion.  None  of  those  steps  were  taken  and  instead  Mr. 
Campbell  simply  expressed  his  opinion  in  a  unilateral  way.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  also 
stressed  that  there  is  a  power  dynamic  in  the  classroom  and  the  teacher  has  significant  power 
in  the  class  and  is  able  to  determine  a  student’s  grade.  The  context  Mr.  Campbell  created  in 
this  class  lecture  was  one  where  if  a  student  disagreed  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  opinion,  the 
student  would  not  feel  safe  challenging  his  assertions  because  there  is  a  significant  cost  to  the 
student  for  doing  so. 

Furthermore,  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  testified  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017, 

lecture,  as  recorded,  included  multiple  instances  of  Mr.  Campbell  asserting  that  cities  and 
communities  with  a  predominately  black  population  are  dysfunctional,  and  left  to  their  own 
devices  will  destroy  themselves  because  the  population  is  black,  and  that  “white  people”  are 
blamed  for  the  destruction.  Mr.  Campbell  asserts  a  causal  relationship  that  because  a  city  has 
a  black  population  it  will  destroy  itself.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  he  is  deeply  disturbed 
by  these  statements  as  they  are  not  only  factually  inaccurate,  but  also  racist,  and  very  toxic  to 

29

the  students  in  the  class  and  to  society  as  a  whole.  He  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  asserts  that 
black  communities  are  disinvested  in  businesses  because  there  are  black  people  in  the 
community,  and  that  white  people  are  needed  to  open  businesses.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade 
stated  this  assertion  is  “historically,  egregiously  inaccurate”  and  troubling  because  the 
students  are  learning  factually  inaccurate  information  that  will  perpetuate  a  set  of  racial 
stereotypes  and  insensitivities  toxic  to  the  class  and  society.  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  also 
included  the  use  of  pronouns  such  as  “us,”  “we,”  and  “them”  implying  that  he  is  aligning 
himself  with  one  community,  namely  the  white  community,  directly  in  opposition  to  another 
community,  namely  the  black  community  that  he  paints  as  violent,  dangerous,  reactionary, 
and  a  threat  to  white  people.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  opined  that  not  only  are  Mr.  Campbell’s 
statements  racist,  but  he  is  normalizing  a  racist  conversation  and  encouraging  his  students  to 
say  racist  things.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stressed  that  for  an  educator  to  teach  that  race  is 
definitive  of  the  quality  of  a  person  is  racially  toxic  to  students  and  creates  a  very  divisive 
environment.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  also  opined  that  during  this  lecture  Mr.  Campbell 
occasionally  asks  a  question  of  the  students,  but  the  question  is  blatantly  rhetorical  because 
he  does  not  pause  for  a  response  but  instead  continues  with  his  monologue.  Also,  when 
students  try  to  come  into  the  conversation,  Mr.  Campbell  does  not  receive  them  but  continues 
with  his  lecture,  showing  that  Mr.  Campbell  is  not  interested  in  a  debate  but  simply  wants  to 
lecture. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  also  notes  that  during  the  lecture  Mr.  Campbell  makes 

assertions  including  “a  white  person  is  more  likely  to  be  killed  by  a  black  person  than  a  white 
person  .. 
.  [t|hat  is  what  the  statistics  show,”  but  in  reality  this  statement  1s  factually 
inaccurate  and  there  are  no  such  statistics.  Instead,  Mr.  Campbell  is  characterizing  his  own 
opinion  as  fact  with  an  assertion  that  data  supports  that  position,  but  he  provides  no  data. 
Furthermore,  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  regarding  how  black  people  act  when  pulled  over  by 
police  versus  how  white  people  act  is  disturbing.  Mr.  Campbell’s  subtext  is  that  when  black 
people  are  pulled  over  by  police  they  act  badly  and  if  they  acted  like  white  people  they 
would  not  get  shot,  which  fails  to  recognize  any  structural  or  individualized  racism  and 
rationalizes  the  mistreatment  of  an  entire  group  of  people  in  society.  Another  subtext  of  this 
part  of  the  lecture  is  “don’t  challenge  authority,”  but  Mr.  Campbell  then  goes  on  to  challenge 
the  students  to  debate  him  on  it,  and  no  student  would  take  that  bait  because  they  would  not 
feel  safe  to  do  so.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stressed  that  this  is  not  a  healthy  and  safe  learning 
environment  for  those  students. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  when  listening  to  the  recording,  he  notes  that  the  tone 

of  Mr.  Campbell’  voice  was  generally  not  one  that  is  inviting  of  dialogue,  critique  or 
analysis.  Instead,  the  tone  was  authoritative  and  Mr.  Campbell  did  not  set  up  the  conditions 
necessary  for  a  classroom  to  have  an  authentic  debate.  The  tone  of  the  lecture  failed  to 
acknowledge  the  teacher/student  power  dynamic.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  also  noted  that  it 
would  be  highly  unlikely  that  any  student  who  disagreed  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  opinions 
would  feel  safe  challenging  Mr.  Campbell  or  leaving  the  classroom,  but  would  instead  feel 
silenced  and  threatened.  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  stated  that  there  would  be  three  groups  of 
students  in  the  classroom:  (1)  those  students  who  agreed  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  opinions,  (2) 
those  students  who  disagreed,  and  (3)  those  students  who  were  trying  to  “figure  it  out.”  Dr. 

30

Duncan-Andrade  stated  he  1s  concerned  about  all  three  groups  of  students  because  of  the 
socially  and  racially  toxic  environment  created.  Additionally,  once  the  students  leave  the 
classroom  and  go  into  the  broader  school  environment  without  adults  present,  students  in 
group  (1)  may  feel  emboldened  to  make  racists  comments  that  they  otherwise  would  not 
have  made,  and  students  in  group  (2)  have a  stressor  that  at  any  moment  another  student  may 
make  racists  comments,  which  have  been  normalized  by  the  lecture.  Accordingly,  the  toxic 
effect  of  the  lecture  1s  not  confined  to  the  classroom. 

Dr.  Duncan-Andrade’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  other  testimony  from  students 

introduced  at  the  hearing,  he  demonstrated  a  vast  knowledge  of  the  issues  at  hand,  and  his 
testimony  was  credible. 

Testimony  of  Students  on  Behalf  of  Respondent 

36. 

During  the  hearing  11  students  testified  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Campbell  in  support 

of  his  character.  Some  of  those  students  were  in  his  September  28,  2017,  recorded  class 
lecture.  The  first  student  to  testify  was  B.L.,  a  17-year-old  current  12th  grade  student  at  the 
Bridge.  B.L.  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  the  past  four  years  and  has  had  three  classes  with 
Mr.  Campbell,  including  AVID  in  the  10th  grade  and  Economics  and  Solar  Cup  in  the  12th 
grade.  B.L  was  not  a  student  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  class  that  was 
recorded.  B.L.  testified  that  in  Economics  class  Mr.  Campbell  would  frequently  mediate 
current  event  discussions  because  students  had  “powerful  opinions.”  B.L.  testified  that  he 
put  together  a  petition  for  the  collection  of  student  signatures  in  an  effort  to  bring  back  Mr. 
Campbell  after  he  was  placed  on  administrative  leave  and  he  collected  about  120  signatures. 
B.L.  also  collected  letters  from  students  who  supported  the  return  of  Mr.  Campbell  to  the 
Bridge  and  provided  that  to  the  district  board  at  the  October  18,  2017,  meeting.  B.L.  stated 
that  he  first  heard  about  the  recording  one  week  before  the  October  18,  2017,  board  meeting 
and  had  requested  a  copy  of  the  recording  from  another  student  in  the  theater  group  and  was 
told  “no.”  B.L.  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  very  engaging  in  class,  allowed  students  to 
share  their  opinions.  B.L.  also  wrote  a  letter  on  November  17,  2017,  which  was  provided  to 
the  board  and  received  into  evidence  where  he  wrote  that  Mr.  Campbell  “made  it  very  clear 
to  all  students  that  they  can  share  and  discuss  their  opinions  and  ideas  on  many  political 
topics...  he  created  an  open  forum  where  anyone  could  share  their  opinions  about  any 
topic.”  B.L.  testified  that  he  had  since  reviewed  the  transcript  of  the  recording  at  issue  and 
he  feels  no  differently  about  Mr.  Campbell  after  his  review  and  “feels  like  what  was  said  was 
something  that  needed  to  be  said.”  B.L.  stated  that  he  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell’s 
comments  on  the  recording  were  appropriate  and  the  district  should  take  no  steps  to  limit 
such  discussions.  B.L.  testified  that  his  mother  was  friends  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  wife 
through  their  work  and  he  had  Mr.  Campbell’s  mobile  phone  number  but  never  texted  Mr. 
Campbell.  However,  on  cross-examination  B.L.  was  shown  printed  text  exchanges  he  had 
with  Mr.  Campbell  on  March  8,  2018,  and  admitted  he  had  texted  Mr.  Campbell. 

37. 

The  second  student  to  testify  was  J.L.,  a  17-year-old  student  in  the  12th  grade 
at  the  Bridge,  who  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  four  years.  J.L.  had  Mr.  Campbell  for  AVID 
class,  as  a  softball  coach,  and  for  Government.  J.L.  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  recorded 

31

September  28,  2017,  class.  She  testified  Mr.  Campbell  never  said  anything  inappropriate 
during  her  AVID  class  and  was  respectful.  J.L.  testified  that  while  she  was  in  the  September 
28,  2017,  class  she  was  working  on  other  assignments  for  other  classes,  specifically  writing 
an  essay  for  her  Communications  class,  and  was  “only  hearing  bits  and  pieces”  of  Mr. 
Campbell’s  lecture.  She  stated  that  during  the  class  Mr.  Campbell  invited  students  to  share 
differing  opinions  and  never  criticized  students  for  their  opinion.  She  did  recall  students 
being  “shouted  down”  by  other  students  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  AVID  class. 
while  in  the  September  28,  2018,  class  she  and  other  students  “took  on  the  challenge” 
presented  by  Mr.  Campbell  to  show  “proof  that  black  people  are  oppressed”  by  researching 
information  from  one  of  the  cities  listed  during  the  class. 
J.L.  stated  that  she  had  reviewed 
the  transcript  of  the  recording  and  at  some  point  listened  to  the  recording.  When  she  listened 
to  the  recording  she  was  confused  because  she  was  not  focusing  on  what  Mr.  Campbell  was 
saying  at  that  time  because  she  was  working  on  her  Communication’s  class  essay.  She  stated 
that  prior  to  the  recording  there  had  been  a  discussion  about  NFL  players  kneeling  during  the 
national  anthem  and  “someone  asked  Mr.  Campbell  his  opinion  on  it.” 
after  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his  classroom,  some  students  were  characterizing  him 
as  racist. 
J.L.  believes  that  those  students  were  “being  overly  sensitive.”  She  stated  that  the 
September  28,  2017,  lecture  was  a  typical  one  from  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom. 

J.L.  testified  that 

J.L.  testified  that 

38. 

The  third  student  to  testify  was  J.O.,  a  17-year-old  12th  grade  student  at  the 

J.O.  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  never  did  or  said 

Bridge,  who  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  three  years.  J.O.  was  a  baseball  player  coached  by 
Mr.  Campbell.  J.O.  also  had  Mr.  Campbell  as  his  AVID  teacher  his  junior  year,  as  well  as 
Government  class  his  senior  year.  J.O.  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  during  the  recorded 
September  28,  2017,  class  lecture.  He  recalled  a  discussion  in  the  class  regarding  NFL 
players  and  the  national  anthem  before  the  recording  began.  J.O.  has  also  reviewed  the 
transcript  of  the  recording  with  his  father. 
anything  in  his  junior  year  or  during  his  baseball  coaching  that  J.O.  felt  was  inappropriate. 
J.O.  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  allowed  his  students  to  express  their  views  and  “say  freely 
whatever  was  on  their  mind.”  J.O.  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  never  did  or  said  anything  that 
was  racist.  After  reviewing  the  transcript  of  the  recording  J.O.  stated  that  he  “felt  like  what 
Mr.  Campbell  was  saying  was  true”  and  J.O.  was  not  offended  by  what  Mr.  Campbell  said 
and  he  did  not  see  any  other  students  being  offended.  J.O.  stated  that  no  student  openly 
stated  that  what  Mr.  Campbell  said  was  biased  or  that  they  were  offended.  J.O.  always  felt 
safe  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  and  believes  Mr.  Campbell  was  always  neutral  and  “everyone 
got  to  express  their  feelings.”  J.O.  testified  that  when  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his 
class,  he  was  surprised,  and  he  had  heard  about  the  recording  and  the  student  who  recorded 
the  lecture.  J.O.  believes  that  the  student  who  recorded  the  lecture  “did  not  like  Mr. 
Campbell.”  J.O.  wrote  a  letter  of  support  for  Mr.  Campbell  to  provide  to  the  district  board. 
In  his  letter  J.O.  wrote  that  Mr.  Campbell  “stated  his  opinion  on  what  he  felt  was  wrong  to 
[sic]  the  United  States  .. 
.  [he]  did  not  mean  to  offend  anyone  but  just  stated  a  true  fact  in  a 
situation  in  a  certain  location.”  J.O.  testified  that  what  he  meant  by  “true  fact”  was  the 
“statistical  fact  that  there  are  certain  areas  that  have  more  crime  than  others”  and  that  “there 
are  more  crime  infested  areas  with  black  people.”  J.O.  testified  that  he  read  the  transcript 
with  his  father  and  discussed  it  with  his  father.  J.O.  stated  he  agreed  with  his  father,  who 
told  him  that  Mr.  Campbell  “was  provoked  or  baited  into  saying  what  they  wanted  to  hear.” 

32

J.O.  further  stated  that  nothing  was  unusual  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  class 
and  it  was  “like  any  other  day  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class.”  J.O.  believes  Mr.  Campbell  was 
neutral  in  his  lecture  that  day.  J.O.  further  testified  that  having  read  the  transcript  of  the 
lecture,  he  believes  that  what  Mr.  Campbell  said  was  completely  appropriate  and  J.O.  had  no 
problem  with  it. 

39. 

The  fourth  student  to  testify  was  A.C.,  a  20-year-old  African-American 

graduate  of  the  Bridge,  who  graduated  in  2016.  She  is  currently  a  college  student.  A.C.  had 
one  class  with  Mr.  Campbell  when  she  attended  the  Bridge,  an  Economics  class.  She 
testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  her  favorite  teacher  at  the  Bridge  and  if  she  needed  help  with 
her  speech  and  debate  class,  she  always  went  to  him  for  help.  A.C.  considers  Mr.  Campbell 
to  be  an  influential  person  in  her  life,  and  described  him  as  a  good  person  who  1s  passionate 
about  teaching.  A.C.  testified  that  when  she  was  his  student  at  the  Bridge,  she  did  have  class 
discussions  about  controversial  issues,  but  did  not  recall  any  specific  issue.  She  stated  he 
was  receptive  to  hearing  all  student  viewpoints  in  class  and  was  neutral.  A.C.  had  heard 
about  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  because  some  of  her  friends  have  siblings 
currently  attending  the  Bridge.  Additionally,  Mr.  Campbell  called  her  on  the  telephone  to 
explain  to  her  that  there  was  a  recording  of  his  class  that  others  deemed  to  be  racist.  A.C. 
stated  she  never  thought  Mr.  Campbell  was  racist.  A.C.  never  heard  the  recording  but  did 
review  the  transcript  of  the  recording  about  four  to  five  days  before  testifying  at  this  hearing. 
A.C.  testified  that  she  did  not  feel  the  comments  made  by  Mr.  Campbell  on  the  transcript 
were  racist  and  did  not  understand  how  someone  else  could  think  his  comments  were  racist. 
A.C.  testified  that  she  believed  the  first  few  lines  of  the  transcript  were  “true  statements.” 

40. 

The  fifth  student  to  testify  was  J.S.,  a  20-year-old  graduate  of  the  Bridge,  who 

graduated  in  2016.  She  is  currently  a  college  student.  J.S.  had  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  teacher  her 
senior  year  for  one  semester  of  Government  and  one  semester  of  Economics.  In  addition,  in 
her  senior  year  she  also  worked  as  Mr.  Campbell’s  teaching  assistant  for  his  AVID  class.  As 
a  teaching  assistant,  she  regularly  met  with  Mr.  Campbell  to  prepare  for  the  AVID  class  and 
to  prepare  lesson  plans.  J.S.  stated  that  it  was  a  regular  occurrence  in  Mr.  Campbell’s 
Government  class  to  have  current  event  discussions  on  controversial  topics.  She  testified 
that  Mr.  Campbell  always  let  the  students  express  their  feelings  in  a  safe  environment.  J.S. 
described  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  “good  guy  and  good  teacher,”  charismatic  and  friendly,  and  “as 
the  Chandler  character”  from  the  television  show  “Friends.”  She  said  he  “tried  his  hardest  to 
be  unbiased”  and  to  “hear  both  sides  of  an  issue.”  J.S.  was  provided  the  transcript  of  the 
recording  by  counsel  for  Mr.  Campbell  and  read  the  transcript  in  its  entirety.  She  stated  that 
the  transcript  did  not  change  her  mind  about  Mr.  Campbell,  and  she  could  see  how  some 
people  would  feel  his  comments  in  the  transcript  were  racist,  but  she  “does  not  share  that 
point  of  view.”  She  also  stated  that  she  would  characterize  those  people  who  see  the 
transcript  as  racist  to  be  “overly  sensitive.” 

41. 

—_  The  sixth  student  to  testify  was  P.G.,  a  17-year-old  Hispanic  student  in  the 

12th  grade  at  the  Bridge  where  he  has  attended  for  the  past  four  years.  P.G.  had  Mr. 
Campbell  for  his  AVID  class  his  junior  year  and  Government  his  senior  year.  P.G.  was  in 
the  September  28,  2017,  class  lecture  that  was  recorded.  P.G.  stated  that  during  his  time  in 

33

Mr.  Campbell’s  AVID  class,  he  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell  say  or  do  anything  that  he 
considered  inappropriate  and  he  never  used  racially  charged  language.  P.G.  had  received  the 
transcript  of  the  recording  from  Mr.  Campbell’s  counsel  and  had  read  through  it  prior  to 
testifying  at  this  hearing.  Reading  the  transcript  reminded  him  of  the  lecture  that  took  place 
in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  on  September  28,  2017.  He  said  when  class  started  there  were 
students  talking  about  the  NFL  players  kneeling  during  the  national  anthem  and  this  “sparked 
a  debate.”  P.G.  testified  that  his  reaction  to  the  class  lecture,  as  well  as  reading  the  transcript 
of  the  recording,  was  that  everything  Mr.  Campbell  said  that  day  was  appropriate,  he  found 
no  offense  to  the  statements,  and  no  other  student  expressed  that  they  were  upset  by  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments.  P.G.  stated  that  he  had  had  other  classes  at  the  Bridge,  specifically 
an  English  class,  where  he  felt  his  teacher  “pushed”  her  very  liberal  views  on  him  and  he  felt 
that  was  inappropriate.  However,  he  never  reported  his  concerns  to  the  administration  of  the 
Bridge. 

42. 

The  seventh  student  to  testify  was  C.P.,  an  18-year-old  student  in  the  12th 

C.P.  was  in  the 

C.P.  did  not  remember  having a  reaction  to 

grade  at  the  Bridge.  She  had  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  softball  coach,  as  well  as  for  AVID  class  her 
sophomore  year,  and  for  Government  and  Economics  her  senior  year. 
September  28,  2017,  class  lecture  that  was  recorded.  She  stated  that  she  was  sick  the  day  of 
the  September  28,  2017,  class  and  did  not  remember  the  lecture.  C.P.  stated  that  she 
received  a  copy  of  the  recording  of  the  lecture  from  another  student  and  she  could  be  heard 
on  the  recording  coughing  because  she  was  sick. 
Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  while  she  was  in  the  class  because  she  did  not  remember  the  lecture 
due  to  her  illness. 
C.  P.  did  review  the  transcript  of  the  recording  prior  to  her  testimony  at 
the  hearing.  She  testified  that  after  reading  the  transcript  she  was  surprised  by  some  of  its 
content,  but  not  shocked.  She  described  Mr.  Campbell  as  “trusting  and  motivational”  and 
stated  that  her  opinion  in  that  regard  did  not  change  after  reading  the  transcript.  C.P. 
believes  that  Mr.  Campbell  made  positive  contributions  to  her  education.  C.P.  testified  that 
she  was  surprised  by  some  of  the  statements  made  by  Mr.  Campbell  in  the  transcript,  such  as 
“how  bluntly”  he  said  that  “black  people  are  not  oppressed.”  She  stated  that  she  could 
understand  how  some  students  would  characterize  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  as  a  “racial 
rant”  and  she  “agrees  somewhat  with  that  characterization.”  When  she  listened  to  the 
recording,  C.P.  admitted  that  she  felt  “uneasy”  at  those  parts. 

43. 

The  eighth  student  to  testify  was  B.R.,  a  17-year-old  student  in  the  12th  grade 

at  the  Bridge.  B.R.  had  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  teacher  for  Economics  and  Government  her 
senior  year  and  was  in  the  recorded  September  28,  2017,  class.  B.R.  liked  Mr.  Campbell  as  a 
teacher  and  felt  that  he  took  the  time  to  know  and  connect  with  his  students.  B.R.  testified 
that  in  addition  to  being  in  the  class  that  day,  she  also  read  the  transcript  of  the  recording. 
She  stated  that  the  recording  was  made  toward  the  beginning  of  the  class  and  after  there  was 
a  conversation  about  NFL  players  kneeling  for  the  national  anthem.  B.R.  said  Mr.  Campbell 
expressed  his  viewpoint  that  he  found  it  disrespectful  for  someone  to  not  stand  for  the  pledge 
of  allegiance.  According  to  B.R.,  at  least  one  student  openly  disagreed  with  Mr.  Campbell’s 
viewpoint.  She  said  after  the  class  was  completed  at  least  two  students  expressed  that  they 
felt  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  were  inappropriate.  B.R.  added  that  those  two  students  are 
“disrespectful  to  teachers  and  have  their  own  opinions  and  something  to  say  about 

34

everything.”  B.R.  also  testified  that  she  was  aware  of  discussion  on  social  media  among 
students  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  recorded  lecture  and  there  was  some  “name  calling”  by 
students  and  it  was  heated.  She  also  said  that  there  were  times  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  when 
students  with  strong  opinions  would  “talk  over  each  other.”  B.R.  testified  that  having  been 
in  the  class  and  after  reading  the  transcript,  she  believes  everything  Mr.  Campbell  said  in  that 
class  was  appropriate. 

44. 

The  ninth  student  to  testify  was  M.W.,  an  18-year-old  senior  at  the  Bridge, 

who  has  attended  the  Bridge  for  four  years.  He  first  met  Mr.  Campbell  his  senior  year  when 
he  was  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  Government  class.  M.W.  was  in  the  September  28,  2017,  class 
which  was  recorded.  Additionally,  M.W.  reviewed  the  transcript  of  the  recording  the  day 
before  he  testified  at  this  hearing.  M.W.  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  a  good  teacher  who 
“always  gave  room  for  both  sides  of  an  issue”  and  allowed  students  to  express  their 
viewpoint.  M.W.  recalled  the  subject  of  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  being  discussed  in  Mr. 
Campbell’s  class  at  some  point  and  according  to  M.W.,  Mr.  Campbell  told  the  students 
“there  were  bad  people  on  both  sides  and  in  the  end  nobody  came  out  looking  good.”  M.W. 
stated  that  prior  to  Mr.  Campbell’s  removal  from  the  class,  M.W.  was  aware  that  some 
students  disagreed  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  viewpoints,  but  “nobody  seemed  uncomfortable.” 
M.W.  stated  that  before  the  recording  started  in  the  September  28,  2017,  class,  students  were 
talking  about  the  NFL  players  kneeling  for  the  national  anthem  and  Mr.  Campbell  “opened 
up  the  floor  to  people  who  wanted  to  talk.”  With  regard  to  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments 
regarding  “black  oppression,”  M.W.  stated  that  he  did  not  think  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments 
“were  eloquent”  but  the  comments  “were  not  mean  spirited.”  M.W.  clarified  that  during  that 
class  “it  was  a  comfortable  class  setting  and  everyone  said  what  they  wanted,  how  they 
wanted,  without  being  judged.”  M.W.  testified  that  he  “would  imagine  that  [Mr.  Campbell] 
would  have  said  things  differently  if  he  knew  he  would  be  judged.”  M.W.  stated  that  the 
September  28,  2017,  lecture  was  not  unusual  from  other  classes  with  Mr.  Campbell  and  the 
discussion  was  civil.  M.W.  testified  that  the  viewpoints  expressed  in  classes  at  the  Bridge 
generally  “tend  to  be  only  a  singular  viewpoint”  and  he  felt  that  Mr.  Campbell  “was 
representing  both  sides  in  the  recording  and  transcript.” 

45.  —  The  10th  student  to  testify  was  S.L.,  a  19-year-old  who  graduated  from  the 

Bridge  in  2016.  S.L.  had  Mr.  Campbell  for  Government  and  Economics  during  her  senior 
year  at  the  Bridge.  S.L.  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  had  an  impact  on  her  life,  was  her  role 
model,  and  he  took  the  time  to  know  her  as  a  student.  S.L.  stated  that  because  of  how  much 
she  liked  Mr.  Campbell’s  class,  she  decided  to  major  in  political  science  in  college.  She 
stated  Mr.  Campbell  was  professional  and  “never  expressed  his  personal  views”  on  issues 
and  solicited  multiple  perspectives.  S.L.  said  that  during  her  Government  class  with  Mr. 
Campbell,  every  Friday  the  class  would  pick  a  “hot  topic”  to  debate  with  another  class.  She 
stated  at  no  time  did  Mr.  Campbell  “cross  the  line”  during  those  debates  and  he  never 
expressed  “racial  views”  in  her  class. 
her  testimony  at  the  hearing.  She  stated  that  the  transcript  was  reflective  of  what  she 
considered  to  be  a  “standard  lecture”  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class.  She  said  Mr.  Campbell’s 
teaching  was  “from  his  heart”  and  he  “did  not  sugar  coat”  things  and  he  gave  “real  world 

S.L.  had  read  the  transcript  of  the  recording  prior  to 

35

information.”  S.L.  testified  that  after  reviewing  the  transcript,  she  saw  no  evidence  that  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  were  racist. 

46.  —  The  final  student  to  testify  was  R.Q.,  an  18-year-old  who  graduated  from  the 

Bridge  in  2017.  R.Q.  is  a  local  real  estate  investor  and  realtor  and  received  his  real  estate 
license  about  one  month  prior  to  the  hearing  in  this  matter.  He  purchased  his  first  investment 
home  on  his  18th  birthday.  R.Q.  credits  the  Bridge  for  his  success,  as  well  as  Mr.  Campbell, 
who  has  a  background  in  real  estate  and  spent  time  with  R.Q.  discussing  real  estate.  R.Q. 
first  met  Mr.  Campbell  in  the  Mock  Trial  program,  and  also  had  him  as  a  teacher  for 
Government  and  Economics  his  senior  year.  R.Q.  stated  that  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  there 
would  regularly  be  discussion  on  controversial  topics,  such  as  abortion,  and  immigration,  but 
those  topics  were  always  discussed  in  a  respectful  way.  R.Q.  stated  that  during  the 
presidential  election  it  was  common  for  teachers  at  the  Bridge,  including  Mr.  Campbell,  to 
express  their  own  views.  R.Q.  said  that  it  was  common  for  Mr.  Campbell  to  discuss  topics  of 
racism  in  class  and  “it  was  common  for  Mr.  Campbell  to  ask  the  students  to  give  their 
perspectives  so  we  could  feel  we  had  a  voice.”  R.Q.  learned  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  removal  from 
his  class  from  other  students  still  attending  the  Bridge.  In  December  2017,  R.Q.  met  with 
Dr.  Pyle  and  gave  him a  letter  written  by  R.Q.  in  support  of  Mr.  Campbell.  R.Q.  stated  he 
knows  Mr.  Campbell  is  a  “good  guy”  and  has  helped  him  and  he  wanted  to  support  Mr. 
Campbell.  R.Q.  never  heard  the  recording  but  has  read  the  transcript  of  the  recording.  He 
testified  that  the  transcript  did  not  change  his  opinions  about  Mr.  Campbell  and  the  transcript 
was  “not  out  of  the  ordinary”  for  Mr.  Campbell’s  class. 

Testimony  of  Teachers,  Administrators,  and  a  Counselor  on  Behalf  of Respondent 

SHERRY  ASBERRY 

  

A7. 

Sherry  Asberry  is  an  African-American  math  teacher  at  the  Bridge  and  has 

held  that  position  for  12  years.  She  teaches  9th,  10th  and  11th  grade  math  classes  at  the 
Bridge,  as  well  as  the  “Scholars”  class  previously  known  as  AVID.  She  has  been  a  teacher 
for  20  years  and  has  a  single  subject  math  teaching  credential,  as  well  as  a  credential  to  teach 
students  of  different  languages.  Before  teaching  at  the  Bridge,  she  taught  both  middle  school 
and  high  school  classes  at  other  school  districts. 

Ms.  Asberry  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  since  August  2014  when  he  began  teaching  at 

the  Bridge.  She  stated  he  has  been  to  her  church  on  one  occasion,  and  he  attended  a  2016 
personal  and  professional  development  program,  which  was  a  weekend  seminar  at  her 
friend’s  house,  that  Ms.  Asberry  also  attended.  Ms.  Asberry  considers  herself  to  be  Mr. 
Campbell’s  friend,  but  has  never  been  to  his  home.  She  has  never  been  in  Mr.  Campbell’s 
classroom  when  he  was  giving  a  lesson.  Ms.  Asberry  used  to  be  the  faculty  advisor  for  the 
Black  Student  Union  (BSU)  about  five  years  ago.  After  she  gave  up  that  role,  Mr.  Campbell 
became  the  faculty  advisor  for  BSU  and  she  did  have  some  discussions  with  Mr.  Campbell 
about  that  role.  Ms.  Asberry  testified  that  during  the  2017-18  school  year,  she  had  no 
knowledge  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  expressing  personal  views  in  his  classroom,  but  she  did 
have  knowledge  that  other  teachers  were  doing  so.  She  stated  she  had  that  knowledge 
because  she  heard  her  students  in  her  Scholars  class  discussing  other  classes  and  the  topics 

36

discussed  in  those  other  classes.  Ms.  Asberry  stated  that  she  has  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell 
ever  express  or  advocate  racist  views.  She  said  that  after  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from 
his  class,  she  did  not  recall  any  students  expressing  any  sentiments  about  Mr.  Campbell  to 
her. 

Ms.  Asberry  reviewed  the  transcript  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September 
28,  2017,  class  lecture  prior  to  her  testimony  at  this  hearing.  She  was  not  shocked  by  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  and  does  not  believe  that  his  comments  were  racist.  Ms.  Asberry 
testified  that  there  “was  something  behind  what  [Mr.  Campbell]  was  saying”  and  that  she 
“imterpreted”  the  transcript  such  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  not  necessarily  expressing  his  views, 
but  instead  bringing  up  a  topic  “people  don’t  want  to  talk  about.”  Ms.  Asberry  stated  that 
with  regard  to  the  question  of  “why  aren’t  cities  that  are  primarily  black  thriving?,”  she 
wanted  to  know  the  answer  to  that  question,  as  well.  Ms.  Asberry  testified  that  she  believes 
that  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  on  the  transcript  were  “provocative  rather  than  racist.” 
However,  she  admitted  it  is  reasonable  and  possible  for  others  to  characterize  his  comments 
as  racist.  She  stated  that  after  reading  the  transcript  her  opinions  of,  and  friendship  with,  Mr. 
Campbell  have  not  changed. 

Ms.  Asberry  testified  that  she  is  familiar  with  the  concept  of  “scaffolding”  by  a 
teacher,  and  that  when  provocative  subjects  are  discussed  in  class  by  a  teacher,  there  should 
be  sufficient  scaffolding  to  prepare  the  students  for  the  discussion.  Ms.  Asberry  testified  she 
believes  that  Mr.  Campbell  “needs  to  be  taught  how  use  scaffolding”  to  properly  prepare  a 
class  for  such  a  discussion  as  that  of  the  transcript. 

ERIC  PEARCY 

48. 

Eric  Pearcy  is  a  teacher  and  athletic  director  at  the  Bridge,  where  he  has  taught 

for  the  past  12  years.  Mr.  Pearcy  teaches  physical  education  and  AVID.  He  stated  that  the 
Bridge  offers  15  different  sports  to  students.  Mr.  Pearcy’s  classroom  was  located  in  the  same 
building  as  Mr.  Campbell’s  approximately  four  doors  down  the  hallway.  Mr.  Pearcy  has 
known  Mr.  Campbell  since  August  2014  when  he  started  teaching  at  the  Bridge.  Mr.  Pearcy 
considers  himself  to  be  a  friend  of  Mr.  Campbell,  but  he  has  never  vacationed  or  dined  with 
Mr.  Campbell.  Mr.  Pearcy  had  a  casual  friendly  relationship  with  Mr.  Campbell  and  they 
would  talk  in  the  hallways,  at  lunch  during  work  and  also  worked  together  on  athletic  matters 
for  the  school.  Mr.  Campbell  was  a  softball  and  baseball  coach  while  he  was  at  the  Bridge, 
and,  as  aresult,  Mr.  Pearcy  would  observe  Mr.  Campbell  talking  to  students  on  a  daily  basis. 
Mr.  Pearcy  described  Mr.  Campbell  as  hard-working,  fair  and  friendly.  Mr.  Pearcy  stated 
that  he  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell  use  racist  terms  or  words  and  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell 
advocate  his  beliefs  on  subjects  of  race. 

Mr.  Pearcy  testified  that  he  first  learned  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his 

classroom  a  few  days  after  October  4,  2017,  and  when  he  learned  this,  he  was  shocked.  Mr. 
Pearcy  spoke  in  support  of  Mr.  Campbell  at  the  October  18,  2017,  district  board  meeting.  At 
that  meeting  he  told  the  board  that  Mr.  Campbell  has  had  a  positive  impact  on  the  students  he 
has  taught  and  coached.  Mr.  Pearcy  testified  that,  as  he  told  the  board,  “it  is  ok  to  be 

37

offended”  and  when  students  get  offended  it  is  the  educator’s  job  to  “understand  the  offense 
and  deal  with  it.”  However,  Mr.  Pearcy  believes  it  is  not  acceptable  for  the  educators  “to 
empower”  the  offended  students  “to  get  Mr.  Campbell  fired”  and  “crush  his  life.”  Mr. 
Pearcy  stated  that  any  offended  students  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  “had  the  opportunity  to  ask 
questions  or  challenge  him”  and  those  students  were  not  “hurt  physically.”  Mr.  Pearcy  was 
also  involved  in  the  incident  involving  the  African-American  student  on  the  football  team 
and  stated  that  the  incident  was  not  related  to  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  lecture. 

Mr.  Pearcy  has  not  heard  the  recording  of  the  lecture,  but  was  provided  with  a  copy  of 

the  transcript  of  the  lecture  and  reviewed  that  transcript  prior  to  his  testimony  at  the  hearing. 
Mr.  Pearcy  stated  that  after  he  read  the  transcript,  “I  felt  proud  to  be  [Mr.  Campbell’s | 
colleague,”  and  he  “wished  his  classes  were  as  engaged”  as  this  one.  Mr.  Pearcy  believes 
that  the  discussion  on  the  transcript  “seemed  like  a  positive  and  engaging  classroom  topic.” 
Mr.  Pearcy  stated  that  in  no  way  were  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  on  the  transcript  racist,  and 
he  cannot  see  how  a  reasonable  person  could  see  those  comments  as  racist. 

TINA  FREY 

49. 

‘Tina  Frey  is  a  high  school  counselor  at  the  Bridge  and  has  held  that  position 

for  13  years.  Ms.  Frey  testified  that  the  Bridge  has  a  total  of  three  counselors  on  staff. 
position  as  a  counselor  she  is  assigned  a  case  load  of  students  for  which  she  will  monitor 
their  academics,  assist  with  college  choices  and  admissions  or  post-secondary  plans,  as  well 
as  work  with  them  on  any  social  issues  they  may  have.  In  addition  to  those  roles,  she  also 
participates  with  the  preparation  of  the  master  schedule  of  teacher  assignments  to  students 
based  on  student  needs.  Ms.  Frey  does  not  hold  any  teaching  credentials,  but  does  have  a 
counseling  credential  in  California.  She  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  since  August  2014  when 
he  began  working  at  the  Bridge.  She  stated  that  she  is  a  friend  of  Mr.  Campbell  but  doesn’t 
“hang  out”  with  him  in  a  social  context. 

In  her 

Ms.  Frey  has  never  heard  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017,  class 
lecture.  However,  she  was  provided  with  a  transcript  of  the  recording  a  couple  of  days  prior 
to  her  testimony  at  this  hearing  and  reviewed  that  document  prior  to  her  testimony.  Ms.  Frey 
wrote  a  letter  in  support  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  character  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Campbell  for  this 
hearing.  She  stated  that  she  wrote  the  letter  before  she  had  read  the  transcript  of  the  recording 
or  had  any  other  knowledge  regarding  the  content  of  the  recording.  She  wrote  that  she  had 
been  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  “on  many  occasions”  to  provide  guidance  lessons. 
During  those  visits  Ms.  Frey  noted  that  students  respected  Mr.  Campbell  and  were  prepared 
for  her  visit.  Ms.  Frey  testified  that  she  did  not  visit  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  in  the  2017- 
18  school  year.  She  said  that  she  never  received  any  complaints  from  parents  about  Mr. 
Campbell  and  only  had  positive  feedback  from  parents.  She  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell 
loves  the  Bridge  and  1s  a  passionate,  caring  teacher.  After  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from 
his  class,  some  students  approached  Ms.  Frey  to  convey  that  they  were  upset  by  his  removal 
and  believed  it  to  be  unfair.  Ms.  Frey  testified  that  no  students  informed  her  they  were  upset 
by  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  on  September  28,  2017.  Ms.  Frey  attended  the  October  18, 
2017,  board  meeting  where  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  spoke  to  the  board  regarding  how  some  of 

38

her  students  were  upset  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments.  After  the  meeting,  Ms.  Frey 
approached  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  and  told  her  if  her  students  were  upset,  she  should  advise 
those  students  to  come  speak  to  Ms.  Frey  because  counseling  students  is  her  job  and  she 
asked  Ms.  Shott-Hammond  for  the  names  of  the  students.  Ms.  Frey  stated  that  Ms.  Shott- 
Hammond  did  not  provide  her  with  the  names  of  those  students  and  no  students  every  came 
to  her  to  express  that  they  were  upset  by  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments. 

Ms.  Frey  testified  that  after  she  reviewed  the  transcript  of  the  recording  of  Mr. 
Campbell’s  lecture,  she  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  were  appropriate  and  he  was 
getting  the  students  to  critically  think  about  “hot  topics.” 

AIMEE  HOWMAN 

50.  |  Aimee  Howman  is  currently  the  Interim  Assistant  Principal  at  the  Bridge  and 

has  held  that  position  since  March  2018  and  has  worked  for  the  district  since  2009.  From 
2009  until  March  2018  she  worked  as  an  English  teacher  at  the  Bridge.  Additionally,  Ms. 
Howman  was  the  faculty  advisor  for  the  Associated  Student  Body  (ASB),  also  known  as  the 
student  council.  Students  in  ASB  are  elected  to  their  positions.  Ms.  Howman  holds  a  single 
subject  teaching  credential  in  English.  During  the  2017-18  school  year  she  taught  11th  and 
12th  grade  English. 

Ms.  Howman  has  known  Mr.  Campbell  since  he  began  working  at  the  Bridge  in 

August  2014.  During  Mr.  Campbell’s  first  year  at  the  Bridge,  Ms.  Howman  was  his  mentor 
and  interacted  with  him  on  a  regular  basis  once  a  week  to  discuss  lesson  plans  and  conduct 
formal  observations  of  Mr.  Campbell,  not  for  evaluation  purposes  but  for  support.  Ms. 
Howman  observed  Mr.  Campbell’s  classes  for  about  one  and  one-half  hours  per  year.  Based 
on  her  observations,  she  had  no  concerns  regarding  Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  in  classes.  Ms. 
Howman  stated  that  she  considers  Mr.  Campbell  to  be  a  friend  of  hers.  She  testified  that  she 
has  “hung  out”  with  Mr.  Campbell,  and  Mr.  Campbell  and  his  family  have  been  to  her  home. 

Ms.  Howman  first  learned  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his  classes  from  Mr. 

Pearcy  in  early  October  2017.  Additionally,  in  early  October  2017,  there  was  discussion 
among  students  in  her  English  class  about  Mr.  Campbell  being  removed  from  his  class. 
Some  students  told  Ms.  Howman  they  were  sad  Mr.  Campbell  was  placed  on  leave  and  one 
student  asked  her  after  class  if  there  was  anything  he  could  do  to  bring  him  back.  Ms. 
Howman  learned  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  placed  on  leave  because  of  a  recording  of  his  class, 
but  she  does  not  recall  exactly  how  she  learned  that  information.  Ms.  Howman  stated  that  at 
least  20  people,  students  and  staff,  told  her  about  the  recording.  Ms.  Howman  did  not  have 
access  to  the  recording  and  never  listened  to  it.  Ms.  Howman  was  aware  that  other  teachers 
had  access  to  the  recording.  Ms.  Howman  never  heard  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s 
class,  but  did  receive  the  transcript  of  the  recording  and  reviewed  it  prior  to  her  testimony. 

Ms.  Howman  stated  that  she  believes  Mr.  Campbell  is  a  good  teacher  who  loves  his 

job  and  cared  about  the  well-being  of  his  students.  She  knows  that  based  upon  personal 
stories  she  has  heard  from  students,  as  well  as  communication  with  Mr.  Campbell.  Ms. 

39

Howman  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  had  never  demonstrated  to  her  that  he  would  injure  a 
student  by  what  he  said  or  did.  She  stated  she  never  heard  from  students  who  were  upset  by 
Mr.  Campbell’s  comments,  but  she  was  aware  of  students  who  were  upset  that  Mr.  Campbell 
was  removed  from  the  classroom.  Ms.  Howman  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell  use  racist  terms 
and  believes  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  Mr.  Campbell’s  character  to  use  racially  motivated 
language. 

After  her  review  of  the  transcript,  Ms.  Howman  testified  that  there  are  parts  of  the 

transcript  that  “are  not  tasteful”  but  she  does  not  want  to  use  the  word  “racist”  because  she 
believes  Mr.  Campbell  “was  frustrated”  and  said  things  in  a  way  “that  could  have  been  said 
better.”  Ms.  Howman  said  that  she  personally  knows  Mr.  Campbell  and  he  is  not  a  racist. 
However,  she  admitted  that  not  all  students  in  his  class  knew  Mr.  Campbell  personally  and 
could  have  viewed  those  statements  through  a  different  lens.  Ms.  Howman  further  stated  that 
“some  students  are  more  sensitive  than  others.” 

LUKE  NIEBLING 

51. 

Luke  Niebling  is  currently  employed  as  a  high  school  teacher  for  business  and 

technology  in  the  Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School  District.  Prior  to  this  position,  and  from 
August  2016  to  January  2018,  he  worked  as  the  Assistant  Principal  of  the  Bridge.  Mr. 
Niebling  testified  that  he  resigned  his  position  at  the  Bridge  voluntarily.  Prior  to  that 
position  he  worked  for  two  years  as  an  Assistant  Principal  and  Athletic  Director  at  a  high 
school  in  Oregon.  He  holds  a  technical  education  credential  in  California,  and  an 
administrative  credential  in  Oregon  and  Arizona.  When  he  worked  at  the  Bridge  as  Assistant 
Principal,  he  oversaw  all  student  discipline,  as  well  as  athletics  and  academic  probation.  He 
supervised  three  to  five  teachers  per  semester,  including  performing  formal  observations. 
Mr.  Niebling  did  not  supervise  Mr.  Campbell.  As  part  of  his  position,  he  would  field  parent 
complaints  about  teachers.  Mr.  Niebling  does  not  recall  any  complaints  about  Mr.  Campbell. 
Mr.  Niebling  interacted  with  Mr.  Campbell  on  a  regular  basis  while  he  worked  at  the  Bridge 
and  would  walk  through  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  to  observe  his  class  on  occasion.  He 
stated  that  when  he  did  observe  Mr.  Campbell’s  class,  the  students  were  engaged.  Mr. 
Niebling  considers  himself  a  friend  of  Mr.  Campbell,  but  does  not  “hang  out”  with  him 
outside  of  school.  Mr.  Niebling  said  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  work  ethic  is  strong  and  he  spent 
countless  hours  with  students  coaching,  in  Solar  Cup,  and  teaching.  Mr.  Niebling  testified 
that  he  never  heard  Mr.  Campbell  say  or  do  anything  inappropriate,  and  Mr.  Campbell’s 
students  really  liked  him.  Mr.  Niebling  stated  that  he  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell  cares  about 
his  students’  well-being. 

Mr.  Niebling  first  became  aware  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28, 
2017,  lecture  when  Dr.  Fowler  played  the  first  few  minutes  of  the  recording  for  him  about 
one  day  after  Dr.  Fowler  learned  of  the  recording.  According  to  Mr.  Niebling,  Dr.  Fowler 
stopped  the  recording  after  a  few  minutes  so  that  they  could  discuss  the  next  steps  and  he 
wanted  Mr.  Niebling  to  be  aware  of  the  recording.  Thereafter,  Mr.  Niebling  was  aware  that 
Mr.  Campbell  was  removed  from  his  class,  and  some  students  approached  him  asking  why. 
Mr.  Niebling  did  not  provide  any  information  to  those  students.  Mr.  Niebling  became  aware 

40

that  the  recording  was  being  circulated  among  students  from  either  Dr.  Fowler  telling  him,  or 
from  “student  chatter.”  Mr.  Niebling  explained  that  because  he  was  an  athletic  person  and 
Mr.  Campbell  was  a  coach,  some  students  would  approach  him  and  speak  highly  of  Mr. 
Campbell.  However,  Mr.  Niebling  admitted  that  other  students  would  likely  not  speak  to 
him  about  how  the  recording  made  them  feel. 

Mr.  Niebling  received  the  transcript  of  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture  the 

day  before  testifying  in  this  hearing.  He  stated  that  after  reading  the  transcript,  he  was 
concerned  that  there  were  things  Mr.  Campbell  said  that  were  inappropriate  and  could  come 
off  as  racist  or  offensive.  Mr.  Niebling  stated  that  part  of  the  transcript  could  be 
characterized  as  a  rant,  and  in  other  parts  there  was  dialogue  from  students.  Mr.  Niebling 
acknowledged  that  he  could  see  how  the  lecture  could  make  students  feel  uncomfortable  and 
discouraged  from  disagreeing  with  Mr.  Campbell.  Mr.  Niebling  admitted  that  Mr. 
Campbell’s  “classification  of  a  race  into  categories”  was  offensive  and  inappropriate.  Mr. 
Niebling  testified  that  he  felt  this  recording  was  “out  of  character”  for  Mr.  Campbell. 

Testimony  of  Parents  on  Behalf  of Respondent 

DIANA  HALL 

52. 

Diana  Hall  is  the  mother  of  a  12th  grade  student  at  the  Bridge.  Ms.  Hall’s  son 
had  Mr.  Campbell  as  a  teacher  for  Economics  and  another  class.  Ms.  Hall  is  also  a  teacher  in 
the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  for  first  grade  and  kindergarten  students.  She  has 
held  that  position  for  18  years.  She  holds  a  multi-subject  teaching  credential.  Ms.  Hall  first 
learned  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  removal  from  the  classroom  from  her  son,  who  told  her  that 
Mr.  Campbell  had  been  recorded  in  his  class  and,  as  a  result  of  the  recording,  he  was 
removed  from  the  classroom.  According  to  Ms.  Hall,  her  son  was  upset  because  Mr. 
Campbell  was  removed  from  the  classroom.  She  stated  her  son  was  sad  and  upset  to  lose  a 
teacher  he  found  fun  and  interesting. 

Ms.  Hall  attended  two  district  board  meetings  to  speak  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Campbell. 
Specifically,  she  attended  a  December  13,  2017,  board  meeting  and  a  December  19,  2017, 
board  meeting.  Ms.  Hall  had  not  heard  the  recording  or  read  the  transcript  of  the  recording  at 
the  time  of  those  board  meetings.  At  the  December  13,  2017,  meeting  Ms.  Hall  spoke  to  the 
board  and  stated  that  she  was  “disappointed  in  the  way  the  situation  was  handled”  and  she  “‘is 
not  aware  of  any  professional  development  for  staff  members  taking  place”  at  the  Bridge. 
She  said  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  absence  is  having  an  impact  on  the  students,  community  and 
the  school  and  believes  Mr.  Campbell  should  be  “given  a  second  chance.”  Ms.  Hall  testified 
at  this  hearing  that  her  district  provides  bias  training  and  she  believes  Mr.  Campbell  did  not 
receive  adequate  professional  development  as  a  teacher.  However,  on  cross-examination  she 
admitted  that  she  has  no  idea  what  training  is  offered  to  teachers  at  the  Bridge  or  what 
training  Mr.  Campbell  has  had.  At  the  December  19,  2017,  board  meeting  Ms.  Hall  again 
stated  she  believes  that  Mr.  Campbell  should  be  given  a  second  chance  and  she  quoted  a  part 
of  the  Education  Code.  Ms.  Hall  testified  at  the  hearing  that  she  “googled”  the  Education 
Code,  as  well  as  some  case  law,  which  she  quoted  to  the  board  on  December  19,  2017.  She 

41

stated  that  her  understanding  of  that  case  law  was  that  if  a  student  recorded  a  teacher  in  the 
classroom  without  the  teacher’s  knowledge  that  the  recording  cannot  be  used  against  the 
teacher  in  any  way.  She  believes  that,  accordingly,  the  recording  in  this  matter  cannot  be 
used  against  Mr.  Campbell  in  any  way. 

Ms.  Hall  received  a  copy  of  the  transcript  of  the  recording  from  Mr.  Campbell’s 
attorney  the  week  before  this  hearing  and  reviewed  it  before  she  testified  at  this  hearing.  She 
stated  that  after  reading  it  she  “really  doesn’t  know  how  she  feels  about  it”  but  feels  that  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  were  taken  out  of  context  of  a  bigger  conversation.  After  reading  the 
transcript,  she  stands  by  her  comments  to  the  board  and  feels  strongly  that  “the  class  should 
not  have  been  recorded.”  She  admitted  that  she  can  see  how  some  people  can  view  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  on  the  transcript  as  racist,  but  believes  that  1f  Mr.  Campbell  had 
sufficient  bias  training  then  this  likely  would  not  have  happened.  Ms.  Hall  stands  by  her 
opinion  that  Mr.  Campbell  should  be  given  a  second  chance. 

ELEAZAR  JAIME  OCHOA   

53. 

 Eleazar  Jaime  Ochoa  is  the  father  of  a  12th  grade  student  at  the  Bridge.  His 

son  plays  baseball  at  the  Bridge  and  Mr.  Campbell  was  his  son’s  baseball  coach,  teacher  and 
tutor.  Mr.  Ochoa  is  a  classified  administrator  at  another  school  district  where  he  has  worked 
for  25  years.  Mr.  Ochoa  has  four  children,  two  of  whom  attend  the  Bridge.  Mr.  Ochoa’s 
work  involves  drop-out  prevention  for  students  who  are  not  on  track  to  graduate  high  school. 
As  part  of  his  work,  he  works  with  the  local  police  department  and  is  familiar  with  gang 
activity  in  his  community.  Mr.  Ochoa  is  trained  in  cultural  sensitivity  and  goes  to  different 
schools  with  racial  tensions  between  Hispanic  and  African-American  students  to  teach 
similarities  in  the  cultures.  Mr.  Ochoa  stated  he  is  very  familiar  with  racism,  and  as  a 
Mexican-American  he  faces  it  every  day  himself. 

Mr.  Ochoa  testified  that  Mr.  Campbell  has  been  a  positive  influence  on  both  of  his 
sons  and  has  helped  them  tremendously  with  their  academics.  Mr.  Ochoa’s  sons  are  good 
baseball  players,  but  when  their  academics  slipped  it  was  Mr.  Campbell  who  tutored  them 
and  helped.  Mr.  Campbell  would  tutor  one  of  his  sons  two  to  three  times  per  week  after 
school  and  during  lunch.  Mr.  Ochoa  stated  that  Mr.  Campbell  helped  “mold”  his  son.  He 
said  Mr.  Campbell  has  never  done  or  said  anything  that  he  felt  was  inappropriate  or  racist. 

Mr.  Ochoa  has  never  heard  the  recording  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  September  28,  2017, 

class,  but  did  receive  the  transcript  of  the  recording  from  Mr.  Campbell’s  attorney  and 
reviewed  it  prior  to  his  testimony  at  the  hearing.  Mr.  Ochoa  does  not  believe  that  Mr. 
Campbell’s  comments  on  the  transcript  are  offensive,  but  can  understand  how  others  may 
find  the  comments  to  be  offensive  and  that  “choice  is  in  the  eye  of  the  beholder.” 

Mr.  Campbell’s  Testimony 

54. 

Joshua  Campbell  is  married  and  has  three  sons,  ages  25,  16,  and  11.  His  16- 

year-old  son  is  a  student  at  the  Bridge  and  his  youngest  son  attends  middle  school  in  Moreno 

42

Valley.  Mr.  Campbell’s  wife  is  a  teacher  and  instructional  coach  employed  by  the  Valle 
Verde  School  District  where  she  has  taught  for  the  last  15  years.  He  and  his  wife  live  in 
Moreno  Valley.  In  2008  Mr.  Campbell  was  working  as  a  real  estate  appraiser  and  broker, 
but  most  of  his  income  came  from  his  appraisal  business.  Because  of  new  legislation  that 
required  mortgage  brokers  to  use  an  appraisal  company  instead  of  an  individual,  Mr. 
Campbell’s  appraisal  business  disappeared  overnight.  After  that,  Mr.  Campbell  decided  to 
work  as  a  substitute  teacher  after  he  obtained  a  temporary  credential  to  work  as  a  substitute 
teacher  in  2010.  He  did  so  because  his  wife  worked  in  that  profession,  and  after  he  tried  it, 
he  decided  he  loved  it.  At  that  point  Mr.  Campbell  made  the  choice  to  go  back  to  school  and 
become  a  teacher.  During  the  time  he  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher,  Mr.  Campbell  worked 
for  the  Valle  Verde  School  District  on  an  as  needed  basis.  He  explained  that  as  he  worked  as 
a  substitute  teacher  the  district  would  frequently  call  those  substitute  teachers  they  wanted 
and  as  a  result  he  was  called  daily  for  work  and  was  very  busy.  At  that  time  he  taught 
Kindergarten  through  12th  grades.  Soon  thereafter  he  was  allowed  to  select  the  grades  he 
wanted  to  substitute  for  and  he  narrowed  that  range  to  the  2nd  to  12th  grades.  Mr.  Campbell 
attended  Brandman  University  in  a  Master’s  program  and  is  six  classes  away  from  finishing 
that  program.  He  completed  his  student  teaching  in  2012  and  has  a  teaching  credential  in 
social  science.  As  part  of  his  credentialing,  he  attained  “highly  qualified  status”  from  the 
California  Teacher  Induction.  Mr.  Campbell  has  a  business  degree  from  Montana  State 
University  and  a  California  real  estate  broker  license  he  still  maintains.  His  first  teaching 
job,  other  than  as  a  substitute  teacher,  was  at  the  Bridge  beginning  in  August  2014  for  the 
2014-15  school  year.  During  his  time  at  the  Bridge,  Mr.  Campbell  taught  Government, 
Economics  and  AVID.  In  addition  to  teaching  those  classes,  he  has  coached  softball  and 
baseball,  and  was  involved  in  the  Solar  Cup  program,  mock  trial  program,  and  was  a  faculty 
advisor  for  the  Black  Student  Union. 

He  never  taught  U.S.  History  at  the  Bridge.  However,  he  did  prepare  to  teach  U.S. 
History  prior  to  the  2017-18  school  year  because  Ms.  Singleton  requested  that  she  switch 
classes  with  Mr.  Campbell.  According  to  Mr.  Campbell,  Ms.  Singleton  told  him  that  the 
reason  she  requested  a  switch  in  the  classes  was  because  she  was  running  for  district 
assembly  office  and  needed  to  take  time  off  for  campaigning  and  a  single  semester  class  of 
Government  and  Economics  would  be  better  for  that.  On  the  first  day  of  the  2017-18  school 
year,  Ms.  Frey  called  Mr.  Campbell  into  her  office  and  informed  him  he  would  not  be 
teaching  U.S.  History  because  Ms.  Singleton  had  a  change  of  heart  because  she  realized  that 
teaching  Government  and  Economics  would  be  harder.  Mr.  Campbell  testified  that  he  never 
contacted  Ms.  Singleton  to  discuss  the  matter  because  he  did  not  want  her  to  feel  bad  about 
it.  According  to  Mr.  Campbell,  neither  Ms.  Singleton  nor  Ms.  Frey  told  him  that  Ms. 
Singleton  had  concerns  about  him  teaching  U.S.  History. 

55. 

Mr.  Campbell  testified  he  utilizes  the  California  standards  for  the  teaching 

profession,  including  the  content  standards  for  11th  and  12th  grades  adopted  in  1998.  Mr. 
Campbell  stated  that  these  were  the  current  teaching  standards  despite  Mr.  Simmons 
testimony  otherwise,  because  the  common  core  standards  were  adopted  in  2015,  and  the 
common  core  standards  were  to  be  adapted  to  these  content  standards  to  develop  a 
curriculum.  Mr.  Campbell  utilized  these  standards  to  create  his  syllabus  for  his  12th  grade 

43

Government  class.  Mr.  Campbell  has  a  “phone  policy”  in  his  syllabus  and  would  remind 
students  from  time  to  time  to  “put  their  phones  away.”  Mr.  Campbell  admitted  that  at  the 
beginning  of  his  September  28,  2017,  lecture  that  he  told  the  students  to  put  away  their  cell 
phones,  but  claims  he  told  them  to  make  sure  their  laptops  were  out.  However,  in  his 
deposition  testimony  Mr.  Campbell  stated  he  directed  his  students  to  put  away  their  laptops. 
Mr.  Campbell  claimed  that  he  missed  this  deposition  testimony  and  accidentally  failed  to 
correct  it. 

Mr.  Campbell  endeavored  to  ensure  a  “comfortable  learning  space”  for  his  students  in 

his  classes  by  first  building  individual  relationships  with  his  students  to  understand  their 
needs.  He  stressed  to  his  students  to  respect  each  other  and  at  the  beginning  of  each  year  he 
reminds  his  students  not  to  engage  in  “ad  hominem”  attacks,  meaning  attacks  on  the  person 
rather  than  the  issue  being  debated.  He  also  stressed  that  individual  criticisms  of  people  by 
his  students  is  not  acceptable  in  his  class.  Mr.  Campbell  testified  he  lets  everyone  in  his 
class  know  that  everyone  is  safe  and  their  opinions  are  welcome  in  his  classroom.  He  allows 
his  students  to  sit  with  the  people  they  get  along  with  under  the  condition  that  the  students  do 
their  work.  Mr.  Campbell  said  he  frequently  plays  “Devil’s  advocate”  in  his  classroom  when 
mediating  debates  and  he  sees  his  role  as  teaching  the  students  to  negotiate  and  come  to  their 
own  conclusions.  He  has  scaffolded  conversations  in  his  classroom  on  the  topic  of  abortion 
and  collaborated  with  Ms.  Singleton  for  a  debate  on  the  issue.  He  stated  the  only  personal 
opinion  he  has  ever  expressed  to  his  class  on  the  issue  of  abortion  is  “how  serious  it  is.”  He 
stated  he  never  told  his  students  that  rape  victims  should  not  have  access  to  abortion,  but  he 
admitted  he  did  say  “what  if  a  rape  victim  had  to  go  to  a  hospital?”  to  add  to  the  discussion. 
He  asserted  he  never  used  the  term  “baby  killers”  and  “nobody  ever  reported  to  me  that  I  said 
that  or  was  offended.”  Mr.  Campbell  testified  he  did  address  the  issue  of  slavery  in  his 
Government  class  “as  an  underlying  cause  of  oppression  in  America”  because  “when  we  talk 
about  social  justice  we  are  really  talking  about  a  hangover  from  slavery.”  Mr.  Campbell 
stated  he  has  never  compared  slaves  to  cell  phones,  but  then  admitted  he  has  used  an  analogy 
to  help  his  students  understand  that  slaves  were  valuable  property.  He  claimed  he  was  not 
trying  to  minimize  slavery,  but  was  trying  to  teach  his  students  that  slaves  were  valuable  and 
he  used  an  analogy  of  the  cell  phone  because  it  is  something  students  treat  with  care. 

56. 

Mr.  Campbell  admitted  that  in  March  2015,  Dr.  Fowler  directed  him  to  make 
sure  he  presents  all  sides  of  all  issues  in  his  class.  He  stated  that  Dr.  Fowler  coached  him  to 
present  all  sides  of  an  issue  and  he  understood  that  to  be  what  was  expected  of  him  during  his 
entire  time  at  the  Bridge. 

Mr.  Campbell  admitted  that  on  October  4,  2017,  when  he  met  with  Dr.  Fowler  and 

Mr.  Huber  that  he  did  not  say  “black  people  are  not  oppressed”  in  the  lecture  and  if  he  did  it 
was  taken  out  of  context.  On  October  6,  2017,  Mr.  Campbell  was  called  in  to  meet  with  Mr. 
Huber,  Dr.  Fowler,  and  Dr.  Pyle  and  Mr.  Campbell  was  asked  about  his  lecture  in  his 
September  28,  2017,  Government  class.  According  to  Mr.  Campbell,  he  did  not  try  to  defend 
his  comments  from  the  September  28,  2017,  class  during  that  October  6,  2017,  meeting. 
Instead,  he  claims  he  recognized  the  divisive  and  non-inclusive  language  and  pronouns  he 
used,  including  “the  black  and  white”  words  and  “turning  it  into  an  issue  that  was  not 

44

encompassing  the  entire  situation.”  Mr.  Campbell  stated  he  admitted  his  mistake  and 
apologized  for  his  lack  of  professionalism  during  that  October  6,  2017,  meeting.  He  also 
admitted  that  his  comments  lacked  factual  data.  Mr.  Campbell  also  stated  that  he  admitted 
during  that  meeting  that  his  comments  could  be  viewed  as  racist.  After  the  meeting  he  was 
placed  on  paid  administrative  leave  and  remained  on  that  paid  leave  until  December  19, 
2017,  when  his  leave  became  unpaid  and  the  charges  were  presented  to  him.  Mr.  Campbell 
stated  that  he  still  received  district  emails  “on  and  off’  until  November  3,  2017.  He  received 
an  email  on  October  17,  2017,  sent  to  all  teachers  at  the  Bridge  regarding  the  October  18, 
2017,  district  board  meeting  and  it  made  reference  to  a  discussion  about  Mr.  Campbell  to  be 
conducted  at  that  district  board  meeting.  Mr.  Campbell  stated  he  was  very  concerned  by  this 
and  had  never  been  invited  to  speak  at  that  district  board  meeting.  As  a  result,  Mr.  Campbell 
felt  his  due  process  rights  had  been  compromised.  Additionally,  he  had  been  assured  of 
confidentiality  and  he  was  concerned  that  staff  and  other  people  were  listening  to  the 
recording. 

Mr.  Campbell  admitted  during  his  testimony  that  he  failed  to  properly  prepare  to 

discuss  the  issue  of  the  NFL  players’  protest  of  kneeling  for  the  national  anthem,  and  that  he 
had  an  emotional  connection  to  that  issue  and  knew  he  would  be  upset  by  it.  He  admitted  he 
needed  to  recognize  his  feelings  about  the  issue  and  prepare  more  prior  to  having  the 
discussion  with  his  students.  He  stated  he  did  not  plan  to  discuss  the  NFL  issue  on 
September  28,  2017,  and  admitted  he  did  not  scaffold  that  lesson,  but  in  his  opinion  there 
was  some  previous  scaffolding  that  took  place  in  previous  conversations.  Mr.  Campbell 
received  emails  from  Dr.  Fowler  on  October  19,  2017,  and  thereafter,  which  were  circulated 
to  all  teachers  at  the  Bridge,  and  contained  links  to  articles  about  teaching  controversial 
topics.  Mr.  Campbell  read  each  of  the  articles  in  those  links  provided  and  recognized  they 
were  directly  related  to  his  situation.  During  his  administrative  leave,  Mr.  Campbell  has 
completed  a  one-hour  webinar  on  discussing  race  and  other  difficult  topics  with  students,  as 
well  as  other  courses  related  to  racial  disparities  and  teaching  tolerance.  Mr.  Campbell  has 
reflected  on  what  happened  in  the  September  28,  2017,  class  and  stated  he  has  learned 
valuable  lessons.  He  believes  he  should  be  punished  for  his  actions,  but  that  punishment 
should  not  include  losing  his  job  because  teaching  is  his  life.  He  feels  he  should  have  an 
opportunity  to  apologize  to  all  the  students  at  the  Bridge. 

57. 

|  Mr.  Campbell  testified  that  he  gave  a  deposition  in  this  matter  on  May  2,  2018, 

and  thereafter  reviewed  the  transcript  and  revised  some  of  his  answers  before  signing  it. 
Specifically,  in  response  to  a  series  of  questions  regarding  whether  he  had  been  a  member  of 
a  group  or  organization,  including  on-line,  that  promoted  prejudice  against  certain  races, 
ethnicities,  sexual  orientation  or  identity,  or  religious  groups,  Mr.  Campbell  answered  “no” 
to  those  questions  during  his  deposition.  However,  he  revised  those  answers  before  signing 
the  deposition  to  “not  that  I  am  aware  of.”  He  stated  he  did  so  because  he  realized  his  ability 
to  accurately  know  what  he  “liked”  or  “posted”  on  his  social  media  sights  was  “more 
accurately  reflected  by  the  changed  answers.  During  cross-examination  Mr.  Campbell 
admitted  to  having  a  Facebook  account  and  being  a  member  of  the  “We  the  People”  group  on 
Facebook.  He  claims  he  does  not  know  much  about  the  group,  and  he  may  have  liked  an 

45

image  from  the  “We  the  People”  Facebook  group  but  does  not  have  any  specific  memory  of 
any  of  the  images  from  that  Facebook  group. 

Allegations  and  Findings  Re:  Directives  to  Mr.  Campbell  Prior  to  September  28,  2017. 

58. 

The  district  alleged  that  in  February  2015,  the  district  received  a  complaint  of 

bias  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  classroom  from  a  parent.  After  receiving  the  complaint  Dr.  Fowler 
directed  Mr.  Campbell  to  present  all  sides  when  he  presented  political  issues  to  his  students. 

The  district  further  alleged  that  on  August  29,  2017,  a  district  board  member  who  is 
the  grandparent  of  a  student  of  Mr.  Campbell  complained  to  the  district  that  Mr.  Campbell 
was  “very  political”  in  the  classroom.  Dr.  Fowler  communicated  those  concerns  to  Mr. 
Campbell  and  directed  him  to  present  all  sides  of  a  political  issue.  The  district  alleged  that 
Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  constituted  a  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by 
the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  the  evidence  did  establish  that  Dr.  Fowler  had  given 
oral  directives  to  Mr.  Campbell  on  those  two  occasions,  but  the  evidence  was  not  sufficient 
to  establish  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  was  a  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  the 
school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him. 

Allegations  and  Findings  Re:  The  September  28,  2017,  Lecture  and  Other  Lectures 

59. 

The  district  alleged  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  recorded  September  28,  2017,  lecture 

contained  substantial  racially  motivated  content  that  was  based  solely  on  Mr.  Campbell’s 
opinion  and  lacked  factual  support.  Furthermore,  the  district  alleged  other  lectures  in  Mr. 
Campbell’s  Government  class  involved  controversial  topics  such  as  abortion,  and  the  Unite 
the  Right  Rally  where  Mr.  Campbell  expressed  his  own  opinions  with  extreme  political  bias 
and  denied  some  students  adequate  opportunities  to  be  heard  or  respond  in  meaningful  ways. 
The  district  further  alleged  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  and  instruction,  as  alleged, 
resulted  in  discriminatory  racially-motivated  comments  and  tensions  within  the  school 
environment  and  were  detrimental  to  the  district’s  mission  and  function,  as  well  as  created  a 
deeply-divisive,  toxic  environment  that  adversely  affected  students  emotionally,  socially,  and 
psychologically.  The  district  alleged  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  was  immoral  and 
demonstrated  an  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  the  evidence  established  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments 

in  his  recorded  September  28,  2017,  class,  as  well  as  other  classes  discussing  the  topics  of 
the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  and  abortion  were  his  own  opinions  demonstrating  a  political  bias 
and  lacking  factual  support,  and  those  comments  created  a  divisive,  toxic  school  environment 
and  adversely  affected  students  emotionally,  socially  and  psychologically.  The  Commission 
found  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  was  immoral  and  demonstrated  an  evident  unfitness  for 
service. 

46

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections  Regarding  Dismissal  Actions 

1. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44934  and  44944.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 
permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (a)(1)  authorizes  dismissal  for  immoral  conduct. 
Subdivision  (a)(6)  authorizes  dismissal  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Subdivision  (a)(8) 
authorizes  dismissal  for  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  and  district  polices. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process 

for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and  sets  forth  the 
Commissions’  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing  board 

must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent  employee. 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

5. 

The  “burden  of  proof’  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the  trier  of 

fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its  nonexistence. 
(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The  district 
has  the  burden  of  proof  to  establish  cause  to  dismiss  its  employee. 

6. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of 
an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of 
the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 
evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence 
that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union 
Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Board  Policy  and  Administrative  Regulation 

7. 

District  Board  Policies  0410,  4119.21,  and  5145.3,  set  forth  the  professional 

standards  the  board  expects  of  its  employees.  As  noted,  the  board  expects  district  employees 
to  “provide  equal  opportunity  for  all  individuals  in  education,”  “to  maintain  the  highest 
ethical  standards,  exhibit  professional  behavior,  follow  district  policies  and  procedures,  abide 
by  state  and  federal  laws,  and  exercise  good  judgment  when  interacting  with  students,”  and 
“provide  a  safe  school  environment  that  allows  all  students  equal  access  and  opportunities  in 
the  district’s  academic  and  other  educational  support  programs,  services,  and  activities.”  The 
board  “prohibits,  at  any  district  school  or  school  activity,  unlawful  discrimination, 

47

harassment,  intimidation,  and  bullying  of  any  student  based  on  the  student’s  actual  race, 
color,  ancestry,  national  origin,  ethnic  group  identification,  age,  religion,  marital  or  parental 
status,  physical  or  mental  disability,  sex,  sexual  orientation,  gender,  gender  identity,  or 
gender  expression.”  The  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  Education  Profession  section  4119.21  sets  out 
ethical  standards  of  educators  as  adopted  by  the  District. 

Relevant  Judicial  Authority 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT   

8. 

The  seminal  case  for  teacher  dismissals  is  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  charges  of 
immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct  or  evidence  unfitness  for  service  are  raised  in 
teacher  dismissal  cases,  the  applicable  standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  The 
factors  outlined  in  Morrison  must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether 
the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (/d.  at  p.229.) 

9. 

Immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare 

of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  It  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with 
rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  and  dissoluteness.  Or,  it  can  be 
conduct  that  is  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless,  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 
opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 
good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of  Education  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School 
District  v.  Weiland  (19  60)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE   

10. 

The  applicable  standard  or  determinative  test  in  teacher  dismissal  cases  is 

whether  the  person  1s  fit  to  teach.  “Fitness  to  teach”  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (Board  of 
Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560- 
561.) 

11. 

“Evident”  is  defined  as  “clear  to  the  vision  and  understanding.”  “Unfit”  is 

defined  as  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable;  incompetent;  and 
physically  or  mentally  unsound”  and  “unsuitable,  incompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a 
particular  use  or  service.”  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  v. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.) 

12. 

In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  the  court  noted  the  two  parallel,  yet  contradictory, 
lines  of  cases  regarding  “unfit  for  service.”  One  line  of  cases  equated  that  term  with 
“unprofessional  conduct”  and  the  other  line  of  cases  distinguished  the  two  definitions.  In 
deciding  that  the  latter  line  of  cases  was  the  correct  way  to  evaluate  “unfit  to  serve,”  and 
complied  with  the  rules  of  statutory  construction.  The  Woodland  court  concluded  that 
“unprofessional  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same 

48

thing.  Although  conduct  constituting  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute 
“unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is  not  always  true.  Evident  unfitness  for  service 
requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not 
necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not 
disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in  Morrison  where  that  court  concluded  that 
“unprofessional  conduct”  meant  conduct  showing  a  teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria 
must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness 
for  service.  If  it  does,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”;  1.e., 
whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.  (Ud.  at  pp.  1442-1445.) 
A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  can  be  made  if  the  evidence,  taken  in  the  aggregate,  shows  that 
retaining  the  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to  students 
and  fellow  teachers.  (Ud.  at  p.1456.) 

13. 

|Anemployee  can  be  dismissed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 
showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either 
students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.  The 
inquiry  is  whether  any  adverse  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the  teacher’s  conduct  as  to  his 
teaching  ability,  or  as  to  the  possibility  that  publicity  surrounding  the  past  conduct  may  in 
and  of  itself  substantially  impair  his  function  as  a  teacher.  (Morrison,  supra,  at  p.  235.) 

14. 

To  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a  nexus  between 

government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from  the  principle  that 
“[njo  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of  factors  unconnected  with  the 
responsibilities  of  that  employment.”  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on 
Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th1454,  1463.) 

15. 

“Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a 

fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectation  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (San  Diego  Unified 
School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2013)  214  Cal.App.4th  1120, 
1142-43.) 

16. 

|Anemployee’s  actions  on  a  given  day  may  suggest  a  lack  of judgment  and 

discretion,  or  may  be  an  isolated  act  precipitated  by  an  unusual  accumulation  of  pressure  and 
stress.  An  absence  of  any  other  incidents  in  the  employee’s  teaching  career  suggestive  of 
lack  of judgment  or  discretion  can  further  distinguish  the  aberrant  character  of  the  act  at 
issue.  In  such  a  case,  a  fact  finder  could  reasonably  conclude  that  the  isolated  incident  of 
poor  judgment  was  outweighed  by  years  of  demonstrated  teaching  competence,  and  that  on 
balance  the  employee  possessed  the  qualities  of  character  necessary  for  teaching  fitness. 
(Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696-701.) 

17. 

In  determining  whether  the  teacher’s  conduct  indicated  unfitness  to  teach,  such 
matters  as  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers,  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time 
of  the  conduct,  (4)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 

49

conduct,  (5)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  (6)  the  notoriety 
and  publicity  accorded  the  teacher’s  conduct  may  be  considered.  (Jack  M.,  supra.,  at  p.702, 
fn.  5.) 

18. 

|  The  nexus  between  an  employee’s  conduct  and  his  fitness  to  teach  is 

established  when  the  conduct  is  detrimental  to  the  mission  and  functions  of  the  employer. 
Factors  to  consider  are  whether  the  acts  demonstrate  a  serious  lapse  in  good  judgment,  the 
teacher  failed  to  recognize  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct,  the  teacher  attempted  to  shift 
blame  to  parents  and  students,  his  principal  had  lost  confidence  in  his  ability  to  serve  as  a 
role  model  based  upon  his  actions,  or,  most  noteworthy,  the  teacher’s  testimony  that  he  did 
not  think  his  actions  would  have  any  impact  on  his  ability  to  teach  his  students  if  any  of  them 
had  viewed  his  actions  as  immoral.  The  conduct  itself,  together  with  the  teacher’s  failure  to 
accept  responsibility  or  recognize  the  seriousness  of  it,  given  his  position  as  a  teacher  and 
role  model,  demonstrates  evident  unfitness  to  teach.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1465-66.) 

19. 

—  One  act  does  not  alone  demonstrate  the  unfitness  of  the  teacher,  but  is  simply 

one  of  the  factors  to  be  considered.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.  App.3d  555,  561-62.) 

20. 

|  There  must  be  a  nexus  between  the  teacher’s  conduct  and  his  usefulness  to  the 

school  district  and  only  when  so  construed  can  grounds  to  dismiss  for  immoral  conduct  or 
unfitness  to  serve  be  constitutionally  applied.  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Judge  (1975)  50  Cal. 
App.  3d  920,  929.) 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  LAWS 

  

21. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  must  also  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then  the  district 
must  further  establish  that  the  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 
“persistent,”  1.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1183.)  Isolated 
incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  not  generally 
considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  317.) 

22. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 
Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Education  Codes  section  44932,  subdivision  (8)  pertains  to 
unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has  decreed  that 
a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for  correction;  “it 
is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.  (/d.  at 
p.84.) 

.  stubborn;  persevering  .. 

. 

50

Morrison  Factors 

23. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  to  consider 

when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the  likelihood  that 
the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity; 
(2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 
held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  and 
publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 
motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct; 
and  (7)  the  extent  that  the  discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher. 

24. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  When a 

camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which 
one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the  totality  of  the 
offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

25. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  476.) 

Other  Disciplinary  Considerations 

26. 

An  admuiunistrator’s  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 

educator’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered. 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal.App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

27. 

The  Commission  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee  even  if 
grounds  for  discipline  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d 
209.) 

Evaluation  of  the  Charges 

28. 

|  Mr.  Campbell  was  employed  as  a  teacher  in  the  district  for  only  four  years 

beginning  in  the  2014-15  school  year.  Based  upon  the  evidence  introduced  at  hearing,  Mr. 
Campbell’s  issues  seemed  to  begin  during  the  2014-15  school  year  when  a  parent  of  a 
student  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  complained  to  Dr.  Fowler  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  being 
“very  political”  and  “biased”  in  his  classroom.  Both  Dr.  Fowler  and  Mr.  Campbell  testified 
that  in  early  2015,  as  a  result  of  the  parent’s  complaint,  Dr.  Fowler  instructed  Mr.  Campbell 
to  be  more  neutral  and  to  present  all  sides  to  all  issues  in  his  classes,  but  this  instruction  was 
never  reduced  to  writing.  Again  in  August  2017  a  district  board  member,  and  grandmother 
ofa  student  in  Mr.  Campbell’s  class,  complained  to  Dr.  Fowler  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  “very 
political”  in  the  classroom.  Both  Dr.  Fowler  and  Mr.  Campbell  testified  that  while  Dr. 
Fowler  was  walking  with  Mr.  Campbell  he  told  him  of  the  board  member’s  complaint  and 

5]

again  instructed  Mr.  Campbell  to  present  all  sides  of  issues  in  his  class  and  remain  neutral. 
Again,  this  instruction  was  never  reduced  to  writing.  At  least  two  teachers,  Mr.  Smith  and 
Ms.  Singleton,  provided  credible  testimony  of  multiple  interactions  with  Mr.  Campbell  that 
caused  them  concern  or  made  them  uncomfortable.  Mr.  Smith  testified  that  prior  to 
November  2016,  Mr.  Campbell  made  racially  charged  statements  to  him  regarding  the 
presidential  election,  as  well  as  discussions  regarding  slavery.  Ms.  Singleton  described 
numerous  incidents  where  students  complained  to  her  about  Mr.  Campbell’s  statements  in 
class  related  to  abortion  and  racial  issues  that  made  them  uncomfortable.  She  also  testified 
about  one  incident  in  August  2017  that  “rattled”  her  when  Mr.  Campbell  came  into  her 
classroom  to  discuss  the  Unite  the  Right  Rally  and  the  discussion  ended  with  him 
ageressively  arguing  and  storming  out  of  her  class  while  students  were  present.  A 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrates  that  Mr.  Campbell  has  a  propensity  to  express 
racially-charged  and  politically  divisive  comments  to  students  and  staff  at  the  Bridge,  as  he 
has  done  so  since  his  first  school  year  there.  Mr.  Campbell  himself  admitted  during  his 
testimony  that  his  comments  made  during  the  September  28,  2017,  class,  can  be  viewed  as 
racist,  were  an  inappropriate  tangent,  and  lacked  factual  data. 

Additionally,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  multiple  students 

experienced  emotional,  social,  and  psychological  harm  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  behavior. 
Specifically,  Dr.  Duncan-Andrade  provided  credible  and  persuasive  testimony  regarding  the 
negative  impact  Mr.  Campbell’s  comments  had  on  all  of  the  students  at  the  Bridge.  Multiple 
students  from  Mr.  Campbell’s  class  testified  that  they  did  not  feel  safe  expressing  their  opinion 
in  his  class  and  would  be  “shouted  down”  if  they  did  so.  The  environment  created  at  the  Bridge 
after  September  28,  2017,  became  deeply  divisive  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Campbell’s  lecture,  for 
which  he  admitted  he  failed  to  properly  prepare,  and  was  viewed  as  racist  by  many  students  and 
staff.  The  degree  of  adversity  anticipated  from  such  comments  tn  a  classroom  from  an  authority 
figure,  such  as  a  teacher,  is  very  high.  Given  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  teaching  credential  is  in 
social  sciences,  he  must  be  particularly  sensitive  to  properly  scaffolding  any  lesson  involving 
controversial  topics,  such  as  race,  but  he  failed  to  do  so.  The  evidence  shows  that  Mr.  Campbell 
manipulated  his  position  of  authority  as  a  teacher  to  push  his  political  agenda  on  his  students. 
In  light  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Campbell  has  engaged  in  this  conduct  during  the  entire  time  he  has 
been  employed  at  the  Bridge,  there  is  a  high  likelihood  he  will  repeat  this  conduct  in  the  future, 
despite  his  assertions  otherwise. 

After  consideration  of  all  the  evidence,  the  Commission  found  that  Mr.  Campbell’s 

conduct  during  the  September  28,  2017,  class  lecture,  as  well  as  prior  to  that  date  as  discussed 
above,  constitutes  immoral  conduct  and  violates  multiple  district  policies  regarding  professional 
standards,  code  of  ethics,  and  prohibition  against  discrimination  or  harassment  based  on  race 
and  national  origin. 

The  Commission  also  found  that  Mr.  Campbell’s  conduct  in  pushing  racially-charged, 
one-sided,  political  views  in  his  classroom  1s  a  fixed  character  trait  or  a  temperamental  defect 
rendering  him  not  fit  or  unsuitable  for  teaching  altogether.  The  evidence  established  Mr. 
Campbell  has  repeatedly  engaged  in  this  conduct  and  has  alienated  students,  staff  and  caused 
a  deep  divide  in  the  students  at  the  Bridge. 

52

The  Commission  did  not  find  Mr.  Campbell  persistently  violated  district  policies, 

regulations  and  school  directives.  Specifically,  insufficient  evidence  was  provided  to 
establish  Mr.  Campbell’s  failure  to  abide  by  district  policies  was  “stubborn  and  continuing.” 
The  evidence  demonstrated  that  only  two  instructional  directives  were  given  to  Mr. 
Campbell  regarding  his  conduct,  and  both  were  very  casual  conversations  never  reduced  to 
writing.  The  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  the  district  provided  any  written  directives  to 
Mr.  Campbell  to  address  his  conduct. 

Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Campbell 

29. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Mr.  Campbell  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  because  the  evidence  established  that  Mr.  Campbell  engaged  in 
immoral  conduct. 

30. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Mr.  Campbell  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  because  the  evidence  established  that  Mr.  Campbell  was  evidently 
unfit  for  service. 

Cause  Does  Not  Exist  to  Dismiss  Mr.  Campbell  for  Persistent  Violation  of District  Policies, 
Regulations  and  School  Directives. 

31. 

|  Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Mr.  Campbell  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  because  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Mr.  Campbell 
persistently  violated  district  polices,  regulations  and  school  directives. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

53

ORDER 

Mr.  Campbell’s  appeal  of  his  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Nuview  Union 
School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  Mr.  Campbell  is  granted.  Mr. 
Campbell  shall  be  dismissed  from  the  district. 

DATED:  September  28,  2018 

  

DATED:  September  28,  2018 

   uve  DocuSigned  by: 

sates  DocuSigned  by: 

Kya 

Callugy 

624EABZD300DC45E- 

RYAN  GALLEGO 
Commission  Member 

: 

A 
Jad l~ 

CAZASAATICOLOARE— 

\ 
STEVE  SPARKMAN 
Commission  Member 

DATED:  September  28,  2018 

   oo  DocuSigned  by: 

|  Obra  Me  crkins 

DEBR® D. NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

54

