BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
OF  THE  KLAMATH-TRINITY  JOINT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
HUMBOLDT  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

JUDITH  ROSE, 

OAH  No.  2018080221 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  of  the  Klamath-Trinity  Joint  Unified  School  District  (District)  on  October  24, 
25,  and  26,  2018,  in  Hoopa,  California.  The  Commission  included  Jani  Ayers,  Alysha 
Simoni,  and  Timothy  Aspinwall,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  presiding. 

Laurie  Kamerrer,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  District. 

Peder  J.  V.  Thoreen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Judith  Rose  (respondent),  who  was 

present  throughout  the  hearing. 

This  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  when  the  Commission  concluded  its 

deliberations  on  October  26,  2018. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  She  was 

regularly  assigned  as  a  Transitional  Kindergarten  (TK)  teacher  at  Trinity  Valley  Elementary 
School.  She  is  presently  suspended  from  the  District  without  compensation. 

2. 

On  May  16,  2018,  Elizabeth  Franklin,  Principal,  Trinity  Valley  Elementary 

School,  signed  a  letter  addressed  to  respondent  enclosing  a  Draft  Notice  of  Intent  to 
Immediately  Suspend  and  Dismiss;  and  Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of  Charges).  On

June  5,  2018,  the  District  Board  of  Trustees  considered  and  approved  the  Statement  of 
Charges.  On  June  6,  2018,  Jon  Ray,  Superintendent,  signed  a  letter  addressed  to  respondent 
notifying  her  that  she  had  been  placed  on  immediate  suspension  without  pay,  effective  June 
6,  2018,  and  enclosing  the  Statement  of  Charges.  On  June  13,  2018,  respondent  filed  a 
Demand  for  Hearing  on  the  Statement  of  Charges.  All  prehearing  jurisdiction  requirements 
were  met. 

3. 

The  District  contends  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  committed 
persistent  and  willful  violations  of  the  school  laws  or  regulations  governing  her  employment, 
and  that  she  is  evidently  unfit  for  service.  The  District  seeks  respondent’s  dismissal  from  her 
position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Background 

4. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  as  a  TK  teacher  since  2013. 

Prior  to  her  appointment  as  a  TK  teacher,  she  worked  for  the  District  as  an  elementary  school 
substitute  teacher  for  approximately  four  years.  Before  she  began  working  for  the  District, 
respondent  worked  in  various  capacities  including  the  operation  of  a  family  day  care  home 
and  substitute  teaching  in  Humboldt  County.  Respondent  earned  a  bachelor’s  degree  in 
liberal  studies  from  California  State  University,  Humboldt,  and  received  a  Multiple  Subject 
Teaching  Credential  in  June  1977.  She  received  a  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development  Certificate  in  September  2007. 

5. 

During  the  2017-2018  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  to  work  as  a  TK 

teacher  at  Trinity  Valley  Elementary  School.  There  were  between  11  and  14  students  in 
respondent’s  class  during  that  year. 

Allegations  of  Misconduct 

6. 

The  District  alleged  numerous  incidents  of  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness 

for  service,  persistent  violations  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations,  and 
violations  of  specified  laws  and  regulations  during  the  period  of  December  2017  through 
April  2018.  The  evidence  regarding  the  incidents  1s  individually  summarized  and  discussed 
below. 

DECEMBER  8,  2017  INCIDENT 

7. 

The  District  alleged  that  on  December  8,  2017,  respondent  took  S.L.,  a  four- 

year-old  student  diagnosed  with  autism,  from  her  class  to  the  school  office,  leaving  seven  TK 
students  alone  in  her  classroom,  and  that  she  thereby  failed  to  provide  required  supervision 
of  her  students.  The  evidence  at  hearing  established  that  on  December  8,  2017,  at 
approximately  1:00  p.m.,  during  free  play  time  in  respondent’s  classroom,  S.L.  bit  another 
child  on  the  shoulder  through  the  clothing.  The  child’s  skin  was  not  broken.  Respondent 
was  concerned  that  S.L.  might  hurt  another  child,  so  she  walked  S.L.  to  the  office 
approximately  70  feet  away  from  the  classroom.  Respondent  was  gone  from  her  classroom

for  approximately  30  to  60  seconds.  Later  the  same  day,  respondent  prepared  an 
Accountability  Referral  Form,  in  which  respondent  summarized  the  incident  and  stated: 
“This  is  more  evidence  that  the  TK  class  needs  a  teacher  assistant.  More  ‘active  supervision’ 
given  to  children  by  ‘two’  adults  will  eliminate  much  of  the  aggressive  behaviors.” 
Respondent  also  wrote  that  she  “had  to  leave  [her]  TK  class  ‘alone’  ‘unsupervised’  while 
[she]  walked  [S.L.]  to  the  office.  Is  this  considered  safe?”  Respondent’s  purpose  in  writing 
this  was  to  notify  Ms.  Franklin  that  something  needed  to  be  done  to  provide  better 
supervision  of  S.L.  Respondent  had  previously  advocated  for  a  one-on-one  aide  to  assist 
with  S.L.  Respondent  did  not  call  the  office  for  assistance  instead  of  taking  S.L.  to  the 
school  office  because  her  telephone  was  in  a  place  in  her  fully  enclosed  classroom  office 
where  she  could  not  see  her  students  while  using  the  telephone. 

8. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  acted  unreasonably  under  the 

circumstances  in  taking  S.L.  to  the  office,  even  considering  that  she  left  her  class  unattended 
for  approximately  30  to  60  seconds.  While  this  is  clearly  not  optimal,  respondent  was  faced 
with  circumstances  where  S.L.  was  acting  out  against  other  children.  The  alternative  course 
of  action  available  to  respondent  was  to  call  the  office  on  the  telephone  in  her  classroom 
office  from  which  she  would  be  unable  to  see  her  students.  Under  these  circumstances, 
respondent  chose  a  reasonable  course  of  action  to  prevent  S.L.  from  harming  other  students, 
and  to  minimize  the  time  that  they  were  left  unsupervised. 

9. 

Following  this  incident,  Ms.  Franklin  told  respondent  not  to  leave  children 

unsupervised,  and  to  instead  call  the  front  office  for  assistance.  Ms.  Franklin  moved 
respondent’s  telephone  to  a  location  in  her  classroom  office  closer  to  the  office  door,  but  still 
not  in  a  location  where  the  classroom  would  be  visible  while  using  the  telephone. 
Respondent  moved  the  telephone  back  to  its  original  place,  because  Ms.  Franklin  had  put  it 
in  a  precarious  position  on  some  storage  boxes,  and  not  within  sight  of  the  classroom.  Some 
months  later,  on  March  7,  2018,  Ms.  Franklin  sent  an  email  to  the  District’s  technicians, 
asking  them  to  relocate  respondent’s  telephone  to  a  location  requested  by  respondent  as  soon 
as  possible.  Respondent’s  telephone  was  not  relocated. 

JANUARY  12,  2018  INCIDENT 

10. 

The  District  alleged  that  on  January  12,  2018,  respondent  again  left  her  TK 
students  alone  in  her  classroom,  and  thereby  failed  to  provide  required  supervision  of  her 
students.  The  evidence  at  hearing  established  that  at  approximately  10:00  a.m.,  respondent 
decided  she  needed  to  take  S.L.  to  the  office  because  he  was  engaged  in  ongoing 
misbehavior  such  as  tackling  another  child  for  a  toy,  putting  toys  away  in  the  wrong  storage 
tub,  and  kicking  another  child.  At  the  moment  that  respondent  was  leaving  the  classroom 
with  S.L.,  Ms.  Franklin  walked  past  the  classroom  door.  Respondent  explained  the  situation 
to  Ms.  Franklin,  who  then  took  S.L.  to  the  office,  thereby  allowing  respondent  to  remain  with 
her  class.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  provide  supervision  of  her 
students  when,  by  happenstance,  Ms.  Franklin  was  available  to  take  S.L.  to  the  school  office.

JANUARY  24,  2018  INCIDENT 

11. 

The  District  alleged  that  on  January  24,  2018,  respondent  again  left  her  TK 

students  alone  while  she  took  S.L.  to  the  school  office,  and  thereby  failed  to  provide  required 
supervision  of  her  students.  The  evidence  at  hearing  established  that  at  approximately  10:45 
a.m.,  respondent  took  S.L.  to  the  office  because  he  would  not  stay  calm  as  the  children  were 
washing  their  hands  before  going  to  lunch.  The  children  were  at  that  time  standing  outside 
near  the  bathroom.  Respondent  was  able  to  see  the  other  students  at  all  points  when  she 
looked  back  to  check  as  she  walked  S.L.  to  the  office,  and  returned.  The  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  respondent  acted  inappropriately  under  the  circumstances.  S.L.  was  being 
disruptive,  and  respondent  was  able  to  see  her  other  students  as  she  took  S.L.  to  the  school 
office. 

12. 

_—‘  The  District  presented  testimony  from  Melinda  Gulley,  who  is  employed  as  a 

secretary  at  Trinity  Valley  Elementary  School.  Ms.  Gulley  testified  that  on  unspecified  dates 
she  saw  respondent  bring  children  to  the  office  three  to  four  times  per  week.  These  undated 
incidents  were  not  alleged,  and  Ms.  Gulley’s  testimony  is  not  sufficiently  specific  to  be 
persuasive  regarding  whether  respondent’s  students  were  left  unattended  in  her  class,  or 
under  the  supervision  of  another  adult  in  her  class,  on  the  playground,  or  elsewhere. 

MARCH  7,  2018  INCIDENT 

13. 

The  District  alleged  that  on  March  7,  2018,  respondent  used  inappropriate 

S.L.  would  not  cooperate  in  going  to  the  office.  Respondent  was 

force  against  S.L.  when  addressing  his  misconduct.  The  evidence  at  hearing  established  that 
at  approximately  11:30  a.m.,  respondent  was  getting  her  students  ready  to  bring  them  back 
from  the  playground.  She  asked  the  children  to  line  up  and  sit  on  the  curb. 
S.L.  refused  to 
follow  respondent’s  instructions.  He  would  not  sit  on  the  curb,  nor  would  he  walk  with  the 
class  to  the  classroom.  Respondent  then  asked  Ms.  Corona,  who  is  the  teacher  in  the 
classroom  next  to  the  playground,  to  take  the  rest  of  her  (respondent’s)  class  while  she  took 
S.L.  to  the  office. 
concerned  that  S.L.  may  try  to  elope  and  run  out  into  the  parking  lot  or  the  forest  next  to  the 
school.  She  had  seen  S.L.  and  other  students  open  the  gate  from  the  playground  to  the 
parking  lot  on  previous  occasions,  so  knew  he  could  do  so.  To  prevent  this  occurrence, 
respondent  picked  up  S.L.  from  behind  in  a  sort  of  bear  hug  and  began  to  carry  him  toward 
the  school  office.  On  the  way  to  the  office,  she  set  him  down  and  picked  him  up  repeatedly, 
and  attempted  to  make  him  walk  by  holding  his  arms  and  pushing  him  with  her  legs.  As 
respondent  approached  the  office,  she  saw  S.L.’s  mother,  J.L,  through  the  window  of  the 
school  office  (who  was  present  with  S.L.’s  father)  and  gestured  for  her  to  come  help.  S.L.’s 
father  came  out  of  the  office  and  snapped  his  fingers  at  S.L.,  who  then  immediately  calmed 
down  and  went  with  his  father. 

14.‘ 

J.L.  saw  respondent  trying  to  bring  S.L.  to  the  office.  To  her  observation, 

respondent  was  holding  S.L.’s  wrists  above  his  head,  with  his  back  toward  respondent,  while 
she  pushed  him  with  her  knees  to  get  him  to  move  forward.  S.L.  appeared  to  be  distressed 
and  was  trying  to  get  away.  J.L.  was  “disgusted”  and  “mortified”  by  what  she  saw.  After

this  incident,  S.L.  began  to  say  that  he  did  not  want  to  go  to  school,  that  he  did  not  want  to  go 
to  respondent’s  classroom  because  “she  is  mean  to  me”  and  “does  not  like  me.” 

15. 

Shari  Hostler,  who  is  employed  by  the  District  as  a  social  worker,  also 

observed  this  incident  from  the  school  office.  To  her  observation,  respondent  was  holding 
S.L.  by  his  wrists  as  he  faced  her.  He  was  sort  of  sitting  on  the  ground  in  the  exterior 
hallway.  S.L.  appeared  to  be  upset,  and  respondent  appeared  to  be  frustrated. 

16. 

|  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  acted  inappropriately  or  used 

excessive  force  under  the  circumstances.  Respondent  reasonably  determined  it  was 
necessary  to  take  S.L.  to  the  office  to  prevent  him  from  eloping  and  possibly  causing  harm  to 
himself.  S.L.  was  clearly  upset  by  the  fact  that  respondent  was  taking  him  to  the  office,  but 
respondent  did  not  use  more  force  than  reasonable  and  necessary  by  carrying  him  and 
pushing  him  with  her  legs  as  a  means  of  taking  him  to  the  school  office. 

MARCH  7,  2018  IEP  MEETING 

17. 

=  On  March  7,  2018,  an  Individualized  Education  Program  (IEP)  meeting  was 

held  with  attendees  including  respondent,  both  of  S.L.’s  parents,  Ms.  Franklin,  Craig  Kimball 
(Assistant  Superintendent  and  Special  Education  Director),  Tom  Veeh  (a  special  day  class 
teacher),  and  a  Redwood  Coast  Regional  Center  representative.  One  topic  of  discussion 
during  the  IEP  meeting  was  the  future  use  of  a  “behavior  journal”  that  respondent  and  S.L.’s 
parents  had  been  voluntarily  utilizing  since  February  1,  2018,  to  note  patterns  in  S.L.’s 
behavior.  The  behavior  journal  provided  a  means  by  which  S.L.’s  parents  could  write  their 
observations  of  S.L.’s  behavior  while  at  home,  and  put  the  journal  in  his  school  pack  so  that 
respondent  could  write  her  observations  of  S.L.’s  behavior  at  school.  In  this  way,  the 
behavior  journal  was  passed  back  and  forth  between  S.L.’s  parents  and  respondent  with  their 
accumulated  observations. 

18.‘ 

The  participants  of  the  IEP  meeting  discussed  how  to  continue  utilizing  the 

behavior  journal.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  IEP  meeting  an  amendment  to  the  IEP  was 
prepared,  which  reads  in  pertinent  part  as  follows: 

Christina  from  CBEM  [a  behavior  consultant]  created  a 
behavior  plan  and  chart  for  [respondent]  and  SCIA  [a  one-on 
one-aid]  to  use  on  a  daily  basis  to  assist  [S.L.]  with  behavior. 
The  chart  will  accompany  the  journal  entry  and  be  sent  home  on 
a  daily  basis. 

19. 

~~  Ms.  Franklin,  Mr.  Kimball,  and  S.L.’s  parents  understood  that  the  IEP  was 

amended  to  make  respondent’s  continued  participation  with  the  behavior  journal  a 
mandatory  component  of  the  IEP.  Respondent  did  not  understand  from  the  discussions  at  the 
IEP  meeting  or  the  IEP  amendment  that  the  behavior  journal  was  mandatory.  Respondent 
continued  writing  in  the  behavior  journal  until  April  2,  2018,  one  or  two  days  before  the 
District  put  her  on  administrative  leave.

20. 

Respondent  had  been  making  written  notes  of  S.L.’s  behavior  since  as  early  as 
October  2017,  partially  as  a  means  of  demonstrating  that  she  needed  a  one-on-one  aide  in  her 
classroom  to  help  with  S.L.  Respondent  shared  these  notes  with  Ms.  Franklin.  A  full-time 
one-on-one  aide  did  not  begin  working  with  S.L.  until  after  the  District  put  respondent  on 
administrative  leave  on  or  about  April  3,  2018. 

APRIL  2,  2018  BEHAVIOR  JOURNAL  ENTRY 

21. 

OnApril  2,  2018,  respondent  wrote  in  S.L.’s  behavior  journal  the  following 

entry: 

This  is  the  last  day  I  am  writing  in  this  book.  It  takes  too  much 
of  my  attention  and  I’m  not  seeing  much  improvement  in 
behavior.  If  they  ever  do  get  him  a  1  on  |  aid  that  person  can 
take  on  the  responsibility  of  daily  written  communication. 

Based  on  this  entry  in  the  behavior  journal,  and  respondent’s  statements  to  Ms. 
Franklin  at  a  meeting  on  May  3,  2018,  discussed  below,  the  District  alleged  that  respondent 
violated  S.L.’s  IEP  and  was  derelict  in  her  responsibilities  as  his  teacher.  Respondent 
credibly  testified  that  she  wrote  the  April  2,  2018  entry  because  she  felt  like  the  journaling 
was  accomplishing  nothing,  and  that  neither  S.L.’s  parents  nor  anyone  in  the  IEP  meetings 
were  talking  with  respondent  about  the  contents  of  the  behavior  journal.  Respondent 
credibly  testified  that  nobody  from  the  District  explicitly  directed  her  to  continue  writing  in 
the  behavior  journal,  and  that  she  would  have  followed  any  directive  that  she  do  so.  Ms. 
Franklin  testified  that  she  spoke  with  respondent  on  April  3,  2018,  and  that  respondent 
seemed  resistant  to  the  ongoing  journaling,  but  did  not  refuse  to  continue  with  it. 

22. 

On  May  3,  2018,  Ms.  Franklin  conducted  an  interview  with  respondent  on 

matters  including  her  April  2,  2018  journal  entry.  Paula  Wyant,  the  Principal  of  Hoopa 
Elementary  School,  took  notes  and  a  transcript  was  prepared.  During  the  interview, 
respondent  stated  the  following  regarding  her  final  journal  entry: 

It  [writing  in  the  behavior  journal]  1s  not  my  job.  I  was  angry, 
frustrated,  pissed  off  as  to  why  the  school  was  not  supporting 
this  child.  I  came  to  you  several  times.  I  was  given  a  TK  class 
with  no  help.  I  wanted  to  convince  them  that  nothing  was 
improving.  S.L.  is  the  worst  out  of  several  challenging  students. 
I  thought  I’m  going  to  write  this  down.  I’m  logging  it 
voluntarily  and  giving  it  to  the  parents.  I  started  writing  it  in  the 
fall. 
giving  [it]  to  the  parents. 

I  gave  all  the  copies  to  administration.  I  was  writing  and 

(fl...  (9)

The  reality  is  that  I  wasn’t  writing  everything  S.L.  did. 
never  not  be  writing.  I  couldn’t  write  everything  because  it 
would  all  be  negative.  Some  days  I  wouldn’t  or  I  would  forget 
and  have  to  do  it  and  then  run  it  over  to  after-school.  Then  I 
was  thinking,  ‘Why  am  I  doing  this?’  Nothing  is  changed.  No 
aid,  I  had  a  classroom  aide  sometimes.  After  4/2  I  was  done,  I 
was  just  done. 

I  would 

23. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  persistently  refused  to  write  in 

the  behavior  journal.  First,  she  wrote  in  the  behavior  journal  up  until  April  2,  2018,  which 
was  one  or  two  days  before  the  District  suspended  her.  Second,  respondent  credibly  testified 
that  she  would  have  complied  with  any  directive  that  she  continue  to  maintain  the  behavior 
journal,  and  that  she  did  not  understand  that  the  IEP  made  it  mandatory.  Third,  respondent’s 
comments  to  Ms.  Franklin  during  the  May  3,  2018  interview  approximately  one  month  after 
the  District  had  suspended  her,  were  a  clear  expression  of  frustration,  but  did  not  include  a 
refusal  to  write  in  the  behavior  journal  if  directed  to  do  so. 

APRIL  2,  2018  INCIDENT 

24. 

The  District  alleged  that  on  April  4,  2018,!  respondent  inappropriately  placed 

her  hands  on  S.L.  out  of  frustration  and  anger,  and  used  an  inappropriate  physical  restraint  on 
S.L.  The  evidence  at  hearing  established  that  on  April  2,  2018,  there  was  an  incident  when 
S.L.  began  kicking  a  female  student,  W.P.,  as  she  and  other  students  were  sitting  on  the 
classroom  carpet  waiting  to  be  released  for  recess.  When  respondent  saw  S.L.  kicking  W.P., 
she  verbally  told  him  to  stop,  but  he  continued  kicking  W.P.  Respondent  was  afraid  that  S.L. 
would  injure  W.P.,  and  possibly  kick  her  into  unconsciousness.  To  prevent  harm  to  W.P., 
respondent  put  her  hands  on  S.L.’s  shoulders  and  gently  pulled  him  away  from  W.P. 
Respondent  attempted  to  talk  with  S.L.,  but  he  was  crying  and  screaming.  Respondent  then 
told  S.L.  that  he  needed  to  go  sit  in  his  “cubby”  to  calm  down.  Each  student  had  a  cubby  to 
store  their  belongings.  There  is  a  built-in  bench  in  front  of  each  cubby.  S.L.  would  not 
voluntarily  go  to  his  cubby,  so  respondent  used  her  hands  to  guide  him.  When  they  got 
within  approximately  one  foot  of  the  cubby,  S.L.  resisted  and  started  kicking.  S.L.  jumped  at 
respondent.  She  put  her  hands  up,  backed  away,  and  again  and  told  him  to  go  to  his  cubby, 
and  that  when  he  calmed  down  she  would  come  talk  with  him.  S.L.  went  to  his  cubby  and 
sat  on  the  built-in  bench  in  front  of  it,  facing  outward  from  the  cubby.  After  approximately 
30  to  60  seconds,  he  began  to  calm  down,  and  respondent  came  back  to  him.  Respondent 
then  took  S.L.  out  to  the  playground  where  his  classmates  were  on  recess.  Respondent  and 
S.L.  then  walked  the  perimeter  of  the  playground  together  during  which  time  S.L.  willingly 
held  respondent’s  hand.  After  they  walked  the  perimeter  of  the  playground,  S.L.  was  totally 
calm.  Respondent  then  told  him  he  could  go  play  with  the  other  students,  which  he  did. 

  

'  The  Statement  of  Charges  incorrectly  states  that  the  incident  occurred  on  April  4, 

2018.  The  District  did  not  move  to  amend  the  Statement  of  Charges  to  conform  to  proof,  and 
respondent  did  not  object  or  make  any  argument  with  respect  to  the  variance.  The  variance 
between  the  proof  and  the  pleadings  did  not  result  in  prejudice  to  either  party.

25. 

 <A.P.is  W.P.’s  mother.  A.P.  occasionally  volunteered  in  respondent’s 

classroom  during  the  afternoons,  and  would  then  take  her  daughter  home  at  the  end  of  the 
school  day.  A.P.  observed  that  respondent  was  very  good  at  redirecting  students.  A.P. 
knows  S.L.  and  his  mother  J.L.  from  respondent’s  classroom.  The  first  time  A.P.  and  W.P. 
met  S.L.  and  J.L.,  S.L.  punched  W.P.  in  the  face.  A.P.  was  not  present  to  observe  S.L. 
kicking  her  daughter  in  respondent’s  classroom  on  April  2,  2018.  Later  that  day  or  the  next, 
when  A.P.  was  giving  W.P.  a  bath,  she  noticed  that  W.P.  had  many  bruises  on  her  body. 
A.P.  asked  what  happened,  and  W.P.  explained  that  S.L.  had  kicked  her  while  in 
respondent’s  classroom. 

26. 

 J.L.is  S.L.’s  mother.  During  the  afternoon  or  evening  of  April  2,  2018,  J.L. 

was  helping  S.L.  remove  his  shoes  and  socks.  When  J.L.  attempted  to  remove  S.L.’s  socks, 
he  withdrew  his  leg  in  pain  and  said  “Ouch,  ouch,  don’t  touch.”  J.L.  gently  removed  S.L.’s 
sock,  and  saw  a  dark  bruise  on  the  front  of  his  leg  near  the  ankle.  S.L.  said  that  respondent 
had  forced  him  into  his  cubby  because  he  had  “been  bad”  and  that  he  had  kicked  the  cubby 
and  bruised  his  leg  while  resisting  respondent.  S.L.  had  not  wanted  to  go  into  the  cubby,  but 
told  J.L.  it  was  his  fault  because  he  “was  bad.”  J.L.  called  her  husband,  who  took  a 
photograph  of  the  bruising.  No  photograph  of  the  bruising  was  offered  as  evidence. 

27. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  more  force  than 

reasonably  necessary  or  that  she  acted  in  frustration  or  anger  when  she  pulled  S.L.  away 
from  W.P.,  and  directed  him  to  a  cubby  to  calm  down.  Respondent  was  faced  with  a 
situation  where  S.L.  was  kicking  a  young  girl  as  she  sat  or  lay  on  the  floor.  Respondent 
acted  reasonably  to  prevent  potential  serious  harm  to  W.P.  Respondent  also  acted  reasonably 
when  she  verbally  and  with  use  of  her  hands  directed  S.L.  to  sit  on  the  shelf  in  front  of  his 
cubby,  where  he  began  to  calm  down  in  less  than  one  minute.  The  bruising  on  S.L.’s  leg 
may  have  been  prevented  if  respondent  had  instead  pulled  W.P.  away  from  S.L.  as  he  was 
kicking  her,  and  then  removed  the  other  students  to  a  safe  place  until  help  could  be 
summoned  to  control  S.L.  This  course  of  action  would  have  presented  its  own  set  of 
problems,  including  the  risk  of  allowing  S.L.  to  further  harm  W.P.  as  respondent  pulled  her 
away  from  him,  and  the  absence  of  supervision  while  respondent  summoned  help  to  control 
S.L.  Given  the  situation  that  respondent  faced,  she  chose  a  reasonable  course  of  action  and 
used  no  more  force  than  reasonably  necessary  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  her  students. 

NOTORIETY  AND  PUBLICITY 

28. 

Two  days  before  the  hearing,  the  District’s  legal  counsel  showed  a  Facebook 

posting  to  J.L.  The  Facebook  posting  was  authored  by  a  man  who  1s  in  a  romantic 
relationship  with  the  parent  of  a  child  who  was  in  respondent’s  class  with  S.L.  The 
Facebook  posting  was  sent  to  approximately  11  other  individuals  in  April  2018,  and  reads  as 
follows: 

For  those  with  kids  at  trinity  valley  school  [sic]  children  are 
being  abused  by  their  teacher  [respondent]  today  was  shoving  an 
autistic  kid  into  a  cubby  he  has  bruised  legs  and  when  another

child  didn’t  like  that  he  got  smacked  in  the  mouth  there  is  a 
meeting  tomorrow  but  this  is  unexcusable  [sic]  I  hope  the  school 
does  the  right  thing  and  fire  [sic]  her  if  she  doesn’t  go  to  jail  I 
am  pissed  the  teachers  [sic]  the  bully  HELL  NAW! 

MANAGEMENT  OF  MALADAPTIVE  STUDENT  BEHAVIORS 

29. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  did  not  use  appropriate  behavior 

management  techniques  in  her  supervision  of  S.L.,  based  on  the  following  incidents.  First, 
on  December  8,  2017,  S.L.  bit  another  child  on  the  shoulder,  as  described  in  Factual  Finding 
7.  Second,  on  April  2,  2018,  S.L.  kicked  another  child,  as  described  in  Factual  Finding  24. 
Third,  on  January  16,  2018,  while  in  the  school  library  under  respondent’s  supervision,  S.L. 
tried  to  grab  a  book  that  another  girl  was  reading.  The  child  resisted,  and  S.L.  punched  her 
on  the  hand.  Respondent  intervened  and  told  S.L.  that  the  book  belonged  to  the  other  child, 
and  directed  him  back  to  his  seat  by  touching  him  with  her  hand.  S.L.  kicked  and  screamed 
at  respondent,  but  then  calmed  down  within  approximately  two  minutes. 

30. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  ineffective  or 

inappropriate  behavior  management  techniques  in  her  supervision  of  S.L.  The  evidence 
showed  that  S.L.  acted  out  unpredictably.  In  each  instance,  respondent  took  quick  and 
appropriate  action,  and  used  no  more  force  than  reasonably  necessary  to  prevent  harm  to  her 
students. 

INCIDENT  WITH  J.W. 

31. 

J.W.  was  one  of  respondent’s  TK  students  during  the  2017-2018  school  year. 

The  District  alleged  that  there  were  multiple  instances  when  respondent  grabbed  J.W.  and 
physically  pulled  him  into  the  main  office.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  on  one 
occasion  during  class  recess,  on  a  date  which  respondent  could  not  recall,  J.W.  was  sitting 
and  lying  on  the  school  sidewalk  screaming  and  crying.  Respondent  was  concerned  that 
J.W.  might  hit  his  head  on  the  sidewalk  and  injure  himself.  Respondent  wanted  to  take  J.W. 
to  the  office  before  recess  ended,  when  the  playground  monitors  would  no  longer  be 
supervising  her  other  students.  Respondent  picked  up  J.W.  in  a  cradling  fashion  and  carried 
him  to  the  office.  Respondent  was  not  physically  restraining  J.W.,  and  would  have  put  him 
down  if  he  had  asked  her  to  do  so.  Respondent  carried  J.W.  to  the  school  office  in  order  to 
ensure  his  safety,  and  in  time  to  supervise  her  other  students  when  they  came  back  from 
recess. 

32. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  inappropriate  or  excessive 

force  in  taking  J.W.  to  the  school  office.  Rather,  she  took  reasonable  and  appropriate  steps, 
using  no  more  force  than  reasonably  necessary,  to  prevent  him  from  injuring  himself  on  the 
sidewalk,  all  before  her  other  students  returned  from  recess.

INCIDENT  WITH  K.K. 

33. 

K.K.  was  one  of  respondent’s  TK  students  during  the  2017-2018  school  year. 

The  District  alleged  that  in  or  around  November  2017,  she  pulled  and  dragged  K.K.  to  a  wall 
outside  of  her  classroom.  Respondent  testified  that  she  recalled  one  occasion  when  she  had 
K.K.  sit  on  a  chair  outside  the  classroom  door  for  a  few  minutes,  though  she  acknowledged 
that  in  a  previous  deposition  she  testified  this  had  occurred  three  or  four  times.  Respondent 
testified  credibly  that  during  the  time  that  K.K.  was  sitting  outside  the  classroom  door, 
respondent  would  keep  the  door  open  so  that  she  could  check  on  K.K.  at  the  same  time  she 
was  attending  to  her  other  students  in  the  classroom. 

34. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  excessive  force  or  failed  to 

appropriately  supervise  K.K.  There  is  no  evidence  that  she  pulled  or  dragged  K.K.  Also, 
when  respondent  had  K.K.  sit  outside  the  classroom,  he  was  close  to  the  open  door  where  she 
could  easily  see  him. 

35. 

The  District  presented  testimony  from  Melinda  Gulley,  who  testified  that  on 

an  unspecified  date  she  saw  two  students  seated  outside  respondent’s  classroom  with  the 
door  closed.  These  undated  incidents  were  not  alleged,  and  Ms.  Gulley’s  testimony  is  not 
sufficiently  specific  to  be  persuasive  regarding  respondent’s  general  level  of  supervision,  or 
her  supervision  of  K.K. 

STUDENT  SNACKS 

36. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  withheld  snacks  from  children  as  a  form 

of  discipline  during  the  2017-2018  school  year.  Respondent  and  the  children’s  parents 
voluntarily  brought  healthy  snacks  to  be  distributed  to  the  children  during  transitions  in  the 
morning  and  at  the  end  of  the  day.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  she  gave  snacks  to 
children  only  when  they  were  sitting  down,  and  would  not  give  snacks  to  them  while  they 
were  running  around.  This  gave  children  an  incentive  to  sit  down  as  requested,  and  provided 
for  their  safety  while  eating  food.  A  child  would  most  likely  not  get  a  snack  if  he  or  she  did 
not  settle  down  during  the  limited  time  that  respondent  was  handing  out  snacks. 

37.  —  J.L.  testified  that  she  saw  respondent  withhold  food  from  children  on  three 

separate  occasions.  In  one  instance  in  October  or  November  2017,  she  saw  respondent  at  the 
end  of  the  day  telling  some  children  “you  get  a  snack”  and  other  children  “you  don’t  get  a 
snack  until  you  behave  and  don’t  move.”  On  another  occasion  in  October  or  November 
2017,  J.L.  saw  respondent  tell  a  child  “you  don’t  get  a  snack;  you  were  bad  today”  which 
made  the  child  scream.  J.L.  also  testified  that  she  also  saw  respondent  physically  remove  a 
food  item  from  the  hands  of  a  child  by  holding  the  child’s  wrist  and  taking  the  food,  but  did 
not  describe  the  circumstances  or  the  amount  of  force  that  respondent  used  sufficient  to  make 
any  factual  finding  that  respondent  used  inappropriate  force.  Both  respondent  and  J.L. 
testified  credibly  regarding  their  recollections. 

10

38. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  snacks  as  a  form  of 

discipline.  Respondent  voluntarily  offered  the  snacks  to  her  students,  which  provided  good 
and  appropriate  incentive  for  students  to  quiet  down. 

TRAINING  REGARDING  USE  OF  PHYSICAL  FORCE 

39. 

On  November  1,  2017,  the  District  provided  a  two-hour  refresher  training 

regarding  Nonviolent  Crisis  Prevention  Intervention.  The  instructor  was  Paula  Wyant, 
Principal  of  Hoopa  Elementary  School.  Ms.  Wyant  1s  a  certified  trainer  for  the  Crisis 
Prevention  Institute  (CPI).  CPI  1s  a  training  organization  that  specializes  in  the  safe 
management  of  disruptive  and  assaultive  behavior.  Ms.  Wyant  described  the  CPI  training  as 
providing  a  set  of  strategies  and  techniques  to  reduce  an  individual’s  harm  to  self  or  others. 
CPI  training  emphasizes  that  physical  force  should  be  used  only  as  a  last  resort  when  there  is 
imminent  risk  of  harm  to  self  or  others,  and  when  all  other  techniques  have  been  exhausted. 
Based  on  CPI  standards,  physical  intervention  should  be  used  to  manage  disruptive  or 
assaultive  behavior  only  with  a  minimum  of  three  individuals  who  have  been  trained  in  the 
techniques.  Unnecessary  use  of  physical  force  could  cause  physical  injury  to  a  student  or 
jeopardize  the  trust  between  the  student  and  teacher.  CPI  training  includes  that  if  one  student 
is  assaulting  another,  the  victim  of  the  assault  should  be  removed,  rather  than  attempting  to 
remove  the  student  committing  the  assault.  Ms.  Wyant  testified  that  these  CPI  techniques 
apply  to  TK  students. 

40. 

Respondent  voluntarily  attended  approximately  one  hour  of  the  two-hour  CPI 

refresher  course  during  a  professional  development  day.  She  did  not  attend  any  preceding 
full  CPI  training  for  which  the  two-hour  course  served  as  a  refresher.  Ms.  Wyant  testified 
that  respondent  said  during  the  training  session  that  she  often  needs  to  guide  students  using 
physical  contact,  and  that  Ms.  Wyant  stated  in  response  that  physical  touch  must  be  used 
only  as  a  last  resort,  and  utilized  in  a  CPI  team  of  at  least  three  individuals.  Respondent 
testified  that  she  does  not  recall  Ms.  Wyant  saying  that  physical  force  may  be  used  only  with 
a  team  of  at  least  three  CPI  trained  individuals.  Both  respondent  and  Ms.  Wyant  testified 
credibly  regarding  their  recollections. 

41. 

Respondent  did  not  follow  CPI  methods  in  her  management  of  disruptive  and 

assaultive  behavior.  This,  however,  is  not  determinative  of  whether  respondent  used  more 
force  than  reasonably  necessary  to  protect  her  students  from  imminent  harm  to  their  health  or 
safety.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent’s  actions  were  appropriate  under  the 
circumstances,  and  that  they  were  reasonably  necessary  to  prevent  S.L.  and  other  students 
from  causing  harm  to  themselves  or  others. 

INSTRUCTIONS  REGARDING  USE  OF  FORCE 

42. 

Craig  Kimball  regularly  attended  IEP  meetings.  Respondent  was  instructed  in 

his  presence,  in  multiple  IEP  meetings,  as  early  as  October  2017,  not  to  use  physical  force 
with  S.L.  Respondent’s  reply  was  something  to  the  effect  that  they  did  not  know  how  hard  it 
is  to  get  S.L.  to  comply  with  verbal  directions.  During  the  IEP  meetings,  respondent  also 

11

advocated  for  a  full-time  one-on-one  aide  to  be  with  S.L.  throughout  the  school  day.  Mr. 
Kimball  acknowledged,  as  soon  as  January  2018,  that  it  was  obvious  S.L.  needed  a  one-on- 
one  aide. 

43. 

Respondent  testified  that  during  one  of  the  IEP  meetings,  Ms.  Franklin 
instructed  her  not  to  touch  S.L.  Respondent  did  not  recall  the  date  of  the  IEP  meeting. 
Respondent  did  not  comply  with  the  instructions  she  received  at  the  IEP  meetings  not  to 
touch  S.L.  and  to  refrain  from  using  physical  force.  Respondent  testified  that  she  believes 
she  utilized  best  practices  under  the  circumstances  on  March  7,  2018,  when  she  took  S.L. 
from  the  playground  to  the  school  office,  and  on  April  2,  2018,  when  she  pulled  S.L.  away 
from  kicking  W.P.  and  directed  him  to  his  cubby. 

44.‘ 

The  fact  that  respondent  did  not  follow  instructions  she  received  to  not  touch 
or  use  force  with  S.L.  is  not  conclusive  on  the  issue  of  whether  respondent  used  more  force 
than  reasonably  necessary  to  protect  her  students  from  the  risk  of  imminent  harm.  The  most 
persuasive  evidence  is  that  respondent’s  actions  were  appropriate  under  the  circumstances. 
Any  deviation  from  the  directions  she  received  from  Mr.  Kimball  and  Ms.  Franklin  occurred 
in  the  context  of  the  fact  that  S.L.  needed  a  one-on-one  aide  as  early  as  January  2018.  In  the 
absence  of  a  one-on-one  aide,  respondent  took  appropriate  actions  to  protect  her  students 
from  harm  with  the  resources  she  had  available  at  the  time. 

Respondent’s  Evidence 

LETTERS,  AFFIDAVITS  OF  SUPPORT,  AND  TESTIMONY  FOR  RESPONDENT 

45. 

Respondent  provided  approximately  20  letters  of  support  which  were  admitted 

into  evidence  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d),”  and  two 
affidavits  of  support  which  were  admitted  into  evidence  pursuant  to  Government  Code 
section  11514.°  The  following  excerpts  provide  a  sample  of  the  letters  and  affidavits. 

Teresa  Cyr,  a  first  grade  teacher  at  Hoopa  Elementary  School  prepared  a  letter  dated 

May  23,  2018,  which  states  in  part  as  follows: 

  

*  Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d),  states:  “Hearsay  evidence  may  be 

used  for  the  purpose  of  supplementing  or  explaining  of  the  evidence  but  over  timely 
objection  shall  not  be  sufficient  in  itself  to  support  a  finding  unless  it  would  be  admissible 
over  objection  in  civil  actions.” 

>  Government  Code  section  11514,  provides  that  a  party  may  introduce  an  affidavit 

into  evidence,  and  that  it  will  be  given  the  same  effect  as  if  the  affiant  had  testified  orally,  if 
the  proponent  of  the  affidavit  provides  a  copy  to  the  opposing  party  10  or  more  days  prior  to 
the  hearing,  and  the  opposing  party  does  not  request  cross-examination  of  the  affiant. 

12

Ramona  Sokolow,  a  special  education  teacher  at  Hoopa  Valley  High  School  prepared 

an  affidavit  dated  October  11,  2018,  which  states  in  part  as  follows: 

[Respondent]  and  I  taught  almost  side-by-side  at  the  primary 
wing  while  she  taught  at  Hoopa  Elementary  [S|chool  for  well 
over  nine  years. 

I  thoroughly  enjoyed  my  time  working  with  [respondent],  and 
came  to  know  her  as  a  truly  valuable  asset  to  absolutely  any 
elementary  or  primary  school  team.  She  is  honest,  dependable, 
and  incredibly  hard-working.  Beyond  that,  she  1s  an  impressive 
transitional  kinder  teacher  who  is  always  consistent,  kind  and 
very  helpful  while  she  worked  with  her  students. 

(fl...  (9) 

Along  with  her  undeniable  talent,  [respondent]  has  always  been 
an  absolute  joy  to  work  with.  She  is  a  true  team  player,  and 
always  manages  to  foster  positive  discussions  and  bring  the  best 
out  of  other  students  and  staff. 

I  have  known  [respondent]  for  about  10  years.  She  has  been  a 
professional  colleague,  and  she  was  my  daughter’s  Transitional 
Kindergarten  (TK)  teacher  four  years  ago,  during  the  2014-2015 
school  year.  Additionally,  [respondent]  has  substituted  in  my 
classroom  at  Hoopa  Valley  High. 

During  the  year  [respondent]  taught  my  daughter,  I  would  visit 
the  classroom  and  chat  with  [respondent].  Also,  I  would  often 
watch  as  she  was  preparing  for  the  next  day... . 

[Respondent]  impressed  me  with  her  creativity  as  a  teacher.  She 
taught  to  all  senses.  My  daughter  came  home  with  projects  that 
showed  the  very  tactile  lessons  along  with  songs  and  stories. 

(fl...  (9) 

(fl...  (9) 

Overall,  I  strongly  believe  that  [respondent]  1s  a  consummate 
teacher.  ... 

Shelley  Middleton,  whose  nephew  was  one  of  respondent  students,  prepared  an 

affidavit  dated  October  12,  2018,  which  states  as  in  part  as  follows: 

13

My  nephew,  [name  deleted],  was  a  student  in  [respondent’s] 
Transitional  Kindergarten  class  in  Trinity  Valley  Elementary 
School  in  2016. 

I  participated  in  [respondent’s]|  class  by  popping  in  throughout 
the  year.  I  also  drove  one  of  the  vans  during  a  school  field  trip 
to  the  beach  in  Trinidad,  CA. 

[Respondent]  was  always  a  pleasure  to  be  around,  and  I  enjoyed 
watching  her  interact  with  her  students. 

46. 

Tom  Veeh,  a  special  day  teacher  at  Trinity  Valley  Elementary  School,  testified 

on  respondent’s  behalf  and  provided  a  letter  of  support.  Mr.  Veeh  has  worked  for  the 
District  for  approximately  four  years,  and  has  known  respondent  for  roughly  the  same 
amount  of  time  as  a  colleague  and  through  carpooling.  As  a  special  day  teacher,  Mr.  Veeh 
works  with  students  who  spend  part  of  the  day  with  him,  and  part  of  the  day  in  general 
education  classes.  He  did  not  share  any  students  with  respondent  prior  to  her  administrative 
leave,  but  did  have  opportunities  to  observe  her  classroom  and  her  teaching  abilities.  Mr. 
Veeh  wrote  in  his  letter  of  support  the  following: 

I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  see  many  students  get  their  first 
experience  of  school  from  [respondent].  She  provides  a 
welcoming  atmosphere  in  a  developmentally  appropriate 
environment  for  her  many  young  students.  She  not  only 
supports  the  students  in  her  class  but  she  is  also  an  important 
part  of  the  school  climate  where  she  supports  her  fellow 
teachers  and  staff. 

S.L.  was  placed  on  Mr.  Veeh’s  caseload  a  very  short  time  after  respondent  was  put  on 

administrative  leave. 
S.L.  now  has  a  one-on-one  aide  to  help  throughout  each  school  day.  In  this  regard,  Mr.  Veeh 
wrote  the  following  in  his  letter  of  support: 

S.L.  spends  approximately  30  minutes  per  day  in  Mr.  Veeh’s  class. 

[Respondent]  worked  diligently  to  convince  the  IEP  team  that 
the  autistic  child  needed  a  one  on  one  aide  to  help  manage  the 
child’s  behavior  and  to  [e]nsure  a  successful  experience  for  the 
child  in  Transitional  Kindergarten.  That  child  was  finally 
provided  with  a  one  on  one  aide.  The  one  on  one  aide  helps  the 
autistic  child  when  they  become  frustrated  or  shows 
inappropriate  behavior.  The  support  of  the  aide  also  has  helped 
the  other  students  in  the  class  with  their  behavior.  ... 
there  had  been  appropriate  support  in  [respondent’s]  class  since 
the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  then  she  would  not  have  been 
put  in  a  situation  that  no  teacher  wants  to  experience. 

I  feel  if 

14

47. 

Susan  Adkins  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  2011,  and  worked  as  a 

classroom  aide  in  respondent’s  room  during  the  2017-2018  school  year.  She  worked  in 
respondent’s  classroom  approximately  one  and  a  half  hours  per  day,  approximately  20  days 
each  in  October  and  November  2017,  10  days  in  December  2017,  and  five  days  in  January 
2018.  Based  on  her  observations,  Ms.  Adkins  has  the  utmost  respect  for  respondent’s  calm 
temperament. 

48. 

The  testimony,  affidavits,  and  letters  of  support  are  credible.  Taken  together, 
they  provide  persuasive  evidence  that  respondent  cares  deeply  about  her  students  and  has  a 
generally  cooperative  character  in  her  desire  to  promote  their  education  and  protect  their 
safety. 

Discussion 

49.  —_ The  evidence  established  that  respondent  did  not  use  more  force  than 

reasonably  necessary  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  her  students.  Specifically,  during  the 
incidents  with  S.L.  on  March  7,  and  April  4,  2018,  respondent  took  appropriate  action  and 
used  no  more  force  than  reasonably  necessary.  With  respect  to  the  incidents  with  J.W.  and 
K.K.,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  any  force. 

50. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  failed  to  utilize  appropriate 

behavior  management  techniques  to  control  S.L.,  with  respect  to  the  incidents  when  he  bit 
another  child  on  December  8,  2017;  tried  to  take  a  book  from  a  child  and  punched  her  on 
January  16,  2018;  and  kicked  another  child  on  April  2,  2018.  Respondent  did  what  she  could 
to  manage  S.L.’s  behavior  with  the  resources  available  to  her.  Respondent  had  advocated  for 
additional  resources  in  the  form  of  a  full-time  one-on-one  aide  for  S.L.  It  was  acknowledged 
by  Mr.  Kimball  as  early  as  January  2018,  that  S.L.  needed  a  one-on-one  aide.  These  events 
occurred  in  the  absence  of  a  one-on-one  aide,  which  made  it  particularly  difficult  to  manage 
S.L.’s  behavior.  S.L.  now  has  a  one-on-one  aide,  and  his  behavior  is  much  easier  to  manage 
as  a  result. 

51. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  inappropriately  left  her  students 
unattended.  On  December  8,  2017,  respondent  did  not  act  unreasonably  in  taking  S.L.  to  the 
school  office  when  he  had  been  acting  out  and  bit  another  student.  Respondent  was  gone 
from  her  class  for  approximately  30  to  60  seconds.  She  had  no  ready  alternative  other  than 
using  the  telephone  in  her  classroom  office,  where  she  would  not  have  been  able  to  see  her 
students.  On  January  12,  2018,  Ms.  Franklin  took  S.L.  to  the  school  office  at  the  moment 
that  respondent  was  preparing  to  do  so,  and  for  this  reason  respondent’s  students  were  not 
left  unattended.  On  January  24,  2018,  respondent  did  not  act  unreasonably  when  she  took 
S.L.  to  the  school  office  while  her  other  students  were  standing  outside  near  the  bathroom. 
The  students  were  within  respondent’s  view  when  she  looked  back  to  check  on  them  while 
walking  S.L.  to  the  school  office. 

52. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  refused  to  write  in  S.L.’s 

behavior  journal.  Respondent  wrote  in  the  behavior  journal  consistently  up  until  April  2, 

15

2018,  just  one  or  two  days  before  she  was  placed  on  administrative  leave.  Respondent 
expressed  frustration  with  the  behavior  journal  during  her  meeting  with  Ms.  Franklin  on  May 
3,  2018,  but  did  not  then  or  at  any  other  time  specifically  refuse  to  continue  writing  1n  itt. 
Rather,  respondent  credibly  testified  that  she  would  have  complied  with  an  explicit  directive 
to  continue  writing  in  the  behavior  journal. 

53. 

The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  withheld  snacks  from  children 

as  a  means  of  discipline.  Respondent  and  parents  voluntarily  brought  snacks  to  give  to 
children  during  transition  times  in  the  morning  and  afternoon.  Respondent  would  not  give  a 
snack  to  a  child  until  he  or  she  complied  with  a  request  to  sit  or  calm  down.  Consequently,  a 
child  would  likely  not  receive  a  snack  if  he  or  she  failed  to  comply  during  the  limited  time 
that  snacks  were  being  distributed.  Snacks  were  not  used  as  a  disciplinary  measure.  Rather, 
they  were  used  to  provide  healthy  nutrition,  and  an  incentive  for  the  children  to  comply  with 
requests  during  transition  times. 

54. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  set  forth 

below,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct. 
“Immoral  conduct”  is  defined  in  Legal  Conclusion  3  to  include  moral  indifference  and  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  the  public  welfare.  Respondent  did  not  display  any  of  these 
qualities  or  characteristics.  Rather,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  desired  the  best 
for  her  students,  and  took  reasonable  steps  to  protect  their  safety. 

55. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  set  forth 
below,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service.  “Evident 
unfitness  for  service”  is  defined  in  Legal  Conclusion  4  to  include  temperamental  defects  and 
fixed  character  traits  in  failing  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  school  district.  Respondent 
did  not  display  any  of  these  characteristics.  Rather,  the  evidence  of  respondent’s  conduct 
and  the  testimony  and  affidavits  on  her  behalf  established  that  respondent  has  a  cooperative 
character  and  that  her  actions  manifest  her  desire  to  promote  her  students’  education  and 
protect  their  safety. 

56. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  set  forth 

below,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  persistent  violations  of  or 
refusals  to  obey.  As  defined  in  Legal  Conclusion  5,  this  requires  a  showing  of  intentional 
and  continual  refusals  to  cooperate.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  displayed 
any  of  these  characteristics  in  her  supervision  of  students  or  in  the  implementation  of  S.L.’s 
IEP. 

/// 

/// 

16

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Law  and  Regulations 

1. 

A  school  district  which  seeks  to  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

from  its  employment  bears  the  burden  of  proof  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035;  Bevii  v.  Brisco  (1989)  211  Cal.App.3d  986.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  provides  in  pertinent  part  that 
no  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  by  a  school  district  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
following  causes,  including  for: 

. 

. 

(1)  immoral  conduct, . 
(6)  evident  unfitness  for  service... 
(8)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of 
the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district 
employing  him  or  her. 

3. 

“Immoral  conduct”  for  the  purpose  of  dismissal  of  a  teacher  is  defined  to 

include  “conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency, 
depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful  [sic],  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San 
Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

4. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.  ... 
[It]  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice 
that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.” 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992) 
2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 

5. 

‘Persistent  violations  of  or  refusal  to  obey”  school  laws  or  reasonable 

regulations  requires  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San 
Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174 
Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

6. 

District  Board  Policy  (BP)  and  Administrative  Regulation  (AR)  5142  require 
District  staff  to  be  responsible  for  proper  supervision  of  students  during  school  hours.  AR 
5142  requires  that  teachers  “be  present  at  their  respective  rooms  and  shall  open  them  to 
admit  students  not  less  than  30  minutes  before  the  time  when  school  starts.” 

17

7. 

District  BP  and  AR  6159  require  the  District  to  maintain  a  valid  IEP  for  all 

qualifying  students,  and  to  provide  services  to  qualifying  students  in  accordance  with  his/her 
IEP. 

8. 

Education  Code  section  44807  prohibits  a  teacher  from  using  physical  control 
over  a  student  that  exceeds  “the  amount  of  physical  control  reasonably  necessary  to  maintain 
order,  protect  property,  or  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  pupils,  or  to  maintain  proper  and 
appropriate  conditions  conducive  to  learning.” 

9. 

Education  Code  section  49001  prohibits  corporal  punishment  of  a  student. 

Section  49001,  subdivision  (a)  states  as  follows: 

For  purposes  of  this  section  “corporal  punishment”  means  the 
willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of, 
physical  pain  on  a  pupil.  An  amount  of  force  that  1s  reasonable 
and  necessary  for  a  person  employed  by  or  engaged  in  a  public 
school  to  quell  a  disturbance  threatening  physical  injury  to 
.  is  not  and  shall  not  be  construed  to  be  corporal 
persons  .. 
punishment  within  the  meaning  and  intent  of  this  section. 

10. 

Education  Code  sections  56000,  56032,  and  56345  require  the  District  to 

provide  all  qualifying  students  with  a  free,  appropriate  public  education  through  the  creation 
and  implementation  of  an  IEP. 

Alleged  Causes  for  Discipline 

11. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  persistently  failed  to  properly  supervise 

her  students  during  school  hours  in  violation  of  BP  and  AR  5142,  in  that: 
students  were  injured  in  her  classroom  on  April  2,  2018,  and  during  the  2017-2018  school 
year;  (2)  respondent  left  her  class  unattended  while  she  took  S.L.  to  the  school  office  on 
December  8,  2017,  and  January  12  and  24,  2018;  and  (3)  respondent  used  inappropriate 
physical  force  against  S.L.  on  March  7  and  April  4,  2018,  against  J.W.  during  the  fall  of  the 
2017-2018  school  year,  and  against  K.K.  in  or  around  November  2017. 

(1)  several 

12. 

_—_  Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  and  the 

specific  Factual  Findings  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  12(a)  through  (c)  below,  the 
evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  persistently  failed  to  properly  supervise  her 
students  during  school  hours  in  violation  of  BP  and  AR  5142. 

12(a). 

First,  based  on  Factual  Findings  7  through  16,  24  through  27,  29,  30,  39 

through  44,  and  49,  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  exercised  all  reasonable 
diligence  in  her  supervision  of  S.L.,  and  promptly  responded  when  he  acted  out  to  prevent 
and/or  minimize  any  harm  that  S.L.  might  cause  to  himself  or  other  students. 

18

12(b).  Second,  based  on  Factual  Findings  7  through  12,  and  51,  the  evidence 
established  that  respondent  left  her  class  unattended  only  on  December  8,  2017,  and  January 
24,  2018,  and  that  she  acted  reasonably  under  the  circumstances  on  both  occasions.  Even  if 
respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  AR  5142  requirement  that  teachers  “be  present  at  their 
respective  rooms”  on  December  8,  2017,  this,  combined  with  her  conduct  on  January  12  and 
24,  2018,  does  not  rise  to  the  level  of  a  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  a  school 
regulation,  and  does  not  under  the  circumstances  of  this  case  warrant  dismissal  or  suspension 
of  respondent. 

12(c).  Third,  based  on  Factual  Findings  13  through  16,  24  through  27,  31  through  35, 

and  49,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  excessive  physical  force  against 
S.L.  on  March  7  and  April  4,  2018,  against  J.W.  during  the  fall  of  the  2017-2018  school  year, 
and  against  K.K.  in  or  around  November  2017. 

13. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  willfully  and  persistently  refused  to 

comply  with  S.L.’s  IEP,  which  required  that  respondent  report  S.L.’s  behavior  in  a  daily 
journal,  in  persistent  violation  of  BP  and  AR  6159. 

14. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  and 

particularly  Factual  Findings  17  through  23,  and  52,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
respondent  willfully  and  persistently  refused  to  comply  with  S.L.’s  IEP. 

15. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent  repeatedly  used  inappropriate  physical 
force  against  S.L.  on  March  7  and  April  4,  2018,  against  J.W.  during  the  fall  of  the  2017- 
2018  school  year,  and  against  K.K.  in  or  around  November  2017,  in  persistent  violation  of 
Education  Code  sections  44807  and  49001. 

16. 

—  Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  and 

particularly  Factual  Findings  13  through  16,  24  through  27,  31  through  35,  and  49,  the 
evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  used  inappropriate  physical  force  against  S.L., 
J.W.,  or  K.K,  or  that  the  force  used  constituted  “corporal  punishment.” 

17. 

The  District  alleged  that  respondent,  by  her  conduct  alleged  in  the  causes  for 

discipline  set  forth  above,  willfully  and  persistently  failed  to  provide  S.L.  with  a  free, 
appropriate  public  education  (FAPE),  in  persistent  violation  of  Education  Code  sections 
56000,  56032,  and  56345. 

18. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  and 

particularly  Factual  Findings  17  through  23,  and  52,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that 
respondent  willfully  failed  to  provide  S.L.  with  a  FAPE. 

19. 

—_  The  District  alleged  that  respondent,  by  her  conduct  alleged  in  the  Statement 

of  Charges  as  a  whole,  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  committed  persistent  and  willful 
violations  of  the  school  laws  or  regulations  governing  her  employment,  and  that  she  1s 

19

evidently  unfit  for  service,  as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1), 
(6),  and  (8). 

20. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the  evidence 

did  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  persistent  and  willful 
violations  of  the  school  laws  or  regulations  governing  her  employment,  or  that  she  is 
evidently  unfit  for  service. 

Fitness  to  Teach 

21. 

Generally,  cause  for  discipline  must  relate  to  a  certificated  employee’s  fitness  to 

teach,  within  the  meaning  of  the  various  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of  Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  did  not  find  cause  to 
discipline  respondent.  An  analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  is  therefore  unnecessary. 
Separately  and  in  addition,  “[t]he  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what 
constitutes  unfitness  to  teach...  ,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate 
sanction.”  (California  Teachers  Association  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327, 
343-344.)  Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still 
has  broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana 
Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.)  Based  on  a  full  review  and 
consideration  of  the  evidence  and  arguments  in  this  case,  the  Commission  has  determined 
that  neither  dismissal  nor  suspension  of  respondent  from  the  District  is  warranted  because  the 
misconduct  alleged  is  unsupported  by  the  evidence  and/or  not  serious  enough  to  support 
dismissal  or  suspension. 

22. 

The  District  did  not  sustain  its  burden  of  proving,  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  demonstrated  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  or  that  she  persistently  violated  or  refused  to  obey  the  applicable  laws  and 
regulations.  For  this  reason,  the  Statement  of  Charges  must  be  dismissed. 

Conclusion 

/// 

/// 

/// 

20

The  Statement  of  Charges  filed  by  the  District  against  Judith  Rose  is  DISMISSED. 

ORDER 

DATED:  November  26, 

2018 

fe  hyp 

DATED:  November  26, 

2018 

(Hi Sc 47TADO448C7CB4GS... 

DATED:  November  26, 

2018 

(a  4  1FS342E... 

  

JANI  AYERS,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

  

ALYSHA  SIMONI,  Member 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

26BAECCBESEF4?8... 

  

TIMOTHY  ASPINWALL,  Chair 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

21

