BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
CULVER  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  Dismissal  of: 

JEFF  ROSE, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.:  2018100560 

DECISION 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Los 
Angeles,  California,  on  March  4-7,  2019.  The  Commission  members  were  Jewel  Desosa; 
Tanya  Golden;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Thomas  Heller,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Culver  City  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  Esq.,  represented  respondent  Jeff  Rose. 

The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  end  of  the  hearing  on  March  7, 

2019.  The  Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session. 

SUMMARY 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  fourth-grade  teacher,  for  allegedly 

engaging  in  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students  despite  multiple  warnings  and 
directives  to  change  his  behavior.  The  physical  contact  included  allowing  students  to  give 
respondent  shoulder  massages,  tickling  students,  placing  his  cheek  against  a  student’s  cheek, 
picking  up  a  student,  flicking  girls’  pony  tails  and  tousling  boys’  hair,  hugging  students,  and 
similar  conduct.  Respondent  admits  most  of  the  physical  contact  but  denies  it  was 
inappropriate,  and  requests  that  he  be  allowed  to  return  to  teaching.  Despite  respondent’s 
arguments,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  causes  for  dismissal,  and  a  majority

of  the  Commission  concludes  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a 
permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Respondent’s  Background 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  who  was 

assigned  as  a  fourth-grade  teacher  at  Linwood  E.  Howe  Elementary  School  in  Culver  City, 
California,  until  being  placed  on  leave  before  this  case  began.  He  started  working  for  the 
District  in  1997.  Before  that,  he  was  a  teacher  for  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
for  about  two  years.  Respondent  has  a  degree  in  psychology  and  holds  a  multi-subject 
teaching  credential  with  an  emphasis  in  cross-cultural  language  and  academic  development 
(CLAD). 

Letter  of Reprimand  in  2014 

2. 

On  September  11,  2014,  the  parents  of  one  of  respondent’s  students  met  with 

Principal  Kim  Indelicato  and  expressed  concern  about  a  report  from  their  child  that 
respondent  had  asked  for  a  massage  during  class.  Ms.  Indelicato  met  with  respondent  about 
the  report,  and  respondent  acknowledged  that  the  week  prior,  while  reviewing  a  student’s 
test,  the  student  went  behind  him  and  gave  him  a  short  massage  on  the  shoulders. 
Respondent  told  the  student  “that  feels  good”  or  words  to  that  effect,  and  the  next  student  did 
the  same  thing  while  respondent  was  reviewing  that  student’s  test.  Altogether,  respondent 
permitted  up  to  10  students  to  give  him  shoulder  massages  in  this  manner. 

3. 

The  incident  was  of  particular  concern  because  respondent  had  received  two 

prior  written  directives  to  refrain  from  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students.  The  first 
came  from  Ms.  Indelicato’s  predecessor  in  a  Conference  Summary  Memorandum  dated 
February  24,  2012,  and  the  second  came  from  Ms.  Indelicato  in  a  Letter  of  Warning  dated 
November  19,  2012.  On  respondent’s  motion,  evidence  about  the  matters  underlying  the  two 
prior  directives  was  excluded  from  the  hearing  because  those  underlying  matters  occurred 
more  than  four  years  before  the  filing  of  this  case.  (See  Ed.  Code,  §  44944.1,  subd.  (d)(3).)! 
However,  evidence  of  respondent’s  receipt  of  the  prior  directives  was  admitted  to  establish 
the  circumstances  under  which  respondent  permitted  the  shoulder  massages  from  students  in 
September  2014. 

4. 

The  District  placed  respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave  while  it 

investigated  the  incident  involving  the  massages.  On  September  30,  2014,  then-Assistant 
Superintendent  Leslie  Lockhart  sent  respondent  a  “Letter  of  Reprimand;  Notice  of 
Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance”  (Letter  of  Reprimand)  formally 
reprimanding  him  for  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students.  The  Letter  of  Reprimand 

  

'  Undesignated  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

concerned  the  massages,  the  matters  underlying  the  prior  directives  in  2012,  and 
respondent’s  violation  of  those  directives  in  permitting  the  massages. 

5. 

The  Letter  of  Reprimand  advised  respondent  that  his  physical  contact  with 

students  was  unprofessional  and  unsatisfactory  and  violated  District  Governing  Board 
(Board)  Policy  4119.21  (Professional  Standards),  and  Board  Policy  5137  (Positive  School 
Climate).  The  Letter  of  Reprimand  also  included  specific  directives  to  respondent  with 
regard  to  future  physical  contact  with  students,  and  notified  him  that  violations  could  result 
in  further  disciplinary  proceedings  up  to  and  including  dismissal.  As  relevant  here,  the 
directives  included: 

1. 

Refrain  from  physical  contact  with  your  students  except 
when  such  physical  contact  is  reasonable  and  necessary 
for  one  or  more  of  the  following  purposes: 

a. 

b. 

To  maintain  order,  protect  property,  or  protect  the 
health  and  safety  of  pupils; 

To  quell  a  disturbance  threatening  physical  injury  to 
persons  or  damage  to  property; 

c. 

For  self-defense; 

d. 

To  obtain  possession  of  weapons  or  other  dangerous 
objects  within  the  control  of  a  student. 

This  directive  specifically  includes  but  is  not  limited  to 
hugging,  kissing,  massages,  and  picking  up  students. 
You  must  not  initiate  such  contact  with  any  student,  and 
you  must  not  permit  any  student  to  engage  in  any  such 
contact  with  you,  if  initiated  by  a  student. 

If  there  1s  ever  an  occasion  in  the  future  when  you  do 
find  it  necessary  to  engage  in  or  permit  physical  contact 
with  a  student  or  students,  you  must,  no  later  than  the 
end  of  the  school  day  on  which  the  contact  occurred, 
report  it  to  me  [1.e.,  Ms.  Lockhart]  and  provide  an 
explanation  of  the  circumstances  that  led  to  the  contact. 

If  you  are  seeking  to  give  encouragement  to  a  student  or 
to  celebrate  learning,  use  an  appropriate  and  professional 
technique  that  does  not  involve  physical  contact,  such  as 
positive  recognition  in  the  form  of  applause,  sticker,  or 
awarding  of  some  classroom  privilege.

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Follow  BP  4119.21,  Professional  Standards,  and  BP 
5137,  Positive  School  Climate.  Copies  are  attached 
hereto  for  your  reference.  You  are  directed  to  review  and 
familiarize  yourself  with  these  policies. 

Follow  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching 
Profession  (CSTP).  A  copy  is  attached  hereto  for  your 
reference.  You  are  directed  to  review  and  familiarize 
yourself  with  these  standards. 

(Exhibit  10,  pp.  3-4.) 

Incident  in  2018 

6. 

Respondent  initially  complied  with  the  directives  in  the  Letter  of  Reprimand, 

but  later  resumed  physical  contact  with  students  that  did  not  comply.  The  incident  that 
brought  this  to  light  occurred  on  or  about  March  16,  2018,  when  respondent  came  up  behind 
female  student  K.C.,  tickled  her  sides  with  his  hands,  and  then  put  his  arm  around  her 
Shoulder  and  his  cheek  to  her  cheek.  K.C.  described  this  conduct  to  her  mother,  who 
reported  it  to  the  District  via  email  on  March  17,  2018. 

7. 

The  District  placed  respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave,  and  respondent 

met  with  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  Jennifer  Slabbinck  and  respondent’s 
union  representative  on  April  18,  2018,  to  discuss  the  incident.  Counsel  for  the  District  also 
interviewed  respondent  about  the  incident  on  June  29,  2018,  with  Ms.  Slabbinck  and 
respondent’s  counsel  present.  In  the  meeting  on  April  18,  2018,  respondent  described  his 
cheek-to-cheek  contact  with  K.C.  as  a  “nuzzle.”  In  the  interview  on  June  29,  2018, 
respondent  acknowledged  that  while  K.C.  was  working  on  a  science  activity  in  his 
classroom,  respondent  approached  K.C.  from  behind,  placed  his  hands  on  or  near  the  sides  of 
K.C.’s  ribcage,  and  tickled  K.C.  on  her  sides  to  gain  her  attention.  Respondent  also 
acknowledged  that  approximately  five  minutes  later,  when  student  K.C.  completed  the 
activity,  respondent  placed  his  left  arm  around  K.C.’s  shoulder,  and  then  lifted  his  arm  to  the 
left  side  of  K.C.’s  head  and  pressed  the  side  of  K.C.’s  head  or  face  against  his  own. 

8. 

Respondent’s  statements  in  the  meeting  and  interview  also  revealed  that  his 

tickling  of  K.C.  was  not  an  isolated  incident.  By  his  own  account  in  the  meeting  on  April  18, 
2018,  respondent  tickled  other  students  on  their  rib  cages  as  a  way  of  saying  “hello.”  In  the 
interview  on  June  29,  2018,  respondent  further  stated  he  tickled  student  N.A.  during  the 
2016-2017  school  year  during  a  morning  assembly.  Respondent  stated  that,  while  standing 
behind  student  N.A.,  he  tickled  N.A.’s  ribcage  on  both  sides,  under  the  arms.  Respondent 
stated  that  his  purpose  in  doing  so  was  to  get  N.A.’s  attention  or  greet  N.A. 

9. 

In  the  interview  on  June  29,  2018,  respondent  also  stated  he  tickled  student 
J.L.  in  or  about  January  2018.  Respondent  acknowledged  that,  while  J.L.  was  sitting  at  a 
desk  reading,  he  placed  both  hands  high  on  the  sides  of  J.L.’s  rib  cage  and  tickled  J.L.

Respondent  stated  that  he  did  so  as  an  “opening”  in  order  to  “see  how  [J.L.]  was  doing,”  and 
that  respondent  were  ‘just  trying  to  be  funny,”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

10. 

During  the  interview  on  June  29,  2018,  respondent  also  acknowledged  tickling 

student  I.C.  in  or  about  November  2017.  Respondent  stated  that,  while  I.C.  was  seated  and 
reading,  respondent  approached  I.C.  from  behind,  and  tickled  I.C.’s  lower-mid  torso  on  the 
left  and  right  side.  Respondent  stated  he  did  so  as  a  means  of  gaining  I.C.’s  attention. 

11. 

Inthe  meeting  on  April  18,  2018,  respondent  further  acknowledged  flicking 

girls’  pony  tails,  stating  that  it  was  a  way  of  saying  “hello,”  and  that  he  may  have  placed  his 
hand  on  students’  shoulders  as  a  way  of  saying  “you  are  doing  good.”  When  interviewed  on 
June  29,  2018,  respondent  again  acknowledged  flicking  girls’  pony  tails  and  described  it  as 
‘just  a  little  boink,”  “just  checking  1n,”  “a  way  to  say  what’s  going  on  or  how  are  you,”  and 
‘a  way  to  get  their  attention  or  icebreak,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  Respondent  also 
acknowledged  tousling  boys’  hair. 

12. 

During  the  2017-2018  school  year,  respondent  also  picked  up  student  G.G.  by 

her  elbows  and  carried  her  for  about  five  steps  in  a  hallway  before  putting  her  down. 
Respondent  was  not  G.G.’s  teacher  at  the  time,  but  knew  G.G.  from a  prior  science  rotation 
in  his  classroom.  G.G.  was  walking  with  another  class  in  a  hallway  when  respondent  picked 
her  up. 

13. 

On  multiple  occasions  since  September  30,  2014,  respondent  also  hugged 

students  despite  the  directive  specifically  prohibiting  him  from  doing  so.  Respondent 
acknowledged  doing  so  when  interviewed  on  June  29,  2018. 

14. 

When  interviewed  on  June  29,  2018,  respondent  stated  he  kept  the  Letter  of 

Reprimand  in  a  file  drawer  in  his  classroom  where  he  saw  it  every  day.  Respondent  also 
stated  he  thought  to  himself  after  tickling  student  N.A.  that  he  should  not  have  done  so,  and 
thought  to  himself  after  tickling  student  I.C.  that  1t  was  unnecessary  and  that  he  could  have 
caught  the  student’s  attention  in  another  way. 

15. 

|  Respondent  did  not  report  any  of  the  physical  contact  described  above  to  Ms. 

Lockhart,  despite  the  directive  in  the  Letter  of  Reprimand  to  do  so.  He  also  did  not  report 
any  of  it  to  Ms.  Indelicato.  Since  the  Letter  of  Reprimand,  the  only  physical  contact 
respondent  reported  was  that  a  student  once  hit  him  on  the  rear  end. 

Procedural  History 

16. 

On  August  24,  2018,  Ms.  Lockhart  —  who  by  then  was  District  Superintendent 

—  filed  a  Statement  of  Charges  for  respondent’s  dismissal  with  the  Board  and  served  it  on 
respondent.  The  alleged  causes  for  dismissal  included  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional 
conduct,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of 
or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations.  On  August  28,  2018,  the  Board  directed  Ms. 
Lockhart  to  give  notice  to  respondent  of  the  Board’s  intent  to  dismiss  him.  On  the  same  day,

respondent  was  served  with  a  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  based  on  the  Statement  of  Charges, 
but  excluding  the  immoral  conduct  charges.  The  District  filed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to 
Dismiss  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  August  31,  2018.  Respondent 
submitted  a  Request  for  Hearing  dated  August  31,  2018,  which  the  District  received  on 
September  5,  2018.  On  November  7,  2018,  the  District  served  a  Notice  of  Hearing  on 
respondent,  through  his  counsel. 

Hearing 

DISTRICT’S  EVIDENCE 

17. 

The  District  called  two  students  (G.L.  and  G.G.)  to  testify  about  respondent’s 

behavior,  and  four  parents  to  testify  about  student  accounts  of  his  behavior.  The  District  also 
called  Ms.  Indelicato,  Ms.  Slabbinck,  and  Ms.  Lockhart  to  testify  about  their  actions  and 
respondent’s  statements  regarding  his  physical  contact  with  students.  These  witnesses,  the 
documentary  evidence,  and  respondent’s  admissions  established  the  facts  described  above, 
which  are  almost  all  of  the  specific  acts  and  omissions  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 
The  only  specific  alleged  acts  that  the  evidence  did  not  establish  were:  (1)  respondent 
squeezed  the  knees  of  students  (Statement  of  Charges,  p.  6,  §  11);  and  (2)  respondent  hit 
GL’s  hips  with  his  open  hands  to  make  them  move  back  and  forth  from  side  to  side  (id.  at  p. 
6,  §  12).  Regarding  the  former  allegation,  G.L.  testified  respondent  squeezed  her  knees 
while  she  was  seated  at  her  desk,  but  that  seemed  unlikely  since  G.L.’s  knees  would  have 
been  under  her  desk  while  she  was  seated.  Respondent  denied  squeezing  any  student’s 
knees,  and  the  District  presented  insufficient  evidence  to  prove  otherwise.  Regarding  the 
latter  allegation,  G.L.  testified  respondent  touched  her  hips  on  one  occasion  while  she  was 
seated,  not  that  he  hit  them  to  make  them  move  back  and  forth  from  side  to  side. 
Furthermore,  other  evidence  suggested  the  allegation  pertained  to  a  different  student  who 
was  dancing,  not  G.L.  Respondent  denied  the  allegation  as  to  any  student,  and  the  evidence 
did  not  establish  tt. 

18. 

The  District’s  evidence  also  included  Board  Policy  4119.21  (Professional 

.  Board  expects  District  employees  to  maintain  the  highest 

Standards)  and  Board  Policy  5137  (Positive  School  Climate).  Board  Policy  4119.21 
provides  in  relevant  part,  “The  .. 
ethical  standards,  to  follow  [District  policies  and  regulations,  and  to  abide  by  state  and 
federal  laws.  Employee  conduct  should  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  [D]istrict  and  advance 
the  goals  of  the  educational  programs...  .”  (Exhibit  10.)  Board  Policy  5137  provides  in 
relevant  part,  “All  staff,  volunteers,  visitors  and  parents/guardians  are  expected  to  serve  as 
role  models  for  students  by  demonstrating  positive,  professional  attitudes  and  respect  toward 
each  student,  parent/guardian,  volunteer  and  staff  member...  .”  (/bid.) 

RESPONDENT’S  EVIDENCE 

19. 

|  Respondent  testified  he  was  designated  a  master  teacher  several  times,  and 
was  a  member  of  the  school’s  leadership  team  and  an  administrative  designee  on  multiple 
occasions.  He  has  also  served  on  curriculum  committees  and  organized  the  school’s  science

fair.  His  overall  performance  ratings  have  met  or  exceeded  District  standards,  even  during 
the  school  year  when  he  received  the  Letter  of  Reprimand.  At  the  end  of  that  year,  he 
received  an  overall  rating  of  “Meets  Expectations,”  with  a  “Needs  Improvement”  rating  in 
just  one  subcategory  regarding  ethical  standards  and  conduct  that  enhances  the  integrity  of 
the  District.  Despite  the  incident,  Ms.  Indelicato  placed  him  on  a  five-year  performance 
review  schedule,  not  on  a  more  frequent  schedule.  Respondent  has  also  won  two  Honorary 
Service  Awards  for  his  service  to  the  school  above  and  beyond  his  job  duties. 

20. 

Regarding  the  massage  incident  in  September  2014,  respondent  testified  the 
first  shoulder  massage  from  a  female  student  lasted  about  10  seconds.  The  second  student 
performed  a  similar  massage,  after  which  respondent  tapped  his  own  shoulders  to  indicate 
another  student  could  perform  a  third  massage.  While  respondent  originally  said  he  received 
massages  from  10  students,  he  now  believes  it  was  only  five  or  six  students.  Eventually  he 
told  the  students  to  stop.  The  last  student  to  give  him  a  massage  was  R.B.,  who  did  so  at 
other  students’  urging.  Respondent  testified  R.B.  appeared  uncomfortable  and  hesitant  about 
the  massage,  so  respondent  called  it  off.  Respondent  also  testified  he  stated,  “I  want  to  bite 
you”  to  R.B.  on  two  or  three  other  occasions,  which  respondent  characterized  as  a  term  of 
endearment. 

21. 

Regarding  the  incident  with  K.C.  in  March  2018,  respondent  testified  he  gave 

her  just  a  short  “poke”  on  the  ribs  to  get  her  attention  that  lasted  a  split  second.  He  then 
kneeled  down  next  to  her,  put  his  arm  around  her,  moved  his  head  toward  her  head  until  they 
touched  temple  to  temple,  and  told  K.C.  she  did  very  well  on  the  test.  Regarding  picking  up 
G.G.  in  the  hallway,  respondent  testified  he  did  it  just  to  be  funny.  With  respect  to  tickling 
students,  respondent  testified  his  contacts  with  students  were  short  “jolts”  or  “pokes”  to  the 
ribs  rather  than  tickles.  He  does  not  recall  using  the  word  “tickle”  in  the  meeting  in  April 
2018  or  the  interview  in  June  2018. 

22. 

With  respect  to  hugging  students,  respondent  testified  he  did  not  hug  students 

in  the  2014-2015  or  2015-2016  school  years  after  receiving  the  Letter  of  Reprimand,  but 
resumed  the  practice  in  the  2016-2017  school  year.  After  that,  he  hugged  students  about  two 
or  three  times  per  day.  Respondent  testified  that  other  teachers  hugged  students,  and  he  was 
not  doing  anything  that  other  teachers  were  not.  Respondent  also  believes  the  Letter  of 
Reprimand  was  an  overreaction  and  displayed  a  lack  of  confidence  in  his  judgment. 
Nonetheless,  he  is  willing  to  change  his  behavior  if  allowed  to  return  to  teaching,  even  if  the 
restrictions  may  be  inconsistent  with  his  personal  philosophy. 

23. 

Respondent  also  called  fellow  teachers,  an  instructional  aide,  and  several 

parents  of  former  students,  who  all  testified  they  never  observed  any  inappropriate  physical 
contact  between  respondent  and  a  student.  In  addition,  respondent  offered  excerpts  from  the 
deposition  of  another  parent  to  the  same  effect.  These  witnesses  described  respondent  as  an 
excellent  teacher  who  was  well  liked  and  fostered  a  positive  learning  environment.  One  of 
the  parents,  Amy  F.,  was  volunteering  in  the  classroom  during  the  massage  incident  in 
September  2014.  She  testified  respondent  did  nothing  wrong  during  that  incident,  and  that 
the  students  initiated  the  contact,  which  respondent  did  nothing  to  reciprocate.  Amy  F.  did

observe  respondent  playfully  pick  up  a  student  in  the  classroom  that  day,  but  that  also  did  not 
concern  her. 

DISCUSSION  OF  EVIDENCE 

24. 

The  evidence  established  that  respondent’s  physical  contact  with  students  was 

inappropriate  on  several  levels.  First,  respondent’s  receipt  of  shoulder  massages, 
“nuzzl{ing]”  a  student,  picking  up  a  student,  and  tickling  students  (or  poking  or  jolting  them) 
displayed  an  overly  familiar  attitude  of  respondent  toward  his  students.  Second,  this  conduct 
and  respondent’s  habit  of  regularly  hugging  students  violated  the  express  directives  in  the 
Letter  of  Reprimand  to  refrain  from  any  unnecessary  physical  contact  with  students.  Third, 
respondent’s  failure  to  refrain  from  such  contact  despite  the  directives  in  the  Letter  of 
Reprimand  and  prior  directives  demonstrated  an  unwillingness  or  inability  to  comply  with 
District  directives  and  policies.  Fourth,  respondent  did  not  report  any  of  the  physical  contact 
to  Ms.  Lockhart,  even  though  she  expressly  instructed  him  to  do  so. 

25. 

Respondent  considered  the  Letter  of  Reprimand  to  be  an  overreaction  to  the 

massage  incident,  and  suggested  the  District  should  have  had  more  confidence  in  his 
judgment.  But  the  massage  incident  was  not  entirely  student-initiated;  respondent  himself 
stated  he  tapped  his  own  shoulders  to  encourage  one  of  the  students  to  give  him  a  massage, 
something  that  Amy  F.  apparently  did  not  see.  Encouraging  that  behavior  reflected  poor 
judgment,  and  respondent’s  behavior  since  then  casts  even  more  doubt  on  his  judgment. 
Despite  the  warnings  and  directives  to  change  his  behavior,  respondent  has  initiated 
unnecessary  physical  contact  with  students  again  and  again.  This  pattern  of  behavior 
undermines  his  assertion  that  he  will  change  his  future  behavior  toward  students,  and 
supports  the  District’s  Statement  of  Charges  as  set  forth  below. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Standards 

1. 

As  a  permanent  employee,  the  Board  may  not  dismiss  respondent  except  for 

one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a),  and/or  section 
44933.  The  causes  for  dismissal  include  unprofessional  conduct  (§§  44932,  subd.  (a)(2), 
44933),  unsatisfactory  performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)),  evident  unfitness  for  service 
(§  44932,  subd.  (a)(6)),  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  state’s  school  laws 
or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state 
board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(8)). 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  dismissal  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 
Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  “‘evidence  that  has 
more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.” 
Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.)

[Citation.]”  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri- 

Causes for  Dismissal 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

3. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  has  been  described  as  “‘that  which  violates  the  rules 

or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  such  conduct  which  is  unbecoming  a  member  of  a 
profession  in  good  standing.’”  (Board  of Education  of the  City  of Los  Angeles  v.  Swan 
(1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  quoting  66  Corpus  Juris,  p.  55,  overruled  in  part  on  another 
ground  in  Bekiaris  v.  Board  of Education  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575,  587,  fn.  7.) 

4. 

Dismissal  on  grounds  of  unprofessional  conduct  requires  that  the  employee 

must  have  first  received  notice  of  the  respect  in  which  his  conduct  has  been  unprofessional, 
and  provided  an  opportunity  to  overcome  his  deficiencies.  More  specifically,  as  provided  by 
section  44938,  subdivision  (a): 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon 
any  charges  of  unprofessional  conduct  unless  at  least  45 
calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its 
authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against  whom 
the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unprofessional  conduct, 
specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of 
behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee 
an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the 
grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the 
evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11  (commencing  with 
Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

5. 

The  notice  requirement  was  met  in  this  case,  and  a  majority  of  the 

Commission  concludes  that  respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional.  In  the  Letter  of 
Reprimand  dated  September  30,  2014,  respondent  was  specifically  notified  that  his  physical 
contact  with  students  was  inappropriate  and  unprofessional.  But  respondent  continued  to 
engage  in  such  physical  contact  with  students,  even  after  being  warned  that  he  could  be 
dismissed  for  doing  so.  This  reflected  poor  judgment  and  an  overly  familiar  attitude  toward 
his  students.  (Factual  Findings  24-25.)  To  a  majority  of  the  Commission,  this  conduct  was 
unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  teaching  profession  in  good  standing  (Board  of Education  of 
the  City  of Los  Angeles  v.  Swan,  supra,  41  Cal.2d  at  p.  553),  and  indicates  unfitness  to  teach 
according  to  the  factors  described  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d 
214  (Morrison),  which  are  analyzed  below.  Therefore,  a  majority  of  the  Commission  finds 
cause  to  dismiss  respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct. 

UNSATISFACTORY  PERFORMANCE 

6. 

Unsatisfactory  performance  is  grounds  for  dismissal  separate  and  apart  from 

unprofessional  conduct.  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(5).)  Like  unprofessional  conduct,  dismissal  for 
unsatisfactory  performance  requires  that  the  employee  must  have  first  received  notice  of  the

respect  in  which  his  performance  has  been  unsatisfactory,  and  been  provided  an  opportunity 
to  overcome  his  deficiencies.  More  specifically,  section  44938,  subdivision  (b)(1)  requires: 

At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board 
or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against 
whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unsatisfactory 
performance,  specifying  the  nature  thereof  with  such  specific 
instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as  to  furnish 
the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall 
include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to 
the  employee. 

7. 

The  notice  requirement  was  met  in  this  case,  and  the  Commission 

unanimously  concludes  that  respondent’s  conduct  amounted  to  unsatisfactory  performance. 
In  the  Letter  of  Reprimand,  respondent  was  specifically  informed  that  his  inappropriate 
physical  contact  with  students  was  unsatisfactory,  and  specifically  warned  that  failure  to 
change  his  behavior  could  result  in  his  dismissal.  (Factual  Finding  5.)  The  same  deficiency 
was  also  specifically  noted  in  respondent’s  next  performance  evaluation.  (Factual  Finding 
19.)  Respondent,  however,  subsequently  engaged  in  unnecessary  and  prohibited  physical 
contact  with  students  on  multiple  occasions.  (Factual  Findings  6-13,  24-25.)  This  was 
unsatisfactory  performance  and  constitutes  cause  for  dismissal. 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

8. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.’  [Fn. 
omitted.]”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444  (Woodland).)  This  cause  for  discipline 
“connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that 
one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/bid.) 
““Unprofessional  conduct’  is,  as  it  were,  often  a  lesser  included  form  of  proscribed  behavior 
within  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service.’  Thus,  conduct  constituting  ‘evident  unfitness  for 
service’  will  often  constitute  “unprofessional  conduct.’  But  the  converse  is  not  true. 
‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in 
temperament  —  a  requirement  not  necessary  for  a  finding  of  ‘unprofessional  conduct.’”  (/d. 
at  p.  1445.) 

9. 

A  majority  of  the  Commission  concludes  that  respondent’s  conduct 

demonstrated  a  fixed  character  trait  or  defect  in  temperament.  Respondent’s  actions  cannot 
be  dismissed  as  a  momentary  lapse  in  judgment  that  was  out  of  character  with  any  otherwise 
redeeming  qualities  that  he  may  have.  Considering  the  multiple  warnings  and  directives 
against  such  actions  over  several  years,  it  is  apparent  from  respondent’s  conduct  that  he  1s 
either  unwilling  or  incapable  of  refraining  from  unnecessary  physical  contact  with  students. 

10

10. 

A  person  acting  with  common  sense  and  self-control  would  take  directives  and 

warnings  against  such  behavior  to  heart  and  abide  by  them.  Respondent  did  not,  and  a 
majority  of  the  Commission  concludes  his  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach  according  to 
the  factors  described  in  Morrison,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  214,  which  are  analyzed  below.  That 
respondent  did  not  do  so  on  many  occasions  also  leads  a  majority  of  the  Commission  to 
conclude  that  his  character  and  temperament  are  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable 
for  teaching.  Therefore,  a  majority  of  the  Commission  finds  cause  to  dismiss  respondent 
based  on  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  BOARD  REGULATIONS 

11. 

Persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  one’s  employing  school  district 
is  another  independent  basis  for  dismissal.  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(8).)  Persistent  refusal 
requires  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union 
High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176, 
1196,  italics  omitted.)  The  term  “persistent”  in  this  context  can  be  defined  as  “refusing  to 
relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  .. 
constantly  repeated.  [Citation.]’”  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v. 
Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82.) 

.  stubborn;  persevering  .. 

. 

12. 

The  Commission  unanimously  concludes  that  respondent  persistently  violated 
and  refused  to  obey  the  reasonable  regulations  of  the  Board.  Respondent  was  advised  in  the 
Letter  of  Reprimand  that  his  physical  contact  with  students  violated  Board  polices, 
specifically,  Board  Policy  4119.21  (Professional  Standards)  and  Board  Policy  5137  (Positive 
School  Climate).  (Factual  Finding  5.)  That  physical  contact  failed  to  “enhance  the  integrity 
of  the  [D]istrict  and  advance  the  goals  of  the  educational  programs,”  and  did  not 
“demonstrat[e]  positive,  professional  attitudes  and  respect  toward  each  student”  as  required 
by  those  policies.  (Factual  Finding  18.)  Respondent  was  directed  in  no  uncertain  terms  that 
such  behavior  must  stop,  but  he  subsequently  engaged  in  similar  behavior  in  violation  of 
those  policies.  The  violations  were  repeated  and  occurred  despite  respondent’s  knowledge  of 
what  was  expected  of  him,  evidencing  intentional  misconduct.  The  evidence  thus  established 
cause  for  dismissal  on  grounds  of  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  reasonable 
regulations  of  the  Board. 

MORRISON  FACTORS 

13. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  214,  the  California  Supreme  Court  described  the 
factors  to  consider  when  determining  whether  a  credentialed  employee’s  conduct  and  overall 
impact  on  students  and  the  school  community  renders  the  employee  unfit  to  teach.  The 
Morrison  analysis  applies  to  causes  for  discipline  involving  unprofessional  conduct  as  well 
as  evident  unfitness  to  teach.  U/d.  at  p.  227-230;  Woodland,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.) 
In  this  case,  the  Commission  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison,  concluding  as 
follows: 

11

a. 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 

fellow  teachers.  Respondent  testified  that  RB  was  uncomfortable  and  hesitant  about  giving 
him  a  shoulder  massage.  (Factual  Finding  20.)  Beyond  that  testimony,  the  District  did  not 
present  evidence  of  an  adverse  effect  on  individual  students  or  teachers.  But  collectively,  the 
incidents  had  the  likelihood  of  creating  an  overly  familiar  environment  between  respondent 
and  his  students,  which  was  undesirable  in  an  educational  setting. 

b. 

The  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated.  The  massage  incident  made 

  

RB  uncomfortable,  which  was  a  mild  adverse  effect.  The  degree  of  adversity  from  the 
overly  familiar  classroom  environment  created  by  respondent’s  misconduct  was  also  mild. 

C. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent’s  last 

  

misconduct  occurred  in  March  2018,  just  a  few  months  before  this  case  began. 

d. 

The  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved. 

Respondent’s  teaching  credentials  allow  him  to  teach  young,  suggestible  students  for  whom 
he  must  serve  as  an  appropriate  role  model. 

e. 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct. 

Respondent’s  repeated  misconduct  despite  prior  warnings  and  directives  is  an  aggravating 
circumstance. 

f. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct.  Respondent  described  his  motives  in  initiating  some  of  the  physical  contact  in 
terms  of  lightening  the  mood  or  “just  checking  in.”  (Factual  Finding  11.)  But  there  are  other 
ways  to  accomplish  these  goals,  and  the  Commission  is  skeptical  of  those  stated  motives 
given  the  pervasiveness  of  the  misconduct.  Overall,  it  is  unclear  to  the  Commission  what 
respondent’s  motives  were  in  engaging  in  the  misconduct. 

g. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  The 

  

likelihood  of  recurrence  of  at  least  some  of  the  questioned  conduct  is  high,  given 
respondent’s  conduct  since  his  receipt  of  the  Letter  of  Reprimand.  The  persuasive  force  of 
respondent’s  promise  to  change  his  conduct  in  the  future  is  undermined  by  his  previous 
failure  to  do  so  despite  clear  warnings  and  directives.  (Factual  Finding  25.) 

h. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 

chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  The 
Commission  does  not  foresee  any  disciplinary  action  will  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 
chilling  effect  upon  respondent’s  constitutional  rights  or  the  constitutional  rights  of  any  other 
teacher. 

14. 

—_  Based  on  this  analysis,  a  majority  of  the  Commission  concludes  that 

respondent’s  misconduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach.  The  most  concerning  aspect  of 
respondent’s  misconduct  1s  its  repetition  despite  multiple  warnings  and  directives,  which 
suggests  a  high  likelihood  of  recurrence  if  respondent  is  allowed  to  return  to  the  classroom. 

12

Respondent  is  apparently  unwilling  or  unable  to  comply  with  the  reasonable  expectation  of 
the  District  that  he  cease  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students.  This  is  persuasive 
evidence  to  a  majority  of  the  Commission  of  respondent’s  unfitness  to  teach. 

Disposition 

15. 

|  “The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach...  ,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction. 
[Citation.]”  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

16. 

A  majority  of  the  Commission  concludes  that  dismissal  is  warranted.  The 

evidence  established  multiple  causes  for  dismissal  and  a  high  likelihood  that  respondent  will 
engage  in  inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students  in  the  future.  Respondent’s  behavior 
spanning  several  years  indicates  to  a  majority  of  the  Commission  that  he  is  unfit  to  teach,  and 
should  not  be  allowed  to  return  to  the  classroom.  His  technical  proficiency  as  a  teacher  and 
recommendations  from  colleagues  and  parents  do  not  change  these  conclusions.  Teaching 
involves  more  than  technical  proficiency,  and  respondent’s  behavior  with  respect  to  physical 
contact  with  students  was  inappropriate  and  violated  clear  directives  and  Board  policies. 
Given  these  considerations,  respondent  should  not  be  allowed  to  return  to  the  classroom. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

// 

13

Respondent  Jeff  Rose  is  terminated  from  employment  with  the  Culver  City  Unified 

ORDER 

School  District. 

DATED:  June  14,  2019 

DATED:  June  14,  2019 

DATED:  June  14,  2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

6A6A1F86D2A3486... 

  
TANYA  GOLDEN 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Jewel  Desosa 

E1A0DA2C9264481... 

  
JEWEL  DESOSA 
Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

[thomas  Keller 

CFDEA01421714A4... 

  
THOMAS  HELLER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

14

