BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JULIO  BELTRAN  (EN  714352), 

OAH  No.  2018120438 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  in  Los  Angeles  on  May  20,  2019  to  May  31,  2019.  The  Commission 
consisted  of  James  Sinclair,  John  Dolan  and  Glynda  B.  Gomez,  Administrative  Law  Judge 
(ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Ellen  Wu,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Kelly  Kim,  Assistant  General  Counsel, 

represented  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Tamra  M.  Smith,  Attorney  at  Law  represented  Respondent  Julio  Beltran 

(Respondent)  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Rulings  on  pre-trial  motions  were  made  on  the  record.  Additionally,  on  the 

record,  the  ALJ  ordered  that  student  names  would  appear  in  the  hearing  transcript  as  first 
name  and  last  initial.  A  subsequent  written  protective  order  was  issued  during  the  hearing. 
In  addition,  when  noted  by  the  Commission  and/or  as  stated  on  the  record,  documentary 
evidence  was  redacted  to  show  student  names  in  that  format. ! 

The  presentation  of  oral  and  documentary  evidence  concluded  on  May  31,  2019. 

The  record  remained  open  until  June  4,  2019,  for  the  lodging  of  the  transcript  of  hearing 
testimony  of  Principal  Elsa  Bolado  which  had  been  relied  upon  by  Respondent’s  expert 
witness.  The  record  closed  and  the  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  June  4,  2019. 

  

'Tn  this  decision,  Student  names  will  either  be  referred  to  with  the  first  full  name  and 

last  initial,  or  just  the  first  full  name.

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

2. 

On  November  14,  2018,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of 
Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Suspension  (Notice  of  Intent),  which 
notified  respondent  of  the  District's  intent  to  dismiss  him  within  30  days  unless  he  made  a 
written  request  for  a  hearing,  and  notified  Respondent  of  his  immediate  suspension  without 
pay.  The  Notice  of  Intent  included  a  Statement  of  Charges  dated  October  12,  2018  with 
exhibits,  a  Request  for  Hearing  form,  and  copies  of  relevant  Education  Code  sections. 

3. 

On  December  12,  2018,  in  response  to  the  November  14,  2018,  Notice  of 
Intent,  Respondent  served  the  District  with  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for  Hearing, 
which  contained  Respondent’s  demand  for  a  hearing  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44941. 

4. 

On  March  13,  2019,  the  District  filed  and  served  the  Accusation  dated  March 

13,  2019,  which  is  the  operative  pleading  in  this  case.  (Exh.  53.) 

5. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent's  Background 

6. 

Education:  Respondent  grew  up  in  South  Gate/Paramount  and  attended  public 

schools  in  the  area.  Respondent  chose  to  remain  in  Paramount  as  an  adult  with  his  own 
family.  Respondent  obtained  a  Bachelor  of  Science  Degree  in  Public  Administration  and  a 
teaching  credential  with  emphasis  in  bilingual  (Spanish)  education  from  California  State 
University,  Dominguez  Hills.  Respondent  also  received  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  and 
an  Administrative  Credential.  Respondent  attributes  his  decision  to  go  into  teaching  to  his 
seventh  grade  teacher  and  many  dedicated  professors  who  saw  his  potential. 

Employment  with  District 

7. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  approximately  20  years 

starting  as  a  substitute  bilingual  aide  while  in  college  and  later  becoming  a  teacher  at 
Stanford  Avenue  Elementary  (Stanford)  in  South  Gate  where  he  taught  most  grades  during 
his  tenure.  After  Stanford,  Respondent  taught  at  Edison  Middle  School,  Graham  Elementary 
School  (Graham)  and  Rodia  Continuation  School  (Rodia).  Respondent  1s  currently  on 
unpaid  leave  as  a  result  of  the  charges  in  this  case. 

8. 

The  charges  in  this  matter  relate  to  Respondent’s  assignments  at  Graham  and 

Rodia  during  the  period  of  August  2013  to  March  2018.

District  Policies 

9, 

The  following  policies  and  procedures  of  the  District  were  presented  at  the 

hearing:  District’s  Employee  Ethics  Policy  (Exh.  56);  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (Exh. 
58);  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  dated  August  19,  2016  (Exh.  55); 
Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  pre-August  19,  2016  (Exh.  55A); 
Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (Exh.  57);  the  Board  and  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful 
Treatment  of  All  Persons  (Exh.  59);  and  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  (Exh.  60).?  Although 
District  alleged  Respondent  violated  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession 
and  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description,  those  documents  were  not  introduced  and  are  not  in 
evidence. 

10. 

The  District’s  Employee  Ethics  Policy  provides  “general  guidelines  for 

employees  to  following  carrying  out  their  critical  roles  as  District  employees.”  In  pertinent 
part  it  provides: 

EMPLOYEE  AND  STUDENT  RELATIONS.  District  employees  are  entrusted 
with  the  physical  and  mental  well-being  of  every  student.  Therefore,  employees 
shall  treat  students  with  respect  and  care  and  be  aware  of  their  proper  roles  as 
public 
student  development. 
Employees  shall  not  exploit,  harass,  or  discriminate  against  any  student  or 
require  students  to  perform  work  or  service  that  could  be  detrimental  to  their 
health. 

role  models  and 

contributors 

servants, 

to 

ACTIONS  AND  CONDUCT  OF  DISTRICT  EMPLOYEES.  District 
employees  shall  not  only  be  aware  that  public  service  is  a  public  trust,  but  also 
conduct  themselves,  both  inside  and  outside  the  school  district’s  services,  in  a 
manner  that  deserves  the  respect  of  the  students,  parents  and  the  communities 
the  District  serves. 

[f--. 4 

COMMITMENT.  District  employees  are  expected  to  uphold  the  federal  and 
California  Constitutions,  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the  United  States  and  the 
State  of  California  (particularly  the  Education  Code)  and  all  other  applicable 
government  entities,  and  the  policies,  procedures,  rules  and  regulations  of  the 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  Board  of  Education. 

FAIRNESS.  District  employees  are  expected  to  conduct  themselves  in  the 
course  of  their  employment  by  word,  gesture,  act,  and  demeanor  to  ensure  that 
regard  and  treatment. 
all 

and  just  consideration, 

others 

given 

fair 

are 

  

*  The  District  refers  to  these  same  policies  by  different  names  in  the  Charges; 
however,  the  policies  referenced  herein  are  the  same  policies  that  were  in  place  at  the  time  of 
the  alleged  conduct  unless  noted  otherwise.

Understanding  that,  employees  are  encouraged  to,  and  should,  report  unethical 
or  fraudulent  practices. 
Employees  shall  not  be  subject  to  retaliation  for  so 
doing. 

(Exh.  56,  p.2.) 

11. 

The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  most  important  responsibility  of  the  [District]  is  the  safety  of  our  students. 
All  employees,  as  well  as  all  individuals  who  work  with  or  have  contact  with 
students,  are  reminded  that  they  must  be  mindful  of  the  fine  line  drawn  between 
being  sensitive  to  and  supportive  of  students  and  a  possible  or  perceived  breach 
of  responsible,  ethical  behavior. 

While  the  District  encourages  the  cultivation  of  positive  relationships  with 
students,  employees  and  all  individuals  who  work  with  or  have  contact  with 
students  are  expected  to  use  good judgment  and  are  cautioned  to  avoid  situations 
including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  following: 

[f.-- 

[f.-- 

[f.-- 

3.  Engaging  in  any  behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a  student(s)  or 
in  the  presence  of  a  student(s),  that  are  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal, 
immoral,  or  exploitive. 

5. 
Making  statements  or  comments,  either  directly  or  in  the  presence  of 
student(s),  which  are  not  age-appropriate,  professional,  or  which  may  be 
considered  sexual  in  nature,  harassing,  or  demeaning. 

Touching  or  having  physical  contact  with  a  student(s)  that  1s  not  age- 
6. 
appropriate  or  within  the  scope  of  the  employee’s/individual’s  responsibilities 
and/or  duties. 

10.  Communicating  with  student(s),  in  writing,  by  phone/Email/electronically, 
via  internet,  or  in  person,  at  any  time,  for  purposes  that  are  not  specifically 
school-related  purposes  and/or  situations. 

11.  Calling  student(s)  at  home  or  on  their  cell  phone,  except  for  specific  school- 
related  purposes  and/or  situations.

12.  Providing  student(s)  with  a  personal  home/cell  telephone  number,  personal 
Email  address,  home  address,  or  other  personal  contact  information,  except  for 
specific  school-related  purposes  and/or  situations. 
Even  though  the  intent  of  the  employee/individual  may  be  purely  professional, 
those  who  engage  in  any  of  the  above  behavior(s),  either  directly  or  indirectly 
with  a  student(s)  or  in  the  presence  of  a  student(s),  are  subjecting  themselves  to 
all  possible  perceptions  of  impropriety.  Employees/individuals  are  advised  that, 
when  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct  or  behavior  are  made,  the  District  is 
obligated  to  investigate  the  allegations  and,  if  warranted,  take  appropriate 
administrative  and/or  disciplinary  action. 

(Exh.  58,  p. 

1.) 

12.‘ 

The  District’s  Board  of  Education  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful 

Treatment  of  All  Persons  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  the  District  reaffirms  its  policy  that 
“students  and  adults  in  both  schools  and  offices  should  treat  all  persons  equally  and 
respectfully  and  refrain  from  the  willful  or  negligent  use  of  slurs  against  any  person  on  the 
basis  of  race,  language  spoken,  color,  sex,  religion,  handicap,  national  origin,  immigration 
status,  age,  sexual  orientation,  or  political  belief.”  (Exh.  59.) 

13. 

The  District’s  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  provides  that  the  mission  of 

employees  of  the  District  1s  to  educate  all  students  to  their  maximum  potential.  It  further 
provides  that  the  purpose  of  the  Code  of  Ethics  is  to  “help[s]  develop  trust  by  describing 
what  the  public  can  expect  from  us,  and  what  we  can  expect  from  each  other  and  our 
District....  Our  goal  is  to  create  a  culture  that  fosters  trust,  commitment  to  excellence  and 
responsibility,  personal  and  institutional  integrity,  and  avoids  conflicts  of  interest  and 
appearances  of  impropriety.”  With  respect  to  students,  the  Code  states:  “Maintain 
appropriate  relationship  with  students.  We  are  committed  to  ensuring  that  employee-student 
relationships  are  positive,  professional  and  non-exploitative.  We  will  not  tolerate  improper 
employee-student  relationships.”  (Exh.  57,  p. 

1,  3.) 

14. 

+The  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy  dated  November  26,  2014  prohibits  bullying, 

hazing  and  sexual  harassment.  It  provides  in  pertinent  part:  “District  policy  requires  all 
schools  and  all  personnel  to  promote  mutual  respect,  tolerance  and  acceptance  among 
students  and  staff.”  It  further  defines  the  term  “bullying”  as  including  cyberbullying, 
physical  bullying,  social  or  relational  bullying,  verbal  and  non-verbal  bullying.  (Exh  54,  p. 
3).  “Physical  bullying”  is  defined  as  including  “intentional,  unwelcome  acts  of  beating, 
biting,  fighting,  hitting,  poking,  punching,  pushing,  shoving,  spitting  and  tripping.”  (Exh. 
54,  p.  3).  “Social  or  relational  bullying”  is  defined  as  including  “spreading  rumors, 
manipulating  relationships,  exclusion,  blackmailing,  isolating,  rejecting,  using  peer  pressure 
and  ranking  personal  characteristics.  (Exh.  54,  p.3.)  “Verbal  and  non-verbal  bullying”  is 
defined  as  including  “gossiping,  making  rude  noises,  name-calling,  spreading  rumors,  hurtful 
teasing  and  threatening  gestures.”  (Exh.  54,  p.3.)

15. 

The  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy  also  states  in  pertinent  part:  “All  pupils  have 

the  right  to  participate  in  the  educational  process  free  from  discrimination  and  harassment. 
Discrimination  is  different  treatment  on  the  basis  of  a  protected  category  in  the  context  of  an 
educational  program  or  activity,  without  a  legitimate  nondiscriminatory  reason,  that 
interferes  with  or  limits  the  ability  of  the  student  to  participate  in  or  benefit  from  the  services, 
activities  or  privileges  provided  by  the  District.  Protected  categories  include  an  individual’s 
actual  or  perceived  sex,  sexual  orientation,  gender,  gender  identity,  gender  expression,  race 
or  ethnicity,  ethnic  group  identification,  ancestry,  nationality,  national  origin,  religion,  color, 
mentor  or  physical  disability,  or  age,  as  well  as  a  person’s  association  with  a  person  or  group 
of  these  protected  categories,  or  any  other  basis  protected  by  federal,  state,  local  law, 
ordinance,  or  regulation.”  (Exh.  54.) 

16. 

The  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy  defines  “Sexual  Harassment”  as  “unwelcome 

conduct  of  a  sexual  nature  directed  at  or  about  an  individual  on  the  basis  of  actual  or 
perceived  sex,  sexual  orientation,  gender  identity  or  gender  expression.  The  policy  also 
provides  that  “Hostile  Environment  Harassment”  occurs  when:  (1)  the  target  1s  subjected  to 
unwelcome  conduct  related  to  a  protected  category;  (2)  the  harassment  is  subjectively 
offensive  to  the  target  and  would  be  objectively  offensive  to  a  reasonable  person  of  the  same 
age  and  characteristics  under  the  same  circumstances;  and  (3)  harassment  is  sufficiently 
severe,  pervasive,  or  persistent  so  as  to  interfere  with  or  limit  the  target’s  ability  to 
participate  in  or  benefit  from  an  education  program  or  activity.  (Exh.  54,  p.  3.) 

17. 

The  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  Bulletin  dated  July  1, 
2011  provides  that  “all  District  employees  shall  report  instances  of  suspected  child  abuse  or 
neglect  by  telephone  immediately,  or  as  soon  as  practically  possible,  to  an  appropriate  child 
protective  agency  and  shall  prepare  and  send  a  written  report  thereof  to  the  same  child 
protective  agency  called  within  36  hours  of  receiving  the  information  concerning  the 
incident.”  (Exh.  55A,  p.  1).  The  Bulletin  defines  and  details  the  duties  of  mandated 
reporters  of  child  abuse.  According  to  the  Bulletin,  all  District  employees  are  mandated 
reporters  with  a  duty  to  report  suspected  child  abuse  to  the  police.  The  reports  are 
confidential.  The  bulletin  defines  physical  abuse,  sexual  abuse,  willful  cruelty  or 
unjustifiable  punishment  and  Mental  suffering,  emotional  well-being  as  follows: 

Physical  Abuse—Physical  injury  (external  or  internal)  such  as  a  bruise,  welt, 
burn,  or  cut  inflicted  on  a  child  by  other  than  accidental  means  by  another 
person.  “Hazing”  may  constitute  physical  abuse. 

Sexual  Abuse—Sexual  assault  or  sexual  exploitation. 
Sexual  assault  includes 
rape,  statutory  rape,  rape  in  concert,  incest,  sodomy,  lewd  or  lascivious  acts 
upon  a  child,  oral  copulation,  penetration  or  intrusion  of  a  genital  or  anal 
opening,  including  the  use  of  any  object,  intentional  touching  of  the  genitals  or 
intimate  parts  or  the  clothing  covering  them,  or  child  molestation. 
Sexual 
to 
includes  conduct  or  encouragement  of  activities 
exploitation 
pornography  depicting  minors  and  promoting  prostitution  by  minors.  “Hazing” 
may  constitute  sexual  abuse.

related 

[f.-- 

Willful  Cruelty  or  Unyustifiable  Punishment-A  situation  where  any  person 
or  permits  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental 
willfully  causes,  inflicts 
suffering,  or  a  caregiver  willfully  causes  or  permits  the  child  to  be  placed  in  a 
situation  in  which  the  child’s  person  or  health  is  endangered.  Endangerment 
and  cruel  punishment  are  both  required  reportable  categories  of  child  abuse, 
even  if  no  injury  is  sustained. 

Mental  Suffering,  Emotional  Well-Being-  A  situation  where  any  mandated 
reporter  has  knowledge  of  or  who  reasonably  suspects  that  mental  suffering  has 
been  inflicted  upon  a  child  or  that  his  or  her  emotional  well-being  is  endangered 
in  any  way. 

(Exh.  55A,  p.  4,  5.) 

18. 

The  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Bulletin  also  contains  a  section 

entitled  “What  Child  abuse  does  not  include.”  In  relevant  part,  the  Bulleting  provides:  “[t]he 
use  of  an  amount  of  force  that  is  reasonable  and  necessary  for  a  person  employed  by  or 
engaged  in  a  public  school  to  quell  a  disturbance  threatening  physical  injury  to  a  person(s)  or 
damage  to  property,  for  purposes  of  self-defense,  or  to  obtain  possession  of  weapons  or  other 
dangerous  objects  within  the  control  of  the  pupil.”  (Exh.  55A,  p.  5.) 

19. 

The  District’s  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  dated  November  29,  2006  provides 

that  the  District  “is  committed  to  maintaining  a  working  and  learning  environment  that  is  free 
from  sexual  harassment.  Sexual  harassment  by  of  or  by  our  employees,  students,  or  persons 
doing  business  with  the  District  is  a  form  of  sex  discrimination  1n  that  it  constitutes 
differential  treatment  on  the  basis  of  sex,  sexual  orientation  (actual  or  perceived)  or  gender 
(actual  or  perceived).  As  such,  an  act  of  sexual  harassment  is  a  violation  of  state  and  federal 
laws  and  a  violation  of  District  policy.”  (Exh.  60,  p.1.) 

20. 

The  District’s  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  also  provides  “Examples  of  Conduct 

which  may  result  in  sexual  harassment”  as  follows: 

Conduct  which  may  result  in  sexual  harassment  may  include,  but  is  not  limited 
to  the  following: 

Verbal-unwelcome  conduct  such  as  the  use  of  suggestive,  derogatory,  or  vulgar 
comments;  the  use  of  sexual  innuendo  or  slurs;  making  unwanted  sexual 
advances,  invitations,  or  comments;  pestering  for  dates;  making  threats;  and/or 
spreading  rumors  about  or 
or 
performance.

activity 

sexual 

others 

rating 

their 

as 

to 

Visual-unwelcome  conduct  such  as  the  display  of  sexually  suggestive  objects, 
pictures,  posters,  written  material,  cartoons,  or  drawings;  the  use  of  graffiti 
and/or  computer-generated  images  of  a  sexual  nature;  and/or  spreading  rumors 
about  or  rating  others  as  to  their  sexual  activity  or  performance. 

Physical-unwelcome  conduct  such  as  unwanted  touching,  pinching,  kissing, 
patting,  or  hugging;  the  blocking  of  normal  movement;  stalking;  assault;  and/or 
physical  interference  with  work  or  study  directed  at  an  individual  because  of  the 
individual’s  sex,  sexual  orientation,  or  gender. 

Threats,  demands,  or  pressure  to  submit  to  sexual  requests  in  order  to  keep  a  job 
or  academic  standing  or  to  avoid  other  loss,  and/or  offers  or  benefits  in  return 
for  sexual  favors. 

60, p. 4.) 
(Exh. 

21. 

Section  VIII.  A.  9.  of  the  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  provides  guidance 

for  assessing  complaints  of  sexual  harassment.  It  provides: 

[C]arefully  consider  all  available  information  in  determining  whether  the 
conduct  described  in  the  complaint  violated  the  District’s  sexual  harassment 
policy.  The  following  five  questions  should  be  asked: 

a.  Was  the  conduct  of  a  sexual  nature? 

b.  Was  the  conduct  unwelcome? 

c.  Did  the  conduct  create  a  hostile  environment  for  the  alleged 
target  of  the  harassment? 

d.  Was  the  conduct  severe,  persistent,  or  pervasive? 

e.  Did  the  conduct  limit  the  individual’s  ability  to  participate  in 
or  benefit  from  an  educational  program  or  activity? 

When  the  answers  to  questions  a-e  are  ‘yes,’  the  conduct  may  be 
considered  sexual  harassment.  However,  conduct  that  does  not 
rise  to  the  level  of  sexual  harassment  may  still  be  considered 
inappropriate  behavior  and  may  require  that  corrective  actions  be 
taken. 

60, p. 4, 11.) 
(Exh. 

22. 

As  noted  in  the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  the  District  is 

obligated  to  investigate  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct  or  behavior  by  teachers.

Generally  speaking,  the  District’s  investigatory  process  regarding  student  complaints  against 
teachers  involves  interviewing  the  student  making  the  complaint  and  randomly  selected 
students  from  the  same  class.  All  students  are  interviewed  separately  and  may  be  asked  to 
write  down  the  statements  made  in  their  interview.  If  the  complaint  is  corroborated,  a 
conference  is  held  with  the  teacher  to  discuss  the  allegations  made  by  the  student(s)  against 
the  teacher.  At  the  conference,  the  teacher  1s  allowed  to  respond  to  the  allegations,  and  the 
teacher  may  be  given  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives.  The  teacher  is  issued  a 
Conference  Memorandum  that  summarizes  the  discussion  at  the  conference  and  the 
assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives  given  to  the  teacher.  (See  e.g.,  Exhs.  17,  45,  46  and 
58.)  Administrative  investigations  of  student  complaints  may  be  conducted  by  school  site 
administrators  and/or  the  District’s  Student  Safety  Investigation  Team.  (See  e.g.,  Exh.  38.) 

Graham  Elementary  School 

23. 

At  Graham,  Respondent  taught  kindergarten  during  his  first  year  and  was 

happy  with  the  assignment.  The  teaching  assignments  are  made  on  the  basis  of  a  seniority 
list.  Because  Respondent  was  low  in  seniority  at  Graham,  he  was  not  assigned  kindergarten 
for  the  subsequent  year.  Instead,  he  was  assigned  a  second  grade  classroom.  While 
Respondent  would  have  preferred  kindergarten,  he  welcomed  the  opportunity  to  teach  second 
grade  since  he  had  an  ultimate  goal  of  becoming  an  administrator,  and  the  assignment  would 
give  him  valuable  experience.  Respondent  clearly  remembered  that  the  new  principal  Elsa 
Bolado  seemed  to  have  assumed  that  he  would  contest  the  assignment.  While  in  the  cafeteria 
reviewing  the  posted  assignments  for  the  coming  school  year,  Ms.  Bolado  commented  from 
across  the  room  to  Respondent  that  if  Respondent  did  not  like  the  assignment,  he  could 
transfer.  Respondent  thought  the  comment  was  odd. 

24. 

Respondent  also  recalled  that  before  a  staff  meeting  one  day,  he  was  in  the 

office  making  photocopies  when  Ms.  Bolado  approached  him.  At  the  time,  Respondent  was 
wearing  a  distinctive  United  Teachers  Los  Angeles  (UTLA)  union  T-shirt  which  had  a 
special  emblem.  The  emblem  signified  his  involvement  with  the  steering  committee  and  area 
meeting.  Respondent  was  not  a  local  representative  or  involved  in  representation  of  other 
employees.  Ms.  Bolado  asked  Respondent  what  his  union  position  and  affiliation  was. 
Respondent  answered  her  question  and  then  stated  that  he  would  like  to  be  on  his  way  to 
attend  the  meeting.  Ms.  Bolado  then  brought  out  a  copy  of  the  UTLA-District  contract  and 
made  a  statement  to  the  effect  of  “1f  you  want  to  play  contract,  we  can  play  contract.” 
Respondent  did  not  respond  and  left  the  office  to  attend  the  meeting.  Once  at  the  meeting,  he 
was  surprised  to  hear  Ms.  Bolado  give  specific  direction  about  what  materials  must  appear  in 
the  classroom  since  Respondent  had  understood  that  classroom  environment  was  generally 
an  area  of  teacher  discretion.  Ms.  Bolado  gave  specific  instruction  that  the  GLAD  program 
and  posters  related  to  the  program  were  to  be  used  and  posted  by  all  teachers.  Respondent 
took  copious  notes  during  the  meeting  and  tried  to  copy  all  of  the  charts  that  were  shown.  At 
one  point  Ms.  Bolado  raised  her  voice  and  stated  “I’m  going  to  want  to  see  this  in  my  class.” 
She  then  turned  to  Respondent  and  called  him  by  name.  She  asked  “Mr.  Beltran,  do  you 
have  an  objection?”  Respondent  said  nothing.  Then  Ms.  Bolado  turned  to  Mr.  Carter,  the 
UTLA  site  representative,  and  stated:  “If  you  have  an  issue  I  don’t  want  to  hear  it  behind  my

back,  you  need  to  say  so  now.”  Respondent  found  the  interactions  concerning  especially 
because  Ms.  Bolado  was  a  new  principal  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  school  year. 

25. 

 Respondent’s  second  grade  classroom  at  Graham  was  set  up  in  six  pods  of 

four  students.  There  were  various  designated  areas  in  the  classroom:  two  rug  areas,  group 
areas,  teacher  stations,  reading,  writing,  listening  and  computer  centers.  Respondent  found 
the  more  areas  he  had,  the  easier  it  was  to  manage  the  classroom.  Respondent’s  students 
were  primarily  beginning  English  language  learners  designated  as  ELD1  and  ELD2.  The 
students  were  grouped  by  English  language  ability  level.  Previously,  teachers  had  helped 
construct  the  groups  of  students  for  each  classroom  to  make  the  ability  and  language  levels 
more  balanced.  Respondent  found  this  class  challenging.  The  students  had  more  behavior 
issues  than  he  was  accustomed  to,  struggled  academically  and  did  not  work  well 
independently.  Respondent’s  wife,  Johanna  Beltran,  a  para-educator,  testified  that 
Respondent  had  mentioned  he  was  struggling  with  some  challenging  classroom  behaviors 
and  was  concerned  about  the  students.  Respondent  and  Campus  Aide  Lorena  Beatriz  both 
testified  about  a  group  of  boys  who  played  together  that  often  a.  and  engaged  in  off 
task  behavior.  Among  those  students  were  . 

na  and 
.  The  boys  usually  went  to  recess  together,  played  rough  |  =  called  each 

other  names  and  played  at  fighting. 

26. 

Respondent  posted  classroom  rules  which  were  developed  with  input  from  the 
students.  The  rules  included  being  respectful,  asking  permission  to  leave  the  classroom,  and 
being  kind.  He  used  incentives  including  praise,  stickers  and,  stamps  for  good  behavior.  He 
also  developed  different  lessons  to  address  some  of  the  classroom  behaviors  and  worked  on 
character  building  and  thematic  lessons  which  included  the  books  “Have  you  filled  up  a 
bucket  today”  and  “No  David.”  Respondent  also  used  a  character  building  program  that  he 
found  for  self-esteem  and  to  foster  positive  interactions.  The  lessons  included  the  use  of 
puppets,  acting  out  scenarios  and  role  modeling  of  appropriate  behaviors. 

27. 

Respondent  used  a  variety  of  strategies  including  modeling,  redirection,  time 
out  and  classroom  admonitions  to  modify  behaviors.  Respondent  used  “time  out”  to  change 
student  behavior.  Time  out  consisted  of  removing  the  student  from  the  situation  for  five 
minutes  or  less  until  Respondent  could  sit  down  with  the  student  individually  and  address  the 
student’s  behavior.  Typically,  in  time  out,  students  were  asked  to  go  to  the  rug  or  one  of  the 
centers  or  go  back  to  the  desks  if  they  were  on  the  rug  or  at  a  center.  He  also  changed 
students’  seats  during  the  year  based  upon  behavior.  Early  in  the  school  year,  Respondent 
also  benched  students  at  recess  if  they  needed  to  be  reminded  of  classroom  rules  or  were 
disruptive  or  did  not  finish  homework.  He  stopped  this  when  he  realized  that  some  of  the 
students  were  not  abiding  by  the  instruction  and  the  benching  was  not  being  enforced 
uniformly  by  campus  aides.  Respondent  also  sent  students  to  the  office  with  a  referral  for 
misbehavior.  In  some  cases,  he  held  conferences  with  the  parents  or  with  the  parents  and  the 
principal.  In  an  attempt  to  reward  good  behavior,  Respondent  held  pizza  parties 
approximately  once  a  month. 

10

28. 

Respondent  denied  using  corporal  punishment  in  his  classroom.  In  his 

testimony  at  hearing,  he  denied  grabbing  students,  yelling  at  students,  throwing  students  or 
excluding  students  from  pizza  parties. 

29. 

 Respondent’s  classroom  door  was  usually  open.  Adults  walked  in 

unannounced  at  least  once  or  twice  a  week.  A  speech  therapist,  a  school  psychologist, 
neighboring  teachers,  parent  volunteers  and  the  principal  all  came  into  the  classroom. 
Because  it  was  an  evaluation  year  for  Respondent,  Principal  Bolado  frequently  came  into  the 
classroom  for  brief  observations  and  to  observe  the  implementation  of  a  reading  program. 

30. 

Respondent  had a  clear  recollection  of  his  students.  Respondent  described 

=  |  as  loud  and  disruptive.  Respondent  had  witnessed qa  engage  in  bully  behavior  and 
had  intervened.  Similar  to  his  friend om.  = |  pushed  other  students,  ran  around  and  was 
generally  disruptive  and  off  task.  When  confronted  by  Respondent  about  behavior  including 
hitting  other  children  or  cutting  in  line,  = |  always  denied  the  behavior.  Respondent 
tecalled  an  incident  during  the  second  semester  in  April,  when 
|  was  leaning  back, 
playing  with  his  chair,  and  fell  out  of  the  chair.  Respondent  had  been  at  the  front  of  the  class 
using  a  projector,  when  there  was  a  disturbance.  He  discovered 
chair.  He  checked  to  make  sure 
that  he  could  sit  in  his  seat  when  he  was  ready  to  use  the  chair  properly.  qi  appeared 
stunned  and  just  stood  by  his  chair.  When  Respondent  returned  to  the  front  of  the  class,  he 
noticed  that 

had  fallen  out  of  his 
| 

later  resumed  sitting  in  his  chair. 

|  was  not  injured,  picked  up 

|  was  kneeling  at  his  desk. 

the  chair,  and  told 

31. 

When 

|  misbehaved  in  class,  Respondent  gave  him  warnings,  re-direction, 

tecess,  “benching”  and  timeouts.  When  those  methods  failed  to  change  his  behavior, 
Respondent  called  Hs  home.  He  kept  Hs  mother  apprised  of  the  progression  of 
os  behavior.  Respondent  spoke  to  his  mother  at  the  gate  before  or  after  school  and  had 
a  conference  with  her.  Usually,  there  was  a  brief  improvement  in  Hs  behavior  after  a 
telephone  call  to  his  mother. 

32. 

|  as  being  loud  and  outspoken.  He  was 

Respondent  described  student 
bigger  than  the  other  students  and  bullied  them.  Frequently, 
“could  not  keep 
described 
pencil  boxes  and  have  difficulty  working  independently.  The  class  generally  had  “must  do” 
work  which  was  to  be  completed  at  their  seats  and  then  “may  do”  work  which  was  completed 
at  classroom  centers.  The  students  always  preferred  the  classroom  centers  over  the  seat 

his  hands  to  himself”  and  had  “personal  space  issues.”  Respondent  also 
as  a  student  who  would  frequently  daydream,  sit  and  stare  at  his  books  or 

|  pushed  other  children  and 

work.  dai  frequently  skipped  his  “must  do”  work  and  attempted  to  push  other  students  out 
of  the  centers  so  he  could  be  at  the  centers.  He  often  told  Respondent  that  he  had  completed 
his  work,  when  in  fact,  he  had  not  done  so.  oma  bumped  into  other  students  and  ran 
around  in  the  music  and  theatre  classes.  He  frequently  laughed  loudly  at  other  students  when 
the  teacher  called  on  them  for  misbehavior  and  made  loud  disruptive  noises  in  class. 
Respondent  saw 
about  his  behavior, 
Respondent  recalled 

intentionally  run  into  other  students  and  cut  into  line.  When  asked 
denied  it. ‘=  also  made  disruptive  noises  in  the  classroom. 
discovered om  with  his  head  down  crying  in  the 

that  one  day,  he 

ll

classroom.  When  Respondent  inquired, om  stated  that  he  missed  his  mother  and  had  not 
seen  her.  Respondent  called 
responded  that  she  did  not  know  why  he  missed  her,  she  was  at  home  and  had  seen  him  that 
morning. 

*s  mother  and  advised  her  of  the  situation. ORs  mother 

33. 

Respondent  described 

mm  as  having  a  hard  time  following  direction  and 
pushed  other  students,  did  not  keep  his 

   
completing  work,  and  generally  disruptive. 
hands  to  himself,  cut  in  line  and  distracted  other  students. 
forth,  bumping  into  other  students  during  rug  time,  and  laughed  and  talked  at  inappropriate 
times.  When  confronted  about  his  behavior, 
academically  and  had  a  difficult  time  writing.  Respondent  tried  a  variety  of  strategies  to  deal 
with  ms  behavior  including  conferencing,  redirection,  referrals  to  the  office,  time  out, 
benching  and  conferences  with  his  parents.  On  one  occasion,  he  remembered im  being 
excited  to  write  about  the  Minions  from  the  movie  “Despicable  Me”  during  a  writer’s 
workshop.  Respondent  was  gratified  to  see 

mi  interested  in  writing. 

also  swayed  back  and 

always  denied  it. 

mm  struggled 

34. 

   

because  they  were  so  difficult  to  handle.  She  described 

| Respondent’s  observations  were  supported  by  Graham’s  campus  aide,  Lorena 
Beatriz.  Ms.  Beatriz  is  currently  a  head  start  teacher  at  a  District  Child  Development  Center. 
She  previously  worked  for  the  District  in  an  afterschool  program,  as  a  teacher’s  assistant,  a 
community  representative  and  a  campus  aide.  Ms.  Beatriz  testified  at  the  administrative 
hearing.  She  was  a  campus  aide  at  Graham  for  two  school  years  from  2013-2015.  She  was 
one  of  four  campus  aides  assigned  to  supervise  the  school  grounds  during  recess  and  lunch. 
She  remembered  Respondent’s  second  grade  class  as  a  group  of  very  active  students.  She 
still  remembers  HME and 
them  as  being  aggressive,  hyperactive,  loud,  and  prone  to  play  fight.  She  knew Ha  and 
to  be  untruthful.  According  to  Ms.  Beatriz,  they  frequently  reported  incorrect 
information  about  other  students  to  get  them  in  trouble  and  lied  about  their  own  behavior. 
om  was  a  large  student  and  did  not  seem  to  know  his  own  strength.  She  found  him  to  be 
ageressive  with  other  students  and  always  moving.  She  described i: 
who  “couldn’t  stay  sitting  down,  needed  a  lot  of  reminders  to  keep  hands  together  and 
playing  nicely  with  others.”  Although  she  did  not  hear  them  talk  about  Respondent  on  the 
yard  or  during  lunch,  the  students  did  talk  about  each  other  and  report  on  each  other  to  the 
campus  aides.  She  had  been  in  Respondent’s  class  several  times  either  to  drop  off  papers  or 
drop  off  students.  His  door  was  usually  open.  She  knocked  on  the  door  if  it  was  closed,  but 
just  walked  in  if  it  was  open.  Respondent’s  class  was  calm.  He  spoke  to  the  children 
directly  and  in  a  calm  voice.  She  never  saw  Respondent  grab  any  student  by  the  neck  and  no 
student  ever  told  her  he  had  been  grabbed  by  the  neck.  She  found  Respondent  to  be 
professional  and  polite  when  dealing  with  campus  aides.  She  noted  that  he  was  always 
dressed  up. 

as  a  “busybody” 

35. 

In  late  May  and  early  June  of  2014,  Mr.  Jimenez,  one  of  the  school 

administrators,  summoned  students  to  the  office  in  pairs  over  the  course  of  several  days. 
told  Respondent  that  the  principal  was  asking  questions  about  him  and  about  what 

happened  in  the  classroom.  When  Mr.  Jimenez  finished  questioning  students,  Respondent 
was  surprised  to  be  called  to  the  school  office  and  questioned  by  police  officers  about  his 

12

  
    

  

discipline  style  and  his  classroom.  After  he  was  questioned  by  the  police,  the  officers  told 
him  that  from  their  perspective,  the  investigation  was  over.  Then,  Principal  Bolado  came  in 
and  instructed  him  to  immediately  report  to  Local  District  South. 

36. 

_  Elsa  Bolado  has  worked  for  the  District  for  31  years.  She  is  currently  the 

principal  of  Hollenbeck  School.  She  served  as  the  principal  of  Graham  from  2013  to  2018. 
She  was  a  District  teacher  for  18  years.  Ms.  Bolado  served  as  an  English  Language  Learner 
(ELL)  coordinator,  a  Title  I  coordinator,  and  a  literacy  coach.  She  holds  a  K-12  teaching 
credential  and  an  administrative  credential.  Ms.  Bolado  also  earned  a  Master’s  degree  in 
Curriculum  and  Instruction. 
Her  assignment  as  the  Graham  principal  for  the  2013-2014 
school  year  was  her  first  administrative  assignment.  She  sees  her  job  as  primarily  providing 
for  the  safety  of  the  students  and  the  wellbeing  of  the  school  personnel,  evaluation  of 
teachers  and  staff,  and  serving  as  the  school  site  representative  to  the  District.  Ms.  Bolado 
testified  about  the  mandatory  training  for  all  teachers  and  staff  at  the  beginning  of  the  school 
year.  During  the  training,  the  District’s  policies  and  procedures  including  the  child  abuse, 
code  of  conduct,  sexual  harassment,  corporal  punishment,  ethics  and  bullying,  were 
teviewed.  Attendance,  payroll  and  the  school  literacy  goals  were  also  discussed.  A  second 
more  intensive  mandatory  child  abuse  training  was  held  in  March  each  year. 

37. 

Ms.  Bolado  remembers  Respondent  as  always  being  cordial  and  professional. 

She  conducted  his  formal  evaluation  and  had  been  in  his  classroom  regularly.  Ms.  Bolado 
teceived  a  complaint  from  student 
complained  that  Respondent  made  him  use  his  chair  as  a  desk  and  made  him  kneel  with  his 
hands  behind  his  back  in  the  corner.  She  also  received  a  second  complaint  from  Hs 
mother  by  telephone  concerning 
mother  that  she  needed  to  speak  to 

being  excluded  from  a  pizza  party.  She  advised  his 

toward  the  end  of  the  second  semester.  He 

directly. 

38. 

Ms.  Bolado  testified  that 

|  was  upset  and a  little  sad  when  he  came  to  her 

office.  She  did  not  remember  his  parents  being  present.  He  was  a  very  active  child.  She 
described  him  as  “very  active”,  “playful”  and  “a  leader  in  the  yard.”  He  was  not  shy  and 
never  displayed  disrespectful  behavior  to  her  nor  did  she  know  him  to  be  untruthful. 
Because  there  were  allegations  of  possible  child  abuse,  she  was  advised  to  report  the 
complaint  to  the  Los  Angeles  County  Sheriff's  Department.  The  complaint  was  not 
consistent  with  her  impressions  of  Respondent.  From  her  observations  during  the  evaluation 
and  walk-throughs,  Respondent  appeared  to  be  calm  and  his  students  appeared  engaged  in 
the  work.  She  had  not  received  any  previous  complaints  about  Respondent  and  was  under 
the  impression  that  the  students  liked  Respondent.  However,  based  upon  her  interview  of 
Ha  she  believed  something  had  happened  in  the  classroom.  When  there  are  allegations, 
principals  have  been  instructed  to  contact  the  Sheriffs  department  and  the  local  district 
office.  Principal  Bolado  made  the  required  reports  and  calls.  After  the  sheriffs  interviewed 
7”.  the  officers  told  Ms.  Bolado  she  could  handle  the  matter  administratively.  Once  she 
teceived  authorization  to  proceed  administratively,  Ms.  Bolado  asked  Gabriel  Jimenez,  the 
Title  I  coordinator,  to  assist  her  with  the  investigation  because  the  school  did  not  have  an 
assistant  principal  and  Mr.  Jimenez  held  an  administrative  credential. 

13

39. 

Ms.  Bolado  interviewed 

Zz 

in  her  office  and  asked  him  to  write  a  statement. 

you  just  told 
She  was  present  when oa  wrote  his  statement  and  told  him  to  “write  what 
me.”  She  also  asked  him  to  identify  other  students  that  were  witnesses. 
"s  May  28, 
2014,  statement  said  “He  toke  me  at  the  wall  and  grape  me  bake  of  my  nick  and  was  still 
grab  me  all  wae  to  the  wall.  Wen  I  was  siting  done  I  at  my  chair.  He  was  He  sidetopush  my 
chire  back  and  site  down  at  my  kneese.”  (Exh.  9).  He  also  identified Omg.  =  and 

   

as  potential  witnesses.  When  she  received 

"s  statement,  she  called  the  operations 

coordinator  for  guidance.  When  more  than  three  students  are  named  as  witnesses,  the 
principals  are  supposed  to  call  the  coordinators  and  determine  whether  the  entire  class  needs 
to  be  interviewed.  Principal  Bolado  and  Jimenez  generally  called  the  students  in  one  at  a 
time.  The  boys  that  were  identified  were  the  first  students  interviewed.  Then,  additional 
members  of  the  class  were  brought  in  for  interviews.  Bolado  did  not  remember  if  the  entire 
class  was  interviewed. 

40. 

According  to  Ms.  Bolado,  Respondent’s  class  was  comprised  of  ELL  level  1 

and  2  students  that  were  struggling  academically.  Some  of  the  students  could  not  write  a 
legible  statement.  In  those  instances,  Ms.  Bolado  and  Mr.  Jimenez  transcribed  statements 
and  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  the  transcription  with  the  students.  When  statements  were 
transcribed,  the  transcriber  signed  the  statement  at  the  bottom. 

STUDENT  WRITTEN  STATEMENTS 

Al. 

Except  for  Hg.  who  was  interviewed  by  Ms.  Bolado  alone  in  her  office,  all 
students  were  interviewed  individually  in  an  empty  classroom  with  Mr.  Jimenez  and/or  Ms. 
Bolado.  Principal  Bolado’s  testimony  was  inconsistent  as  to  whether  she  was  present  during 
the  interviews  of om  and 
Om  during  the  investigation. 
interviewed om  and  transcribed  his  statement  as:  “He  put  me  to  the  rug  and  put  my 
knees  just  because  I  didn’t  read  my  book.  He  grabbed  me  by  the  neck.  He  grabs 
the  neck  and  puts  him  on  his  knees.”  (Exh.  1.) 

.  She  recalled  reading  the  statements  made  by om  and 
*s  statement  was  illegible  and  unintelligible.  Jimenez 
leg  to 
by 

   

grab 

      > 

Exhibit  3  is  a  statement  dated  May  28,  2014  which  purports  to  be  from  student 

42. 
M.  The  written  statement  is  partially  illegible.  As  transcribed  by  Mr.  Jimenez,  the 
go  to  the  time  out  in  the  rug  or  wall.  He  puts  me 
and  Ha  get  on  their  knees.  I  saw 
Zz 
on  the  neck  and  he  said  ouch.”  (Exh.  3.) 

statement  provided:  “The  teacher  says  to 
kneeling  facing  the  wall.  He  also  makes 
Mr.  Beltran 
hearing, 
any  of  the  things  set  forth  in  the  statement. 
Respondent  was  an  excellent  teacher  and  had  helped 
with  bully  behavior  from  other  students. 
testified  that 
bad  behavior  of  other  students  such  as  making  noises  in  class,  play  fighting  and  not 
completing  his  work.  Their  clear  recollection  of  Os  experience,  their  admission  of 
Oa  challenges,  and  their  warm  feelings  about  Respondent  supported  Respondent’s 

and  his  father  both  credibly  and  candidly 
had  some  behavior  problems  in  school  and  had  a  tendency  to  copy  the 

denied  that  Exhibit  3  was  his  statement  and  denied  that  Respondent  had  done 
and  his  father,  both  testified  at  hearing  that 

in  many  ways  including  dealing 

In  his  testimony  at  the 

   

14

         
  

  

  

  
  

  

testimony  about  his  conduct  as  a  teacher.  Jimenez  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative 
hearing  and  there  was  no  evidence  to  rebut Oms  denial  of  the  statement. 

43.  mi:  May  29,  2014  statement  provided:  “icoy  ioiok  yraysars  tcit  isroe;  olot 

ieitio  olot  ieitio  oot  liBHyor  iogo  iBSDIHYA  otozz  iese  neet.”  Mr.  Jimenez  transcribed  the 
statement  as  “He  makes  me  cry.  He  holds  me  from  the  neck  hard.  He  screams  to  everybody. 
He  tells  us  to  be  quiet.  He  makes  me  kneel  facing  the  wall.”  (Exh.  3.) 

A.’s  statement  dated  May  29,  2014  provides:  “I  now  that  ween  kind  of 
44. 
knids  get  in  troble 
he  gets  from  the  sih  when  we  in  troble  Next  wen  he  gets  us  from  the  nike 
he  puts  us  in  timeout  and  put  us  seeing  the  wall.  Then  some  times  he  puts  us  outside.  Last  he 
sell  as  you  go  to  your  chair.  When  we  go  to  timeout  he  pus  us  kneling.  Some  times  he  takes 
are  chrae  away  and  tales  us  to  kneling.”  (Exh.  5.) 
|  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative 
hearing  and  his  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

4S.  A  statement  dated  June  2,  2014  provides:  “When  people  get  in  trouble 

they  put  them  in  the  coner.  When  they  don’t  pay  auttenchen  that  the  teacher  says  to  sit  down 
in  the  carpet.  The  Kids  that  they  don’t  linsen  the  teacher  sends  them  outside  in  the  Hallwya. 
When  the  kids  talk  loud  the  teacher  tells  them  to  be  quiet.  When  the  kids  are  bade  the  teacher 
graves  them  when  the  kidsa  are  bad  the  teacher  tells  them  to  put  there  heads  down.”  (Exh. 
5.) Am  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  his  statement  was  admitted  solely 
as  administrative  hearsay. 

46.  ME  s  statement  dated  June  2,  2014  provides: 

bes  mad  Mr,  beltran  takes  his  cher.  When 
:  | and 
|  alwase  fite.  And 
Beltran.  I  thery  get  in  trubl.  Amd 
char  they  sit  on  there  nes.”  (Exh.  6). 
and  her  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

trose  water.  I Ha  and 

|  alwses  talk  about  Mr. 
bes  men  to  me  to.  And  bull.  Whem  they  tack  is 
did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing 

| 
gets  in  trabl.  Mr.  Beltran  Yells  at  him.  And 

al and om. When 

AT. 

ZZ 

s  statement  dated  June  2,  2014,  provides: “  When 

and 

and om  get  in  Trouble  Mr.  Beltran  gravs  hthem  form  the  neck  When 
chari  Mr.  Beltran  takes  away  his  chair  and  sometime  eric  nees  her  and 
timeout  sometimes  they  go  the  carpet  and  face  the  wall  and  stand  up  and 
(Exh.  7). Ca  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was 
admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

face  the  door.” 

sits  rong  on  his 
crys.  They  go  to 

48. 
.  get  in  Trouble  mr.  Beltran  Puts  them in  ter  his  at  ter  desk.”  (Exh.  8.) 

’s  statement  dated  June  2,  2014,  provides:  “Wen  a and 

and 
did 

not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was  admitted  solely  as 
administrative  hearsay. 

49. 

’s  statement  dated  June  2,  2014,  provides:  “Mr.  Beltran  puts Ha  on  his 
nees  because 
dsint  lisin  to  Mr.  Beltran. Hal  sits  on  the  corpit  facing  the  wall.  Sum 
times  a  stance  up  and  zene  Mr.  Beltran  takes  away  his  chair.  = |  sits  on  his  nees  and 

15

does  his  work.”  (Exh.  10.)  + |  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  his 
statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

50.  ma:  statement  dated  June  2,  2014,  provides:  “When 

|  dus  something 

bad  Msr.  Beltran  tells  him.  To  go  sit  on  the  carpit  or  put  his  head  down  in  the  table.  To 

om  he  tells  him  the  same  thing.  But  to 

he  tells  him  the  same  thing  too.  But 

sometimes  wen  he  is  not  using  his  chair  Msr.  Beltran  tells  him  to  sit  on  his  nese  and.  Then 
tells  Msr.  Beltran  that  he  has  learn  is  lein.  To im  he  tells  him  to  put  his  head  down. 
did  not  testify  at  the 
istrative  hearsay. 

Or  to  face  the  wall.  Sitting  Kriss  cross  applessos.”  (Exh.  11.) 
administrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  a 

51.  a  :  statement  dated  June  2,  2014,  was  provides:  “a  has  to  sit  in  the 
floor  on  his  because  he  do  not  lizen  to  the  teacher.  Some  times  a  is  on  and  he  sit  on  the 
floor.”  Ms.  Bolado  transcribed  the  statement  as:  7a  has  to  sit  on  the  floor  on  his  knees. 
|  losee  his  chair  and  he  sits  on  his  kness  and  he  does  his  work.”  (Exh.  12.) 
Someimes 

also  drew  a picture  of  qi  on  his  knees  at  his  desk. 

7  did  not  testify  at  the 

adnunistrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

§2.  mi:  statement  dated  June  2,  2014  provides:  “ 

he  gets  in  trabale.  Mr.  Beltran  gets  him  from  the  neck  hard. 
goes  to  the  coner  and  faces  the  wall. om  gets  in  trabale  because  he  hits 
om  goes  to  time  out.” .  |  drew  pictures. 
hearing  and  his  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  a 

did  not  testify  at  the  administrative 
istrative  hearsay. 

a  lot. 

talks  a  lot  that’s  why 
gets  in  trabale  a  lot. E  | 

53. 

’s  undated  statement  was  unintelligible.  Mr.  Jimenez  transcribed  his 
doesn’t  do  his  work.  The  teacher  gets  mad  and  he  screams  at  him. 

statement  as:  “ 
Even 
|  gets  in  trouble  because  he  talks  a  lot  and  he  brings  toys.  The  teacher  tells  him  to 
look  at  the  wall  and  not  to  look  at  other  people  and  make  him  sit  on  the  carpet.”  (Exh.  14.) 
did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  his  statement  was  admitted  solely  as 

istrative  hearsay. 

54. 

i:  statement  dated  June  2,  with  no  year  indicated,  provides:  “Wen  a  kid 
gets  in  chuh  Mr.  Beltran  pets  him  in  taime  out.  Or  he  gets  him  frem  the  nege.  Or  some  tame 
he  sdrems  to  the  kids.  Or  he  gets  he  from  the  shatter.  Or  gets  a  book  and  slase  the  book  in 
his  tabl.  Or  gets  the  get  hane  hard.  Pets  him  out  cyde.  Or  has  the  kids  hade  vetry  hookd.  Or 
he  takes  him  to  the  offist.”  (Exh.  15.) .  |  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and 
his  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

|,  whose  mother  worked  as  a  campus  aide  at  Graham.  Ms.  Bolado 

Principal  Bolado  had  not  received  any  prior  complaints  from  any  of  the 

55. 
students  including 
opined  that  the  statements  obtained  from  Respondent’s  students  seemed  consistent.  She  was 
not  aware  that  any  of  them  knew  what  the  interviews  were  about  in  advance  or  that  they  had 
talked  to  each  other;  however,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  students  were  admonished  not 
to  talk  about  the  investigation  or  their  interviews.  The  interviews  were  started  on  May  23, 
2014,  with 

|  and  concluded  on  June  2,  2014  with  the  majority  of  students  interviewed  on 

16

,  She  had  concluded  something  wrong  happened.  When  two  or  more  students 

the  last  day.  Ms.  Bolado  did  not  take  any  notes  for  the  interviews  because  the  District 
instructs  the  principals  not  to  take  notes.  The  District  staff  relations  department,  not 
Principal  Bolado,  determined  which  student  statements  were  used.  After  interviewing 
and 
come  in  with  the  same  complaint  she  assumes  the  truth  of  their  statements  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  these  particular  students  did  not  have  a  reputation  for  honesty.  Additionally,  the 
students  were  known  to  be  friends.  After  meeting  with  personnel  from  the  staff  relations 
department,  she  agreed  that  it  was  appropriate  to  issue  a  Conference  Memorandum  and  to 
discipline  Respondent  based  upon  the  statements  of  the  students. 

CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM  DATED  NOVEMBER  3,  2014 

56. 

On  November  3,  2014,  Principal  Elsa  Bolado  issued  a  Conference 

Memorandum  to  Respondent  summarizing  a  conferences  held  on  October  3,  2014  and 
November  3,  2014  attended  by  Respondent,  Principal  Bolado,  Juan  Alfayate,  Field  Director 
and  Carl  Joseph,  UTLA  union  representative.  In  the  Conference  Memorandum,  Ms.  Bolado 
R.,  ,  |  A 
summarized  quotations  from  interviews  with  students oa  R. 

a  C., 

°)9 

, 

M., 

  > 

and 
Respondent  grabbed  students  by  the  back  of  the  neck,  made  them  sit  or  kneel  on  the  carpet 
and/or  face  the  wall  and  screamed.  The  statements  were  taken  during  the  period  of  May  23, 
2014  to  June  2,  2014. 

A.  concerning allegations  that 

57. 

During  the  conference,  Respondent’s  UTLA  representative  denied  all 
allegations  and  requested  copies  of  the  statements,  notes  and  additional  information. 

58. 

Principal  Bolado  provided  Respondent  with  assistance  and  guidance  including 

a  directive  to  “not  touch,  handle,  or  grab,  students,  unless  it  1s  for  their  immediate  safety.” 
She  also  provided  him  with  copies  of  the  District  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  Board 
Resolution  Reaffirming  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California  Standards  for  the 
Teaching  Profession,  Standard  Two  which  addresses  Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective 
Environments  for  Student  Learning  by  (1)  establishing  a  climate  that  promotes  fairness  and 
respect  and  (11)  establishing  and  maintaining  standards  for  student  behavior;  Bulletin  1347.0 
“Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements”  and  Bulletin  5046.0  entitled  “Abolition 
of  Corporal  Punishment”  and  directed  him  to  Adhere  to  the  those  bulletins  and  policies. 
(Exh.  17.) 

TESTIMONY  OF  GRAHAM  STUDENTS 

59. 

Zz 

R.  is  a  13-year-old  seventh  grader  who  attends  middle  school  in  the 

District.  He  previously  attended  Graham  Elementary  School.  oa  testified  that  he  was  in 
Respondent’s  third  grade  class,  but  in  fact,  he  was  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class. 
testified  that  he  did  not  remember  second  grade,  but  remembered  Respondent’s  third  grade 
class.  His  memory  was  sketchy  about  details  and  time,  but  he  testified  that  he 
remembered  that  Respondent  “would  put  circles  in  a  jar  until  the  class  filled  it  up  then  they 
could  have  a  party.”  He  also  testified  that  if  someone  was  bad,  Respondent  “grabbed  us  by 

17

  

  

|  testified  that  Respondent 
the  neck  and  put  us  in  the  comer  to  stare  at  the  corner.” 
grabbed  him  by  the  neck,  below  the  hair  line,  and  dragged  him  to  the  corner,  forced  him 
down  on  his  knees  to  make  him  look  at  the  corner  for  5  to  10  minutes.  He  also  testified  that 
Respondent  made  him  kneel  on  the  floor.  ql  saw  dai  and  ml  taken  to  the  rug  for 
time  out.  =  |  testified  that  on  a  scale  of  1  to  10,  kneeling  on  the  floor  hurt  at  a  level  6. 
was  angry,  sad,  embarrassed  and  about  to  cry  at  the  time.  When  school  ended  he 
sometimes  locked  himself  in  his  room  and  cried  for  five  or  ten  minutes.  ql  remembered 
that  the  class  had  a  pizza  party  and  he  was  outside  of  the  classroom  crying  because  he  was 
the  only  one  who  had  been  excluded.  When  some  teachers  saw  him,  he  told  them  some 
things  that  he  did  not  clearly  recollect  when  testifying,  and  the  teachers  took  him  to  the 
He  spoke  to  the  principal,  wrote  a  statement  and  spoke  to  the  police. 
principal’s  office. 

60. 

|  is  a  seventh  grade  student  at  Thomas  Edison  Middle  school.  He 

had 
       

attended  Graham  Until  fifth  grade.  =  testified  that  he  was  in  Respondent’s  third  grade 
class  at  Graham  not  his  second  grade  class  when  he  was  seven  years  old.  mi  was 
noticeably  nervous  and  constantly  moving  his  hands  and  feet  during  his  testimony.  At  one 
point,  he  appeared  to  hide  his  head  under  his  hands  and  put  his  head  down. 
difficulty  making  eye  contact  with  the  attorneys  and  the  Commission  members. 
remembered  that  Respondent  had  classroom  rules.  One  of  the  rules  was  to  be  respect: 
did  not  really  like  Respondent  because  of  how  he  treated  the  students.  He  testified  that 
Respondent  screamed a  lot,  grabbed  students  by  the  neck,  threw  them  “like  a  baseball”  on  to 
the  carpet,  pushed  students  and 
“angry  weird  face  every 
day.” 
wasn’t  that  hard.” 
He  thought  it  was  funny  until  he  was  the  one  who  got  in  trouble. 
Respondent  grabbed  him  by  the  neck  because  he  grabbed  him  with  a lot  of pressure. 
estimated  that  on  a  scale  of  1-10,  Respondent  grabbed  him  at  a  level  9  and  it  hurt. 
was  placed  in  time  out  many  times.  Usually,  he  was  asked  to  stand  by  the  door  to  the 
classroom.  Sometimes  he  was  required  to  face  the  wall  or  the  comer  for  up  to  15  minutes. 
Respondent  required  him  to  keep  his  hands  behind  his  back. 

generally  “he  looked  like  a  really  mean  guy,”  and  had  an 
testified  that  when  Respondent  pushed  students  “it 

laughed  when  other  students  got  in  trouble  in  Respondent’s  class. 

got  angry  when 

   .  He 

at 

61. 

also  testified  that  Respondent  screamed  “sit  down”  “pay  attention”  “do 
.  The  conduct  made  him  feel  uncomfortable  and 

.  = ‘=  and 
he  use 

that  one  day  he  got  tired  of  Respondent’s  behavior  and  told  one  of  the  adults  on 

to  cry  in  class  because  of  Respondent’s  behavior.  = 
the 

your  work”  to 
sad.  =  testified 
testified 
playground.  They  sent  him  to  the  office  to  write  it  down. 
(Exh.  3),  and  confirmed  that  Mr.  Jimenez’s  transcription  at  the  bottom  was  a  correct 
tendition  of  what  he  told  Mr.  Jimenez.  He  did  not  tell  Mr.  Jimenez  that  Respondent  made 
him  put  his  hands  behind  his  back.  He  also  did  not  tell  Jimenez  that  he  thought  Respondent 
had  videotaped  him  pulling  fibers  from  the  rug.  However,  he  did  tell  his  parents  about  the 
alleged  videotape  and  he  thought  they  seemed  surprised. 

|  teviewed  his  statement, 

62. 

mm  had  recent  telephone  conversations  and  Instagram  exchanges  with 
some  of  the  other  students  from  Respondent’s  classes  to  discuss  what  they  remembered 

18

  

about  Respondent  and  to  discuss  the  proceedings  against  Respondent  before  giving  his 
testimony. 

63. 

|  C.  is  a  13  year-old  seventh  grader.  He  attended  Graham  from 
kindergarten  through  sixth  grade.  He  was  in  Respondent’s  second  grade  class  until 
Respondent  left  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Respondent  discussed  the  class  rules  with  the  students 
frequently.  In  Respondent’s  class,  students  were  given  praise  and  stickers  as  rewards  for 
being  good.  When  students  misbehaved  in  class,  Respondent  told  them  to  “do  your  work.” 
When om  was  misbehaving,  Respondent  came  close  to  his  face,  approximately  three 
inches  from  his  ear,  and  whispered  in  his  ear  to  “stop  talking,”  “do  your  work”  or  “go  to  the 
tug”.  Respondent  also  “lightly  grabbed”  students  by  the  neck  below  the  hair  line  and  put 
them  on  the  rug  to  sit  down  in a  criss-cross  style.  Respondent  also  made  students  stand 
straight  by  the  wall  for  up  to  10  minutes.  i  recalled  being  placed  on  the  rug,  multiple 
times  each  week. 

saw  Respondent  grab 

other  boy  students  by  the  neck  including 
|  did  not  remember  Respondent  ever  raising 

7. om. ‘ae  and  mm. 

his  voice  to  students. 

remembered  one  incident  in  which  Respondent  grabbed 

    
64. 
|  by  the 
to  the  rug.  ql  did  not  want  to  sit  down,  tripped  over  a  pole  near 
neck  and  pushe 
one  of  the  tables  and  fell  on  his  butt  and  leg.  qi  sat  down  when  he  fell  and  did  not  say 
anything  that 
his  chair  seat  as  a 
him  on  the  rug. 

desk.  om  remembered  that 
|  also  remembered  that 

was  sent  to  another  class  sometimes. 
   
estimated  that  iz:  grabbed  him  by  the  neck  about  30  times._He  estimated  that 

did  not  remember :  |  falling  from  a  chair  or  using 

cried  one  time  when  Respondent  put 

/-  remembered. 

Respondent  grabbed 
   
20  times,  and 

by  the  neck  about  20  times, 
15  times. 

|  did  not  like  Respondent’s  class 

|  30  times, 

20  times, 
because  he  felt 

left  behind  and  in  one  instance  he  felt  that  Respondent  did  not  respond  to  his  request  for  help. 

65. 

remembered  being  summoned  from  recess  to  speak  to  the  principal.  She 
asked  “what  did 
Mr.  Beltran  do  to  everybody”  and  told  him  to  write  it  down.  First,  he  talked 
with  Ms.  Bolado  in  her  office  and  then  she  had  him  write  a  statement.  He  remembered  being 
asked  “What  happened”  and  after  writing  the  statement  Ms.  Bolado  asked  him  if  the 
statement  was  true.  He  responded  that  it  was  true.  When 
Respondent  that  the  principal  was  asking  about  him.  He  also  told 
other  students  that  Principal  Bolado  was  asking  about  Respondent  and  what  he  had  told 
Principal  Bolado.  He  approached  Bolado  more  than  once  to  ask  what  had  happened  to 
Respondent  after  he  left  Graham  and  asked  if  he  had  been  arrested. 
with  ae  and 
they  al 

teturned  to  class,  he  told 
all  of  his  classmates  and 

and  discussed  Respondent  after  he  left  Graham  up  until 

e  end  of  sixth  grade. 

maintained  contact 

66.  om  M.  attended  Graham  from  first  through  fourth  grades.  He  was  in 

Respondent’s  second  grade  class. 
taught  him  “honorable  lessons”  and  “how  to  behave  in  class.” om  liked  Respondent’s 
class  and  found  it  to  be  “fun”  because  Respondent  would  read  aloud. 
remember  Respondent  doing  anything  to  hurt  any  of  the  students  or  raising 

testified  that  Respondent  was  a  good  teacher  and 

did  not 
his  voice.  om 

    
  
    
    

            

19

    

id. 

was  not  a  truthful 

did  remember  that  Respondent  got  mad  at  the  boys  sometimes,  but  not “super  mad.” 
remembered  being  escorted  to  another  classroom  for  a  few  minutes  when  he  misbehaved. 
person,  had  bullied  him  and  blamed  him  for 
om  testified  that 
did  not  like  Principal  Bolado  because  she 
saying  curse  words  that 
was  bullying  him. oa  believed  that 
had  made  him  apologize  to 
   
Principal  Bolado  was  “a  bad 
testified  that  he  would  have  told  his  parents  if 
Respondent  had  hurt  him. 
denied  writing  or  giving  the  statement  set  forth  in  exhibit  2. 
    
He  stated  that  he  did  not  have  a  signature  at  that  time  and  did  not  sign  exhibit  2. 
from  Respondent’s  class. 
tameebered  OB 
and Rg 
   
on  classes  occasionally. 
RE 
vas  sent  to 
   
   
7” 
DE  also  remembered 
  
and  did  not  think  that  they  vould le lie  = Respondent. 

     

considered 
had  been 
and  < 

friend,  but  later  bullie 

peal an  ab  lly. 

principal.” 

NOTICE  OF  UNSATISFACTORY  ACT/NOTICE  OF  SUSPENSION 

67. 

On  December  18,  2014,  the  District,  through  Principal  Pedro  Garcia,  issued  a 

Act  for  the 

period  of  pusust  2013  to  May  2014  concerning  the 

M.  The  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
fessional  and  Immoral  Conduct  and 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 
allegations  made  by 2  a 
Acts  set  forth  two  causes  |  == ey  Sa 
(2)  Persistent  Violation  or  Refusal  to  Obey  the  School  Laws  of  the  State  or  Reasonable 
Regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  Board  of 
Education  or  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  School  Employing  him.  The  Second  cause  was 
based  upon  alleged  violation  of  the  District’s  (1)  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  (2)  Board 
Resolution  regarding  respectful  treatment  of  all  personal,  (3)  Employee  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students  and  (4)  Bulletin  5747:  Abolition  of  Corporal  Punishment.  (Exh.18.) 
Respondent  also  received  a  Notice  of  15-day  suspension  on  December  18,  2014. 
Respondent  appealed  the  suspension  and  has  not  served  a  suspension.  (Exh.  19.) 

EXPERT  TESTIMONY 

68. 

 Respondent’s  expert,  Bradley  McAuliff,  appeared  by  video  conference.  Mr. 

McAuliff  is  a  professor  of  psychology  at  California  State  University,  Northridge  and  an 
adjunct  professor  at  the  University  of  Southern  California  Law  School.  Professor  McAuliff 
has  done  extensive  research  in  the  area  of  suggestibility  in  young  children.  (Exh.  520.) 
Professor  McAuliff  provided  valuable  insight  to  the  Commission.  According  to  McAuliff, 
age  and  cross-contamination  are  two  of  the  biggest  issues  when  questioning  children.  The 
younger  the  children,  the  more  likely  that  they  are  vulnerable  to  suggestibility.  Additionally, 
children  with  learning  differences  are  also  more  susceptible  that  typically  developing 
children.  Professor  McAuliff  reviewed  the  transcript  of  Ms.  Bolado’s  hearing  testimony,  the 
witness  statements  and  the  Conference  Memorandum.  He  expressed  concem  that  the 
questions  asked  by  Ms.  Bolado  and  Mr.  Jimenez  may  have  confirmation  bias  and  cross- 
contamination  (i.e.  confirmation  of  the  information  suspected  or  provided  from  other 
interviews)  which  impacted  the  questions  and  the  conclusions  derived  from  the  information. 
Professor  McAuliff  opined  that  he  suspected  that  the  shift  of  the  focus  of  the  written  student 
statements  over  the  period  of  May  23  to  June  2  should  be  a  concern. 

  
  

  

20

  

69. 

Professor  McAuliff  opined  that  the  focus  of  the  statements  became  more 

narrow  as  time  went  on  indicative  of  more  narrow  focused  questions  and  directions  designed 
to  elicit  certain  information  consistent  with  the  information  derived  from  previous 
interviews.  Thus,  evidencing  confirmation  bias  and  cross-contamination  which  likely  tainted 
the  interviews.  Best  practices  for  interviewing  students  are:  1)  setting  ground  rules  to 
decrease  the  deference  to  adults;  2)  rapport  building;  and  3)  allowing  students  to  give  a 
narrative.  Some  of  the  written  statements  have  a  focus  that  suggests  there  was  direction  or 
highlighting  by  the  interviewers.  This  may  have  been  inadvertent  and  unintentional. 
According  to  Professor  McAuliff,  it  is  also  a  good  practice  to  record  statements.  Here,  by 
design,  there  is  not  much  contemporaneous  information  about  what  was  said  by  the  adults  to 
elicit  the  written  statements.  By  design,  there  are  no  notes  or  recordings  of  the  interviews  so 
that  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  context  in  which  the  statements  were  given,  precursor 
instructions  or  conversations  that  occurred  between  the  students  and  the  interviewers. 

CONCLUSIONS  REGARDING  CONDUCT  AT  GRAHAM 

70. 

Upon  deliberation,  the  Commission  determined  that  the  evidence  offered  by 

both  parties  established  that  Respondent  was  an  experienced  elementary  school  teacher 
handling  a  challenging  class  of  level  1  and  2  ELL  students  who  were  struggling 
academically.  Respondent  was  also  contending  with  a  group  of  very  active,  disruptive  male 
students.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Respondent  used  a  variety  of 
strategies  and  tactics  to  deal  with  the  academic  and  behavioral  challenges  posed  by  his 
students.  Among  the  tools  Respondent  used  was  a  “time  out”  which  involved  moving  a 
student  to  another  location  or  standing  by  a  wall,  or  sitting  on  a  rug  or  at  a  classroom  center 
so  that  the  student  had  time  to  think  about  their  actions  until  Respondent  finished  lessons 
with  other  students  and  addressed  the  subject  student  directly.  The  testimony  of  the  students 
at  hearing  was  inconsistent  about  the  character  of  Respondent’s  “grab”  of  the  students  by  the 
neck.  The  testimony  ranged  from  hard  with  a  lot  of  pressure,  to  a  light  touch  to  no  “grab”  at 
all. 

71. 

|  While  it  was  not  established  that  the  students  intended  to  lie  about  their 

interactions  with  Respondent,  the  truth  of  what  they  purportedly  observed  was  not 
established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  Three  of  the  four  students  had  reputations 
for  being  untruthful  and  two  were  prone  to  making  false  reports  about  classmates  to  authority 
figures.  Additionally,  a  significant  amount  of  time  had  elapsed  from  when  the  alleged  events 
occurred  and  the  hearing  testimony  and  their  recollections  were  inconsistent  about  timelines 
and  details.  Moreover, Om  contradicted  the  statements.  Under  these  circumstances  and 
given  the  totality  of  the  evidence,  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that 
exaggerated  when  describing  Respondent’s  actions.  When  the  written  statements  are 
examined  closely  with  the  witness  testimony  and  in  light  of  the  credible  expert  testimony 
provided  by  Professor  McAulliff  about  the  potential  for  suggestibility,  confirmation  bias  and 
cross-contamination  from  the  way  the  questioning  was  conducted,  and  the  students’ 
conversations  amongst  themselves,  1t  cannot  be  concluded  that  the  District  met  its  burden. 

, om  and 

21

72. 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  Respondent  most  likely 

used  a  physical  prompt  in  the  form  of  a  hand  at  the  shoulder  or  neck  to  get  the  subject 
student’s  attention  and  guide  them  to  the  “time  out”  location.  Ifthe  location  was  a  rug  or 
carpet,  Respondent  did  insist  that  the  students  sit  down  cross-legged  in  a  “criss-cross 
applesauce”  position.  This  was  not  a  “grab”  or  physical  harm  or  intimidation  to  the  students 
and  did  not  violate  any  of  the  District’s  many  policies.  However,  it  may  not  have  been  best 
practices.  Similarly,  using  “time  outs”  was  not  in  violation  of  any  of  the  District’s  polices, 
but  may  not  have  constituted  “best  practices”  for  a  teacher  of  Respondent’s  experience  level. 
The  term  “yelling”  is  subjective  and  implies  that  someone  raises  their  voice  to  an 
inappropriately  loud  level.  The  Commission  did  not  conclude  that  Respondent  raised  his 
voice  to  an  inappropriate  level  at  any 
time,  but  it  is  likely  that  Respondent  was  required  to 
directly  address  —  Hg. Cm. om  and  some  of  their  friends,  and  likely  in  a  stern 
voice,  for  a  variety  of  reasons  including  to  get  students’  attention,  to  stop  dangerous 
behavior,  etc.,  none  of  which  would  have  been  inappropriate  in  these  circumstance. 
Similarly,  the  Commission  concluded  that  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not 
establish  that  Respondent  required  the  students  to  kneel  or  put  their  hands  behind  their  back. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  students  did  not  in  fact  kneel  or  hold  their  hands  behind  their  back 
or  use  a  chair  as  a  desk  as  a  self-selected  alternative  to  sitting  or  standing  as  instructed. 

SPECIFIC  CHARGES  RELATED  TO  GRAHAM 

73. 

Inthe  Accusation,  the  District  made  specific  charges  related  to  Respondent’s 

conduct  at  Graham.  The  Commission’s  determination  of  these  charges  is  based  upon  factual 
findings  5-72.  Those  charges  are  addressed  below: 

74. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in  Charge  1 
(b)  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  through  May  2014,  Respondent 
made  student oa  R.  stand  facing  the  wall  as  part  of  a  time  out. 

75. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  |  (a)(c)  and  (d)  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  through 
May  2014,  Respondent  did  the  following  to  second  grade  student 

R: 

Grabbed  the  back  of  his  neck  “hard”  while  walking  him  to  the  wall. 

(a) 

(c) 

Made  him  kneel,  causing  him  pain. 

(d) 

|  Screamed  at  him. 

76. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  2  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  through  May  2014, 
Respondent  Beltran  did  the  following  to  Second  grade  student om  C: 

(a) 

Grabbed  his  neck,  causing  him  pain. 

22

  

  

(b) 

|  Made  him  kneel  because  he  did  not  read  his  book. 

(CS) 

Yelled  at  him. 

77. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  3  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  to  May  2014,  Respondent 
Beltran  did  the  following  to  Second  grade  student 

R.: 

(a) 

Grabbed  his  neck  “hard,”  causing  him  to  cry. 

(b) 

Made  him  kneel  facing  the  wall. 

(c) 

Screamed  at  him. 

78. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  4  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  to  May  2014,  Respondent 
Beltran  did  the  following  to  Second  grade  student 1  |  A.: 

(a) 

Grabbed  his  neck  and  put  him  in  timeout  “seeing  the  wall.” 

(b) 

Removed  his  chair  and  made  him  kneel  during  the  timeout. 

(c) 

Made  him  stand  outside. 

79. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  5  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2013  through  May  2014, 
Respondent  Beltran  did  the  following  to  Second  grade  student Om  M.: 

(a) 

Grabbed  his  neck. 

(b) 

Made  him  kneel  facing  the  wall. 

80. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  any  of 

Respondent’s  conduct  as  described  above,  was  egregious.  Nor  was  it  established  that  his 
conduct  constituted  an  offense  listed  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  including,  but  not 
limited  to  Penal  Code  sections  11165.2-11165.6. 

August  28,  2015  Conference  Memorandum 

81. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  Respondent  participated  in  an  August  28,  2015 

conference  with  Local  District  South  Administrator  Pedro  Garcia  wherein  Mr.  Garcia 
directed  Respondent  to  adhere  to  all  of  the  District  policies,  specifically,  but  not  limited  to, 
the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting 
Procedures  Policy,  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment 
of  All  Persons,  Teacher  Job  Description,  Sexual  Harassment  Policy,  Bullying  and  Hazing 

23

Policy  and  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession.  The  Conference  was 
memorialized  in  an  August  28,  2015  Conference  Memorandum  which  was  issued  to 
Respondent.  There  was  no  discipline  imposed  upon  Respondent. 

Simon  Rodia  Continuation  High  School 

82. 

Rodia  was  in  a  transition  period  and  suffered  from  a  chaotic  environment 

during  Respondent’s  tenure  there.  Regina  Awtry  was  the  Principal  when  Respondent  first 
arrived  at  Rodia.  Many  of  the  students  did  not  like  Principal  Awtry  and  had  circulated  a 
petition  to  have  her  removed.  Ms.  Awtry  warned  Respondent  to  be  wary  of  the  students  and 
told  him  that  some  students  had  voiced  concerns  that  they  were  uncomfortable  with  him. 
Ms.  Awtry  warned  Respondent  that  the  students  “would  throw  their  own  grandmother  under 
a  bus.”  He  understood  this  to  be  a  caution  to  him  since  he  had  primarily  taught  at  the 
elementary  level  and  was  not  familiar  with  the  continuation  high  school  student  population. 
Principal  Awtry  did  not  give  him  any  specific  criticism,  details  or  the  names  of  the  students 
that  were  uncomfortable. 

83. 

Ms.  Awtry  left  Rodia  mid-year  due  to  an  unspecified  medical  issue  and  never 

returned.  After  Ms.  Awtry’s  departure,  the  school  had  a  series  of  interim  principals  with 
tenures  of  a  few  months  or  less.  Respondent,  the  Office  manager  Irma  Medina, 
Respondent’s  colleague  teacher  Evelyn  Mendoza,  and  Dr.  Ramirez,  the  Local  District  East 
Director,  were  on  the  interview  committee  for  the  new  principal.  Teacher  Adrian  Martinez 
had  provided  leadership  and  assistance  to  the  various  interim  principals  and  had  taken 
significant  responsibility  for  the  packing  and  movement  of  Rodia  from  the  Jordan  campus  to 
the  South  East  campus.  He  had  hoped  to  be  the  new  principal.  The  committee  ultimately 
decided  to  hire  Victorio  Gutierrez  to  serve  as  the  school’s  principal  effective  in  August  of 
2016. 

84. 

Mr.  Gutierrez  had  served  as  the  principal  of  View  Park  High  School  for  four 

years,  Alonso/Johnson  Community  Day  School  for  four  years  and  assistant  principal  of 
Roosevelt  High  School.  Mr.  Gutierrez  had  been  a  social  studies  teacher  and  the  dean  of 
discipline  at  South  Gate  High  School.  He  holds  an  administrative  credential,  a  bilingual  K- 
12  credential,  a  single  subject  social  studies  credential  and  a  special  education  credential. 
According  to  Mr.  Gutierrez,  the  principal’s  job  is  providing  a  safe  environment  for  students, 
parents  and  staff  and  to  evaluate  teachers.  At  Rodia,  his  job  included  representing  the 
District’s  policies,  working  with  the  community  and  the  limited  resources  available  at  the 
school. 

85.  | Rodia  had  nine  large  instruction  rooms  in  a  two  story  facility.  Two  of  the  first 
floor  rooms  were  used  for  the  cafeteria  and  the  library.  Two  additional  rooms  were  used  for 
Room  110,  which  was  Respondent’s  classroom  and  the  adjoining  classroom  which  was  the 
science  classroom  occupied  by  Ms.  Mendoza.  Principal  Gutierrez  described  Rodia  students 
as  “at  risk  students  and  they  are  the  ones  that  fall  through  cracks,  young  parents,  drug 
addicted,  the  neediest  kids  in  the  district-with  the  lowest  budget.”  According  to  Mr. 
Gutierrez,  generally  the  students  were  forced  to  come  to  Rodia  because  they  were  behind  in 

24

credits  or  had  behavior  problems.  Rodia  had  policies  to  contact  parents  about  attendance, 
profanity,  and  dress  code  violations.  The  students  had  a  limited  amount  of  time  to  make  up 
credits  and  either  return  to  their  prior  schools  or  graduate  from  Rodia. 

86. 

Students  frequently  “cut”  class  by  not  attending,  staying  in  the  bathroom  or 

“jumping”  the  school  fence  and  leaving  during  breaks  or  passing  periods.  Classroom 
equipment  had  also  been  stolen.  This  included  IPads,  science  equipment  and  math 
equipment.  (Testimony  of  Respondent,  Gutierrez,  Martinez,  Ruther,  Mendoza  and  Student 
Kimberly).  Teachers  were  asked  to  supervise  and  observe  students  to  reduce  the  tardies, 
truancies  and  thefts. 
It  was  not  uncommon  for  teachers  to  stand  at  the  classroom  door  or 
watch  to  see  if  students  went  to  the  restroom  or  office  as  they  said  they  would.  (Testimony 
of  Respondent,  Gutierrez,  Martinez,  Ruther,  Mendoza). 

87. 

Principal  Gutierrez  provided  training  on  the  District  policies  each  year.  The 

Child  Abuse  policy  and  the  Sexual  Harassment  policies  were  the  subject  of  considerable 
discussion  each  year.  According  to  Mr.  Gutierrez,  the  District  was  on  high  alert  for  such 
issues  after  an  infamous  case  of  child  abuse  at  Mira  Monte  elementary  school.  District  staff 
receive  two  mandatory  yearly  training  on  child  abuse.  Violations  of  any  of  the  District 
policies  (i.e.  bullying,  hazing,  harassment,  child  abuse)  were  to  be  reported  to  the  teacher 
and/or  a  principal  immediately. 

88. 

During  his  first  year  at  Rodia,  Gutierrez  was  overwhelmed.  There  were  five 

teachers  and  Gutierrez  to  supervise  all  of  the  students.  Gutierrez  sometimes  served  as  a 
teacher  when  there  were  too  many  students  in  a  class  or  a  student  needed  to  be  moved  from  a 
In  addition  to  the  normal  duties  of  a  principal,  Gutierrez  was  in  the  midst  of 
particular  class. 
hiring  teachers,  attempting  to  secure  funds  for  additional  personnel,  and  organizing  the 
campus.  Gutierrez  had  two  disagreements  with  Respondent  about  (1)  supervision;  and  (2) 
moving  his  classroom  to  the  second  floor.  Gutierrez  asked  Respondent  to  move  to  the 
second  floor  to  accommodate  another  teacher  who  relied  upon  the  elevator  because  of  a 
disability.  Respondent  objected  to  moving  to  the  second  floor,  so  Gutierrez  did  not  press 
him  any  further  or  direct  him  to  do  so.  The  second  disagreement  was  over  lunchtime 
supervision  and  eventually  involved  UTLA  intervention. 

89. 

 Rodia  students  were  in  class  from  8:00  a.m.  to  12:58  p.m.  with  lunch  from 

Prior  to  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  tenure  at  Rodia,  teachers  had  lunch  at  the 

11:36  a.m.  to  12:06  p.m. 
same  time  as  the  students  and  were  not  required  to  supervise  students. 
instituted  a  lunch  supervision  requirement  and  made  the  teacher  lunch  period  from  1:00  p.m. 
to  1:45  p.m.,  after  students  were  no  longer  on  campus.  Ms.  Ingrid  Vadalla,  the  UTLA  area 
chapter  chair,  met  with  Principal  Gutierrez  to  resolve  the  dispute.  Respondent  was  the  leader 
on  behalf  of  the  majority  of  the  teachers.  Ms.  Vadalla  had  a  vivid  recollection  of  Mr. 
Gutierrez  making  a  comment  to  her  with  respect  to  Respondent.  He  said,  “You  have  won  the 
battle,  but  you  have  not  won  the  war.”  She  found  this  to  be  odd  and  unnecessarily 
adversarial.  (Testimony  Vadalla).  Mr.  Gutierrez  admitted  that  he  was  frustrated  with 
Respondent’s  rigidity  on  the  supervision  issue.  Respondent  felt  that  there  was  a  substantial 
change  in  Gutierrez’s  attitude  toward  him  after  that.  As  an  example,  he  cited  that  Principal 

Mr.  Gutierrez 

25

Gutierrez  had  obtained  funding  for  teachers  to  work  with  students  for  one  additional  week 
after  the  conclusion  of  the  school  year.  Initially,  all  of  the  teachers  were  scheduled  to  work 
the  week  and  received  additional  compensation  for  the  time.  Mr.  Gutierrez  abruptly 
determined  that  Respondent  would  not  be  needed  for  the  additional  week  and  sent  him  home. 
All  of  the  other  members  of  the  Rodia  teaching  staff  received  the  opportunity  to  work  for  an 
additional  week  of  compensation.  (Testimony  of  Respondent).  During  the  hearing, 
Gutierrez  rationalized  that  he  could  run  the  Edgenuity  program,  that  Respondent  was  usually 
responsible  for,  by  himself  and  save  money  by  not  paying  Respondent  and  that  it  was  not  a 
personal  decision,  instead  it  was  a  financial  decision.  (Testimony  of  Gutierrez). 

90. 

After  their  lunch,  teachers  were  required  to  participate  in  daily  staff  meetings 
from  2:00  p.m.  to  2:50  p.m.  The  meetings  focused  on  growth,  resources,  student  study  team 
issues,  professional  development,  special  projects  and  WASC  accreditation.  Mr.  Gutierrez 
noted  that  Respondent  sometimes  arrived  back  at  school  a  few  minutes  late  from  lunch,  but 
always  stayed  late  in  the  afternoon.  Mr.  Gutierrez  liked  Respondent  and  was  grateful  to 
Respondent  for  his  role  in  hiring  him  as  principal.  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  office  was  next  to 
Respondent’s  classroom  on  the  first  floor.  They  occasionally  talked  casually  about  their 
families,  cars,  motorcycles  and  sometimes  about  students.  Mr.  Gutierrez  described 
Respondent  as  being  awkward  in  an  odd,  formal  way.  He  also  used  odd  phrases  such  as 
“How  can I  be  of  assistance.”  He  attributed  Respondent’s  demeanor  to  his  long  history  as  an 
elementary  teacher  and  being  new  to  the  continuation  school  environment.  Respondent’s 
classroom  was  next  to  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  office  and  he  frequently  visited  the  classroom  and 
observed  Respondent  teaching.  The  students  were  usually  in  their  assigned  seats  working 
and  the  class  was  quiet.  Mr.  Gutierrez  was  impressed  with  Respondent’s  inventory  control 
system  for  the  laptop  computers.  Respondent  assigned  each  student  a  seat  with  a  number  and 
the  number  corresponded  to  the  number  on  the  laptop.  When  Principal  Gutierrez  first  arrived 
at  Rodia,  Respondent  had  the  classroom  set  up  with  student  desks  facing  a  whiteboard  and 
his  desk  was  in  front  in  the  corner.  At  some  later  point,  Respondent  moved  his  desk  to  the 
back  of  the  class.  He  also  brought  in  a  sofa  for  a  reading  area. 

91. 

Respondent  taught  a  variety  of  classes  on  a  computer  platform  known  as 

Edgenuity.  The  platform  allowed  students  to  recover  credits  in  a  variety  of  subjects  and  was 
available  seven  days  a  week,  24  hours  a  day.  Students  were  able  to  access  the  platform  from 
their  cellphones  and  computers.  When  students  failed  a  test  or  were  otherwise  locked  out  of 
the  platform,  Respondent  was  required  to  reset  the  platform  so  students  could  regain  access. 
Many  of  Respondent’s  students  were  seniors  and  had  a  short  time  frame  to  complete  the 
necessary  credits  to  graduate.  At  times,  the  students  needed  their  access  restored  during  the 
weekends  and  during  non-school  hours.  Initially,  Respondent  told  them  to  email  him  at  his 
District  email  address.  Respondent  did  not  have  ready  access  to  his  District  email  on  his 
cellphone  and  therefore  student’s  had  to  wait  until  Respondent  checked  his  District  email  in 
order  to  proceed  in  their  programs.  Several  students  asked  Respondent  if  they  could  send 
him  text  messages  when  they  were  needed  to  have  their  access  restored.  Solely  for  the 
educational  purpose  of  rapidly  responding  to  the  students’  needs  during  his  off  hours, 
Respondent  gave  the  students  his  personal  cellular  telephone  number.  He  received  and 

26

responded  to  text  messages  solely  for  educational  purposes  and  did  not  have  telephone 
conversations  with  students.  (Testimony  Respondent,  Student  ii) 

92. 

Respondent  watched  his  students  closely.  He  had  been  warned  about 

technology  and  equipment  thefts.  He  was  also  vigilant  about  the  school’s  no-cellular 
telephone  policy.  He  frequently  caught  students  using  their  telephones  and  made  them  put 
them  away.  At  one  point,  the  school  had  a  policy  that  all  cellular  telephones  had  to  be 
checked  in  and  left  at  the  front  desk  in  the  morning.  The  policy  was  discontinued  when  some 
telephones  were  stolen  from  the  front  desk.  Respondent’s  classroom  was  orderly,  calm  and 
generally  quiet,  except  homeroom  when  students  were  allowed  to  circulate  a  little  more 
freely.  Originally,  Respondent  had  his  desk  in  the  front  of  the  classroom,  but  later  moved  it 
to  the  rear  near  the  door  so  that  he  could  see  what  the  students  were  doing  on  their  computers 
and  to  monitor  the  entry  and  exit  of  students  from  the  classroom.  (Testimony  of 
Respondent.) 

93. 

Respondent  attended  a  Restorative  Justice  training  with  his  colleagues.  In  the 

training,  the  teachers  were  taught  to  try  to  raise  self-esteem  and  make  a  human  connection 
with  students  so  that  they  felt  acknowledged.  Part  of  the  strategies  that  the  teachers  were 
instructed  to  use  included  giving  the  students  positive  reinforcements  and  compliments  and 
being  more  social  with  the  students  to  engage  them  and  anchor  them  in  the  school 
community.  (Testimony  of  Respondent,  Ruther  and  Martinez.) 

94.  —  Respondent  is  a  relatively  formal  person.  His  implementation  of  the  strategies 

had  experienced  some  trauma  and  thought  the  compliment  would  be  encouraging 

had  given  some  thought  to  her  personal  appearance.  He  also  complimented 
glitter  eye  shadow  when  she  wore  a  dramatic  makeup  style.  Respondent  was  aware 

and  practices  was  awkward  and  clumsy.  He  complimented  both  male  and  female  students 
m7  when  she  wore  her 
and  attempted  to  make  small  talk  with  them.  He  complimented 
hair  down. 
had  very  beautiful  long  hair.  Respondent  wanted  to  acknowledge  that 
   
on  her 
that 
to  her.  Respondent  also  commented  on  a  “Notorious  BIG”  rapper  T-shirt  that  one  student 
wore  because  he  remembered  the  music  artist  from  his  youth  and  thought  it  was  interesting 
that  someone  of  this  generation  would  wear  such  a  shirt.  Respondent  also  told  one  student 
that  a  hoodie  with  an  image  of  rapper  Tupac  Shakur  giving  the  middle  finger  was  not 
appropriate  attire.  Respondent  also  remembered  providing  bottled  water  to  a  student  who 
had  forgotten  her  water  bottle.  He  spoke  to  student  Hi 
American  heritage  several  times,  including  one  instance  in  which  he  allowed  her  to  substitute 
something  related  to  her  heritage  for  a  standard  assignment.  He  also  encouraged  her  to  seek 
scholarships  and  continue  her  education.  Respondent  encouraged  many  students  to  continue 
their  education.  He  often  explained  to  them  how  his  education  had  impacted  his  life. 

about  her  Native  Mexican- 

95. 

Respondent  is  known  to  maintain  a  calm  demeanor  even  when  students  are 

upset.  Respondent  testified  about  an  interaction  with  student Xm.  According  to 
Respondent,  Xi  was  talking  with  student  i  and  other  friends  and  generally  not 
following  classroom  rules.  When  Respondent  directed  him  to  go  to  the  office, 
became  upset  and  started  yelling  and  accusing  Respondent  of  looking  at Lg  inappropriately. 

27

  

  

Because  Xi  was  moving  towards  the  door  of  the  classroom  to  leave  as  he  made  his 
comments  and  was  following  instructions  to  leave,  Respondent  stood  silently  and  allowed 
him  to  leave.  He  did  not  believe  it  was  appropriate  to  respond  to 
(Respondent’s  testimony).  In  another  incident,  Student i: 
recordings  she  needed  to  complete  the  Spanish  class  and  received  credit.  Respondent  had 
excused N@  from  making  the  recordings  for  undisclosed  reasons. 
make  the  recordings  and  wanted  to  be  excused  as N@  had  been.  Respondent  gave  her 
became 
some  options  on  how  to  approach  the  recordings,  but  did  not  excuse  her. 
angry  and  never  finished  the  required  recordings. 

refused  to  complete  the  five 

*s  comments. 

did  not  want  to 

96. 

After  Principal  Gutierrez  had  been  at  Rodia  for  approximately  a  month,  he 

began  hearing  complaints  and  comments  from  teachers  and  students  that  Respondent  had  a 
history  of  making  female  students  uncomfortable  and  that  they  did  not  want  to  go  to  his 
class.  Primarily,  he  heard  this  from  the  office  manager,  Irma  Medina,  and  from  the  science 
teacher,  Evelyn  Mendoza.  In  the  beginning,  Mr.  Gutierrez  attributed  the  comments  and 
rumors  to  Respondent’s  awkward  and  overly  formal  demeanor  and  his  strict  discipline  style. 
He  also  was  aware  that  the  students  frequently  complained  about  other  teachers  and  started 
rumors  about  them.  This  was  corroborated  by  testtmony  from  Adrian  Martinez  and  the 
statements  of  Esther  Hall  and  Nancy  Daza.’  (Exhs.  38  and  24.)  Gutierrez  attempted  to  talk 
with  a  few  students  about  the  reports,  the  students  were  not  cooperative  and  did  not  want  to 
make  complaints.  When  Medina  made  him  aware  of  consistent  complaints  to  her  from 
female  students  and  their  reluctance  to  attend  Respondent’s  classes,  he  told  her  to  obtain 
statements  from  the  students.  (Testimony  of  Gutierrez  and  Mendoza.)  Ms.  Mendoza  also 
reported  complaints  she  heard  to  Gutierrez.  Mendoza  never  saw  Respondent  stare  or 
otherwise  act  inappropriately  with  a  student.  However,  she  did  find  him  to  be a little  strange 
and  reduced  her  interactions  with  him  after  the  student  complaints.  She  told  him  of  the 
student  complaints  early  on  but  did  not  give  him  any  of  the  student  names.  (Testimony  of 
Mendoza.) 

97. 

Gutierrez  delegated  the  task  to  Medina  because  she  was  female,  had  a 

relationship  with  the  girls,  many  of  which  hung  around  the  office  and  felt  that  they  would  be 
more  comfortable  with  her.  Additionally,  Gutierrez  was  extremely  busy  with  his  own  work 
and  carrying  a  student  caseload  of  his  own. 

98. 

Irma  Medina  testified  at  hearing.  She  had  been  with  the  District  since  1986 

and  Rodia  since  2016.  She  and  Principal  Gutierrez  were  the  only  staff  in  the  office.  She 
heard  the  female  students  hanging  around  her  office  talk  about  Respondent  and  the  word 
most  often  used  was  “weird.”  On  Gutierrez’s  instruction,  she  separated  the  students  and  had 
them  write  statements  about  their  experiences  with  Respondent.  The  students  did  not  want  to 
return  to  Respondent’s  class  so  she  allowed  them  to  remain  in  the  school  office  with  her. 

  

>  Teacher  Nancy  Daza  also  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  August  31,  2017 

acknowledging  that  she  heard  the  students  complain  about  Respondent  staring  at  their  butts 
and  breasts  and  were  uncomfortable  in  his  class.  Ms.  Daza  did  not  testify  at  the 
administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay. 

28

      

Some  of  the  students  regularly  came  to  her  office  and  referred  to  her  as  “mom.”  Some 
students  were  assigned  to  the  office  as  assistants  and  some  also  had  her  personal  phone 
number.  She  tried  to  care  for  the  students  and  took  on  the  role  of  confidant  since  the  school 
did  not  have  a  counselor  or  psychiatric  social  worker  available  most  days.  Ms.  Medina 
gathered  statements  from  current  students  and  had  former  students  contacted  for  statements 
as  well.  (Testimony  of  Medina.)  Medina  and  Respondent  were  not  particularly  friendly  with 
each  other.  When  Medina  insisted  his  art  students  move  to  the  library,  they  were  upset  and 
he  allowed  them  to  confront  her  directly  and  complain  about  the  move.  She  was  very  upset 
that  the  students  confronted  her  directly.  (Testimony  of  Respondent.) 

WRITTEN  STATEMENTS  OF  RODIA  STUDENTS 

99, 

R.’s  written  statement  dated  “Sep.  2017”  provided:  “I  am  writing  this 

letter  to  inform  you  of  inappropriate  gazes  a  teacher  at  Simon  Rodia  Continuation  High 
School  has  made  to  my  fellow  peers  at  school  several  students  have  been  a  victim  of  Mr. 
Beltran’s  gazes  in  the  classroom  area.  I’ve  witness  this  teacher  eyeball  students  such  as 

(last  name  redacted)  and Hi 

(last  name  redacted).  I  had  both  peers  in  the  same 

   
class  which  is  Spanish  that  Mr.  Beltran  instructs.  As  a  student  sometimes  you  need  help  with 
something  or  sometimes  just  may  have  a  question  to  ask.  These  two  students  would  go  up  to 
Mr.  Beltran’s  desk  to  ask  of  whatever  they  may  have  needed  and  as  they  walked  away  from 
his  desk  back  to  their  assigned  seats  I  spotted  Mr.  Beltran  scrutizize  those  two  girls  butts. 
I 
say  I  believe  this  teacher  has  a  type  of  student  he  likes  to  examine  because  si  and 
may 
_ 
administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

are  both  plumped  shaped  girls.  (Exh.  25.) N@  R.  did  not  testify  at  the 

100.  ; 

S.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2017.  In  her 

statement  she  wrote:  “Mr.  Beltran  told  me  ‘You're  a  pretty  girl  and  I  like  your  style’.””  The 
way  he  said  it  made  everything  awkward.  This  was  during  class;  I  was  next  to  his  desk  when 
this  had  happened.  He  also  used  to  stare  alot.  I  would  catch  him  looking  at  me  sometimes 
as  well.”  (Exh.  26.)  . 
admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was 

101. 

ig  B.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2017.  ig  wrote  that 

she  was  in  Respondent’s  Spanish  class.  She  wrote  “Mr.  Beltran  would  stare  at  me  when  I  get 
up.  Mr.  B  would  get  really  close  when  having  communication  sometimes  with  no 
communication.  [He]  [w]ould  ask  about  personal  business  referring  to  my  relationship. 
[M]anny  students  would  come  up  to  me  and  tell  me  he  is  starring  at  me,  manny  girls  would 
feel  uncomfortable  being  his  class  myself  as  well.  One  day  a  student  and  friend  of  mine  did 
stand  up  for  me  in  class  to  Mr.  B  and  told  him  to  ‘stop  looking  at ug  when  she  gets  up,  no 
girl  likes  to  be  checked  out.’  Mr.  B  did  not  say  a  word  also  did  not  deny  his  action.  The 
student  named Xm  did  get  called  in  the  office  and  did  get  in  trouble  for  defending  me,  the 
principal  at  the  time  Ms.  Awdrey  told  him  not  to  get  in  things  that’s  not  his  bussinesss  that 
she  doesn’t  have  that  many  to  be  firing  teachers.  When  talking  to  guy  friends  he  would  get 
mad  and  stay  around  hearing  and  butt  in  the  conversation.  After  the  incident  with  the 

29

  

  

  

principal  no  student  said  anything,  I  didn’t  say  anything  because  Ms.  Awdrey  wasn’t  going 
to  do  anything.”  (Exh.  27.) 

102. 

mm 

R.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2017.  In  her 

statement  she  wrote:  “Mr.  Beltran  told  me  names  like  Amor  sito  and  has  looked  at  me  up  and 
down  I  felt  very  unfotable  and  this  happened  when  we  had  to  come  to  Saturday  school  hes 
always  picking  on  me  and  I  have  seen  him  looking  at  other  girls  as  well.  I  also  heard  that  he 
told  one  of  the  students  he  liked  her  shirt  and  that  she  had  to  take  it  off.”  (Exh.  28.) 
did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative 
hearsay  only. 

103. 

mm  Z  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  5,  2017.  In  her 

statement  she  wrote:  “I  don’t  feel  comfortable  working  in  Mr.  Beltran’s  classroom 
sometimes  because  he  stares  a  lot.  I’ve  hear  rumors  that  he  tells  my  friends  inappropriate 
things  or  makes  them  uncomfortable  and  I’m  scared  that  he  will  tell  me  those  inappropriate 
thins.  When  he  stares  he  like  checks  us  out  and  I  don’t  think  its  right  for  a  teacher  to  be 
doing  that  to  his  students.”  (Exh.  29.) 
Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

mm  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing. 

104. 

Oa”  R.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  6,  2017.  In  her 
statement  she  wrote  with  regard  to  Respondent:  “would  stare  at  me  in  a  weird  way  that 
would  make  me  feel  uncomfortable.  He  would  look  at  me  up  and  down  every  time  I  would 
be  sitting  down  he  always  get  near  me  and  try  to  be  in  my  space.  He  would  come  too  close 
to  me  when  I  would  stay  afterschool  he  would  try  to  be  like  next  to  me  even  when  I  would 
have  questions  I  would  go  up  to  him  and  he  would  stare  at  me  when  I  would  go  sit  down  but 
he  would  look  at  me  just  from  the  back.  People  would  tell  me  after  class.”  (Exh.  30.) 

did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as 

administrative  hearsay  only. 

105.  : 

N.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  7,  2017.  In  her 

statement  she  wrote:  “Well  when  I  started  bring  my  hair  down  he  asked  me  if  I  notice  guys 
being  nicer  and  that  he  liked  how  I  had  my  hair  [.]  I...  didn’t  pay  attention  because  I  feel  like 
he’s  just  trying  to  be  nice  but  there  was  a  couple  times  where  I  witnessed  him  speaking  to  a 
student  in  a  way  he  shouldn’t  have  been.  Beltran  told  the  student  ‘I  like  how  you  put  the 
glitter  you  look  cute.’  And  saying  she  should  wear  it  more  often.  He  also  told  one  of  my 
friends  they  looked  like  ‘cute  cholas.’”  (Exh.  31.) 

106. 

Hi 

A.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  7,  2017.  In  her 

statement  she  wrote:  “When  I  first  enrolled  in  1s  class  he  would  always  squat  down  next  to 
me  and  ask  me  stuff  about  my  family  being  Native  Mexican  American.  [I]t  got  to  the  point 
where  it  was  an  everyday  thing,  talking  about  how  there  was  a  lot  of  money  left  and  how  I 
should  go  claim  it.  One  day  an  old  student 
mm  M  told  me  that  Mr.  Beltran  would  stand  in 
the  back  and  just  stare  at  me,  when  I  was  sick  I  kept  getting  up  to  get  tissue  and  every  time  I 
at  me  and im  would  always  tell  me  he  would  stare  to  the  point 
would  he  would  be  looking 
mm  help.  I  checked 
where  he  got  caught  by 

and  he  just  try  playing  it  off  by  offering 

30

out  of  his  class  and  I  didn’t  want  to  enroll  back  in  because  he  would  make  everything  super 
uncomfortable,  especially  when  I  would  run  into  him,  he  only  would  stare  at  me  constantly. 
[H]e  never  tried  anything.  He  never  touched  me,  he  would  just  stare  and  ask  stuff  about  my 
family.  (Exh.  32.) 
did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was 
admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

107.  7  O.  prepared  a  written  statement  dated  September  7,  2017. 

|  wrote: 

“What  I  know  is  when I  used  to  be  in  [B]eltran’s  class  he  would  stare  at  i  |  walking 
back  to  her  desk.  [A]t  first  I  didn’t  pay  attention  but  he  would  do  it  often.  To  one  point  I 
would  sit  in  front  of  his  desk  and  he  would  just  stare  at  me.  I  would  look  at  my  laptop  cause 
I  felt  uncomfortable.  There  was  this  one  girl  not  sure  her  name  but  he  would  go  up  to  her 
and  just  look  at  her  while  asking  her  something  and  keep  walking.  When  I  just  took  my  new 
phone I  had a little  plug  to  it  he  got  it  and  looked  at  it  I  told  him  what  it  was  he  kept  looking 
at  it  and  was  too  close.  I  moved  slowly  cause  it  was  uncomfortable.”  (Exh.  33.) 
did 
not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative 
hearsay  only. 

7/ 

108.  Ki  B.,  brother  of  Student if  B.,  prepared  an  undated  written  statement 

which  was  likely  prepared  on  September  5,  2017,  the  same  day  as  the  written  statement  of 
his  sister.  At  the  top  of  the  statement  “Grad  Year  -2016”  was  handwritten.  In  his  statement, 

wrote:  “I  had  Mr.  Beltran  for  2"  period  I  was  taking  Spanish  2B  at  the  time.  My  sister 

ad  the  class  as  well.  Many  students  noticed  Mr.  Beltran  looked  at  some  of  the  female 

students  in  a  weird  way.  He  would  stare  for  abnormal  periods  of  time.  He  would  sometimes 
pick  on  them  to  do  things  like  pass  out  paper  which  isnt  weird  at  all  except  he  never  seem  to 
mnake  the  male  students  do  things  like  that.  It  bothered  me  the  way 
and  one  of  my  friends  pointed  it  out  to  him  one  day.  My 
Mr.  Beltran  would  stare  at  my 
Beltran  didn’t  deny  what 
looked  at  them.”  (Exh.  34.) 
statement  was  admitted  as  admunistrative  hearsay  only. 

said  to  him.  Many  girls  would  talk  about  the  way  he 
did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing.  His 

pointed  it  out  that 
got  sent  to  the  office  but  Mr. 

he  looked  at  my  sister 

sister  and  other  girls. 

friend 

109.  A  M.  wrote  an  undated  statement.  In  her  statement  she  wrote:  “the  first 
semester  of junior  year  I  got  switched  of  Mr.  Beltran’s  class  for  the  reason  that  I  was  feeling 
very  unconfortable  in  his  class  the  reason  why  was  because  he  would  always  stare  at  me  and 
other  girls  and  that  would  just  make  me  feel  really  unsafe.  So  I  went  to  Ms.  Medina  and  let 
her  know  what  was  going  on  and  they  pulled  me  out  of  his  class.”  (Ex.  35.)  A  did  not 
testify  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay 
only. 

110.  a  A.  wrote  an  undated  statement.  In  her  statement  she  wrote:  “Beltran 
is  a  nice  guy  but  when  it  comes  to  females  he’s a  little  too  nice  and  sometimes  oversteps  his 
boundaries[.]  [T]he  first  time  anything  strange  happened  was  I  was  coming  out  of  his  class  to 
go  to  my  next  and  his  other 
you  look  beautiful  today 
student.  The  next  situation  I  can  remember  is  I  had  to  go  around  and  take  pictures  of 

period  students  were  coming  and  he  called  her  and  said-‘wow 
’  which  was  kinda  weird  for  a  teacher  to  say  to  a  female 

31

teachers  for  the  newspaper  and  when  I  went  back  to  his  classroom  he  asked  me  to  take  4 
because  he  didn’t  like  the  way  the  others  would  come  out  but  yet  he  never  moved  positons. 
In  the  end  he  told  me  to  pick  one  for  the  newspaper  and  keep  the  rest  for  myself  as  if  I  would 
want  or  need  pictures  of  my  teacher.”  (Exh.  36.) 
administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

did  not  testify  at  the 

111. 

|  A.  wrote  a  statement  dated  September  8,  2017.  In  her  statement  she 

wrote:  “So  like  always  I  went  to  my  fourth  period  and  I  got  my  computer  that  was  assigned 
for  me  and  then  Mrs.  Beltran  like  always  took  roll  and  when  he  was  done  he  started  walking 
around  the  class  and  once  he  got  to  w[h]Jere  I  was  seat[ed]  he  passed  by  me  but  stood  behind 
me  looking  at  my  chest  [.] 
I  started  to  get  nervous  and  I  purposely  coughed  so  that  he  would 
get  the  idea  I  notice  him  then  he  walked  forward  and  turned  around  to  face  me  and  said 
“wow  that  blouse  really  looks  nice  on  you”  but  as  he  said  that  I  looked  at  him  with  a 
disgusted  face  and  he  smiled  at  me  but  not  a  friendly  smile  1t  was  more  like  a  creepy  one  and 
then  he  left  to  take  a  seat  at  his  desk  but  I  would  feel  his  gaze  looking  and  me  and  I  turned 
around  to  make  sure  and  in  did  he  was  looking.”  (Exh.  37.)  ua  did  not  testify  at  the 
administrative  hearing.  Her  statement  was  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only. 

TESTIMONY  OF  RODIA  STUDENTS 

112.  ig  B.  testified  at  the  hearing.  She  was  a  student  at  Rodia  from  2014  until  she 

       

graduated  on  June  7,  2017.  She  came  to  Rodia  as  a  sophomore  with  freshman  credits.  She 
had  Ms.  Walton  as  a  teacher  until  Ms.  Walton  left  the  school  and  was  replaced  by 
Respondent.  Ms.  Walton’s  class  was  also  in  room  110.  Respondent  was  us  Spanish 
was  also  in  the  class  until  2016  when  he 
teacher  for  almost  two  years.  Her  brother 
graduated.  i  had  liked  Respondent’s  class  because  she  was  able  to  use  computers  and 
many  of  her  friends  including 
were  in  the  class.  She 
became  uncomfortable  in  the  class  when  some  of  her  friends  told  her  that  Respondent  looked 
at  her  butt  each  time  she  got  up.  Her  brother  told  her  to  remain  in  her  seat  because  he  did  not 
like  that  Respondent  was  looking  at  her  butt  and  his  friends  were  commenting  on  it.  She  was 
not  sure  what  to  think  about  the  comments  so  she  began  watching  Respondent  to  see  if  he 
looked  at  the  butts  of  female  students.  One  day  she  saw  him  look  at  her  friend ARs  butt 
and  then  she  was  convinced  that  he  had  also  looked  at  her  butt  as  her  friends  had  said.  After 
that,  the  students  began  watching  Respondent  to  see  if  he  was  looking  at  the  butts  of  female 
students.  ug  believed  that  Respondent  frequently  looked  at  her  friend  As  butt. 
had  an  hour  glass  figure  and  was  often  absent  from  class.  She  believed  he  stopped  when  he 
realized  the  students  were  watching  him. 

and 

2 

2 

113. 

i  did  not  feel  comfortable  in  Respondent’s  class  and  did  not  want  him  close 

to  her  after  that.  She  felt  that  Respondent  would  stand  too  close,  by  her  shoulder  or  behind 
her  when  he  was  looking  at  her  work.  Once,  he  whispered  to  her  that  her  open  button 
exposed  her  breast.  ug  did  not  respond  to  Respondent’s  comment  and  was  flush  from 
embarrassment.  He  talked  to  her  about  staying  on  task  and  told  her  “you  are  better  than  you 
do.”  He  never  talked  to  her  about  her  phone  because  she  did  not  take  it  out  in  class.  Overall, 
she  did  not  feel  that  he  understood  personal  space  boundaries.  Other  students  teased  her  and 

32

  

  

told  her  that  Respondent  “just  likes  you,”  “he  acts  like  your  dad,”  “he  doesn’t  like  guys 
talking  to  you,”  and  “he  keeps  looking  at  your  ass.”  She  was  bothered  by  the  comments  and 
subsequently  became  angry  when  Respondent  told  her  to  turn  over  the  photos  she  had  on  her 
notebook  depicting  her  exchanging a  kiss  with  her  boyfriend.  Respondent  told  her  the 
photos  were  “inappropriate.”  i  |  also  recounted  an  incident  in  which  her  friend 
in  trouble  in  class  and  then  started  a  scene  with  Respondent.  As  he  exited  the  class, 
yelled  something  to  the  effect  of  “stop  looking  at 
LJ.  No  girl  likes  to  be  checked  out 
that.”  Respondent  did  not  respond  to ME:  comments.  i”  ‘was  upset  because  she 
thought  that  Respondent  should  have  said  something  or  made  a  denial.  The  incident  was 
embarrassing  to  her. 

ot 

like 

114. 

Hn 

confided  in  her  science  teacher,  Ms.  Mendoza  about  her  discomfort  with 

around  the  time  that  it  occurred.  She  felt  like 
her  a  few  times.  Ms.  Mendoza  reported  all  of  the 

Respondent  and  about  the  incident  with 
she  had  a  bond  with  Mendoza  and  spoke  to 
concerns  raised  by i”  to  Principal  Awtry  (Testimony  of  Mendoza).  if  also  told  her 
parents.  She  was  upset  that  no  one  did  anything  about  Respondent’s  staring.  i”  testified 
that  she  did  not  want  to  be  in  Respondent’s  class.  She  circulated  a  petition  to  have  Principal 
Awtry  removed  because  she  did  not  like  a  lot  of  things  Ms.  Awtry  did.  There  were  also 
petitions  to  have  various  teachers  removed.  She  did  not  sign  all  of  them.  if  admitted  that 
she  spent  a  lot  of  time  planning  parties  and  making  money  from  throwing  parties,  but  denied 
ever  coming  to  school  under  the  influence  of  alcohol  or  drugs.  if  did  not  prepare  a  written 
statement  while  she  was  a  student.  She  was  contacted  by  the  school  to  come  in  and  write  a 
statement  after  she  graduated  and  wrote  a  statement  at  that  time.  (Exh.27.)  She  also  took  her 
brother Ki  with  her  to  write  a  statement.  (Exh.  35.) 

115.  i  N.  testified  at  hearing.  She  attended  Rodia  for  two  years  from  2016 

until  she  graduated  in  June  of  2018.  She  is  currently  attended  a  community 
had  two  Spanish  classes  and  a  health  class  with  Respondent.  Initially, 
problem  with  Respondent,  but  after  a  while  she  found  him  “very  weird.”  She  found  his 
comments  and  the  way  he  expressed  himself  to  be  strange  and  it  made  her  uncomfortable. 
As  an  example,  she  mentioned  that  he  complimented  her  on  her  hair  when  she  wore  it  down 
one  day  and  commented  about  her  makeup.  She  also  found  it  strange  that  he  asked  her  if  she 
noticed  he  had  opened  the  door  for  her  and  asked  whether  she  had  been  getting  extra 
attention  from  others  because  of  her  hairstyle.  She  also  found  his  comment  to  her  friend 

did  not  have  a 

college. 

about  liking NE:  eyeshadow  to  be  strange  and  inappropriate  because  he  was  a 

teacher  and  older.  As  another  example  of  Respondent’s  weird  comments,  she  mentioned  that 
complained  about  the  room  being  too  hot  and  Respondent  suggested  that 
on  a  hot  day 
thought  it  was  inappropriate  because  she  was  not  sure 
her  jacket. 
she  should  take  off 

that NE  had  anything  on  under 

the  black  hoodie  she  was  wearing  at  the  time. 

116. 

nu 

testified  about  a  second  incident  when  she  and  her  four  friends  were 

walking  toward  Respondent’s  classroom  during  lunch  planning  to  go  inside  to  eat  their 
lunch.  Respondent  was  standing 
chola”  directed  at  her  friend  _  S.  According  to 
gang  lifestyle  and  someone  who 

,  the  term  “chola”  denotes  a 
hoop  earrings.  i”  testified 

outside  his  door  and  made  a  comment  to  the  effect  of  “cute 

wears  baggy  clothes  and 

33

that  she  and  her  friends  were  not  “cholas”  and  the  use  of  the  term  was  offensive  and  weird. 

also  commented  to i, 

that  it  was  “weird”  for  a  teacher  to  make  such  a 

m7 

comment.  The  students  turned  and  went  in  another  direction  after  Respondent’s  comment. 
testified  that  she  watched  Respondent  to  see  if  he  was  staring  at  the  butts  of  female 
students  as  was  rumored.  She  testified  that  Respondent  looked  at  female  students  as  they 
were  leaving  the  room  or  moving  around  the  classroom.  She  felt  that  she  has  “caught  him” 
looking 
when ir  and  some  of  the  other  students  were  making  written  statements  for  Mr.  Gutierrez. 
She  was  not  asked  to  make  a  statement,  but  volunteered  to  do  so  when  she  found  out  other 
students  were  doing  so.  (Exh.  31.) 

a  few  times.  There  was a lot  of  talk  among  the  female  students  about  Respondent 

117. 

Respondent  caught 

using  her  cellphone  in  class  and  made  her  put  it 
away.  She  was  also  angry  with  him  because  he  insisted  that  she  complete  the  recordings 
required  in  her  Spanish  class,  but 
had  been  excused  from  making  the  recordings. 
Respondent’s  class  was  quiet,  but  students  would  talk  during  their  break.  Respondent  never 
raised  his  voice  to  the  class.  When  break  was  over,  she  would  often  sit  on  the  bench  instead 
of  going  into  the  class.  Respondent  would  talk  to  her  and  insist  that  she  go  in. 
not  feel  that  she  learned  anything  from  Respondent  because  the  classes  were  all  on  the 
computer. 

m7  did 

118. 

Ma 

L.,  a  former  student  at  Rodia  from  2015  to  June  of  2016,  testified  at  the 

via 

was  in  Respondent’s  Health,  Spanish  1,  Spanish  2  and  Art 
administrative  hearing. 
History  classes.  Depending  upon  the  day  of  the  week,  she  was  in  his  class  for  one  or  two 
periods  per  day.  She  found  Respondent  to  be  a  “very  good  teacher,”  “very  respectful  to  any 
students  that  needed  help  and  respectful.”  Respondent  encouraged  her  and  gave  her 
assistance  to  complete  her  Health  class.  He  also  helped  her  sign  up  for  college  and 
encouraged  her  to  study  child  development.  Mia 
now  and  credits  Respondent  with  motivating  her  to  graduate  and  “pushing  me  toward  this 
career.”  va  remembered  Respondent  welcoming  students  to  the  class  at  the  door, 
walking  around  to  see  if  anyone  needed  help  and  then  sitting  at  his  desk.  She  never  heard 
him  make  any  inappropriate  remarks  or  look  at  anyone  inappropriately.  He  usually  said 
hello  to  the  students  or  gave  a  high-  five  greeting.  She  felt  that  he  was  very  respectful  and 
the  students  were  usually  respectful  to  him 

is  proud  to  be  an  early  childhood  teacher 

119. 

ii 

was  a  Student  at  Rodia  from  January  2016  to  July  2016.  She  had 
one  or  two  class  periods  each  day  with  Respondent.  She  thought  Respondent  was  “great.” 
He  was  the  teacher  she  had  the  most  trust  in  and  had  a  great  relationship  with  him. 
Respondent  concentrated  on  helping  the  students  that  were  working.  She  was  working  very 
hard  to  finish  her  credits  in  time  to  graduate.  Respondent  was  very  helpful  and  stayed  with 
her  on  the  last  day  to  make  sure  she  was  able  to  complete  her  classes.  She  had  his  personal 
cellular  telephone  number  to  text  him  when  she  needed  access  to  the  Edgenuity  program. 
She  once  tried  to  call  him,  but  he  did  not  answer  his  telephone.  Respondent  was  strict  and 
required  everyone  to  remain  in  their  seats  at  their  computers.  He  stood  at  the  door  and 
watched  who  came  and  went  from  the  classroom.  She  never  heard  him  make  any 
inappropriate  remarks  or  look  at  students  inappropriately.  He  caught  her  using  her  phone 

34

  

once  in  class  and  made  her  put  it  away.  Respondent  was  very  formal  and  had a strict 
classroom.  Sometimes  he  would  make  a  casual  remark  such  as  a  compliment. 
not  make  many  friends  at  Rodia.  She  felt  that  there  was  a  lot  of  gossip  at  the  school.  She 
heard  gossip  that  Respondent  was  “creepy”,  but  no  one  would  tell  her  why  he  had  been 
labeled  as  “creepy.”  She  knew  that  he  was  not  considered  one  of  the  favorite  teachers.  He 
frequently  caught  students  ditching  and  trying  to  “jump  the  fence”  which  made  him 
unpopular.  She  felt  that  the  female  students  in  the  classroom  were  more  serious  than  the 
tnale  students  and  Respondent  seemed  to  help  them  more  because  they  were  more  motivated 
to  finish  because  many  of  them  were  already  parents. 

did 

120. 

|  is  22  years  old.  He  was  Respondent’s  student  at  Rodia  during 

the 

sat  with  a  group  of  male  students  in  Respondent’s  homeroom. 

2014  to  2015  school  year.  He  considered  Respondent  to  be  a  good  teacher. 
considered  Respondent  a  role  model.  Respondent  gave  him  good  advice  and  kept  him  “from 
getting  into  a  lot  of  trouble.”  Respondent  behaved  normally  with  students  and  made  some 
small  talk.  : 
Respondent  sometimes  talked  to  them  about  motorcycles  and  sports.  Respondent  was a strict 
teacher  and  some  of  the 
telephones  away.  _  never  saw  Respondent  looking  at  girls’  butts  or  breasts.  He  does 
temember  a  group  of 
were  going  to  start  a  petition  to  get  rid  of  him  saying  that  he  was  looking  at  their  butts  and 
breasts.  The  same  group  had  circulated a  petition  to  have  principal  Awtry  removed  also. 

girls  which  included If  that  did  not  like  Respondent  and  said  they 

girls  did  not  like  him  because  he  made  them  put  their  makeup  and 

a7  remembered  seeing  Harley  motorcycle  catalogues  and  magazines  in  the  classroom. 

very 

121. 

is  a:  cousin  and  was  also  a  student  in  Respondent’s  class 
had  Respondent  for  Spanish  once  a  week.  He  found  Respondent  to  be  a 

helpful.  He  never  saw  Respondent  looking  at  students 

in  2015. 
good  teacher  and 
inappropriately. 
were  trying  to  get  him  “kicked  out.”  Respondent  sent  students  to  the  office  if  they  were 
disruptive  or  not  completing  their  work.  Respondent  insisted  that  students  remain  on  task 
and  working  during  the  class.  Some  of  the  students  referred  to  him  as  “annoying”  or 
“boring”  and  did  not  want  to  be  in  the  class. 

was  aware  that  a  group  of  students  did  not  like  Respondent  and 

TESTIMONY  OF  RODIA  TEACHERS 

122. 

Evelyn  Mendoza  has  been  the  science  teacher  at  Rodia  since  August  of  2015. 
Her  class  was  connected  to  Respondent’s  by  a  door  that  usually  remained  closed.  She  had 
previously  taught  ninth  grade  Science  at  Crenshaw  high  school.  She  has  been  the  Title  1 
designee  at  Rodia  since  2016.  Respondent  was  already  a  teacher  at  Rodia  when  she  arrived. 
In  the  beginning  there  were  only  five  teachers  at  Rodia  and  they  frequently  had  lunch 
together.  When  Mendoza  first  arrived  Ms.  Awtry  was  the  principal.  Principal  Awtry  left  in 
November  of  2015  and  was  followed  by a  series  of  five  interim  principals.  Mr.  Gutierrez 
became  the  principal  in  2017.  Initially,  Ms.  Mendoza  spent  a lot  of  time  with  Respondent 
and  Adrian  Martinez,  another  male  teacher  at  lunch.  As  time  went  by,  more  teachers  were 
hired  and  she  found  female  friends  on  the  staff  and  consequently  spent  less  time  with 
Respondent.  Early  on,  she  was  one  of  two  female  teachers  and  students  confided  in  her 

35

about  a  variety 
ug  B.  and 
and  complained  that  he  stared  at  them a  lot. 

of  things  including  suicidal  feelings,  lost  family  members  and  depression. 

L.  complained  to  her  about  not  feeling  comfortable  in  Respondent’s  class 

123. 

She  told  the  girls  that  Respondent  was  probably  trying  to  manage  classroom 
behaviors.  She  knew  that  Respondent  had  a  reputation  of  being  a  strict  teacher.  The  girls 
insisted  that  was  not  the  case.  It  was  not  unusual  for  students  to  gossip  about  teachers  and 
make  negative  remarks  about  them.  They  frequently  ridiculed  Martinez  as  having  a  robotic 
voice  and  commented  about  the  math  teacher’s  sexuality.  The  students  were  also  vocal 
about  their  dislike  of  Ms.  Awtry.  Ms.  Mendoza  reported  the  concerns  raised  by  the  girls  to 
Principal  Awtry.  Ms.  Mendoza  recalled  that  Respondent  made  one  strange  comment  to  her 
in  passing  and  that  she  felt  that  on  one  occasion  he  inadvertently  invaded  her  personal  space, 
but  generally  she  had  no  problems  with  Respondent.  She  told  Respondent  that  some  students 
had  complained  that  he  made  them  uncomfortable  because  he  stared  or  looked  at  them 
inappropriately.  He  was  quiet  and  did  not  respond.  She  did  not  give  him  the  names  of  the 
students  and  she  did  not  investigate  their  clams.  Mendoza  frequently  overheard  student 
conversations  about  Respondent  staring  at  girls.  Each  time  she  heard  the  comments  she 
reported  them  to  the  administrators:  Awtry,  Fernandez,  the  interim  principal,  and  the 
psychiatric  social  worker.  The  last  time  she  heard  a  comment  about  Respondent  was  when 
students  Maite  and  Caroline  were  discussing  Respondent’s  behavior.  She  reported  what  she 
heard  to  Principal  Gutierrez.  Mr.  Gutierrez  did  not  ask  her  any  questions,  but  she  was  later 
interviewed  by  two  District  investigators.  She  prepared  a  written  statement  in  September  of 
2017. 

124. 

Adrian  Martinez  has  been  a  District  employee  for  15  years.  Currently,  he 
serves  as  the  Dean  of  Students  at  Mervyn  Dymally  High  School.  Previously  he  taught  at 
South  East  High  School,  Roybal  High  School,  Richard  Alonzo  Community  Day  School  and 
Rodia.  He  worked  at  Rodia  for  four  years  from  August  of  2013  to  July  of  2017.  Mr. 
Martinez  has  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Social  Services  from  University  of  the  Pacific,  a 
Master’s  degree  in  Education  from  the  University  of  Phoenix  and  a  Master’s  degree  in 
Educational  Administration  from  Concordia  University.  He  holds  a  single  subject  credential, 
a  tier  1  administrative  credential  and  certificates  in  anger  management  counseling  and 
drug/alcohol  counseling.  Mr.  Martinez  began  his  work  at  Rodia  before  Principal  Awtry  was 
hired  and  while  the  school  was  on  the  Jordan  High  School  Campus. 

125. 

Mr.  Martinez  was  placed  in  charge  of  many  aspects  of  the  physical  move  of 

the  school  from  the  Jordan  High  School  Campus  to  its  new  home  on  the  South  East  High 
School  campus.  He  had  all  of  the  contents  of  the  school  moved  from  the  Jordan  campus  to 
the  South  East  campus.  This  included  many  boxes  of  books,  papers,  magazines,  office 
supplies,  records  and  folders.  Many  of  the  boxes  were  labeled  and  he  could  easily  direct 
where  those  boxes  were  to  be  placed.  There  were  also  large  quantities  of  unlabeled  boxes 
and  many  unlabeled  boxes  of  magazines  that  were  packed  by  the  art  teacher  and  others. 
Respondent  did  not  work  at  Rodia  at  the  time  and  was  not  involved  with  the  move.  Mr. 
Martinez  directed  many  of  the  boxes  to  be  placed  in  the  physical  education  room,  which  later 
became  a  text  book  room.  Other  boxes  were  placed  in  the  school  office  and  in  Room  110, 

36

the  classroom  used  by  Ms.  Walton  and  later  by  Respondent  which  was  next  to  the  principal’s 
office.  Because  there  were  so  many  boxes  and  limited  time  to  have  the  items  moved,  Mr. 
Martinez  had  the  movers  place  them  in  any  open  and  empty  spaces  available. 

126. 

While  Ms.  Walton  occupied  Room  110  it  was  full  of  “junk”  in  all  of  the 

cabinets,  storage  and  closets.  Mr.  Martinez  was  aware  of  this  because  he  regularly  made  the 
tounds  of  the  school  to  make  sure  the  windows  were  closed  and  things  were  secure  on  behalf 
of  Ms.  Awtty,  the  principal,  who  was  elderly  and  in  failing  health.  Mr.  Martinez  was  also 
aware  that  Ms.  Walton  was  the  subject  of  either  an  investigation  or  disciplinary  action.  He 
tecalled  that  she  was  on  suspension  for  five  days,  after  which  Respondent  was  hired.  Quite  a 
while  after  Respondent  had  been  teaching  at  Rodia,  Walton  came  to  retrieve  her  belongings. 
There  was  some  controversy  about  whether  some  of  her  belongings  and  files  were  missing. 
Martinez  was  aware  that  she  did  not  take  all  of  her  things  and  remembers  that  she  brought 
some  boxes  with  her.  Room  110  was  never  cleaned  out  after  Ms.  Walton  left  and  boxes  from 
the  initial  move  to  the  South  East  campus  remained  in  the  classroom. 

127. 

After  Ms.  Awtry  left  the  school,  Mr.  Martinez  and  Respondent  helped  the 

various  interim  principals  to  the  extent  they  could.  Each  interim  principal  was  limited  to  a 
30-day  stint  at  the  school.  The  environment  was  chaotic  during  the  2015-2016  school  year. 
A  substitute  teacher  was  brought  in  for  six  weeks  at  the  end  of  the  school  year  and  Mr. 
Martinez  was  relieved  of  classroom  duties  so  that  he  could  assist  the  various  interim 
principals  and  to  establish  some  continuity  for  the  students.  During  this  time,  Mr.  Martinez 
observed  each  classroom  to  see  what  the  students  were  doing  and  to  monitor  any  discipline 
issues.  Respondent’s  class  was  in  order  and  the  students  were  on  task.  Respondent  was 
generally  at  his  desk  or  walking  around  monitoring  student  progress.  He  was a strict  teacher 
and  made  sure  that  the  students  followed  the  rules.  He  was  always  calm.  He  stood  by  his 
door  and  welcomed  students.  They  frequently  made  negative  remarks  or  started  rumors 
about  teachers.  The  students  frequently  gossiped  about  teachers  including  Respondent. 
Students  frequently  complained  about  teachers  being  weird  or  strict.  Mr.  Martinez  was  not  a 
fan  of  Ms.  Mendoza,  he  felt  that  she  gossiped  about  her  colleagues  and  spread  rumors. 

128. 

Respondent  and  Adrian  Martinez  walked  around  during  lunch  and  nutrition 

break.  They  walked  around  to  check  on  the  students.  Respondent  usually  stood  by  the  door 
to  his  classroom  at  the  before  class  to  welcome  students.  He  was  a  very  strict  teacher  and 
had  classroom  control.  He  was  always  calm  and  never  lost  his  temper.  Mr.  Martinez  was 
impressed  with  his  demeanor  and  patience. 

129. 

Mr.  Martinez  was  familiar  with  students  s  i  | and 

if  say  that  Respondent  was  mean  and  too  strict.  According  to  Mr.  Martinez, 
school  under  the  influence  of  alcohol  or  drugs  with  bloodshot  eyes  on  several  occasions.  She 
was  sent  home  for  being  under  the  influence  and  for  dress  code  violations.  Mr.  Martinez 
considered if  to  be a 
battle  between  Ms.  Awtry  and  Ms.  Walton,  Respondent’s  predecessor. 
thought  Principal  Awtry  was  “a  fat  racist.”  According  to  Mr.  Martinez, 
part  of  a  group  of  Hispanic  students  that  supported  Walton  in  her  dispute  with  Awtry. 

flirt  and  a  gossip.  ff  had  been  upset  about  what  she  perceived  as  a 
voiced  that  she 

and  nu 

‘were 

.  He  heard 
came  to 

37

gossiped  and  complained  about  all  of  the  teachers.  She  did  not  like 

felt  that  Respondent  was  one  of  Awtry’s  allies  and  resented  that  Respondent  replaced 

i, 
Walton.  ; 
Respondent,  the  English  teacher  or  the  Math  teacher.  Martinez  had  her  in  class  and  as  part  of 
an  afterschool  study  program.  He  opined  that 
flirt  with  older  men. 
fighting.  Although  she  was  given  a  second  chance,  Martinez  did  not  recall  her  graduating. 

was  almost  removed  from  Rodia  for  dress  code  violations  and 

was  manipulative  and  attempted  to 

130. 

Mr.  Martinez  described  the  Restorative  Justice  training  as  a  training  to 

encourage  positive  interactions.  The  training  was  intended  to  provide  positive  feedback  to 
students  who  generally  did  not  receive  positive  reinforcements.  Teachers  were  supposed  to 
give  compliments  when  appropriate,  make  positive  comments,  be  personable  and  encourage 
the  students. 

131. 

Marie  Ruther  retired  from  the  District.  She  worked  for  the  District  for  20 

years  during  two  separate  stints.  Ms.  Ruther  worked  as  a  pool  substitute  at  Rodia  during  the 
2016-2017  school  year  and  was  a  regular  math  teacher  at  Rodia  for  the  2017-2018  school 
year  until  her  retirement  in  March  of  2018.  She  had  a  good  relationship  with  Respondent. 
She  observed  him  with  students  and  thought  he  had  good  classroom  control  and 
management.  All  of  the  desks  were  in  rows,  the  students  were  in  their  seats  and  Respondent 
was  seated  in  the  back  of  the  class  where  he  could  see  exactly  what  each  student  was  doing. 
She  opined  that  Respondent  was  very  professional.  She  never  saw  him  yell  at  a  student  and 
would  have  confronted  him  had  she  seen  him  do  so.  Adults  including  the  principal  and 
visitors  from  the  District  office  visited  the  classes  unannounced. 

132. 

Ruther  has  a  long  history  of  work  in  the  motorcycle  industry  and  as  a 

motorcycle  enthusiast.  She  knew  Respondent  had  a  motorcycle  and  had  spoken  with  him 
about  it.  Ruther  also  had  motorcycle  and  car  magazines.  Ruther  opined  that  Respondent  was 
not  a  true  biker  because  his  motorcycle  was  not  customized. 

133. 

She  went  to  the  Restorative  Justice  training  with  Martinez  and  Respondent. 
According  to  the  training,  the  teachers  and  the  school  were  the  social  network  and  support 
for  the  students.  Ruther  came  from  a  humble  background  and  did  not  receive  a  lot  of  family 
support  for  her  education.  She  felt  strongly  about  the  need  to  build  the  self-esteem  of  the 
students  and  encourage  them.  She  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  the  mornings  encouraging  students 
to  eat  breakfast.  She  understood  that  many  students  had  food  insecurity,  some  were 
homeless  and  some  others  were  in  foster  care  or  abusive  homes.  The  Restorative  Justice 
training  taught  them  to  compliment  the  students  when  appropriate. 

134. 

Ms.  Ruther  described  Respondent  as  a  “religious  catholic  man”  and  a  “union 

guy.”  She  was  aware  of  Respondent’s  discussions  with  Principal  Gutierrez  about  lunch 
supervision.  She  and  most  of  the  teachers  agreed  with  Respondent.  As a  result  of  his 
complaints,  the  teachers  were  given  a  longer  lunch  hour  after  the  students  left  in  exchange 
for  supervision  of  the  student  lunch.  Respondent  always  helped  if  there  was  a  problem  at 
lunch,  but  she  did  not  remember  him  having  a  supervision  station  like  the  other  teachers. 
She  sometimes  went  to  lunch  with  the  group  of  teachers.  Respondent  was  always  a 

38

  

gentleman,  never  was  inappropriate  and  never  stared  at  women.  She  interacted  with  him 
often  at  school.  She  had  been  in  his  class  numerous  times.  Sometimes,  she  went  to  his 
classroom  to  retrieve  items  that  students  had  taken  without  permission  or  to  get  his  help  with 
Edgenuity.  At  the  time,  there  were  only  four  teachers  and  they  were  in  constant 
communication  about  the  students.  She  always  felt  comfortable  with  him.  Ms.  Ruther 
described  a  constant  flow  of  rumors  among  the  students  about  all  of  the  teachers.  As 
examples,  she  stated  she  was  aware  of  erroneous  rumors  that  the  students  circulated  that  she 
believed  in  “flat  earth”  and  was  a  “Trump  supporter.” 

135. 

Ruther  gave  extensive  testimony  about  the  magazines  at  Rodia.  According  to 

Ruther,  there  were  magazines  in  the  library,  the  English  classroom,  the  social  studies  room, 
and  in  the  teacher’s  room.  Ruther  had  seen  magazines  throughout  the  school.  Magazines 
were  used  for  art  projects  and  also  in  some  of  the  classrooms.  Ruther  observed  some  very 
old  magazines  in  the  library.  Teachers  and  students  donated  magazines.  Ms.  Ruther  also 
donated  magazines.  If  she  had  motorcycle  magazines  which  had  girls  in  bathing  suits  she 
would  donate  those,  but  not  any  magazines  where  women  were  partially  nude.  She  did  not 
go  through  the  magazines  page  by  page.  Ms.  Walton,  the  teacher  who  occupied  room  110 
before  Respondent,  had  magazines  in  the  classroom  and  in  the  closets.  Ms.  Ruther  observed 
many  old  magazines  in  the  closets  of  the  school.  After  Respondent  left,  the  teachers  started 
cleaning  out  the  closets.  She  cleaned  out  two  closets  before  she  retired.  All  teachers  had  the 
same  key  that  would  open  all  of  the  classrooms  except  the  science  classroom.  Respondent’s 
classroom  was  used  by  other  groups  in  the  evenings.  Additionally,  the  janitors,  security 
guards  and  information  technology  personnel  had  free  access  to  all  of  the  classrooms  in  the 
evenings.  A  computer  was  stolen  from  Ruther’s  classroom  after  hours  on  one  occasion. 

136. 

Esther  Hall  was  a  substitute  teacher  assigned  to  Rodia  in  September  of  2016. 

Ms.  Hall  did  not  testify  at  the  administrative  hearing,  but  did  prepare  a  written  statement 
dated  September  8,  2017.  The  statement  was  admitted  solely  as  administrative  hearsay.  In 
relevant  part,  she  wrote: 

In  September  of  2016  I  was  assigned  as  a  pool  teacher  at  Simon  Rodia.  During 
my  first  week  since  I  had  no  classroom  and  no  assigned  classes,  I  tutored 
students  from  the  math  classes  either  outside  at  the  lunch  tables  or  in  the  library. 
At  the  end  of  one  period,  I  told  the  small  group  of  students  that  they  needed  to 
go  to  their  next  class.  No  one  wanted  to  leave  and  one  student  said,  ‘I  don’t  like 
I  asked  if  she  had  told  anyone  about  this 
him.  I  think  he  stares  at  my  breasts.’ 
and  she  said,  ‘No,  they  wouldn’t  do  anything  if  I  did.  He’s  creepy.’ 

The  other  students  did  not  want  to  leave  either.  One  said  that  another  teacher 
was  also  ‘creepy’  and  a  ‘moron.’  Another  teacher  had  ‘bad  breath.”  Another 
girl  said  Mr.  Beltran  was  ‘fat’  and  she  didn’t  like  looking  at  him.  Everyone  in 
the  group  said  that  they  didn’t  like  any  of  the  teachers,  but  Mr.  Gutierrez  was 
‘OK’.  I  did’nt  know  any  of the  teachers  yet  but  was  skeptical  about  the  students’ 
characterizations  of  them. 

39

I  did  not  perceive  this  conversation  as  a  case  of  child  abuse  or  posing  a  threat  to 
anyone  except  perhaps  the  teachers  who  received  negative,  disparaging  remarks 
across  the  board.  To  me  it  was  just  another  feeble  attempt  by  students  to  escape 
the  confines  of  their  classrooms. 

(Exh.  38.) 

DISTRICT  INVESTIGATION 

137. 

Kandice  Galata  is  currently  an  investigator  with  the  District  Office  of 

Inspector  General.  She  has  held  that  position  for  eleven  months.  Previously,  she  was  an 
investigator  with  the  District’s  Student  Safety  Investigation  Team  for  eight  years.  In  that 
capacity,  Ms.  Galata  interviewed  Principal  Gutierrez,  7 L. 
Mendoza,  teacher  Esther  Hall,  teacher  Nancy 

Medina,  Evel: 

Daza,  Students 
R.. He A. 

M, 
‘and  Respont  lent. 

A., 

G.,  > =  Ss. 

, 

,  and 

were  not  students  at the  time and were  at ‘interviewed.  Galata’s 

teport  and  the  summaries  of  interviews  therein  were  admitted  solely  as  administrative 
hearsay.  Galata  was  not  a  peace  officer  and  her  report  did  not  meet  the  threshold 
tequirements  for  admission  pursuant  to  Lake  v.  Reed  (1997)  16  Cal.  4th  448.  The  interview 
summaries  contained  in  the  report  were  admitted  as  administrative  hearsay  only.  The 
interview  summaries  were  generally  consistent  with  the  written  statements  and  hearing 
testimony.  Ms.  Galata  noted  that  as  part  of  the  investigation,  Respondent’s  classroom 
computer  was  subjected  to  a  forensic  examination  which  “did  not  reveal  any  violations  of  the 
Responsible  Use  Policy.”  In  the  interview,  Respondent  provided  explanations  and  denials 
consistent  with  his  hearing  testimony  and  written  responses  to  the  Conference  Memorandum. 
The  interview  summaries  were  generally  consistent  with  the  written  statements  and  hearing 
testimony  except  as  follows: 

M.  clarified  that  she  did  not  believe  that  Respondent’s  comments 
A. 
were  sexual, 
he  did  not  stare  at  her  breasts,  she  felt  uncomfortable,  not  unsafe 
and  she  never  heard  Respondent  say  anything  inappropriate  to  female  students. 
She  also  clarified  that  when  Respondent  stared  at  female  students  it  was  only 
for  a  few  seconds  and  that  his  staring  was  not  sexual  or  scary,  but  it  made  the 
students  uncomfortable. 

B. 
keeping  photographs  literally  but  he  could  have  been  joking. 

clarified  that  she  took  Respondent’s  comment  about 

ia  A. 

Cc. 
a  sexual  way. 

mm  clarified  that  she  thought  Respondent  looked  at  her  often  and  in 

D. 
Al  M.  was  reported  to  have  stated  that  she  thought  that  Respondent 
“was  a  cool  teacher”,  “complimented  both  male  and  female  students”  and  that 
she  did  not  see  anything  wrong  with  his  comments.  It  was  also  noted  that  she 
felt  Respondent  stared  at  female  students  in  class,  but  no  one  in  particular,  gave 

40

her  a  “cold  stare”  once  when  she  was  standing  outside  the  classroom,  but  it  was 
not  creepy,  just  awkward. 

138. 

Ms.  Galata  findings  and  conclusions  were  that  some  students  felt 

uncomfortable  because  Respondent  stared  at  them  for  long  periods  of  time  and  commented 
on  their  appearance  or  attire  which  they  thought  was  inappropriate.  Some  female  students 
felt  uncomfortable  witnessing  Mr.  Beltran  staring  at  other  female  students.  She  also  noted 
that  Respondent  denied  allegations,  but  admitted  that  he  sometimes  complimented  both  male 
and  female  students  on  their  hair  or  attire  to  acknowledge  them  and  make  them  feel 
comfortable.  (Exh.  40.) 

CANDY  JAR 

139. 

Respondent’s  wife  gave  him  a  jar  of  Hershey’s  kisses  for  Valentine’s  day.  She 
labelled  the  jar  with  a  note  that  said  “Kisses  for  when  I’m  not  around.”  (Exh.  42;  Testimony 
of  Respondent  and  Johanna  Beltran.)  Respondent  treasured  her  thoughtful  gift  and  had  it 
with  him  at  work.  It  was  usually  either  in  his  backpack,  a  desk  drawer  or  a  closet.  He  did 
not  share  the  candy  with  his  students  and  did  not  leave  it  on  his  desk  or  in  public  view. 
When  he  was  removed  from  Rodia,  he  was  not  allowed  to  gather  his  things  and  left  the  candy 
jar  and  some  other  mementos  from  elementary  school  students  and  a  pencil  cup  that  his  wife 
had  decorated  with  photographs  of  his  son’s  first  year  in  his  classroom.  The  items  were 
never  returned  to  him.  (Respondent’s  testimony.)  When  Ms.  Medina  went  to  Respondent’s 
classroom  to  see  what  he  had  in  his  closets  and  desk  that  could  be  used  in  other  classes,  she 
found  the  jar  behind  his  desk.  She  was  upset  by  the  presence  of  the  jar  behind  Respondent’s 
and  redistributed  items 
desk  and  testified  that  it  “triggered  her.”  She  and  others  threw  away 
C.) 
from  Respondent’s  classroom.  (Testimony  of  Medina,  Ruther, 

MAGAZINES 

140. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Respondent  went  through  the  box  of  magazines 

and  catalogues  that  the  District  claims  were  retrieved  from  storage  in  his  former  classroom. 
(Exh.  513.)  He  identified  certain  educational  magazines  and  J&B  Motorcycle  catalogues  as 
belonging  to  him.  (Exh.  513A.)  He  denied  ownership  of  the  remaining  magazines  which 
included  some  magazines  which  only  included  motorcycles  and  cars  and  other  magazines 
that  had  semi-clothed,  and  partially  nude  photos.  For  the  majority  of  the  magazines,  the 
photos  were  included  a  quarter  to  mid-way  through  the  magazines  as  advertisements  and 
were  not  apparent  from  the  cover.  Respondent’s  wife  testified  that  Respondent  did  not  have 
motorcycle  magazines  at  home,  but  did  have  some  parts  catalogues  and  she  had  not  been 
aware  that  he  had  taken  them  to  work.  Respondent  did  all  of  the  automobile  and  motorcycle 
maintenance  for  his  family  vehicles  himself  and  sometimes  ordered  parts.  (Testimony  of 
Respondent  and  Johanna  Beltran.) 

141. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  had  magazines  in  his  classroom  mostly  for  art 
class  or  free  time.  Some  were  old  magazines  from  the  school,  others  were  donated  from 
students,  teachers  and  community  members.  Usually,  he  looked  through  magazines  before 

4]

making  them  available  to  his  Art  class  students.  Respondent  recognized  the  magazines  that 
were  his  in  two  ways.  Some  he  recognized  as  being  those  that  he  had  subscriptions  to  and 
others  that  were  his  or  given  to  him  had  the  name  and  address  label  carefully  excised.  When 
Respondent  looked  through  the  magazines  in  Exhibit  518,  it  was  relatively  easy  for  him  to 
determine  which  magazines  were  his.  The  magazines  that  Respondent  claimed  as  his  own 
did  not  contain  any  inappropriate  photos.  There  were  some  motorcycle  magazines  that 
Respondent  was  not  immediately  sure  about,  but  after  careful  examination  determined  were 
not  his.  He  was  not  aware  of  all  of  the  items  contained  in  the  closets  because  he  had  never 
cleaned  them  out.  Respondent  was  adamant  that  the  various  motorcycles  magazines  which 
contained  inappropriate  advertisements  and  photographs  were  not  his  and  he  did  not 
remember  seeing  them.  The  Commission  noted,  as  did  Respondent,  that  many  of  the 
magazines  had  a  name  and  address  listed  on  them  which  did  not  correspond  to  Respondent  or 
any  of  the  teachers  at  Rodia  or  witnesses  in  the  case.  Additionally,  many  of  the  magazines 
were  more  than  10  years  old. 

142. 

At  Gutierrez’s  request,  Student am  C.  wrote  a  statement  dated  March  23, 

2018  which  stated  that  “While  I  was  cleaning  out  the  room  of  Mr.  Beltran  I  found  a  stack  of 
magazines  of  choppers  and  motorcycles  in  the  back  closet.  I  was  told  to  take  any  art  supplies 
to  the  art  room  so  I  took  the  magazines  and  put  time  on  the  table  in  the  extra  room  for  kids  to 
use  to  make  posters.  I  didn’t  look  through  them,  I  just  put  them  on  the  table.”  (Exh.  40.) 

143. 

On  May  27,  2019, am  C.  executed  a  declaration  under  penalty  of  perjury 

I  never  saw  him  do  anything  bad  or  strange.  A  month  or  two  after  Mr. 

which  stated:  “I  was  a  student  ...1n  2017.  One  of  my  teachers  at  Rodia  was  Julio  Beltran.  It 
was  a  regular  class. 
Beltran  left  Rodia,  I  was  cleaning  out  his  classroom  because  a  new  teacher  was  moving  in.  It 
was  after  school  and  nobody  was  with  me  when  I  was  cleaning  out  the  classroom.  I  found 
some  boxes  with  magazines  in  a  locked  cabinet  under  the  whiteboard.  One  of  the  boxes  had 
‘Beltran’  written  on  the  outside.  I  obtained  the  key  to  the  locked  cabinet  from  the  lady  in  the 
school  office.  I  checked  a  few  of  the  magazines  and  did  not  see  anything  that  drew  my 
attention.  I  did  not  see  choppers.  I  combined  the  contents  of  the  boxes  into  one  box.  Then  I 
took  that  box  to  a  room  where  students  do  classwork  and  other  activities.  About  a  month 
later,  Principal  Gutierrez  told  me  it  had  choppers  and  to  write  something  about  what  I  found. 
I  did  not  see  choppers.  I  wrote  the  March  23,  2018  letter  based  on  what  Mr.  Gutierrez  told 
me.”  (Exh.  519.) 

144.  am  testified  via  telephone  at  the  administrative  hearing. am  explained 
that  he  was  a  student  for  approximately  one  month  in  Respondent’s  class  for  two  periods  a 
day.  He  never  saw  anything  inappropriate  and  did  not  see  Respondent  staring  at  anyone’s 
butt.  Ba  saw  some  teachers  and  Ms.  Medina  cleaning  out  Respondent’s  classroom  and 
volunteered  to  assist.  He  was  assigned  to  clean  out  the  closets.  He  found  two  boxes  of 
magazines  in  a  locked  closet.  One  box  had  a  few  magazines  and  another  had  a  lot  of 
magazines.  One  had  Respondent’s  name  on  it  and  one  did  not.  am  combined  the  boxes  of 
magazines.  He  described  them  as  “normal  magazines”  and  nothing  caught  his  attention.  He 
placed  the  magazines  in  the  room  on  the  other  side  of  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  office  which  was  used 
for  multiple  purposes.  am  credibly  testified  that  he  did  not  see  “choppers  and 

42

motorcycles”  magazines.  However,  Mr.  Gutierrez  told  him  that  such  magazines  were  there 
and  he  wrote  what  Principal  Gutierrez  told  him  because  he  was  in  a  hurry  to  leave  that  day. 

CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM  DATED  APRIL  11,  2018 

145. 

Gutierrez  provided  all  of  the  statements  and  information  to  his  local  district 

office.  Susan  Cuevas,  the  Staff  Relations  Field  Director  advised  him  on  how  to  proceed  and 
how  the  District  wanted  to  handle  the  situation.  Cuevas  drafted  a  Conference  Memorandum 
for  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  signature  and  for  him  to  issue  to  Respondent. 

146. 

On  April  11,  2018,  Principal  Gutierrez  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  at 

the  Local  District  East  office.  Also  present  at  the  meeting  was  Respondent’s  union 
representative  Luis  Vicente  Ovalles  and  a  Staff  Relations  Field  Director  Susana  Cuevas  for 
the  District.  During  the  conference,  the  following  matters  from  the  2016-2018  school  years 
were  discussed:  Respondent’s  comments  to  some  female  students;  reports  from  female 
students  that  Respondent  stared  at  their  buttocks  and  breasts  making  them  uncomfortable; 
reports  from  the  office  manager  and  two  teachers  that  students  were  reluctant  to  attend 
Respondent’s  class;  and  motorcycle  and  car  magazines  with  semi-clothed  women  and 
advertisements  for  pornography,  sex  toys  and  alcoholic  beverages  were  found  in 
Respondent’s  classroom.  During  the  conference,  Principal  Gutierrez  provided  Respondent 
with  assistance  and  guidance,  and  specific  directives.  Gutierrez  issued  a  Conference 
Memorandum  dated  April  11,  2018,  which  summarized  the  discussion  at  the  conference  and 
the  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives,  given  to  respondent.  The  Conference 
Memorandum  also  identified  the  various  District  policies  to  which  respondent  was  expected 
and  directed  to  adhere.  (Exh.  43.) 

147. 

Atthe  April  11,  2018  conference  Principal  Gutierrez  gave  Respondent 

assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives,  that  included  the  following: 

Be  aware  of  the  manner  in  which  you  look  at  students  as  it  may  be 

A. 
perceived  as  being  inappropriate. 

It  is  not  appropriate  to  bring  magazines  or  other  items  to  school  that  are 
considered 
in 

or  may  be 

content 

contain 

and/or 

sexual 

nature 

B. 
sexual 
inappropriate. 

C. 

Maintain  appropriate  and  professional  relationships  with  students. 

As 

of 
D. 
excellence,  integrity,  and  responsibility  at  all  times. 

an  employee  and  representative 

the 

District  demonstrate 

Follow  the  LAUSD  Ethics  Policy  Statement  with  attention  to  the  section 

E. 
titled  “Actions  and  Conduct  of  District  Employees.” 

43

Follow  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  with  attention  to  the 
F, 
sections  entitled  commitment  to  Excellence,  District  and  Personal  Integrity  and 
Responsibility. 

Adhere  to 

the  District  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  including: 
G. 
avoiding  engaging  in  unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral  or  exploitative 
behaviors  with  directly  or  indirectly  with  students;  making  statements  that  are 
age-inappropriate,  unprofessional  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual,  harassing 
or  demeaning;  and  touching  or  having  physical  contact  with  a  student  that  is  not 
age-appropriate  or  within  the  scope  of  your  responsibilities  or  duties. 

Review  the  District  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  Bulletin  including  the 
H. 
section  entitled  “Examples  of  Conduct  which  may  result  in  Sexual  Harassment” 
including  visual  and  physical  examples  listed  in  the  Policy  Bulletin  and 
specifically  page  7  of  the  bulletin  wherein  it  addresses  responsibility  for 
“modeling  appropriate  behavior  and  creating  an  environment  where  student  and 
staff  know  that  sexual  harassment  and  sex  discrimination  is  inappropriate  and 
will  not  be  tolerated”  and  “cultivate  positive  relationships  with  students  per  the 
District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students.” 

I. 
Review  the  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Policy  including  the  sections  on 
Willful  Cruelty  or  Unjustifiable  Punishment  and  Sexual  abuse,  Sexual  assault 
or  sexual  exploitation. 

Review  the  District  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy  Bulletin  including 
J. 
Section  III  Discrimination  and  Harassment  and  Section  V  Staff Responsibilities. 

148. 

Principal  Gutierrez  gave  Respondent  the  following  directives:  Immediately 

refrain  from  staring  at  female  students  and  having  magazines  or  other  items  in  school  that  are 
sexual  in  nature  and/or  contain  sexual  content.  He  also  directed  Respondent  to  maintain 
appropriate  and  professional  relationships  with  students,  adhere  to  all  District  policies  and 
procedures  and  follow  the  directions  given  in  the  August  25,  2015  Conference  Memorandum 
to  refrain  from  using  inappropriate  language  when  addressing  students,  having  physical 
contact,  and  looking  at  student  in  an  intimidating  manner,  adhere  to  the  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students  and  the  District  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  procedures.  (Exh.  43.) 

149. 

Respondent  prepared  a  written  response  to  the  April  11,  2018  Conference 

Memorandum  on  April  16,  2018.  Respondent  denied  that  he  had  done  anything 
inappropriate  including  looking  at  students  inappropriately.  Respondent  explained  that  he 
did  not  own  the  magazines  that  had  inappropriate  content.  He  also  explained  that  the  candy 
jar  was  a  Valentine’s  day  gift  from  his  wife  and  he  did  not  display  it  or  share  its  contents 
with  anyone.  Respondent  noted  that  the  Conference  Memorandum  stated  that  on  August  11, 
2017,  multiple  students  made  reports  to  the  administration,  but  students  did  not  report  to 
school  until  August  15,  2017.  (Exh.  504.) 

44

150. 

Respondent  also  asserted  that  he  attended  a  District  “Restorative  Justice” 
training  where  he  was  taught  that  implementing  the  values  and  concepts  of  Restorative 
Justice  practice  in  a  student  setting  requires  that  teachers  “acknowledge  that  relationships  are 
essential  to  building  a  successful  school  community.”  Respondent  wrote  that  his  interactions 
with  students  were  made  with  the  intent  “to  build  a  safer  and  more  caring  school 
environment”  and  to  “increase  awareness  of  the  importance  of  connectedness  to 
people.”  Respondent  wrote  that  his  interactions  with  A  C., 
L.  were 
all  meant  to  foster  those  values.  He  also  asserted  that  he  has  “always  committed  to  ensuring 
that  my  teacher-student  relationships  are  positive,  professional,  and  proper.”  (Exh.  504.) 

M.  and 

young 

151. 

Principal  Gutierrez  issued  a  revised  Conference  Memorandum  on  April  19, 
2018.  Respondent  declined  an  invitation  to  meet  with  Mr.  Gutierrez  a  second  time.  The 
revised  April  19,  2018  Conference  Memorandum  added  excerpts  from  statements  of  students 

A.  NEG.  UE.  GEE  s.  NIE. 

HBA. 

RR. 

anc 

summary  of  an  interview  with  Respondent  conducted  by  Ms.  Galata  on  November  13,  2017. 
(Exh.  45.) 

152. 

Respondent  submitted  an  additional  response  to  both  the  April  11,  2018  and 

April  19,  2018  Conference  Memorandum.  (Exh.  503.)  In  this  response,  he  reiterated  his 
previous  response,  (Exh.  504),  and  addressed  the  specific  statements  attributed  to  each  of  the 
students  in  the  revised  April  19,  2018  Conference  Memorandum.  Specifically,  Respondent 
denied  that  he  stared  at  students  or  acted  inappropriately  and  asserted  that  he  always 
conducted  himself  in  a  respectful  and  professional  manner.  Respondent  asserted  that 
A.  was  enrolled  in  his  class,  but  did  not  attend  his  class  in  October  of  2015. 

gave 

    

A.’s  allegations.  Respondent  asserted 

S.  that  she  was  a 

A.  and  other  students  bottles  of  water. 

was  having  difficulties  understanding  one  assignment,  he  approached  her 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  he 
Respondent  acknowledged  that 
A.  came  in  to  his  class  to  take  photographs  for  the 
school  paper,  took  multiple  photos  and  he  told  her  to  choose  the  best  one.  Respondent  also 
denied  calling  any  students,  whispering  to  students  or  telling . 
“pretty  girl”  or  “chola.”  Respondent  also  denied Hi 
that  when Hi 
when  she  raised  her  hand,  stood  by  her  desk,  clarified  the  assignment  which  involved 
characteristics  and  importance  of  cultural  attire  and  told  her  that  “she  could  incorporate  her 
Native  Mexican  American  culture  for  the  assignment.”  (Exh.  503.)  Respondent  also  denied 
that  he  called 
R.  “amorcito,”  Respondent  concluded  his  response  by  stating:  “I  have 
always  strived  to  be  a  great  teacher  and  I  have  the  most  respect  for  my  students,  my  peers 
and  the  teaching  profession.  I  am  hurt  that  some  have  misinterpreted  my  generosity  as 
otherwise.  Year  after  year  I  have  continued  and  have  been  willing  to  make  improvements  to 
growth  as  a  profession[al]  educator.  I  would  like  to  restate  that  the  students’  allegations  are 
untrue  and  false. 
appropriate,  and  professional  manner.”  (Exh.  503.)  Respondent’s  testimony  at  hearing  was 
consistent  with  his  responses  to  the  Conference  Memorandum  and  his  interview  with  Ms. 
Galata  from  the  Student  Safety  Team. 

I  always  and  will  always  continue  to  conduct  myself  in  a  respectful, 

mam 

45

  

CONCLUSIONS  REGARDING  RESPONDENT’S  CONDUCT  AT  RODIA 

153. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  Respondent  was  truthful  about  his 

conversations  and  interactions  with  his  students.  Respondent  commenced  working  at  Rodia 
in  the  midst  of  chaos  which  worsened  over  time.  He  worked  in a  stressful  environment  of 
gossip,  innuendo,  power  struggles  between  staff  members,  students  and  staff,  and 
administration  and  students,  where  troubled  students  were  not  given  any  boundaries  or 
structure  and  few  consequences.  Layered  on  top  of  the  chaos  was a  training  in  Restorative 
Justice  in  which  the  teachers  were  instructed  to  compliment  students,  make  social 
connections  and  engage  students,  but  without  giving  them  any  real  resources  or  guidance  to 
complete  the  task.  Respondent  is  a  very  formal  individual  who  arrived  at  the  hearing  each 
morning  in  a  suit  and  sat  stiffly  and  expressionlessly  staring  ahead,  often  looking  over  the  top 
of  his  glasses  and  listening  intently  to  evidence  each  day.  Based  upon  the  testimony  of 
Respondent,  his  students,  administrators  and  staff,  this  was  consistent  with  Respondent’s 
rigid,  formal  and  sometimes  awkward  demeanor  tn  the  classroom.  Respondent  has  been  an 
educator  for  20  years,  most  of  which  were  spent  in  a  kindergarten  and  elementary  school 
setting.  There  is  no  doubt  that  teaching  16  through  21-year-old  students  with  complicated 
lives  and  unsuccessful  academic  histories  that  the  Rodia  students  had  was  a  completely  new 
experience  for  Respondent.  Respondent  used  the  tools  and  strategies  that  had  been 
successful  for  him  in  the  past.  Primarily  he  imposed  structure  and  order  in  the  classroom  and 
enforced  rules.  This  gave  him  the  label  of  “mean”  and  “strict”  and  did  not  make  him  a 
popular  teacher.  Respondent  values  respect  and  order  and  was  not  particularly  concerned 
about  being  popular  or  the  friend  of  all  students.  However,  his  awkward  attempts  at 
conversation  were  seen  as  contrived  by  the  students  and  the  mandate  to  implement 
Restorative  Justice  techniques  only  exacerbated  the  situation.  Since  Rodia  had  no 
administrative  support  for  a  substantial  period  of  time  and  then  only  had  an  overwhelmed 
administrator  in  Mr.  Gutierrez,  Respondent  had  no  support  for  his  transition. 

154. 

The  Commission  concluded  that  Respondent  probably  stared  at  students  and  at 

the  computers  to  ensure  that  students  were  doing  what  they  were  supposed  to  do,  and  that 
computers  and  other  equipment  were  not  being  damaged,  stolen  or  used  for  other  than  the 
intended  purposes.  He  also  was  on  the  lookout  for  cellphone  usage,  students  applying 
makeup,  students  that  needed  assistance,  tardy  students,  off  task  behavior  and  students 
coming  and  going  from  the  classroom  without  permission.  Ultimately,  only  Respondent 
knows  what  he  was  looking  at,  if  anything,  when  students  felt  uncomfortable.  The 
Commission  acknowledges  that ig  felt  uncomfortable  when  her  peers  teased  her  whether 
they  accurately  or  really  perceived  Respondent  to  be  overly  attentive  to  her  or  not.  The 
allegations  that  Respondent  was  inappropriate  with  Rodia  students  are  without  substance. 
The  evidence  presented  at  hearing  consisted  of  layers  of  speculation  and  hearsay  upon 
hearsay.  Based  upon  the  evidence  presented,  it  cannot  be  concluded  by  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence  that  Respondent  was  inappropriate  with  any  of  his  students  at  Rodia. 

155. 

The  Commission  evaluated  the  testimony  pursuant  to  Evidence  Code  section 

780:  the  demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witnesses  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the 
testimony,  the  capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the 

46

witness  for  honesty,  the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness 
which  are  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact 
to  which  the  witness  testified  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the  proceeding  in  which 
the  testimony  is  given.’ 

156. 

Given  these  factors,  the  testimony  of ig  B.  and  m7  N.  are  given  little 

B.,  or  any  other  students.  These  witnesses  generally  extrapolated  from 

weight  in  determining  whether  Respondent  actually  inappropriately  looked  or  stared  at  the 
butts  or  breasts  of  Li 
and  relied  on  hearsay  from  others  and  speculated  about  Respondent’s  gaze  and  intent.  Each 
had  reason  to  be  biased  against  Respondent  (i.e.  m7  did  not  receive  credit  for  her  Spanish 
class  because  Respondent  would  not  excuse  her  from  the  required  recordings,  Respondent 
to  be  distracted  by  photos  with  her  boyfriend  and  was  strict  about  his 
would  not  allow  Li 
classroom  rules.)  However,  the  Commission  gives  weight  to  their  testimony  about  how  they 
felt  about  their  perception  of  Respondent  and  believes  that  based  upon  the  totality  of 
circumstances  in  the  gossip-laden  environment, ug  B.  and 
with  Respondent  due  to  what  their  peers  had  represented  to  them  and  their  misinterpretation 
of  Respondent’s  demeanor.  The  gossip  and  speculation  based  upon  hearsay  was  pervasive 
and  infected  most  of  the  written  statements  from  the  Rodia  students. 

N.  were  uncomfortable 

  

  

157. 

Great  weight  was  given  to  Respondent’s  candid  testimony  and  that  of  his  wife 

Johanna.  Respondent  presented  as  serious,  thoughtful  and  responsive  in  both  direct  and 
cross-examination.  He  answered  all  questions  posed  to  him  without  hesitation.  Mrs.  Beltran 
was  appropriately  circumspect,  but  responsive  and  fully  answered  all  questions  posed  to  her. 
Similarly,  the  testimony  of  Martinez  and  Ms.  Ruther  were  given  great  weight.  Neither  had 
any  motive  to  be  untruthful  and  each  was 
events  and  players  at  Rodia.  Students  _. Mag.  —  and  |  provided 
consistent  information  about  Respondent’s  demeanor  and  behavior  with  students  and  gave 
important 
witness 

perspectives  about  the  Rodia  school  culture  and  student  behavior  including  that  of 
B.  who  reportedly  proclaimed  that  she  intended  to  get  Respondent  fired. 

positioned  to  have  unique  perspectives  on  the 

158. 

Less  weight  overall  was  given  to  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Medina  and  Ms. 

Mendoza  than  to  others  because  they  had  become  ensnarled  in  the  gossip  and  speculation 
about  Respondent.  It  was  also  clear  from  Ms.  Medina’s  demeanor  during  her  testimony  that 
she  was  friends  with  the  female  students  and  did  not  care  for  Respondent.  The  Commission 
credits  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Medina  and  Ms.  Mendoza  in  that  they  accurately  recounted  what 
was  told  to  them  by  students  and  what  they  heard  from  the  students.  Ms.  Galata’s  testimony 
regarding  her  interviews  with  Respondent  and  the  students  was  credited  as  was  the  testimony 
of  Principal  Gutierrez.  However,  neither  had  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  allegations  nor  had 

  

+  The  manner  and  demeanor  of  a  witness  while  testifying  are  the  two  of  the  most 
important  factors  a  trier  of  fact  considers  when  judging  credibility.  (See  Evid.  Code,  §  780.)  The 
mannerisms,  tone  of  voice,  eye  contact,  facial  expressions  and  body  language  are  all  considered, 
but  are  difficult  to  describe  in  such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly  understands  what  causes  the  trier 
of  fact  to  believe  or  disbelieve  a  witness. 

47

  

they  observed  Respondent  stare  at  students  inappropriately,  make  inappropriate  remarks  or 
possess  the  subject  magazines. 

159. 

With  respect  to  the  magazines  found  in  the  storage  area  of  Respondent’s 
classroom  months  after  he  left  the  school,  the  Commission  concluded  that  there  was  no 
evidence  that  the  magazines  which  contained  objectionable  images  belonged  to  Respondent 
or  were  in  any  way  related  to  Respondent.  Based  upon  the  testimony  of  Respondent,  Mr. 
Martinez,  Ms.  Ruther  and  Ms.  Medina,  there  were  magazines  stored  throughout  the  campus, 
many  of  which  were  still  boxed  from  the  campus  move  from  Jordan  High  School  to  South 
East  High  School.  Moreover,  there  was  no  chain  of  custody  linking  Respondent  to  the 
objectionable  magazines.  As  Ms.  Medina,  student am  and  teacher  Maria  Ruther  noted  in 
their  testimony,  Respondent’s  personal  1tems  were  mixed  in  with  other  stored  items, 
destroyed  and  thrown  away  by  Ms.  Medina, am  and  other  teachers  and  many  other  people 
and  outside  groups  had  access  to  the  classroom  during  and  after  Respondent  was  assigned  the 
classroom.  There  is  no  clear  link  to  Respondent  despite  the  label  on  the  box  and  without 
more  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  Respondent  had  any 
responsibility  for  the  objectionable  magazines. 

Specific  Charges  Related  Rodia  Students 

160. 

Inthe  Accusation,  the  District’s  made  specific  allegations  as  to  Respondent’s 
conduct  at  Rodia.  The  Commission  considered  the  evidence  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings 
6,  22,  56-58,  67,  and  81-159  in  reaching  its  determination  of  these  charges  of  whether  the 
District  met  its  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  as  to  each  allegation. 
These  allegations  are  addressed  below: 

161. 

It  was  established  as  alleged  in  Charge  6  of  the  Accusation  that  Respondent 
gave  his  personal  cell  phone  number  to  some  of  the  Rodia  students  for  the  sole  educational 
purpose  of  facilitating  their  access  to  the  Edgenuity  program  during  evening  and  weekend 
hours.  Respondent  did  not  converse  with  the  students  by  telephone.  He  received  text 
messages  from  the  students  when  they  needed  him  to  reset  the  computer  program  for  him. 
However,  this  did  not  violate  any  of  the  District’s  policies  because  it  was  solely  for  an 
educational  purpose  and  facilitated  the  student’s  educational  program. 

162. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  7  of  the  Accusation,  that  on  or  about  May  2016  to  October  2016,  Respondent  Beltran 
did  any  of  the  following  with  respect  to  Student Hi 
uncomfortable  or  squatted  next  to  her  desk  and  talked  about  her  family  for  20-30  minutes  or 
A.  or  looking 
the  entire  class  period.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  stared  at 
at  her  inappropriately.  However,  it  was  established  that  Hi 
A.  thought  Respondent  stared 
at  her,  did  not  like  it  and  was  uncomfortable  because  or  her  belief.  It  was  established  that 
Respondent  did  speak  with  Hi 
American  heritage,  available  scholarships  and  incorporating  her  cultural  experience  into  one 
classroom  assignment  that  she  was  having  difficulty  with.  It  was  not  established  by  a 

on  more  than  one  occasion  about  her  Native  Mexican 

A.:  stared  at  her  making  her  feel 

48

  

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  looked  at Hi 
extended  period  of  time. 

A.  inappropriately  or  for  an 

163. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  8  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  May  2016  to  October  2016, 
Respondent  Beltran  engaged  in  the  conduct  which  constituted  a  willfully  refusal  to  perform 
his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  excuse,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  employing  District  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students; 
LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons; 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  or  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

164. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  8  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  May  2016  to  October  2016, 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  previous  administrative  directives  that  he,  refrain  from  having 
physical  contact  with  students  and  refrain  from  looking  at  students  in  an  intimidating 
manner. 

165. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  9  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  to  December  2016, 
Respondent  Beltran  did  the  following  to  student  AN 

M.: 

Looked  at  her  in 

a  manner  that  “creeped  her  out,”  on  at  least  two 

(a) 
occasions. 

Sat  next  to  her  and  asked  what  size  her  Biggie  Smalls  graphic  shirt  was 

(b) 
or  that  he  said,  “I  would  ask  you  to  let  me  have  it  but  it  wouldn’t  fit  me.” 

166. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  10  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  December  2016, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  9  of  the  Accusation.  It  was  also 
not  established  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow  previous  administrative  directives  that  he, 
refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with  students  and  refrain  from  looking  at  students  in  an 
intimidating  manner. 

167. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  10  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  December  2016, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  which  constituted  a  willfully  refusal  to  perform  his 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  excuse,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  employing  District  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students; 
the  LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee 
Code  of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons; 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  or  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

49

168. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  11  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  September  2017, 
Respondent  stared  at  Students’  buttocks  and  breasts.  It  was  only  established  that  some 
students  reported  that  they  believed  Respondent  was  staring  at  their  buttocks  and  breasts  and 
that  their  belief  in  the  that  as  fact  made  them  uncomfortable  in  the  classroom. 

169. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  12  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  September  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  11. 
It  was  also  not  established  that 
Respondent  failed  to  follow  a  previous  administrative  directive  that  he  refrain  from  looking 
at  students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

170. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  12  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  December  2016, 
Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  constituted  a  willfully  refusal  to  perform  his  regular 
assignments  without  reasonable  excuse,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  employing  District  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  LAUSD 
Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California 
Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the  LAUSD 
Sexual  Harassment  Policy  or  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

171. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  13  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  September  2017, 
Respondent  looked  at  student Ag  C.  with  a  “cold  stare,”  which  made  her  uncomfortable  and 
caused  her  to  move  to  another  location. 

172. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  14  of  the  Accusation,  that  Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge 
13  of  the  Accusation.  It  was  also  not  established  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow  a  previous 
administrative  directive  that  he  refrain  from  looking  at  students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

173. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  14  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  through  September  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  which  constituted  a  willfully  refusal  to  perform  his  regular 
assignments  without  reasonable  excuse,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  employing  District  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the  LAUSD 
Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of 
Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California 
Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the  LAUSD 
Sexual  Harassment  Policy  or  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

50

174. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  15  of  the  Accusation,  that  Respondent  had  motorcycle  magazines  in  his  classroom 
during  the  period  of  August  2016  to  March  2018,  that  contained  explicit  material,  including: 

a. 

Photographs  of  women: 

1. 

Topless,  wearing  bikini  bottoms  only. 

Wearing,  bikini  bottoms  but  topless  with  motorcycle  parts,  their 

il. 
hands,  suspenders,  or  “censor”  stars  covering  their  breasts. 

Wearing  bikinis  while  posing  on  motorcycles  and/or  inside  of 

111. 
cars,  in  sexually  provocative  positions. 

Topless,  standing  between  two  men,  with  one  man  sticking  his 

IV. 
tongue  out  as  if  to  lick  the  woman’s  breast. 

Wet  and  topless,  hugging  each  other,  while  wearing  bikini 

Vv. 
bottoms  only. 

b. 

Advertisements  for: 

1. 

Pornographic  videos,  texts,  movies  and  speed  dating. 

Vibrators. 

i, 

il. 

Flasks  (for  alcoholic  beverages). 

175. 

It  was  established  that  there  were  motorcycle  magazines  and  catalogues  in  the 

classroom,  but  it  was  not  established  that  the  magazines  and/or  catalogues  contained  the 
images  and  advertisements  alleged  in  Charge  15  of  the  Accusation.  Moreover,  the 
Commission  explicitly  finds  that  the  District  failed  to  prove  that  Respondent  was  aware  of 
any  magazines  containing  such  images  in  his  classroom  or  in  any  storage  in  his  classroom. 
Moreover,  there  was  no  material  evidence  that  linked  Respondent  to  the  chain  of  custody  of 
the  magazines  that  contained  the  alleged  images  and  advertisements. 

176. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  16  of  the  Accusation  that  during  the  period  of  August  2016  to  March  2018, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  15,  nor  that  he  willfully  refused  to 
perform  his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  District.  It  was  also  not  established  that  he  failed  to 
adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the 
LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful 
Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  or  the  LAUSD 
Teacher  Job  Description;  or  the  LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy. 

51

177. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  17  of  the  Accusation,  that  on  or  about 

August  2016  through  March  2018,  Respondent  maintained  a  jar  of  Hershey’s  kisses  in  his 
classroom  with  a  label  that  read,  “Kisses  for  when  I’m  not  around.”  It  was  also  established 
that  the  jar  was  given  to  him  as  a  Valentine’s  gift  from  his  wife  and  was  not  displayed 
publicly  or  shared  with  his  students. 

178. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
period  of  September  2016  to  April  2017, 

Charge  18  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the 
Respondent  did  the  following  to  student 

S.: 

Followed  her  back  to  her  desk  after  she  approached  him  to  ask  a  question. 

a. 

b. 

C. 

Kneeled  next  to  her. 

Whispered  that  she  was a  pretty  girl  and  that  he  liked  her  style. 

179. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  19  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  through  April  2017 
that  Respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  set  forth  in  Charge  18  or  that  Respondent  failed  to 
follow  previous  administrative  directives,  that  he  refrain  from  using  inappropriate  language 
when  addressing  students  and  refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with  students. 

180. 

It  was  also  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  19  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  through  April  2017, 
Respondent  failed  to  adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct 
with  Students;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the 
Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the 
LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the  LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  LAUSD 
Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

181. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  20  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  through  April  2017, 
Respondent  lowered  his  gaze  and  stared  at  student 
returned  a  computer. 

S.’s  breasts  whenever  she 

182. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in  charge 

21  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  to  April  2017,  Respondent 
engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  20  or  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow  previous 
administrative  directives,  that  he  refrain  from  using  inappropriate  language  when  addressing 
students,  refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with  students  and  refrain  from  looking  at 
students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

183. 

It  was  also  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  21  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  through  April  2017 
Respondent  failed  to  adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct 

52

with  Students;  the  LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the 
LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful 
Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD 
Teacher  Job  Description;  the  LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  LAUSD  Bullying 
and  Hazing  Policy. 

184. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
the  period  of  September  2016  to  April  2017, 

Charge  22  of  the  Accusation,  that  during 
Respondent  commented  to  student 
trouble:  “They  pick  on  you  because  of  how  you  look  and  how  your  dress.” 

S.  when  he  saw  her  in  the  office  for  getting  in 

185. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  23  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  to  April  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  22  or  that  Respondent  failed  to 
follow  previous  administrative  directives,  that  he  refrain  from  using  inappropriate  language 
when  addressing  students,  refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with  students  and  refrain 
from  looking  at  students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

186. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  23  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  September  2016  to  April  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  22,  or  that  he  willfully  refused  to 
perform  his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  District.  It  was  also  not  established  that  he  failed  to 
adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the 
LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons; 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description,  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

187. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  24  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the 
Respondent  did  the  following  to  student 

R.: 

period  of  January  2017  through  June  2017, 

a. 

b. 

Said,  “I’m  going  to  call  you  ‘amorsito’  [my  love].” 

Looked  at  her  in  a  sexual  manner. 

Followed  her  to  the  door  and  watched  her  walk  into  the  restroom,  which  was 

C. 
near  the  classroom. 

188. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in  charge 
25  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  through  June  2017,  Respondent 
engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  24  or  that  Respondent  failed  to  follow  previous 
administrative  directives,  that  he  refrain  from  using  inappropriate  language  when  addressing 

53

  

students,  refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with  students  and  refrain  from  looking  at 
students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

189. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  25  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  to  June  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  24,  or  that  he  willfully  refused  to 
perform  his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  District.  It  was  also  not  established  that  he  failed  to 
adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the 
LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons; 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

190. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  26(a)  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  through  June  2017, 
Respondent  assigned  Student 
G.  to  sit  in  the  front  row,  directly  in  front  of  his  desk. 
It  was  also  not  established  as  alleged  in  Charge  26(b)(1)  and  (iv)  that  Respondent  said  to 

G.  in  the  presence  of  other  students  “Hello  Sunshine”  and  “You  look  nice.  Where 

going?  You  going  out?”  It  was  established  as  alleged  in  charge  26(b)(11)  and  (111)  that 
wore  glitter  eye  shadow,  Respondent  said  “I  like  your  eye  shadow”  and  that 

are  you 
when 
when  she  did  not  wear  the  glitter  eye  shadow  the  next  day,  Respondent  made  a  comment  to 
the  effect  of  “what  happened  to  you  glitter  eye  shadow?  You  should  bring  it,  you  look  nice.” 
Respondent’s  compliments  were  sincere,  caring  and  non-sexual  intended  to  boost  the  self- 
esteem  of  a  student  that  had  experienced  serious  trauma. 

191. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  27  of  the  Accusation  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  through  June  2017,  when 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charge  26(B)(11)  and  (111)  that  Respondent 
Beltran  failed  to  follow  previous  administrative  directives,  that  he  refrain  from  using 
inappropriate  language  when  addressing  students,  refrain  from  having  physical  contact  with 
students  and  refrain  from  looking  at  students  in  an  intimidating  manner. 

192. 

It  was  also  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  27  of  the  Accusation  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  to  June  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  the  misconduct  alleged  in  Charge  26,  or  that  he  willfully  refused  to 
perform  his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  District.  It  was  also  not  established  that  he  failed  to 
adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including  the  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the 
LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy;  the  LAUSD  Employee  Code 
of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons; 
California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD  Teacher  Job  Description;  the 
LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  LAUSD  Bullying  and  Hazing  Policy. 

54

  

193. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  28  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the 
Respondent  did  the  following  to  student 

A: 

period  of  January  2017  through  June  2017, 

Put  a  water  bottle  on  her  desk,  every  day  for  more  than  a  week,  after  she 

a. 
forgot  to  bring  a  water  bottle  to  school  one  day. 

After  iia”  took  a  photo  of him  for  the  school  newspaper,  told  her  to 

b. 
pick  the  best  photo  for  the  school,  and  to  keep  the  rest  for  herself. 

194. 

It  was  established  that  Respondent  gave 

A.  and  others  bottled  water 

and  that  Respondent  placed  the  bottle  back  on 
the  day 
after  she  had  left  it  behind  from  an  earlier  class.  It  was  also  established  that 
_  took  several  photographs  of  Respondent  for  the  school  newspaper  and  he  told  her 
to  select  the  best  one.  Respondent  was  the  only 
photograph.  Additionally,  even  though 
of  the  photographs  for  herself,  she  thought  he  might  be  joking  and  not  serious  about  the 
comment. 

thought  Respondent  said  to  keep  the  rest 

teacher  that  allowed  =  to  take a 

A.’s  desk  when  she  returned  later  in 

195. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  29(a),  (b),  and  (c)  of  the  Accusation 
the  period  of  August  2017  through  September  2017,  Respondent  commented  to 

N.  When  she  began  wearing  her  hair  down  that  “I  like  the  way  you  look  with 
down,”  “Didn’t  you  notice  guys  are  being  nicer  to  you?”  and  “I  even  held  the  door 

that  during 
student 
your  hair 
open  today  for  you.” 

196. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in  charge 

29(d)  and  (e)  of  the  Accusation,  that  during 
2017,  Respondent  commented  to  student 
cute,”  “You  should  probably  put  a  little  something  right  here,”  or  patted  his  cheeks  implying 
that  she  should  wear  makeup. 

period  of  August  2017  through  September 
N.  that  “I  like  the  way  you  look,  you  look 

the 

197. 

It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  30  of  the  Accusation,  that  during  the  period  of  August  2017  through  September  2017, 
when  Respondent  engaged  in  the  conduct  alleged  in  Charge  29(a)(b)  and  (c)  that  Respondent 
failed  to  follow  previous  administrative  directives,  that  he  refrains  from  using  inappropriate 
language  when  addressing  students.  Instead,  it  was  established  that  Respondent  awkwardly 
attempted  to  deliver  some  compliments  to  a  student,  consistent  with  the  Restorative  Justice 
training,  and  the  compliments  initially  were  well  received,  but  the  sincerity  and  intent  later 
came  into  question  when  other  students  began  to  make  complaints  about  Respondent. 

198. 

It  was  also  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  alleged  in 

Charge  30  of  the  Accusation  that  during  the  period  of  January  2017  to  June  2017, 
Respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  as  alleged  in  Charge  29(d)  and  (e)  nor  was  it  established 
that  conduct  that  Respondent  did  engage  in  as  alleged  in  Charge  29(a),  (b)  and  (c),  was 
indeed  misconduct.  Additionally,  it  was  not  established  that  Respondent’s  conduct 

55

constituted  willful  refusal  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as 
prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  District.  It  was  also  not 
established  that  he  failed  to  adhere  to  all  District  policies,  including:  the  LAUSD  Code  of 
Conduct  with  Students;  the  LAUSD  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Procedures  Policy; 
the  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics;  the  LAUSD  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful 
Treatment  of  All  Persons;  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  the  LAUSD 
Teacher  Job  Description;  the  LAUSD  Sexual  Harassment  Policy  and  the  LAUSD  Bullying 
and  Hazing  Policy. 

Respondent’s  Character  Evidence? 

199. 

mm  C.  is  a  17  years  old  graduating  high  school  student  who  was  in 

Respondent’s  first  grade  class  at  Stanford.  She  testified  that  she  remembered  Respondent’s 
class  as  fun  and  Respondent  never  screamed,  had  students  stand  in  the  corner  or  by  the  wall 
and  never  touched  them. 

200. 

Shane  Riddle  testified  on  behalf  of  Respondent  at  hearing  and  prepared a  letter 

of  support.  (Exh.  512.)  Mr.  Riddle  teaches  Algebra  I  at  Carson  High  School.  He  began 
teaching  in  2002  at  Stanford  where  Respondent  was  his  colleague  and  served  as  a  mentor. 
From  2002-2005,  he  and  Respondent  taught  together.  Mr.  Riddle  found  Respondent  to  be  a 
“total  professional”  who  was  genuinely  happy  to  see  the  students  each  day.  He  never  saw 
him  be  abusive  to  students.  During  2002-2005,  Mr.  Riddle  and  Respondent,  both  of  whom 
were  single  at  the  time,  socialized  together  during  non-school  hours.  Mr.  Riddle  had  the 
opportunity  to  observe  Respondent  interact  with  women  on  many  occasions  and  always  saw 
him  as  respectful. 

201. 

Ingrid  Villeda  has  worked  for  the  District  for  19  years.  She  has  known 

Respondent  for  12  years  as  a  colleague  and  through  union  activities.  She  and  Respondent 
worked  at  Stanford.  Ms.  Villeda’s  daughter  was  in  Respondent’s  first  grade  class.  She 
observed  his  class  many  times  during  her  free  period  because  she  was  concerned  about  her 
daughter’s  adjustment  to  public  school.  She  observed  Respondent  to  be  firm,  but  gentle  with 
students.  Ms.  Villeda  believed  he  was  well  liked  by  the  students  and  families  and  had  a  good 
reputation  for  student  achievement.  She  never  observed  him  to  be  disrespectful  to  women. 
He  was  also  very  helpful  to  her  daughter  in  making  college  choices. 

202. 

Ms.  Villeda  was  a  union  chapter  chair  when  Respondent  was  at  Rodia.  At 

Rodia,  there  was  an  issue  about  lunch  time  supervision.  The  majority  of  the  staff  and 
teachers  did  not  want  to  supervise  students  during  lunch.  She  encouraged  Respondent  to 
take  the  lead  at  the  school  site  and  speak  to  Mr.  Gutierrez  one  to  one  as  the  group 
spokesperson  on  the  issue.  She  understood  most  of  the  staff  was  afraid  of  Mr.  Gutierrez. 
She  was  surprised  by  some  of  Mr.  Gutierrez’s  comments  when  she  came  to  the  campus  to 

  

>  Respondent  was  limited  to  three  character  witnesses  not  including  any  percipient 

witnesses  that  were  also  character  witnesses. 

56

discuss  the  lunch  supervision  issue  with  him.  She  specifically  remembered  him  saying 
something  to  the  effect  of  “you  have  won  the  battle,  but  not  the  war.” 

203. 

Mary  Pandy  is  a  retired  District  teacher.  She  worked  at  Graham  for  35  years. 

She  taught  kindergarten,  first  grade  and  combination  first  and  second  grade  classes. 
Respondent  had  a  classroom  next  to  hers.  Although  she  never  observed  him  teaching  in  his 
classroom,  she  observed  him  with  children  whenever  the  students  were  out  at  recess,  lunch  or 
on  the  way  to  the  restroom.  He  had  a  calm  demeanor,  did  not  raise  his  voice  and  had  good 
rapport  with  the  students.  She  never  saw  him  grab  any  students  by  the  neck  or  heard 
accusations  of  such  conduct. 

204. 

Respondent  submitted  declarations  of  support  signed  under  penalty  of  perjury 

from  Javier  Campos,  Gloria  Fernandez,  Janae  Garcia,  Josie  Medrano,  Karrie  Garcia, 
Emmanuel  Reyes  and  Sergio  Rodrigo  Villasenor  as  well  as  Shane  Riddle.  Shane  Riddle 
testified  at  the  hearing  and  his  declaration  was  referenced  in  factual  finding  155  above.  Each 
of  the  declarants  has  known  Respondent  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  Mr.  Campos  and 
Mr.  Villasenor  are  personal  friends  from  outside  of  the  educational  community  while  Gloria 
Fernandez,  Jose  Medrano,  Karrie  Garcia,  and  Emmanuel  Reyes,  are  experienced  educators. 
Each  from  his  or  her  own  perspective  attested  to  Respondent’s  ethical  character,  kind  and 
giving  nature,  professionalism,  commitment  to  his  community,  his  family  and  his  students. 
Jenae  Garcia  is  an  early  childhood  educator  who  has  learning  disabilities  and  was  mentored 
and  encouraged  by  Respondent  throughout  her  high  school  and  college  education.  She  also 
attested  to  Respondent’s  good  character  and  kind  nature. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944°  and  Factual  Findings  1-5. 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof  is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

3. 

The  grounds  for  dismissal  alleged  by  the  District  against  respondent  are 

unprofessional  conduct  [Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2)],  immoral  conduct,  but  not 
limited  to  egregious  misconduct  [Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  and  Code  section 
44939],  evident  unfitness  for  service  [Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)]|,  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  [Code  section  44932, 
subdivision  (a)(8)  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 
cause,  as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district  [Code 
section  44939]. 
  

°  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

indicated. 

57

4. 

It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact—in  this  case  the  three  members  of  the 

Commission—may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even 
though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9 
Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected 
material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762, 
767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an  expert,  although 
not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the 
testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute  substantial  evidence.”  (Kearl  v.  Board  of 
Medical  Quality  Assurance,  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  1052.) 

Unprofessional  Conduct 

5. 

The  Commission  finds  that  cause  does  not  exist  for  Respondent’s  dismissal, 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2),  for  unprofessional  conduct.  (Factual  Findings 
6-204.) 

6. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of  Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

7. 

The  Commission  finds  that  Respondent  did  not  engage  in  unprofessional 

conduct.  Respondent  engaged  in  some  conduct  that  did  not  constitute  “best  practices”  at 
Graham.  He  also  awkwardly,  but  sincerely,  delivered  some  compliments  to  students  at 
Rodia  and  took  a  jar  of  candy  gifted  to  him  from  his  wife  with  him  to  Simon  Rodia.  None  of 
these  things  individually  or  in  the  aggregate  constitute  unprofessional  conduct. 

Immoral  Conduct 

8. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

9. 

The  Commission  finds  that  cause  does  not  exist  for  Respondent's  dismissal, 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  immoral  conduct.  Respondent  did  not 
engage  in  any  form  of  immoral  conduct.  (Factual  Findings  6-204.) 

58

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

10. 

The  Commission  finds  that  Cause  does  not  exist  for  Respondent's  dismissal, 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Factual 
Findings  6-204.) 

11. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (/d.) 

12. 

_—_—  In  this  case,  the  Commission  determined  that  Respondent  has  by  nature,  a 

stern,  formal  demeanor  and  may  appear  awkward  to  teenagers.  However,  there  is  no 
indication  that  Respondent  has  a  non-remedial  defect  in  temperament.  To  the  contrary,  over 
his  twenty-year  history  as  an  educator,  Respondent  has  consistently  undertaken  training  and 
education  to  better  himself  and  improve  the  delivery  of  education  to  his  students. 
Respondent  did  not  engage  in  conduct  that  violated  any  directives  or  counseling  that  he  had 
been  given  and  did  not  violate  any  District  policies. 

Persistent  Violation  of  School  Laws  and  Regulations 

13. 

|The  Commission  determined  that  cause  does  not  exist  for  Respondent's 

dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  for  persistent  violation  of  school 
laws  and  regulations.  (Factual  Findings  6-204.) 

14. 

(A)  |  In  Governing  Board  of  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman 

(1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82,  the  court  stated:  “The  word  ‘persistent’  is  defined  by 
lexicographers  as  ‘refusing  to  relent;  continumg,  especially  im  the  face  of  opposition  . 
stubborn;  persevering  ...  constantly  repeated.’  GWVebster's  New  World  Dict.  (College  ed.); 
see  Webster's  Third  New  Internat.  Dict.}  And  in  the  pudicial  decisions  of this,  as  well  as 
other  states,  the  word  has  been  interpreted  to  mean  “contmuing  or  constant.’  [citations 
omitted.” 

.. 

(B) 

The  court  in  Seaman  further  explained  that  ‘a  single  violation  of  a 
school  board's  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of a  permanent  teacher  under 
subdervision  (g)  of  section  13403  [now  section  44932.  subdivision  (aj($)].  The  subdivision 
pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature, 
apparently  to  allow  opportunity  for  a  correction,  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not 
sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal;  ‘it  is  the  persistent  disregard’  of  school  rules  that  the 
subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.”  (28  Cal  App.3d  at  84  [citation  omitted.) 

15. 

|  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  Respondent  did  not  engage 

in  a  persistent  violation  of  the  District's  policies  and  school  rules.  (Factual  Findings  6-204.) 

59

Morrison  Factors 

16.  |  When  the  Commission  determines  that  the  cause  does  not  exist  for  dismissal  of  a 

teacher,  an  analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors  1s  not  required.  Here,  application  of  the  Morrison 
factors  demonstrates  that  even  had  there  been  cause  for  dismissal,  which  there  1s  not,  dismissal 
of  Respondent  would  nevertheless,  not  be  appropriate.  Discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate 
to  his  fitness  to  teach  within  the  meaning  of  the  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  vy. 
State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  found  cause  does 
not  exist  to  dismiss  Respondent  based  on  any  of  the  alleged  causes  for  discipline.  The 
Commission  also  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and  compared  them  to  the 
facts  established  above.  Not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 
satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 

17. 

The  Morrison  case  sets  forth  the  following  factors  for  determining  a  teacher's 
fitness  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 
fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  extenuating  or 
ageravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
in  question  will  recur;  and  (8)  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  chilling  impact 
on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of  Education,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  at  229.)  The  Morrison  factors  apply  as  follows: 

  

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 
(A) 
Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 
teachers. 
teachers. 
However,  the  investigatory  process  used  at  Graham  may  have 
impacted  students  and  the  general  environment  of  chaos  at  Rodia  may  have  had 
an  adverse  impact  upon  students  and  staff. 

The  degree  of  such  adversity.  As  set  forth  above,  Respondent’s  conduct 

(B) 
was  not  the  cause  of  any  adversity. 

  

  

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 

(C) 
Respondent's 
conduct  at  issue  was  recent,  having  occurred  during  the  period  of  August  2013 
to  March  2018. 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  Respondent 

(D) 
holds  the  appropriate  credential  for  the  teaching  assignments. 

  

  

  

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 
(E) 
surrounding  the  conduct. 
At  Graham,  Respondent  was  dealing  with  a 
challenging  class  of  ELL  students  with  both  academic  and  behavior  challenges. 
At  Rodia,  Respondent  was  new  to  high  school  teaching  and  entered  a  chaotic 
school  setting  with  little  to  no  administrative  support. 

60

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 
His  conduct  was  always 

(F) 
conduct.  Respondent’s  motives  were  praiseworthy. 
intended  for  the  benefit  of  his  students. 

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of the  questioned  conduct.  This  factor  does 
(G) 
not  directly  apply  to  Respondent.  However,  Respondent  1s  likely  to  be  very 
circumspect  with  any  comments  and  conservative  about  his  future  disciplinary 
approaches 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 
Not 

of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 

(H) 
the  constitutional  rights 
applicable. 

18. 

The  Commission  finds  that  Respondent  did  not  engage  in  any  misconduct  that 

constitutes  cause  for  discipline.  Furthermore,  analysis  of  the  above  Morrison  factors,  does 
not  demonstrates  unfitness  for  service  as  teacher  in  the  District. 

Disposition 

19. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  decision  of  the  Commission  in  this  case  is  that 

Respondent  shall  not  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  District.  (Factual  Findings  1- 
204;  Legal  Conclusions  1-  19.) 

61

1. 

Respondent  Julio  Beltran  shall  not  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the 

ORDER 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

2. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED: 

July  19,  2019 

  

July  11,  2019 

DATED:    

DATED: 

July  19,  2019 

  

(Poesia 

:  Ad ade  Aomes 

by: 

not  DocuSigned  by: 
f 

t  Solu  Yolaw 

annem  OACT26BA680D4D1  we 

  

JOHN  DOLAN 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

oot  DocuSigned  by: 

James  Siucdaur 

“wae  4E6874DE9043482... 

  

JAMES  SINCLAIR 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

\ 

a  67A2  40488. 

  

GLYNDA  B.  GOMEZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

62

