BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
REDLANDS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

MARIE  HONEYFIELD, 

OAH  No.  2018031237 

Respondent.      

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  Redlands, 
California  on  September  4,  5,  6,  and  7,  2018.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  the  following 
members:  Administrative  Law  Judge  Theresa  M.  Brehl,  Frank  Pulice,  and  David  W.  Rodgers. 

Mark  W.  Thompson  and  Dhruva  N.  (Neel)  Ghanshyam,  Attorneys  at  Law,  of 
Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District. 

Justin  M.  Crane,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  The  Myers  Law  group,  A.P.C.,  represented 

respondent  Marie  Honeyfield,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

After  the  Commission  deliberated,  the  matter  was  submitted  on  September  7,  2018. 

SUMMARY 

This  case  concerns  whether  Ms.  Honeyfield  should  be  discharged  from  her  position  as  a 

teacher  for  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District  due  to  events  that  occurred  from  October  26, 
2017,  through  October  30,  2017.  On  October  26,  2017,  Ms.  Honeyfield  drove  I.N.,  a  17-year- 
old  student,'  off  campus  to  a  restaurant  to  eat  lunch  when  I.N.  should  have  been  in  class.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  did  not  have  authorization  from  the  school  or  I.N.’s  mother,  who  believed  her 

  

'  The  student’s  name  was  redacted  from  the  exhibits  received  in  evidence;  the  court 

reporter  was  instructed  to  use  the  student’s  initials,  I.N.,  in  any  transcription;  and  a  protective 
order  was  issued.  The  protective  order  provides:  “No  persons  shall  release  a  transcript  or 
recording  of  this  matter  containing  confidential  witness  names  or  other  identifying 
information  to  the  public.  Every  court  reporter  or  transcriber  is  hereby  ordered  to  refer  to 
individuals  whose  names  appear  on  the  confidential  names  list  by  the  person’s  initials  or 
assigned  number  only.  Any  confidential  names  list  1s  sealed  and  subject  to  this  order.”

daughter  was  at  school,  to  take  I.N.  out  of  class  or  off  campus  or  to  drive  I.N.  in  Ms. 
Honeyfield’s  personal  vehicle.  I.N.’s  counselor  also  ate  at  the  same  restaurant  that  day  and  saw 
Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  there.  After  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  returned  to  campus,  they  decided 
to  lie  about  it  and  say  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  eaten  lunch  with  I.N.’s  older  adult  sister,  who 
Ms.  Honeyfield  had  never  met.  When  the  school  principal  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  what 
happened,  she  told  the  principal  she  took  I.N.’s  older  sister,  who  was  not  a  student,  to  lunch  on 
October  26,  2017,  to  thank  her  for  watching  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  son.  On  October  30,  2017,  after 
being  told  she  would  be  placed  on  administrative  leave  until  an  investigation  was  completed, 
Ms.  Honeyfield  admitted  to  the  principal  that  she  lied  and  that  she  had  taken  I.N.  to  lunch. 

The  district  decided  to  discharge  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  suspend  her  without  pay 
pending  her  dismissal.  The  district  has  dealt  with  other  instances  involving  sexual  contact 
between  teachers  and  students  in  recent  years  and  takes  its  responsibility  to  stop  and/or 
prevent  inappropriate  relationships  seriously.  The  district  did  not  believe  Ms.  Honeyfield 
engaged  in  any  sort  of  sexual  misconduct,  but  it  contended  that  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  actions 
amounted  to  “grooming  behavior  which  is  known  to  lead  to  inappropriate  sexual  contact.” 
The  district  asserted  Ms.  Honeyfield  should  be  dismissed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44932  under  the  following  grounds:  immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.(a)(1)), 
dishonesty  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.(a)(4)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  § 
44932,  subd.(a)(6)”),  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  (Ed.  Code,  § 
44932,  subd.(a)(8)).  The  district  also  asserted  that  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  suspension  without  pay 
pending  her  dismissal  should  be  affirmed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939  based 
on  allegations  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and  willfully  refused  to 
perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  admitted  that  she  took  I.N.  off  campus  during  class  time  without 
authorization  and  then  lied  about  it.  She  denied  engaging  in  “grooming  behavior.”  Ms. 
Honeyfield  contended  that  she  took  I.N.  to  lunch  to  help  I.N.,  who  was  anxious  and  having  a 
bad  day,  and  she  initially  lied  about  it  to  protect  LN.  Ms.  Honeyfield  admitted  that  she  knew 
it  was  wrong  when  she  took  I.N.  off  campus  and  then  lied  about  it.  Ms.  Honeyfield  has  had  a 
stellar  14-year  career  working  as  a  physical  education  and  health  teacher  and  athletic  coach. 
Ms.  Honeyfield  has  received  exemplary  performance  evaluations,  and  she  has  never 
previously  engaged  in  any  similar  behavior  or  been  disciplined. 

Based  on  the  evidence  presented,  the  district  met  its  burden  of  proving  that  Ms. 

Honeyfield  should  be  discharged  due  to  her  dishonesty  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(4).  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in 
“srooming  behavior.”  The  district  failed  to  prove  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  immoral  conduct,  was  evidently  unfit  for  service,  or  persistently 
violated  or  refused  to  obey  school  laws.  Additionally,  the  district  failed  to  prove  grounds  to 
  

*  As  is  discussed  further  below,  the  Statement  of  Charges  erroneously  cited 

subdivision  (a)(5)  instead  of  subdivision  (a)(6). 
215  was  enacted  in  2014,  amending  the  Education  Code  effective  January  1,  2015,  the 
“evident  unfitness  for  service”  ground  for  dismissal  was  contained  in  subdivision  (a)(5).

It  should  be  noted  that  before  Assembly  Bill 

suspend  Ms.  Honeyfield  without  pay  pending  her  dismissal  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44939. 

Accordingly,  the  district’s  decision  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  is  affirmed,  but  its 

decision  to  suspend  her  without  pay  pending  her  dismissal  is  reversed.  Ms.  Honeyfield  shall 
be  dismissed  from  her  employment  at  the  district,  and  the  district  shall  pay  her  wages  for  the 
time  she  was  suspended  without  pay  up  to  the  date  of  this  decision. 

Jurisdictional  Background 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  has  been  employed  by  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District  as 

a  health  teacher  since  2006.  During  October  2017,  when  the  events  at  issue  in  this  matter 
occurred,  Ms.  Honeyfield  taught  at  Redlands  East  Valley  High  School  (REV). 

2. 

On  October  30,  2017,  the  district  placed  Ms.  Honeyfield  on  paid 
administrative  leave  pending  the  outcome  of  its  investigation  regarding  what  occurred  from 
October  26,  2017,  through  October  30,  2017. 

3. 

On  February  12,  2018,  Sabine  Robertson-Phillips,  the  district’s  Assistant 

Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  sent  Ms.  Honeyfield  a  letter  entitled  “Notice  of  Proposed 
Recommendation  for  Suspension  Without  Pay  and  Dismissal,  and  Statement  of  Charges,” 
advising  Ms.  Honeyfield  of  the  district’s  “proposed  intention  to  recommend  to  the  Governing 
Board  that  you  be  suspended  without  pay  pending  your  dismissal  from  employment  as  a 
certificated  employee  of  the  District.”  The  letter  also  informed  Ms.  Honeyfield  of  her  right 
to  a  Skelly  hearing,  which  was  set  to  proceed  on  February  22,  2018.°  Enclosed  with  the  letter 
was  the  district’s  Statement  of  Charges,  dated  February  12,  2018,  which  Ms.  Robertson- 
Phillips  signed  in  her  official  capacity. 

4. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  asserted  that  cause  existed  to  dismiss  Ms. 

Honeyfield  for  immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1));  dishonesty  (Ed.  Code,  § 

  

>In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering  disciplinary 
action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “preremoval  safeguards,” 
including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a  copy  of  the  charges  and 
materials  upon  which  the  action  is  based,  and  the  right  to  respond,  either  orally  or  in  writing, 
to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The  Court’s  directive  gave  rise  to  an 
administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly  hearing,  in  which  an  employee  is  afforded  the 
opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon  which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based.

44932,  subd.  (a)(4));  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(5)  [sic])*; 
and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(8)),  based 
on  the  following  allegations: 

e 

e 

e 

e 

On  October  26,  2017,  Ms.  Honeyfield  took  a  17-year-old  student  off  campus  to  a 
restaurant  in  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  personal  vehicle,  when  the  student  was  supposed 
to  be  in  class,  and  without  parental  consent,  in  violation  of  district  policies  and 
rules; 

On  October  27,  2017,  Ms.  Honeyfield  misrepresented  to  administrative  staff  and 
law  enforcement  that  she  had  actually  taken  the  student’s  older,  adult  sister  to 
lunch; 

On  October  30,  2017,  Ms.  Honeyfield  again  falsely  denied  taking  the  student  to 
lunch  off  campus;  and 

On  October  30,  2017,  after  being  placed  on  administrative  leave,  Ms.  Honeyfield 
admitted  to  the  school’s  principal  that  she  had  taken  the  student  to  lunch  off 
campus  on  October  26,  2017,  and  then  lied  about  it. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  did  not  allege  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  any  inappropriate 
physical  contact  with  the  student.  However,  paragraph  8  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  alleged 
Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and  was  evidently  unfit  to  serve  because  her 
interactions  with  the  student  constituted  “grooming  behavior”  as  follows: 

You  have  engaged  in  one  or  more  secret  one-on-one  encounters 
with  an  at-risk  or  troubled  minor  student,  with  whom  you  have 
established  a  close  and  nurturing  position  [sic],  which  is 
indicative  of  grooming  behavior  which  is  known  to  lead  to 

  

*  The  Statement  of  Charges  listed  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  one  of  the 

grounds  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield,  but  erroneously  cited  subdivision  (a)(5),  instead  of 
subdivision  (a)(6).  Since  2015,  subdivision  (a)(5)  has  concerned  “unsatisfactory 
performance,”  which  was  not  alleged  in  this  case,  and  subdivision  (a)(6)  has  concerned 
“evident  unfitness  for  service.”  Ms.  Honeyfield  filed  a  motion  in  limine  to  exclude  evidence 
regarding  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  because  the  wrong  subdivision  was  cited  in  the 
Statement  of  Charges.  However,  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  clear  that  the  district  meant 
to  charge  Ms.  Honeyfield  with  “evident  unfitness  for  service,”  and  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  March 
29,  2018,  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense  stated  on  page  2,  at  paragraph  4,  that 
the  “[c]harge  alleging  unfitness  for  service  mistakenly  cites  §  44932(a)(5).”  Therefore,  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  not  prejudiced  by  evidence  of  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  because  she 
had  long  been  aware  of  the  district’s  typographical  error,  and  her  motion  was  denied.

inappropriate  sexual  contact.  This  conduct  is  completely 
unacceptable  in  a  school  environment.  You  are  charged  with 
immoral  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  also  asserted  cause  existed  to  suspend  Ms.  Honeyfield 
without  pay  pending  her  dismissal  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939,  based  on 
allegations  that  her  actions  constituted  immoral  conduct  and/or  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  employing  school  district. 

5. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  opted  to  have  her  union  representative  submit  a  written 

response  to  the  charges  instead  of  appearing  in  person  at  the  February  22,  2018,  informal 
Skelly  meeting.  Her  union  representative,  John  Vigrass,  Executive  Director,  Citrus  Belt 
Uniserv,  Inc.,  submitted  a  letter  on  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  behalf,  dated  March  2,  2018.  The  last 
paragraph  of  that  letter  stated: 

Ms.  Honeyfield  is  a  caring  professional  with  an  excellent  record. 
She  admits  she  had  a  lapse  in  judgment  and  handled  it  poorly 
when  first  questioned  about  it.  Her  conduct  was  not  born  of 
malice  or  ill  intent,  or  an  act  of  “grooming”.  She  understands 
some  manner  of  discipline  is  warranted  and  that  her  choices  in 
this  matter  were  regrettable.  She  is  remorseful  and  there  is  not 
any  indication  from  her  record  of  service  that  she  has  any  defect 
of  temperament  and  that  continued  service  would  constitute  any 
sort  of  threat  to  anyone.  One  of  the  Morrison  Factors  considers 
the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 
resulting  in  the  conduct.  Her  motive  here  was  to  help  a  child  in 
need;  this  is  in  keeping  with  her  record  and  can  be  supported  by 
many  individuals.  While  her  method  of  meeting  that  need  was 
not  the  best  choice,  this  conduct  does  not  rise  to  such  a  level-all 
things  considered-as  to  warrant  termination. 

6. 

On  March  9,  2018,  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  sent  Ms.  Honeyfield  a  letter 
entitled  “Notice  of  Recommendation  for  Suspension  Without  Pay  and  Dismissal,  and 
Statement  of  Charges.”  That  letter  advised  Ms.  Honeyfield  the  administration  planned  to 
recommend  to  the  district’s  Governing  Board  during  closed  session  on  March  13,  2018,  that 
it  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  suspend  her  without  pay  pending  her  dismissal.  The  letter 
acknowledged  that  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  labor  representative  sent  a  written  response  to  the 
charges,  instead  of  Ms.  Honeyfield  appearing  at  the  Skelly  hearing,  and  stated  that  “[a]fter 
considering  your  responses,  the  administration  has  determined  to  proceed  with  the 
recommendation  to  the  Board  for  your  suspension  and  dismissal  as  noted  above.  Your 
written  response  will  be  provided  to  the  Board  at  the  time  of  the  recommendation.”  The 
letter  also  notified  Ms.  Honeyfield  of  her  right  to  have  the  administration’s  recommendation 
made  in  open  session  instead  of  closed  session.  Enclosed  with  the  letter  was  another  copy  of 
the  Statement  of  Charges,  dated  February  12,  2018.

7. 

On  March  16,  2018,  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  signed  the  Notice  of  Suspension 

Without  Pay  and  30-Day  Notice  of  Dismissal  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44932 
and  44939,  in  her  official  capacity,  which  was  sent  to  Ms.  Honeyfield  by  certified  mail.  In 
that  notice,  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  advised  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  on  March  13,  2018,  “the 
Board  of  Education  of  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District  took  action  to  suspend  you 
without  pay  effective  March  14,  2018,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44939,  and  to 
give  you  notice  that  it  intends  to  dismiss  you  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 
District.”  Enclosed  with  the  March  16,  2018,  notice  was  another  copy  of  the  Statement  of 
Charges,  dated  February  12,  2018. 

8. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  timely  appealed  the  district’s  dismissal  and  suspension 

determination,  denying  that  grounds  for  her  dismissal  and  suspension  without  pay  existed,  and 
this  hearing  followed. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  Education,  Employment  History,  and  Evaluations  of  Her  Teaching  Ability 

9. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  holds  a  Bachelor’s  Degree  in  Kinesiology  and  a  Master’s 
Degree  in  Education,  with  an  emphasis  in  Multi-Cultural  Education.  She  has  also  taken 
courses  at  the  University  of  Redlands  geared  towards  becoming  a  counselor.  She  has  worked 
as  a  health  and  physical  education  teacher  for  14  years,  11  years  of  which  were  as a  district 
employee.  Ms.  Honeyfield  holds  a  single  subject,  physical  education  or  health  science, 
credential.  Ms.  Honeyfield  submitted  certificates  showing  she  completed  the  following 
courses:  Mandated  Reporter:  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  (Full  Course  (California))  on  August 
10,  2015;  Concussion  in  Sports  on  January  10,  2016;  Sudden  Cardiac  Arrest  on  January  10, 
2016;  Heat  Illness  Prevention  on  January  10,  2016;  and  Standard-CPR/AED/First-Aid°  on 
January  10,  2016. 

10. 

_—_- Her  first  fulltime  teaching  position  was  working  as  a  seventh-grade  physical 
education  teacher  during  the  2003-2004  school  year  at  Suzanne  Middle  School,  which  is  in 
the  Walnut  Unified  School  District.  Ms.  Honeyfield  presented  letters  from  John  Casato, 
Suzanne  Middle  School’s  Principal,  and  Sue  Lemaire,  Suzanne  Middle  School’s  Physical 
Education  Department  Chair,  praising  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  teaching  abilities. 

Mr.  Casato  explained  in  his  March  25,  2004,  letter  that  the  school  might  not  be  able  to 

retain  Ms.  Honeyfield  due  to  budget  cuts  and  stated: 

First,  let  me  say  that  I  have  every  intention  of  working  to 
preserve  Marie’s  job  status  at  our  school.  I  have  found  her  to  be 
a  very  good  addition  to  our  staff.  She  has  brought  good 
organizational  skills,  some  real  expertise  to  the  P.E.  curriculum, 
a  sense  of  positive  energy  and  enthusiasm,  and  a  student- 

  

>  “CPR”  is  the  abbreviation  for  “Cardiopulmonary  Resuscitation”  and  “AED”  is  the 

abbreviation  for  “Automated  External  Defibrillator.”

centered  approach  to  her  work  each  day.  She  is  some  one  [sic] 
we  don’t  want  to  lose. 

Marie  is  eager  to  please  and  to  do  an  outstanding  job.  She  has 
been  a  positive  influence  to  [sic]  our  already  exemplary  P.E. 
program.  Her  organization  and  management  skills  are  well- 
developed.  Her  program  has  a  good  level  of  rigor  and  a  high 
level  of  participation  and  success  among  her  students.  She 
possesses  an  in-depth  knowledge  of  her  subject  area  and  an 
unusual  ability  to  relate  to  and  motivate  her  students.  Her 
instruction  is  clear  and  sequential.  She  models  skills  for  her 
students  and  provides  them  with  opportunities  for  guided 
practice  before  moving  into  independent  activities  or  games. 

Marie  has  worked  hard  to  make  herself  a  full-fledged  member 
of  our  P.E.  department  and  our  school.  She  has  been  successful 
in  doing  both.  It  is  my  hope  that  we  will  be  able  to  find  a  way 
to  retain  her  for  the  up-coming  school  year. 

Ms.  Lemaire’s  April  28,  2004,  letter  noted  that  before  Ms.  Honeyfield  worked 

fulltime  at  Suzanne  Middle  School,  she  had  been  a  day  substitute  for  the  Walnut  Valley 
School  District  for  five  years  and  a  long-term  substitute  at  Suzanne  Middle  School  for  two 
years.  Ms.  Lemaire’s  letter  went  on  to  describe  Ms.  Honeyfield  as  follows: 

Marie  has  made a  great  contribution  to  our  program.  She  is 
reliable,  dependable  and  responsible  as  a  teacher  and  a 
professional.  She  takes  care  of  school  equipment  and  the 
facilities.  Marie  is  skilled  in  classroom  management  and 
student  discipline  following  school  guidelines  in  all  areas  of  her 
faculty  responsibilities.  Marie  truly  cares  about  her  students  and 
works  very  hard  to  make  sure  that  they  perform  at  high 
standards. 

11. 

After  working  at  Suzanne  Middle  School,  Ms.  Honeyfield  taught  physical 

education  at  Nicolet  Middle  School,  in  the  Banning  Unified  School  District,  during  the  2004- 
2005  and  2005-2006  school  years.  While  she  was  there,  she  was  also  the  Head  Softball 
Coach  for  Banning  High  School  for  one  season  and  the  Girls  Soccer  Coach  for  Banning  High 
School  for  one  season. 

On  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  probationary  2006  evaluation,  while  working  at  Nicolet  Middle 
School,  she  received  “Meets  the  Standard”  ratings  in  all  categories,  except  that  in  the  area  of 
“[p|romoting  social  development  and  group  responsibility,”  in  which  she  received  an  “E-

Exemplary”?  rating.  The  observer’s  notes,  attached  to  the  evaluation,  stated  several  times 
that  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  class  and  lessons  “went  just  like  “clockwork.” 

Matt  Valdivia,  Nicolet  Middle  School’s  Interim  Principal,  wrote  a  reference  letter  for 

Ms.  Honeyfield,  dated  May  22,  2006,  which  stated: 

Professionally,  I  have  known  Marie  since  she  joined  the 
Banning  Unified  School  District  in  2004.  Marie  quickly 
became  an  integral  and  indispensable  part  of  the  Nicolet  Middle 
School  staff.  Marie  continues  to  strive  to  learn  and  improve 
herself  professionally.  Marie  has  been  a  positive  force  within 
our  school  district. 

I  can  attest  that  Marie  conducts  herself  as  the  consummate 
professional.  From  observations,  Marie  provides  valuable  input 
and  recommendations  regarding  how  to  best  serve  student 
needs.  Marie  works  effectively  with  the  students  she  serves. 
Through  effective  strategies  in  delivering  instruction  and 
assertive  discipline,  Marie  makes  certain  that  students  are 
diligent  to  the  tasks  asked  of  them  to  perform.  Marie  effectively 
communicates  with  staff,  students,  and  parents  on  a  regular 
basis.  Marie  possesses  excellence  in  character  as  well  as 
personality.  Marie  is  a  natural  born  educator  who  is  highly 
motivated  and  is  truly  innovative  as  a  professional. 

12. 

While  she  was  working  for  the  Banning  Unified  School  District,  Ms. 

Honeyfield  applied  for  a  physical  education  position  in  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District, 
without  knowing  to  which  school  or  level  she  might  be  assigned.  She  wanted  to  work  for  the 
district  because  she  had  grown  up  in  the  area,  Redlands  Unified  was  a  prestigious  school 
district,  and  there  was  a  strong  union.  It  was  her  goal  to  work  for  a  district  of  Redlands 
Unified’s  stature,  and  she  believed  it  would  be  great  for  her  career. 

13. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  first  position  for  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District  was 
working  as  a  physical  education  teacher  for  Clement  Middle  School  during  the  2006-2007 
school  year.  On  a  2007  probationary  evaluation,  Ms.  Honeyfield  received  mostly  “meets 
standards”  ratings  and  some  “exemplifies  or  exceeds  standards”  ratings.  She  received  only 
one  “developing  practice/needs  to  improve”  rating  in  the  category  “[w]orking  with 
communities  to  improve  professional  practice.”  The  evaluator  included  the  following 
comment  on  the  evaluation:  “Marie  has  been  a  great  addition  to  our  PE  team.  She  works 
well  with  other  staff  members  and  has  developed  a  positive  rapport  with  her  students.” 

  

°  According  to  the  “evaluation  code”  on  the  evaluation  form,  an  “E”  rating  meant 
“exceeds  standard.”  However,  in  the  body  of  her  evaluation,  the  word  “exemplary”  was 
used.

14. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  next  taught  physical  education  at  Beattie  Middle  School,  also 

in  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District,  for  two  years  beginning  in  the  2007-2008  school 
year.  While  she  was  at  Beattie  Middle  School,  Ms.  Honeyfield  volunteered  with  the  “Run 
Club,”  which  was  a  cross-country  running  program.  On  her  2007-2008  probationary 
evaluation,  Ms.  Honeyfield  received  mainly  “meets  standards”  ratings  and  some 
“exemplifies  or  exceeds  standards”  ratings.  Under  the  “Evaluator  Comments,”  was  written: 
“T  appreciate  your  hard  work  in  the  PE  department  to  continue  developing  our  students  [  sic] 
physical  abilities  and  helping  them  understand  the  importance  of  creating  a  healthy  lifestyle.” 

15. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  then  taught  physical  education  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School, 

also  in  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District,  for  seven  years  beginning  in  the  2009-2010 
school  year.  While  at  Citrus  Valley,  she  served  as  the  Head  Cross  Country  Coach  for  six 
years  and  the  Head  Track  and  Field  Coach  for  seven  years.  She  was  the  Assistant  Athletic 
Trainer  for  two  or  three  years.  She  was  also  the  Physical  Education  Chair  for  one  or  two 
years  and  served  as  the  WASC’  representative  for  physical  education  and  health  while  she 
was  the  department  chair. 

On  her  2010  and  2012  evaluations  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School,  Ms.  Honeyfield 
received  mostly  “exemplifies  or  exceeds  standards”  ratings  and  some  “meets  standards” 
ratings.  The  “Evaluator  Comments”  on  the  2010  evaluation  stated:  “Throughout  the  school 
year,  Marie  has  had  adversities  and  challenges  in  the  face  of  delayed  construction.  She  has 
made  adjustments  and  has  managed  through  the  lack  of  facilities  and  locker  rooms.  In  the 
second  semester,  Marie  has  worked  with  students  and  has  established  a  culture  of 
expectations  for  students  of  Citrus  Valley  High  School  within  the  PE  department.”  The 
“Evaluator  Comments”  on  the  2012  evaluation  stated:  “Marie  is  a  significant  contributor  to 
CVHS.  She  does  a  great  job  in  the  classroom  while  serving  as  the  P.E.  Department  Chair, 
Assitant  [sic]  Athletic  Trainer,  Head  Cross  Country  and  Head  Track  Coach.  I  sincerely 
appreciate  Marie’s  work  ethic  and  her  valuable  contributions  to  our  school,  students  and 
staff.” 

During  2014,  while  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School,  Ms.  Honeyfield  worked  on  an 

extensive  project  to  serve  as  an  alternative  evaluation,  and  as  a  result  of  the  nature  of  that 
project,  her  evaluation  date  was  extended  from  May  2014  to  May  2015.  Ms.  Honeyfield’s 
project  integrated  the  common  core  subjects  of  writing,  reading,  mathematics,  and  science 
into  her  physical  education  class  to  teach  her  students  the  connection  between  physical 
education  and  common  core  subjects.  The  curriculum  included  having  students  complete 
X/Y  graphs  of  their  fitness  scores  on  fitness  tests  throughout  the  first  semester;  create  cross- 
curricular  connections  between  physical  education,  math,  and  science  by  completing  “a 
summary  comparing  fitness  core  progress  by  evaluating  their  own  fitness  graphs”;  and  write 
“arguments  to  support  claims  using  valid  reasoning  and  sufficient  evidence.”  The 

  

7  WASC  is  the  acronym  for  “Western  Association  of  Schools  and  Colleges,”  which  is 

an  organization  that  accredits  schools,  including  kindergarten  through  12th  grade  public 
schools.

Administrator’s  Assessment  Comments  on  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  2015  alternative  evaluation 
described  the  project  as  follows: 

Over  the  past  two  years,  Ms.  Honeyfield  has  diligently  worked 
to  provide  her  physical  education  students  with  an  authentic 
learning  experience  incorporating  science,  math,  reading,  and 
writing.  Students  monitored  their  physical  progression 
throughout  the  year,  graphed  their  results,  reflected  upon  their 
standings  and  compared  results  with  their  peers.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  incorporated  the  national  Fitnessgram  Standards  to 
further  provide  students  with  authentic  evidence  to  compare  to 
their  own  results.  Students  also  participated  in  close  reading 
activities,  comparing  the  pros  and  cons  of  artificial  turf  after 
reading  several  resources.  Ms.  Honeyfield  not  only  created 
cross-curricular  assignments  but  she  also  created  a  make-up 
assignment  for  PE  which  asked  students  to  reflect  upon  several 
questions,  resulting  in  thoughtful  “essays”  written  by  each 
student  who  completed  the  assignment.  Ms.  Honeyfield 
compiled  all  of  her  “findings”  in  a  well-organized  and 
comprehensive  binder  which  clearly  shows  the  activities 
themselves,  student  work  samples,  and  clear  evidence  of  the 
power  of  integrating  multiple  subjects  within  a  PE  curriculum. 

Under  the  heading,  “Recommendations,”  the  evaluator  also  wrote: 

I  believe  that  this  was  a  valuable  and  appropriate  project  to 
demonstrate  to  students  ways  in  which  other  subject  areas  can 
be  supported  through  cross-curricular  activities  in  a  physical 
education  class.  The  Common  Core  ts  difficult  for  students  and 
incorporating  some  of  the  strategies  and  practices  into  a 
typically  non-academic  course  like  PE,  was  very  powerful.  My 
hope  is  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  shares  this  model,  along  with  the 
results/reflections  of  her  students,  with  her  colleagues.  This  1s  a 
true  model  of  how  all  content  areas  can  be  integrated  in  order  to 
provide  engaging  and  authentic  learning  experiences  for 
students,  and  truly  models  the  effectiveness  of  Common  Core.  I 
hope  Ms.  Honeyfield  uses  this  experience  as  a  model  for  her 
further  PE  instruction  so  that  future  students  will  also  benefit. 

Based  on  her  project,  Ms.  Honeyfield  received  an  “Exemplifies  or  Exceeds 
Standards”  rating  for  her  2015  alternative  evaluation  and  qualified  for  five-year  evaluations 
at  the  district  going  forward. 

16. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  began  working  for  Redlands  East  Valley  High  School  (REV) 

at  the  beginning  of  the  2016-2017  school  year,  as  a  health  teacher  and  Assistant  Athletic 

10

Coach.  She  continued  working  in  that  role  until  she  was  placed  on  leave  beginning  October 
31,  2017. 

17. 

|  Ms.  Honeyfield  has  been  a  Director  of  the  Ken  Hubbs  Foundation  for  the  past 

four  or  five  years.  The  Ken  Hubbs  Foundation  recognizes  the  top  student  athletes  in  the 
Inland  Empire. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  Relationship  with  I.N.  Before  October  26,  2017 

18. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  first  met  I.N.  when  she  attended  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  class  during 

I.N.’s  freshman  year  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School.  I.N.  did  not  play  on  any  teams,  but  her 
best  friend  was  an  athlete.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  see  I.N.  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School 
after  I.N.’s  freshman  year,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  believed  that  I.N.  lived  with  her  father  in 
Arizona  for  a  period  of  time  after  her  freshman  year.  When  Ms.  Honeyfield  began  working 
at  REV  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  I.N.  was  a  student  at  REV,  in  her  junior  year.  I.N. 
was  not  in  any  of  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  classes  at  REV,  but  she  was  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  first 
period  Teacher’s  Aide  (TA)  during  the  2017-2018  school  year,  when  I.N.  was  a  senior. 

19. 

During  the  2016-2017  school  year,  I.N.  would  sometimes  visit  Ms.  Honeyfield 

in  her  classroom,  and  I.N.  asked  if  she  could  spend  time  in  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  class.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  told  I.N.  that  she  needed  permission  from  her  counselor,  Ms.  O’Day.  Ms.  O’Day 
then  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  if  I.N.  could  sit  in  her  class,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  Ms.  O’  Day 
I.N.  was  welcome  to  come  to  her  class,  as  long  as  she  did  not  interfere  with  the  class. 

20. 

IN.  sent  text  messages  to  Ms.  Honeyfield  in  August  2017,  asking  if  I.N.  could 

be  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  TA,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  exchanged  text  messages  about  that 
request.  Ms.  Honeyfield  explained  during  this  hearing  that  TAs  help  teachers  pass  out 
papers,  possibly  grade  papers,  get  photocopies,  and  they  may  also  deliver  messages  to  other 
teachers.  The  teachers  at  REV  were  usually  limited  to  having  only  two  TAs.  When  Ms. 
Honeyfield  received  I.N.’s  request  to  be  a  TA,  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  know  if  she  already 
hadaTA.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  request  that  I.N.  be  one  of  her  TAs,  but  she  did  request 
that  another,  exemplary  student  from  the  previous  school  year,  be  her  TA.  Ms.  Honeyfield 
ended  up  having  five  TAs  for  the  2017-2018  school  year,  including  I.N.,  who  was  the  TA  for 
Ms.  Honeyfield’s  first  hour  health  class. 

21. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  remember  receiving  any  text  messages  from  I.N. 

before  August  2017,  nor  did  she  remember  giving  I.N.  her  cell  phone  number.®  Ms. 
Honeyfield  mentioned  that  when  she  taught  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School,  her  cell  phone 

  

®  Text  messages  between  August  1,  2017,  and  October  2,  2017,  were  received  as 

evidence.  Due  to  the  manner  in  which  Ms.  Honeyfield  responded  to  I.N.’s  August  1,  2017, 
text,  without  asking  who  that  message  was  from,  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  testimony  that  the  August 
1,  2017,  text  was  the  first  text  message  she  received  from  I.N.  was  not  credible. 
Additionally,  I.N.’s  mother  testified  that  she  believed  her  daughter  had  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  cell 
phone  number  when  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  at  Citrus  Valley  High  School. 

11

number  was  available  on  the  Track  and  Field  website.  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  testified  that  she 
did  not  have  personal  cell  phone  numbers  of  other  REV  students. 

22. 

__I.N.  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  exchanged  text  messages  about  topics  other  than 

I.N.’s  request  to  be  a  TA,  including  a  few  instances  when  I.N.  was  running  late  in  the 
morning,  whether  I.N.  could  draw  something  for  the  classroom,  I.N.  taking  Polynesian  dance 
lessons  from  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  mother,  a  memorial  service  I.N.  was  considering  attending, 
and  I.N.  being  in  the  hospital.  Ms.  Honeyfield  explained  that  she  knew  I.N.  wanted  to  join 
the  Hawaitian/Polynesian  Dance  Club,  but  I.N.  was  pessimistic  about  it.  Ms.  Honeyfield’s 
mother  taught  that  type  of  dance,  so  Ms.  Honeyfield  referred  I.N.  to  her  mother  to  take  dance 
lessons.  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  aware  that  I.N.  had  lost  a  family  member  and  was  in  what  Ms. 
Honeyfield  described  as  the  “anger”  stage  of  her  grief  and  trying  to  decide  whether  to  attend 
a  memorial  service.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  know  why  I.N.  was  in  the  hospital. 

23. 

While  working  at  REV,  Ms.  Honeyfield  talked  to  students,  including  I.N., 

about  various  topics  while  in  her  classroom  and  sometimes  outside  her  classroom,  but  still  on 
campus.  During  such  discussions  with  I.N.,  I.N.  confided  in  Ms.  Honeyfield  about  I.N.’s 
concerns  about  a  rigorous  English  class,  which  was  at  a  higher  level  than  I.N.  had  been 
accustomed;  boys  I.N.  liked;  arguments  I.N.  had  with  her  mother;  I.N.  missing  her 
grandmother,  who  had  passed  away;  I.N.’s  anger  about  her  uncle  passing  away;  I.N.’s 
anxiety;  and  other  “teenager  type  issues.” 

24. 

__I.N.  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  she  had  anxiety  in  stressful  situations,  including 

sometimes  when  she  argued  with  her  mother.  Ms.  Honeyfield  asked  I.N.  if  she  had  seen  a 
doctor  about  her  anxiety,  but  Ms.  Honeyfield  could  not  remember  how  I.N.  responded.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  told  I.N.  that  if  she  was  experiencing  high  anxiety,  she  should  see  her  counselor, 
Ms.  O’ Day,  or  even  the  principal.  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  at  least  three  times  that  she 
should  talk  to  her  counselor  because  “obviously,  something  was  bothering  her.”  Ms. 
Honeyfield  thought  that  if  I.N.  was  telling  her,  I.N.  should  also  tell  the  counselor  as  well. 
However,  according  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  I.N.  reyected  the  suggestions  that  she  speak  with  her 
counselor,  claiming  that  she  did  not  feel  comfortable  talking  to  her  counselor.  I.N.  was  also 
not  open  to  seeing  the  principal  because  I.N.  did  not  know  the  principal  well  enough.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  believed  I.N.’s  counselor,  Ms.  O’  Day,  was  a  good  counselor,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield 
believed  I.N.  had  talked  to  Ms.  O’Day  about  school. 

25. 

There  was  a  point  in  time,  no  more  than  three  months  before  October  2017, 

when  I.N.  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  I.N.  wanted  to  be  emancipated  from  her  mother  and  go  to 
foster  care  because  I.N.  and  her  mother  had  been  fighting  and  I.N.  felt  that  her  mother  did 
not  want  her  anymore.  At  that  time,  it  seemed  to  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  I.N.  and  her  mother 
had  a  strained  relationship.  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  to  talk  to  her  counselor  about  it,  and 
Ms.  Honeyfield  believed  that  I.N.  did.  Ms.  Honeyfield  believed  I.N.  had  been  in  foster  care 
at  one  point,  and  that  she  had  “been  happy  in  foster  care.”’  By  October  2017,  it  seemed  to 
  

?  There  was  no  evidence  presented  that  I.N.  was  ever  in  foster  care  other  than  Ms. 

Honeyfield’s  testimony,  which  was  based  solely  on  things  I.N.  had  told  her. 

12

Ms.  Honeyfield  that  I.N.  and  her  mother  were  in  a  good  place.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not 
believe  I.N.  wanted  to  be  emancipated  anymore,  and  she  never  asked  I.N.  why  she  changed 
her  mind. 

October  26,  2017-Ms.  Honeyfield  Takes  I.N.  Off  Campus  to  a  Restaurant;  School  Counselors 
Eat  at  the  Same  Restaurant;  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  Decide  to  Lie  About  It 

26. 

On  October  26,  2017,  I.N.  went  to  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  classroom  in  the  morning 
shortly  before  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  preparation  (prep)  time,  when  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  have  a 
class.  When  I.N.  arrived  in  her  classroom,  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  know  whether  I.N.  had  a 
class,  but  Ms.  Honeyfield  knew  I.N.  had  a  class  during  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  prep  time.  I.N.  told 
Ms.  Honeyfield  she  was  “stressed  out”  about  a  birthday  party  her  mom  was  giving  her  on 
Saturday  and  because  she  had  a  major  project  due  and  she  was  behind  the  progress  of  all  the 
other  students.  I.N.  said:  “Ms.  Honey,  I  can’t  be  here’;  “I  just  can’t  be  here  right  now’; 
“T’m  stressing  out”  about  the  “party,”  “English  class,”  and  “just  everything”;  and  “Can  I  stay 
in  your  classroom?”  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  that  she  could  not  stay  in  her  classroom 
because  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  leaving  to  run  errands.  I.N.  asked  if  she  could  accompany  Ms. 
Honeyfield  while  she  ran  her  errands,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  said,  “No.”  I.N.  continued  to  ask 
if  she  could  go  with  Ms.  Honeyfield,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  her  “No”  a  “few”  times.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  eventually  changed  her  mind  and  decided  to  take  I.N.  to  eat  lunch  off  campus 
and  have  a  chat  with  her  because  it  seemed  like  I.N.  needed  to  talk.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not 
recall  telling  I.N.  to  see  her  counselor  during  this  conversation. 

27. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  decided  to  take  I.N.  to  the  Restore  Kitchen  restaurant,  which 

was  about  a  15-minute  drive  from  school  and  on  the  other  side  of  town,  because  the  food 
there  was  “delicious.”  They  did  not  discuss  how  they  would  get  off  campus,  but  Ms. 
Honeyfield  offered  to  drive.  They  did  not  walk  to  her  car  together.  Instead,  Ms.  Honeyfield 
gave  I.N.  her  car  keys,  and  they  met  at  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  car  in  the  parking  lot.  Before  going 
to  her  car,  Ms.  Honeyfield  went  to  the  administrative  office  because  she  needed  to  do 
something  there.  She  did  not  tell  anyone  in  the  office  that  she  planned  to  take  I.N.  off 
campus.  When  Ms.  Honeyfield  got  to  her  car,  I.N.  was  in  the  passenger  seat  with  the  seat 
reclined.  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  to  sit  up  and  buckle  her  seatbelt,  and  I.N.  was  sitting 
upright  with  her  seatbelt  on  by  the  time  they  turned  onto  the  street  exiting  the  campus 
parking  lot.  Ms.  Honeyfield  knew  I.N.  was  supposed  to  be  in  class,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  did 
not  have  I.N.’s  mother’s  permission  or  the  school’s  authorization  to  take  I.N.  out  of  class  or 
off  campus.  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  concerned  about  taking  I.N.  out  of  class  and  off  campus, 
but  she  felt  I.N.  needed  to  talk  to  someone. 

28. 

While  driving  to  the  restaurant,  they  talked  about  the  party  I.N.’s  mother  was 
planning,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  asked,  “What’s  so  stressful  about  a  party?”  I.N.  calmed  down 
and  seemed  “happy.”  They  parked  directly  across  the  street  from  the  restaurant,  went  inside, 
and  ordered.  Inside  the  restaurant,  they  discussed  the  party  some  more.  They  also  discussed 
I.N.’s  plans  after  graduation,  and  I.N.  said  she  would  likely  attend  Grafton  College.  I.N. 
asked  if  she  could  live  with  Ms.  Honeyfield  after  graduation,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  declined 
by  telling  I.N.  that  she  “already  had  one  child.”  I.N.  had  previously  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  if 

13

she  could  live  with  her,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  always  said,  “No.” !°  Ms.  Honeyfield 
believed  I.N.  liked  the  way  she  listened  and  maybe  I.N.  just  felt  comfortable  with  her 
because,  according  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  she  does  not  judge  when  she  listens  to  kids. 

29. 

While  I.N.  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  were  still  in  the  restaurant,  three  REV 

I.N.,  who  was  seated  facing  that  table,  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  Ms. 

counselors,  including  Ms.  O’Day,  arrived  and  were  seated  at  a  table  next  to  where  I.N.  and 
Ms.  Honeyfield  were  sitting.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  see  the  counselors  come  in  because  her 
back  was  to  that  table. 
O’Day,  I.N.’s  counselor,  had  come  in.  After  the  counselors  entered  the  restaurant,  I.N.’s 
demeanor  changed.  According  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  I.N.’s  facial  expression  then  showed 
“anxiety  and  stress,”  whereas  before  she  had  been  “happy  and  positive.”  Ms.  Honeyfield 
told  I.N.  to  say  “Hello”  to  Ms.  O’Day,  but  I.N.  said,  “No.”  They  still  needed  to  pay  their  bill, 
and  I.N.  said  she  needed  to  use  the  restroom.  Ms.  Honeyfield  gave  I.N.  her  car  keys,  LN.  left 
for  the  bathroom,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  waited  for  the  bill.  Ms.  Honeyfield  paid  the  bill  and 
said  “Hello”  to  Ms.  O’Day  and  the  other  two  counselors  at  their  table.  They  did  not  discuss 
the  fact  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  at  the  restaurant  with  a  student,  and  the  counselors  did  not 
ask  why  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  there  or  say  anything  about  the  person  with  whom  Ms. 
Honeyfield  had  been  eating.  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  see  I.N.  leave  the  restaurant,  and  after 
she  exited  the  restaurant  and  went  to  her  car,  she  saw  I.N.  standing  across  the  street  near  a 
neighboring  business.  I.N.  then  walked  to  and  got  in  the  car,  and  they  left. 

30. 

—  While  at  the  restaurant,  Ms.  O’Day  recognized  I.N.  because  she  was  one  of  the 
students  on  Ms.  O’Day’s  caseload.  Ms.  O’Day  then  checked  the  school’s  calendar  system  on 
her  phone  to  see  if  I.N.  or  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  a  class  during  that  period  and  saw  that  it  was 
Ms.  Honeyfield’s  prep  time  and  I.N.  had a  class.  The  counselors  did  not  see  I.N.  leave  the 
restaurant.  After  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  left  the  restaurant,  the  counselors  discussed  how 
unusual  it  was  to  see  someone  off  campus  in  the  middle  of  the  day  and  their  concerns  about 
Ms.  Honeyfield  being  with  a  student  off  campus  so  far  away  from  school.  Ms.  O’Day 
thought  it  was  strange  that  I.N.  did  not  talk  to  her  because  she  knew  I.N.  Ms.  O’Day  did  not 
see  Ms.  Honeyfield  or  I.N.  do  anything  that  caused  her  concern,  other  than  the  fact  they  were 
off  campus.  The  counselors  decided  that  Ms.  O’Day,  who  was  the  student’s  counselor, 
would  tell  the  school’s  administration  what  they  saw. 

31. 

On  the  drive  back  to  school,  I.N.  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  why  she  was  so  calm, 

and  Ms.  Honeyfield  asked  I.N.  why  she  was  “freaking  out.”  I.N.  then  told  Ms.  Honeyfield 
that  her  mother  would  be  upset  that  she  had  left  campus,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  suggested  that 
they  call  her  mother  from  the  car,  but  they  did  not  do  so.  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  to  “calm 
down.”  I.N.  also  mentioned  to  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  her  probation  officer  would  be  notified  if 
her  mother  found  out  she  had  ditched  class.  This  was  the  first  time  I.N.  had  ever  said 

  

'0  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  provide  further  details  about  when  or  how  often  I.N.  had 

asked  if  she  could  live  with  Ms.  Honeyfield. 

14

anything  to  Ms.  Honeyfield  about  a  probation  monitor.'!  As  they  were  about  to  turn  into  the 
school  parking  lot,  I.N.  said  she  needed  to  get  out  of  the  car,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  let  her  out 
at  a  location  that  she  believed  was  a  “safe  spot.”  Ms.  Honeyfield  then  parked  her  car  and 
returned  to  her  classroom. 

32. 

IN.  went  to  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  classroom  again  later  the  same  day.  I.N.  was 

then  very  nervous  and  said  she  had  been  pulled  out  of  class  by  a  security  guard,  who 
questioned  her  about  being  out  of  class  and  asked  her,  ““Where  have  you  been?”  I.N.  told 
Ms.  Honeyfield  that  she  did  not  want  to  get  into  trouble.  I.N.  said  she  did  not  want  her 
mother  to  find  out  she  was  off  campus,  and  she  was  afraid  about  how  her  mother  would  react 
because  she  did  not  ask  for  permission.  Ms.  Honeyfield  believed  I.N.  did  not  want  to  be  sent 
I.N.  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  to 
back  to  live  with  her  father  in  Arizona  or  be  sent  to  foster  care. 
say  she  was  eating  lunch  with  I.N.’s  older  sister,  who  I.N.  said  looked  like  her.  They  agreed 
that  Ms.  Honeyfield  would  say  she  was  at  the  restaurant  with  I.N.’s  sister,  who  Ms. 
Honeyfield  had  never  met. 

October  27,  2017-School  Administration’s  Efforts  to  Investigate  What  Happened  on  October 
26,  2017,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  Communications  with  I.N.’s  Mother  that  Day 

33. 

On  October  27,  2017,  at  about  7:30  a.m.,  Ms.  O’ Day  told  REV  Principal 

Jennifer  Murillo  that  Ms.  O’Day  and  two  other  counselors  had  seen  Ms.  Honeyfield  with  I.N. 
at  a  restaurant  and  considered  it  to  be  odd.  Ms.  O’Day  told  Ms.  Murillo  that  although  Ms. 
Honeyfield  talked  to  the  counselors  at  the  restaurant,  I.N.  did  not  talk  to  them  and  took  a 
different  route  to  exit  the  restaurant.  Ms.  O’ Day  was  concerned  that  I.N.  did  not  come  to  her 
and  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  with  a  student  during  the  day  when  the  student  should  have 
been  in  class.  Ms.  Murillo’s  reaction  to  learning  this  information  was  that  “it  didn’t  seem 
natural.”  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  not  contacted  Ms.  Murillo  about  taking  I.N.  to  lunch,  nor  had 
Ms.  Honeyfield  sought  Ms.  Murillo’s  approval  to  take  I.N.  off  campus.  Ms.  Murillo  would 
not  have  given  a  teacher  permission  to  take  a  student  off  campus  during  school. 

34. 

Ms.  Murillo  and  REV  Assistant  Principal  Jeffrey  Martinez  began  investigating 

the  report  Ms.  Murillo  received  from  Ms.  O’Day.  Ms.  Murillo  called  Ms.  Robertson- 
Phillips,  the  district’s  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  several  times  during  the 
day  to  let  her  know  what  they  had  learned  and  ask  for  guidance. 

35. 

Mr.  Martinez  and  Ms.  Murillo  confirmed  that  I.N.  was  supposed  to  be  in  class 

during  the  time  when  Ms.  O’Day  said  she  saw  IN.  at  the  restaurant  with  Ms.  Honeyfield. 

36. 

Ms.  Murillo  checked  I.N.’s  attendance  and  saw  that  she  was  not  at  school  on 
October  27,  2017,  and  she  had  been  marked  absent  on  October  26,  2017.  Ms.  Murillo  then 
called  I.N.’s  mother  and  shared  with  her  that  it  had  been  reported  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had 
taken  I.N.  off  campus.  I.N.’s  mother  was  in  her  car  during  their  conversation,  and  Ms. 

  

'l  There  was  no  evidence  presented  showing  that  I.N.  actually  had  a  probation 

monitor. 

15

Murillo  could  hear  another  voice  saying,  “at  school”  and  “not  off  campus.”  I.N.’s  mother 
told  Ms.  Murillo  that  her  daughter  had  not  gone  off  campus,  and  her  daughter  did  not  have 
permission  to  be  off  campus,  but  if  she  was  off  campus  with  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  was  okay 
because  she  was  a  family  friend.'*  I.N.’s  mother  told  Ms.  Murillo  that  she  was  too  busy  to 
bring  I.N.  to  school  that  day  because  they  were  preparing  for  I.N.’s  birthday  party  that 
weekend.  The  conversation  ended  with  Ms.  Murillo  saying  she  would  talk  to  Ms. 
Honeyfield  and  then  call  I.N.’s  mother  back  if  Ms.  Murillo  needed  to  talk  to  I.N. 

37. 

Near  the  end  of  the  day,  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  met  with  Ms. 

Honeyfield  in  Ms.  Murillo’s  office.  Ms.  Murillo  shared  the  information  she  had  received 
from  Ms.  O’Day  and  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  what  happened.  Ms.  Honeyfield  confirmed  that 
She  had  seen  and  talked  to  the  counselors  at  the  restaurant,  but  she  denied  she  was  with  LN. 
Ms.  Honeyfield  told  them  she  had  not  seen  I.N.  all  day.!>  Ms.  Honeyfield  said  she  took 
“Chelsea,”  who  was  I.N.’s  older,  adult  sister,  out  to  lunch  at  Restore  Kitchen  restaurant.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  explained  to  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  that  Chelsea  was  in  her  20s  and  was 
not  one  of  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  students;  Chelsea  helped  Ms.  Honeyfield  out  with  her  son;  and 
sometimes  Ms.  Honeyfield  took  Chelsea  out  to  lunch  to  thank  her.  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  told 
them  she  saw  Chelsea  on  campus  on  October  26,  2017;  they  went  to  the  restaurant  together; 
Chelsea  left  the  restaurant  and  walked  to  Saverino’s,  a  sandwich  shop  next  to  Restore 
Kitchen,  to  buy  a  sandwich  for  her  sister,  I.N.;  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  picked  Chelsea  up  at 
Saverino’s.  Both  Mr.  Martinez  and  Ms.  Murillo  were  relieved  when  they  learned  it  was  not 
I.N.,  and  Ms.  Murillo  said  it  lowered  her  blood  pressure  to  learn  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  not 
been  with  a  student. 

38. 

Before  talking  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  Ms.  Murillo  had  called  the  sheriff's 

department,  and  a  sheriff's  deputy  showed  up  while  Mr.  Martinez  and  Ms.  Murillo  were 
talking  to  Ms.  Honeyfield.  Ms.  Murillo  left  the  room  to  speak  with  the  deputy,  and  she 
relayed  to  him  that  it  had  turned  out  to  be  a  case  of  “mistaken  identity.”  The  deputy 
responded  that  there  was  not  really  anything  for  him  to  do,  and  he  offered  to  talk  to  Ms. 
Honeyfield  to  share  with  her  why  the  school  made  a  report  and  to  confirm  it  was  a  case  of 
mistaken  identity. 

39. 

—  While  Mr.  Martinez  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  were  alone  in  the  room,  Mr.  Martinez 

asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  where  she  parked,  and  she  said,  “I  don’t  know,  it  changes.” 
According  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  she  told  Mr.  Martinez  that  where  she  parked  depended  on  the 
activities  she  had  scheduled  for  the  day.  For  example,  if  she  was  teaching  baseball,  she 
would  park  close  to  the  baseball  field.  The  fact  that  she  parked  in  different  places  was  a  “red 
flag”  to  Mr.  Martinez  because  teachers  usually  parked  in  the  same  spots.  Ms.  Honeyfield 

  

'2  T.N.’s  mother  testified  that  she  had  not  given  Ms.  Honeyfield  written  permission  to 

take  I.N.  off  campus,  but  that  she  gave  Ms.  Honeyfield  “verbal”  permission,  although  that 
“verbal”  permission  was  not  given  “ahead  of  time.” 

'3  T.N.  was  not  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  TA  that  day  because  October  26,  2017,  was  a 

“blocked”  day  such  that  she  did  not  have  her  regular  first  hour  class  that  day. 

16

also  testified  that  she  asked  Mr.  Martinez  if  she  could  leave,  and  he  told  her  to  wait  until  Ms. 
Murillo  came  back.  Mr.  Martinez  did  not  recall  her  asking  him  if  she  could  leave. 
According  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  she  almost  said  to  Mr.  Martinez  that,  1f  she  needed  to  stay, 
maybe  she  needed  union  representation.  However,  she  did  not  request  union  representation 
during  this  meeting. 

40. 

Ms.  Murillo  returned  to  the  room  with  the  deputy.'*  The  deputy  summarized 

what  Ms.  Murillo  had  told  him  about  it  being  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.  He  also  said  the 
school  had  called  law  enforcement  because  someone  had  reported  to  the  school  that  Ms. 
Honeyfield  had  been  seen  having  lunch  with  a  student.  He  did  not  ask  Ms.  Honeyfield  any 
questions.  While  the  deputy  was  in  the  room,  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  do  anything  to  correct 
the  perception  that  it  was  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.  The  deputy  was  in  the  room  for  three 
to  four  minutes,  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  not  placed  under  arrest,  and  the  deputy  did  not  tell  her 
she  was  in  custody  or  that  she  could  not  leave.  Although  Ms.  Honeyfield  thought  that  it 
would  have  been  seen  as  inappropriate  and/or  disrespectful  if  she  had  left,  no  one  told  her 
she  could  not  leave.'° 

Al. 

After  speaking  with  Ms.  Honeyfield,  Ms.  Murillo  called  I.N.’s  mother  again 

and  told  her  that  1t  was  a  case  of  mistaken  identity  because  Ms.  Honeyfield  actually  had 
lunch  with  I.N.’s  older  sister.  During  that  call,  Ms.  Murillo  asked  if  she  could  speak  with 
I.N.  the  following  Monday  because  I.N.  had  been  absent  from  class.  I.N.’s  mother  then  told 
Ms.  Murillo  that  I.N.  missed  class  because  she  had  been  crying  in  the  bathroom,  and  I.N.’s 
mother  agreed  to  bring  I.N.  in  to  talk  to  Ms.  Murillo  on  Monday. 

42. 

Near  the  end  of  the  school  day,  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  told  Ms.  O’Day 

that  it  was  a  case  of  “mistaken  identity”  because  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  been  at  lunch  with 

  

4  Ms.  Honeyfield  filed  a  motion  in  limine  seeking  an  order  excluding  the  deputy’s 

testimony,  any  statements  made  by  the  deputy,  and  any  statements  Ms.  Honeyfield  made  to 
the  deputy,  arguing  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  been  subjected  to  a  custodial  interrogation  in 
violation  of  her  constitutional  rights.  The  district  opposed  that  motion  with  sworn 
declarations  stating  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  not  in  custody  and  she  was  not  questioned  by 
the  deputy.  The  motion  was  denied  pursuant  Department  of  Transportation  v.  State 
Personnel  Board  (2009)  178  Cal.App.4th  568,  in  which  the  court  explained  that  the 
exclusionary  rules  applied  in  criminal  cases  are  seldom  applied  in  administrative  proceedings 
and  a  balancing  test  was  required  before  such  evidence  would  be  excluded  from  an 
administrative  hearing,  taking  into  consideration  the  “social  consequences  of  applying  the 
exclusionary  rules.”  (/d.  at  pp.  576-578.)  The  evidence  presented  by  both  sides  during  this 
hearing  confirmed  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  not  in  police  custody,  was  not  questioned  by  the 
deputy,  and  was  not  subjected  to  a  custodial  interrogation. 

'S  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  testimony  that  she  asked  Mr.  Martinez  if  she  could  leave,  and  that 

he  responded  that  she  should  wait  until  Ms.  Murillo  returned  to  the  room,  was  not  sufficient 
under  the  circumstances  to  establish  she  was  “in  custody.” 

17

I.N.’s  older  sister.  But  Ms.  O’Day  said  it  was  not  I.N.’s  sister;  Ms.  O’  Day  was  certain  it  was 
IN. 

43.  |  When  Ms.  Honeyfield  returned  to  her  class  after  the  meeting  with  Ms.  Murillo 

and  Mr.  Martinez,  she  learned  that  I.N.  and  her  mother  had  been  trying  to  get  hold  of  her. 
Ms.  Honeyfield  then  called  I.N.’s  mother  and  asked  if  she  could  meet  with  her.  About  30 
minutes  later,  Ms.  Honeyfield  met  with  I.N.’s  mother  and  told  her  the  truth  about  what 
happened  on  October  26,  2017.  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  told  I.N.’s  mother  that  she  had  covered 
for  I.N.  when  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  questioned  on  October  27,  2017,  because  she  thought  I.N. 
would  get  into  trouble.  I.N.’s  mother  was  not  happy  that  I.N.  had  not  told  her  the  truth  and 
that  she  had  gotten  a  call  from  school  when  she  did  not  know  what  was  going  on.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  apologized  to  I.N.’s  mother  for  taking  her  child  off  campus  during  school  hours 
and  then  lying  about  it,  and  I.N.’s  mother  accepted  her  apology.  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  told 
I.N.’s  mother  that  she  did  not  “want  to  get  fired.”  I.N.’s  mother  wanted  to  tell  the  school  that 
Ms.  Honeyfield  took  I.N.  to  lunch  because  she  could  not  go  to  I.N.’s  birthday  party,  but  Ms. 
Honeyfield  told  her  she  did  not  want  to  concoct  any  more  lies.  '° 

44. 

I.N.’s  mother  went  to  the  school  late  in  the  day  on  October  27,  2017,  and 

asked  to  speak  to  Ms.  Murillo,  and  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  met  with  her.  Mr. 
Martinez  described  her  as  a  “bull  in  a  china  shop,”  “agitated,”  and  “aggressive”  due  to  her 
tone  of  voice.  Ms.  Murillo  described  her  as  “very  upset”  and  like  a  “whirlwind.”  I.N.’s 
mother  told  them,  “You  will  not  question  or  talk  to  my  daughter”  and  “You  are  not  going  to 
turn  her  into  one  of  those  things  we  read  about  in  the  paper.”  She  said  she  believed  her 
daughter  “100  percent.”  Ms.  Murillo  got  I.N.’s  mother  to  calm  down  and  assured  her  that 
she  did  not  intend  to  interrogate  I.N.,  but  she  wanted  to  support  I.N.,  and  I.N.’s  mother 
agreed  to  bring  I.N.  in  to  talk  to  Ms.  Murillo  on  Monday.  Ms.  Murillo  thought  I.N.’s 
mother’s  demeanor  raised  “red  flags”  because  it  seemed  out  of  proportion  to  what  they  were 
dealing  with  and  I.N.’s  mother  had  been  very  agreeable  when  they  spoke  earlier  in  the  day. 

45. 

After  I.N.’s  mother  left,  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  talked  about  how 

strange  it  was  that  I.N.’s  mother  was  so  defensive.  Based  on  I.N.’s  mother’s  behavior  and 
Ms.  O’Day’s  insistence  that  she  had  seen  I.N.  at  the  restaurant,  they  decided  Mr.  Martinez 
would  look  at  the  school’s  surveillance  camera  tapes. 

46. 

| When  Mr.  Martinez  viewed  the  tapes,  he  saw  I.N.  go  to  Ms.  Honeyfield’s 

classroom  at  9:35  a.m.  on  October  26,  2017.  He  also  saw  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  leave  and 
return  within  minutes  of  each  other.  Mr.  Martinez  called  Ms.  Murillo  and  told  her  about 
what  he  saw  on  the  tapes,  and  they  viewed  them  together.  Video  footage  was  played  during 
the  hearing  and  screen  shots  were  received  as  exhibits.  The  video  footage  and  screen  shots 
showed  I.N.  walking  to  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  classroom;  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  leaving  Ms. 
Honeyfield’s  classroom  within  minutes  of  each  other;  I.N.  leaving  campus;  I.N.  returning  to 

  

‘6  Ms.  Honeyfield  explained  during  the  hearing  that  she  was  not  planning  to  go  to 
I.N.’s  birthday  party  because  she  did  not  believe  it  was  appropriate  for  teachers  to  attend 
students’  birthday  parties. 

18

campus;  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  returning  to  her  classroom  close  to  the  time  when  I.N.  returned 
to  campus.  The  video  footage  and  still  shots  did  not  show  Ms.  Honeyfield  leave  or  return  to 
campus  or  drive  out  of  or  into  the  parking  lot. 
In  addition  to  the  screen  shots  received  as 
evidence,  Ms.  Murillo  testified  that  she  saw  footage  of  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  car  leaving  the 
parking  lot,  in  which  a  passenger  could  not  be  seen,  but  no  such  video  footage  was  offered  as 
evidence.  '’ 

47. 

After  viewing  the  tapes,  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  reported  to  Child 

Protective  Services  (CPS)  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  reportedly  left  campus  and  had  lunch 
with  a  student  and  they  believed  she  had  lied  about  it.  They  made  the  report  because  they 
had  a  reasonable  suspicion,  and  they  feared,  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  might  be  having  an 
inappropriate  relationship  with  I.N.  They  later  received  a  response  from  CPS  that  the  report 
did  not  meet  the  requirements  to  warrant  a  referral. 

October  30,  2017-School  Administration  Meets  with  ILN.  and  Her  Mother  and 
Ms.  Honeyfield  Admits  She  Took  I.N.  Off  Campus  and  Lied  About  It 

A8. 

_—_I.N.  and  her  mother  met  with  Ms.  Murillo  and  Mr.  Martinez  in  the  morning  on 

Monday,  October  30,  2017.  I.N.  told  them  she  had  left  campus,  but  she  gave  short  answers 
like,  “I  told  my  mom,”  “My  mom  knows,”  and  “I  don’t  have  to  tell  you”  in  response  to 
questions  about  where  she  was  on  October  26,  2017.  I.N.  was  then  excused  to  go  to  class, 
and  Mr.  Martinez  and  Ms.  Murillo  continued  to  talk  to  her  mother.  I.N.’s  mother  told  them 
that  I.N.  told  her  that  she  had  walked  off  campus  to  a  friend’s  house,  which  was  okay  with 
I.N.’s  mother.  I.N.’s  mother  gave  them  the  name  of  the  friend,  and  I.N.’s  mother  said:  “My 
daughter  was  with  her  friend”;  “She  told  me  where  she  was”;  and  “TI  believe  her.”  According 
to  Mr.  Martinez,  the  friend  I.N.’s  mother  identified  lived  on  the  opposite  side  of  campus 
from  the  location  where  he  saw  I.N.  leave  campus  on  the  video  footage.  Ms.  Murillo 
believed  the  “whole  meeting  seemed  off.” 

49. 

—  Because  Ms.  Murillo  thought  things  did  not  make  sense,  she  asked  her 

secretary  to  schedule  another  meeting  with  Ms.  Honeyfield.  When  Ms.  Murillo’s  secretary 
scheduled  the  meeting,  she  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  she  could  bring  a  union  representative  to  the 
meeting.  Ms.  Honeyfield  met  with  Ms.  Murillo  in  her  office  after  school  between  3:00  and 
3:30  p.m.  No  one  else  was  present.  Ms.  Honeyfield  testified  that  she  “did  not  know”  why 
she  did  not  bring  a  union  representative  to  the  meeting.  '® 

  

'7  Because  no  video  footage  or  screen  shots  were  presented  showing  Ms.  Honeyfield 

driving  in  or  out  of  the  parking  lot,  the  testimony  about  what  such  footage  showed  was 
viewed  with  distrust  pursuant  to  Evidence  Code  section  412,  which  states: 
less  satisfactory  evidence  is  offered  when  it  was  within  the  power  of  the  party  to  produce 
stronger  and  more  satisfactory  evidence,  the  evidence  offered  should  be  viewed  with 
distrust.” 

“If  weaker  and 

'8  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  spoken  to  a  former  union  official  over  the  weekend,  and  he  had 

told  her  that  she  needed  union  representation 

19

50. 

During  this  meeting,  Ms.  Murillo  walked  through  what  Ms.  Honeyfield  had 
told  her  before  while  Ms.  Honeyfield  just  sat  there.  Ms.  Murillo  also  told  Ms.  Honeyfield 
that  the  details  were  not  lining  up  and  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  for  clarification  of  the  timeline 
of  events.  According  to  Ms.  Murillo,  Ms.  Honeyfield  again  stated  that  Chelsea  had  come  to 
campus,  but  Ms.  Honeyfield  focused  on  the  sign-in  procedure  and  said  Chelsea  did  not  sign 
in  correctly.  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  stated  that  she  could  put  a  timeline  together  at  home, 
which  Ms.  Murillo  thought  raised  a  “red  flag”  because  Ms.  Murillo  just  needed  a  general 
understanding  of  what  happened. 

51. 

During  this  meeting,  Ms.  Honeyfield  stated  she  wanted  a  union  representative, 

but  there  were  some  differences  between  Ms.  Murillo’s  and  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  versions  of 
what  occurred  when  she  made  that  request.!?  Ms.  Murillo  stated  that  as  soon  as  Ms. 
Honeyfield  said  she  wanted  union  representation,  Ms.  Murillo  stopped  asking  questions  and 
provided  Ms.  Honeyfield  dates  for  a  future  meeting  when  a  union  representative  could  be 
present  and  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  she  would  be  placed  on  administrative  leave  pending  an 
investigation.  According  to  Ms.  Honeyfield,  she  had  to  ask  for  union  representation  several 
times;  Ms.  Murillo  responded  that  her  request  raised  a  “red  flag”  and  Ms.  Honeyfield 
“needed  to  cooperate’;  Ms.  Honeyfield  responded  that  she  would  cooperate  with  a  union 
representative  present;  and  Ms.  Murillo  then  told  her  she  was  placed  on  administrative  leave 
pending  an  investigation.  Either  way,  both  witnesses  agreed  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not 
answer  questions  after  she  asked  to  have  a  union  representative  present. 

52. 

After  Ms.  Murillo  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  she  would  be  on  paid  administrative 
leave  pending  an  investigation,  Ms.  Murillo  accompanied  Ms.  Honeyfield  to  her  classroom 
because  Ms.  Honeyfield  needed  to  prepare  her  class  for  a  substitute  and  pick  up  her  things. 
While  they  walked  to  the  classroom  and  while  Ms.  Honeyfield  gathered  her  personal 
belongings  in  the  classroom,  they  engaged  in  small  talk,  but  they  did  not  talk  about  the 
allegations  in  this  case.  As  Ms.  Honeyfield  finished  gathering  her  things,  she  said,  “I  am 
ready  to  tell  you  everything.”  That  statement  was  not  in  response  to  a  question,  and  Ms. 
Murillo  believed  that  it  meant  Ms.  Honeyfield  wanted  to  tell  her  the  truth.  According  to  Ms. 
Honeyfield,  she  needed  to  “get  the  weight  off  her  shoulders.” 

53. 

They  then  went  back  to  Ms.  Murillo’s  office,  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  Ms. 

Murillo  the  following:  I.N.  came  to  her  classroom  on  October  26,  2017;  I.N.  was  having  a 

  

'  Ms.  Honeyfield  filed  a  motion  in  limine  seeking  an  order  excluding  any  statements 
she  made  after  she  asserted  her  right  to  union  representation,  citing  N.R.L.B.  v.  Weingarten, 
Inc.  (1975)  420  U.S.  251.  In  opposition  to  the  motion,  the  district  submitted  a  sworn 
declaration  by  Ms.  Murillo,  which  was  consistent  with  her  hearing  testimony,  stating  that  she 
stopped  asking  Ms.  Honeyfield  questions  as  soon  as  she  asked  to  have  a  union  representative 
present.  Although  violating  an  employee’s  Weingarten  rights  to  union  representation  may  be 
an  unfair  labor  practice,  respondent’s  counsel  was  unable  to  point  to  any  authority  that,  even 
if  those  rights  were  violated,  would  require  that  information  obtained  after  the  assertion  of 
such  rights  should  be  excluded  from  evidence  in  this  proceeding.  Therefore,  the  motion  was 
denied. 

20

bad  day  and  did  not  want  to  go  to  class;  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  that  she  was  planning  to 
run  errands;  Ms.  Honeyfield  agreed  to  take  I.N.  off  campus  to  go  to  lunch;  I.N.  left  the 
classroom  first;  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  met  in  the  parking  lot;  while  they  were  in  the 
restaurant,  they  saw  the  counselors;  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  I.N.  to  talk  to  the  counselors,  but 
I.N.  did  not  do  so;  Ms.  Honeyfield  talked  to  the  counselors;  I.N.  panicked  and  walked  a 
different  route  out  of  the  restaurant;  I.N.  went  next  door  to  get  a  sandwich  and  Ms. 
Honeyfield  had  the  sandwich  for  dinner  that  evening’®;  and  I.N.  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield  to 
drop  her  off  at  the  side  gate.  Ms.  Murillo  then  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  no  passenger  was 
visible  in  her  vehicle  on  the  camera  footage  Ms.  Murillo  had  seen,  but  Ms.  Honeyfield  did 
not  then  have  an  explanation  why.  During  this  conversation,  Ms.  Murillo  said  Ms. 
Honeyfield  could  not  recall  specifics  about  why  I.N.  was  having  a  bad  day.  Regarding  the 
reason  I.N.  did  not  want  to  talk  to  the  counselors,  Ms.  Honeyfield  told  Ms.  Murillo  that  I.N. 
said  something  about  being  drug  tested  and  having  a  probation  monitor.”! 

54. 

Ms.  Murillo  again  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  she  was  placed  on  paid 

administrative  leave,  pending  a  further  investigation,  and  instructed  Ms.  Honeyfield  not  to 
have  any  contact  with  I.N.’s  family  or  talk  to  anyone  about  the  situation  other  than  Ms. 
Murillo  and  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips. 

The  Investigation  Report 

55. 

The  district  decided  to  hire  an  investigator  to  make  sure  nothing  else  was 

going  on.  They  knew  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  taken  a  student  off  campus,  then  lied  about  it,  and 
there  were  other  “red  flags,”  including  that  there  was  no  other  adult  in  the  car  when  Ms. 
Honeyfield  drove  I.N.  to  the  restaurant  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  and  I.N.  had  exchanged  text 
messages.” 

56. 

—  Alyssa  Jarvis,  a  Senior  Investigator  of  Education  Services  and  Student 

Relations  for  Nicole  Miller  &  Associates,  Inc.,  conducted  the  investigation  for  the  district. 
Ms.  Jarvis  testified,  and  her  written  Investigation  Report  was  received  as  evidence.  She  has 
worked  for  her  current  employer  for  the  past  three  and  one-half  years,  she  has  been  in  her 
current  position  for  one  and  one-half  years,  and  she  has  conducted  other  investigations  for 
the  district.  She  holds  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Marriage  and  Family  Therapy,  and  she  has  also 
received  “Title  9”  and  “Title  5”  training  and  some  informal  interview  training.  Ms.  Jarvis  1s 
not  familiar  with  the  Education  Code,  and  she  does  not  have  a  legal  background. 
  

*°  During  this  hearing,  Ms.  Honeyfield  admitted  that  no  one  bought  a  sandwich  from 

the  business  next  to  the  restaurant. 

71  No  evidence  was  presented  verifying  whether  I.N.  was  subject  to  any  sort  of  drug 

testing. 

2  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  also  believed  Ms.  Honeyfield  may  have  communicated  with 

students  on  social  media,  but  there  was  no  evidence  presented  during  this  hearing  to 
substantiate  that  belief. 

21

57. 

Ms.  Jarvis  performed  her  investigation  in  2017.  She  was  told  Ms.  Honeyfield 

had  admitted  some  of  the  conduct,  and  Ms.  Jarvis’s  assignment  was  to  confirm  what 
happened  and  make  sure  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  not  engaged  in  any  other  inappropriate 
conduct.  The  primary  allegations  were  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  took  I.N.  off  campus  to  a 
restaurant  during  school  hours,  and  when  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  later  asked  about  it,  she  was 
dishonest. 

58. 

Ms.  Jarvis  interviewed  Ms.  Murillo,  Ms.  Honeyfield,  Ms.  O’ Day,  students 

who  were  close  to  I.N.,  another  student  who  had  graduated,  and  that  student’s  mother.  I.N.’s 
mother  refused  to  be  interviewed  and  declined  to  consent  to  I.N.  being  interviewed.  Based 
on  her  interviews,  Ms.  Jarvis  confirmed  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  taken  I.N.  off  campus 
without  parental  consent  to  a  restaurant  in  downtown  Redlands  in  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  car,  and 
when  REV’s  administrators  questioned  Ms.  Honeyfield  about  it,  she  was  dishonest.  When 
Ms.  Jarvis  interviewed  Ms.  Honeyfield,  she  admitted  to  most  of  the  allegations,  but  she 
denied  that  she  lied  to  law  enforcement,  as  she  was  never  posed  a  direct  question  when  the 
deputy  was  present.  Ms.  Jarvis  did  not  find  any  evidence  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  any 
similar  relationships  with  other  students  or  that  she  engaged  in  any  sexual  misconduct. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  Explanatory  Testimony 

59. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  explained  during  her  testimony  at  this  hearing  that  when  she 
took  I.N.  to  lunch,  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  trying  to  make  I.N.  “feel  better,”  and  she  lied  about 
taking  I.N.  to  the  restaurant  because  she  did  not  want  to  get  I.N.  in  trouble.  Ms.  Honeyfield 
expressed  her  belief  that  it  is  “extremely  important”  that  children  remain  with  their  parents. 
She  believed  I.N.  and  her  mother  were  in  a  good  place,  although  their  relationship  had  been 
unstable  before.  I.N.  seemed  more  responsible  and  healthier  than  when  she  was  in  foster 
care,  and  I.N.  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  she  did  not  want  to  be  kicked  out  of  her  home.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  concluded  that  I.N.  might  be  sent  to  live  with  her  father  or  to  foster  care,  and  Ms. 
Honeyfield  did  not  want  either  of  those  things  to  happen.  Ms.  Honeyfield  acknowledged  that 
part  of  her  was  afraid  she  would  get  into  trouble  because  she  lied  to  the  school’s 
administration.  She  was  not  initially  afraid  she  might  get  into  trouble,  but  after  she  lied,  she 
was  afraid  she  might  be  terminated. 

60. 

Thursday,  October  26,  2017,  was  the  only  time  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  ever  taken 

a  student  off  campus  during  a  school  day.  She  knew  it  was  inappropriate  to  take  I.N.  off 
campus  when  she  did  it.  She  did  not  intend  to  engage  in  any  physical  contact  with  I.N.,  she 
has  never  had  a  physical  relationship  with  any  student,  and  she  denied  being  a  lesbian.”?  Ms. 
Honeyfield  had  never  lied  to  the  school’s  administrators  before,  and  it  bothered  her  that  she 
lied.  She  stated  that  she  decided  to  tell  the  truth  over  the  weekend. 

  

*3  Although  Ms.  Murillo  testified  that  Ms.  O’Day  said  her  sister  heard  that  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  “openly”  a  “lesbian”  when  she  worked  at  Beattie  Middle  School,  Ms. 
Honeyfield’s  sexual  orientation  was  not  relevant,  and  such  unsubstantiated  rumors  were  not 
considered  in  rendering  this  decision. 

22

Expert  Witness  Brian  Paul  Jacks,  M.D.’s  Testimony  Regarding  “Grooming  Behavior” 

61. 

Brian  Paul  Jacks,  M.D.,  is  a  clinical  doctor  of  psychiatry  at  the  University  of 

Southern  California,  and  he  serves  as  an  expert  witness  in  childhood  sex  abuse  cases.  He 
received  his  medical  degree  from  the  University  of  Toronto  in  1967.  He  moved  to  California 
in  1969,  where  he  did  his  residency  in  adult  and  child  psychiatry  and  neurology.  He  is  board 
certified  in  both  adult  and  child  psychiatry  and  neurology.  Dr.  Jacks  has  served  as  a 
consultant  for  the  California  Medical  Board.  Dr.  Jacks  has  testified  approximately  100  times 
in  court  cases,  including  about  20  times  in  federal  court.  He  has  testified  about  50  percent  of 
the  time  for  the  defense,  and  50  percent  of  the  time  for  the  plaintiff.  However,  in  cases 
regarding  child  abuse  in  schools,  his  testimony  has  mainly  been  against  school  districts. 

62. 

Dr.  Jacks  explained  that  “grooming”  is  behavior  used  by  sexual  predators  to 

gain  trust  as  a  prelude  to  sexual  abuse.  Sexual  predators  usually  pick  vulnerable  victims, 
such  as  someone  with  only  one  parent  and  limited  financial  resources.  A  sexual  predator  will 
typically  single  out  a  minor  of  special  interest,  usually  in  a  certain  age  group  to  which  the 
predator  is  attracted.  The  predator  will  carefully  ingratiate  him  or  herself  with  the  intended 
victim’s  family  by  gaining  the  parent’s  trust,  buying  gifts,  and  granting  special  favors.  Dr. 
Jacks  mentioned  that  allowing  a  student  to  be  a  TA  could  be  an  example  of  granting  a  special 
favor.  However,  Dr.  Jacks  also  stated  that  such  conduct  may  not  always  be  inappropriate. 
He  noted  that  there  are  rules  at  schools  to  protect  students  and  to  protect  schools  from 
liability.  Grooming  is  almost  always  a  prelude  to  sexual  abuse,  unless  it  is  rape.  Grooming 
does  not  require  “intent,”  as  people  may  not  be  honest  about  their  intentions  and  predators 
deny  and  rationalize  their  behavior. 

63. 

Grooming  is  a  form  of  a  boundary  violation.  Dr.  Jacks  explained  that 

boundary  violations  relate  to  persons  with  unequal  power,  such  as  an  authority  figure  and 
someone  under  that  person’s  authority.  If  the  person  in  power  crosses  boundaries,  it  creates 
problems  “because  it  creates  expectations.”  He  gave  an  example  of  a  therapist  giving  out  his 
or  her  personal  telephone  number  to  a  patient,  which  would  lead  the  patient  to  expect  the 
therapist  to  be  there  to  help  if  the  patient  called  the  number.  Intent  is  not  part  of  what  is 
required  to  find  a  boundary  violation,  and  a  boundary  line  violation  is  not  a  crime.  Dr.  Jacks 
noted  that  the  person  with  authority  has  the  ability  to  change  the  relationship.  Therefore, 
even  if  a  child  tries  to  make  a  relationship  more  personal,  the  teacher  is  still  in  a  position  of 
authority  and  should  avoid  crossing  boundaries. 

64. 

—  Dr.  Jacks  had  never  met  Ms.  Honeyfield  or  LN.  He  reviewed  the  Statement  of 

Charges,  which  he  understood  had  not  been  proven;  the  Investigation  Report  and  Witness 
Key  to  the  Investigation  Report;  and  the  transcript  of  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  deposition.”*  Dr. 
Jacks  summarized  his  understanding  of  the  facts  as  follows:  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  been  a 
teacher  for  13  years  and  she  was  not  a  counselor;  Ms.  Honeyfield  took  the  student  off 
campus  without  parental  permission  and  without  school  authorization;  taking  the  student  off 
  

*4  The  Statement  of  Charges  and  the  Investigation  Report  were  received  as  evidence; 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  deposition  transcript  was  not. 

23

campus  interfered  with  the  student’s  class  time;  the  behavior  was  very  suspicious;  there  were 
efforts  to  conceal  it;  and  Ms.  Honeyfield  lied  about  it. 
“extremely  vulnerable”  because  she  had  been  in  foster  care,  had  familial  problems  with  her 
mother,  had  a  probation  monitor,  and  was  required  to  submit  to  random  drug  testing.”  He 
stated  that  it  is  “wrong”  for  a  teacher,  such  as  Ms.  Honeyfield,  to  assume  a  counseling  role 
with  a  troubled  student. 

Dr.  Jacks  believed  I.N.  was 

65. 

Based  on  the  information  he  was  provided,  Dr.  Jacks  reached  the  following 

conclusions  in  this  case:  There  was  no  evidence  of  sexual  abuse  in  this  case.  There  are  two 
ways  to  look  at  what  happened.  Ms.  Honeyfield  might  just  have  been  trying  to  help,  or  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  a  “renegade  teacher”  who  was  “not  following  the  rules.”  Dr.  Jacks  saw  no 
reason  to  take  the  student  off  campus  and  he  opined  that  this,  therefore,  appeared  to  be  a 
situation  involving  a  “renegade  teacher”  who  was  not  following  the  rules.  Ms.  Honeyfield’s 
behavior  “could  be  grooming,”  and  her  behavior  “would  come  under  the  category”  of 
“srooming.”  Dr.  Jacks  made  it  clear  during  his  testimony  that  he  cannot  generalize  that 
grooming  behavior  “predicts”  sexual  abuse  will  occur. 

Pertinent  District  Board  Policies 

66. 

The  district’s  Board  Policies  (BP)  regarding  transporting  students  are  provided 
in  BP  3541.1,  which  was  cited  in  and  attached  to  the  Statement  of  Charges.  BP  3541.1  states 
the  following  regarding  use  of  private  and  school  employee’s  vehicles  to  transport  students: 

Transportation  by  Private  Vehicle 

The  Superintendent  or  designee  may  authorize  the  transportation 
of  students  by  private  automobile  for  appropriate  field  trips  and 
activities  when  the  vehicle  is  driven  by  an  adult  who  has 
registered  with  the  district  for  such  purposes  by  filing  a 
completed  School  Driver  Certification  Form.  When  filing  the 
School  Certification  Form,  all  drivers  shall  be  issued  the  Driver 
Instruction  Form  and  asked  to  keep  it  in  their  car.  All  student 
passengers  shall  provide  permission  slips  signed  by  their 
parents. 

(fl...  (9) 

  

*°  There  was  no  evidence  in  this  record  establishing  I.N.  had  actually  ever  been  in 

foster  care,  had  a  probation  monitor,  or  was  required  to  submit  to  drug  testing.  Although  I.N. 
and  her  mother  briefly  testified,  such  topics  were  not  addressed  during  their  testimony.  IN. 
and  her  mother  were  not  interviewed  by  the  investigator,  and  Ms.  O’ Day  was  reluctant  to 
disclose  information  about  I.N.  to  the  investigator.  According  to  the  Investigation  Report, 
Ms.  O’Day  told  the  investigator  she  was  not  aware  of  I.N.  being  in  foster  care. 

24

67. 

BP  4119.21  sets  forth  the  district’s  professional  standards.*°  Ms.  Robertson- 

Phillips  testified  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  the  types  of  inappropriate  conduct  listed 
under  BP  4119.21,  items  1,  4,  and  9.  BP  4119.21  states  (references  to  other  board  policies 
are  omitted): 

Transportation  of  Students  in  School  Employee’s  Vehicle 

The  school  principal  or  designee  is  authorized  to  transport 
students  when  involved  in  school  activities,  school  business  or 
for  emergency  purposes. 

When  such  transportation  is  arranged,  and  the  employee  uses 
his/her  private  vehicle,  the  employee’s  automobile  liability 
insurance  shall  provide  the  primary  insurance  coverage.  The 
school  district’s  liability  insurance  shall  provide  secondary 
insurance  coverage. 

If  an  employee  uses  his/her  private  vehicle,  the  employee  must 
follow  the  most  direct  route  to  the  destination,  and  avoid 
unnecessary  stops. 

The  Governing  Board  expects  district  employees  to  maintain  the 
highest  ethical  standards,  exhibit  professional  behavior,  follow 
District  Policies  and  Regulations,  abide  by  state  and  national 
law,  and  exercise  good  judgment  when  interacting  with  students 
and  other  members  of  the  school  community.  Employee 
conduct  should  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  district,  advance  the 
goals  of  the  educational  programs  and  contribute  to  a  positive 
school  climate. 

The  Board  encourages  District  employees  to  accept  as  guiding 
principles  the  professional  standards  and  codes  of  ethics  adopted 
by  educational  or  by  professional  associations  to  which  they 
belong. 

Each  employee  should  make  a  commitment  to  acquire  the 
knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to  fulfill  his/her  responsibilities 
and  should  focus  on  his/her  contribution  to  the  learning  and 
achievement  of  district  students. 

Inappropriate  employee  conduct  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to: 

  

©  BP  4119.21  was  not  cited  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

25

1.  Engaging  in  any  conduct  that  endangers  students,  staff,  or 
others,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  physical  violence,  or 
possession  of  a  firearm  or  other  weapon. 

4.  Engaging  in  inappropriate  socialization  or  fraternization  with 
a  student  or  soliciting,  encouraging,  or  maintaining  an 
inappropriate  written,  verbal,  or  physical  relationship  with  a 
student. 

(fl...  (9) 

(fl...  (9) 

9.  Dishonesty  with  students,  parents/guardians,  staff,  or 
members  of  the  public,  including  but  not  limited  to  falsification 
of  information  in  employment  records  or  other  school  records. 

The  District’s  “Tips  for  Working  Smart” 

68. 

Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  explained  that  the  district  has  zero  tolerance  for 

misconduct  against  children,  and  since  2013,  all  district  employees  have  been  given  a  copy 
of  a  document  titled  “Tips  for  Working  Smart”  at  the  beginning  of  each  school  year.  Ms. 
Robertson-Phillips  created  the  Tips  document,  which  addresses  interactions  with  students 
through  social  media  and  electronic  communications,  based  on  information  she  obtained 
from  a  colleague  from  another  district.  The  Tips  document  is  meant  to  advise  district 
employees  regarding  how  to  avoid  “red  flags”  that  could  be  interpreted  as  something  that 
may  lead  to  disciplinary  action.  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  explained  that  she  put  the  document 
together  because  of  everything  going  on  in  Southern  California,  including  a  2013  incident  in 
the  district  which  involved  a  teacher  giving  birth  to  a  student’s  child. 

The  Tips  for  Working  Smart  is  not  a  board  policy.  Instead  it  provides  guidelines  as 

follows  (italicized  and  boldened  emphasis  in  original): 

Teachers,  staff,  and  coaches  should  interact  and  communicate 
with  students  for  educational  purposes  in  a  professional  manner 
at  all  times.  Further,  courteous  and  professional  relationships 
with  students  are  expected  at  all  times.  All  employees  are 
expected  to  establish  and  maintain  appropriate  boundaries  in 
their  interactions  with  students  inside  and  outside  of  the 
classroom.  Below  please  find  tips  for  working  with  students  as 
related  to  physical  and  emotional  boundaries,  social  media  and 
electronic  communications.  More  than  ever,  employees  are 
being  scrutinized  in  their  daily  interactions  with  students; 
therefore,  it  is  imperative  that  employees  are  cognizant  of  their 
actions  in  the  performance  of  their  professional  duties. 

26

Behaviors  that  Raise  Red  Flags  Regarding  Professional 
Boundaries 

When  employees  are  alone  with  a  student  behind 
closed/locked  doors. 

When  employees  ask  students  to  run  their  personal 
errands. 

When  employees  transport  students  without  proper 
authorization. 

Even  when  approved  to  transport,  when  employees  do 
not  have  another  adult  in  their  vehicle  when  transporting 
students. 

When  employees  share  their  personal 
problems/stories/information  with  or  in  the  presence  of 
students. 

When  employees  invite  students  to  their  home,  unless  it 
is  a  school  sponsored  extracurricular  activity  that  1s 
appropriately  supervised. 

When  employees  meet  students  in  off-site  locations 
without  a  parent/guardian  being  present. 

When  employees  exhibit  behaviors  which  may  be 
viewed  as  favoring  one  student  over  others. 

When  employees  use  innuendos  that  may  be  suggestively 
interpreted  when  talking  with  students. 

When  employees  tell  inappropriate  jokes  or  make 
inappropriate  comments  about  others  to  students. 

[fl  .-. 

( 

Texting  with  Students 

Cell  phone  numbers  should  only  be  provided  if 
absolutely  necessary  to  accomplish  a  District  related  or 
school  related  purpose. 

27

Consider  whether  sending  a  text  message  is  absolutely 
necessary. 

Keep  texting  communication  related  to  educational 
purposes,  class  matters  or  school  activities. 

Be  respectful  of  timing  of  electronic  communications. 
Texting  after  8:00  p.m.  or  before  6:00  a.m.  should  be 
information  based,  absolutely  necessary,  and  should 
include  another  adult  as  a  recipient. 

Whenever  possible,  avoid  texting  students  one  on  one. 

Consider  using  group  text  messages  or  including  another 
adult  (parent,  club  advisor,  assistant  coach,  etc.)  as  a 
recipient. 

Be  aware  of  innuendo,  casual  or  informal  language 
(nickname,  inside  jokes,  etc.). 

Consider  how  something  (context)  sent  could  be 
perceived  as  inappropriate. 

[fl  .-. 

( 

Absolute  Prohibitions 

The  following  are  examples  of  interactions  between  employees 
and  students  that  are  absolutely  prohibited: 

Inappropriate  physical  contact  with  students. 

Inappropriate  emotional  relationships  with  students. 

Planning  or  discussing  a  future  romantic  relationship 
with  a  student. 

Engaging  in  any  conduct  that  violates  Board  Policies, 
Regulations,  Education  Code,  or  constitutes  criminal 
behavior. 

// 

28

Ms.  Robertson-Phillip’s  Testimony  Regarding  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  Conduct 

69. 

As  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  for  the  district,  Ms. 

Robertson-Phillips’s  duties  include  negotiating  with  the  union,  recruitment,  hiring,  contract 
management,  and  employee  discipline.  She  is  also  a  member  of  the  district’s  executive 
committee.  She  has  been  in  her  current  position  for  approximate  12  years,  and  she  has 
worked  for  the  district  for  23  years.  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  has  known  Ms.  Honeyfield  since 
she  was  hired  by  the  district  about  14  years  ago.  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  testified  that  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  generally  a  good  teacher. 

70. 

Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  was  very  upset  about  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  conduct.  With 
all  the  training  that  was  given,  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  could  not  believe  that  a  teacher  would 
violate  the  rules  and  then  lie  about  it.  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  was  “highly  disappointed.” 

71. 

|  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  hoped  it  was  not  common  for  teachers  and  TAs  to 

communicate  by  text  because  they  see  each  other  every  day  in  class  such  that  texting  should 
not  be  necessary.  She  did  not  know  if  1t  was  common  for  coaches  to  text  students,  although 
she  noted  there  were  text  message  apps  that  teachers  may  use  to  communicate  things  to 
students,  such  that  it  should  not  be  necessary  to  communicate  using  their  personal  cell  phone 
numbers.  If  there  was  a  need  to  text,  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  stated  that  it  should  not  be  a 
“one-on-one”  text. 

72. 

Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  acknowledged  that  not  all  socialization  between 

teachers  and  students  is  inappropriate.  Appropriate  social  interactions  with  a  student  would 
include  discussing  school  and  future  plans,  but  not  getting  into  “personal”  topics  that  do  not 
have  anything  to  do  with  school.  “Getting  so  close  to  a  student”  that  a  teacher  takes  that 
student  off  campus  is  “completely  inappropriate,”  a  health  teacher  taking  a  student  off 
campus  constitutes  inappropriate  fraternization,  and  “inappropriate  emotional  relationships” 
with  students  are  “absolutely  prohibited.”  Counselors  can  discuss  personal  lives  with 
students,  and  teachers  should  refer  students  seeking  to  engage  in  personal  discussions  to  the 
administration,  their  parents,  and/or  counselors. 

73. 

Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  believed  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  relationship  with  I.N. 

amounted  to  a  boundary  violation.  She  pointed  out  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  texted  I.N.  one- 
on-one  regarding  topics  that  were  not  related  to  education. 

74. 

—  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  explained  that  when  dealing  with  “grooming”  as 
opposed  to  “signs  of  grooming,”  the  district  cannot  wait  to  learn  a  teacher’s  motivation 
before  taking  action.  She  was  not  aware  of  any  other  cases  where  the  district  was  aware  of 
signs  of  grooming  and  did  not  act.  According  to  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips,  in  the  case  of  the 
teacher  giving  birth  to  her  student’s  child,  there  were  no  signs  from  which  the  district  was 
aware  of  an  inappropriate  relationship  between  the  student  and  the  teacher,  and  in  another 

29

case,  there  were  signs  and  the  district  took  appropriate  action.  Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  denied 
there  was  a  cover-up  in  those  cases,  as  had  been  asserted  in  news  articles.7’ 

75. 

Ms.  Robertson-Phillips  also  stressed  that  anytime  a  student  is  taken  off 

campus,  if  an  accident  or  anything  happens,  it  endangers  the  student. 

Character  Testimony  by  Matthew  Madea 

76. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  called  Matthew  Madea,  the  father  of  one  of  her  former  student 
athletes,  to  testify.  Mr.  Madea  has  worked  for  the  San  Bernardino  Unified  School  District  as 
the  Athletic  Director  at  San  Gorgonio  High  School  for  the  past  16  years.  In  his  current 
position,  he  supervises  coaches  and  he  does  not  teach  any  classes.  He  previously  taught  for 
12  years  at  the  same  school.  Mr.  Madea  is  also  a  representative  of  the  Ken  Hubbs 
Foundation. 

77. 

Mr.  Madea’s  son  recently  graduated  from  Pepperdine  University,  and  he  now 

helps  Mr.  Madea  coach  his  team  at  San  Gorgonio  High  School.  When  his  son  was  in  sixth 
and  seventh  grade,  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  one  of  his  teachers  at  Beattie  Middle  School,  and  she 
recruited  Mr.  Madea’s  son  to  run  when  he  was  in  sixth  grade.  “It  shaped”  his  “son’s  life,” 
and  it  has  “defined”  his  son.  When  his  son  attended  Citrus  Valley  High  School,  Mr.  Madea 
and  his  family  spent  a  lot  of  time  with  the  track  team;  they  would  cook  for  the  entire  team 
and  Mr.  Madea  would  drive  the  team  and  support  the  kids  on  the  team.  As  a  result,  his 
family’s  relationship  with  Ms.  Honeyfield,  who  was  then  a  coach  at  Citrus  Valley  High 
School,  evolved.  His  youngest  daughter  also  ran  and  competed  in  track  and  field,  with  Ms. 
Honeyfield  as  her  coach,  and  his  oldest  daughter  volunteer  coached  for  one  to  two  years 
while  his  kids  were  coached  by  Ms.  Honeyfield.  While  his  son  was  in  college,  Ms. 
Honeyfield  continued  to  attend  races  to  support  his  son. 

78. 

According  to  Mr.  Madea,  coaches’  relationships  with  students  vary,  can 

become  personal,  can  be  positive  or  negative,  and  there  should  be  boundaries.  When  there  is 
a  special  personal  relationship  between  a  coach  and  student,  greater  care  should  be  taken  to 
ensure  boundaries  are  not  crossed.  Adults  do  not  want  to  give  the  wrong  idea  to  students.  In 
Mr.  Madea’s  experience,  it  is  common  for  coaches  to  have  personal  cell  phone  numbers  of 
student  athletes,  and  it  would  not  concern  him  if  one  of  his  coaches  had  a  student  athlete’s 
cell  phone  number.  Whether  texting  students  is  appropriate  depends  on  the  circumstances.  It 
is  okay  if  it  is  on  the  job  and  it  does  not  get  personal.  He  was  not  aware  of  defined 
guidelines  about  texting  students.  Purely  personal  texts  are  “not  a  good  idea”  because  of  the 
perception.  Ifa  teacher  is  not  a  coach,  Mr.  Madea  did  not  see  any  need  to  have  students’  cell 
phone  numbers  or  to  be  texting  students,  although  it  might  be  appropriate  if  the  texts  are 
associated  with  extracurricular  activities,  such  drama  club. 

  

7  No  news  articles  were  submitted  as  evidence  or  considered  in  reaching  this 

decision. 

30

79. 

Mr.  Madea  noted  that,  as  a  parent,  he  does  not  immediately  trust  his  kids  with 

a  coach.  Based  on  his  and  his  children’s  interactions  with  Ms.  Honeyfield,  Mr.  Madea 
believes  Ms.  Honeyfield  is  honest.  He  never  saw  her  do  anything  that  concerned  him,  and  he 
had  no  fear  that  she  would  ever  harm  his  children.  Mr.  Madea  never  believed  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  not  acting  in  the  best  interests  of  his  children.  Ms.  Honeyfield  is  now  a 
friend  of  his  family  and  they  have  become  “lifelong  friends.” 

80. 

|  Mr.  Madea  has  not  observed  Ms.  Honeyfield  working  as  a  teacher,  and  he  did 
not  know  much  about  the  allegations  against  her.  He  had  been  told  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was 
on  leave  because  of  an  incident  involving a  girl  going  to  lunch  during  the  school  day.  It 
surprised  him  because  of  his  past  experience  with  Ms.  Honeyfield.  Mr.  Madea  stated  that  it 
was  “not  advised”  for  a  coach  to  spend  time  one-on-one  with  a  student,  but  it  does  happen. 
He  advises  his  staff  not  to  do  it  because  of  what  could  happen.  He  had  no  recollection  of  Ms. 
Honeyfield  taking  other  students  to  lunch,  and  that  sort  of  conduct  seemed  out  of  character 
If  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  taken  his  son  to  lunch,  he  would  not  have  been  concerned, 
for  her. 
even  if  it  had  been  without  his  knowledge.  But,  he  would  not  want  his  children  to  be  taken 
out  of  class,  and  if  she  lied  about  it,  that  “would  raise  concerns.” 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

1. 

The  district  bears  the  burden  in  this  case  of  proving  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss 

respondent  and/or  to  suspend  her  without  pay  pending  dismissal.  (Evid.  Code,  §  500.) 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 
1035,  1039-1040.) 

3. 

‘“*Preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  evidence  that  has  more  convincing 

force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citations.]”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Company  (1990)  226 
Cal.App.3d  314,  324-325.)  “The  sole  focus  of  the  legal  definition  of  ‘preponderance’  in  the 
phrase  ‘preponderance  of  the  evidence’  is  on  the  quality  of  the  evidence.  The  quantity  of  the 
evidence  presented  by  each  side  is  irrelevant.”  (/bid.,  italicized  emphasis  in  original.)  “If  the 
evidence  is  so  evenly  balanced  that  you  are  unable  to  say  that  the  evidence  on  either  side  of 
an  issue  preponderates,  your  finding  on  that  issue  must  be  against  the  party  who  had  the 
burden  of  proving  it  [citation].”  (People  v.  Mabini  (2001)  92  Cal.App.4th  654,  663.) 

Statutory  Authority 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  (4),  (6),  and  (8),  provides: 

(a)  A  permanent  employee  shall  not  be  dismissed  except  for  one 
or  more  of  the  following  causes: 

31

(1)  Immoral  conduct,  . 

. 

.78 

(i.  . 

-  (9 

(4)  Dishonesty 

(i.  . 

-  (9 

(8)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of 
the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44934  sets  forth  the  steps  a  governing  board  of  a 

school  district  must  follow  for  dismissal  or  suspension  of  a  permanent  employee  based  on 
charges  specified  under  Education  Code  section  44932. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44939,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  concern  when  a 

permanent  school  district  employee  may  be  suspended  without  pay  and  provide: 

(b)  Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified 
by  the  person  filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school 
district,  or  upon  a  written  statement  of  charges  formulated  by 
the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  charging  a  permanent 
.  [or] 
employee  of  the  school  district  with  immoral  conduct,  . 
with  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  .. 
board  of  the  school  district  may,  if  it  deems  that  action 
necessary,  immediately  suspend  the  employee  from  his  or  her 
duties  and  give  notice  to  him  or  her  of  his  or  her  suspension,  and 
that  30  days  after  service  of  the  notice  of  dismissal,  he  or  she 
will  be  dismissed,  unless  he  or  she  demands  a  hearing. 

.  the  governing 

. 

(c)(1)  An  employee  who  has  been  placed  on  suspension 
pursuant  to  this  section  may  serve  and  file  with  the  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  a  motion  for  immediate  reversal  of 
suspension.  Review  of  a  motion  filed  pursuant  to  this  section 

  

is  not  at  issue  in  this  matter. 

*8  The  deleted  portions  of  subdivision  (a)(1)  concern  “egregious  misconduct,”  which 

32

shall  be  limited  to  a  determination  as  to  whether  the  facts  as 
alleged  in  the  statement  of  charges,  if  true,  are  sufficient  to 
constitute  a  basis  for  immediate  suspension  under  this  section. 
The  motion  shall  include  a  memorandum  of  points  and 
authorities  setting  forth  law  and  argument  supporting  the 
employee’s  contention  that  the  statement  of  charges  does  not  set 
forth  a  sufficient  basis  for  immediate  suspension. 

(fl...  (9) 

(4)...  The  grant  or  denial  of  the  motion  shall  be  without 
prejudice  to  consideration  by  the  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  based  upon  the  full  evidentiary  record  before  it,  of 
the  validity  of  the  grounds  for  dismissal.  The  ruling  shall  not  be 
considered  by  the  commission  in  determining  the  validity  of  the 
grounds  for  dismissal,  and  shall  not  have  any  bearing  on  the 
commission’s  determination  regarding  the  grounds  for 
dismissal. 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process 

for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and  the 
Commission’s  authority  regarding  its  final  decision. 

8. 

Education  Code  section  44946  provides: 

If  the  employee  has  been  suspended  pending  the  hearing,  he 
shall  be  reinstated  within  five  days  after  the  governing  board’s 
decision  in  his  favor,  and  shall  be  paid  full  salary  by  the 
governing  board  for  the  period  of  his  suspension. 

California  Supreme  Court  and  Appellate  Court  Authority 

TEACHERS’  DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES  TO  STUDENTS  AND  TO  THE  PUBLIC 

9. 

“TR  ]esponsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in 

regard  to  other  callings”  are  imposed  upon  certain  professions,  “such  as  judges,  policemen 
and  schoolteachers.  ...”  (Board  of  Trustees  v.  Stubblefield  (Stubblefield)  (1971)  16 
Cal.App.3d  820,  824.)  Therefore,  when  analyzing  whether  a  teacher,  such  as  Ms. 
Honeyfield,  should  be  dismissed  and/or  suspended  without  pay  pending  dismissal,  reviewing 
courts  have  consistently  taken  into  account  the  inherent  and  important  obligations  teachers 
owe  to  students  and  to  the  public. 

10. 

The  court  of  appeal  in  Board  of  Education  v.  Weiland  (Weiland)  (1960)  179 

Cal.App.2d  808,  812,  citing  Goldsmith  v.  Board  of  Education  (1924)  66  Cal.  App.  157,  168, 
explained: 

33

[T]he  calling  of  [a  teacher]  is  so  intimate,  its  duties  so  delicate, 
the  things  in  which  a  teacher  might  prove  unworthy  or  would 
fail  are  so  numerous  that  they  are  incapable  of  enumeration  in 
any  legislative  enactment.  ...  His  habits,  his  speech,  his  good 
name,  his  cleanliness,  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  his  unofficial 
utterances,  his  associations,  all  are  involved.  His  ability  to 
inspire  children  and  to  govern  them,  his  power  as  a  teacher,  and 
the  character  for  which  he  stands  are  matters  of  major  concern 
in  a  teacher’s  selection  and  retention.  ...  A  teacher  in  the 
public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public  and  pupils  in  the 
light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions  are  likely  to  be 
followed  by  the  students  coming  under  his  care  and  protection. 

11. 

|The  importance  of  a  teacher’s  ability  to  counsel  and  direct  students  was 

discussed  in  Watson  v.  State  Bd.  of  Education  (1971)  22  Cal.App.3d  559.  In  that  case,  the 
appellate  court  upheld  the  Board  of  Education’s  decision  to  deny  Watson’s  application  for  a 
general  secondary  life  diploma  (teaching  credential)  because  Watson  had  sustained  six 
criminal  convictions  involving  alcohol  abuse  over  a  10-year  period.  In  upholding  the  Board 
of  Education’s  decision,  the  court  noted  that  in  light  of  that  teacher’s  conduct:  “Tt  is 
unreasonable  to  conclude,  therefore,  that  petitioner  can  have  the  proper  concerned  attitude 
necessary  for  successfully  counseling  and  directing  young  students  away  from  the  harmful 
effects  of  alcohol.”  (/d.  at  p.  564.)  The  court  stressed  that  Ud.  at  p.  565): 

. 

.  is  the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for 

‘As  between  a  teacher  and  his  student,  ‘[a]n  important  part  of 
the  education  . 
authority  and  obedience  to  necessary  discipline.  Lessons  are 
learned  from  example  as  well  as  from  precept.’ 
[Citations.]  ‘A 
teacher...  in  the  public  school  system  is  regarded  by  the  public 
and  pupils  in  the  light  of  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions 
are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  [students]  coming  under  [his] 
care  and  protection.””  [Citation.]  It  would  seem  that  even 
minimum  responsible  conduct  on  the  part  of  a  teacher 
necessarily  excludes  a  consistent  course  of  law  violations  and 
convictions  which  can  do  no  less  than  give  the  students  a  bad 
example  or  proper  respect  for  law  and  authority.  The  teaching 
by  example  as  well  as  precept,  of  obedience  to  properly 
constituted  authority  and  discipline  necessary  to  a  well  ordered 
[sic]  society  1s  an  important  part  of  education. 

12. 

Similarly,  Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  of  Riverside  County  v.  Hensey 

(Hensey)  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  970-71,  citing  Johnson  v.  Taft  School  District  (1937)  19 
Cal.App.2d  405,  408,  stated: 

A  board  of  education  is  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the 
schools  under  its  jurisdiction,  their  standards  of  education,  and 

34

the  moral,  mental  and  physical  welfare  of  the  pupils  during 
school  hours.  An  important  part  of  the  education  of  any  child  is 
the  instilling  of  a  proper  respect  for  authority  and  obedience  to 
necessary  discipline.  Lessons  are  learned  from  example  as  well 
as  from  precept.  The  example  of  a  teacher  who  is  continually 
insubordinate  and  who  refuses  to  recognize  constituted  authority 
may  seriously  affect  the  discipline  in  a  school,  impair  its 
efficiency,  and  teach  children  lessons  they  should  not  learn. 
Such  conduct  may  unfit  a  teacher  for  service  in  a  school  even 
though  her  other  qualifications  may  be  sufficient.  “Book 
learning”  is  only  a  phase  of  the  important  lessons  a  child  should 
learn  in  a  school. 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

13. 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined,  as  set  forth  in  San  Diego  Unified  School 

District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466, 
citing  Weiland,  supra,  179  Cal.App.2d  at  811,  as  conduct: 

[  W  |hich  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and 
contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to 
sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude, 
or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness; 
or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the 
community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order 
and  the  public  welfare. 

14. 

Weiland,  supra,  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  was  among  the  first  appellate  decisions 
analyzing  “immoral  conduct”  in  the  context  of  a  teacher  dismissal  case  under  the  Education 
Code.  The  Weiland  court  found  that  a  teacher  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  when  she 
falsified  attendance  records  after  she  learned  that  if  attendance  fell  below  a  certain  level,  her 
class  would  be  dropped,  and  she  would  lose  her  job.  The  appellate  court  noted  that  no  other 
California  cases  had  previously  defined  the  term  “immoral  conduct”  in  the  context  of  the 
Education  Code  section  authorizing  dismissal  of  a  school  employee  for  “immoral  conduct.” 
(Id.  at  p.  811.)  The  Weiland  court  explained  that  the  charge  of  immoral  conduct  was  “amply 
supported”  because  the  teacher  admitted  she  felt  no  remorse  other  than  to  the  extent  that  she 
got  into  trouble  and  “[h]er  acts  were  deliberately  designed  to  defraud  the  state  and  the  district 
and  were  essentially  criminal  in  nature.”  (/d.  at  p.  812.) 

15. 

|  Other  appellate  cases  have  found  immoral  conduct  based  on  sexual 

indiscretions  and  use  of  vulgar  language,  illegal  drug  use  and  alcohol  abuse,  and  theft.  For 
example: 

35

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

In  San  Diego  Unified  School  District.,  supra.,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1466,  a  teacher 
who  solicited  sex  using  an  explicit  Craigslist  ad  was  found  to  have  engaged  in 
immoral  conduct. 

In  Stubblefield,  supra,  16  Cal.App.3d  827,  a  teacher  caught  having  sex  with  a 
student  in  a  car  who  then  led  the  police  on  a  high-speed  chase  was  found  to  have 
engaged  in  immoral  conduct  which  indicated  unfitness  to  teach. 

In  Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  a  teacher  who  made  vulgar  and  sexual 
comments  in  the  classroom  was  found  to  have  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and 
unfit  to  teach. 

In  West  Valley-Mission  Community  College  District  v.  Concepcion  (1993)  16 
Cal.App.4th  1766,  a  teacher  who  possessed  and  sold  cocaine  was  found  to  have 
engaged  in  immoral  conduct. 

In  Pittsburg  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1983)  146  Cal.App.3d  964,  a  teacher  who  purchased  and  received  stolen 
property  from  an  undercover  police  officer  was  found  to  have  engaged  in 
immoral  conduct. 

16. 

The  California  Supreme  Court  explained,  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214,  229,  that  whether  conduct  is  “immoral”  cannot  be  considered 
in  the  abstract  but  must  be  analyzed  in  the  context  of  whether  the  conduct  at  issue  is  hostile 
to  the  welfare  of  the  school  community.  That  case  addressed  whether  a  teacher’s  life 
diplomas  (teaching  credentials)  should  be  revoked  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  based  on 
private,  out  of  classroom,  non-criminal,  homosexual  activity  between  two  teachers.  In  that 
case,  the  Court  reversed  the  lower  court’s  revocation  of  the  teacher’s  life  diplomas  because 
the  evidence  did  not  support  the  conclusion  that  the  teacher’s  actions  indicated  he  was  unfit 
to  teach.  (Ud.  at.  p.  224-229.)  The  Court  concluded:  “[T]he  Board  of  Education  cannot 
abstractly  characterize  the  conduct  in  this  case  as  ‘immoral,’  ‘unprofessional,’  or  “involving 
moral  turpitude’  within  the  meaning  of  section  13202”?  of  the  Education  Code  unless  that 
conduct  indicates  that  the  petitioner  is  unfit  to  teach.”  (/bid.) 

In  response  to  the  concern  that  the  term  “immoral”  may  be  too  vague  to  provide 

teachers  fair  notice  of  the  type  of  conduct  that  may  lead  to  dismissal  from  employment  or 
revocation  of  their  right  to  teach,  the  Morrison  Court  explained  (/d.  at  p.  233): 

  

22  When  the  Morrison  case  was  decided,  Education  Code  section  13202  set  forth 
grounds  to  suspend  or  revoke  a  teacher’s  certification  to  teach,  which  were  similar  to  the 
grounds  to  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  currently  set  forth  in  Education  Code 
section  44932,  which  is  at  issue  in  the  present  case. 

36

[T]he  prohibitions  against  immoral  and  unprofessional  conduct 
and  conduct  involving  moral  turpitude  by  a  teacher  constitutes  a 
general  ban  on  conduct  which  would  indicate  his  unfitness  to 
teach.  This  construction  gives  section  13202  the  required 
specificity.  Teachers,  particularly  in  the  light  of  their 
professional  expertise,  will  normally  be  able  to  determine  what 
kind  of  conduct  indicates  unfitness  to  teach.  Teachers  are 
further  protected  by  the  fact  that  they  cannot  be  disciplined 
merely  because  they  made  a  reasonable,  good  faith,  professional 
judgment  in  the  course  of  their  employment  with  which  higher 
authorities  later  disagreed. 

17. 

The  Morrison  Court  listed  seven  factors  to  analyze  whether  a  teacher’s 

conduct  demonstrates  an  unfitness  to  teach.  (/d.  at  p.  229.)  Those  factors  and  their 
application  are  discussed  further  under  the  “Morrison  Factors”  subheading  below. 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

18. 

“Fitness  to  teach”  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (Board  of  Education  of 

(/d.  at  pp.  558-559.)  He  did  so  based  on  “an  inchoate,  emotionally  founded, 

Sunnyvale  Elementary  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(Sunnyvale)  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d  555,  560-562.)  In  Sunnyvale,  a  teacher  described  as  “an 
exceptional,  efficient  and  effective  classroom  teacher”  made  a  false  bomb  threat  during  a 
teachers’  strike. 
but  irrational  thought  that  a  visual  count  of  the  students  assembled  outside  the  school  would 
effectively  challenge  what  he  believed  to  be  incorrect  attendance  figures  announced  by  the 
District.  He  was  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  bringing  the  True  [sic]  facts  on  attendance 
to  the  media,  and  thereby  to  the  public,  would  help  to  shorten  the  strike  by  causing  the 
District  to  negotiate  more  earnestly.”  (/bid.)  The  court  affirmed  the  commission’s  finding 
that  the  evidence  presented  of  the  teacher’s  conduct  did  not  prove  that  he  was  evidently  unfit 
to  teach.  (Ud.  at  p.  562.) 

19. 

In  Hensey,  supra,  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  the  court  applied  the  following 

definitions  when  affirming  a  finding  that  a  teacher  was  evidently  unfit  to  teach  (/d.  at  p.  972): 

Insofar  as  the  phrase  “evident  unfitness”  1s  concerned,  the 
parties  refer  us  to  dictionary  definitions  in  which  “evident”  is 
defined  in  Webster’s  Collegiate  Dictionary  as  “Clear  to  the 
vision  and  understanding,”  (Webster’s  Collegiate  Dict.,  7th  ed. 
p.  288),  and  “unfit”  as  defined  in  the  same  tome  at  page  968,  as 
“not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable;  incapable; 
incompetent;  and  physically  or  mentally  unsound.”  The  parties 
further  refer  us  to  a  definition  of  the  word  “unfit”  in  California 
Words,  Phrases  and  Maxims,  page  440,  as  in  general  “unfit” 
means  “unsuitable,  incompetent  and  not  adapted  for  a  particular 
use  or  service.” 

37

20. 

|  When  evaluating  a  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach, 

eee 

“‘evident  unfitness  for  service’ .  . 

.  means  ‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 
temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.’  Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness 
for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of 
notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.” 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  District,  supra,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1462,  quoting  Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  District.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Woodland)  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444,  fn.  omitted.) 

21. 

In  Woodland,  supra,  the  appellate  court  affirmed  the  trial  court’s 
determination  that  a  teacher  who  failed  to  follow  procedures  for  disciplining  students;  wrote 
sarcastic  and  belittling  notes  to  students;  insulted  and  was  rude  to  students,  parents,  and  other 
teachers;  and  used  profanity,  was  evidently  unfit  to  teach.  (Woodland,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th 
at  1434-1435.)  The  appellate  court  determined  that  ““evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes 
a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 
conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Ud.  at  p.  1444.) 
The  court  of  appeal  also  stated  that  when  interpreting  the  “evident  unfitness  for  service” 
grounds  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  significance  must  be  given  to  the  word  “evident,” 
and  that  “[a]  requirement  of  temperamental  defect  gives  significance  to  this  term.”  (/bid.) 
The  Woodland  opinion  explained  that,  notwithstanding  its  interpretation  of  “evident 
unfitness  to  serve,”  the  Morrison  factors,  still  “must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold 
matter,  whether  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.”  (Ud.  at  p.  1445.)  “Ifthe 
Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  1s  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is 
“evident”;  1.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.”  (/bid.) 
A  finding  of  “unfit  to  serve”  may  be  made  if  “the  evidence,  taken  in  the  aggregate,  shows 
that”  retaining  the  employee  “would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to 
students  and  fellow  teachers.”  (/d.  at  p.1456.) 

22. 

Furthermore,  “[t]o  establish  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach,  Morrison  requires  a 

nexus  between  government  employment  and  alleged  employee  misconduct  stemming  from 
the  principle  that  “‘[n]o  person  can  be  denied  government  employment  because  of  factors 
unconnected  with  the  responsibilities  of  that  employment.”’  (San  Diego  Unified  School 
District,  supra,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1463,  citation  omitted.) 

23. 

The  nexus  between  an  employee’s  conduct  and  his  fitness  to  teach  1s 

established  when  the  conduct  is  detrimental  to  the  mission  and  functions  of  the  employer. 
Factors  to  consider  are  whether  the  acts  demonstrate  a  “serious  lapse  in  good  judgment,”  the 
teacher  “failed  to  recognize  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct,”  the  teacher  “attempted  to 
shift  blame  to  parents  and  students”  or  others,  his  principal  had  “lost  confidence  in  his  ability 
to  serve  as  arole  model  based  upon”  his  conduct,  or,  “[m]Jost  noteworthy,”  if  the  teacher  “did 
not  think  it  would  have  any  impact  on  his  ability  to  teach  if  his  students”  were  aware  of  his 
conduct,  which  the  teacher  did  not  view  as  immoral.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District, 
supra,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1465-1466.)  “The  conduct  itself,  together  with  [the  teacher’s] 
failure  to  accept  responsibility  or  recognize  the  seriousness  of  his  misconduct  given  his 
position  as  a  teacher  and  role  model,  demonstrates  evident  unfitness  to  teach.”  (/bid.) 

38

24. 

On  the  other  hand,  an  employee’s  actions  on  a  given  day  may  suggest  a  lack  of 
judgment  and  discretion  or  may  be  an  isolated  act  precipitated  by  an  unusual  accumulation  of 
pressure  and  stress.  An  absence  of  any  other  incidents  in  the  employee’s  teaching  career 
suggestive  of  lack  of judgment  or  discretion  can  further  distinguish  the  aberrant  character  of 
the  act  at  issue.  In  such  a  case,  a  fact  finder  may  reasonably  conclude  that  the  isolated 
incident  of  poor  judgment  was  outweighed  by  years  of  demonstrated  teaching  competence, 
and  that  on  balance  the  employee  possessed  the  qualities  of  character  necessary  for  teaching 
fitness.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.  3d  691,  696-701.)  In  Jack  M.,  the 
school  district  sought  to  dismiss  the  teacher  based  on  a  single  incident,  an  arrest  for  soliciting 
homosexual  activity  in  a  public  restroom,  which  did  not  result  in  a  conviction.  The  teacher 
had  taught  for  16  years,  without  any  previous  incidents.  The  school’s  principal  testified  that 
she  “felt  that  the  charged  conduct  demonstrated  ‘unusual  judgment  and  improper  reaction  to 
stress  and  pressure.’  She  stated  that  she  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  he  could  not  now 
perform  his  specific  duties  as  a  certified  teacher  but  that  she  was  not  willing  to  take  a  chance 
that  the  incident  might  recur  and  that,  therefore,  she  felt  the  defendant  unfit  to  teach.”  (/d.  at 
p.  695.)  On  appeal,  the  court  determined  that  the  evidence  supported  the  trial  court’s  finding 
that  the  teacher’s  conduct  did  not  demonstrate  an  unfitness  to  teach.  (/d.  at  p.  697.) 

DISHONESTY 

25. 

The  California  Supreme  Court  examined  and  upheld  a  commission’s  decision 
that  a  teacher  should  not  be  dismissed,  despite  the  commission’s  finding  that  the  teacher  was 
guilty  of  dishonesty,  in  Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208. 
Ms.  Burman  was a  school  principal  who  decided  to  falsely  call  in  sick  on  December  8,  1983, 
so  that  she  could  attend  the  first  California  landing  of  the  space  shuttle  at  Edwards  Air  Force 
Base,  and  she  had  a  third  party  call  her  school  to  falsely  report  that  she  was  ill.  When  she 
was  initially  confronted  by  the  district’s  superintendent  about  it,  she  lied,  but  she  confessed  a 
short  time  later.  The  district’s  statement  of  charges  asserted  cause  to  dismiss  her  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  for  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for 
service,  dishonesty,  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  of 
the  district.  The  commission  only  found  cause  existed  to  dismiss  her  for  dishonesty,  but  it 
nonetheless  decided  that  dismissal  was  not  warranted  under  the  circumstances.  The 
commission  noted  that  Burman  “had  a  previously  unblemished  record”  and  made  an  express 
finding  that  her  actions  “represented  isolated  conduct.  . 
set  of  circumstances  in  the  future.”’  (Ud.  at  pp.  213-214.) 

.  not  likely  of  repetition  under  any 

In  a  footnote,  the  Court  added  (7d.  at  p.  220,  fn.  12): 

Although  Morrison  concerned  itself  only  with  the  proper 
definition  of  “immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,”  its  analysis 
requires  an  identical  approach  to  an  attempt  to  discipline  a 
permanent  employee  on  grounds  of  dishonesty,  as  here. 
Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smallest  fib  to  the  most 
flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or 

39

unprofessional  conduct,  and  not  every  falsehood  will  constitute 
“dishonesty”  as  a  ground  for  discipline. 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  SCHOOL  LAWS 

26. 

In  Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman 

(Seaman)  (1971)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  the  appellate  court  found  that  a  teacher’s  approximately 
one-month  long  absence,  although  it  violated  the  school’s  rules  and  regulations,  was  not 
“persistent”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Education  Code,  and  therefore  did  not  support  a 
dismissal  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws.  The  facts  of  the  case 
were  that  Mrs.  Seaman  was  supposed  to  begin  work  for  the  1969-1970  school  year  by 
participating  in  orientation  beginning  on  September  3,  1969,  and  then  begin  teaching  on 
September  10,  1969.  She  requested  a  leave  of  absence  until  October  1,  1969,  to  participate 
in  an  international  conference  on  mental  health  in  Paris,  France  during  September  1969,  but 
her  request  was  not  granted.  Before  the  start  of  the  school  year,  she  again  asked  for  a  leave 
of  absence,  while  she  was  out  of  the  country,  and  she  received  no  response.  She  then  did  not 
return  to  the  school  until  October  1,  1969. 

The  appellate  court  explained  that  the  question  on  appeal  was  whether  Mrs.  Seaman’s 

violation  was  “persistent,”  as  the  grounds  listed  in  the  applicable  code  section,  which  was 
then  Education  Code  section  13403,  subdivision  (g),  stated:  “Persistent  violation  of  or 
refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the 
government  of  the  public  schools,  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board 
of  the  school  district  employing  him.”  (Jd.  at  p.  81.)°° 

The  district  argued  that  each  day  Mrs.  Seaman  was  absent  was  a  separate  violation  of 

the  school’s  regulations,  thereby  making  her  violation  “persistent.”  The  court  of  appeal 
rejected  that  argument  as  follows  Ud.  at  pp.81-82): 

The  argument  is  specious.  This  is  not  a  case  where  it  is 
reasonable  to  say  that  Mrs.  Seaman’s  absence,  by  its  very 
duration,  amounted  to  a  “persistent”  violation  of  the  governing 
board’s  rules. 
[Citation  omitted.]  Nor  can  it  fairly  be  said  from 
the  evidence  presented  that  the  teacher  was  motivated  by  an 
attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.  Mrs.  Seaman  had  been 
employed  by  the  district  for  a  period  of  eight  years,  and  there  1s 
no  evidence  in  the  record  to  prove  that  she  ever  violated  a 
school  law  or  regulation  of  the  governing  board  prior  to  the 
incident  in  question;  before  leaving  on  her  trip,  appellant 
requested  a  leave  of  absence  and  gave  sound  academic  reasons 
in  support  of  the  request;  . .  . 

  

*°  The  same  language  is  contained  in  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(8),  which  is  at  issue  here. 

40

The  court  found  that  Mrs.  Seaman  engaged  in  a  single  violation  of  the  school’s  rules, 

which  was  not  enough  to  support  dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher,  and  reasoned  (Jd.  at  p. 
84): 

To  hold  that  Mrs.  Seaman  was  guilty  of  “persistent”  violation  of 
the  school  board’s  regulations  under  the  evidence  presented  in 
this  case,  even  though  the  violation  resulted  in  an  absence  of 
several  school  days,  is  to  distort  the  meaning  of  the  term 
“persistent,”  no  matter  what  acceptable  definition  1s  used.  The 
word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to 
relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition .  . 
stubborn;  persevering  . 
World  Dict.  (College  ed.);  see  Webster’s  Third  New  Internat. 
Dict.)  And  in  the  judicial  decisions  of  this,  as  well  as  other 
states,  the  word  has  been  interpreted  to  mean  “continuing  or 
constant.”  [Citations  omitted. | 

.  constantly  repeated.”  (Webster’s  New 

. 

. 

We  do  not  quarrel  with  respondent’s  contention  that  the  school 
district  board  had  the  right  to  adopt  rules  governing  the  conduct 
of  its  employees  and  to  require  the  employees  to  observe  the 
rules.  We  hold,  only,  that  a  single  violation  of  a  school  board’s 
rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of  a  permanent 
teacher  under  subdivision  (g)  of  section  13403.  The  subdivision 
pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions, 
and  hence  the  Legislature,  apparently  to  allow  opportunity  for  a 
correction,  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to 
warrant  dismissal;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules 
that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate. 

27. 

San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1982)  135  Cal.App.3d  278  also  concerned  whether  cause  existed  to  dismiss  a 
teacher  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws.  In  that  case,  over  a  four- 
year  period,  the  teacher  was  absent  21  percent  of  the  time  and  she  failed  to  supply  lesson 
plans  to  substitute  teachers  numerous  times,  despite  having  received  several  written  and  oral 
communications  instructing  her  to  provide  thorough  lesson  plans  when  she  planned  to  be 
absent.  The  appellate  court  concluded  that  “[w]ithout  question  a  persistent  refusal  to  prepare 
lesson  plans  for  substitute  teachers,  viewed  in  light  of  the  number  of  absences  Harris  [the 
teacher|  was  experiencing,  might  be  sufficient  to  constitute  “persistent  violation  . 
rules’  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  ...”  (Ud.  at  p.287-288.) 

.  of  school 

. 

MORRISON  FACTORS 

28. 

Morrison,  supra,  articulated  seven  factors  relevant  to  a  determination  of 

whether  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach  which  are  considered  in  teacher  dismissal  and  suspension 
cases,  as  well  as  in  disciplinary  actions  regarding  a  teacher’s  credentials.  (San  Diego  Unified 

41

School  District,  supra,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1462;  Broney  v.  California  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  466  and  473;  Woodland,  supra,  2 
Cal.App.4th  at  1456-1457;  Governing  Board  of  ABC  Unified  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994) 
28  Cal.App.4th  369,  383;  Sunnyvale,  supra,  102  Cal.App.3d  at  560;  Fontana  Unified  School 
District,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  220,  fn.  12.) 

29. 
footnotes  omitted): 

The  seven  Morrison  factors  are  (Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  229-230, 

“[T]he  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers,  [and]  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated”; 

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

“[T]he  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct”; 

“[T]he  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved”; 

“[T]he  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the 
conduct”; 

“[T]he  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 
conduct”; 

“[T]he  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct”;  and 

“[T]he  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or 
chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other 
teachers.” 

30. 

The  Morrison  factors  “are  relevant  to  the  extent  that  they  assist  the  board  in 

determining  whether  the  teacher’s  [sic]  fitness  to  teach,  1.e.,  in  determining  whether  the 
teacher’s  future  classroom  performance  and  overall  impact  on  his  students  are  likely  to  meet 
the  board’s  standards.”  (Ud.  at  p.  229.) 

31. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney,  supra,  184 

Cal.App.4th  at  476.) 

32. 

In  addition  to  the  seven  Morrison  factors,  the  commission  may  also  consider 

the  “notoriety  and  publicity  accorded  a  teacher’s  conduct,”  if  any.  (Jack  M.,  supra,  19 
Cal.3d  at  701,  fn.  5.)  “[I]fthe  teacher’s  conduct  is  sufficiently  notorious  that  the  students 
know  or  are  likely  to  learn  of  it,  and  if  the  teacher  continues  to  model  his  past  conduct,  the 
Commission  may  infer  that  the  teacher’s  conduct  may  result  in  student  emulation,  but  such 
an  inference  is  disputable.  [Citation.]”  (Broney,  supra,  184  Cal.App.4th  at  474.) 

42

33. 

The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate.  “When a 
camel’s  back  is  broken,”  the  trier  of  fact  “need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which 
one  could  have  done  the  deed.”  A  trier  of  fact  may  consider  “the  totality  of  the  offensive 
conduct.”  (Woodland,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  1456-1457.) 

34. 

“[AJn  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 

showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either 
students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.” 
(Morrison,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  at  235.)  The  inquiry  is  “whether  any  adverse  inferences  can  be 
drawn  from”  the  teacher’s  conduct  as  to  his  teaching  ability,  or  “as  to  the  possibility  that 
publicity  surrounding  the  past  conduct  may  in  and  of  itself  substantially  impair  his  function 
as  a  teacher.”  (lbid.) 

OTHER  CONSIDERATIONS 

35. 

An  admunistrator’s  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt  regarding  the 
educator’s  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that  may  be  considered  in 
determining  whether  a  teacher  is  unfit  to  teach  and  should  be  dismissed.  (San  Diego  Unified 
School  District,  supra,  194  Cal.App.4th  at  1460  and  1463.)  In  San  Diego  Unified  School 
District,  the  principal  testified  that  based  on  the  teacher’s  conduct,  she  had  lost  confidence  in 
him  and  “questioned  his  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students.”  (Cd.  at  p.  1460.)  On 
appeal,  the  court  considered  the  principal’s  testimony  as  substantial  evidence  of  the  adverse 
impact  the  teacher’s  conduct  had  on  his  on-campus  relationships  and  that  the  teacher’s 
relationship  with  the  principal  “had  been  sufficiently  impaired  to  render  him  unfit  for  service 
as  a  teacher  or  administrator.”  (/d.  at  p.  1463.) 

36. 

|The  Commission  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee  even  if 
grounds  for  dismissal  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  219-223.) 
As  the  California  Supreme  Court  explained,  “nothing  in  the  statutory  scheme  indicates  that 
the  commission  must  be  bound  by  the  district’s  choice  to  the  extent  that  it  is  required  to 
approve  an  employee’s  dismissal  if  it  is  not  persuaded,  in  the  exercise  of  its  discretion,  that 
[§]  We  thus  cannot  accept  the  proposition 
an  offense  is  serious  enough  to  warrant  that  step. 
that  discipline  must  be  imposed,  when a  finding  is  made  that  cause  for  discipline  exists.”  (Ud. 
at  p.  219,  italicized  emphasis  in  original.) 

SUSPENSION  WITHOUT  PAY  UNDER  EDUCATION  CODE  SECTION  44939,  SUBDIVISION 
(B),  AND  REINSTATEMENT  OF  BACK  PAY 

37. 

Ifa  commission  on  professional  competence  clears  an  employee  of  the  charges 

upon  which  the  suspension  was  based,  then  the  employee  must  be  paid  back  pay  for  the 
period  of  suspension,  even  if  she  is  dismissed  on  other  charges  that  do  not  support  cause  for 
suspension  without  pay.  (Von  Durjais  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1978)  83  Cal.App.3d  681,  686- 
687.)  In  Von  Durjais,  the  employee  was  charged  with  immoral  conduct  and  evident 
unfitness  for  service  based  on  her  possession  of  marijuana.  The  commission  expressly  found 
that  the  employee’s  conduct  did  not  amount  to  immoral  conduct,  but  it  found  she  was 

43

evidently  unfit  for  service.  Because  immoral  conduct  was  not  found,  the  appellate  court 
concluded  the  employee  was  entitled  to  back  pay  for  the  period  of  suspension.  (Jbid.) 

Evaluation  Regarding  the  Existence  of  Cause  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield 

38. 

Asateacher,  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  required  to  set  an  example,  and  she  did  not 

set  a  good  one  when  she  took  I.N.  off  campus,  without  authorization  from  the  school  or 
I.N.’s  parent,  when  I.N.  should  have  been  in  class,  and  then  lied  about  it.  Ms.  Honeyfield 
does  not  dispute  that  what  she  did  was  wrong.  Her  misconduct  occurred  over  the  course  of 
three  days,  after  having  a  lengthy  and  impressive  career  working  as  a  teacher.  Ms. 
Honeyfield  was  trying  to  help  an  anxious  student  who  was  so  stressed  out  that  she  felt  she 
could  not  attend  her  classes  and  was  reluctant  to  talk  to  her  counselor.  The  student  told  Ms. 
Honeyfield  she  might  be  kicked  out  of  her  home  and  sent  to  foster  care,  she  had  a  probation 
monitor,  and  she  had  to  submit  to  drug  testing.  The  student  had  also  asked  Ms.  Honeyfield 
several  times  if  she  could  live  with  her,  and  she  had  previously  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  that  she 
wanted  to  be  emancipated.  The  things  this  student  was  telling  Ms.  Honeyfield,  regardless  of 
whether  they  were  true  or  not,  raised  serious  issues  which  should  have  prompted  Ms. 
Honeyfield  to  alert  the  student’s  parent  and  counselor  and  the  school’s  administrators. 
Instead,  Ms.  Honeyfield,  who  was  not  trained  as  a  counselor,  but  fashioned  herself  as  a 
person  to  whom  children  could  talk,  made  the  huge  mistake  of  deciding  to  take  the  student  to 
lunch  off  campus,  during  class  time,  without  her  mother’s  permission  or  school 
authorization,  so  the  student  could  talk.  Then,  after  they  were  seen  off  campus,  Ms. 
Honeyfield  agreed  with  the  student  to  lie  about  it.  Ms.  Honeyfield  went  along  with  the  plan 
to  lie,  which  she  stated  during  this  hearing  was  suggested  by  the  student,  when  she  was 
confronted  the  next  day  by  school  administrators.  Ms.  Honeyfield  clearly  exercised  serious 
lapses  in  judgment. 

39. 

However,  in  light  of  all  the  evidence  presented,  the  district  failed  to  prove  that 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  serious,  but  isolated,  lapses  in  judgment  amounted  to  immoral  conduct  or 
demonstrated  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  unfit  to  teach.  The  evidence  showed  that  until 
October  26,  2017,  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  demonstrated  her  skill  and  competence  as  a  health 
and  physical  education  teacher  and  coach,  and  she  had  earned  the  right  to  five-year 
evaluations  following  an  impressive  project  in  which  she  skillfully  incorporated  the  Common 
Core  subjects  into  her  high  school  health  class.  Ms.  Honeyfield  had  never  engaged  in  similar 
conduct,  and  she  had  never  been  disciplined  before.  The  fact  that  I.N.  trusted,  confided  in, 
and  sought  Ms.  Honeyfield  out,  when  I.N.  was  suffering  episodes  of  anxiety,  did  not  prove 
that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  inappropriate  “grooming  behavior.”  While  Dr.  Jacks’s 
testimony  tended  to  show  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  may  have  crossed  the  appropriate  boundaries 
of  a  teacher/student  relationship,  when  she  attempted  to  provide  counsel  to  I.N.,  his 
testimony  that  her  conduct  “could  have  been  grooming  behavior”  that  1s  known  to  be  used  by 
sexual  predators,  was  speculative  and  was  not  persuasive. 

In  finding  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  engage  in  immoral  conduct,  weight  was  given 
to  the  praiseworthiness  of  her  motivation  to  help  an  anxious  student  and  to  the  fact  that  this 
was  an  isolated  incident,  which  tended  to  show  that  it  would  not  recur.  Although  dishonesty 

44

may  amount  to  immoral  conduct,  as  was  found  in  the  Weiland,  supra,  case,  that  matter  is 
distinguishable  from  this  case  because  it  involved  Weiland’s  attempt  to  defraud  her  employer 
to  continue  to  employ  her  despite  a  lack  of  enrollment  in  the  program  she  taught.  Weiland’s 
conduct  was  an  attempt  to  steal  wages,  and  she  did  not  acknowledge  the  wrongfulness  of  her 
actions.  In  this  case,  Ms.  Honeyfield  admitted  that  what  she  did  was  wrong  and  her  conduct 
based,  in  part,  by  a  sincere,  albeit  misguided,  belief  that  she  was  helping  the  student. 

Accordingly,  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  because  the  district  did  not  prove  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  immoral  conduct. 

AO. 

Similarly,  the  district  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  is  evidently  unfit  to 

teach.  Her  bad  judgment  in  taking  I.N.  off  campus  without  permission  and  then  lying  about 
it  did  not  rise  to  the  level  of  demonstrating  that  she  is  unsuitable,  incapable,  incompetent  or 
unfit  to  teach.  The  evidence  did  not  show  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  suffers  from  a  defect  in 
temperament,  or  a  fixed  character  trait,  nor  did  1t  demonstrate  that  retaining  Ms.  Honeyfield 
as  an  employee  would  pose  a  significant  danger  of  psychological  harm  to  students  and  fellow 
teachers.  Ms.  Honeyfield  acknowledged  that  what  she  did  was  wrong,  and  she  apologized 
for  her  misconduct.  Thus,  it  was  not  established  that  she  was  incapable  of  remediation. 
Rather,  her  behavior  was  an  aberrant,  isolated  act  in  an  otherwise  distinguished  teaching 
career.  On  balance,  Ms.  Honeyfield  possesses  the  qualities  of  character  necessary  to  serve  as 
a  competent  teacher  and  the  likelihood  that  she  would  ever  take  a  student  off  campus  without 
permission  or  lie  about  it  again  is  extremely  remote. 

Accordingly,  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  because  the  district  did  not  prove  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  is  evidently  unfit  for  service. 

41.  —_  The  district  also  did  not  establish  that  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  conduct  amounted  to  a 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws.  While  Ms.  Honeyfield  knowingly 
violated  the  school’s  rules  when  she  took  I.N.  off  campus,  without  permission  from  I.N.’s 
mother  or  school  administrators,  and  when  she  later  lied  to  school  staff  about  it,  the  evidence 
did  not  establish  that  those  violations  or  refusals  to  obey  the  rules  were  “persistent.”  Her 
violations  were  all  part  of  a  single  incident  that  spanned  over  several  days.  Consistent  with 
the  court’s  determination  and  analysis  in  the  Seaman,  supra,  case,  merely  breaking  the 
incident  into  subparts  in  order  to  add  up  a  higher  number  of  violations  is  not  enough  to  make 
the  violations  “persistent.”  Indeed,  to  read  the  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(8),  in  the  fashion  suggested  by  the  district,  would  be  adverse  the  intent  of  the  statute  “to 
allow  opportunity  for  a  correction,”  such  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant 
dismissal;  rather,  ““it  is  the  persistent  disregard’  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  1s 
designed  to  regulate.”  (Seaman,  supra,  28  Cal.App.3d  at  84.) 

Accordingly,  cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  because  the  district  did  not  prove  by  a  preponderance 
of  the  evidence  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  engaged  in  “persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 

45

school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 
schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or 
her.” 

42. 

The  district  met  its  burden  of  proof  to  establish  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Ms. 

Honeyfield  for  engaging  in  dishonesty.  Possibly  the  most  troubling  aspect  of  Ms. 
Honeyfield’s  conduct  was  that  she  conspired  with  I.N.  to  lie.  As  a  teacher  and  role  model, 
she  set  a  poor  example  for  I.N.  when  she  chose  to  lie  instead  of  immediately  telling  the  truth. 
Then,  not  only  did  Ms.  Honeyfield  lie,  but  she  concocted  a  detailed  story  about  having  lunch 
with  someone  whom  she  had  never  met,  which  included  untrue  details  about  that  person 
caring  for  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  son.  Ms.  Honeyfield  then  allowed  the  school’s  administration  to 
remain  uninformed  of  the  true  facts  over  the  weekend  and  through  almost  the  entire  day  on 
Monday,  October  30,  2017.  Although  she  claimed  at  this  hearing  that  she  decided  over  the 
weekend  to  tell  the  truth,  she  did  not  do  so  until  she  was  told  she  was  being  placed  on  leave 
pending  an  investigation.  As  such,  her  testimony  that  she  planned  to  tell  the  truth  was  not 
credible,  as  it  appeared  more  likely  that  she  only  confessed  when  she  realized  there  would  be 
further  inquiries  made  about  what  had  occurred  on  October  26,  2017.  It  was  also  concerning 
that  after  I.N.  told  Ms.  Honeyfield  about  her  extreme  anxiety,  that  she  was  afraid  she  might 
be  kicked  out  of  her  mother’s  home  and  sent  to  foster  care,  and  possibly  that  she  had  a 
probation  monitor  and  was  required  to  submit  to  drug  tests,  Ms.  Honeyfield  did  not  alert  the 
school’s  administration,  I.N.’s  mother,  or  I.N.’s  counselor.  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  dishonesty 
therefore  could  very  well  have  resulted  in  adverse  consequences  for  I.N.  had  she  needed 
professional  intervention,  as  well  as  serving  as  a  poor  exemplar  for  I.N.  Ms.  Honeyfield’s 
claim  that  she  lied  to  protect  the  student  was  not  entirely  credible,  as  the  student’s  best 
interests  would  have  been  better  served  by  alerting  the  school,  so  the  student  could  receive 
help  for  her  problems.  It  was  more  credible  Ms.  Honeyfield  also  lied  to  protect  herself, 
which  is  blameworthy,  particularly  when  she  should  have  been  telling  the  school  the  things 
I.N.  had  told  her.  Due  to  the  extent  of  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  dishonesty,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive 
how  REV’s  administrators  to  whom  she  lied,  or  the  district,  could  trust  her  going  forward. 

Accordingly,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  because  the  district  proved  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  that  Ms.  Honeyfield  was  dishonest.  The  circumstances  surrounding,  and  the  extent 
of,  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  dishonesty  warrants  her  dismissal. 

Evaluation  Regarding  the  Existence  of  Cause  to  Suspend  Ms.  Honeyfield  Without  Pay 
Pending  her  Dismissal 

43. 

Ms.  Honeyfield  was  suspended  without  pay  based  on  assertions  that  she 

engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause.  As  was  discussed  above,  the  district  failed  to  establish  that  Ms. 
Honeyfield  engaged  in  immoral  conduct.  The  district  also  failed  to  prove  that  Ms. 
Honeyfield  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments.  There  was  no  evidence 
presented  to  prove  that  she  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments,  and  the  district’s 
argument  that  taking  I.N.  to  lunch  off  campus,  during  Ms.  Honeyfield’s  prep  time,  and  then 

46

lying  about  it,  somehow  amounted  to  a  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  was 
not  persuasive.  Therefore,  cause  did  not  exist  to  suspend  her  without  pay,  and  Ms. 
Honeyfield  shall  be  given  back  pay  for  the  period  of  time  she  was  suspended  without  pay  up 
to  the  date  of  this  decision. 

ORDER 

1. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  appeal  from  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District’s  decision 

to  suspend  her  without  pay  and  dismiss  her  from  employment  with  the  district  is  granted  in 
part  and  denied  in  part. 

2. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  appeal  from  the  district’s  decision  to  dismiss  her 

employment  is  denied.  The  district’s  decision  to  dismiss  Ms.  Honeyfield  1s  affirmed. 

3. 

Ms.  Honeyfield’s  appeal  from  the  district’s  decision  to  suspend  her  without 

pay  pending  her  dismissal  is  granted.  The  district’s  decision  to  suspend  Ms.  Honeyfield 
without  pay  pending  her  dismissal  is  reversed.  The  district  shall  pay  Ms.  Honeyfield 
backpay  from  the  time  she  was  suspended  without  pay  until  the  date  of  this  decision. 

DATED:  October  4,  2018 

G  DocuSigned  by: 

DATED:  October  4,  2018 

DATED:  October  4,  2018 

- 

ABBODICI5F194.4E  ..    

THERESA  M.  BREHL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

-  TSD4F 

ASS? DAAIBE...    

  

DocuSigned  by: 

Frank  Puliw 

FRANK  PULICE 
Commission  Member 

Ci 

DDS33SC7ABSAS42& 

DAVID  W.  RODGERS 
Commission  Member 

47

