BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
COMPTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

CORRY  HEARD, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.:  2018051034 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  consisting  of  complainant’s  designee, 
Benjamin  Bell,  respondent’s  designee,  Christopher  D.  Anaya,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge 
Jennifer  M.  Russell,  from  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in 
Compton,  California  on  September  18,  19,  20,  21,  and  24,  2018.  The  record  closed  and  the 
matter  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  on  September  24,  2018. 

Milton  E.  Foster,  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Compton  Unified 

School  District  (CUSD  or  District).  Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 
respondent  Corry  Heard,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

In  a  Statement  of  Charges,!  the  District  alleges  that  respondent  engaged  in  acts 
manifesting  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness,  dishonesty,  disobedience  of  school  laws  or 
regulations,  and  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments.  The  Commission  has  determined 
that  all  but  one  of  the  charges  were  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  but  that 
dismissal  of  respondent  is  nonetheless  unwarranted  because  the  competent,  credible  evidence 
failed  to  establish  respondent’s  unfitness  to  teach. 

// 

  

'  At  the  administrative  hearing,  the  Statement  of  Charges  alleging  immoral  conduct 

(Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  and  44939),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code, 
§44932,  subd.  (a)(6)),  persistent  violations  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  or  reasonable 
regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd. 
(a)(8)),  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  (Ed. 
Code,  §44939)  was  amended  by  interlineation  to  add  dishonesty  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd. 
(a)(4)).

Alleged  Failure  to  Clear  Single  Subject  Credential  in  a  Timely  Manner 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  State  of  California  mandates  that  all  teachers  shall  hold  a  valid  California 

teaching  credential  authorizing  them  to  provide  classroom  instructions.  To  assist  novice 
teachers  with  the  credentialing  process  and  requirements,  the  Commission  on  Teaching 
Credentialing  (CTC)  sponsors  the  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  (BTSA),  an 
intensive,  voluntary  professional  development  and  assessment  program  designed  for 
induction  into  the  profession.  School  districts,  including  CUSD,  maintain  and  provide  a 
local  consortium  of  directors  and  trainers  or  support  providers  to  implement  the  BTSA 
program.  Participating  teachers  typically  complete  the  BTSA  program  in  two  years.  Those 
requiring  additional  time  to  complete  the  BTSA  program  may  apply  to  the  CTC  for  an 
extension  of  time  to  do  so. 

2. 

The  BTSA  program  focuses  on  transforming  academic  accomplishments  and 

preparedness  into  practical  knowledge  and  skills  to  achieve  success  in  the  classroom.  The 
Formative  Assessment  for  California  Teachers,  a  performance-based  assessment  system,  is 
employed  to  guide  the  acquisition,  development,  and  assessment  of  classroom  instruction 
and  management  skills.  Participating  teachers  are  paired  with  a  support  provider  responsible 
for  mentoring  professional  growth.  Among  other  things,  support  providers  guide 
instructional  preparation,  observe  participating  teachers  in  the  classroom,  and  provide 
feedback  for  improving  classroom  instruction.  Participating  teachers  attend  conferences  or 
regularly  scheduled  meetings,  and  they  engage  in  informal  and  formal  self-assessments. 

3. 

Consistent  with  California’s  mandated  credentialing  requirements  for  teachers, 
the  District’s  Personnel  Policy  on  “Certification”  states  that  “The  Superintendent  or  designee 
may  provide  support  and  guidance  to  noncredentialed  teachers  in  accordance  with  law  to 
ensure  the  quality  of  the  instructional  program.  He/she  also  may  provide  assistance  and 
support  to  staff  holding  preliminary  credentials  to  help  them  meet  the  qualifications  required 
for  the  professional  clear  credential.”  (Exh.  A  at  p.  000017.) 

4. 

The  District  initially  hired  respondent  as  a  substitute  teacher  at  the  beginning 

of  the  2009/2010  academic  year.  Four  months  into  that  academic  year,  the  District  re- 
assigned  respondent  to  a  full-time  teaching  position  at  Dominguez  High  School.  For  reasons 
not  established  by  the  evidence,  respondent  left  the  District  for  a  period  of  time  lasting  at 
least  one  and  one-half  years  after  full-time  teaching  at  Dominguez  High  School,  but  he  then 
returned  to  the  District  as  a  substitute  teacher.  On  August  21,  2012,  the  District  again 
retained  respondent  as  a  full-time  teacher.  In  the  2013/2014  academic  year,  the  District 
assigned  respondent  to  Compton  Community  Day  High  School,  where  he  remained  until  the 
District  re-assigned  him  to  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  in  the  2015/2016 
academic  year. 

5. 

When  respondent  began  his  teaching  career  in  the  2009/2010  academic  year  in 

the  District,  respondent  possessed  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential.

Respondent  did  not  possess  any  clear  teaching  credential  from  the  CTC.  The  District’s 
retention  of  respondent  was  conditioned  on  respondent  obtaining  a  valid  clear  teaching 
credential. 

6. 

In  2009,  and  again  in  November  2012,  respondent  signed  a  BTSA  Induction 
Program  Memorandum  of  Understanding  agreeing  to  adhere  to  the  program’s  requirements 
and  to  participate  in  the  program’s  professional  development  activities  in  order  to  gain  full 
It  is  undisputed  that  respondent  did  not  complete  the  BTSA 
credential  eligibility  status. 
program  within  two  years  of  2009  or  within  two  years  of  2012  because  respondent  either 
took  or  was  placed  on  leaves  of  absence  from  the  District,  had  multiple  support  providers 
resulting  in  a  discontinuity  of  mentorship,  did  not  attend  an  unspecified  number  of  meetings, 
did  not  meet  with  an  assigned  support  provider  at  unspecified  times,  did  not  submit  or  made 
untimely  submissions  of  logs,  reports,  or  written  reflections,  and,  on  occasions,  made 
submissions  with  either  or  both  inaccurate  and  incomplete  information. 

7. 

On  February  1,  2016,  when  respondent  was  teaching  at  Cesar  Chavez 

Continuation  High  School,  his  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  expired 
before  he  completed  the  BTSA  program.  As  a  consequence,  the  District  relieved  respondent 
of  his  full-time  instructional  duties  and  responsibilities  and  placed  respondent  on  leave  of 
absence  without  pay.  After  respondent  requested  and  obtained  from  the  CTC  an  extension  of 
time  to  complete  the  BTSA  program,  the  District  re-employed  respondent  to  serve  as  a 
substitute  teacher  for  the  remainder  of  the  2015/2016  academic  year. 

8. 

In  the  2016/2017  academic  year,  respondent  requested  and  obtained  a  second 

extension  of  time  from  the  CTC,  and  the  District  again  employed  respondent  as  a  full-time 
social  studies  teacher  assigned  to  Centennial  High  School.  During  that  academic  year, 
respondent  completed  the  BTSA  program. 

9. 

On  June  1,  2017,  the  CTC  issued  a  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in 

Social  Science  to  respondent. 

10. 

=‘  In  the  2017/2018  academic  year,  the  District  continued  respondent’s 

assignment  to  teach  at  Centennial  High  School,  and  respondent  taught  there  up  until 
February  21,  2018,  when  the  District  provided  respondent  with  a  notice  of  immediate 
suspension  without  pay  and  dismissal.  (See  Factual  Findings  73-75.) 

11. 

 Atthe  administrative  hearing,  Aracely  Zambrano,  who  provided  support  to 

teachers  in  the  District  participating  in  BTSA,  and  Dr.  Abimbola  Williams-Ajala,  who  served 
as  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  until  her  recent  2018  appointment  as 
Assistant  Superintendent  for  Pupil  Services,  both  opined  that  they  believed  respondent’s 
approach  to  BTSA  was  not  serious.  Ms.  Zambrano  claimed  that  she  reached  out  to 
respondent  regarding  his  efforts  to  complete  certain  requirements  of  BTSA  by  certain 
deadlines  and  that  respondent  yelled  at  her  and  used  profanity.  Dr.  Ajala  claimed  that  “the 
BTSA  incident  shows  a  pattern  of  behavior  of  someone  who  likes  to  do  things  his  way.”  Dr. 
Ajala  asserted  that  because  respondent  “had  to  be  taken  out  of  the  classroom  in  the  middle  of

the  year,”  the  consequential  impact  on  students  was  “inconsistency  in  learning.”  Dr.  Ayjala 
testified  that  she  “offered  for  him  to  sub  to  allow  him  to  move  around  from  school  to  school, 
but  he  had  to  work  full-time  to  complete  BTSA.” 

12. 

A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  respondent  required  at  least 
six  years  to  complete  successfully  the  BTSA  program  to  clear  his  single  subject  credential. 
Nonetheless,  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  14,  it  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of 
evidence  that,  as  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,”  requiring  six  years  to  clear  a  single 
subject  credential  warrants  respondent’s  dismissal  from  the  District. 

Alleged  Physical  Altercation  with  a  Student  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School 

13. 

As  noted  in  Factual  Finding  4,  beginning  with  the  2013/2014  academic  year, 

the  District  assigned  respondent  to  teach  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School,  an 
alternative  high  school  for  students  with  severe  disciplinary  issues,  poor  school  attendance, 
or  needs  better  served  in  a  small  learning  environment. 

14. 

=  In  the  2014/2015  academic  year  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School, 
respondent  taught  a  social  science  class  with  a  student  population  vacillating  between  nine 
and  15  students  who  were  in  grades  ranging  between  eighth  grade  and  eleventh  grade. 
Among  the  student  population  in  respondent’s  classroom  were  students  with  a  history  of 
violent  altercations,  students  with  known  gang  membership  or  affiliation,  and  students  under 
varying  levels  of  supervision  by  a  juvenile  court  or  facility.  At  the  administrative  hearing, 
respondent  explained  that  “there  was  a  lot  of  tension  in  the  class”  but  that  he  “liked  the  class 
and  the  kids”  because  “they  were  good  kids”  who  “just  needed  hugs.”  Profanities  and  racial 
epithets  were  interwoven  into  the  students’  vernacular.  Among  other  terms,  students  used 
“nigger,”  “fuck  niggers,”  “fucking  taco,”  “pifiata,”  and  “Mexican  beaner”  to  degrade  and 
offend,  to  express  anger,  and  as  terms  of  endearment.*  Respondent  managed  the  classroom 
environment  by,  among  other  things,  naming,  voicing,  or  otherwise  repeating  the  racial 
epithets  students  deployed  in  specific  contexts  to  instruct  and  explain  to  students  how  their 
usage  of  such  terms  are  offensive  and  hurtful  and  therefore  should  not  be  used  in  the  course 
of  their  social  interactions. 

15. 

It  was  imprudent  for  respondent  to  name,  voice,  or  repeat  the  racial  epithets  in 
their  fullness,  as  opposed  to  saying  “the  N-word,”  for  example,  in  the  classroom.  Given  the 
troublesome  social  history  from  which  the  racial  epithets  arise  and  are  encapsulated,  their  full 

  

*  See  Exh.  A  at  p.  6,  paragraphs  10-13. 

>  The  students’  multifaceted  deployment  of  the  various  racial  epithets  illustrates 

Justice  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes’  observation  that  “a  word  is  not  a  crystal,  transparent  and 
unchanged.”  A  word  is  instead  “the  skin  of  a  living  thought  [that]  may  vary  greatly  in  color 
and  content  according  to  the  circumstances  and  the  time  in  which  it  is  used.”  (Towne  v. 
Eisner  (1918)  245  U.S.  418,  425).  Justice  Holmes’  observation  holds  true  for  racial  epithets 
as  well.

utterance  out  loud  in  a  classroom  already  filled  with  “a  lot  of  tension”  risked  heightened 
volatility.  Nonetheless,  the  competent  credible  evidence  offered  at  the  administrative 
hearing  establishes  that  respondent  was  innocent  of  intention  to  offend,  humiliate,  denigrate, 
demean,  or  otherwise  harm  the  students  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  was  simply  trying  to 
instruct  his  students  for  their  own  benefit,  albeit  in  a  regrettable  manner. 

16. 

On  Wednesday,  October  29,  2014,  N.  was  one  of  five  students  in  attendance  in 

respondent’s  social  science  class  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School.  In  between 
assignments,  the  students  took  a  break  by  playing  a  game  of  basketball  designed  to  expose 
students  to  concepts  of  mathematical  percentages.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  basketball  game, 
respondent  informed  the  students  that  they  would  have  an  opportunity  to  fly  model 
helicopters.  Four  or  five  model  helicopters  were  in  the  classroom,  and  each  student  raced  to 
the  classroom  to  secure  one  of  the  helicopters.  N.  was  not  able  to  get  one  of  the  helicopters 
and  he  became  angry  and  engaged  one  of  his  classmates  in  a  shouting  match.  Respondent 
intervened,  and  a  verbal  exchange  between  respondent  and  N.  ensued.  Respondent  explained 
at  the  administrative  hearing  that  “it  got  to  a  point  where  it  looked  like  [N.]  was  going  to  do 
something.”  Respondent  positioned  himself  in  front  of  N.  Respondent  stretched  out  his 
arms  with  the  palm  of  his  hands  downward  and  respondent  put  his  hands  on  N.’s  shoulders 
for  approximately  five  seconds  as  he  told  N.,  “Calm  down.”  N.  stormed  out  of  the 
classroom,  but  soon  thereafter  returned  to  the  classroom,  at  which  time  he  had  an  opportunity 
to  fly  one  of  the  model  helicopters.  At  the  end  of  the  instructional  day,  respondent  informed 
the  principal,  Richard  Reed,  that  N.  “had  a  blow  out  again.” 

17. 

Two  days  later,  on  Friday,  October  31,  2014,  N.  and  his  parents  met  with 

principal  Reed  and  claimed  that  respondent  choked  N.  in  the  classroom.  N  did  not  report  any 
injuries  to  principal  Reed.  Principal  Reed’s  meeting  with  N.  and  N.’s  parents  1s 
memorialized  in  a  Compton  School  Police  Incident  Report  Form  (Incident  Report)  prepared 
by  Officer  H.  Lucas.  (Exh.  B  at  pp.  000049-000053.)  According  to  the  Incident  Report, 
principal  Reed  informed  Officer  Lucas  that  N.  told  him  “that  prior  to  the  incident  that  they 
both  exchanged  words  by  saying  ‘who  would  see  who  on  the  street.’”  (/d.  at  p.  000051.) 
Principal  Reed  additionally  informed  Officer  Lucas  that  N.  “stated  that  Mr.  Heard  made 
racial  slurs  by  saying  ‘Dirty  Mexicans.’”  (Ud.)  Officer  Lucas  did  not  interview  N.  or  N.’s 
parents. 

18. 

According  to  the  Incident  Report,  on  Monday,  November  3,  2014,  principal 
Reed  met  with  respondent  “to  inquire  about  the  alleged  choking  incident.”  Officer  Lucas 
writes  in  the  Incident  Report  that  principal  Reed  told  him  the  following:  “Mr.  Heard  reported 
that  a  verbal  exchange  occurred  between  himself  and  the  student.  Mr.  Heard  also  stated  that 
at  some  point  the  exchange  became  heated  at  which  time  the  student  pushed  him  while  inside 
the  classroom.  Heard  went  on  to  state  that  he  responded  to  the  push,  by  restraining  the 
student  which  consisted  of  grabbing  the  student  on  both  shoulders  and  holding  him,  during 
which  time  the  student  stopped  his  aggressive  behavior  and  the  class  resumed  without  further 
incident.”  (  Jd.)  Officer  Lucas  did  not  interview  respondent.

19. 

Officer  Lucas  conducted  interviews  of  four  students  who  were  present  in 

respondent’s  classroom  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School  on  Wednesday,  October 
29,  2014.  The  students’  interviews  are  summarized  in  the  Incident  Report.  One  student  had 
no  recollection  of  the  incident.  Two  students  did  not  see  or  were  unaware  of  the  incident. 
Officer  Lucas  writes  in  the  Incident  Report  that  another  student,  referenced  as  Witness  #2, 
stated  “there  was  a  verbal  exchange  between  the  student  and  teacher  during  which  the 
student  dared  the  teacher  by  stating  he  wouldn’t  choke  the  student.  Witness  #2  continued  to 
say  that  the  teacher  and  student  talked  back  and  forth  as  to  whether  the  teacher  would  do  it 
(choke  the  student).  Witness  #2  said  at  some  point  the  teacher  briefly  choked  the  student  and 
then  let  go  at  which  time  the  teacher  went  back  to  teaching  the  class.”  (/d.  at  p.  52.) 

20. 

Officer  Lucas  concludes  in  the  Incident  Report  that  “it  appears  that  physical 

contact  did  occur  between  the  student  and  the  teacher.  This  is  established  by  the  statements 
from  the  teacher,  the  student,  and  Witness  2.  The...  statements  also  lead  to  inference  that  if 
the  “choking”  incident  occurred  [it]  was  not  malicious  in  nature.”  (/d.) 

21. 

Principal  Reed  testified  at  the  administrative  hearing.  Principal  Reed  recalled 

that  N.  and  N.’s  parents  were  upset.  “They  were  livid.  They  wanted  something  done.” 
Principal  Reed  explained  that  he  “pulled  in  students”  and  that  “some  wouldn’t  say  anything 
because  they  didn’t  want  to  be  a  snitch.  Some  said  [respondent]  choked  him.  Some  said 
they  heard  [respondent]  say  ‘dirty  Mexican.’”  Principal  Reed  explained  that  he  also  spoke  to 
respondent,  and  principal  Reed  testified  that  respondent  “said  there  was  a  back  and  forth,” 
that  respondent  “said  he  didn’t  physically  assault  the  student,”  that  respondent  “didn’t 
mention  racial  comments  made  either  by  him  or  by  [N.],”  and  that  respondent  “said  he  didn’t 
use  that  language.” 

22. 

Principal  Reed  explained  that  he  never  heard  respondent  make  racial 

comments  to  students,  that  he  never  observed  respondent  making  any  physical  contact  with 
students,  and  that  respondent  never  demonstrated  animosity  towards  Mexicans  or  racist 
tendencies.  Principal  Reed  described  respondent  as  “a  good  teacher,”  “very  supportive,”  and 
“was  always  there”  when  work  needed  to  be  done.  Principal  Reed  testified  that  prior  to  the 
incident  there  were  “no  complaints  about  [respondent’s]  behaviors.” 

23. 

The  District  placed  respondent  on  paid  administrative  leave  effective 

November  3,  2014,  pending  an  investigation  by  the  District,  which  consisted  of  principal 
Reed  obtaining  the  statements  from  N.,  N.’s  parents,  the  four  students  mentioned  in  the 
Incident  Report,  and  respondent  and  providing  notification  to  the  Los  Angeles  County 
Sheriff's  Department  and  Child  Protective  Services. 

24. 

On  Tuesday,  November  4,  2014,  a  sheriff  deputy  was  dispatched  to  Compton 
Community  Day  High  School  to  interview  N.  N.  declined  the  interview.  N.  reportedly  told 
the  deputy  “that  he  had  nothing  to  say  and  does  not  talk  to  the  Police.”  Ud.)  At  the 
administrative  hearing  N.  maintained,  “I  don’t  condone  talking  to  the  police.  I  don’t  do 
that.”

25. 

According  to  principal  Reed,  upon  the  completion  of  his  investigation  he 

prepared  a  written  memorandum  of  his  investigative  findings,  which  he  submitted  to  Andrea 
D.  Credille,  the  Senior  Director  for  the  District’s  Human  Resources-Certificated  Personnel. 
Principal  Reed  did  not  elaborate  on  those  findings  beyond  the  memorialized  statements 
attributed  to  him  in  Officer  Lucas’  Incident  Report.  Principal  Reed  testified,  “I  never  got  a 
conclusion  of  what  happened  so  I  assumed  everything  was  cleared.” 

26. 

By  letter  dated  January  23,  2015,  Ms.  Credille  notified  respondent  that  the 

Sheriff's  Department  was  not  pursuing  criminal  charges  against  him,  and  she  reminded 
respondent  of  his  obligation  to  conduct  himself  in  a  professional  manner.  The  letter,  which 
enclosed  two  District  policy  directives—CUSD  Board  Policy  Code  of  Ethics  and  CUSD 
Board  Policy  Corporal  Punishment—in  pertinent  part  provides  the  following: 

We  have  received  notice  that  the  Sheriff's  Department  is  not  pursuing  any 
criminal  charges  against  you.  While  the  Sheriff's  Department  found  no 
criminal  findings,  please  be  reminded  that  you  must  always  conduct  yourself 
in  a  professional  manner  when  interacting  with  students,  staff  and  parents. 
Also  be  reminded  that  you  must  employ  a  “Hands  off”  policy,  when 
interacting  with  students.  Further,  please  review  the  corporal  punishment 
policy  that  1s  attached. 

(Exh.  G.) 

27. 

Inthe  spring  semester  of  the  2014/2015  academic  year,  the  District  returned 

respondent  to  the  same  classroom  he  taught  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School  prior 
to  the  October  29,  2014  incident  involving  N.  Respondent  explained  at  the  administrative 
hearing  that  Dr.  Ajala  “gave  me  a  pamphlet  and  said  at  no  time  I  should  put  hands  on  a 
student.”  Respondent  recalled  that  he  agreed  with  Dr.  Ajala  because  he  “was  off  for  90  days 
from  a  job  [he]  liked.”  When  respondent  returned  to  the  classroom,  he  apologized  to  N. 
during  their  first  encounter.  Respondent  explained,  “I  was  big  with  the  kids  about  being 
respectful  and  showing  respect.”  N.’s  testimony  corroborated  that  respondent  treated  him 
with  respect  after  respondent  returned  to  the  classroom.  N.  regarded  respondent  as  “a  pretty 
good  teacher”  and  as  “cool.”  Principal  Reed  testified  that  he  had  “no  concerns”  about 
respondent’s  return  to  the  same  classroom  where  N.  was  present. 

28. 

Atthe  administrative  hearing,  N.  presented  at  least  two  versions  of  the  events 

precipitating  the  October  29,  2014  incident.  In  one  version,  N.  testified  that  “a  conflict  in 
class  started  with  students  joking  around,”  “that  racial  slurs  [were]  going  back  and  forth,” 
and  that  respondent  “got  involved.”  In  another  version,  N.  testified  that  he  “returned  from 
playing  basketball,”  that  he  “was  giving  [respondent]  a  hard  time...  antagonizing  him.”  N. 
testified,  “I  said  something  racial  to  Mr.  Heard.  Just  me  being  a  fool  in  school.  I  wasn’t  the 
best  student.  I  was  in  Community  Day  for  a  reason.  I  was  acting  bad.  He  said  something 
back,  something  like  ‘all  you  taco-eating  motherfuckers’  or  something  like  that.  We  went 
back  and  forth.  He  got  upset.”  In  this  version  of  events,  N.  recollects  that  “[respondent] 
grabbed  me  by  the  throat  and  lifted  me  up  on  the  table.”  N.  demonstrated  by  crossing  his

palms  one  over  the  other  to  form  a  V-shape  and  putting  his  crossed  palms  on  his  chest  at  the 
base  of  his  neck  under  his  chin  with  his  fingers  encircling  his  neck. 

29. 

_N.  testified  that  he  “was  in  shock”  and  that  the  incident  “lasted  no  longer  than 

three  seconds.”  N.  recalled  either  walking  out  of  the  classroom  or  sitting  in  the  back  of  the 
classroom  after  the  incident.  N.  testified,  “The  next  day,  I  told  [respondent],  ‘Try  doing  that 
to  a  grown  man  and  see  how  that  goes  for  you.’” 

30. 

 N.’s  step-father  testified  that  N.  told  him  that  respondent  “grabbed  him  by  the 
neck”  in  “a  choke  hold”  and  that  “some  racial  remarks  were  made.”  N.’s  step-father  claimed 
that  respondent  “made  racial  remarks  towards  Mexicans  and  my  son  made  one  back.”  N.’s 
step-father  testified  that  when  N.  informed  him  about  the  incident  N.  was  upset,  N.’s  eyes 
were  watery,  and  that  N.’s  neck  “had  a  little  bit  of  red.”  According  to  N.’s  mother’s 
testimony,  when  she  asked  N.  about  what  happened,  N.  mentioned  that  respondent  “was 
making  racist  remarks  about  Hispanic  people  and  he  in  turn  made a  racist  remark  out  of 
anger.”  N.’s  mother  recalled  N.  stating  that  respondent  “got  upset  and  grabbed  him  by  the 
neck  and  put  him  on  the  table.” 

31. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  12,  it  1s  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of 

evidence  that,  as  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges,’  respondent  engaged  in  a  physical 
altercation  by  choking  N.  during  class  and  that  respondent  made  racial  slurs  during  the 
encounter. 

Alleged  Failure  to  Fulfill  Contractual  Duty  to  Arrive  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation 
High  School  on  Time 

32.  —  Article  7.7  of  The  Agreement  Between  the  Compton  Unified  School  District 

and  the  Compton  Education  Association  Certified  Unites  for  the  period  July  1,  2015  —  June 
30,  2018  (The  Agreement),  provides  that  “Unit  members  assigned  to  middle  and  high  schools 
shall  report  to  work  fifteen  (15)  minutes  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  student  instructional 
day.”  (Exh.  1  at  p.  15.)  As  noted  in  Factual  Finding  4,  the  District  assigned  respondent  to 
teach  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  in  the  2015/2016  academic  year. 
Consistent  with  the  requirements  of  Article  7.7,  teachers,  including  respondent,  were 
required  to  report  to  duty  at  7:45  a.m.,  fifteen  minutes  before  the  8:00  a.m.  student 
instructional  day. 

33. 

Article  7.15  of  The  Agreement  requires  the  District  to  “make  a  reasonable 
effort  to  obtain  a  substitute  for  unit  members  when  they  are  absent.”  In  the  event  that  a 
substitute  cannot  be  obtained,  “[m]iddle  and  high  school  unit  members  shall  be  assigned  to 
cover  the  absent  unit  member’s  class  during  his/her  preparation  period  on  an  equitable  basis” 
and  “[m]iddle  and  high  school  unit  members  who  cover  another  unit  member’s  class  shall  be 
paid  one-fifth  (1/5)  of  the  daily  rate  of  a  substitute.”  (Exh.  |  at  p.  18.)  The  established 
protocol  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  required  teachers  to  provide  Bridget 
  

*  See  Exh.  A  at  p.  4,  paragraphs  2  and  3.

Brown,  the  school  secretary,  with  advance  notice  of  anticipated  late  arrivals  or  absences. 
Ms.  Brown’s  responsibilities  include  scheduling  and  assigning  substitute  or  other  teachers  to 
the  classrooms  of  late-arriving  or  absent  teachers. 

34.  — Respondent’s  three-year  old  son  attended  a  school  located  approximately  three 
miles  from  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School.  In  August  2015,  prior  to  the  beginning 
of  the  fall  semester  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School,  respondent  informed  the 
principal,  Laura  Brown,  that  he  takes  his  son  to  school  at  7:45  a.m.,  and  respondent  requested 
that  she  designate  the  first  period  of  the  instructional  day  as  his  preparation  period,’  as  was 
the  case  when  he  taught  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School,  to  avert  conflict  between 
his  parental  and  professional  obligations.  At  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School, 
respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  during  the  first  period  and  to  preparation  time  during  the 
seventh  period.  Principal  Laura  Brown  declined  respondent’s  request,  and  she  advised 
respondent  that  late  arrival  to  his  first  period  class  was  unacceptable.  Principal  Laura  Brown 
testified  at  the  administrative  hearing  that  respondent  told  her,  “‘I’m  a  do  my  best.’” 

35. 

On  August  18,  20,  21,  24,  and  31  and  September  1,  2,  3,  8,  9,  and  10,  2015, 

respondent  reported  late  for  duty,  including  at  times  after  the  first  period  commenced,  at 
Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School.  On  September  10,  2015,  principal  Laura  Brown 
met  with  respondent  to  discuss  his  contractual  work  hours,  and  she  memorialized  the  meeting 
in  a  Post  Conference  Summary,  which  in  pertinent  part  states,  “During  this  conference  you 
were  reminded  of  your  contractual  work  hours.  You  were  informed  that  beginning  Monday, 
September  14,  2015  your  time  will  be  docked  if  you  arrive  at  work  after  7:45AM.”  (Exh.  I.) 

36. 

After  the  September  10,  2015  meeting  with  principal  Laura  Brown,  respondent 

reported  late  for  duty,  including  at  times  after  the  first  period  commenced,  five  additional 
times  in  September  2015  and  13  times  in  both  October  and  November  2015.  On  December 
1,  2015,  principal  Brown  placed  respondent  on  a  30-day  improvement  plan  directing  him, 
among  other  things,  to  “[rJeport  to  work  daily  a  7:45AM”  and  to  “[c]all  into  the  district 
substitute  line  to  request  a  substitute  teachers  [sic]  whenever  you  are  going  to  be  more  than 
one  period  (50  minutes)  late.”  (Exh.  J.)  The  directive  was  intended  to  implement  the 
California  Teaching  Standard  6  requirement  that  respondent  maintain  appropriate  school 
wide  policy  and  rules  as  a  professional  educator  including  regular  and  prompt  attendance. 
(Ibid.)  Principal  Brown  advised  respondent  of  her  intentions  to  re-evaluate  him  by  January 
28,  2016,  and  of  her  expectations  “to  see  great  improvement.”  (/d.) 

  

>  Article  7.10  of  The  Agreement  provides:  “Middle  and  high  school  unit  members 

shall  be  provided  a  preparation  period  of  not  fewer  than  two  hundred  (200)  minutes  per 
week.  A  preparation  period  is  an  assigned  period  set  aside  for  all  regular  classroom  middle 
and  high  school  unit  members  to  be  used  for  instructional  preparation  and  planning  purposes, 
grade  recording  and  correction,  student  evaluation,  curriculum  development,  staff 
development,  unit  member/student  conferences,  unit  member/parent  conferences,  unit 
member/administrator  conferences,  for  covering  another  unit  member’s  classes  .. 
whatever  administrative  assignments  are  necessary  for  the  efficient  operation  of  the 
educational  program.”  (Exh.  |  at  p.  15.)

.  and  for 

37. 

Respondent  reported  late  for  duty,  including  at  times  after  the  first  period 
commenced,  11  times  in  December  2015  and  10  times  in  January  2016.  On  January  28, 
2016,  principal  Laura  Brown  placed  respondent  on  another  30-day  improvement  plan  with 
directives  requiring  him  to  report  to  work  daily  at  7:45  a.m.  and  to  call  into  the  District’s 
substitute  line  as  set  forth  in  the  prior  improvement  plan.  Principal  Laura  Brown  additionally 
advised  respondent  that  he  would  undergo  another  evaluation  by  March  15,  2016. 

38. 

On  March  15,  2016,  no  additional  evaluation  occurred  because,  as  noted  in 

Factual  Finding  7,  on  February  1,  2016,  respondent  was  relieved  of  his  full-time  instructional 
duties  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  when  his  Preliminary  Single  Subject 
Teaching  Credential  expired.  Respondent  never  returned  to  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High 
School  to  teach.  Evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  did  not  establish  whether  in 
subsequent  academic  years  teaching  in  the  District,  respondent  continued  to  engage  in  a 
similar  pattern  of  tardiness.  The  tensions  between  respondent’s  parental  and  professional 
obligations  ceased.  Respondent  testified,  “I  smooth  out  a  lot  of  things.  I  found  my  groove.” 

39. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  principal  Laura  Brown  explained  that 

respondent’s  late  arrival  to  teach  his  first  period  class  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High 
School  was  “an  imposition.”  She  maintained  that  “students  lost  out  on  instructional  time.” 
Principal  Laura  Brown  emphasized  that  students  attending  a  continuation  school  “are  there  to 
make  up  credits”  and  that  when  left  unsupervised  “will  have  a  tendency  to  get  into  things.” 
Other  teachers  who  were  unprepared  to  instruct  respondent’s  students  were  required  to 
accommodate  respondent’s  students  in  their  classrooms.  Principal  Laura  Brown  covered 
respondent’s  class  when  no  other  teacher  was  available  to  do  so,  and  she  maintains  that  as  a 
consequence  her  attention  was  diverted  away  from  her  day-to-day  administrative  duties  as  a 
principal. 

40.  —  It  1s  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that,  as  alleged  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges,°  respondent  did  not  fulfill  his  contractual  duties  to  arrive  at  Cesar 
Chavez  Continuation  High  School  on  time  as  required  under  the  terms  of  The  Agreement. 
Nonetheless,  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  15,  it  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of 
the  evidence  that  respondent’s  failure  to  arrive  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  on 
time  warrants  respondent’s  dismissal. 

Alleged  Difficulty  Instructing  Students  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School 

41. 

During  the  September  10,  2015  meeting  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  35, 

Principal  Laura  Brown  discussed  respondent’s  submission  of  lessons  plans,  and  she 
memorialized  her  discussion  with  respondent  as  follows: 

You  informed  me  that  you  had  not  submitted  lessons  plans  because  your 
computer  was  not  working.  You  informed  me  that  a  colleague  was  working 
on  your  computer.  At  that  time  you  submitted a  list  of  activities  that  you 

  

°  Exh.  A  at  pp.  4-6,  paragraphs  4-9. 

10

assigned  to  your  students.  After  recetving  that  list  of  activities  I  informed  you 
via  a  face  to  face  conversation  that  the  list  of  activities  that  you  provided  was 
not  acceptable  and  I  gave  you a  lesson  plan  to  utilize. 

(Exh.  J.) 

42. 

On  November  10,  2015,  principal  Laura  Brown  observed  respondent’s 

classroom  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School.  She  explained  at  the  administrative 
hearing  that  she  observed  tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  graders  coloring  maps  and  that  map 
coloring  1s  “generally  over  in  elementary  schools.”  She  also  testified  that  the  white  board  in 
respondent’s  classroom  had  “a  lot  of  information  which  didn’t  match  students’  work.”  To 
principal  Laura  Brown,  it  appeared  as  if  “a  packet  of  work  sheets  was  randomly  handed  out 
to  the  students”  and  that  “there  was  no  apparent  lesson  plan.”  She  was  concerned  that 
students  were  doing  busy  work,  that  students  were  not  being  prepared  for  the  next  grade 
level,  and  that  students  “would  not  be  able  to  acquire  and  speak  academic  language.” 
Principal  Laura  Brown  documented  her  classroom  observation  as  follows: 

After  observing  your  class  on  November  10,  2015,  and  saw  that  the  students 
were  coloring  maps  of  the  United  States,  I  met  with  you  again  face  to  face  to 
express  my  concern  for  the  lack  of  rigor;  you  explained  that  this  activity  was 
leading  into  more  rigorous  activities.  At  that  time  I  asked  you  for  a  lesson 
plan;  you  stated  that  your  computer  still  did  not  work  and  that  you  refuse  to 
use  your  personal  computer  for  CUSD  business;  you  stated  that  the  colleague 
was  still  trying  to  fix  your  computer. 

(Exh.  J.) 

43. 

|Asaconsequence  of  principal  Laura  Brown’s  observation  of  respondent’s 

classroom,  the  December  1,  2015  30-day  Improvement  Plan,  discussed  in  Factual  Finding 
36,  additionally  directs  respondent  to  create  and  submit  lesson  plans  effective  December  2, 
2015,  and  it  informs  respondent  that  lesson  plans  are  due  every  Friday.  The  directive  was 
intended  to  implement  the  California  Teaching  Standard  4  requirement  that  respondent 
establish  and  communicate  learning  goals  for  all  students. 

44. 

Ina  December  9,  2015  30-day  Improvement  Plan  Addendum,  principal  Laura 
Brown  informs  respondent  that  she  would  assist  him  with  fulfilling  the  directives  of  the  30- 
day  Improvement  Plan  in  the  following  pertinent  manner: 

Provide  you  with  a  computer  so  that  you  can  submit  lesson  plans[. | 

Frequently  observe  your  class  and  provide  you  with  written  feedback  to  assist 
you  with  delivering  rigorous  instruction]. | 

Since  you  are  requesting  a  copy  of  the  district  lesson  plan  template  I  will 
accommodate  you  by  allowing  you  to  utilize  the  district  lesson  plan  template 
to  formulate  your  lessons.  Because  this  is  not  the  lesson  plan  template  that  we 
use  at  Chavez  I  do  not  have  a  completed  lesson  using  this  template;  however, 

1]

you  can  use  the  laptop  computer  that  was  issued  to  you  on  Tuesday,  December 
8,  2015  to  go  to  the  CUSD  website  and  download  a  copy  of  the  district  lesson 
plan  template.  If  you  need  assistance  with  completing  the  lesson  plan  I  am 
available  to  assist  you. 

(Exh.  J.) 

45. 

Respondent  defended  his  classroom  instruction  explaining  that  he  engaged  his 

students  in  work  that  was  consistent  with  state-wide  academic  standards  and  expectations, 
and  that  because  his  students  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  presented  with 
varying  levels  of  academic  deficiency  he  also  offered  his  students  exercises  so  “that  they 
could  feel  accomplished.”  Regarding  the  map  coloring  exercise,  respondent  explained,  “A 
lot  of  the  kids  didn’t  know  geography;  so,  I  added  it  to  history.  I  met  them  where  they  were. 
I  wouldn’t  have  taught  it  if  they  knew  it.” 

46. 

As  noted  in  Factual  Finding  7,  on  February  1,  2016,  respondent  was  relieved 

of  his  full-time  instructional  duties  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  when  his 
Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  expired.  Although  the  District  subsequently 
re-employed  respondent  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  duration  of  the  2015/2016  academic 
year,  respondent  was  likely  not  expected  and  did  not  submit  lessons  to  principal  Laura 
Brown.  The  evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  did  not  establish  whether 
respondent  formulated  lesson  plans  or  submitted  lesson  plans  to  principal  Laura  Brown 
consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the  30-Day  Improvement  Plan.  Nor  did  the  evidence 
offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  establish  whether  principal  Laura  Brown  conducted 
further  observations  of  respondent’s  classroom  or  offered  written  feedback  to  assist 
respondent  with  the  delivery  of  rigorous  classroom  instruction. 

47. 

 Itis  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that,  as  alleged  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges,’  respondent  “struggled  to  establish  and  communicate  learning  goals 
for  all  students,”  but  it  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent 
“failed  to  effectively  develop  and  sequence  instructional  activities  and  materials  for  student 
learning.”  As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  16,  it  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of 
evidence  that  respondent’s  struggle  to  establish  and  communicate  learning  goals  warrants 
respondent’s  dismissal. 

Alleged  Neglect  of Duties  Arising  from  Early  Departure  to  Coach  Softball  for  Private  School 

48.  —_ The  District’s  Personnel  Policy  on  “Nonschool  Employment”  provides,  “In 

order  to  help  maintain  public  trust  in  the  integrity  of  district  operations,  the  Board  of  Trustees 
expects  all  employees  to  give  the  responsibility  of  their  positions  precedence  over  any  other 
outside  employment.  A  district  employee  may  receive  compensation  for  outside  activities  as 
long  as  these  activities  are  not  inconsistent,  incompatible,  in  conflict  with,  or  inimical  to 
his/her  district  duties.”  (Exh.  A  at  p.  000023.)  The  “Nonschool  Employment”  policy 

  

7  Exh.  A  at  p.5,  paragraph  6.) 

12

specifies  which  outside  activity  is  deemed  inconsistent,  incompatible,  or  inimical  to  district 
employment  as  follows: 

An  outside  activity  shall  be  considered  inconsistent,  incompatible,  or  inimical 
to  district  employment  when  such  activity: 

1.  Requires  time  periods  that  interfere  with  the  proper,  efficient  discharge  of 

the  employee’s  duties 

2. 

3. 

4. 

(Id.) 

Entails  compensation  from  an  outside  source  for  activities  which  are  part 
of  the  employee’s  regular  duties 

Involves  using  the  district’s  name,  prestige,  time,  facilities,  equipment,  or 
supplies  for  private  gain 

Involves  service  which  will  be  wholly  or  in  part  subject  to  the  approval  or 
control  of  another  district  employee  or  Board  member 

49. 

The  “Nonschool  Employment”  policy  establishes  the  following  process  for 

obtaining  authorization  to  engage  in  outside  employment: 

An  employee  wishing  to  accept  outside  employment  that  may  be  inconsistent, 
incompatible,  in  conflict  with,  or  inimical  to  the  employee’s  duties  shall  file  a 
written  request  with  his/her  immediate  supervisor  describing  the  nature  of  the 
employment  and  the  time  required.  The  supervisor  shall  evaluate  each  request 
based  on  the  employee’s  specific  duties  within  the  district  and  determine 
whether  to  grant  authorization  for  such  employment. 

The  supervisor  shall  inform  the  employee  whether  the  outside  employment  is 
prohibited.  The  employee  may  appeal  a  supervisor’s  denial  of  authorization  to 
the  Superintendent  or  designee.  An  employee  who  continues  to  pursue  a 
prohibited  activity  may  be  subject  to  disciplinary  action. 

(Id.) 

50.  —  Junipero  Serra  High  School  (Serra),  a  private  religious-affiliated  school  not 

associated  with  the  District,  employed  respondent  during  the  spring  semester  of  the 
2014/2015,  2015/2016,  and  2016/2017  academic  years  to  assist  with  coaching  Serra’s  Girls 
Varsity  Softball  team.  Respondent  took  the  coaching  position  at  Serra  because  he  was 
interested  in  securing  a  similar  coaching  position  within  the  District  and  respondent  believed 
that  the  Serra  coaching  position  would  establish  him  as  an  experienced  coach  and  therefore  a 
suitable  candidate  for  a  coaching  position  within  the  District  should  the  opportunity  arise. 
Serra’s  softball  season  begins  in  March  of  each  spring  semester,  and  for  each  spring  semester 
that  respondent  coached  at  Serra  he  was  paid  a  $500  stipend. 

13

51. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2014/2015  academic  year,  respondent  was 

assigned  to  Compton  Community  Day  High  School.  The  students  whom  respondent  taught 
departed  at  1:30  p.m.  Respondent  concluded  his  duties  in  the  District  at  2:45  p.m.  He 
commenced  coaching  at  Serra  at  3:15  p.m.  Respondent  credibly  testified,  “I  never  had  to 
It  was  after  school.”  Respondent’s  outside  activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls 
leave  early. 
Varsity  Softball  did  not  require  his  use  of  time  that  interfered  or  conflicted  with  his  proper 
and  efficient  discharge  of  his  instructional  duties  at  Compton  Community  Day  High  School. ° 
In  these  circumstances,  the  “Nonschool  Employment”  policy  did  not  obligate  respondent  to 
obtain  authorization  to  engage  in  outside  activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls  Varsity  Softball. 

... 

52. 

It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that,  in  the  spring 

semester  of  the  2014/2015  academic  year,  respondent’s  outside  activity  coaching  Serra’s 
Girls  Varsity  Softball  was  inconsistent,  incompatible,  or  in  conflict  with,  or  inimical  to,  his 
District  duties. 

53. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2015/2016  academic  year,  the  February  1,  2016 

expiration  of  respondent’s  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  caused  the 
District  to  relieve  respondent  of  his  full-time  instructional  duties  in  the  District.  After 
February  1,  2016,  respondent  functioned  as  a  substitute  teacher  in  the  District  for  the 

  

’  Respondent’s  testimony  that,  in  the  spring  semester  of  the  2014/2015  academic  year, 

he  never  had  to  leave  early  to  pursue  his  coaching  activities  is  credited  over  the  information 
appearing  in  Exhibit  O,  which  Dr.  Ayjala  instructed  District  personnel  to  prepare,  and  which 
Dr.  Ajala  claims  “demonstrates  that  [respondent]  was  using  personal  necessity  leave  to  work 
elsewhere.”  Article  12.4  of  The  Agreement  defines  “Personal  Necessity  Leave”  as 
accumulated  sick  leave  for  certain  specified  personal  emergencies  not  present  in  this  matter. 
(See  Exh.  1  at  pp.  35-36.)  Exhibit  O  falsely  represents  that  respondent  was  assigned  to 
Chavez  Tubman  on  May  7,  2015,  a  day  when  respondent  purportedly  used  three  hours  of 
personal  necessity  leave.  Respondent  was  not  assigned  to  Chavez  Tubman  on  May  7,  2015. 
In  fact,  during  the  spring  semester  of  the  2014/2015  academic  year,  the  District  returned 
respondent  to  Compton  Community  Day  High  School  after  its  investigation  of  the  October 
29,  2014  incident  involving  N.  (Factual  Finding  27.)  Exhibit  O  does  not  specify  the  actual 
time  comprising  the  purported  hours  identified  as  personal  necessity  leave  and  used  in 
connection  with  respondent’s  outside  activity  coaching.  Other  evidence  offered  at  the 
administrative  hearing  indicate  that  respondent  used  personal  necessity  leave  on  days 
unrelated  to  days  he  engaged  outside  activity  coaching.  (See  Exhibit  R.)  Consequently, 
respondent’s  use  of  personal  necessity  leave  is  not  indisputably  linked  to  his  outside 
coaching  activity.  Additionally,  Exhibit  O  attributes  seven  hours  of  “School  Business”  to 
respondent’s  outside  activity  coaching  on  April  30,  2015.  Article  12  of  The  Agreement 
governs  leaves  and  it  does  not  list  “School  Business”  as  one  of  14  enumerated  specific  leave 
categories.  (See  Exh.  |  at  pp.  33-54.)  Exhibit  R,  which  purports  to  represent  respondent’s 
payroll  record,  does  not  support  attributing  that  number  of  hours  to  any  leave  of  absence 
category  respondent  utilized  on  that  day.  These  infirmities  engender  doubts  about  the 
reliability  of  the  information  appearing  in  Exhibit  O  such  that  Exhibit  O  was  deemed  worthy 
of  mistrust. 

14

remainder  of  the  2015/2016  academic  year.  Without  a  full-time  teaching  assignment  and 
concomitant  instructional  obligations  during  that  period  of  time,  respondent  fulfilled  his 
coaching  duties  and  responsibilities  for  Serra’s  Girls  Varsity  Softball  during  times  when  he 
did  not  accept  teaching  assignments  and  did  not  function  as  a  substitute  teacher  in  the 
District. 

54. 

It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that,  in  the  spring 

semester  of  the  2015/2016  academic  year,  respondent’s  activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls 
Varsity  Softball  interfered  with  the  proper  and  efficient  discharge  of  the  duties  he  assumed  as 
a  substitute  teacher  in  the  District. 

55. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year,  respondent  was 

assigned  to  teach  social  studies  full-time  at  Centennial  High  School,  where  his  students 
included  tenth  graders  and  graduating  seniors.  Dr.  Shauna  Harris  and  Douglas  Charles 
Brown,  Sr.  served  as  co-principals  at  Centennial  High  School  during  the  2016/2017 
academic  year. 

56. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year,  respondent’s  coaching 

obligations  required  him  to  drive  a  bus  transporting  members  of  Serra’s  Girls  Varsity 
Softball  team.  To  attend  Serra’s  home  games,  respondent  left  Centennial  High  School  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  instructional  day.  To  attend  Serra’s  “away  games,”  respondent  admits  and 
does  not  dispute  that  he  “had  to  leave  at  the  beginning  of  fifth  period”  for  “near  games”  or 
“during  lunch  period”  for  “far  games.” 

57. 

Respondent  and  principal  Douglas  Brown  are  fraternity  brothers,  and  they 
frequently  “talked  shop”  and  about  softball,  including  respondent’s  coaching  position  at 
Serra.  At  the  administrative  hearing,  principal  Douglas  Brown  acknowledged  that  he  was 
aware  of  respondent’s  employment  as  a  softball  coach  at  Serra.  Principal  Douglas  Brown 
testified,  however,  “I  did  not  give  permission  for  Mr.  Heard  to  leave  his  contractual  work  day 
in  2016/2017.  I  received  no  notification  from  Mr.  Heard  that  he  would  be  leaving  early  to 
coach  softball  at  Serra.”  According  to  principal  Douglas  Brown,  “I  approached  [respondent] 
and  told  him  he  shouldn’t  be  working  somewhere  else  while  working  for  the  District.  I  was 
aware  that  he  was  leaving  early  and  I  instructed  him  that  it  was  inappropriate  and  against 
District  policy.” 

58. 

In  March  2017,  on  a  day  not  specified  in  the  evidence  received  at  the 

administrative  hearing,  the  teacher  in  the  classroom  adjacent  to  respondent’s  classroom 
informed  Ms.  Brown,  the  school  secretary  at  Centennial  High  School,  that  respondent’s 
students  were  lingering  outside  respondent’s  classroom  after  the  lunch  period  concluded  and 
the  next  instructional  period  began.  Respondent  had  not  provided  Ms.  Brown  notification 
about  his  absence,  and  no  arrangement  had  been  made  for  coverage  of  respondent’s 
classroom.  Ms.  Brown  queried  respondent  about  the  matter,  and  at  the  administrative 
hearing  she  recalled  that  respondent  orally  informed  her  “he  would  be  leaving  early  a  number 
of  days.” 

15

59. 

On  March  10,  2017,  respondent  provided  Ms.  Brown  a  hand-written  note  with 
the  following  disclosures:  “These  are  the  dates  that  I  need  coverage  for  my  5"  &  6"  periods. 
I  coach  Varsity  Softball  at  Serra  H.S.  And  on  travel  days  or  away  games  the  team  leaves 
during  lunch.”  (Exh.  T.)  The  hand-written  note  lists  March  10,  16,  and  28,  April  4  and  27, 
and  May  4  and  9,  2017  as  days  on  which  coverage  would  be  need  for  respondent’s 
classroom. 

60. 

Ms.  Brown  reported  the  times  respondent  departed  the  District  early  to  pursue 

his  outside  activity  coaching  to  the  District’s  Payroll  Department  under  the  category 
“Personal  Necessity  Leave.”  Ms.  Brown  arranged  for  coverage  for  respondent’s  classroom. 
At  times,  the  teacher  in  the  classroom  adjacent  to  respondent’s  classroom  covered  for 
respondent.  That  teacher  taught  a  science  class  to  approximately  20  students  with  special 
needs.  Covering  respondent’s  classroom  required  that  teacher  to  incorporate  respondent’s  30 
social  studies  students  into  her  classroom  populated  with  special  needs  students. 

61. 

On  April  6,  2017,  respondent  provided  Ms.  Brown  with  another  note 

disclosing  additional  days  on  which  he  expected  departing  the  District  early  to  pursue  his 
outside  activity  coaching.  The  note  states,  “These  are  the  remaining  days  that  I  have  to  leave 
for  Serra  Softball,”  and  lists  April  6,  11,  25  and  27  and  May  2,  4,  and  9,  2017.  (Exh.  P.) 

62. 

It  is  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent’s  outside 

activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls  Varsity  Softball  was  inconsistent,  incompatible  and  in  conflict 
with  respondent’s  instructional  duties  at  Centennial  High  School  in  the  spring  semester  of  the 
2016/2017  academic  year.  Consequently,  the  District’s  “Nonschool  Employment”  policy 
required  respondent  to  obtain  authorization  to  engage  in  such  outside  activity  from  his 
supervisors.  Respondent  informing  Ms.  Brown  about  his  outside  activity  coaching  and 
providing  Ms.  Brown  with  relevant  dates  was  not  the  equivalent  of  obtaining  authorization 
for  such  activity  from  his  supervisors. 

63. 

Onan  unspecified  day  in  late  April  2017,  Dr.  Harris  observed  students 

lingering  outside  respondent’s  classroom  after  the  instructional  period  began.  Dr.  Harris 
queried  about  respondent’s  whereabouts,  and  Ms.  Brown  informed  Dr.  Harris  that  she  was  in 
the  process  of  finding  someone  to  cover  respondent’s  classroom.  On  a  second  occasion,  Dr. 
Harris  again  observed  students  lingering  outside  respondent’s  classroom  after  the 
instructional  period  began.  Dr.  Harris  learned  from  Ms.  Brown  that  respondent  was  coaching 
softball  elsewhere.  Dr.  Harris  testified,  “Ms.  Brown  informed  me  he  was  coaching  softball  at 
another  district.  Prior  to  that  conversation  with  Ms.  Brown,  I  was  not  aware.  I  had  no 
conversation  with  him  about  this.” 

64. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  Dr.  Harris  recalled  that  when  respondent  learned 

that  she  wanted  to  address  the  matter  with  him,  he  approached  her  asking,  “You  want  to 
speak  to  me?”  Dr.  Harris  testified  that  she  responded  by  querying  respondent,  ““Are  you 
leaving  your  classes  to  coach  baseball,’  and  respondent  said,  ‘Yes.’  I  asked,  “Why  would 
you  leave  your  class  to  do  that?’  and  he  said  he  was  coaching  at  Serra  and  that  he  wasn’t 
going  to  quit  and  you  can  dock  me  because  I’m  not  going  to  quit.”  Respondent’s  response 

16

surprised  Dr.  Harris.  “He  was  just  like,  I’m  not  quitting  and  you  can  dock  me  if  you  want  to. 
He  had  a  nonchalant  this-is-what-I’m-doing  tone.  No  expression  of  remorse  or  expression  of 
appreciation  of  what  he  was  doing.” 

65. 

After  her  conversation  with  respondent,  Dr.  Harris  confirmed  with  principal 
Douglas  Brown  that  he  provided  no  authorization  to  respondent  to  leave  Centennial  High 
School  during  the  lunch  or  fifth  period  to  engage  in  outside  activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls 
Varsity  Softball. 

66. 

It  is  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  the  respondent  did  not 

provide  his  supervisors  with  a  prior  written  request  describing  the  nature  of  and  the  time 
required  for  him  to  pursue  outside  activity  coaching  for  Serra  and  that  respondent  obtained 
no  authorization  to  engage  in  such  activity  from  his  supervisors. 

67. 

On  April  26,  2017,  Dr.  Harris  sent  Dr.  Ajala  the  following  email  regarding  her 

exchange  with  respondent. 

Good  Morning  Dr.  Ajala.  I  wanted  to  touch  base  with  you  in  regards  to  Mr. 
Heard.  I  spoke  with  you  about  his  leaving  campus  early  to  go  coach  for 
another  school.  He  never  cleared  any  of  this  with  me  and  I  found  out  when  I 
noticed  he  needed  more  coverage  than  usual.  When  I  spoke  with  him  about  it 
his  response  to  me  was  “Well  go  ahead  and  dock  me  because  I  have  an 
obligation  over  there  and  I  am  not  going  to  quit  now.”  When  I  told  him  of  his 
obligation  here  with  his  students  at  Centennial  (who  are  also  Seniors)  he 
refused  to  change  his  tone  or  his  mind.  So  I  am  now  forwarding  the  dates  and 
information  to  you  because  although  I  can  write  him  up  for  not  adhering  to  his 
contractual  obligations  here  at  Centennial,  I  can’t  block  his  pay.  Or  can  I? 
know  HR  can.  He  needs  to  either  remain  committed  to  the  students  he  signed 
up  to  teach  or  not  get  paid.  Attached  please  find  the  dates  that  were  given  to 
my  secretary  (not  to  me)  for  coverage.  For  the  attached  dates  he  has  requested 
6"  period  coverage  but  leaves  during  5"  period  as  well.  His  conference  is  1* 
period  by  the  way.  Let  me  know  if  there  is  anything  else  I  need  to  do  or 
submit.  Thanks. 

I 

(Exh.  S.) 

68. 

Evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  failed  to  establish  whether  Dr. 

Harris  actually  wrote  up  respondent.  Evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  failed  to 
establish  whether  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Department  had  authority  to  “block” 
respondent’s  pay  or  whether  respondent’s  pay  was  actually  blocked  and  on  what  grounds. 

69. 

Dr.  Harris  and  Dr.  Ayjala  testified  that  respondent’s  early  departure  from  his 

teaching  assignment  at  Centennial  High  School  in  the  District  to  engage  in  outside  activities 
coaching  was  disruptive  to  the  educational  community  at  Centennial  High  School.  Dr. 
Harris  was  concerned  about  “deprivation  of  instructional  time  to  students”  attempting  to 
graduate.  According  to  Dr.  Ajala,  respondent’s  students  at  times  wandered  around  the  school 

17

without  supervision  or  they  did  not  receive  subject  matter  instructions—they  were  “just 
being  baby  sat.”  Dr.  Ajala  contended  that  “content  matters  and  that  is  why  you  have a  single 
subject  matter  credential.  If  the  substitute  is  not  qualified  in  that  subject  matter,  then  the 
substitute  is  not  appropriate  for  the  students.  There  was  no  time  for  the  school  to  prepare  for 
the  coverage.  The  school  has  to  scurry  around  to  find  an  appropriate  response  at  extra  costs. 
On  a  number  of  levels,  1t  was  wrong.  It  was  conduct  unbecoming.”  Dr.  Ajala  additionally 
contended  that  respondent  committed  “theft  of  District  time”  because  respondent  “had  an 
obligation  to  work  his  full  hours,  he  left  and  went  to  another  paid  job”  and  it  was  “not 
appropriate  to  receive  pay  for  the  same  time.”  Dr.  Ajala’s  theft  contention  is  rejected.  At 
most,  there  was  a  misuse  of  respondent’s  personal  leave  time. 

70. 

On  June  7,  2017,  several  days  after  the  CTC  issued  a  Single  Subject  Teaching 

Credential  in  Social  Science  to  respondent,  Dr.  Ajala  summoned  respondent  to  her  office. 
Respondent  recalled  Dr.  Ajala  admonishing  him  stating  “‘you  are  double  dipping. 
Respondent  testified  that  he  “immediately  quit”  his  coaching  position  at  Serra  because  “‘it 
was  hard  for  me  to  get  my  credential  and  I  didn’t  want  to  jeopardize  it.” 

999 

71. 

The  District  continued  to  employ  respondent.  In  the  2017/2018  academic 

year,  respondent  resumed  his  teaching  assignment  at  Centennial  High  School. 

72. 

It  is  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that,  as  alleged  in  the 
Statement  of  Charges,’  in  the  spring  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year,  respondent  left 
Centennial  High  School  early  to  purse  outside  activity  coaching  softball  for  a  private  school 
outside  the  District  contrary  to  District  policy.  Nonetheless,  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion 
17,  it  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  such  conduct  warrants 
respondent’s  dismissal. 

Compton  Unified  School  District’s  Suspension  of Respondent 

73. 

On  February  21,  2018,  the  District  provided  respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

Proposed  Intent  to  Immediately  Suspend  Without  Pay  and  Dismiss  with  Statement  of 
Charges.  In  the  Notice,  the  District  informed  respondent  of  his  right  to  respond  to  the 
Statement  of  Charges  and  that  a  Skelly  conference  was  scheduled  for  February  28,  2018. 

74. 

Respondent  attended  the  February  28,  2018  Skelly  conference  with  his  union 

representative  and  respondent  presented  reasons  why  he  should  not  be  dismissed  from  the 
District.  The  Skelly  officer  recommended  that  the  District  proceed  with  the  immediate 
suspension  and  dismissal  of  respondent. 

75. 

On  March  14,  2018,  the  Governing  Board  for  the  District  placed  respondent  on 

unpaid  suspension  pending  dismissal.  On  March  20,  2018,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44943,  respondent  requested  a  hearing  on  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Thereafter, 
these  proceedings  ensured. 
  

”  Exh.  A  at  p.  6,  paragraphs  14-20. 

18

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that 
cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  permanent 
certificated  employee,  from  the  District.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  “‘Preponderance  of  the  evidence 
means  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citations.].. . 
[T]he  sole  focus  of  the  legal  definition  of  ‘preponderance’  in  the  phrase  ‘preponderance  of 
the  evidence’  is  the  quality  of  the  evidence.  The  guantity  of  the  evidence  presented  by  each 
side  is  irrelevant.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Company  (1990)  226  Cal.App.3d  314,  324- 
325;  italics  in  text.)  In  meeting  the  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  the 
District  “must  produce  substantial  evidence,  contradicted  or  un-contradicted,  which  supports 
the  finding.”  Cn  re  Shelley  J.  (1998)  68  Cal.App.4th  322,  339.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  authorizes  the  dismissal  of  a  permanent, 

certificated  employee  only  for  certain  specified  causes  including  immoral  conduct, 
unprofessional  conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violation  of, 
or  refusal  to  obey,  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her. 

3. 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  generally  as  “that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to 
sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption, 
indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  a  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate 
attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.”  (Board  of Education  of  the  San  Francisco 
Unified  School  District  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

4. 

‘““Dishonesty’  connotes  a  disposition  to  deceive.  [Citation.|  It...  denotes  an 
absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud[.]”  (Gee  v.  California  State 
Personnel  Bd.  (1970)  5  Cal.App.3d  713,  718-719.)  Courts  understand  integrity  to  mean 
“soundness  of  moral  principle  and  character,  as  shown  by  a  person’s  dealings  with  others,  in 
the  making  and  performance  of  contracts,  in  fidelity  and  honesty  in  the  discharge  of  trusts. 
In  short,  it  is  used  as  a  synonym  for  probity,  honesty,  and  uprightness  in  business  relations 
with  others.’”  (See  Jn  re  Estate  of  Gordon  (1904)  142  Cal.  125,  132,  quoting  In  re  Bauquier 
(1891)  88  Cal.  307.) 

5. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  “‘clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 
merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 
school  district.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.) 

19

6. 

‘Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 
reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State 
Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  or  her”  as 
cause  for  dismissal  requires  more  than  a  single  violation  of  a  school  board's  rules  by  a 
permanent  school  teacher.  (Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d 
77,  rehearing  denied  28  Cal.App.3d  77.)  In  addition,  persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to 
obey,  a  district’s  governing  board’s  reasonable  regulations  requires  a  “showing  of  intentional 
and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Diego  Union  High  School  District  v.  Commission 
on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  1176,  1196.) 

7. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44939,  subdivision  (b),  a  teacher’s  “willful 

refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school  district”  is  ground  for  dismissal 

8. 

Abstract  characterizations  of  conduct—for  example,  as  “immoral”—are 
insufficient  grounds  for  dismissal  of  a  district’s  permanent  certificated  employee.  (See 
Morrison  vy.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.)  A  rational  connection  or  nexus 
must  exist  between  alleged  misconduct  and  competence  or  ability  to  teach  effectively.  The 
determinative  test  is  whether  conduct  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach.  (See  Board  of 
Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691.)  Unfitness  to  teach  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact. 
(Id.  at  p.  698,  fn.  3.) 

9. 

Morrison  identifies  several  factors  relevant  to  the  determination  of  unfitness  to 

teach:  the  likelihood  that  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students,  fellow  teachers,  or 
the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  the  proximity  or 
remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  the  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person 
involved;  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the  likelihood 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may 
inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person 
involved,  or  other  certified  persons;  and  the  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

10. 

All  Morrison  factors  need  not  be  present  to  reach  a  determination  of  unfitness 

to  teach.  In  other  words,  an  item  by  item  analysis  of  each  established  individual  fact  is  not 
required.  Rather,  Morrison  calls  for  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  accumulated 
established  facts.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  1457.) 

11. 

In  this  matter,  complainant  established  some  but  not  all  allegations  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges  by  a  preponderance  of  competent,  credible  evidence. 

12. 

Notably,  complainant  failed  to  produce  a  preponderance  of  competent, 

credible  evidence  establishing  that  respondent  engaged  in  a  physical  altercation  with  a 
student. 

20

a. 

The  only  testifying  witnesses  who  perceived—indeed,  who  were  involved  in— 

the  incident  occurring  in  respondent’s  classroom,  on  October  29,  2014,  at  Compton 
Community  Day  High  School  are  respondent  and  N.  Their  testimony  conflicts  in  material 
aspects.  N.  claims  respondent  choked  and  lifted  him  by  his  neck  to  placed  him  on a table. 
Respondent  denies  N.’s  claim,  but  admits  to  placing  the  palms  of  his  hands  on  N.’s  shoulders 
to  calm  N.  in  a  moment  of  escalating  tensions. 

b. 

Members  of  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of  N.  and  respondent’s 

testimony  in  accordance  with  the  factors  cataloged  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the 
demeanor  and  manner  of  the  witness  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the 
capacity  to  perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty, 
the  existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent  or 
inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the  witness 
testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the  proceedings. 

C. 

Members  of  the  Commission  were  guided  by  the  decisional  law 

acknowledging  that  fact  finders  are  permitted  to  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness 
and  reject  another  part  even  though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v. 
Parke,  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9  Cal.3d  51,  67);  to  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of a  witness, 
though  not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected 
material.”  (/d.,  at  pp.  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762, 
777);  and  even  to  reject  testimony  that  is  not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v. 
Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.) 

d. 

Respondent’s  testimony  was  found  to  be  more  credible  than  N.’s  testimony. 
In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  incident  occurring  on  October  29,  2014,  principal  Reed 
obtained  statements  from  N.,  N.’s  parents,  a  student  present  in  respondent’s  classroom  at  the 
time  of  the  incident  identified  as  Witness  #2,  and  respondent.  No  one—not  N.,  N.’s  parents, 
Witness  #2,  or  respondent—reported  to  principal  Reed  that  N.  was  lifted  off  the  ground  and 
placed  atop  a  table.  N.’s  parents,  who  learned  of  the  incident  from  N.  since  they  were  not 
present  in  respondent’s  classroom  at  the  time  of  the  incident,  parroted  N.’s  claim  at  the 
administrative  hearing.  They  exhibited  a  discernible  misunderstanding  of  how  racial  epithets 
were  actually  deployed  in  the  classroom.  Their  claim  included  N.’s  step-father’s  assertion 
that  N.’s  neck  “had  a  little  red”  even  though  almost  contemporaneously  with  the  incident  N. 
had  informed  principal  Reed  that  he  sustained  no  injuries.  The  intimate  relationship  N. 
presumably  enjoys  with  his  parents  likely  affected  N.’s  parents’  testimony  in  favor  of  their 
son  and  against  respondent. 

e. 

A  Compton  School  Police  officer  conducting  a  contemporaneous  investigation 

of  the  incident  determined  and  documented  that  there  was  physical  contact  between 
respondent  and  N.  Respondent  does  not  deny  making  physical  contact  with  N.  N.’s 
rendition  about  students  joking  around  and  an  ensuing  conflict  in  which  racial  slurs  were 
going  back  and  forth  is  consistent  with  respondent’s  testimony  explaining  how  he  intervened 
by  positioning  himself  in  front  of  N.  and  placing  his  out-stretched  arms  with  palms 

21

downward  on  N.’s  shoulders  to  calm  N.  when  it  appeared  to  him  that  N.  “was  going  to  do 
something.”  The  Compton  School  Police  officer’s  documented  investigative  determination 
corroborates  that  although  physical  contact  occurred  between  respondent  and  N.,  such 
contact  was  “not  malicious  in  nature.”  The  Incident  Report  the  officer  prepared  contains 
principal  Read’s  report  of  N.  pushing  respondent  and  respondent  restraining  N.  by  grabbing 
N.’s  shoulders  and  holding  N.  to  stop  N.’s  aggressive  behavior.  N.’s  testimony  claiming  that 
respondent  choked  and  lifted  him  by  his  neck  to  placed  him  on a table  is  not  credible. 

f. 

N.  told  principal  Reed  that  during  the  October  29,  2014  incident  he  and 

respondent  “exchanged  words”  and  that  respondent  said  “Dirty  Mexicans.”  Respondent  told 
principal  Reed  that  there  was  “a  back  and  forth”  and  that  at  some  point  the  exchange  became 
heated,  but  that  he  “didn’t  use  that  language.”  Respondent’s  practice  of  instructing  his 
students  on  the  offensive  and  hurtful  nature  of  racial  epithets  more  than  suggests  that 
respondent  was  unlikely  to  have  deployed  “Dirty  Mexican”  or  any  other  racial  epithet  to 
harm  N.  during  the  October  29,  2014  incident.  Principal  Reed,  who  appeared  as  a  witness  on 
behalf  of  the  District,  vouched  that  respondent  never  demonstrated  animosity  towards 
Mexicans  or  racist  tendencies. 

g. 

Consistent  with  its  obligation  to  provide  safe  school  environments  and  to 

minimize  the  risk  of  harm  to  students,  the  District  launched  an  investigation,  at  the 
conclusion  of  which  the  District  returned  respondent  to  his  classroom  at  Compton 
Community  Day  High  School  with  a  reminder  to  conduct  himself  in  a  professional  manner 
and  to  employ  a  “Hands  off’  policy  when  interacting  with  students.  Law  enforcement 
officials  declined  to  pursue  any  criminal  charges  against  respondent  in  connection  with  the 
alleged  October  29,  2014  incident.  A  reasonable  inference  is  that  N.’s  claims  were  as 
unsubstantiated  then  as  they  are  now,  and  that  the  District  did  not  consider  respondent’s 
return  to  Compton  Community  Day  High  School  a  risk  to  the  District’s  pupils. 

h. 

It  is  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent  engaged 
in  a  physical  altercation  with  a  student  warranting  respondent’s  dismissal  from  the  District. 

13.  |  Even  where  complainant  produced  a  preponderance  of  evidence  establishing 
certain  conduct  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges—that  respondent  took  at  least  six  years 
to  obtain  a  clear  teaching  credential  (Factual  Findings  1-12),  that  respondent  failed  to  arrive 
at  his  assigned  school  site  on  time  as  he  was  contractually  required  (Factual  Findings  32-40), 
that  respondent  had  difficulty  with  classroom  instruction  (Factual  Findings  41-47),  and  that 
respondent  left  work  early  to  pursue  outside  activity  coaching  softball  (Factual  Findings  48- 
72)—1t  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  competent,  credible  evidence  that  such 
conduct  individually  or  collectively  warranted  respondent’s  dismissal  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44932  or  44939. 

14a. 

During  the  six-year  period  when  respondent  lacked  a  clear  single  subject 

credential,  the  District  employed  and  re-employed  respondent  to  perform  both  substitute  and 
full-time  teaching  duties  and  responsibilities  notwithstanding  that,  pursuant  to  Education 

22

Code  section  44929 .21,  subdivision  (b),  the  District’s  Governing  Board  could  have,  but  did 
not,  terminate  respondent’s  employment  with  the  District.  '° 

b. 

Although  teachers  holding  preliminary  teaching  credentials  typically  complete 
the  processes  for  satisfying  the  requirements  for  obtaining  a  clear  professional  credential  in  a 
two-year  period,  no  evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  supports  a  conclusion  that 
the  typical  two-year  period  is  a  mandated  period  of  time.  To  the  contrary,  the  competent, 
credible  evidence  establishes  that  teachers  unable  to  satisfy  the  qualifications  for  a  clear 
professional  credential  within  the  typical  two-year  period  may  apply  for  and  obtain  from  the 
CTC  an  extension  of  time,  which  is  what  respondent  did.  Complainant  therefore  failed  to 
produce  a  preponderance  of  evidence  establishing  that  respondent  requiring  an  atypical 
amount  of  time  to  conclude  the  processes  for  obtaining  a  clear  teaching  credential  alone 
amounts  to  unfitness  to  teach  warranting  his  dismissal  from  the  District. 

15. 

On  multiple  occasions  respondent  did  not  fulfill  his  contractual  duties  in  the 

2015/2016  academic  year  to  arrive  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  at  7:45  a.m.  as 
required  under  the  terms  of  The  Agreement.  (Factual  Findings  32-40.)  Respondent’s 
tardiness  had  an  adverse  effect  on  the  educational  community.  Students  lost  out  on 
instructional  time.  Other  faculty  were  required  to  cover  respondent’s  classroom  without 
adequate  preparation.  Principal  Laura  Brown’s  attention  was  diverted  from  her 
administrative  responsibilities  and  duties  in  order  for  her  to  attend  to  respondent’s  students. 
Respondent’s  tardiness  contravened  terms  of  employment  with  the  District  set  forth  in  The 
Agreement.  In  extenuation,  respondent’s  conduct  was  not  occasioned  by  a  refusal  to  obey 
the  contractual  terms  governing  his  employment  in  the  District.  Rather,  respondent  was 
caught  between  a  rock  and  a  hard  place—eschewing  his  parental  responsibility  to  his  child 
and  abandoning  his  professional  obligations  to  his  students.  Respondent’s  dilemma  resolved, 
and  respondent  subsequently  provided  classroom  instruction  in  the  District  without  any 
further  recurrence  that  would  support  a  conclusion  that  tardiness  is  a  fixed,  irremediable 
character  trait  he  possesses.  Under  these  circumstances,  respondent’s  tardiness  was  not 
established  as  indicating  unfitness  to  teach  warranting  respondent’s  dismissal  from  the 
District. 

loa. 

Principal  Laura  Brown  opined  that  respondent  exhibited  difficulties  with 

classroom  instruction  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School,  which  piqued  her  concern 

  

'  Section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b)  provides: 

The  governing  board  shall  notify  the  employee,  on  or  before  March  15  of  the 
employee’s  second  complete  consecutive  school  year  of  employment  by  the 
district  in  a  position  or  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  of  the 
decision  to  reelect  or  not  reelect  the  employee  for  the  next  succeeding  school 
year  to  the  position.  In  the  event  that  the  governing  board  does  not  give  notice 
pursuant  to  this  section  on  or  before  March  15,  the  employee  shall  be  deemed 
reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year. 

23

about  the  quality  of  instruction  respondent’s  students  were  receiving.  (Factual  Findings  41- 
47).  At  the  time,  respondent  held  a  preliminary  teaching  credential.  The  District  evidently 
anticipated  that  the  preliminary  credentialed  teachers  it  employed,  including  respondent, 
might  need  support  and  guidance  to  achieve  the  high-quality  educational  program  it  sought 
for  its  pupils.  Principal  Laura  Brown  consistent  with  the  District  objectives  provided 
respondent  with  a  30-Day  Improvement  Plan  directing  him  to  prepare  and  submit  lesson 
plans  and  informing  him  of  her  intentions  of  providing  him  with  written  feedback.  The 
evidence  offered  at  the  administrative  hearing  failed  to  establish  whether  the  30-Day 
Improvement  Plan  was  actually  implemented  or  whether  after  receipt  of  support  and 
guidance  respondent  continued  to  exhibit  difficulties  with  his  classroom  instruction  since 
respondent  was  relieved  of  his  full-time  instructional  duties  at  Cesar  Chavez  Continuation 
High  School  and  placed  on  a  leave  of  absence  when  his  preliminary  credential  expired  on 
February  1,  2016. 

b. 

The  District  re-hired  respondent  in  two  subsequent  academic  years— 

2016/2017  and  2017/2018—to  provide  classroom  instruction  full-time  at  Centennial  High 
School.  No  evidence  of  recurring  issues  or  concerns  about  respondent’s  classroom 
instruction  in  the  District  during  those  subsequent  academic  years  was  presented  at  the 
administrative  hearing.  If  there  were  significant  recurring  or  on-going  issues  or  concerns 
about  respondent’s  classroom  instruction,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  District, 
consistent  with  its  objective  of  providing  a  high  quality  educational  program,  would  not  have 
continued  respondent’s  employment  teaching  District  students  in  the  2016/2017  academic 
year  and  again  in  the  2017/2018  academic  year.  Indeed,  by  the  conclusion  of  the  2016/2017 
academic  year,  respondent  successfully  completed  the  BTSA  program,  which  included 
assessments  of  his  classroom  instruction  and  management  skills.  A  reasonable  inference  1s 
that  whatever  difficulties  principal  Laura  Brown  may  have  observed  they  were  redressed  and 
abated.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence 
that  the  difficulty  respondent  had  in  the  2015/2016  academic  year  instructing  students  at 
Cesar  Chavez  Continuation  High  School  constitutes  cause  warranting  respondent’s  dismissal. 

17a. 

In  the  spring  semester  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year,  respondent  engaged  in 

outside  activity  coaching  Serra’s  Girls  Varsity  Softball  team  that  was  inconsistent, 
incompatible,  and  in  conflict  with  respondent’s  instructional  duties  at  Centennial  High 
School.  (Factual  Findings  55-72.)  Respondent  disclosed  his  outside  activity  to  the  school 
secretary,  who  arranged  coverage  for  respondent’s  class  and  who  reported  respondent’s  early 
departure  from  the  District  to  pursue  that  outside  activity  to  the  District’s  Payroll  Department 
as  personal  leave  time.  Principal  Douglas  Brown  was  aware  of  respondent’s  outside  activity 
coaching  (Factual  Finding  57),  but  did  not  ask  respondent  to  seek  formal  authorization. 
Principal  Douglas  Brown’s  awareness  1s  imputed  to  the  District. 

b. 

Respondent  was  required  to  obtain  authorization  to  engage  in  outside  activity 
deemed  inconsistent,  incompatible,  and  conflicting  with  the  duties  he  owed  the  District  from 
his  supervisors,  but  he  obtained  none.  Respondent’s  pursuit  of  his  outside  activities  coaching 
was  disruptive  to  the  educational  community  at  Centennial  High  School.  He  remediated  his 
conduct  by  immediately  ceasing  all  outside  activity  coaching  softball  when  Dr.  Ayala 

24

reproved  his  conduct.  Thereafter,  the  District  continued  to  employ  respondent  to  provide 
classroom  instruction.  A  reasonable  inference  is  that  respondent’s  unauthorized  outside 
activity  did  not  unfit  him  to  teach.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  not  established  by  a 
preponderance  of  evidence  that  respondent’s  early  departures  from  Centennial  High  School 
in  the  spring  semester  of  the  2016/2017  academic  year  to  engage  in  outside  activity  coaching 
softball  warrants  respondent’s  dismissal. 

18. 

=  In  sum,  application  of  pertinent  Morrison  Factors  to  the  conduct  alleged  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges  that  complainant  established  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence—that 
respondent  took  at  least  six  years  to  obtain  a  clear  teaching  credential,  that  respondent  failed 
to  arrive  at  his  assigned  school  site  on  time  as  he  was  contractually  required  to  do,  that 
respondent  had  difficulty  with  classroom  instruction,  and  that  respondent  left  work  early  to 
pursue  outside  activity  coaching  softball—does  not  support  the  conclusion  that  respondent’s 
dismissal  is  warranted.  In  each  instance,  respondent  remediated  his  conduct.  Where 
remediation  has  occurred,  there  is  no  longer  any  grounds  for  dismissal.  (See  e.g.  Crowl  v. 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1990)  225  Cal.App.3d.  334.) 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

25

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

DATED: 

December  18,  2018 

DATED: 

December  19,  2018 

DATED: 

December  19,  2018 

ES8soE42CBDS041E... 

  

Benjamin  Bell 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

[Chri 

luaya 

CBDSCDCC6D12481... 

  

Christopher  D.  Anaya 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DecuSigned  by: 

(  CaCFE2  334046434... 

  

JENNIFER  M.  RUSSELL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

26

