BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS 
FOR  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
SAN  DIEGO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Proceeding  to  Dismiss: 

KYRIBA  DEL  CASTILLO,  Respondent 

OAH  No.  2018110463 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Debra  D.  Nye-Perkins  of 

the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  pursuant  to  a 

stipulation  of  the  parties  as  allowed  by  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision 

(c)(1),  waiving  their  right  to  convene  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  in  this 

matter.  This  matter  was  heard  by  videoconference  on  October  7,  2020,  pursuant  to  the 

September  10,  2020,  order  converting  this  hearing  to  a  videoconference  because  of 

the  COVID-19  pandemic. 

Kari  D.  Sullivan,  Attorney  at  Law,  San  Diego  Unified  School  District,  represented 

San  Diego  Unified  School  District  (the  district). 

Kyriba  Del  Castillo,  respondent,  represented  herself. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  was  closed,  and  the 

matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  October  7,  2020.

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

1. 

Ms.  Del  Castillo  has  been  employed  by  the  San  Diego  Unified  School 

District  as  a  high  school  teacher  since  March  8,  2005.  Ms.  Del  Castillo’s  most  recent 

assignment  in  the  district  was  as  a  physical  education  (PE)  teacher  at  Lincoln  High 

School  beginning  in  September  2015. 

2. 

On  September  7,  2018,  the  district  sent  a  letter  to  respondent  informing 

her  of  its  recommendation  for  termination  based  upon  her  failure  to  return  to  her 

teaching  assignment  on  August  22,  2018,  as  required. 

3. 

Acacia  Thede,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  signed  the  Dismissal 

Charges  and  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  on  October  10,  2018,  in  her  official  capacity. 

The  Dismissal  Charges  set  forth  the  facts  and  laws  on  which  the  district  was  relying 

and  sought  to  immediately  dismiss  Ms.  Del  Castillo  from  employment  with  the  district 

on  the  grounds  of  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  and  district 

polices  (Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8)). 

4. 

In  the  Dismissal  Charges,  the  district  alleged  as  follows: 

On  August  16,  2018,  a  school  district  in  the  state  of  Georgia 

called  the  District's  Human  Resources  Division  to  verify 

employment  of  del  Castillo.  Human  Resources  contacted 

del  Castillo,  as  she  was  still  listed  as  an  active  teacher  at 

Lincoln  High  School.  Del  Castillo  verified  via  email  and 

telephone  that  she  had,  in  fact,  moved  out  of  state. 

Thereafter,  del  Castillo  completed  a  request  for  medical 

2

leave  of  absence,  but  the  leave  was  denied  due  to  lack  of 

required  documentation. 

On  September  7,  2018,  del  Castillo  received  a 

recommendation  for  termination  via  certified  mail.  She  was 

given  until  September  21,  2018,  to  schedule  a  pre- 

disciplinary  meeting.  Del  Castillo  contacted  Human 

Resources  on  September  19,  2018,  and  verified  that  she  was 

still  out  of  state.  Del  Castillo  has  not  submitted  any  new 

documentation  to  request  a  leave  of  absence.  Del  Castillo 

has  stated  that  she  does  not  currently  intend  to  return  to 

the  District. 

5. 

On  October  20,  2018,  Ms.  Del  Castillo  timely  appealed  the  dismissal 

action,  denying  that  grounds  for  her  dismissal  from  employment  existed,  and  this 

hearing  followed. 

Respondent's  Employment  and  Communications  with  the  District 

6. 

Darin  Noyes  is  employed  by  the  district  as  a  Human  Resources  Specialist, 

a  position  he  also  held  in  2018  during  the  relevant  events  of  this  hearing.  Mr.  Noyes’ 

responsibilities  in  his  position  include  assisting  employees  of  the  district  with  leave  of 

absence  requests  and  responding  to  requests  for  verification  of  employment.  Mr. 

Noyes  testified  at  the  hearing  and  the  following  factual  findings  are  based  on  his 

testimony. 

7. 

In  May  2018,  Mr.  Noyes  received  two  requests  for  employment 

verification  of  respondent's  employment  with  the  district.  The  first  request  Mr.  Noyes 

received  was  from  respondent  herself  on  May  3,  2018,  in  an  email  requesting  “proof  of 

3

employment  and  any  evaluation  you  may  have  on  me.”  On  May  31,  2018,  Mr.  Noyes 

received  an  email  from  an  out  of  state  school  district  named  Clover  Park  School 

District  stating  that  respondent  had  listed  him  as  a  reference  for  a  job  application  and 

seeking  information  on  a  reference  form  regarding  respondent's  employment.  Mr. 

Noyes  explained  that  when  the  district  receives  such  a  request  from  another  school 

district,  he  completes  the  information  and  also  notifies  the  Human  Resources  officer 

for  the  particular  school  site  where  the  person  worked  that  a  member  of  that  school 

site  was  seeking  employment  with  another  district  to  alert  them  to  a  possible  need  to 

recruit  for  a  vacancy.  In  May  2018,  after  receiving  these  requests,  Mr.  Noyes  notified 

the  Human  Resources  officer  for  Lincoln  High  School  that  the  out  of  state  school 

district  requested  this  information  regarding  respondent. 

8. 

In  August  2018,  Mr.  Noyes  received  a  second  request  from  Clover  Park 

School  District  by  mail  for  employment  verification  for  respondent.  When  Mr.  Noyes 

checked  the  district  records,  he  learned  that  respondent  was  still  employed  by  the 

district.  Mr.  Noyes  stated  that  the  district  has  a  policy  to  not  provide  this  information 

to  another  district  if  the  teacher  is  still  employed  by  their  district  because  a  teacher 

cannot  be  employed  by  two  districts  at  the  same  time.  Instead,  Mr.  Noyes  sends  the 

request  to  the  Human  Resources  department  to  handle,  in  this  case  Josue  Diaz. 

Additionally,  Mr.  Noyes  contacted  respondent  to  ask  her  if  she  wanted  him  to  respond 

to  the  August  request  from  Clover  Park  School  District.  According  to  Mr.  Noyes, 

respondent  told  him  not  to  respond  to  the  request. 

9, 

Josue  Diaz  is  currently  employed  at  the  district  as  a  Human  Resources 

(HR)  officer.  His  duties  include  providing  support  for  the  high  school  network  of  the 

district  for  staffing,  guidance  on  contract  language,  disciplinary  actions  and  other 

supports.  Mr.  Diaz  began  working  in  this  position  in  the  last  week  of  July  2018.  Mr.

Diaz  testified  at  the  hearing  and  the  following  factual  findings  are  based  on  his 

testimony. 

10. 

During  the  first  few  weeks  that  Mr.  Diaz  was  working  in  his  current 

position,  Mr.  Noyes  notified  him  that  an  out  of  state  school  district  requested 

information  about  respondent  for  possible  employment.  Mr.  Diaz  attempted  to 

contact  respondent  by  telephone  and  reached  respondent's  father  on  the  phone 

number  on  file  at  the  district.  The  father  told  Mr.  Diaz  that  respondent  lived  out  of 

state  and  he  would  tell  respondent  to  call  Mr.  Diaz.  Sometime  thereafter,  Mr.  Diaz  had 

a  telephone  conversation  with  respondent.  During  that  conversation  respondent  told 

Mr.  Diaz  that  she  had  been  experiencing  stress  from her  job  at  Lincoln  High  School, 

that  she  had  no  intention  of  returning  to  work  at  Lincoln  High  School,  and  that  she 

was  living  in  another  state  (specifically  Georgia).  Respondent  told  Mr.  Diaz  that  she  did 

not  want  to  resign  from  her  position  at  the  district  because  she  “wanted  to  remain  tied 

to  the  district.”  Mr.  Diaz  discussed  various  leave  of  absence  options  for  respondent 

and  respondent  expressed  an  interest  in  the  medical  leave  of  absence.  Mr.  Diaz 

informed  respondent  about  how  to  get  the  form  to  complete  to  request  a  medical 

leave  of  absence  during  that  call. 

11. 

Mr.  Diaz  stated  that  respondent  thereafter  did  apply  for  a  medical  leave 

of  absence,  however  her  request  was  not  approved  by  the  school  district  because  she 

failed  to  provide  the  required  documentation  of  a  doctor's  note  for  the  request.  Mr. 

Diaz  explained  that  he  is  responsible  for  approving  respondent's  medical  leave  of 

absence  request  as  the  HR  officer  assigned  to  her  school.  He  testified  that  at  no  point 

did  he  ever  approve  respondent's  medical  leave  of  absence  request  or  any  other  leave 

of  absence  request  by  respondent.

12. 

Mr.  Diaz  explained  that  the  2018-19  school  year  at  Lincoln  High  School 

began  on  August  22  or  23,  2018,  only  a  few  days  after  the  district  received  the 

employment  verification  and  information  request  from  the  out  of  state  school  district 

for  respondent.  Respondent  never  reported  to  her  first  day  of  work  during  the  2018-19 

school  year  at  Lincoln  High  School  as  required  for  her  position  as  a  physical  education 

teacher.  Respondent  also  failed  to  notify  HR  or  any  other  person  at  Lincoln  High 

School  that  she  was  not  reporting  to  work  for  the  beginning  of  the  2018-19  school 

year.  Mr.  Diaz  explained  that  because  respondent  never  resigned  from  her  position 

and  she  never  had  an  approved  leave  of  absence,  she  was  expected  to  report  to  work 

for  the  school  year. 

13. 

After  receiving  the  August  16,  2018,  request  from  the  out  of  state  school 

district  regarding  respondent,  Mr.  Diaz  investigated  and  conducted  a  public  records 

search  for  teacher  credentialing  in  other  states  for  respondent.  Through  this  search  he 

learned  that  respondent  was  first  credentialed  in  the  state  of  Georgia  for  teaching 

physical  education  on  August  9,  2018.  Mr.  Diaz  used  this  information  to  locate  the 

website  for  Henderson  Middle  School  located  in  Atlanta,  Georgia.  The  website  for 

Henderson  Middle  School  listed  respondent  as  a  physical  education  teacher  at  that 

school  on  the  staff  directory  at  the  time  he  searched  in  late  August  2018.  Mr.  Diaz 

printed  these  search  results  at  that  time,  which  were  received  in  evidence.  Mr.  Diaz 

conducted  another  search  of  the  Henderson  Middle  School  website  on  a  date  near  this 

hearing  and  respondent  was  still  listed  on  the  staff  directory  as  a  physical  education 

teacher  at  that  school.  Mr.  Diaz  testified  that  the  district  has  a  policy  that  prohibits  any 

teacher  from  being  employed  as  a  teacher  by  the  district  and  also  as  a  teacher  at  any 

other  school  district  at  the  same  time.

14. 

On  September  7,  2018,  Mr.  Diaz,  on  behalf  of  the  district,  wrote  a  letter 

to  respondent  notifying  her  that  the  district  is  recommending  her  termination  from 

employment  based  on  the  information  Mr.  Diaz  learned  that  she  is  employed  by 

another  school  district  located  in  Georgia,  and  because  she  failed  to  show  up  for  work 

during  the  beginning  of  the  2018-19  school  year. 

15. 

Acacia  Thede  is  currently  employed  by  the  district  as  the  Chief  Human 

Resources  Officer.  Her  duties  include  supervision  of  all  personnel  matters  for  the 

district,  including  recruitment,  retention,  credentials,  monitoring  and  discipline  of 

teachers.  Ms.  Thede  testified  at  the  hearing  and  the  following  factual  findings  are 

made  based  on  her  testimony  and  supporting  documents  received  in  evidence. 

16. 

Ms.  Thede  first  learned  of  issues  related  to  resoondent  when  respondent 

failed  to  report  to  work  during  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year.  Ms.  Thede 

testified  that  the  district  verified  that  respondent  had  taken  employment  as  a  teacher 

out  of  state,  and  that  respondent  failed  to  provide  services  to  the  district.  As  a  result, 

respondent  was  terminated  from  her  position.  The  process  of  termination  includes 

notification  of  the  proposed  action  to  respondent,  presentation  to  the  board  of 

education  for  the  district  for  a  recommended  action  of  termination,  service  to 

respondent  of  dismissal  charges,  notification  of  intention  to  dismiss,  and  blank  request 

for  hearing.  Ms.  Thede  testified  that  all  required  procedural  mechanisms  were  followed 

to  terminate  respondent  for  her  failure  to  provide  services  to  the  district,  and  her 

violation  of  district  policy  for  taking  another  teaching  position  out  of  state  while  still 

employed  by  this  district. 

17. 

Ms.  Thede  testified  that  the  district  has  a  policy  that  prohibits  any  district 

employee  from  taking  another  position  at  another  school  district  while  still  employed 

by  the  district.  This  policy  is  provided  upon  employment,  as  well  as  annually,  and  is 

7

posted  online  and  publicly  available.  Ms.  Thede  also  provided  a  copy  of  respondent's 

offer  and  acceptance  of  employment  letter,  which  was  received  in  evidence  and 

showed  above  respondent's  signature  dated  March  9,  2011,  that  she  “accepts  the 

above  offer  of  employment”  and  “certify  that:” 

[Tt]...  [9] 

I  will  not  be  employed  with  any  other  school  district  or 

county  superintendent  of  schools,  which  will  result  in  a 

conflict  with  my  employment  with  the  San  Diego  Unified 

School  District...  . 

18. 

|  Ms.  Thede  presented  the  information  to  the  board  of  education  for  the 

district  regarding  respondent's  failure  to  report  to  work  for  the  2018-2019  school  year, 

as  well  as  information  received  from  Mr.  Diaz  that  respondent  was  employed  at  a 

school  district  in  Georgia  during  the  time  she  was  also  employed  by  this  district.  As  a 

result,  the  board  recommended  termination  of  respondent  and  this  process  was  set  in 

motion. 

Respondent's  Testimony 

19. 

Respondent  is  currently  employed  as  a  physical  education  teacher  with 

the  DeKalb  County  School  District  in  Georgia.  She  has  held  this  position  since  August 

2018.  Respondent  testified  that  she  went  on  medical  leave  in  November  2017  from  her 

position  as  a  teacher  with  the  district  at  Lincoln  High  School,  where  she  had  worked 

for  three  years.  Respondent  stated  that  she  went  on  medical  leave  “because  of 

harassment”  at  the  school  where  she  worked  and  for  her  “mental  health.”  According  to 

respondent,  she  was  on  medical  leave  from  her  position  for  six  months  during  which 

she  received  therapy.  As  part  of  her  therapy,  she  was  asked  to  “see  what other  jobs 

8

were  out  there  in  different  states”  in  order  to  “get  over  what  was  going  on”  at  her 

current  job.  Respondent  applied  for  jobs  in  various  states,  including  Washington, 

Oregon,  California,  New  York,  and  Georgia.  Respondent  stated  that  there  was  “no 

harm”  in  applying  for  other  jobs,  and  she  was  “hoping  for  a  change”  when  she 

returned  to  the  school  environment  at  Lincoln  High  School.  However,  respondent 

stated  that  after  returning  to  Lincoln  High  School,  the  “bullying  continued.” 

On  cross-examination,  respondent  admitted  that  she  was  out  on  medical  leave 

of  absence  beginning  in  March  2018  for  a  hernia  repair  surgery,  which  happened  to 

overlap  with  her  psychiatric  treatment  for  her  mental  issues. 

20. 

After  respondent  applied  for  the  position  in  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and 

received  an  offer  of  employment,  she  decided  to  take  the  job.  Thereafter,  sometime 

before  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year  in  the  district,  respondent 

contacted  Mr.  Diaz  “to  let  him  know  I  would  not  be  returning  to  Lincoln  High  School 

because  of  the  harassment  I  was  getting  and  because  I  did  not  feel  safe  mentally 

there.”  Respondent  testified  that  she  told  Mr.  Diaz  that  she  was  currently  living  and 

working  in  Georgia,  she  would  not  be  returning  to  work,  and  she  requested  a  “leave  of 

absence.”  Respondent  testified  that  she  applied  for  the  leave  of  absence  “because  I  did 

not  know  if  I  would  want  to  stay  in  Georgia  forever”  and  she  did  not  know  if  she 

“would  like  it”  in  Georgia.  Respondent  received  the  required  documents  to  request  the 

medial  leave  of  absence  from  the  district  and  sent  in  the  documents  to  the  district  on 

August  17,  2018.  Respondent  later  received  a  letter  notifying  her  that  the  district 

denied  her  leave  of  absence  request  because  her  request  lacked  sufficient 

documentation  from  a  physician. 

21. 

Respondent  thereafter  received  a  letter  dated  September  7,  2018,  from 

the  district  wherein  she  was  notified  of  the  recommendation  for  termination  of  her 

9

employment  based  upon  her  failure  to  report  to  work  on  the  first  day  of  the  2018- 

2019  school  year  on  August  22,  2018,  as  well  as  respondent's  report  that  she  had 

moved  to  Georgia  and  would  not  be  returning. 

22. 

Respondent  testified  that  prior  to  September  19,  2018,  she  again 

returned  her  request  for  a  medical  leave  of  absence  to  the  district  with  additional 

paperwork  as  required  prior  to  that  date.  However,  respondent  admitted  during  her 

testimony  that  the  district  never  approved  that  request  for  a  medical  leave  of  absence. 

23. 

Respondent  argued  that  she  did  inform  the  district  prior  to  the  August 

22,  2018,  first  day  of  the  2018-2019  school  year  that  she  would  not  return  to  her 

position  at  Lincoln  High  School.  Respondent  argued  that  this  notification  was  sufficient 

for  her  to  avoid  termination  from  her  position. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Code  Sections  Regarding  Dismissal  Actions 

1, 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  8§  44934  and  44944.) 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  the  grounds  for  dismissing  a 

permanent  employee.  Subdivision  (a)(8)  authorizes  dismissal  for  persistent  violation  of 

or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for 

the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of 

the  school  district  employing  her  or  district  polices. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44944  establishes  the  right  to  a  hearing,  the 

process  for  selecting  the  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  and 

10

sets  forth  the  Commissions’  authority  regarding  its  final  decision.  Education  Code 

section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1),  allows  for  both  parties  to  waive  their  right  to  convene 

a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  and  stipulate  to  having  the  hearing 

conducted  by  a  single  administrative  law  judge. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44938  outlines  the  procedures  the  governing 

board  must  follow  before  acting  on  any  charges  brought  against  a  permanent 

employee. 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

5. 

The  “burden  of  proof”  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  to  convince  the 

trier  of  fact  that  the  existence  of  a  fact  sought  to  be  proved  is  more  probable  than  its 

nonexistence.  (Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm’s  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121, 

1128.)  The  district  has  the  burden  of  proof  to  establish  cause  to  dismiss  its  employee. 

6. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  proceeding  is  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  that 

the  evidence  on  one  side  of  an  issue  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than, 

the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of  the  issue,  not  necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or 

quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the  evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it 

is 

addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to  evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force 

than  that  opposed  to  it.  (People  ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171 

Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

11

Relevant  Judicial  Authority 

7. 

The  seminal  case  for  teacher  dismissals  is  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  There  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  where  persistent 

refusal  to  obey  regulations  or  polices  are  raised  in  teacher  dismissal  cases,  the 

applicable  standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach.  The  factors  outlined  in 

Morrison  must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited 

conduct  Indicates  unfitness  for  service.  (Jd.  at  p.229.) 

8. 

A  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  must  be 

established  by  reference  to  the  Morrison  factors.  If  unfitness  to  teach  is  shown,  then 

the  district  must  further  establish  that  the  employee's  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or 

regulations  was  “persistent,”  i.e.,  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 

School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 

1176,  1183.)  Isolated  incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period 

of  time  are  not  generally  considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d  317.) 

9. 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  ..  .  stubborn;  persevering  ...  constantly 

repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28 

Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  Education  Codes  section  44932,  subdivision  (8),  pertains  to 

unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has 

decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to 

allow  for  correction;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision 

is  designed  to  regulate.  (Jd  at  p.84.) 

12

Morrison  Factors 

10. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  suggested  seven  factors  to 

consider  when  evaluating  whether  the  school  employee  should  be  dismissed:  (1)  the 

likelihood  that  the  conduct  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers  and  the 

degree  of  such  adversity;  (2)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (3) 

the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (4)  the  existence  of  extenuating  or 

aggravating  circumstances  and  publicity,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (5)  the 

praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (6)  the 

likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  that  the 

discipline  may  adversely  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  constitutional  rights  of 

the  teacher. 

11.  |  The  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  the  charges  in  the  aggregate. 

When  a  camel’s  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  Its  load 

to  see  which  one  could  have  done  the  deed.  A  trier  of  fact  is  entitled  to  consider  the 

totality  of  the  offensive  conduct.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v. 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1456-1457.) 

12. 

Only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  to  be  analyzed.  (Broney  v. 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  476.) 

Other  Disciplinary  Considerations 

13. 

An  administrator's  loss  of  confidence  in  the  educator  and  doubt 

regarding  the  educator's  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  are  factors  that 

may  be  considered.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (2011)  194  Cal App.4th  1454,  1460.) 

13

14. 

|The  Commission  is  vested  with  discretion  not  to  dismiss  an  employee 

even  if  grounds  for  discipline  exist.  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burman  (1988) 

45  Cal.3d  209.) 

Evaluation  of  the  Charges 

15. 

Ms.  De.  Castillo  was  employed  by  the  district  beginning  on  March  9, 

2011.  Ms.  Del  Castillo’s  issues  seemed  to  begin  during  the  2017-18  school  year  when 

she  was  out  on  a  medical  leave  of  absence  for  various  reasons.  Respondent  was 

expected  to  return  to  work  for  the  2018-19  school  year  on  August  22,  2018,  and  she 

failed  to  return  to  her  position.  Additionally,  a  few  days  prior  to  the  August  22,  2018, 

date,  respondent  informed  Mr.  Diaz  that  she  would  not  be  returning  to  her  position, 

she  was  employed  as  a  teacher  in  Georgia,  and  she  requested  paperwork  for  a  medical 

leave  of  absence.  However,  respondent  did  not  resign  from  her  teaching  position 

during  her  conversation  with  Mr.  Diaz  and  informed  him  that  she  intended  to  remain 

employed  by  the  district  while  working  as  a  teacher  in  Georgia.  The  district  has  a 

policy,  as  written  on  respondent's  letter  of  acceptance  for  her  position,  that  an 

employee  of  the  district  may  not  also  be  employed  by  any  other  school  district  during 

the  time  he  or  she  is  employed  by  the  district.  Respondent's  acceptance  of  a  teaching 

position  in  DeKalb  County,  Georgia  violated  that  school  policy. 

Respondent's  failure  to  return  to  her  position  without  being  on  approved  leave 

was  also  a  violation  of  the  regulations  of  the  district  and  the  expectation  that 

respondent  work  as  a  teacher  as  her  position  requires.  Respondent's  argument  that 

she  informed  the  district  that  she  would  not  return  to  her  position  because  of 

harassment  does  not  address  respondent's  failure  to  property  follow  the  district's 

policies  that  she  not  be  employed  by  the  district  and  any  other  school  district  at  the 

same  time  and  that  she  fulfill  her  duties  as  a  teacher  for  the  district.  Respondent's 

14

argument  that  she  had  no  intention  of  resigning  from  her  position  as  a  teacher  at  the 

district  while  also  working  as  a  teacher  at  another  school  district  in  Georgia 

demonstrates  her  lack  of  understanding  of  her  obligations  to  follow  district  policies. 

Respondent's  actions  left  her  students  in  the  district  with  no  teacher  at  the  beginning 

of  the  2018-19  school  year  and  the  district  scrambling  to  obtain  a  substitute  teacher. 

Cause  Exists  to  Dismiss  Ms.  Del  Castillo 

16. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Ms.  Del  Castillo  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  because  the  evidence  established  that  Ms.  Del 

Castillo  persistently  violated  district  polices,  regulations  and  school  directives  when 

she  refused  to  return  to  her  position  as  a  teacher  in  the  district  at  the  beginning  of  the 

2018-19  school  year  and  when  she  violated  school  policies  by  taking  another  teaching 

position  at  another  school  district  located  out  of  state  while  still  employed  as  a  teacher 

at  the  district. 

Ms.  Del  Castillo’s  appeal  of  her  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  San  Diego 

Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district's  request  to  dismiss  Ms.  Del  Castillo  is 

granted.  Ms.  Del  Castillo  shall  be  dismissed  from  the  district. 

DATE:  December  16,  2020 

Debra  Nye-POruins, 

DEBRA  D.  NYE-PERKINS 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

ORDER 

15

