BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

IGNACIO  GIL, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2018070558 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 

in  Los  Angeles  on  January  11,  24,  25,  28-31,  2019,  and  February  1,  2019.  The  Commission 
consisted  of  Edward  Gil  de  Montes,  Monica  Lukesh,  and  Erlinda  G.  Shrenger, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of 
California,  who  presided. 

Kelly  Kim,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Ignacio  Gil  (respondent)  was  present  and  represented  himself. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  As  stated  on  the  record,  the  ALJ 
ordered  that  student  names  would  appear  in  the  hearing  transcript  as  first  name  and  last 
initial. 
documentary  evidence  was  redacted  to  show  student  names  in  that  format. 

In  addition,  when  noted  by  the  Commission  and/or  as  stated  on  the  record, 

The  record  closed  and  the  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  February  1,  2019. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.

2. 

On  June  13,  2018,  the  District  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Intention  to 

Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Suspension  (Notice  of  Intent),  which  notified 
respondent  of  the  District's  intent  to  dismiss  him  within  30  days  unless  he  made  a  written 
request  for  a  hearing,  and  notified  respondent  of  his  immediate  suspension  without  pay.  The 
Notice  of  Intent  included  a  Statement  of  Charges  with  exhibits,  a  Request  for  Hearing  form, 
and  copies  of  relevant  Education  Code  sections. 

3. 

On  July  12,  2018,  respondent,  through  his  previous  counsel,  served  the  District 
with  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for  Hearing,  which  contained  respondent’s  demand  for 
a  hearing  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44941,  in  response  to  the  June  13,  2018  Notice 
of  Intent. 

4. 

On  July  23,  2018,  the  District  filed  and  served  the  Accusation  dated  July  20, 

2018,  which  is  the  operative  pleading  in  this  case.  (Exh.  5.) 

5. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent's  Background 

EDUCATION  /  CREDENTIALS 

6. 

Respondent  is  originally  from  Mexico.  He  earned  his  bachelor’s  degree  in 

Spanish  literature  from  California  State  University,  Fresno  in  1999.  He  earned  his  master’s 
degree  in  psychology  from  National  University  in  2012. 

7. 

Respondent  has  a  teaching  credential  from  California  State  University,  Fresno. 

He  received  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential  in  2012.  Respondent  meets  the  District’s 
requirements  to  teach  Spanish  language  classes  in  the  District’s  schools. 

EMPLOYMENT  WITH  DISTRICT 

8. 

Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  as  a  Spanish  teacher  since 

1999.  He  has  worked  at  various  high  schools  in  the  District  over  the  years,  including 
King/Drew  Magnet  High  School,  Hollywood  High  School,  and  Helen  Bernstein  High 
School.  He  had  brief  assignments  at  Dorsey  High  School,  Crenshaw  High  School,  and 
Washington  High  School.  Respondent  also  worked  as  a  floater  teacher  in  the  District. 

9. 

The  charges  in  this  matter  relate  to  respondent’s  assignments  at  Burroughs 

Middle  School  and  Hollywood  High  School.  Respondent  was  assigned  to  Burroughs  Middle 
School  for  the  2015-2016  school  year.  He  worked  at  the  school  in  the  2015  fall  semester. 
On  December  7,  2015,  respondent  was  reassigned  to  Local  District  West.  He  remained 
assigned  to  Local  District  West  for  the  rest  of  the  2015-2016  school  year  and  for  most  of  the 
2016-2017  school  year.  In  May  2017,  respondent  was  reassigned  to  a  vacant  position  at 
Hollywood  High  School  for  the  last  two  weeks  of  the  2016-2017  school  year.  In  August 
2017,  respondent  was  assigned  as  a  Spanish  teacher  at  Hollywood  High  School  for  the  2017-

2018  school  year.  He  taught  during  the  2017  fall  semester.  Respondent  has  been  on  unpaid 
status  from  June  2018  to  the  present  time. 

District  Policies 

10. 

—  The  following  policies  and  procedures  of  the  District  were  presented  at  the 
hearing:  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  (Exh.  25);  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (Exh.  26); 
Board  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  (Exh.  28);  Non- 
Discrimination  and  Anti-Harassment  Policy  and  Complaint  Procedure  (Exh.  31);  Discipline 
Foundation  Policy  Bulletin:  School-Wide  Positive  Behavior  Intervention  and  Support  (Exh. 
32);  Child  Abuse  and  Neglect  Reporting  Requirements  (Exh.  33);  and  Abolition  of  Corporal 
Punishment  (Exh.  34);  Guidelines  for  Student  Suspensions  (Exh.  35).  Additionally,  the 
School-Wide  Positive  Behavior  Support  and  Discipline  Plan  for  Hollywood  High  School  was 
presented.  (Exh.  37.) 

11. 

The  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  most  important  responsibility  of  the  [District]  is  the  safety 
of  our  students.  All  employees,  as  well  as  all  individuals  who 
work  with  or  have  contact  with  students,  are  reminded  that  they 
must  be  mindful  of  the  fine  line  drawn  between  being  sensitive 
to  and  supportive  of  students  and  a  possible  or  perceived  breach 
of  responsible,  ethical  behavior. 

While  the  District  encourages  the  cultivation  of  positive 
relationships  with  students,  employees  and  all  individuals  who 
work  with  or  have  contact  with  students  are  expected  to  use 
good  judgment  and  are  cautioned  to  avoid  situations  including, 
but  not  limited  to,  the  following: 

3.  Engaging  in  any  behaviors,  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a 
student(s)  or  in  the  presence  of  a  student(s),  that  are 
unprofessional,  unethical,  illegal,  immoral,  or  exploitive. 

[f.-- 

[f.-- 

5.  Making  statements  or  comments,  either  directly  or  in  the 
presence  of  student(s),  which  are  not  age-appropriate, 
professional,  or  which  may  be  considered  sexual  in  nature, 
harassing,  or  demeaning. 

Even  though  the  intent  of  the  employee/individual  may  be 
purely  professional,  those  who  engage  in  any  of  the  above

behavior(s),  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a  student(s)  or  in 
the  presence  of  a  student(s),  are  subjecting  themselves  to  all 
possible  perceptions  of  impropriety.  Employees/individuals  are 
advised  that,  when  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct  or 
behavior  are  made,  the  District  is  obligated  to  investigate  the 
allegations  and,  if  warranted,  take  appropriate  administrative 
and/or  disciplinary  action. 

(Exh.  26.) 

12.‘ 

The  District’s  Board  of  Education  Resolution  to  Enforce  the  Respectful 

Treatment  of  All  Persons  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  the  District  reaffirms  its  policy  that 
“students  and  adults  in  both  schools  and  offices  should  treat  all  persons  equally  and 
respectfully  and  refrain  from  the  willful  or  negligent  use  of  slurs  against  any  person  on  the 
basis  or  [sic]  race,  language  spoken,  color,  sex,  religion,  handicap,  national  origin, 
immigration  status,  age,  sexual  orientation,  or  political  belief.”  (Exh.  28.) 

13. 

The  District’s  School-Wide  Positive  Behavior  Intervention  and  Support 

Bulletin  states,  in  part:  “All  LAUSD  students  will  attend  schools  with  climates  that  focus  on 
safety,  teaching,  learning  and  interpersonal  relationships  that  enhance  student  learning  and 
well-being.  [{...  §|  School-wide  positive  behavior  and  support  fosters  a  culture  of 
discipline  grounded  in  positive  behavior  intervention.  Positive  behavior  support  1s  a  systems 
approach  for  establishing  the  social  culture  and  individualized  behavioral  supports  needed 
for  schools  to  achieve  both  social  and  academic  success  for  all.  [§...  9]  Modeling 
appropriate  behavior  should  be  embraced  by  all  staff,  students  and  parents  for  creating  a 
positive  school  climate.  The  most  effective  discipline  systems  use  proactive  strategies 
designed  to  prevent  discipline  problems.  Before  consequences  are  given,  students  must  first 
be  supported  in  learning  the  skills  necessary  to  enhance  a  positive  school  climate  and  avoid  a 
negative  behavior.”  (Exh.  32,  pp.  640,  641,  642.) 

14. 

As  noted  in  the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  the  District  is 

obligated  to  investigate  allegations  of  inappropriate  conduct  or  behavior  by  teachers. 
Generally  speaking,  the  District’s  investigatory  process  regarding  student  complaints  against 
teachers  involves  interviewing  the  student  making  the  complaint  and  randomly  selected 
students  from  the  same  class.  All  students  are  interviewed  separately  and  may  be  asked  to 
write  down  the  statements  made  in  their  interview.  If  the  complaint  is  corroborated,  a 
conference  is  held  with  the  teacher  to  discuss  the  allegations  made  by  students  against  the 
teacher.  At  the  conference,  the  teacher  1s  allowed  to  respond  to  the  allegations,  and  the 
teacher  may  be  given  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives.  The  teacher  is  issued  a 
conference  memorandum  that  summarizes  the  discussion  at  the  conference  and  the  assistance 
and  guidance,  and  directives  given  to  the  teacher.  (See  e.g.,  Exhs.  14,  15,  19,  20.) 
Administrative  investigations  of  student  complaints  may  be  conducted  by  school  site 
administrators  and/or  the  District’s  Student  Safety  Investigation  Team.  (See  e.g.,  Exh.  38.) 
The  Commission  finds  that  the  administrative  investigations  in  this  case  (discussed  below) 
were  conducted  fairly  and  in  accordance  with  the  District’s  policies.

15. 

Hollywood  High  School’s  School-Wide  Positive  Behavior  Support  and 

Discipline  Plan  provides,  in  part,  that  the  role  of  teachers  is  to  “provide  a  well-planned, 
standards-driven  curriculum  in  a  clean,  safe,  nurturing  environment.  They  should  model 
respectful  communication,  mature  decision-making  and  life-long  learning  skills  along  with 
teaching  the  course  content.”  (Exh.  37,  p.  744.) 

Burroughs  Middle  School 

16. 

|  Respondent  was  a  Spanish  teacher  at  Burroughs  Middle  School  for  the  2015- 
2016  school  year.  Steve  Martinez  (Martinez)  was  the  principal  at  Burroughs  Middle  School 
during  that  school  year. 

17.  | Martinez  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  20  years.  He  is  currently  the 
principal  at  Burroughs  Middle  School,  and  has  been  the  principal  at  the  school  for  the  past 
seven  years.  Prior  to  becoming  principal,  Martinez  was  also  an  assistant  principal  at  the 
school  for  approximately  four  to  five  years.  Martinez  holds  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  earth 
science,  a  master’s  degree  in  education  leadership,  and  an  education  doctorate  degree. 
Martinez  has  teaching  and  administrative  credentials.  Martinez  testified  credibly  at  the 
hearing. 

INAPPROPRIATE  COMMENTS 

18. 

=  In  October  2015,  Principal  Martinez  was  informed  by  Assistant  Principal 

Arturo  Enriquez  (Enriquez)  that  a  student  in  respondent’s  sixth  period  class  reported  that 
respondent  made  inappropriate  comments  during  class.  Student Ti  G.  cp  reported  that, 
on  October  16,  2015,  respondent  told Ti.  in  the  presence  of  his  classmates,  “white  boy, 
you're  rich,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  Respondent  asked Ti  about  his  living  situation,  which 
the  student  described  in  class,  to  which  respondent  stated,  “you  are  rich,  you’re  white,”  or 
words  to  that  effect. 

19. 

At  the  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  told  Tim  “you’re  rich”  during  a 

class  discussion  about  the  value  of  having  classroom  materials.  Respondent  testified  that  he 
brought  culture  to  his  classes  and  often  spoke  about  Mexico  and  Central  America. 
Respondent  was  telling  his  students  about  his  cultural  background  and  that  when  he  lived  in 
Mexico,  he  could  not  afford  a  typewriter  and  students  in  Mexico  have  to  buy  their  own 
desks.  During  the  discussion, if  raised  his  hand  and  said,  “I’m  poor,  too.”  Respondent 
testified  he  explained  that,  in  America,  there  are  services  and  education  is  free.  Respondent 
told Ti.  “you're  not  poor,  you’re  rich.”  Respondent  testified  that  Ti  was  smiling  and 
laughing  when  he  made  the  comments. 

20. 

Assistant  Principal  Enriquez  initiated  an  administrative  investigation  regarding 

respondent’s  remarks.  Other  students  in  the  sixth  period  class  were  randomly  selected  and 
interviewed.  The  other  students,  in  their  interviews,  corroborated  Ts  allegations.  For 
example, 
said  he  was  poor,  respondent  said,  “no,  white 
people  are  rich.” 

K.  reported  that  respondent  asked Ti  if  his  family  was  wealthy,

mm  A.  reported  that  when  Ti 

and  1  said  it  wasn’t.  When  | |  finished  the  writing  assignment,  respondent  took  his 
paper  and  read  it  out  loud  to  the  class.  Respondent  then  said  he  did  not  believe 
bus  and  that  1”  lived  in  a  rich  neighborhood.  (See  Exh.  14,  p.  32.) 

|  rode  the 

21. 

The  statements  obtained  from  the  student  interviews  disclosed  other 

period  class.  Students  reported  that  respondent  made  reference  to  student 

imappropriate  comments  made  by  respondent  to  students  on  October  15,  2015,  during 
sixth 
})  in  a  manner  implying  a  connection  to  a  drug  dealer  or  drug 
( 
himself  reported  that  when  taking  roll,  respondent  called  him  = 
dealer  or  drug  lord,  instead  of  his  real  name. .  |  reported  that  respondent’s  comment  made 
him  feel  disrespected.  Another  student, 
respondent  said  i:  last  name  was  a  drug  dealer  name  and  then  asked . 
parents  were  drug  dealers.  Another  student, 
the  name  of  a  famous  drug  dealer  because  of 

FF  C.  reported  that  respondent  called .  | 
’s  last  name  and  his  race  (Mexican). 

the 
A, 
lord.  For  example, . 

|  L.,  reported  that  when  taking  attendance, 

in  reference  to  a  drug 

if  he  or  his 

22. 

At  the  hearing,  respondent  testified  that . 

was  an  outspoken  student  who 
often  distracted  his  classmates  away  from  the  classroom  lessons.  Respondent  would  try  to 
tegain  control  of  the  class  by  playing  music  on  the  radio.  On  one  occasion,  the  song  on  the 
tadio  was  a  “narco  corridos”  song  about  illegal  drug  dealers  and  drug  lords.  Respondent 
admitted  he  made  a  comment  that  a  name  mentioned  in  the  song  sounded  like  re  last 
name.  Respondent  testified  he  cannot  control  the  music  played  on  the  public  radio. 

23. 

On  November  17,  2015,  Principal  Martinez  was  informed  by  Assistant 

Principal  Enriquez  that  students  from  respondent’s  sixth  period  class  reported  that,  during 
class,  respondent  said,  “Every  time  I  go  to  the  shooting  range,  I  imagine  my  annoying  kids,” 
or  words  to  that  effect  (shooting  range  comment).  Martinez  and  Enriquez  notified  the  Los 
Angeles  Police  Department  (LAPD)  and  the  Operations  Coordinator  at  Local  District  West 
of  respondent’s  shooting  range  comment.  LAPD  declined  to  initiate  a  criminal  investigation 
and  advised  the  District  the  matter  could  be  handled  administratively.  The  District 
conducted  a  threat  assessment  and  determined  respondent  to  be  a  “moderate  risk.”  (Exh.  38.) 

24. 

On  December  4,  2015,  Principal  Martinez  held  an  intake  meeting  with 

tespondent  in  the  main  office  regarding  his  return  to  school.  During  the  meeting,  Principal 
Martinez  asked  respondent  threat  assessment  questions,  specifically,  did  he  have  any 
weapons  on  his  person  or  in  his  car;  did  he  have  a  gun  or  plan  to  bring  a  gun  to  school;  did  he 
plan  to  inflict  harm  on  anyone  at  the  school  or  anywhere;  did  he  plan  to  harm  himself;  and 
did  he  have  a  weapon  with  him  at  the  meeting.  Respondent  refused  to  answer  any  of 
Principal  Martinez’s  questions.  Respondent’s  refusal  to  answer  made  Principal  Martinez 
uncomfortable  having  respondent  present  at  the  school.  Principal  Martinez  informed 
tespondent  he  was  directing  him  to  go  home,  and  told  respondent  to  wait  in  the  main  office 
while  he  made  arrangements  to  have  him  escorted  off  campus.  Instead  of  waiting  in  the 
mnain  office,  respondent  ran  off.  Principal  Martinez  was  notified  by  an  office  technician  that 
respondent  ran  off.  Principal  Martinez  was  concerned  he  did  not  know  where  respondent 
was,  given  that  the  intake  meeting  did  not  go  well.  Principal  Martinez  ordered  a  school-wide 
lockdown  of  the  campus  while  a  search  was  conducted  to  locate  respondent.  During  the

search,  a  witness  notified  Principal  Martinez  that  the  witness  saw  respondent  get  into  a  car 
and  leave  the  campus.  The  lockdown  of  the  campus  lasted  15  minutes. 

25. 

At  the  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  answer  Principal  Martinez’s 

questions  during  the  intake  meeting  because  his  UTLA  representative  told  him  he  did  not 
have  to  answer  any  of  the  principal’s  questions.  Respondent  testified  that  when  the  meeting 
was  over,  he  called  Uber  for  a  ride  home.  He  left  when  his  Uber  driver  arrived  at  the  school. 
Respondent  testified  he  did  not  remember  Principal  Martinez  telling  to  him  to  let  him 
(Martinez)  know  when  he  was  leaving  the  campus.  The  Commission  finds  it  was  not 
appropriate  for  respondent  to  refuse  to  answer  Principal  Martinez’s  threat  assessment 
questions  at  the  December  4,  2015  intake  meeting,  purportedly  based  on  his  union 
tepresentative’s  advice.  The  purpose  of  the  questions  was  to  assess  whether  respondent 
posed a threat  to  the  students  and  staff  at  the  school  related  to  weapons.  The  questions  were 
appropriate  given  respondent’s  shooting  range  comment.  The  Commission  also  finds  it  was 
not  appropriate  for  respondent  to  have  left  the  main  office  without  first  notifying  Principal 
Martinez,  as  he  had  been  instructed  to  do. 

26. 

On  December  7,  2015,  respondent  was  assigned  to  Local  District  West, 

pending  the  District’s  administrative  investigation  of  respondent’s  shooting  range  comment. 
The  District’s  Student  Safety  Investigation  Team  (SSIT)  conducted  the  investigation,  which 
included  interviewing  students  from  respondent’s  sixth  period  class,  interviewing 
respondent,  and  preparing  a  written  report.  (See  Exh.  38.)  The  students’  statements 
corroborated  the  allegation  that  respondent  made  the  shooting  range  comment  during  the 
sixth  period  class.  During  his  interview  with  the  SSIT  investigators,  respondent  denied 
mnaking  the  shooting  range  comment.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  used  a  laser  pointer  in 
class  but  denied  that  he  ever  pointed  it  at  students.  Respondent  stated  that  a  male  student 
once  referred  to  the  laser  pointer  as  a  gun. 

27. 

At  this  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  used  a  laser  pointer  during  class, 
which  he  pointed  at  images,  and  he  sometimes  made  a  laser  noise.  Respondent  testified  he 
never  pointed  the  laser  at  students,  as  he  is  aware  that  a  laser  can  damage  eyes.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  made  the  comments  about  guns  and  going  to  the  shooting  range  because 
students  repeatedly  asked  him  the  same  question,  and  respondent  nodded  and  automatically 
tesponded  “yes”  just  so  he  could  get  back  to  keeping  the  class  going.  Respondent  testified 
he  was  just  agreeing  with  whatever  the  students  were  saying. 

28. 

oO.  “lp  testified  at  this  hearing. 
was  a  seventh  grader  at  Burroughs  Middle  School  in  the  2015-2016 

high  school. 
school  year.  He  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  sixth  period  Spanish  class.  AH  thought 
tespondent  was  “a  pretty  good  teacher.” AH  testified  there  were  approximately  35  to  40 
students  in  the  class,  mostly  Latino  students.  In  November  2015,  respondent,  in  a  loud  voice, 

is  currently  a  tenth  grader  in 

called 
AH  gave  a  wrong  answer  in  class.  Additionall 

“retarded”  in  front  of  the  entire  class.  Respondent  made  the  comment  after 

heard  respondent  make  the  shooting 

tange  comment  during  the  sixth  period  class.  A  etc  that  respondent  made  a  gun 
gesture  with  his  hand  and  pointed  at  the  students  when  he  said  the  shooting  range  comment.

testified  that  when  a  student  asked  respondent  a  question,  respondent  mentioned  he  had 

guns  and  went  to  the  shooting  range. Am  testified  that  everyone  in  the  class  was  shocked 
by  respondent’s  comments  and  felt  they  should  be  reported. ATs  testimony  was 
consistent  with  his  written  statement  dated  November  19,  2015,  regarding  the  comments  he 
heard  in  respondent’s  class.  (Exh.  39.) 

FAILURE  TO  SUBMIT  STUDENT  ATTENDANCE 

29. 

Asateacher  at  Burroughs  Middle  School,  respondent  was  required  to  submit 

mandated  student  attendance  through  the  MISIS  computer  system  on  a  daily  basis.  Teachers 
are  given  a  password  to  access  the  MISIS  system.  Ifthe  MSIS  system  is  not  available, 
teachers  submit  student  attendance  on  paper. 

30. 

In  October  2015,  Principal  Martinez  received  a  complaint  from  the  School 

Administrative  Assistant,  Ms.  Suppal,  that  respondent  failed  to  submit  his  mandated  student 
attendance  through  MSIS  on  October  19,  2015.  During  that  school  day,  Ms.  Suppal 
reminded  respondent  to  enter  his  student  attendance  in  MSIS  as  he  had  not  yet  done  so. 
Respondent  indicated  to  Ms.  Suppal  that  his  MSIS  password  was  not  working.  At  the  end  of 
the  day,  Ms.  Suppal  spoke  with  respondent  in  the  main  office.  When  Ms.  Suppal  offered  to 
re-set  respondent’s  password  so  he  could  enter  the  attendance  for  that  day,  respondent  replied 
that  he  had  done  his  part  in  requesting  a  new  password  and  he  would  not  be  submitting  the 
attendance  that  day  and  would  do  it  tomorrow.  When  Ms.  Suppal  informed  respondent  she 
never  received  a  request  for  another  password  from  him,  respondent  walked  away  from  her 
desk.  Assistant  Principal  Ms.  Lee  entered  the  main  office,  introduced  herself  to  respondent, 
and  reminded  him  to  submit  the  mandated  student  attendance  for  the  day  on  MSIS. 
Respondent  stated  to  Ms.  Lee  that  he  needed  to  leave  and  she  should  enter  the  attendance  for 
him.  Respondent  left  the  school  without  submitting  the  student  attendance  for  the  day. 

31. 

 Atthe  hearing,  respondent  testified  that  he  recalled  this  incident  clearly 

because  it  occurred  on  his  second  day  at  Burroughs  Middle  School.  Respondent  claimed  he 
did  not  have  a  MSIS  password.  Respondent  testified  the  only  way  he  could  take  attendance 
that  day  was  on  paper.  Respondent  testified  he  sent  one  of  his  students  to  the  main  office  to 
ask  the  secretary  to  send  respondent  a  MSIS  password.  The  student  returned  and  reported  to 
respondent  that  no  one  was  in  the  main  office.  Respondent  testified  he  took  attendance  on 
paper.  At  the  end  of  the  school  day,  when  respondent  was  in  the  main  office  signing  out,  a 
secretary  pointed  him  out  to  Assistant  Principal  Ms.  Lee.  Respondent  testified  he  had  the 
paper  attendance  with  him  that  he  took  that  day,  he  handed  it  to  Ms.  Lee  and  asked  her  to 
enter  it  in  MSIS,  and  then  told  Ms.  Lee  he  had  to  leave  because  he  had  a  meeting. 

UNAPPROVED  LETTER  TO  PARENTS 

32. 

On  October  20,  2015,  Principal  Martinez  found  a  letter  generated  by 

respondent  in  his  mailbox  at  the  school’s  main  office.  Respondent’s  letter  was  addressed  to 
Burroughs  Middle  School  parents  and  included  the  following  statements:  “The  previous 
substitute  had  a  nervous  breakdown”;  “It  is  impossible  for  me  and  for  any  other  teacher  to

teach  two  extremely  different  levels  of  Spanish”;  and  “Come  and  visit  my  classroom  (229)  to 
see  for  yourself  how  difficult  my  job  is  right  now.”  (Exh.  5.)  The  letter  had  not  been 
approved  for  distribution  to  parents  by  Principal  Martinez  or  any  administrators. 

33. 

|  Upon  finding  the  letter  in  his  mailbox,  Principal  Martinez  requested  two 

assistant  principals,  Ms.  Lee  and  Mr.  Bolanos,  to  immediately  inform  respondent  the  letter 
was  not  approved  for  distribution  to  parents.  Principal  Martinez,  in  testimony,  explained  the 
letter  was  inappropriate  because  it  contained  “sensitive  information”  related  to  a  prior 
teacher’s  mental  health  issue.  As  directed  by  Principal  Martinez,  Assistant  Principals  Ms. 
Lee  and  Mr.  Bolanos  contacted  respondent  in  his  classroom  regarding  the  letter.  They 
reported  to  Principal  Martinez  that  respondent  was  uncooperative  and  refused  to  tell  them 
which  class  periods  he  distributed  the  letter,  stating  words  to  the  effect  “we  will  let  the  union 
decide”  and  “I  will  not  tell  you.”  (Exh.  14.)  The  assistant  principals  were  able  to  recover 
some,  but  not  all,  of  the  letters  respondent  distributed  to  his  students. 

34. 

 Atthe  hearing,  respondent  admitted  the  contents  of  the  letter  as  alleged  in 

Charge  11  of  the  Accusation.  (Exh.  5.)  Respondent  testified  that  he  called  the  “personnel 
office”  and  informed  them  of  the  statement  regarding  the  prior  teacher’s  mental  breakdown. 
Respondent  claimed  he  was  told  he  could  send  the  letter  to  parents.  Respondent  testified  that 
he  placed  a  copy  of  the  letter  in  Principal  Martinez’s  mailbox,  early  in  the  morning,  as  a  way 
of  asking  permission  for  the  letter.  Later  the  same  day,  two  assistant  principals  came  to  see 
him  and  asked  about  the  letter.  Respondent  testified  that  he  told  them  that  the  principal 
approved  the  letter  and  he  had  already  distributed  the  letter  to  his  students.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  felt  “a  little  bothered”  that  the  two  assistant  principals  “burst  in  [his] 
classroom”  and  took  away  something  he  felt  he  had  permission  to  send  to  parents.  The  job 
description  for  respondent’s  position  as  a  secondary  teacher  in  the  District  provides,  in  part, 
that  teachers  are  “[r]esponsible  to  [the]  School  Principal  or  designee.”  (Exh.  11.)  By 
refusing  to  cooperate  with  the  two  assistant  principals,  respondent  was  not  being  responsible 
for  his  actions  to  the  principal’s  designees. 

CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM  DATED  FEBRUARY  12,  2016 

35. 

On  February  12,  2016,  Assistant  Principal  Enriquez  held  a  conference  with 

respondent  at  the  Local  District  West  office,  where  respondent  was  assigned  at  the  time. 
Also  present  at  the  meeting  was  respondent’s  union  representative  and  a  Staff  Relations  Field 
Director  for  the  District.  During  the  conference,  the  following  matters  from  October  2015 
were  discussed:  respondent’s  comments  to  his  sixth  period  class,  including  the  comments 
regarding  students  Ti  G.  and ,  |  A.;  respondent’s  failure  and  refusal  to  submit  the 
mandated  student  attendance  through  MSIS;  and  respondent’s  unapproved  letter  to  parents. 
Although  he  was  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  allegations  at  the  conference, 
respondent  indicated  he  would  respond  in  writing.  (No  evidence  of  a  written  response  by 
respondent  was  presented.)  During  the  conference,  Assistant  Principal  Enriquez  provided 
respondent  with  assistance  and  guidance,  and  specific  directives.  Enriquez  issued  a 
conference  memorandum  dated  February  12,  2016,  which  summarized  the  discussion  at  the 
conference  and  the  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives,  given  to  respondent.  The

conference  memorandum  also  identified  the  various  District  policies  to  which  respondent 
was  expected  and  directed  to  adhere.  (Exh.  14.) 

36. 

 Atthe  February  12,  2016  conference,  Assistant  Principal  Enriquez  gave 

respondent  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives,  that  included  the  following: 

1.  Cease  immediately  from  making  any  demeaning  or 
derogatory  comments  about  race,  references  to  race,  or  racial 
stereotypes  to  students  or  in  the  presence  of  students. 

2.  Treat  all  students,  staff  members,  and  parents  with  respect, 
sensitivity,  and  fairness. 

3.  Cease  immediately  from  humiliating  students  and  never 
question  or  engage  in  a  discussion  about  their  home  life  in  front 
of  the  class.  This  is  both  unprofessional  and  highly 
inappropriate.  Students  should  be  able  to  expect  to  learn  in  a 
non-threatening,  non-hostile  environment. 

4.  You  are  to  conduct  yourself  appropriately,  fairly,  honestly,  in 
a  professional  manner  with  the  highest  integrity. 

5.  Treat  all  students  equally  regardless  of  gender,  race, 
ethnicity,  creed,  educational  status  or  any  other  cultural  or  visual 
differences. 

6.  Maintain  a  professional  demeanor  and  do  not  yell,  use 
demeaning  language,  toward  any  student,  staff  member,  parent 
or  administrator  under  any  circumstances. 

7.  Cease  immediately  from  generating  and  distributing  any 
correspondence  intended  for  the  school  community  without  the 
consent  and  authorized  approval  of  the  administrator. 

8.  Refrain  immediately  from  making  any  negative  comments 
toward  your  colleagues  and  or  administrators,  that  can  be 
interpreted  as  discourteous  and  disrespectful. 

(Exh.  14,  p.  38.) 

CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM  DATED  APRIL  19,  2017 

37. 

On  April  19,  2017,  Principal  Martinez  held  a  conference  with  respondent  at 
the  Local  District  West  office,  where  respondent  was  assigned  at  the  time.  Also  present  at 
the  conference  was  respondent’s  UTLA  representative  and  a  Staff  Relations  Field  Director 

10

for  the  District.  During  the  conference,  the  following  matters  were  discussed:  respondent’s 
shooting  range  comment  on  November  17,  2015;  his  refusal  to  answer  questions  at  the 
December  4,  2017  intake  meeting  and  running  off,  resulting  in  a  school-wide  lockdown;  the 
unapproved  letter  respondent  sent  to  parents  in  October  2015;  and  an  incident  in  November 
2015  reported  to  Assistant  Principal  Enriquez  involving  respondent’s  comments  and  conduct 
towards  a  student  with  gender  identity  issues.  When  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the 
allegations  at  the  conference,  respondent  stated,  “Nothing  to  say  at  this  time.”  (Exh.  15,  p. 
29.)  During  the  conference,  Principal  Martinez  provided  respondent  with  assistance  and 
guidance,  and  specific  directives.  Principal  Martinez  issued  a  conference  memorandum 
dated  April  19,  2017,  which  summarized  the  discussion  at  the  conference  and  the  assistance 
and  guidance,  and  directives,  given  to  respondent.  The  conference  memorandum  also 
identified  the  various  District  policies  to  which  respondent  was  expected  and  directed  to 
adhere.  (Exh.  15.) 

38. 

The  directives  given  to  respondent  during  the  April  19,  2017  conference 

included  the  following:  maintain  appropriate  and  professional  relationships  with  students, 
parents  and  staff  at  all  times;  treat  students,  parents  and  staff  with  respect,  courtesy,  and 
sensitivity;  refrain  from  making  demeaning  or  derogatory  comments  about  students;  set  a 
safe,  respectful  classroom  and  school  environment;  read,  review,  and  adhere  to  enumerated 
district  policies  and  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession;  and  refrain  from 
yelling,  name-calling,  demeaning  or  physically  handling  students  as  a  disciplinary  technique. 
(Exh.  15,  p.  31.) 

39.  —  Principal  Martinez  testified  he  would  not  request  to  have  respondent  assigned 
to  his  school  because  he  would  worry  about  the  safety  of  the  students.  Respondent  engaged 
in  behavior  indicating  a  disregard  for  student  safety  and  a  lack  of  cooperation  with  the 
administrative  team. 

SPECIFIC  CHARGES  IN  ACCUSATION 

40. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  1,  that  on  October  15,  2015, 

respondent  stated  to  student Ti  G.,  during 
other  students,  words  to  the  effect  that 
respondent  did  not  believe TH  rode  the  bus  because  he  lived  in a  rich  neighborhood. 

the  sixth  period  Spanish  class,  in  the  presence  of 
was  “rich”  because  he  was  “white,”  and  that 

Al. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  4,  that  on  October  15,  2015, 

A.,  during  the  sixth 

respondent  stated  to  student 
other  students,  words  to  the  effect  that  associated 
and  drug  activity.  Respondent,  in  testimony,  explained  he  made  the  comments  about 
because  a  “narco  corrido”  song  came  on  the  radio,  and  that  he  cannot  control  what  music 
plays  on  the  radio.  The  Commission  finds  respondent’s  explanation  did  not  excuse  or 
mitigate  his  statements  regarding im.  While  respondent  could  not  control  the  music 
played  on  the  radio,  he  did  control  the  radio  in  the  classroom  and  could  have  turned  it  off 
when  there  was  an  inappropriate  song. 

period  Spanish  class,  in  the  presence  of 
and  his  parents  to  illegal  drug  dealers 

11

  

  

  

  

42. 

It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  7,  that  on  October  15,  2015,  during 

the  sixth  period  Spanish  class,  that  respondent  stated  he  “hated  Black  people”  or  words  to 
that  effect.  The  District’s  hearsay  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  this  charge. 

43. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  10,  that  on  October  19,  2015, 

respondent  refused  to  complete  his  mandatory  student  attendance  on  MSIS,  despite  several 
reminders  from  the  administration,  and  that  he  suggested  someone  else  (1.e.,  the  assistant 
principal)  should  complete  his  work  instead. 

44. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  11,  that  on  October  20,  2015, 
respondent  sent,  or  attempted  to  send,  a  letter  to  parents  without  prior  administrative 
approval.  It  was  also  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  12,  that  on  October  20,  2015,  when 
respondent  was  questioned  about  the  parent  letter  by  two  assistant  principals,  he  was 
uncooperative  and  refused  the  assistant  principals’  directive  to  disclose  which  classes  he 
distributed  the  letter. 

45.  —  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  15,  that  on  November  17,  2015, 

respondent  called  student Am  O.  “retarded.” 

46. 

—  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  18,  that  on  November  17,  2015, 

respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  his  sixth  period  Spanish  class,  said  words  to 
the  effect  that  every  time  he  went  to  the  shooting  range,  he  imagined  his  annoying  students. 
It  was  further  established  that  when  making  that  comment,  respondent  made  a  gun  gesture 
with  his  hand  and  pointed  at  the  students  in  the  class. 
It  was  not  established,  as  alleged  in 
Charge  18,  that  respondent  pointed  a  laser  at  students  and  made  shooting  noises. 

47. 

Regarding  Charge  21,  the  District’s  hearsay  evidence  was  insufficient  to 

establish  this  charge.  (See  Exh.  15,  p.  29.) 

48. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  24,  that  on  December  4,  2015,  during  a 

threat  assessment  meeting,  respondent  refused  to  answer  any  questions  posed  by  Principal 
Martinez  and  subsequently  ran  off  campus,  resulting  in  a  school-wide  lockdown. 

Hollywood  High  School 

49. 

—_  Hollywood  High  School  is  organized  into  four  academic  programs:  the 

School  for  Advanced  Studies,  the  Performing  Arts  Magnet,  the  New  Media  Academy,  and 
the  Teaching  Career  Academy.  For  the  2017-2018  school  year,  respondent  was  assigned  as  a 
Spanish  teacher  in  the  Performing  Arts  Magnet.  Alexandra  Sanchez  (Sanchez)  was  the 
principal  at  Hollywood  High  School  for  the  2017  fall  semester. 

50. 

|  Sanchez  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  21  years.  She  has  worked  as  an 

administrator  in  the  District  for  10  years.  Sanchez  was  the  principal  at  Hollywood  High 
School  for  five  years,  from  fall  2012  through  fall  2017.  She  left  Hollywood  High  School  at 
the  end  of  the  2017  fall  semester  because  of  her  promotion  to  Staff  Relations  Field  Director 

12

at  Local  District  West,  which  is  her  current  position.  Sanchez  testified  credibly  at  this 
hearing. 

51. 

In  August  2017,  prior  to  the  start  of  the  2017-2018  school  year,  Sanchez  and 

Assistant  Principal  Sam  Dovlatian  (Dovlatian)  met  with  respondent  in  Sanchez’s  office  at 
Hollywood  High  School.  The  purpose  of  the  meeting  was  to  inform  respondent  of  his 
teaching  schedule  and  provide  the  instructional  materials  for  his  classes.  Sanchez  testified 
that,  during  the  meeting,  respondent  repeatedly  asked  her  why  she  did  not  offer  him  the 
position  the  previous  school  year.  Respondent  was  upset  and  raised  his  voice.  Respondent 
claimed  that  Sanchez  did  not  like  him;  Sanchez  disputed  and  corrected  that  claim  during  the 
meeting.  Because  of  respondent’s  disrespectful  attitude,  Sanchez  stopped  the  meeting  and 
walked  out,  with  respondent  storming  after  her.  Sanchez  testified  that  later  that  evening,  she 
received  an  email  from  respondent  in  which  he  stated  he  wanted  to  “start  over”  and  he  would 
come  by  her  office  to  get  his  teaching  materials. 

OCTOBER  19,  2017  CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM 

52. 

On  September  22,  2017,  Principal  Sanchez  visited  respondent’s  sixth  period 

Spanish  class.  The  students  in  the  class  were  ninth  graders.  At  the  end  of  the  class,  Sanchez 
handed  out  an  instructional  survey  to  the  students  to  obtain  their  anonymous  responses  to  the 
following  four  questions:  What  do  you  like  about  the  class?  What  could  be  improved?  How 
can  you  learn  more  of  the  material?  What  can  the  teacher  do  differently  to  help  learn  the 
material?  (See  Exh.  96.)  The  purpose  of  the  survey  was  to  get  the  students’  perspective 
about  what  was  happening  in  respondent’s  classroom. 

53. 

Principal  Sanchez  testified  that  she  found  the  students’  anonymous  responses 

to  the  survey  were  “concerning.”  The  students’  responses  included  comments  that 
respondent  spoke  inappropriately  to  the  class,  he  called  students  racist  terms,  he  called 
students  “savages,”  he  yelled  and  screamed  at  students,  and  he  insulted  students  and  their 
parents.  Based  on  the  survey  responses,  Principal  Sanchez  initiated  an  administrative 
investigation  of  respondent’s  conduct  in  his  sixth  period  Spanish  class. 

54. 

Principal  Sanchez  and  the  administrative  team  obtained  a  student  roster  for  the 

sixth  period  class  and  randomly  selected  every  other  student  on  the  roster  to  be  interviewed. 
The  administrative  team  interviewed a  total  of  15  students  from  the  sixth  period  class.  The 
students  were  interviewed  separately  by  a  member  of  the  administrative  team.  Each  student 
was  asked  open-ended  questions  about  respondent’s  class.  At  the  end  of  the  interview,  the 
student  was  asked  to  write  a  statement  of  what  he  or  she  said  during  the  interview.  The 
statements  obtained  from  the  students  during  the  interviews  corroborated  the  allegations 
from  the  instructional  survey  responses,  including  that  respondent  called  the  whole  class 
“savages”  when  only  some  of  the  students  were  being  disruptive;  respondent  told  two 
students  who  came  to  see  him  after  school,  “Get  the  hell  out  of  my  class”;  and  respondent  did 
not  allow  African-American  students  to  go  to  the  restroom,  resulting  in  one  female  student 
urinating  on  herself  during  class. 

13

55. 

On  October  19,  2017,  Principal  Sanchez  held  a  conference  with  respondent. 

Also  present  was  Assistant  Principal  Dovlatian  and  respondent’s  UTLA  representative. 
During  the  conference,  the  following  matters  were  discussed:  the  allegations  made  in  the 
students’  instructional  survey  responses  and  the  allegations  made  by  students  who  were 
interviewed  as  part  of  the  administrative  investigation.  Respondent  was  allowed  to  respond 
to  the  students’  allegations  against  him.  Principal  Sanchez  issued  a  conference  memorandum 
dated  October  19,  2017,  which  summarized  the  discussion  at  the  conference  and  the 
assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives  given  to  respondent.  The  conference  memorandum 
also  identified  the  various  District  policies  to  which  respondent  was  expected  and  directed  to 
adhere.  (Exh.  19.) 

56. 

During  the  October  19,  2017  conference,  in  response  to  the  students’ 

allegations,  respondent  stated  that  the  students  in  the  sixth  period  class  were  “all  difficult 
students.”  (Exh.  19,  p.  73.)  Regarding  the  allegation  that  one  female  student  urinated  on 
herself  during  class  because  he  would  not  let  her  go  to  the  restroom,  respondent  explained: 
“The  girl  who  peed  on  herself  went  out  [of  the  classroom]  three  times.  I  though[t]  it  was 
common  sense  to  say  no,  her  mom  is  aware,  her  social  worker  knows  she  leaves  and  doesn’t 
come  back.”  (/d.)  Respondent  also  stated:  “AII  these  kids  are  late.  I’ve  invited  you  and  Mr. 
Lazo  to  come  in. 
I  was  afraid  to  be  there  alone.  Of  course  they’re  going  to  have  a  problem 
because  they’re  African  American.  I  sent  you  emails.”  (/d.)  Respondent  complained  that 
the  students  who  were  interviewed  were  “not  randomly  selected”  because  “they’re  friends  of 
each  other.”  (/d.)  Respondent  stated:  “I’m  here  to  teach  them.  I’m  not  a  horrible  teacher. 
You're  crucifying  the  teachers.  I’m  going  to  let  them  know  after  all  this.”  (/d.) 

57. 

As  stated  in  the  conference  memorandum  issued  by  Principal  Sanchez,  the 

directives  given  to  respondent  during  the  October  19,  2017  conference  included  the 
following: 

(fl...  (9) 

C.  Refrain  immediately  from  engaging  in  conduct  that  is 
disrespectful,  discourteous,  unprofessional,  and  insulting  toward 
students. 

D.  Never  make  inappropriate  remarks  directed  to  your  students 
such  as  “get  the  hell  out  of  my  classroom”,  “get  out”,  or  “I 
don’t  want  you  in  my  class.”  As  a  district  employee,  you  are 
expected  to  providing  [sic|  the  best  example  that  you  can, 
striving  to  demonstrate  excellence,  integrity  and  responsibility 
in  your  work,  and  creating  an  environment  of  trust,  care  and 
respect  for  your  students. 

E.  Never  make  demeaning  comments  such  as  calling  students 
“savages”  or  telling  students  that  their  parents  are  “bad 
parents”  or  any  similar  comment.  I  reminded  you  that  as  a 

14

district  employee  you  are  expected  to  act  as  role  model  and 
never  engage  in  discriminatory  or  harassing  behaviors  with  our 
students.  I  reminded  you  that  you  were  given  this  directive  of 
acting  in  a  professional  manner  at  all  times  on  February  12, 
2016  and  April  19,  2017. 

F.  Immediately  cease  from  screaming  and  yelling  at  any 
students  when  they  ask  you  for  help,  experience  behavioral 
problems  and/  or  [sic]  any  other  circumstances.  I  reminded  you 
that  as  a  district  employee  you  are  expected  to  act  as  a  role 
model,  to  maintain  your  composure  in  the  classroom  and  create 
an  environment  conducive  to  learning. 

(Exh.  19,  p.  78  (italics  in  original).) 

58. 

Principal  Sanchez  also  directed  respondent  to  follow  all  District  policies  listed 

in  the  conference  memorandum,  and  to  take  specified  classroom  management  training 
sessions  through  the  Learning  Zone. 

59. 

Principal  Sanchez  testified  that  respondent  did  not  follow  the  directives  given 

to  him  during  the  October  19,  2017  conference.  Sanchez  received  new  student  complaints 
tegarding  respondent’s  fourth  period  and  fifth  period  classes. 

DECEMBER  2017  CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM 

60. 

On  October  25,  2017, 

while  supervising  the  lunch  period,  Principal  Sanchez 

period  class. 

!),  who  appeared  upset.  FE 

as  a  student 
teported  to  Principal  Sanchez  that,  during  class  the 

asked  respondent  what  she  should  do  after  finishing  a  task,  he 
told  her  to  sit  down. aia  also  reported  that  respondent  made 

was  approached  by  student 
in  respondent’s  fifth 
previous  day,  when 
yelled  “I  don’t  know”  and 
another  student  in  the  fifth  period  class  feel  bad.  Student 
and  respondent  told  the  class  she  was  “a  sophomore  with  freshman  credits.” aia  also 
teported  to  Principal  Sanchez  that  respondent  “talks  about  how  he  doesn’t  like  freshmen  and 
how  they  stress  him  out.” 
student  to  “stop  speaking  Spanish 
told  students,  “I’m  tired  of  you  asking  stupid  questions.”  (Exh.  20.) 

also  reported  that  respondent  once  told  a  fifth  period 
like  a  white  person,”  and  he  does  not  clarify  things  and 

P.  AD  was  a  tenth  grader 

61. 

Principal  Sanchez  initiated  an  administrative  investigation  of aa  Ss 

complaints  regarding  respondent’s  fifth  period  Spanish  class.  Students  from  respondent’s 
fifth  period  class  were  randomly  selected  and  interviewed,  and  written  statements  were 
obtained  from  them.  The  other  students’  statements  corroborated 
example,  students  reported  that  respondent  displayed  disrespectful  and  unprofessional 
conduct  towards  the  fifth  period  class,  he  made  discriminatory  comments  towards  students, 
and  he  did  not  answer  students’  questions  about  the  classwork  and  ignored  their  requests  for 
help. 

’s  allegations.  For 

15

  

62. 

Principal  Sanchez  also  initiated  an  administrative  investigation  of  respondent’s 
fourth  period  Spanish  class  after  receiving  complaints  that  respondent  displayed  disrespectful 
period 
and  unprofessional  conduct  towards  students  in  that  class.  Students  from  the  fourth 
class  reported  that  respondent  made  sexist  comments  in  class.  Student Am  A.  ( 
) 
   
reported  that  respondent  made  a  comment  that  “young  girls  not  knowing  how  to  cook”  was 
“shameful.”  Respondent  also  reportedly  made  discouraging  comments  about  the  students’ 
command  of  the  Spanish  language.  Student 
students  that  he  was  embarrassed  they  were  Latinos  and  did  not  know  Spanish.  When 
mentioned  English  was  her  first  language,  respondent  added  he  was  embarrassed  to  tell 
parents  their  student  did  not  know  Spanish.  Student Am M.  AD  reported  that 
respondent  told  him,  in  Spanish,  not  to  help  his  African-American  friends  because  the 
also  reported  that  respondent  would  answer  his  ( 
should  learn  for  themselves. 
questions  with  no  problem,  but  when  an  African-American  student  asked  a  question, 
respondent  would  tell  the  student  he  or  she  should  have  been  paying  attention.  Students  from 
the  fourth  period  class  were  randomly  selected  and  interviewed,  and  written  statements  were 
obtained  from  them.  The  students’  statements  corroborated  the  complaints  about  respondent 
making  sexist,  racist  and  discouraging  comments  to  students  during  class. 

)  reported  that  respondent  told 
   

     

P. ( 

Ss) 

63. 

On  December  5,  2017,  Principal  Sanchez  held  a  conference  with  respondent  to 

discuss  the  allegations  made  by  students  in  his  fourth  and  fifth  period  classes.  Also  present 
at  the  conference  were  Assistant  Principal  Dovlatian  and  respondent’s  UTLA  representative. 
Principal  Sanchez  prepared  and  issued  a  conference  memorandum  dated  December  5,  2017, 
which  summarized  the  students’  allegations  and  the  investigation  findings,  respondent’s 
comments  during  the  conference,  and  the  assistance  and  guidance  and  directives  given  to 
respondent  by  Principal  Sanchez.  The  conference  memorandum  identified  the  various 
District  policies  to  which  respondent  was  expected  and  directed  to  adhere.  The  conference 
memorandum  also  directed  respondent  to  take  classroom  management  training  sessions. 
(Exh.  20.) 

64. 

During  the  December  5,  2017  conference,  respondent  was  allowed  to  respond 

to  the  allegations  made  against  him.  Respondent  denied  the  allegations.  Respondent 
claimed  that  certain  students  made  allegations  against  him  because  those  students  were 
failing  his  class  and  other  classes.  Respondent  stated  that  he  treated  all  of  his  students  with 
respect  and  has  always  been  nice  to  his  students  and  their  parents.  He  complained  that 
students  interviewed  during  the  investigation  were  not  randomly 
that  had  been 
because 
she  is  a  good  student.  Respondent  also  explained:  “My  intention  is  to  motivate  them  to 
speak  their  language,  if  they  misinterpret  it,  I  just  want  them  to  speak  the  language.”  (Exh. 
20,  p.  94.) 

selected  but  were  the  ones 
C.  mitiated  the  investigation 
wants  to  run  the  classroom  and  the  school,  and  she  gets  away  with  it  because 

giving  him  problems.  He  claimed  student 

65. 

Inthe  December  5,  2017  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Sanchez 

reminded  respondent  of  the  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives  given  to  him  by  Assistant 
Principal  Enriquez  on  February  12,  2016,  and  by  Principal  Martinez  on  April  19,  2017,  as 
well  as  the  assistance  and  guidance  and  directives  she  gave  him  in  her  October  18,  2017 

16

  

  

  

conference  memorandum.  The  December  5,  2017  conference  memorandum  included 
additional  directives  including,  but  not  limited  to,  refrain  immediately  from  engaging  in 
conduct  that  is  disrespectful,  discourteous,  unprofessional,  and  insulting  toward  students; 
never  make  negative  comments  about  students’  academic  progress,  or  negative  comments 
about  parents  and  guardians,  in  front  of  other  students  or  adults  on  campus;  never  use 
discriminatory  remarks  such  as  “stop  speaking  Spanish  like  a  white  person’;  cease  from 
making  discriminatory  and  offensive  remarks  such  as  “acting  white”  or  “being  too 
Americanized”;  and  never  make  discriminatory  or  inappropriate  comments  directed  to 
female  students.  (Exh.  20,  pp.  102-104.) 

66.  —  Principal  Sanchez  testified  that  she  would  not  ask  respondent  to  return  to  his 

job  assignment  at  Hollywood  High  School.  Respondent  was  given  directives,  and  assistance 
and  guidance,  prior  to  his  assignment  at  Hollywood  High  School  and  then  in  the  two 
conference  memos  she  issued  to  respondent  in  the  2017  fall  semester.  Respondent  did  not 
adhere  to  those  directives.  For  example,  respondent,  admitted  in  testimony,  that  he  did  not 
take  the  classroom  management  training  sessions  as  directed  by  Principal  Sanchez.  Principal 
Sanchez  testified  that  her  “strong  opinion”  is  that  respondent’s  misconduct  with  students 
cannot  be  corrected. 

TESTIMONY  OF  STUDENT  WITNESSES 

STUDENT  SAMANTHA  C.  (FOURTH  PERIOD) 

67. 

C.  ( 

     

)  testified  at  this  hearing. 

an 
was  a 
eleventh  grader  at  Hollywood  High  School.  For  the  2017-2018  school  year, 
tenth  grader  in  respondent’s  fourth  period  Spanish  class. 
testified  that,  at  first,  she 
thought  respondent  was  “okay”  as  a  teacher,  but  then  he  “started  to  speak  his  mind”  and  the 
class  became  “hectic.” 
testified  that  her  relationship 
good,”  but  it  got  better  as  her  grade  in  the  class  improved.  a  testified  she  was  kicked 
out  of  respondent’s  class  on  four  occasions,  and  admitted  that  she  did  things  that  justified  her 
being  kicked  out  of  class. 

with  respondent  was  “not 

is  currently 

   

68. 

testified  that,  as  part  of  the  class  routine,  respondent  had  the 

students  write  in  their  journals.  Respondent  wrote  a  question  or  topic  on  the  board  and 
instructed  the  class  to  write  about  the  question  or  topic  in  their  journals. 
understood  the  purpose  of  the  journal  writing  was  to  get  the  students  to  practice  writing  in 
Spanish.  Respondent  encouraged  the  students  to  speak  only  in  Spanish  in  the  classroom  and 
to  speak  with  each  other  in  Spanish.  However,  in  seeking  to  motivate  the  class  to  write  and 
speak  in  Spanish,  respondent  would  go  off  topic  and  make  inappropriate  comments. 

69. 

testified  credibly  that  respondent  made  inappropriate  comments  and 

remarks  during  the  fourth  period  class,  including  the  following: 

17

  
  

  

  

  

(A) 

When  the  King  of  Nigeria  visited  the  school,  respondent  told  the  class 
the  King’s  country  was  “dirty  and  poor.”  _  was  bothered  by  respondent’s  comment 
because  she  felt  it  was  rude,  uncalled  for,  and 

ignorant. 

(B) 

Respondent  made  racist  comments  about  Hispanics. 

a.  in  her 
testimony,  did  not  remember  respondent’s  exact  words,  but  she  recalled  they  were  words  a 
teacher  is  not  supposed  to  say  and  were  disrespectful  and  rude. 
tespondent’s  words  made  her  angry.  She  admitted  that  she  responded  to  him  with  words  she 
should  not  have  used  and  words  that  were  disrespectful  to  adults. 

7  testified 

(C)  _  Respondent  made  sexist  comments  in  class.  He  said  that  a  woman’s 

only  purpose  is  to  get  pregnant  and  have  children.  Samantha  did  not  like  this  comment 
because  it  was  directed  at  her  gender  group.  Respondent  also  told  the  class  that  “girls  are 
emotional.” 

7  felt  that  comment  was  an  ignorant  statement  and  wrong. 

(D) 

Respondent  called  7  and  another  student  @ 

“dumb.” 

Respondent  called  a  male  student  who  was  acting  out  “retarded”  before  kicking  the  student 
out  of  class.  _  testified  that  respondent  called  students  “dumb”  or  “stupid”  at  least 
once  a  day,  during  class.  Respondent  called  students  “dumb”  when  they  made  a  mistake  or 
were  misbehaving. 
testified  that  respondent  insulted  her  multiple  times  by  calling 
her  “dumb,”  “rude,”  and  “disrespectful.” 
tespondent’s  class  because  he  made  inappropriate  comments  and  gave  her  low  grades  for  her 
work. 
class,  and  he  would  call  the  student’s  parents. 

7  testified  that  respondent  argued  with  the  students  who  misbehaved  during 

testified  she  was  “negative”  in 

(©) 

7  testified  that  respondent  said  her  grade  out  loud,  during  class. 

Respondent  had a  list  of  students  who  did  badly. 
tespondent  not  to  read  the  grades  out  loud,  because  she  already  knew  her  grade. 

7  testified  she  got  up  and  told 

(F)  _  Respondent  talked  about  the  television  show  “Portlandia”  and  told  the 

   
   

class  they  probably  did  not  watch  it  because  the  jokes  were  “smart”  and  they  would  not 
understand  them. 
stupid  and  dumb.  In 
those  that  made 
made  comments  about  the  students  “acting  white”  or  being  “too  Americanized.” 
testified  respondent  called  the  students  in  her  class  “Americanized” 

felt  this  comment  was  respondent’s  way  of  calling  the  students 
’s  opinion,  respondent’s  most  disrespectful  comments  were 
her  classmates  feel  uneducated.  Additionally,  respondent 

three  times  per  week. 
testified  that  respondent  encouraged  the  students  to  speak  Spanish  and  tried  to 

and 

the  students  feel  proud  of  their  Spanish  heritage.  Respondent  played  music  and 

[= 
e 

showed  videos  that  were  not  part  of  the  lesson. 

(G) 

When  respondent  made  insulting  and  inappropriate  comments. 

7  admitted  that  she  fought  back  and  responded  with  similar  words. 
believes  respondent  insulted  her  because  she  “argued  with  him  a  lot”  about  his  comments 
when  they  made  her  feel  angry  and  mad.  _  felt  respondent’s  comments  were 
inappropriate  and,  as  a  teacher,  he  should  know  how  to  handle  himself  better. 

7 

18

  

  

testified  that,  during  the  fourth  period  class,  respondent  talked  about  the  students  in  his  first 
period  and  fifth  period  classes. 

Srupenr Ka  W.  (FIRST PERIOD) 

70. 

W. 

first  period  Spanish  class. 

)  testified  credibly  at  the  hearing. Ki  is  currently 
School.  For  the  2017-2018  school  year, ki  was 
an  eleventh  grader  at  Hollywood  High 
|  described  respondent  as  a 
a  tenth  grader in  respondent's 
teacher  who  had  good  days  and  bad  days.  One  minute  he  would  be  all  right  with  you  and  the 
next  minute  he  would  be  mad  at  you.  _  testified  that  on  a  “good  day,”  respondent 
was  funny  and  relaxed,  he  did  not  argue  or 
e  inappropriate  remarks,  and  the  class  was 
|  testified  that  on  a  “bad  day,”  respondent  would  argue  with  students 
comfortable. 
and  make  “smart  remarks”  (i.e.,  racial  slurs,  say  things  that  “irked”  students). 
felt 
tespondent  made  racial  slurs  when  he  referred  to  black  students  as  “these  people”  and  “you 
people.”  Respondent’s  remarks  made 
respondent  and  then  get  kicked  out  of  class. 
out  of  class  “a  lot”  because  of  their  arguments.  She  raised  her  voice  when  respondent  raised 
his  voice  at  her. MEE  ested  that  her  relationship  with  respondent  improved  not 
because  his  behavior  changed  but  because  she  decided  to  “fall  back”  and  stop  arguing  with 
respondent  and  just  “let  him  do  him.” Ki  did  not  enjoy  having  respondent  as  a 
teacher.  Respondent’s  class  was  not  “comfortable”  and  she  felt  as  if  she  were  “walking  on 
egg  shells”  in  his  class. 

feel  upset,  and  she  would  argue  with 

testified  that  respondent  kicked  her 

71.  _  testified  that,  during  the  first  period  class,  respondent  talked  about 

students in  his  sixth 
done. 

period  and  fifth  period  classes,  and  how  those  classes  did  not  get  things 
|  did  not  care  that  respondent  spoke  about  his  other  classes  during  her  class. 

Srupenr 

K.  (FIFTH  PERIOD) 

Zz! 

72. 

ml K. 

testified  credibly  at  the  hearing.  ml  is  currently  an 
|  was  a 
felt  respondent  did  not  set  a 
testified  the  fifth  period  class 
finish  the  school  day,  work  never 
|  felt  that  respondent 

eleventh  grader  at  Hollywood  High  School.  For  the  2017-2018  school  year, 
tenth  grader  in  respondent’s  fifth  period  Spanish  class. 
good  example  for  the  class  and  he  was  irresponsible. 
was  pretty  loud  and  rambunctious,  everyone  was  ready  to 
got  done,  and  the  students  argued  with  respondent  all  the  time. 
wasted  so  much  instructional  time  during  class  arguing  with  student,  and  that  it  was  stressful 
to  be  in  that  classroom  environment  every  day. 
testified  she  received  an  “A”  grade  in 
tespondent’s  class. 

B. 

mi  testified  that  as  displayed  racist  behavior  in  class.  During 

asked  respondent  why he  thought  she  was  listening  to  rap  or  hip-hop, 

class,  respondent  asked  student 
When  . 
respondent  replied  it  was  because  she  was  black.  mi  heard  respondent’s  comment  and 
thought  it  was  racist.  On  another  occasion,  respondent  made  a  comment  that  the  music 
played  in  the  quad  is  always  rap  or  hip-hop  because  the  students  who  dance  in  the  quad  are 

if  the  music  she  was  listening  to  was  rap  or  hip-hop. 

19

mostly  African-American.  mi  felt  this  comment  was  prejudiced  because  everyone 
dances  in  the  quad,  not  just  African-American  students.  Respondent  also  made  comments 
that  black  people  are  lazy  and  Hispanic  people  work  harder  than  black  people. 

74. 

Respondent  told 

|  she  was  becoming  a  bad  student  and  misbehaving 

because  she  was  hanging  out  with  the  black  kids.  Respondent  called 
told  her  ml  was  being  extremely  negative  in  class  and 

playing  games  on  her  phone. 

i:  mother  and 

did  not  care  that  respondent  called  her  parents.  WR  testtica  her  parents 
understood  what  was  going  on  in  respondent’s  class  and  they  were  not  disappointed  in  her. 

testified  that  she  had  negative  interactions  with  respondent,  mostly  because  she  called 

him  out  for  being  racist  or  making  racist  comments. 
expressed  favoritism  towards  certain  students.  When  respondent  planned  a  field  trip  for  the 
class,  respondent  told  mi  he  would  only  take  his  “favorite  students.” 

also  testified  that  respondent 

75. 

ml  testified  that  respondent  had  an  argument  with  student NE  P.  durin; 

class  and  respondent  said  her  parents  would  be  disappointed  in  her  and  her  behavior.  = 
felt  respondent’s  comment  was  inappropriate  to  say  in  front  of  the  entire  class  and 
disrespectful  towards NE.  Respondent  also  talked  about  Ns  credits  during  class.  He 
said  that 
grader. 
because  her  grades  were  not  the  best  grades. 

did  not  pass  with  enough  credits  the  previous  year  so  she’s  just  a  ninth 
felt  respondent’s  comments  were  inappropriate  and  humiliating  for NB 

76.  __  Respondent  often  mentioned  students  grades  and  how  many  students  failed  in 

the  class.  mi  testified  she  never  asked  her  friends  about  their  grades. 

77. 

ml  testified  that  respondent  made  comments  about  his  sixth  period 

Spanish  class  in  her  fifth  period  class.  Respondent  said  the  sixth  period  class  was  extreme 
loud.  Respondent  also  said  his  other  classes  were  better  than  the  fifth  period  class.  = 
thought  respondent’s  comment  was  inappropriate  and  that  it  was  unfair  to  compare  her  fifth 
period  class  to  respondent’s  other  classes  because  every  class  is  different. 

FEBRUARY  1,  2018  CONFERENCE  MEMORANDUM 

78.  |  Edward  Colacion  (Colacion)  is  currently  the  principal  at  Hollywood  High 
School.  He  became  the  principal  in  January  2018.  Colacion  has  been  employed  by  the 
District  for  over  15  years.  He  has  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  environmental  planning  and  a 
master’s  degree  in  education  administration.  Colacion  currently  holds  single-subject 
credentials  in  biology,  chemistry,  and  physics,  a  BCLAD  certificate  in  Spanish,  a 
supplemental  credential  in  elementary  education,  and  an  administrative  credential.  Colacion 
testified  credibly  at  this  hearing. 

79.  | When  he  arrived  at  Hollywood  High  School  in  January  2018,  Principal 

Colacion  was  made  aware  of  pending  administrative  investigations  involving  respondent. 
Eric  Maxie  of  Local  District  West  informed  him  of  the  student  allegations  against 
respondent.  Principal  Colacion  worked  with  Assistant  Principal  Dovlatian  and  made 

20

findings  regarding  the  allegations,  which  are  summarized  in  a  conference  memorandum 
dated  February  1,  2018.  (Exh.  21.)  Principal  Colacion  discussed  the  conference 
memorandum  with  respondent  at  a  meeting  on  February  1,  2018.  Assistant  Principal 
Dovlatian  was  also  present  at  the  meeting.  During  the  meeting,  respondent  was  given  the 
opportunity  to  respond  to  the  allegations,  which  are  summarized  in  the  conference 
memorandum.  Respondent  stated,  among  other  things,  that  every  student  mentioned  in  the 
allegations  “has  had  discipline  issues  in  my  class,”  and  he  complained  the  District’s 
investigations  were  not  done  in  a  “clear  and  fair  way.”  (Exh.  21,  p.  111.)  Respondent  was 
given  assistance  and  guidance,  and  directives,  by  Principal  Colacion,  as  documented  in  the 
conference  memorandum.  Principal  Colacion  also  reminded  respondent  of  prior  assistance 
and  guidance,  and  directives,  previously  given  to  him  by  Principal  Sanchez  and  Principal 
Martinez. 

80. 

On  February  22,  2018,  Principal  Colacion  met  with  respondent  and  gave  him  a 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Performance.  (Exh.  17.)  On  March  9,  2018,  Principal  Colacion 
met  with  respondent  and  gave  him  a  Notice  of  Suspension  which  imposed  a  15-day 
suspension.  Principal  Colacion  determined  a  15-day  suspension  was  appropriate,  given  the 
pattern  of  respondent’s  behavior  and  incidents.  There  were  a  number  of  incidents  involving 
respondent’s  treatment  of  students,  his  comments  on  gender  and  race,  as  well  as  other 
comments  not  appropriate  in  a  learning  community.  Principal  Colacion  testified  that 
teachers  must  be  role  models  for  the  students.  There  was  no  change  in  respondent’s  behavior 
despite  the  assistance  and  guidance  given  to  him  over  multiple  school  years.  Principal 
Colacion  believes  respondent’s  dismissal  is  appropriate. 

SPECIFIC  CHARGES  IN  ACCUSATION 

81. 

It  was  alleged  in  Charge  25,  but  not  established  by  sufficient  evidence,  that 
during  the  period  August  15,  2017,  to  September  22,  2017,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of 
students  during  the  sixth  period  Spanish  class,  would  not  allow  African-American  students  to 
use  the  restroom  or  use  the  drinking  fountain.  The  District’s  hearsay  evidence  was 
insufficient  to  establish  this  charge.  (See  e.g.,  Exh.  19,  p.  72;  Exh.  77.) 

82. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  28,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 
2017,  to  September  22,  2017,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  sixth  period 
Spanish  class,  said  to  the  class  they  were  all  “savages”  (Charge  28a),  and  said  words  to  the 
effect  “No  I  don’t  want  to  hear  it,  I  don’t  want  you  in  my  class.”  (Charge  28b.)  Respondent 
testified  he  called  some  students  “savages,”  but  not  the  whole  class,  and  clarified  that  he  said 
“some  of  you  act  like  savages.”  Regarding  Charge  28b,  respondent  testified  he  was  under  so 
much  stress  and  “many  times,  I  hate  to  admit  it,  I  lost  my  temper  and  raised  my  voice.”  He 
admitted  he  probably  told  the  students  “I  don’t  want  to  hear  it”  in  order  maintain  his 
authority  in  the  classroom.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent’s  explanations  do  not 
excuse  or  mitigate  his  conduct  described  in  Charges  28a  and  28d.  The  Commission  finds  the 
District’s  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  remaining  allegations  in  Charges  28b  and 
28c.  As  to  those  charges,  respondent  denied  those  allegations  and  claimed  the  students  and 
administrators  misconstrued  his  statements. 

21

83. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  31,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 
2017,  to  October  19,  2017,  respondent,  on  at  least  one  occasion  did  not  allow  a  ninth  grade 
African-American  student  (( 
by  sufficient  evidence  that,  as  a  result,  the  student  urinated  in  her  pants.  Respondent 
admitted  that,  on  this  one  occasion,  he  did  not  allow 
she  had  on  previous  occasions  left  the  classroom  to  use  the  restroom  but  did  not  return  to 
class.  Respondent  testified  that,  on  this  one  occasion, 
use  the  restroom  and  respondent  told  her  to  wait.  Respondent  testified  no  one  told  him 

S.)  to  use  the  restroom.  However,  it  was  not  established 

|  had  asked  multiple  times  to 

|  to  go  to  the  restroom  because 

had  urinated  on  herself  until  the  administrative  investigation.  Respondent  denied 
urinated  on  herself  in  class.  The  District’s  evidence,  consisting  of  hearsay 
by  students,  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  student,  in  fact,  urinated  on  herself  in 

that 

statements 
class. 

84. 

(A) _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  34,  that  during  the  period 

August  15,  2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  fifth  period 
Spanish  class,  respondent  said  words  to  the  effect,  “Stop  speaking  Spanish  like  a  white 
person”  (Charge  34a),  and  “I  don’t  know  why  every  time  they  play  rap  music  in  the  quad, 
there  are  so  many  black  kids”  (Charge  34b),  and  he  referred  to  African-Americans  as  “those 
people”  as  a  racial  slur  (Charge  34c). 

(B)  |  The  District’s  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  allegation  in 

Charge  34d  that  respondent  said  words  to  the  effect  “Blacks  in  his  class  are  rude.”  The 
evidence  established  that  respondent  commented  that  students  in  his  classes  were  “rude,”  but 
there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  respondent  directed  the  comment  towards  Black 
students. 

(C)  _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  34e,  that  respondent  said  words 

to  the  effect  “That’s  why  I  only  pick  my  favorite  students  and  that’s  why  I  prefer  Latino 
students.”  Respondent,  in  his  testimony,  did  not  deny  this  charge  but,  instead,  claimed  his 
comment  was  taken  out  of  context.  He  explained  the  context  for  his  comment.  Respondent 
testified  that  he  asked  some  students  to  come  on a  field  trip  to  the  Mayan  Theater  to  watch  a 
movie  in  Spanish.  Respondent  testified  the  lady  in  charge  of  the  Spanish  Department  invited 
respondent  and  his  class  to  go  with  her  class  to  watch  the  movie.  The  Commission  finds 
tespondent’s  comment  was  not  appropriate  because  expressing  favoritism  towards  certain 
students  is  not  conducive  to  creating  a  supportive  learning  environment  for  all  the  students. 

(D) _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  34f,  that  respondent  said  words 

to  the  effect  that  kids  sound  funny  when  trying  to  learn  Spanish.  However,  it  was  not 
established  that  respondent  specified  that  “Black  kids,”  in  particular,  sounded  funny  when 
trying  to  learn  Spanish.  Respondent  testified  that  he  told  students  about  how  much  he 
enjoyed  teaching  Spanish,  and  how  cute  they  sound  when  they’re  first  learning  Spanish  (they 
sound  like  babies),  which  makes  him  happy.  Respondent  testified  he  did  not  intend  his 
students  to  take  his  comment  as  being  derogatory. 

22

85. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  37b,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 

2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  fifth  period 
Spanish  class,  refused  to  take  a  tardy  slip  from  a  student  and  said,  “I  am  not  going  to  accept 
this  because  I  am  in  America  and  I  have  rights,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  Respondent,  in  his 
testimony,  admitted  this  charge.  The  District’s  hearsay  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish 
the  remaining  allegations  in  Charges  37a,  37c,  and  37d. 

86. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  40,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 

2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  fifth  period  Spanish  class, 
respondent  told  tenth  grade  student N@  P.,  on  at  least  one  occasion,  words  to  the  effect 
that  she  is  in  the  tenth  grade  with  only  ninth  grade  credits.  Respondent  denied  the  allegations 
in  Charge  40,  again  claiming  that  his  comments  were  misconstrued  by  the  students. 
Respondent  explained  that N@  was  in  her  second  year  at  Hollywood  High  School  and  she 
had  not  passed  a  class  in  two  years.  The  Commission  finds  that  respondent’s  explanation 
does  not  excuse  or  mitigate  his  comments,  in  the  presence  of  other  students,  that N@  S 
credits  were  not  at  grade  level. 

87. 

(A)  _  It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  43,  that  during  the  period 

August  15,  2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the 
fourth  period  class,  made  comments  or  statements  that  the  students  considered  to  be  racist, 
sexist,  insulting,  offensive  and/or  inappropriate.  This  finding  is  based  on  the  credible 
testimony  of  student  so  C.,  as  supplemented  by  student  statements  contained  in  the 
conference  memoranda  issued  by  Principal  Sanchez  (Exhibits  19  and  20). 

(B) 

Respondent,  in  his  testimony,  explained  that  his  statements  were 

misconstrued  by  the  students,  he  explained  the  context  for  his  statements,  and  he  claimed  he 
was  simply  trying  to  motivate  the  students  to  speak  and  write  in  Spanish.  For  example, 
respondent  discussed  gender  roles  in  reference  to  his  upbringing  in  Mexico  and  told  the  class 
that  his  mother  and  sister  did  all  the  household  chores  and  cooking.  He  told  the  students  to 
write  in  their  journals  about  what  they  thought  of  gender  roles  in  Mexico  as  he  explained 
them.  Respondent,  at  the  start  of  class,  wrote  a  topic  or  question  on  the  board  to  get  the 
students  to  write,  in  Spanish,  in  their  journals.  The  journal  topics  varied  and,  for  example, 
covered  gender  issues  (e.g.,  empowerment  of  women  and  the  “Me  Too”  movement)  as  well 
as  racial  and  ethnic  stereotypes.  Respondent  explained  that  he  told  the  students  they  were 
“too  Americanize”  to  motivate  them  to  speak  in  Spanish.  If  he  referred  to  students  being 
“white,”  which  he  did  not  remember  saying,  it  was  not  with  the  intent  to  make  students  feel 
inferior. 

(C) 

|The  Commission  finds  that,  in  trying  to  motivate  his  students  to  write 

in  their  journals  (which  is  commendable),  respondent  made  negative,  insulting,  offensive, 
and/or  inappropriate  statements,  especially  when  giving  further  explanation  for  the  journal- 
writing  topics  he  wrote  on  the  board.  Respondent’s  contention  that  his  statements  were 
misconstrued  by  the  students  did  not  excuse  or  mitigate  his  conduct.  Respondent,  as  an 
experienced  educator,  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  know  the  types  of  statements  or 
comments  that  are  inappropriate  in  a  classroom  setting.  The  Commission  finds  respondent 

23

was  unprofessional  by  making  inappropriate  and  offensive  statements  to  the  students  in  his 
fourth  period  class. 

88. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  46,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 

M.,  on  at  least  one  occasion, 

2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  respondent  told  student 
words  to  the  effect  that  he  should  not  to  help  his  African-American  friends  because  they 
should  learn  for  themselves.  Respondent,  in  his  testimony,  did  not  deny  this  charge  but, 
instead,  explained  the  context  for  his  statements  to  the  student.  He  testified  this  was  “a 
good  intention  was  tumed  into  a  negative  by  administrators. 
perfect  example”  of  how  his 
was  Latino  and  knew  Spanish  but  was  placed  in  the  non- 
Respondent  testified  that 
Spanish  speaking  class. 
gave  answers  to  his  peers  (black  students  and  white  students). 
Respondent  told Al  not  to  give  answers  to  the  other  students  and  to  let  them  do  their  own 
work.  After AH  ‘was  switched  to  the  appropriate  Spanish  class,  respondent  continued  to  be 
his  teacher.  Respondent  testified  there  were  no  further  issues  with 
other  students.  Respondent’s  conduct,  however,  was  perceived  by  5  as  example  of 
tespondent’s  bias  against  his  African-American  classmates.  (See  Exh.  20,  p.  90.) 

giving  answers  to 

89. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  49,  that  during  the  period  August  15, 

2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  respondent  told  student  A  A.,  on  at  least  one  occasion, 
words  to  the  effect,  “You  guys  have  to  get  married  to  husbands  and  have  kids  for  the  sake  of 
the  next  generation.”  Respondent,  in  his  testimony,  did  not  deny  making  this  statement  but, 
instead,  claimed  his  statement  was  misconstrued.  Respondent  spoke  to  the  class  about 
gender  roles  and  asked  the  students  if  they  thought  about  getting  married.  A  asked. 
tespondent  why  he  assumed  they  would  be  getting  married.  Respondent  replied  that  if 
people  are  not  married,  they  cannot  procreate,  so  some  people  need  to  get  married. 

90. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  52,  that  during 

the  period  August  15, 

2017,  to  December  5,  2017,  respondent  told  ninth  grade  student 
effect,  “Why  are  you  wearing  Chapstick?  You  look  too  pretty  already.”  Respondent,  in  his 
testimony,  admitted  making  these  statements  the  student  and  was  “proud”  to  have  done  so. 
Respondent  explained  that  female  students  look  up  make-up  tutorials  on  their  phone.  His 
intent  was  to  compliment YEE  that  she  was  already  pretty  and  did  not  need  to  put  on 
make-up.  The  Commission  finds  it  was  not  appropriate  for  respondent,  as  a  teacher,  to 
comment  on  the  appearance  of  female  students. 

P.  words  to  the 

91. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  55,  that  during  the  period  November  7, 

2017,  to  February  1,  2018,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  first  period 
Spanish  class,  made  comments  or  statements  that  were  inappropriate,  insulting,  and/or 
offensive,  or  were  deemed  as  such  by  the  students,  including,  for  example,  referring  to 
African-American  students  as  “those  people”;  stating  that  girls  should  go  to  the  gym  and  be 
skinny  and  pretty  for  their  husbands,  and  women  belong  in  the  house  cooking  for  their  man; 
and  telling  a  student  “You  must  come  from  a  low-income  family.”  Respondent,  in  his 
testimony,  did  not  deny  the  allegations  of  Charge  55  (except  that  he  denied  making  the 
statement  described  in  Charge  55f)  but,  instead,  explained  the  context  for  his  comments, 
which  was  to  motivate  his  students  to  speak  and  write  in  Spanish,  and  the  students 

24

misconstrued  the  comments.  He  explained  there  were  class  discussions  about  racial 
stereotypes  where  he  mentioned  some  racial  groups  and  then  asked  the  students  about  their 
thoughts. 

92. 

It  was  established,  as  alleged  in  Charge  58,  that  during  the  period  November  7, 

2017,  to  February  1,  2018,  respondent,  in  the  presence  of  students  during  the  first  period 
Spanish  class,  he  threw  a  marker  against  the  wall  and  told  the  students  “I 
W.  “You  are 
teaching”  or  words  to  that  effect  (Charge  58c),  and  he  told  student 
annoying”  or  words  to  that  effect  a ic  58d).  Charges  58c  and  58d  were  established  by 
respondent’s  testimony  and 
*s  testimony,  as  supplemented  by  her  written  statement 
(Exhibit  41.)  The  Commission  finds  respondent’s  conduct  was  unprofessional  and  contrary 
to  his  duty,  as  a  teacher,  to  create  a  safe  and  positive  learning  environment  for  his  students. 
The  District’s  hearsay  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  allegations  of  Charges  58a 
and  58b. 

give  up  on 

Respondent’s  Character  Witnesses 

93. 

James  Beus  testified  as  a  character  witness  for  respondent.  Mr.  Beus  has  been 

employed  by  Chipotle  Grill  as  a  real  estate  manager  for  the  past  four  years.  Mr.  Beus  first 
met  respondent  20  years  ago  when  they  were  neighbors  living  in  the  same  apartment 
building.  Mr.  Beus  met  respondent  when  he  was  starting  his  career  as  teacher.  Mr.  Beus 
testified  that  respondent  tried  out  lessons  on  him  to  make  sure  they  would  be  exciting  enough 
for  his  students.  For  example,  respondent  assigned  his  students  to  write  an  essay  about  their 
best  friend.  Respondent  told  his  class  about  his  friendship  with  Mr.  Beus.  At  the  time,  Mr. 
Beus  was  in  a  rock  band,  so  respondent  took  pictures  of  Mr.  Beus  performing  with  the  band. 
Mr.  Beus  was  impressed  with  how  much  work  respondent  put  into  that  assignment. 

94.‘ 

Mr.  Beus  volunteers  at  a  homeless  shelter  called  Casa  Libre  that  serves 
children  from  Central  America.  Respondent  volunteered  with  Mr.  Beus  at  Casa  Libre. 
Respondent  worked  with  the  children  and  explained  to  them  about  life  in  America,  including 
that  children  went  to  school  and  did  not  just  work.  Respondent  has  shared  with  Mr.  Beus 
about  the  struggles  in  his  own  life.  Mr.  Beus  feels  that  respondent  1s  a  powerful  advocate  for 
Latino  children  and  is  passionate  about  helping  children.  Mr.  Beus  feels  that  respondent  is 
the  kind  of  person  needed  as  role  models  in  school. 

95. 

Vladimir  Hernandez  testified  as  a  character  witness  for  respondent.  Mr. 

Hernandez  became  a  registered  nurse  in  November  2016,  and  has  worked  for  the  County  of 
Los  Angeles  in  that  capacity  since  October  2018.  Mr.  Hernandez  was  a  twelfth  grader  in 
respondent’s  Spanish  class  at  Hollywood  High  School  in  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Mr. 
Hernandez  considers  respondent  to  be  a  good  person,  someone  he  personally  looks  up  to,  and 
a  mentor.  Mr.  Hernandez  testified  that,  after  he  graduated  from  high  school,  he  did  not  care 
about  school  or  his  future.  Respondent  encouraged  Mr.  Hernandez  to  do  something  with  his 
life.  With  respondent’s  advice,  Mr.  Hernandez  started  thinking  maturely  about  his  future. 
Mr.  Hernandez  decided  to  pursue  a  career  in  nursing.  Mr.  Hernandez  testified  that,  having 
known  respondent  as  a  student,  and  then  meeting  him  again  as  an  adult,  he  has  never  seen 

25

  

any  indication  that  respondent  mistreated  students.  Mr.  Hernandez  found  respondent  to  be  a 
creative  teacher  who  thought  of  fun  and  interactive  ways  for  his  students  to  learn. 

96. 

Mr.  Beus  and  Mr.  Hernandez  appeared  sincere  in  expressing  their  favorable 
opinions  of  respondent’s  character,  his  passion  for  teaching,  and  his  creativity  and  desire  to 
motivate  his  students  to  learn  Spanish.  However,  their  opinions  of  respondent’s  character  are 
not  sufficient  to  refute  the  student  allegations  at  issue  in  this  case.  Mr.  Beus  has  never  seen 
respondent  teaching  in  a  classroom  at  Burroughs  Middle  School  or  Hollywood  High  School. 
Mr.  Beus  has  never  worked  in  a  public  school.  Similarly,  Mr.  Hernandez  has  not  held  a 
position  in  a  public  school.  He  did  not  observe  respondent’s  classes  in  the  2015-2016  or 
2017-2018  school  years.  Nor  did  he  speak  with  any  students  in  respondent’s  classes  during 
those  school  years.  Mr.  Hernandez’s  last  contact  with  respondent  in  a  classroom  was  as  a 
student  14  years  ago  during  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44944!  and  Factual  Findings  1-5. 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  and  the  standard  of  proof  is 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

3. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44932,  the  grounds  for  dismissal  alleged  by  the 
District  against  respondent  are  unprofessional  conduct  [subdivision  (a)(2)],  immoral  conduct 
[subdivision  (a)(1)],  evident  unfitness  for  service  [subdivision  (a)(6)],  and  persistent 
violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  [subdivision  (a)(8)]. 

4. 

In  the  Accusation,  the  District  also  alleged  grounds  for  immediate  suspension 

under  Education  Code  section  44939  for  immoral  conduct  and  willful  refusal  to  perform 
regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause.  However,  the  grounds  for  immediate 
suspension  under  section  44939  were  not  issue  at  the  hearing  in  this  matter  and,  thus,  will  not 
be  addressed  in  this  Decision.  (See  Ed.  Code,  §  44939,  subd.  (c)(2).) 

5. 

It  is  settled  that  the  trier  of  fact—in  this  case  the  three  members  of  the 

Commission—may  “accept  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness  and  reject  another  part  even 
though  the  latter  contradicts  the  part  accepted.”  (Stevens  v.  Parke  Davis  &  Co.  (1973)  9 
Cal.3d  51,  67.)  The  trier  of  fact  may  also  “reject  part  of  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  though 
not  directly  contradicted,  and  combine  the  accepted  portions  with  bits  of  testimony  or 
inferences  from  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses  thus  weaving  a  cloth  of  truth  out  of  selected 
material.”  (/d.,  at  67-68,  quoting  from  Neverov  v.  Caldwell  (1958)  161  Cal.App.2d  762, 

  

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

indicated. 

26

767.)  Further,  the  fact  finder  may  reject  the  testimony  of  a  witness,  even  an  expert,  although 
not  contradicted.  (Foreman  &  Clark  Corp.  v.  Fallon  (1971)  3  Cal.3d  875,  890.)  And,  the 
testimony  of  “one  credible  witness  may  constitute  substantial  evidence.”  (Kearl  v.  Board  of 
Medical  Quality  Assurance,  189  Cal.App.3d  1040,  1052.) 

Unprofessional  Conduct 

6. 

Cause  exists  for  respondent’s  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(2),  for  unprofessional  conduct.  (Factual  Findings  10-15,  16-48,  and  49-92.) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2),  may  be 
defined  as  conduct  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  such  conduct 
that  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of  Education  v. 
Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.) 

8. 

(A) 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  engaged 

in  unprofessional  conduct  towards  his  students.  By  regularly  arguing  with  students, 
respondent  failed  to  model  appropriate  behavior  of  how  to  disagree  with  others  in  a 
respectful  manner.  Respondent  yelled  and  screamed  at  his  students  during  class,  called  his 
students  names  such  as  savages,  dumb,  and  stupid,  and  demeaned  their  Spanish-speaking 
abilities.  His  comments  were  contrary  to  creating  a  safe  and  nurturing  learning  environment. 
He  also  made  comments  that  were  racist,  sexist,  insulting,  and  offensive,  and  reasonably 
perceived  as  such  by  his  students.  Under  the  District’s  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students,  even 
if  his  intent  was  “purely  professional,”  respondent’s  comments  subjected  him  to  “all  possible 
perceptions  of  impropriety.”  Respondent’s  conduct  did  not  demonstrate  good  judgment  and 
was  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  the  teaching  profession  in  good  standing. 

(B) 

Additionally,  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  respondent 

engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  towards  his  principals,  assistant  principals,  and 
administrative  staff.  Respondent  was  disrespectful  to  Principal  Sanchez  during  their  first 
meeting  in  the  2017  fall  semester.  He  was  uncooperative  and  defiant  with  Principal 
Martinez,  the  assistant  principals,  and  staff  at  Burroughs  Middle  School.  Respondent 
ignored  Principal  Sanchez’s  directives  to  complete  classroom  management  training.  The 
Commission  finds  that  latter  point  concerning.  Training  provides  teachers  with  opportunities 
for  self-improvement  and  personal  growth.  Respondent’s  resistance  to  training  is 
inconsistent  with  the  life-long  learning  required  to  be  a  good  teacher  and  positive  role  model 
for  students. 

(C) 

|The  Commission  concludes  that  cause  for  respondent’s  dismissal  on 

the  basis  of  unprofessional  conduct  is  supported  by  the  overwhelming  weight  of  the 
evidence. 

// 

// 

27

Immoral  Conduct 

9. 

Cause  exists  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(1),  for  immoral  conduct.  (Factual  Findings  10-15,  16-48  and  49-92.) 

10. 

The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent 
with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful, 
flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 
public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179 
Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

11. 

|The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  by  making 

K.  was 

particular 

comments  that  were  racist  or  sexist,  and/or  perceived  as  such  by  the  students.  Respondent’s 
comments  were  immoral  to  the  extent  they  connected  a  negative  attribute  to  a 
racial  or  gender  group.  For  example,  his  comment  insinuating  that  student 
becoming  a  bad  student  and  misbehaving  because  she  was  hanging  out  with  the  black 
students;  his  use  of  the  racial  slur  “those  people”  when  referring  to  black  students;  and  his 
comments  that  the  role  of  women  was  to  get  married,  have  children,  and  maintain  the 
household.  These  comments  demonstrate  a  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community.  The  Commission  recognizes  that  the  phrase  “these  people”  in 
|  W.’s  testimony  made  clear 
Spanish  could  have  an  innocent  meaning.  But  student 
that  she  took  respondent’s  comment  as  a  racial  slur  against  African-American  students.  It 
was  respondent’s  responsibility,  as  the  teacher,  to  protect  against  using  language  that 
reasonably  could  be  taken  as  being  offensive  by  his  students.  Additionally,  the  Commission 
finds  respondent’s  shooting  range  comment,  in  which  respondent  told  students  he  thought  of 
his  annoying  kids  when  he  went  to  the  gun  range,  was  immoral  as  it  demonstrated  an 
inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

12. 

Cause  exists  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(6),  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Factual  Findings  10-15,  16-48,  and  49-92.) 

13. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.” 
(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2 
Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444.)  Evident  unfitness  for  service  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 
presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  Ud.) 

14. 

—_—  In  this  case,  the  Commission  is  persuaded  that  respondent's  misconduct  is 

caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament  and  non-remediable.  Respondent  engaged  in  conduct  that 
violated  the  directives  and  counseling  he  had  been  given.  He  continued  to  make 
inappropriate  comments,  during  his  classes,  in  the  presence  of  students.  Respondent  has 

28

     

been  given  multiple  opportunities  to  address  his  misconduct  and  correct  his  behaviors.  His 
continued  and  repeated  failure  to  comply  with  his  supervisors'  directives  leads  to  no  other 
conclusion  that  his  misconduct  will  not  be  corrected  if  given  additional  notice  and 
opportunities  to  do  so. 

Persistent  Violation  of  School  Laws  and  Regulations 

15. 

Cause  exists  for  respondent's  dismissal,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 
(a)(8),  for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  and  regulations.  (Factual  Findings  10-15,  16-48, 
and  49-92.) 

16. 

(A)  —  In  Governing  Board  of  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman 

(1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82,  the  court  stated:  “The  word  ‘persistent’  is  defined  by 
lexicographers  as  ‘refusing  to  relent,  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
Stubborn;  persevering  ...  constantly  repeated.’  (Webster's  New  World  Dict.  (College  ed_): 
see  Webster's  Third  New  Internat.  Dict.)  And  in  the  judicial  decisions  of  this,  as  well  as 
other  states,  the  word  has  been  interpreted  to  mean  “contimuing  or  constant.”  [citations 
omitted|.” 

.. 

(B) 

The  court  in  Seaman  further  explained  that  ‘a  single  violation  of  a 
school  board's  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher  under 
subdivision  (2)  of  section  13403  [now  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)\(8)].  The  subdivision 
pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  imtentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature, 
apparently  to  allow  opportunity  for  a  correction,  has  decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not 
sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal:  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard’  of  school  rules  that  the 
subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.”  (28  Cal  App.3d  at  84  [citation  omitted].} 

17. 

|  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  engaged  in  a 

persistent  violation  of  the  District's  policies  and  school  rules,  as  documented  in  the 
conference  memoranda  he  received  during  his  assignments  at  Burroughs  Middle  School  in 
the  2015-2016  school  year  and  Hollywood  High  School  in  the  2017-2018  school  year,  and 
testified  to  by  the  principals  who  appeared  as  witnesses  at  this  hearing.  Respondent 
repeatedly  demonstrated  an  unwillingness  to  comply  with  directives  given  by  his  superiors  or 
to  cooperate  with  the  administrative  teams  at  his  assigned  school  sites. 

Morrison  Factors 

18. 

Cause  for  discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate  to  his  fitness  to  teach  within 
the  meaning  of  the  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education 
(1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  Here,  the  Commission  has  found  cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent 
based  on  unprofessional  conduct,  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and 
persistent  violation  of  school  rules.  With  regard  to  those  causes  for  dismissal,  the 
Commission  considered  all  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  and  compared  them  to  the 
facts  established  above.  Not  all  Morrison  factors  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 
satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 

29

Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established 
but,  rather,  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  “When  the 
camel's  back  is  broken  we  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load  to  see  which  could  have 
done  the  deed.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  1457.) 

19. 

The  Morrison  case  sets  forth  the  following  factors  for  determining  a  teacher's 
fitness  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 
fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  extenuating  or 
ageravating  circumstances  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or 
blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct 
in  question  will  recur;  and  (8)  the  extent  that  discipline  will  cause  an  adverse  chilling  impact 
on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (Morrison  v.  State 
Board  of  Education,  supra,  |  Cal.3d  at  229.)  The  Morrison  factors  apply  as  follows: 

(A) 

The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or  fellow 

  

teachers.  Respondent’s  conduct  adversely  affected  the  students  in  his  classes.  Students  were 
offended  and  made  to  feel  uncomfortable  and  disrespected  in  the  classroom  by  respondent's 
comments  and  conduct. 

(B) 

The  degree  of  such  adversity.  Respondent’s  conduct  caused  great 

  

adversity  to  those  students  who  were  offended,  made  uncomfortable,  or  negatively  impacted 
by  his  conduct. 

(C) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent's 

  

misconduct  at  issue  was  recent,  having  occurred  during  the  2015  fall  semester  and  the  2017 
fall  semester. 

(D) 

The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved.  Respondent 

holds  credentials  authorizing  him  to  teach  Spanish  in  high  school  and  middle  school. 

  

(E) 

The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

  

surrounding  the  conduct.  The  Commission  finds  no  extenuating  circumstances  surrounding 
respondent’s  misconduct  in  this  case.  There  are,  however,  aggravating  circumstances 
surrounding  respondent’s  misconduct,  in  that  respondent  received  multiple  conference 
memoranda  which  counseled  and  directed  him  regarding  conduct  he  was  to  avoid,  yet  his 
misconduct  persisted. 

(F) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct.  The  Commission  finds  there  is  evidence  that  respondent  had  praiseworthy 
motives  behind  his  conduct.  The  Commission  believes  that  respondent  appears  to  have  a 
sincere  desire  to  motivate  his  students  to  learn  how  to  speak  and  write  in  Spanish,  which  1s 
commendable.  Problems  arose,  however,  when  respondent  provided  further  explanations  for 
assignments.  For  example,  when  he  provided  journal  writing  topics  involving,  for  instance, 

30

gender  roles  or  racial  stereotypes,  respondent  made  comments  that  students  perceived  as 
racist,  sexist,  and  inappropriate  for  a  classroom  teacher.  Respondent  had  arguments  during 
class  with  the  students  who  challenged  his  comments  as  being  inappropriate  and  offensive, 
taking  up  valuable  instruction  time.  As  a  teacher  with  20  years’  experience  working  in  the 
District,  respondent  should  have  known  how  to  handle  himself  better  and  ensure  his 
comments  and  remarks  to  his  students  were  appropriate  and  conducive  to  maintaining  a 
positive  learning  environment.  He  failed  in  that  respect.  Although  he  may  have  started  with 
positive  intentions,  respondent,  by  his  conduct,  undermined  his  own  ability  to  create  a 
positive  learning  environment  for  all  the  students  in  his  classes,  and  undermined  his  position 
as  the  authority  figure  in  the  classroom. 

(G) 

  

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  Respondent's 
conduct  at  issue  1s  likely  to  recur.  Warnings  and  directives  from  school  administrators  have 
not  helped  in  the  past.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  Commission  believes  there  is  more  than 
a  remote  possibility  that  respondent  would  continue  to  engage  in  the  same  type  of 
misconduct  if  he  is  allowed  to  return  to  a  classroom. 

(H) 

The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

  

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Not  applicable. 

20. 

Based  on  the  above  Morrison  factors,  the  Commission  finds  that  respondent's 

misconduct  demonstrates  he  is  unfit  for  service  as  teacher  in  the  District. 

Disposition 

21. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach...  ,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Association  vy.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.) 
Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  District  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

22. 

In  his  closing  argument,  respondent  expressed  that,  in  his  heart,  he  feels  he  did 

everything  he  could  to  do  his  job  properly.  He  admitted  he  was  not  the  best  teacher  or  a 
perfect  teacher.  He  raised  his  voice  at  times  due  to  stress,  but  he  never  had  bad  intentions. 
He  did  his  best  to  teach  the  students  Spanish  and  culture,  and  never  intended  to  be 
disrespectful. 

23. 

The  Commission  finds  that  respondent  has  a  sincere  passion  to  be  a  teacher. 

Despite  his  good  intentions,  he  has  been  unwilling  to  perform  teaching  duties  in  accordance 
with  the  District’s  rules,  policies,  and  expectations.  He  has  been  a  teacher  1n  the  District  for 
20  years.  Yet,  at  this  stage  in  his  career,  he  engaged  in  conduct  that  adversely  affected 
students  and  was  not  conducive  to  creating  a  positive  learning  environment  for  his  students. 
Respondent’s  conduct  raises  concern  about  his  character  and  whether  he  can  be  trusted  to 
have  a  positive  relationship  with  students  as  a  teacher  for  the  District.  The  Commission 

31

concludes  that  respondent’s  misconduct  in  this  case  is  inexcusable  and  warrants  his 
dismissal. 

24. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  decision  of  the  Commission  in  this  case  is  that 

respondent  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  District.  (Factual  Findings  1-92; 
Legal  Conclusions  1-23.) 

ORDER 

Respondent  Ignacio  Gil  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District. 

mayo  8,  2019 

DATED: 

  

DATED:  Mays820099 

  

DATED:  May  9:  2019 

  

oot  DocuSigned  by: 
:  Edward  El  de  Montes 

“wee  C73B7D42380F47C... 

EDWARD  GIL  DE  MONTES 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

oot  DocuSigned  by: 

|  Mouica  Luleste 

*naew  4AECBEBGO14F 1468... 

  

MONICA  LUKESH 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

p77  DocuSigned 

by: 

: 

Ervtinda Shrenger 

wae  7833820A62A44D8... 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

32

concludes  that  respondent’s  misconduct  in  this  case  is  inexcusable  and  warrants  his 
dismissal. 

24. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  decision  of  the  Commission  in  this  case  is  that 

respondent  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  District.  (Factual  Findings  1-92; 
Legal  Conclusions  1-23.) 

ORDER 

Respondent  Ignacio  Gil  shall  be  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District. 

DATED: 

mayo  8,  2019 
  

May  9,  2019 

DATED:  May&820099 

  

DATED:  May  9,  2019 

  

DocuSigned  by: 

Edward  El  de  Montes 

CH3B/D42380F4/C. 

  

EDWARD  GIL  DE  MONTES 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

Pocusigned  by: 

Monica  (ukes  |  Movica  (ukesle 
4AEC6ER614F  146E 

4AEC6EB614F 146E... 

  

MONICA  LUKESH 
Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 
[ eetind  Shrenger 

TeS3820A82444D8 

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Commissioner 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

32

