BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

ISABEL  YBAR    RA  (EN  00727446), 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2018100600 

DECISION 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  at 

of  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  on  June  13-14,  17- 

21,  24-28,  and  July  29  through  August  7,  2019.  The  Commission  members  were  Krystal 

Fowler;  Judy  Stella;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Irina  Tentser,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Alex  ¥Y.  Wong  and  Ronnie  Arenas,  Attorneys,  Liebert  Cassidy  Whitmore, 

represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District).

  

Tamra  M.  Smith,  Attorney,  Egality  Law  LLP,  represented  respondent  Isabel 

Ybarra,  who  was  present  and  assisted  by  readers  Cosme  Dominguez  and  Erika  Scott 

throughout  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  was  left  open  until 

August  1,  2019  for  submission  of  documents  referred  to  by  respondent's  counsel 

during  closing  argument;  the  documents  were  received  and  marked  as  Exhibit  770.  The 

record  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  August  1,  2019.  The 

Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  exectitive  session. 

SUMIVIARY 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  Psychiatric  Social  Worker  with  the 

District's  School  Mental  Health  (SMH)  Ramona  Clinic,  for  allegedly  failing  to  comply 

with  the  District’s  performance  and  ethical  obligations.  According  to  District, 

respondent  habitually  failed  to  timely  complete  required  documentation  and  forms,  as 

well  as  failed  to  timely  correct  returned  documentation,  within  deadlines  mandated  by 

the  District  SMH  and  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Mental  Health  (DMH).  District 

further  alleges  respondent  failed  to  practice  and  maintain  standards  of  client 

confidentiality.  Further,  District  alleges  respondent  willfully  falsified  billing.  Respondent 

is  also  accused  of  acting  derelict  in  her  duties,  and  demonstrating  poor  clinical 

judgment  and  unprofessional  conduct  when  meeting  with  her  clients  and/or  their 

families.  Based  on  the  foregoing  allegations,  District  asserts  resoondent  is  unsurtable 

to  serve  as  a  District  Psychiatric  Social  Worker  and  asks  that  her  disrnissal  be  upheld  by 

the  Commission.

Respondent  denies  the  District's  allegations.  Respondent,  whose  vision 

deteriorated  over  the  course  of  her  employment  with  the  District  and  who  is  legally 

blind,  asserts  that  District  failed  to  provide  reasonable  accommodation  for  her 

disability,  and  wants  to  dismiss  her  instead  of  accommodating  her  disability. 

After  evaluation  of  the  evidence  by  the  Commission,  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  did  not  establish  causes  for  dismissal,  and  the  Commission  unanimously 

concluded  that  respondent  should  not  be  dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  who  was 

assigned  as  a  Psychiatric  Social  Worker  (PSW)  at  the  District's  SMH  Ramona  Clinic  in 

Los  Angeles,  California,  frorn  approximately  August  2016  until  May  2078.  She  started 

working  for  the  District  in  1999.  Respondent  ts  a  licensed  clinical  social  worker  who 

holds  a  master’s  degree  in  social  welfare  from  the  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles. 

There  was  no  evidence  of  license  discipline  during  the  20  years  respondent  has  been 

licensed. 

2, 

As  stipulated  to  by  District  and  confirmed  by  respondent's  credible 

testimony  and  that  of  her  treating  optometrist,  Dr.  Chester  Chang,  respondent  is 

legally  blind.  A  person  who  ts  legally  blind  has  vision  worse  than  20/200.  Respondent 

began  to  lose  her  sight  when  she  was  in  college,  approximately  28  years  ago.  She  has 

a  history  of  Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada  (VKH)  syndrome,  an  autoimmune  condition  that 

has  ocular  involvement.  Her  eye  history  includes  chronic  inflammation,  cataract 

3

surgery,  and  swelling  of  the  retina,  which  has  left  respondent  significantly  visually 

impaired.  Respondent's  vision  deteriorated  over  the  course  of  her  employment  with 

the  District.  She  was  able  to  drive  until  2008,  at  which  time  she  lost  more  vision  in  her 

right  eye  after  an  eye  surgery.  During  times  relevant  to  this  matter,  respondent's  right 

eve  vision  included  light  perception  with  projection,  which  Dr.  Chang  described  as 

“really  nonfunctional.”  Respondent's  left  eye  sees  finger  counting  at  two  feet,  which  Dr. 

Chang  described  as  akin  to  taking  a  thin  satin  scarf  and  blindfolding  yourself  with  that 

scarf.  Respondent  can  see  outlines  of  people’s  shapes,  depending  on  the  light,  with 

her  left  eye. 

3. 

For  the  last  seven  years  of  her  employment  with  the  District,  respondent 

was  required  to  work  in  a  “clinic-based”  PSW  position.  As  a  clinic-based  PSW, 

respondent's  regular  assignments  included,  but  were  not  limited  to:  providing 

individual,  group  and  family  treatmnent  targeting  students  who  are  at  risk  of  school 

failure  due  to  social,  behavioral,  and  emotional  problems;  providing  student  and 

parent  psycho-education  on  topics  that  include  mental  health,  trauma  awareness, 

social  skills,  conflict  mediation,  grief,  drug  prevention,  and  other  social  emotional 

issues  that  impact  learning;  utilizing  electronic  health  records  for  documentation 

pertaining  to  programmatic  requirements,  complying  with  federal,  state  and  Los 

Angeles  County  DMH,  and  District  SMH  policies,  guidelines,  and  regulations;  and 

collaborating  with  teachers  and  school  staff  in  providing  mental  health  consultation. 

A, 

In  order  for  respondent  to  work  with  a  computer,  respondent  needs  to 

utilize  a  computer  program  called  JAWS  Uob  Access  With  Speech).  JAWS  Is 

a  screen 

reading  software  which  is  incompatible  with  the  District's  computer  program 

(Welligent}  that  held  respondent's job  duties.  As  a  result,  respondent's  visual  disability 

rade  it  difficult  for  her  to  function  with  her  cornputer  documentation-related  job

duties  as  a  PSW  at  Ramona,  which  required  her  to  keep  meticulous  records  of  her 

chent  interactions  on  tight  deadlines  using  the  Welligent  software,  which  is 

inaccessible  to  the  blind. 

5. 

The  District  took  no  steps  to  make  Welligent  directly  accessible  to 

respondent  during  her  tenure  as  a  PSW,  dismissing  the  idea  as  cost-prohibitive 

without  any  substantive  evidence  to  support  that  assumption.  In  addition,  the  District 

took  no  reasonable  steps,  such  as  working  with  the  Department  of  Rehabilitation 

(DOR),  to  make  Welligent  directly  accessible  to  respondent  through  JAWS.  Instead,  the 

District  attempted  to  accommodate  respondent  by  providing  her  a  sighted 

Communication  Support  Assistant  (CSA)  or  “reader”  to  help  enter  data  into  Welligent. 

6, 

Respondent  repeatedly  advised  the  District  that  the  CSA  accommodation 

was  not  effective  in  allowing  her  to  complete  the  required  recordkeeping  within  the 

strict  guidelines  demanded  by  the  District's  SMH  and  DMH.  Most  significantly,  the 

process  of  recordkeeping  through  a  third-party  intermediary  caused  the 

recordkeeping  tasks  to  take  longer.  None  of  respondent's  supervisors  were  willing  to 

acknowledge  the  foregoing  reality,  insisting  that  the  CSA  accommodation  was 

effective  despite  clear  evidence  to  the  contrary.  In  fact,  respondent's  supervisors 

believed  that  she  had  an  advantage  over  her  sighted  PSW  co-workers  by  being 

assigned  a  dedicated  CSA,  at  times  exaggerated  her  visual  impairment,  and  should 

have  been  able  to  complete  recordkeeping  in  a  timely  manner.  Any  issues  with  CSA 

performance  were  attributed  to  respondent,  including  a  perception  that  respondent 

was  difficult  to  deal  with  based  on  CSA  complaints  (which  respondent  credibly  denied) 

and,  therefore,  caused  a  high  rate  of  CSA  turnover. 

7. 

in  evaluating  respondent's  performance,  none  of  respondent's 

supervisors  gave  due  consideration  to  the  fact  that  respondent  could  not  complete 

>

Welligent  documentation  at  home  that  she  was  unable  to  complete  at  the  clinic  or 

that  she  fell  further  behind  on  documentation  when  respondent  or  her  reader  was 

absent  from  work.  In  fact,  presumably  because  respondent's  JAWS  software  was 

compatible  with  Outlook  email,  one  of  respondent’s  supervisors  incorrectly  reported 

to  the  District  reasonable  accommodation  committee  that  respondent  could,  tn  fact, 

access  Welligent.  (Exhibit  44.)  Additionally,  respondent's  clinical  supervisor  at  the  SMH 

Ramona  Clinic  returned  Welligent  documentation  frequently  for  revisions  by  sending  it 

through  the  Welligent  system.  Respondent  was  often  unaware  of  these  messages 

because  she  could  not  see  them  and  was  fully  reliant  on  the  CSA  to  make  her  aware  of 

any  communication  through  Welligent. 

&. 

Respondent  is  an  avid  self-advocate  and  frequently  communicated  the 

challenges  inherent  in  her  CSA  accommodation  to  her  supervisors,  asking  the  District 

repeatedly  for  more  effective  accommodations.  None  of  her  substantive  requests  were 

granted.  Most  notably,  the  District  refused,  without  valid  reason,  to  transfer 

respondent  to  a  school-based  PSW  pasition,  which  she  had  previously  held  during  her 

tenure  with  the  District.  Such  a  position  would  have  reduced  her  Welligent  computer 

documentation  requirements  by  approximately  seventy  percent.  Respondent 

repeatedly  provided  the  District  with  medical  documentation  from  her  optometrist,  Dr. 

Chang,  explaining  her  visual  impairment  and  recornmending  a  transfer  to  a  PSW 

position  with  more  face-to-face  counseling  and  less  computer  documentation  duties. 

(Exhibit  667.) 

9, 

Despite  the  challenges,  respondent  made  a  concerted  effort  to  keep  up 

with  recordkeeping  deadlines  identified  during  the  2016-2017  school  year,  which 

included,  arnong  other  things,  working  from  home  to  complete  client  records.  By 

2017-2018,  respondent’s  recordkeeping  improved.  Nevertheless,  the  District  remained

dissatisfied  with  respondent's  performance.  As  a  result,  a  litany  of  other  charges, 

including  allegations  of  knowing  falsification  of  timekeeping  records  and 

unprofessionalism  in  the  treating  of  clients,  were  brought  against  respondent  during 

the  2017-2018  school  year. 

10. 

On  September  12,  2018,  the  District's  Board  of  Education  took  action  to 

dismiss  respondent.  As  set  forth  in  the  operative  pleading,  the  Amended  Accusation, 

the  District  filed  a  statement  of  charges  notifying  respondent  of  its  intent  to  dismiss 

her  on  the  following  grounds:  immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code  8§  44932(a)(1)  and  44939); ' 

unprofessional  conduct  (§  44939(a)(2));  dishonesty  (§  44932(a)(4));  unsatisfactory 

performance  (§  44932(a)(5));  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§  44932(a)(6));  persistent 

violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the  state,  or  reasonable  regulations 

prescribed  for  the  government  of  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by 

the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  her  (§  44932(a)(8));  and  willful 

refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by 

reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district  (§  44939).  Each  of  the 

charges  contained  in  the  Amended  Accusation  is  discussed  below  based  on  the 

Amended  Accusation’s  factual  allegations,  which  fall  into  the  categories  of  1) 

recordkeeping;  2)  timekeeping;  and  3)  professionalism. 

Introduction 

11.  | SMH  Ramona  Clinic  provides  mental  health  services  to  primarily  District 

students  and  their  families.  The  District  is  a  contracted  agency  with  the  DMH  to 

provide  the  aforementioned  mental  health  services.  Ramona  has  both  DMH  cases, 

  

'  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

which  are  subject  to  strict  DMH  recordkeeping  guidelines  and  deadlines,  and  non- 

DMH  cases.  As  a  SMH  Ramona  Clinic  PSW,  respondent  was  required  to  submit  clent 

health  records  through  Welligent,  consistent  with  District  SMH  policy  and,  for  DMH 

cases,  within  DMH  guidelines.  Failure  to  comply  with  record  timekeeping  DMH 

deadlines  places  District  SMH  at  risk  for  not  receiving  reimbursement  for  services, 

failing  an  audit,  and  being  required  to  return  to  DMH  ail  reimbursement  funds 

received.  Client  assessments,  consisting  of  over  10  pages  of  documentation,  are  to  be 

completed  by  PSW’s  within  30  days.  Chent  treatment  plans  are  also  to  be  completed 

within  30  days.  In  addition,  cent  progress  notes  are  to  be  completed  within  24  hours. 

Respondent  was  also  tasked  with  submitting  referral  information  into  Welligent  and 

correcting  notes  in  compliance  with  her  program  facilitator’s  instructions.  District 

provided  no  evidence  that  any  of  respondent's  alleged  late  recordkeeping  or 

faisification  of  timekeeping  records  resulted  in  District  SMH  either  not  receiving 

reimbursement  for  services,  failing  an  audit,  or  being  required  to  return  to  DMH  any 

reimbursement  funds  received.  In  addition,  District  did  not  provide  evidence  that  any 

of  respondent's  alleged  late  recordkeeping  or  falsification  of  timekeeping  records 

resulted  in  District  SMH  having  to  refund  reimbursements  received  from  any  other 

federal,  state,  and/or  local  government  programs. 

12. 

In  August  2016,  respondent  was  transferred  to  Ramona,  where  she  had 

previously  worked  during  her  PSW  tenure  at  the  District.  Rarnona  clinic  is  located 

adjacent  to  Ramona  High  School.  Respondent  was  transferred  to  the  clinic  based  on 

her  request  to  be  transferred  to  a  location  closer  to  her  hore  for  disabled  paratransit 

commuting  and  safety  reasons.  Her  belongings  and  computer  remained  at  her  prior 

work  location  until  September  2016,  after  the  2016-2017  school  year  commenced  in 

mid-August  2016.

13. 

Respondent's  program  facilitator  at  Ramona  was  her  former  Ramona  co- 

worker  and  college  classmate,  Rosanna  Serrano.  Ms.  Serrano  is 

a  licensed  PSW,  whase 

District  assignment  as  program  facilitator  of  both  the  Rarnona  and  Roybal  Clinic  began 

in  approximately  2016.  As  a  program  faciiitator,  Ms.  Serrano  supervises  seven 

clinicians,  including  respondent,  at  relevant  times.  Her  duties  included  meeting  with 

clinicians  to  discuss  their  caseloads,  auditing  their  cases,  and  reviewing  progress  notes, 

assessments,  and  all  the  paperwork  needed  to  do  client  intake  and  assessment.  When 

a  cCHnician,  such  as  respondent,  opens  a  case,  Ms.  Serrano  reviews  diagnosis  and 

treatment  to  ensure  that  the  clinician's  diagnosis  and  intervention  plan  are  appropriate 

to  the  symptoms.  Ms.  Serrano  essentially  provides  quality  assurance  to  ensure  not  only 

that  cHents  receive  good  care,  but  that  the  District  submits  client  paperwork  correctly, 

thereby  ensuring  it 

is  compensated  by  DMH  for  the  services  it  provides  and  is  not 

subject  to  DMH  audit. 

14. 

Respondent  was  the  only  visually  impaired  PSW  employed  by  District.  At 

no  time  did  Ms.  Serrano  or  any  other  Rarnona  clinic  staff  receive  any  training  by  the 

District  in  how  to  work  with  a  sight-impaired  PSW.  Further,  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that 

she  had  no  knowledge  of  any  of  the  reasonable  accommodations  provided  by  the 

District  to  respondent.

District's  Charges” 

13,  14,  15,  AND  16 

2016-2017  SCHOOL  YEAR  RECORDKEEPING  —  CHARGES  4,  5,  9,  10,  11,  12, 

15. 

The  District  established  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

for  the  2016-2017  School  Year,  respondent  did  not  submit  records  into  Welligent  as 

required  by  DMH  and  District  SMH,  as  set  forth  in  Charges  4,  5,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15, 

and  16,  thereby  placing  District's  SMH  at  risk  of  audit  failure  and  the  possibility  of 

having  to  refund  all  reimbursements  received  from  federal,  state,  and/or  local 

government  programs. 

16. 

The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  for  the  2016-2017  School  Year  respondent  did  not  submit  records  into  Welligent 

as  required  by  DMH  and  District  SMH,  as  set  forth  in  Charge  10. 

17. 

Charge  4. 

From  September  7,  2016  to  November  3,  2016,  respondent 

did  not  complete  her  session  notes  within  24  hours  of  providing  the  services,  as 

mandated  by  DMH  and  SMH.  This  includes  all  billable  and  non-billable  notes  for  DMH 

and  non-DMH  clients.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue  notes,  Amended  Accusation,  p. 

6-7,  lines  11-1.) 

18. 

Charge  5.  From  September  7,  2016  to  November  3,  2016,  respondent  did 

not  complete  documentation  of  her  required  clinical  forms  within  the  mandated 

timelines  required  by  DMH  and  District  SMH.  This  documentation  included,  but  was 

  

*  All  references  to  “charges”  refer  to  paragraph  numbers  in  the  Amended 

Accusation,  filed  and  served  on  June  13,  2019. 

10

not  limited  to,  her  assessments  and  client  treatment  plans.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of 

overdue  assessment  and  client  treatment  plans,  Amended  Accusation,  p.  7,  lines  11- 

23.) 

10,  lines  10-24.) 

19. 

Charge  9.  From  September  20,  2016  to  February  17,  2017,  respondent 

did  not  correct  returned  documentation  within  the  mandated  timelines  required  by 

DMH  and  District  SMH.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  corrections,  Amended  Accusation,  p. 

20. 

Charge  10.  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  from  October  5,  2016  to  February  7,  2017,  respondent  did  not  complete 

her  session  notes  within  24  hours  of  providing  the  service  as  mandated  by  DMH  and 

District  SMH.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue  notes,  Amended  Accusation,  p.  11,  lines 

3-13.)  For  two  of  the  students,  ae  and 

is.’  the  notes  were  submitted 

on  time.  (Exhibit  168,  p.  5538  and  Exhibit  182,  p.  5724).  The  remainder  of  the  listed 

students  cancelled  or  failed  to  appear  at  their  appointments,  so  there  was  no  progress 

note  to  be  prepared.  (See  Exhibit  670,  Table  3.) 

21. 

Charge  11.  From  October  14,  2016  to  February  7,  2017,  respondent  did 

not  complete  the  documentation  of  required  clinical  forms  within  DMH  and  District 

SMH  mandated  timelines.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue  notes,  Amended 

Accusation,  pp.  11-12,  lines  20-4.) 

22. 

Charge  12.  From  October  14,  2016  to  May  15,  2017,  respondent  did  not 

complete  documentation  of  required  clinical  forms  within  DMH  and  District  SMH 

  

>  Students  and  parents  are  referred  to  by  their  first  name  and  first  initial  of  their 

last  name  to  protect  privacy. 

11

mandated  timelines.  See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue  clinical  forms,  Amended 

Accusation,  pp.  12-13,  lines  11-5) 

23. 

Charge  713.  From  November  9,  2016  to  May  15,  2017,  respondent  did  not 

complete  session  notes  within  24  hours  of  providing  service  as  mandated  by  DMH  and 

District  SMH.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue  notes,  Amended  Accusation,  p.  13,  lines 

11-26.) 

24. 

Charge  14.  From  November  18,  2016  to  May  15,  2017,  respondent  did 

not  correct  returned  documentation  within  DMH  and  District  SMH  guidelines.  (See 

Exhibit  3  for  list  of  corrections,  Amended  Accusation,  pp.  14-15,  lines  6-4) 

25. 

Charge  15.  Fromm  December  9,  2016  to  February  27,  2017,  respondent  dic 

not  correct  returned  progress  notes  within  DMH  and  District  SMH  mandated  timeless. 

(See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  progress  notes,  Amended  Accusation,  p.  15,  lines  10-14.) 

26. 

Charge  16.  From  January  16,  2017  to  May  15,  2017,  respondent  did  not 

correct  returned  progress  notes  within  DMH  and  District  SMH  mandated  timelines. 

(See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  progress  notes,  Amended  Accusation,  pp.  15-16,  lines  20-5) 

27. 

Respondent's  assigned  CSA  from  August  2016  through  June  2017  (2016- 

2017  school  year}  was  Ellisie  Cotledge.  Ms.  Cotledge  was  hired  by  the  District  and 

trained  by  Ms.  Serrano.  Respondent  did  not  participate  in  the  training  of  Ms.  Cotledge, 

her  CSA,  nor  did  respondent’s  supervisors  discuss  with  respondent  what  her  needs  or 

expectations  were  of  a  CSA  prior  to  Ms.  Cotledge’s  training. 

28. 

Ms.  Cotledge’s  training  consisted  of  a  review  of  the  folders  that  pertained 

to  the  work  of  a  PSW  and  an  explanation  by  Ms.  Serrano  as  to  what  Ms.  Cotledge’s 

role  would  be  as  respondent's  CSA.  PSW  guidelines  and  instructions  were  also 

12

reviewed  to  provide  Ms.  Cotledge  with  an  understanding  of  the  functions  of  a  PSW. 

Ms.  Cotledge  testified  that  while  she  was  not  a  PSW,  she  understood  her  role  to  be  “as 

basically  just  typing  in  information.”  Ms.  Serrano  also  trained  Ms.  Cotledge  on  how  to 

use  Welligent  to  assist  respondent  in  entering  documents  and  information  into 

Welligent,  including  clent  progress  notes,  intake  information,  and  referrals. 

Instructions  on  making  corrections  to  progress  notes  were  also  discussed.  Ms. 

Cotlecdge’s  training  lasted  a  week,  with  Ms.  Serrano  availabie  for  follow-up  questions. 

29. 

- Frorn  the  beginning  of  their  collaboration  in  mid-August  2016, 

respondent  and  Ms.  Cotledge’s  working  relationship  was  subject  to  a  steep  and 

difficult  learning  curve.  Because  of  client  privacy  considerations,  Ms.  Cotledge  was  not 

present  during  any  cent  sessions  conducted  by  respondent.  Accordingly,  Ms. 

Cotledge  was  tasked  with  entering  documentation  into  Welligent  primarily  when 

respondent  was  in  session  with  clients. 

30. 

Up  unt  October  2016,  respondent  used  a  tape  recorder,  a  District 

approved  practice  she  had  been  utilizing  for  years,  to  record  client  intakes.  Ms. 

Cotledge  would  then  be  provided  the  tape  recording  to  transfer  the  information  into 

Welligent.  After  the  information  was  entered  into  Weiligent,  Ms.  Cotledge  and 

respondent  would  meet  in  order  for  the  information  entered  into  Welligent  to  be  read 

back  to  respondent  so  that  respondent  could  provide  final  approval  on  the  record  to 

be  submitted  into  Welligent.  Ms.  Cotledge  was  also  responsible  for  entering  progress 

notes  on  behalf  of  respondent  into  Weilligent,  which  would  either  be  dictated  verbally 

by  respondent  or  typed  in  Word  by  respondent  to  then  be  typed  into  Welligent  by  Ms. 

Cotledge,  all  subject  to  respondent's  final  review  and  approval. 

31. 

In  October  2016,  the  District  caused  respondent  to  fundamentally  change 

her  typical  work  habits  by  notifying  respondent  that  she  would  no  longer  be  allowed 

13

to  use  a  tape  recorder  to  record  client  sessions,  effective  immediately.  The  change 

caused  respondent  to  have  to  type  up  information  during  the  cllent  sessions  in  a  Word 

document,  which  would  then  be  provided  to  Ms.  Cotledge  to  transcribe  into  Welligent, 

for  final  review  and  approval  by  respondent  before  the  information  could  be 

submitted  through  Welligent. 

32. 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  recordkeeping  demands,  from  the  beginning 

of  the  school  year,  chent  records  submitted  into  Welligent  by  respondent  through  Ms. 

Cotledge  were  subject  to  extensive  correction  by  Ms.  Serrano.  Respondent  had 

difficulty  adjusting  to  the  level  of  revision  required  by  Ms.  Serrano;  past  supervisors 

had  not  demanded  so  many  changes  or  so  extensively  questioned  her  clinical 

judgment.  When  Ms.  Serrano  requested  respondent  change  a  diagnosis  for  several 

clients,  respondent  was  unable  to  submit  needed  documentation  to  open  up  an  intake 

until  all  clent  documentation  was  changed  to  be  consistent  with  the  new  diagnosis, 

further  delaying  the  timeliness  of  recordkeeping. 

33. 

During  her  testimony,  Ms.  Cotledge  testified  that  respondent  was  behind 

in  recordkeeping  from  the  beginning  of  her  tenure  at  Ramona,  describing  the  situation 

as  a  “mountain  of  clents  that  needed  corrections.” 

34, 

At  the  same  time,  respondent  felt  that  she  was  being  circumvented  and 

undermined  by  Ms.  Cotiedge  challenging  her  instructions  about  how  clent  records 

were  to  be  drafted,  and  communicating  directly  to  Ms.  Serrano  about  client  records.  In 

turn,  Ms.  Cotiedge  felt  that  her  function  was  to  enter  Welligent  information  based  on 

Ms.  Serrano’s,  rather  than  respondent’s,  instructions,  and  provided  feedback  to 

respondent  when  she  felt  respondent  was  asking  her  to  enter  client  information  into 

Welligent  that  was  contrary  to  Ms.  Serrano’s  training.  Further,  respondent  asserted 

that  Ms.  Cotledge  made  errors  in  entering  recordkeeping  into  Welligent  and  did  not 

14

always  inform  her  what,  if  any,  changes  Ms.  Serrano  required  to  be  made  to  client 

documentation,  both  claims  Ms.  Cotledge  denied.  Respondent's  ciaims  that  Ms. 

Cotledge  made  errors  in  Welligent  records  were  corroborated,  however,  by 

subseguent  assigned  CSA’s  during  the  2017-2018  school  year,  thereby  undermining 

Ms.  Cotledge’s  credibility. 

35. 

Throughout  hearing,  it  was  unclear  from  the  evidence  presented  what 

steps  the  District  took,  if  any,  to  monitor  how  effectively  respondent’s  assigned  CSA's 

were  performing  their  duties.  The  District’s  position  was  that  respondent  was 

ultimately  responsible  for  any  information  entered  into  Welligent  by  any  assigned 

reader,  despite  the  fact  that  respondent  was  entirely  dependent  on  her  assigned 

readers  to  provide  her  with  correct  information. 

36. 

Whenever  Ms.  Cotledge  was  absent  from  work,  respondent  did  not  have 

a  dedicated  CSA  at  Rarnona.  She  would  document  client  sessions  and  intakes  ona 

word  document  until  her  CSA's  return,  further  delaying  the  timely  submission  of 

records  into  Weilligent.  Occasionally,  respondent  and  Ms.  Cotledge  had  computer 

issues,  which  further  delayed  recordkeeping.  Throughout  the  early  2016-2017  school 

year,  respondent  frequently  communicated  her  recordkeeping  challenges  at  Ramona 

to  her  other  supervisors,  rather  than  just  to  Ms.  Cotledge  and  Ms.  Serrano.  Those 

supervisors  were  Mr.  Jeffrey  King,  licensed  PSW,  District  School  Mental  Health  and 

Ramona  Specialist,  and  Ms.  Kim  Griffin-Esperon,  licensed  PSW,  Field  Coordinator,  Clinic 

Services,  District  School  Mental  Health. 

37. 

Further,  as  of  October  2016,  respondent  had  yet  to  complete  her  CCTV 

(Close  Circuit  Television)  training  and  was  not  provided  with  ail  the  requisite  client 

forms  available  in  an  accessible  Word  format  for  cornpletion  until  approximately 

November  2016,  with  some  forms  still  outstanding  until  Spring  2017.  Despite  the 

15

issues  with  the  effectiveness  of  respondent's  accommodation  of  a  CSA  reader,  the 

District  began  to  issue  conference  memos  to  respondent  that  she  was  not  timely 

meeting  recordkeeping  requirements  beginning  in  November  2016,  culminating  in 

respondent  being  issued  a  May  2,  2017  Below  Standard  Evaluation. 

38. 

At  hearing,  Mr.  King  testified  regarding  the  counseling  he  provided 

throughout  the  2016-2017  and  2017-2018  school  years  to  respondent.  On  November 

14,  2016,  Mr.  King  provided  a  conference  memo  to  respondent  regarding  his 

counseling.  (Exhibit.  11.)  Mr.  King  testified  that  he  based  his  all  his  counseling  memos 

regarding  late  recordkeeping  on  his  review  of  the  first  Welligent  pop-up  screen,  which 

showed  outstanding  records,  without  reviewing  the  actual  client  records  in  detail, 

Despite  the  lack  of  2016-2017  chent  record  review,  the  assertion  of  late  recordkeeping 

for  much  of  the  2016-2017  was  established  by  the  weight  of  other  credible  evidence, 

including  submitted  client  Welligent  records.  However,  notably,  much  of  Mr,  King’s 

information  regarding  respondent's  late  Welligent  recordkeeping  was  not  reliable  for 

the  2017-2078  school  year  and  for  portions  of  the  2016-2017  school  year.  (See  Factual 

Findings  20.)  In  addition,  Mr.  King  cid  not  consider  whether  the  client  records  in 

question  for  the  2016-2017  school  year  were  still  being  transcribed  by  Ms.  Cotledge 

from  recordings  and/or  from  Word  docurnents  provided  by  respondent  to  Ms. 

Cotledge  on  a  flash  drive. 

39. 

In  fact,  Ms.  Cotledge’s  CSA  responsibilities  were  not  clarified  until  after 

respondent  was  counseled  on  November  14,  2016  for,  among  other  things,  failing  to 

meet  mandated  timeline  requirements.  On  November  15,  2016,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon 

rnet  with  respondent  and  Ms.  Cotiedge  to  clarify  both  respondent  and  Ms.  Cotledge’s 

responsibilities.  (Exhibit  655.)  During  that  meeting,  outstanding  issues,  such  as  who 

would  assist  respondent  in  Ms.  Cotledge’s  absence,  were  addressed.  However,  Ms. 

16

Griffin-Esperon  directed  that  no  past  due  documentation  would  be  entered  into 

Welligent  by  the  substitute  CSA  aid  unless  directed  by  the  substitute  aid’s 

administrator.  Rarnona’s  client  treatment  sessions  were  generally  60  minutes,  with  a 

two-hour  session  for  initial  client  intakes.  However,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  directed  that 

“unless  there  is  a  need  for  longer  appointments,  client  appointments  will  be  45 

minutes  long  so  the  remaining  15  minutes  can  be  used  for  documentation  purposes.” 

(Exhibit  655,  p.  4982.)  Often,  client  sessions  ran  past  the  45-minute  time  period  goal 

based  on  respondent’s  professional  opinion  a  client's  effective  treatment  required  a 

full  60-minute  session. 

AQ. 

During  the  November  15  meeting,  respondent  notified  Ms.  Griffin- 

Esperon  that  she  had  written  notes  and  assessment  information  that  were  ready  to  be 

copied  and  pasted  into  Welligent.  After  the  November  15  meeting,  respondent  and 

Ms.  Cotledge  worked  to  the  best  of  their  abilities  for  the  remainder  of  the  2016-2017 

school  year  to  catch  up  on  past  due  documentation  while  keeping  up  on  the 

additional  ongoing  case  assignment  documentation  and  the  progress  note  corrections 

of  Ms.  Serrano. 

44, 

Despite  respondent's  ongoing  insistence  that  the  accommodation  of  the 

CSA  was  ineffective  for  the  2016-2017  school  year  and  the  corroboration  of  multiple 

disciplinary  District  memos  regarding  late  recordkeeping,  District  asserts  it  has  cause 

to  dismiss  respondent  for  late  recordkeeping  in  2016-2017.  Based  on  the 

circumstances,  however,  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  respondent's  timekeeping  deficiencies  were  the  result  of  respondent's 

performance  issues,  rather  than  the  District's  failure  to  provide  an  effective  reasonably 

accommodation  to  her  disability  for  the  2016-2017  school  year. 

1?

2017-2078  SCHOOL  YEAR  RECORDKEEPING  ~—  CHARGES  21,  22,  34,  AND  35 

42, 

The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  for  the  2017-2018  School  Year  respondent  failed  to  submit  records  into  Welligent 

as  required  by  DMH  and  District  SMH,  thereby  placing  District's  SMH  at  risk  of  audit 

failure  and  the  possibility  of  having  to  refund  all  reimbursements  received  from 

federal,  state,  and/or  local  government  programs;  nor  did  the  District  establish  that 

respondent  engaged  in  misconduct  by  failing  to  timely  submit  records  and  willfully 

refused  to  perform  her  regular  duties  or  assignments  without  reasonabie  cause,  as 

prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations. 

43. 

The  District's  allegations  regarding  submission  of  late  documentation 

were  primarily  based  on  Mr.  King’s  testimony  regarding  his  review  of  the  initial  pop-up 

Welligent  record  for  2017-2018  School  Year.  A  review  of  specific  student  Welligent 

records,  however,  revealed  that  his  representations  were  unreliable  because  they  were 

either  specifically  contradicted  by  relevant  Welligent  records  for  the  student  as  timely 

submitted,  there  was  a  cancellation,  there  was  no  Welligent  record  provided  for  the 

student  to  corroborate  Mr.  King’s  testimony,  or  respondent  was  absent  the  day  the 

note  was  due,  in  two  instances,  because  of  her  mother’s  heart  attack.  Accordingly,  the 

District's  charges  are  unsupported  by  the  weight  of  credible  evidence. 

44, 

Charge  21.  As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  42  and  43,  District  did  not 

establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that,  from  November  30,  2017  to 

March  5,  2018,  respondent  did  not  complete  her  required  session  notes  and  clinical 

forms  within  the  DMH  and  District  SMH  timelines.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  overdue 

notes,  Amended  Accusation,  op.  21-22,  lines  18-5.)  As  noted,  the  session  notes  were 

either  submitted  on  time,  the  session  was  cancelled,  and/or  respondent  was  absent 

18

from  work  on  the  date  the  note  was  due  because  of  her  mother’s  heart  attack  and 

promptly  turned  in  the  note  upon  her  return  to  work.  (See  Exhibit  670,  Table  2.) 

45. 

Charge  22.  Based  on  District’s  failure  to  establish  the  misconduct  alleged 

by  Charge  21,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  42  through  45,  District  did  not  establish 

through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform 

her  reguiar  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  as  prescribed  by  the  District’s 

reasonable  rules  and  regulations. 

46. 

Charge  34.  As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  42  and  43,  District  did  not 

establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  for  the  period  from  February  7, 

20718  to  March  5,  2078,  that  respondent  did  not  correct  returned  documentation  within 

the  DMH  and  District  SMH  mandated  timelines.  (See  Exhibit  3  for  list  of  notes, 

Amended  Accusation,  p.  31,  lines  11-19.)  As  noted,  the  corrected  session  notes  were 

either  submitted  on  time,  the  session  was  cancelled,  and/or  respondent  was  absent 

from  the  work  on  the  date  the  note  was  due.  (See  Exhibit  670,  Table  7} 

47. 

Charge  35.  Based  on  the  District’s  failure  to  establish  the  misconduct 

alleged  by  Charge  34,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  42,  43,  and  46,  the  District  dic 

not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  willfully 

refused  to  perform  her  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  as  prescribed  by 

the  District's  reasonable  rules  and  regulations. 

TIMEKEEPING  ~  CHARGES  17,  15,  23,  24,  25,  26,  29,  36,  31,  32,  33,  38, 

AND  39 

48. 

Ramona’  PSW's  are  responsible  for  chent  and  caregiver  session 

timekeeping,  as  submitted  through  Welligent.  Welligent  automatically  populates  each 

session  to  60  minutes,  requiring  a  manual  edit  if  a  session  is  longer  or  shorter.  The 

19

District  prohibits  faisification  of  timekeeping  records  and  PSW’s  are  charged  with 

accurate  timekeeping.  Waiting  room  sign-in  sheets  were  used  to  have  clients  sign-in 

for  sessions  at  Rarnona,  but  were  not  used  to  sign  clients  out  after  their  sessions  were 

completed.  No  evidence  was  presented  by  District  as  to  what,  if  any,  specific  training 

Ramona  PSW’s  received  and  whether  the  training  was  vision-impaired-accessible  for 

respondent  during  the  relevant  time  period  regarding  how  to  track  their  session  times. 

49. 

 Anumber  of  charges  against  respondent  are  based  on  the  District’s 

allegations  that  she  wilHully  falsified  her  timekeeping  for  client  sessions  for  the  2017- 

2078  school  year.  For  example,  District  alleges  that  respondent  routinely  directed  her 

2017-2018  CSA's,  Ms.  Christie  loarra  and  Ms.  Cindy  Juarez,  to  indicate  more  face-to- 

face  and  collateral  billing  time  than  respondent  actually  spent  with  students  and/or 

caregivers,  Many  of  the  timekeeping  charges  name  specific  students  and  times  that 

were  allegedly  faisified  by  respondent.  However,  none  of  the  witness  testimony  or 

documentary  evidence  credibly  supparts  the  allegations  of  willful  falsification  of 

timekeeping  by  respondent  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  more  fully 

described  below.  Rather,  the  credible  evidence  established  that  respondent  made 

occasional  inadvertent  errors  approximately  twice  a  month  in  her  cent  session 

timekeeping.  Respondent  corrected  the  errors  when  she  was  informed  by  her  reader 

that  Ms.  Serrano  asserted  errors  nad  been  made.  Ms.  Serrano  did  not  time 

respondent's  client  sessions  and  based  her  assertions  of  error  on  subjective 

interpretation,  rather  than  documentation.  Respondent  made  corrections  to 

timekeeping  when  she  agreed  with  Ms.  Serrano’s  client  time  assessment.  Respondent 

did  not  make  Ms.  Serrano’s  suggested  change  when  she  believed  she  had  accurately 

timed  a  session  or  when  she  was  unaware  that  the  accuracy  of  her  timekeeping  was 

being  questioned. 

20

50. 

The  witnesses  who  testified  regarding  respondent's  alleged  falsification 

of  timekeeping  (Ms.  Serrano,  Ms.  Irma  Gonzalez,  Ms.  Christie  Ibarra,  and  Ms.  Cindy 

Juarez)  did  not  indicate  that  they  were  aware  that,  as  an  accommodation  to  her  vision 

impairment  and  to  facilitate  timely  recordkeeping,  respondent  had  been  instructed  by 

Ms.  Kim  Griffin-Esperon  in  November  2016  that  she  was  to  spend  45  minutes  of  each 

client  session  on  face-to-face  time,  with  the  other  15  minutes  of  the  60-minute  session 

to  be  spent  documenting  the  session  with  her  reader  (collateral  time).  The  witnesses’ 

lack  of  knowledge  about  how  long  respondent's  face-to-face  client  sessions  were  to 

last  undermined  the  reliability  of  their  assertion  that  respondent  either  shortened  or 

fraudulently  billed  for  face-to-face  client  sessions.  Further,  much  of  the  testimony  of 

the  District's  witnesses  was  based  on  vague  hearsay  statements  and  anecdotes  and 

was  unsupported  by  more  reliable  evidence  of  timekeeping,  such  as  specific  dates  and 

start  and  end  times  of  sessions.  (Evid.  Code,  §  412.)  In  many  instances,  witnesses  were 

unable  to  recall  the  specific  client  sessions  as  alleged  in  the  charges,  thereby  providing 

little  weight  to  the  District's  allegations  of  respondent's  fraudulent  billing. 

57. 

Respondent  was  not  trained  on  how  to  bill  for  sessions  by  Ms.  Serrano 

and  did  not  believe  that  her  billing  was  an  issue  based  on  Ms.  Serrano  approving  all 

the  timekeeping  records  that  the  District  alleged  were  faisitied.  As  previously  noted, 

clients  were  generally  scheduled  back-to-back  for  60  minute  sessions,  with  respondent 

taking  the  full  60  minutes  to  provide  counseling.  Based  on  the  identified  needs  of  the 

client,  respondent's  sessions  sometimes  lasted  longer  than  60  minutes.  Accordingly, 

respondent's  regular  practice  was  to  bill  based  on  the  length  of  each  scheduled 

session.  Respondent  was  not  formally  counseled  face-to-face  regarding  her 

timekeeping  until  she  was  confronted  by  Ms.  Serrano  and  accused  of  fraudulent  billing 

on  February  7,  2018,  a  claim  respondent  vehemently  denied  to  both  Mr.  King  and  Ms. 

Serrano.  After  the  February  2018  confrontation,  respondent  began  to  more  carefully 

21

time  her  cent  sessions,  completely  ceasing  any  sporadic  inadvertent  timekeeping 

errors.  The  fact  that  respondent  corrected  her  timekeeping  errors  subsequent  to  early 

February  2018  was  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  her  CSA  at  that  time,  Ms.  Juarez. 

Further,  at  hearing,  respondent  was  credible  in  her  testimony  that  her  she  did  not 

fraudulently  bill  for  sessions,  but  billed  to  the  best  of  her  ability,  admitting  to 

occasional  errors  in  the  time  she  instructed  her  readers  to  submit  through  Weilligent. 

As  noted,  Welligent  automatically  populated  the  time  for  each  client  session  to  60 

minutes,  requiring  respondent,  who  could  not  see  and  access  Welligent  directly,  to 

instruct  her  reader  to  manually  change  the  time  from  the  automatic  60-minute 

population,  as  necessary. 

5¢. 

Charge  17.  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  from  August  2017  to  February  2018,  respondent  “routinely  directed"  Ms. 

Christie  Ibarra,  Medical  Assistant  assigned  as  respondent's  temporary  Communication 

Support  Assistant,  to  indicate  60  minutes  of  billing  time  for  students  despite  the  fact 

that  the  actual  sessions  were  much  shorter. 

53. 

The  District's  primary  evidence  in  support  of  charge  17  was  the  testimony 

of  Ms.  Ibarra.  She  testified  that  there  were  a  “couple  of  incidents”  on  days  she  couldn't 

recall  that  parents  complained  of  shorter  sessions.  during  her  approximately  seven- 

month  tenure  as  respondent's  CSA.  Ms.  Ibarra  further  asserted,  without  specifying 

dates,  that  on  one  occasion  respondent  instructed  her  to  indicate  50  minutes  for  a 

client  session,  when  the  session  was  actually  15  minutes.  On  that  occasion,  Ms.  Ibarra 

testified  that  she  told  respondent  the  time  she  was  asking  her  to  enter  was  longer  than 

the  session  had  lasted,  to  which  respondent  responded  that  she  should  out  in  the  time 

anyway  and  that  if  “they  wanted  to  return  it,  they  will  return  it.”  Ms.  Toarra  further 

asserted  that,  on  a  second  occasion,  respondent  instructed  her  to  enter  30  minutes  in 

22

time,  when  the  chent  session  was  10  minutes,  and  on  another  occasion,  respondent 

corrected  time  based  on  Ms.  Serrano’'s  feedback.  Ms.  Ibarra’s  testimony  is 

unconvincing  in  that  it  was  vague  as  to  dates  when  respondent  engaged  in  the 

foregoing  alleged  conduct  and  uncorroborated.  None  of  the  District's  other 

timekeeping  witnesses,  Ms.  Serrano,  Ms.  Gonzalez,  and  Ms.  Juarez,  testified  that 

respondent  dramatically  shortened  any  client  sessions.  Further,  Ms.  Ibarra’s  testimony 

was  uncorroborated  by  any  other  documentary  evidence  and  was  inconsistent  with 

respondent's  timekeeping  practices,  as  credibly  testified  to  by  respondent. 

54. 

Even  if  Ms.  ibarra’s  testimony  were  accepted  as  convincing  evidence,  the 

isolated,  approximate  two  occasions  of  incorrect  recordkeeping  would  not  establish 

charge  17  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence,  as  they  do  not  support  the 

allegation  that  respondent  “routinely  directed"  Ms.  Ibarra  to  indicate  60  minutes  of 

billing  time  when  the  sessions  were  much  shorter. 

55. 

Charge  18.  Based  on  Factual  Findings  49  through  51,  the  District  did  not 

establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to 

perform  her  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the 

District’s  reasonable  rules  and  regulations. 

56. 

Charge  38.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  from  February  2018  to  March  2018,  respondent  routinely  directed  Ms. 

Cindy  Juarez,  her  assigned  CSA,  to  enter  more  face-to-face  and  collateral  billing  time 

than  respondent  actually  spent  with  her  students  and/or  caregivers. 

57. 

Ms.  Juarez  testified  that  respondent’s  timekeeping  was  generally 

accurate,  but  that  respondent  would  overbill  once  or  twice  a  month  for  unspecified 

client  sessions.  On  the  isolated  occasions  Ms.  Juarez  opined  respondent  was 

23

overbilling  for  a  session,  she  did  not  notify  respondent  and  did  not  time  the  sessions. 

Ms.  Juarez  did  not  indicate  during  her  testimony  whether  she  was  aware  that 

respondent  had  been  instructed  to  bill  45  minutes  of  face-to-face  time  and  15  minutes 

of  collateral  time  for  sessions  to  facilitate  recordkeeping  in  November  2016.  Ms.  Juarez 

testified  that  after  Ms.  Serrano’s  meeting  with  respondent  on  February  7,  2018,  in 

which  she  accused  respondent  of  falsifying  her  timekeeping,  respondent  became  more 

careful  to  avoid  timekeeping  errors  and  ceased  any  overbilling.  Accordingly,  District's 

charge  that  respondent  “routinely  directed”  Ms.  Juarez  to  overbill  in  February  2018 

through  March  2018  is  inconsistent  with  Ms.  Juarez’s  hearing  testimony  and  was  not 

established. 

58. 

Charge  39.  Based  on  Factual  Findings  53  and  54,  District  did  not 

establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to 

perform  her  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the 

District’s  reasonable  rules  and  regulations. 

59. 

Charge  23.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  December  12,  2017,  resoondent  completed  and  submitted  a  session 

note  for  student ORD.  indicating  60  minutes  of  face-to-face  billing  time,  despite 

the  fact  that  OD.  was  In  session  with  respondent  for  approximately  30  minutes. 

District  further  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Ms. 

Serrano,  when  reviewing  this  note,  returned  it  to  respondent  reminding  her  that 

respondent  could  only  bill  for  the  time  actually  spent  with DED.  District  further  did 

not  establish  that  respondent  subsequently  returned  the  note  with  45  minutes  of  face- 

to-face  time  indicated. 

60. 

The  documentary  and  testimonial  evidence  presented  by  District  did  not 

establish  charge  23,  as  discussed  below.  Specifically,  the  Welligent  session  note  record 

24

for  OD.  indicated  45  minutes  for  face-to-face  time  and  15  minutes  of  collateral 

time  for  service  on  December  15,  2017.  (Exhibit  659.)  While  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that 

respondent  overbilled  for  an  unspecified  session  with Oa  D.,  she  also  testified  that 

she  could  not  “specifically”  recall DE  D.'s  case  and  the  date  of  the  session.  Ms. 

Serrano  testified  she  “may”  have  been  up  at  the  front  desk  waiting  area  when 

respondent  came  to  get  a  client  for  session  and  was  in  the  waiting  area  when  the 

client  came  back  from  session,  thereby  determining  that  the  client  was  not  there  for 

“more  than  35  or  40  minutes.”  However,  she  could  not  identify  the  client  as Oa  D., 

did  not  time  or  document  her  observations  of  what  she  speculated  was  DED .'s 

session,  and  did  not  recall  the  date  of  service.  The  Welligent  note  Ms.  Serrano  wrote  to 

respondent,  to  be  read  by  her  CSA,  regarding ORD .'s  December  15,  2017  session 

that  was  dated  December  15,  2017,  was  vague  and  general  in  nature,  stating,  “Please 

make  sure  you  are  only  billing  for  the  time  client  you  actually  met  with  client.”  (Exhibit 

659.)  The  Welligent  note  did  not  specify  any  information  regarding  how  long Oa 

D.'s  session  lasted  on  December  15,  2017.  There  was  no  documentary  evidence  to 

support  the  allegation  that  the  time  specified  in  the  note  was  changed  by  respondent 

after  Ms.  Serrano's  December  15,  2017  note. 

61. 

_—_  District  witness  Ms.  Gonzalez,  a  front  office  staff  worker  at  Ramona  SMH, 

took  it  upon  herself,  without  informing  respondent,  to  keep  informal  track  of  the 

length  of  respondent's  client  sessions.  After  several  months  of  surreptitiously  watching 

respondent  without  using  a  formal  time-keeping  method  to  time  respondent's  client 

sessions,  Ms.  Gonzalez  communicated  her  opinion  to  Ms.  Serrano  that  respondent  was 

not  conducting  face-to-face  sessions  a  full  hour.  Beginning  in  March  2018,  in  response 

to  Ms.  Serrano’s  instruction,  Ms.  Gonzalez  prepared  a  written  record  of  the  beginning 

and  end  times  for  all  Ramona  PSW’s  sessions.  The  referenced  written  time-keeping 

record  was  not  submitted  into  evidence  by  District.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Gonzalez’s 

25

testimony  was  based  on  a  hearsay  statement  that  a  session  ended  early,  made  to  her 

by DED.  at  an  unspecified  time  period.  Aside  from  additional  vague  anecdotal 

testimony  that  some  of  respondent's  sessions  ended  early  and  that  some  parents 

occasionally  complained  of  shortened  sessions,  Ms.  Gonzalez  provided  no  specific 

testimony  regarding  the  beginning  and  end  time  of Oa  D.'s  session  on  or  about 

December  12,  2017.  During  her  testimony,  Ms.  Gonzalez  did  not  indicate  whether  she 

was  aware  that  respondent  had  been  instructed  to  conduct  client  sessions  consisting 

of  45  minutes  of  face-to-face  time  as  of  November  2016. 

62. 

Charge  24. 

District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  or  about  December  12,  2017,  respondent  completed  and  submitted 

a  session  note  for  student  a.  indicating  60  minutes  of  face-to-face  billing  time, 

despite  the  fact  that  a:  was  in  session  with  respondent  for  approximately  30 

minutes.  District  further  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  Ms.  Serrano,  when  reviewing  this  note,  returned  it  to  respondent  reminding  her 

that  respondent  could  only  bill  for  the  time  actually  spent  with  s  686i  District  further 

did  not  establish  that  respondent  subsequently  returned  the  note  with  45  minutes  of 

face-to-face  time  indicated. 

63. 

Similar  to  charge  23,  the  documentary  and  testimonial  evidence 

presented  by  District  did  not  establish  charge  24's  allegations,  as  discussed  below. 

Specifically,  the  Welligent  session  note  record  for  S|  F.  indicated  45  minutes  for 

face-to-face  time  and  15  minutes  of  collateral  time  for  service  on  December  15,  2017. 

(Exhibit  658.)  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that  respondent  overbilled  for  an  unspecified 

session  with  S|  F.,  which  she  asserted  lasted  30  minutes,  and  that  respondent  failed 

to  correct  the  session  note  when  Ms.  Serrano  requested  correction  to  the  note. 

However,  after  additional  direct  examination  regarding  the  length  of  sessions  with 

26

co  F.,  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that  while  she  knew  there  were  instances  of  overbilling 

by  respondent,  she  could  not  distinguish  between  the  clients.  Ms.  Serrano  did  not  time 

or  document  her  observations  of  what  she  speculated  was  S|  F.’s  session,  and  did 

not  recall  the  date  of  service.  The  Welligent  note  Ms.  Serrano  wrote  to  respondent,  to 

be  read  by  her  CSA,  regarding  Se §.'s  December  15,  2017  session  was  dated 

December  15,  2017,  was  vague  and  general  in  nature,  stating,  “Please  make  sure  you 

are  only  billing  for  the  time  client  you  actually  met  with  client.”  (Exhibit  658.)  The 

Welligent  note  did  not  specify  any  information  regarding  how  long  Sas  session 

lasted  on  December  15,  2017.  There  was  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  the 

allegation  that  the  time  specified  in  the  note  was  changed  by  respondent  after  Ms. 

Serrano’s  December  15,  2017  note.  Further,  contrary  to  Ms.  Serrano’s  testimony  the 

note  indicated  45  minutes,  rather  than  30  minutes  of  face-to-face  time  with co  F. 

Ms.  Gonzalez  testified  that  the  name  sounded  “familiar,”  but  that  she  did  not  recall 

 «. 

64. 

Charge  25.  Similar  to  charges  23  and  24,  the  District  did  not  establish 

through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  on  January  16,  2018,  respondent 

completed  and  submitted  a  session  note  for  student Oa  L.,  indicating  60  minutes  of 

face-to-face  billing  time,  despite  the  fact  that Oi.  was  only  in  session  for 

approximately  30  minutes. 

65. 

District  did  not  submit  respondent's  Welligent  session  note  for Oi. 

for  the  relevant  time  period  into  evidence  to  support  the  allegation.  The  only  session 

note  submitted  into  evidence  for Oi.  was  for  February  6,  2018,  almost  a  month 

after  the  January  16,  2018  time-period.  (Exhibit  174.)  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that  she 

didn’t  recall  “specifically”  the  timing  of  respondent's  sessions  with Oi.  Further,  Ms. 

Gonzales  testified  that  she  did  not  recall  Oa. 

2/7

66. 

Based  on  District's  failure  to  establish  respondent's  misconduct  as  related 

to  charges  23  through  25,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  59  through  65,  District  did 

not  establish  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  assignments 

without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  District's  reasonable  rules  and 

regulations. 

67. 

Charge  29.  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  January  18,  2018,  respondent  completed  and  submitted  a  session 

note  for  student  a.  indicating  60  minutes  of  face-to-face  billing  time,  despite 

the  fact  that  a.  was  in  session  with  respondent  for  approximately  35  minutes, 

as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  68  below. 

68. 

The  session  note  submitted  by  District  to  support  charge  29  indicated  a 

February  1,  2018  session  date.  (Exhibit  654.)  Both  ma  A.  and  her  mother, Ag  A., 

testified  at  hearing  in  support  of  respondent,  highly  praising  respondent's  kind,  caring, 

and  attentive  treatment  and  professional  abilities  as  a  PSW.  In  response  to  questions 

about  the  length  of  respondent's  session  with  ma A.,  mz  A.  testified  that  her 

sessions  lasted  an  hour  and  that  there  were  never  any  times  when  her  session  with 

respondent  ended  after  approximately  35  minutes.  AA.  who  participated  in 

monthly  family  sessions  with  a.  and  respondent,  testified  that  she  brought 

y 

A.  to  Ramona  for  her  sessions  with  respondent  and  specifically  denied  that 

any  of  her  daughter's  sessions  ended  after  approximately  35  minutes,  testifying  that 

1  We  sessions  with  respondent  lasted  an  hour. 

69. 

Charges  30.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of 

the  evidence  that,  on  January  19,  2018,  respondent  completed  and  submitted  a 

session  note  for  student  Am  B.  indicating  50  minutes  of  collateral  billing  time  (time 

28

with  parent),  despite  the  fact  that  the  parent  was  not  present  in  the  clinic  for  longer 

than  30  minutes,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  70  below. 

70.  —  The  District  provided  no  persuasive  evidence  to  support  charge  30.  The 

primary  witness  who  testified  regarding  the  length  of  Ag  B.'s  sessions  with 

respondent  was  Ms.  Gonzalez.  However,  Ms.  Gonzalez  offered  no  support  for  her 

testimony  that AR..'s  sessions  with  respondent  would  sometimes  end  after  between 

10  and  15  minutes.  No  evidence  was  presented  regarding  time  in  session  with 

respondent's  parent  during  the  specific  session  alleged  in  the  charge.  Ms.  Gonzalez’'s 

testimony  was  unpersuasive  and  unreliable  because  she  also  testified  that  T's 

sessions  with  respondent  ended  earlier  than  60  minutes,  a  claim  ma  A.  specifically 

denied  during  her  hearing  testimony. 

71. 

Charge  31.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  January  30,  2018,  respondent  completed  and  submitted  a  session 

note  for  student  C.  a  indicating  45  minutes  of  face-to-face  billing  time,  despite 

the  fact  that  C.  y 

was  in  session  with  respondent  for  less  than  30  minutes,  as  set 

forth  in  Factual  Finding  72  below. 

72. 

—  Similar  to  charge  30,  District  provided  no  persuasive  evidence  to  support 

charge  31  because  the  primary  witness  who  testified  regarding  the  length  of  C. 

A's  sessions  with  respondent  was  Ms.  Gonzalez,  whose  testimony  generally  was 

not  found  reliable.  Ms.  Gonzalez  provided  no  specific  testimony  regarding  the  start  or 

end  time  of  C.  i:  session  with  respondent  on  or  about  January  30,  2018.  Rather, 

she  testified,  based  on  her  “estimate,”  that  respondent's  sessions  with  C.  y 

ended  between  10  and  15  minutes  early  on  between  two  of  five  occasions.  Even  if  Ms. 

Gonzalez's  testimony  is  accurate,  respondent  ending  sessions  10  to  15  minutes  early 

29

with  a  client  was  consistent  with  her  supervisor's  instruction  that  she  conduct  45 

minute  face-to-face  sessions  with  clients  to  facilitate  respondent's  recordkeeping. 

73. 

Charge  32.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  February  5,  2018,  respondent  completed  and  submitted  a  session 

note  for  student  may.  indicating  60  minutes  of  face-to-face  billing  time,  despite 

the  fact  that 

mm 

V.  was  in  session  with  respondent  for  no  more  than  30  minutes,  as 

set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  74  below. 

74. 

The  District  provided  no  persuasive  evidence  to  support  charge  32.  Ms. 

Gonzalez  testified,  without  documentary  corroboration,  that  “probably  three  out  of 

five”  sessions  between  a  V.  and  respondent  ended  early.  Admittedly,  she  did  not 

actually  time  the  sessions,  and  provided  no  specific  testimony  about  a  session  that 

occurred  on  or  about  February  5,  2018.  Ms.  Serrano  did  not  remember  any  instances 

of  overbilling  for  a.  Ms.  Juarez  did  not  know  that  respondent's  sessions  were  to 

last  45  minutes  of  face-to-face  time.  She  testified  that  she  recalled  a  specific  instance 

with 

mm 

V.  when  respondent  instructed  her  to  enter  60  minutes  into  Welligent  for  a 

session  Ms.  Juarez  testified  she  believed  lasted  “about  35”  minutes.  Aside  from  a 

general  estimate,  Ms.  Juarez  provided  no  specific  date  for  the  session  or  the  method 

on  which  she  based  her  testimony  regarding  the  alleged  instance  of  overbilling. 

75. 

Based  on  District's  failure  to  establish  respondent's  misconduct  as  related 

to  charges  29  through  33,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  67  through  74,  District  did 

not  establish  that  respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  assignments 

without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  District's  reasonable  rules  and 

regulations. 

30

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT,  DERELICTION  OF  DUTIES,  VIOLATION  OF 

STUDENT  CONFIDENTIALITY,  FAILURE  TO  COMPLY  WITH  DISTRICT  POLICIES,  — 

CHARGES  6,  7,  19,  20,  27,  28,  36,  37,  40,  42,  43,  AND  44 

76. 

Charge  6.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  from  October  26,  2016  to  November  10,  2016,  respondent  was  derelict 

in  her  duty  and/or  acted  unprofessionally  when,  on  several  occasions,  she  left  clients  in 

the  waiting  room  after  their  appointment  start  time,  even  though  she  was  available  to 

see  the  client  at  the  time  they  were  scheduled  to  be  seen.  District  did  not  establish 

that:  (a)  Student fc 

P.  arrived  for  his  3:00  appointment  on  October  26,  2016,  but 

respondent  did  not  arrive  to  pick  him  up  until  3:15  p.m.;  (b)  Student  A.  was 

regularly  scheduled  for  1:00  p.m.  appointment  weekly,  but  was  picked  up  10  minutes 

late  for  most  appointments;  (c)  Student yO  C.  arrived  on  time  for  her 

appointment  on  October  27,  2016,  but  was  picked  up  by  respondent  10  minutes  after 

her  appointment  start  time;  and  (d)  Student 

mm  A.'s  father  arrived  on  time  for  his 

8:00  a.m.  appointment  on  November  10,  2016,  but  respondent  picked  him  up  at  8:07 

a.M. 

77.  —  The  District  provided  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the  foregoing 

charge  consisting  only  of  hearsay  testimony  from  District  witnesses,  such  as  Mr.  King, 

rather  than  specific  client  records  and  documents  regarding  late  session  start  times. 

Even  if  the  allegations  were  supported  by  sufficient  documentary  evidence,  there  is  no 

basis  for  respondent  dismissal  based  on  this  charge,  which  asserts  relatively  minor  and 

professionally  common  delays  of  client  session  start  times.  Respondent  credibly 

testified  that  she  was  occasionally  late  picking  up  clients  for  their  appointments 

because  she  was  either  in  session  with  other  clients  or  on  the  phone  discussing  cases. 

Ms.  Cotledge,  testifying  for  the  District,  corroborated  respondent's  assertions  that  she 

31

did  not  willfully  leave  clients  waiting  to  be  picked  up  for  session  when  respondent  was 

available;  she  testified  that,  on  those  occasions,  when  respondent  was  negligibly 

delayed  in  picking  up  a  client  from  the  waiting  room,  it  was  because  respondent  was 

working.  Further,  respondent  required  additional  time  to  navigate  from  her  office  to 

the  waiting  room  to  pick  up  clients  because  she  is  legally  blind.  After  counseling  by 

Mr.  King,  respondent  consistently  made  her  best  effort  to  pick  up  clients  for  sessions 

in.as  timely  a  manner  as  feasible  based  on  her  professional  dernands. 

78. 

Charge  7.  The  charge  refers  to  the  time  period  between  October  17, 

2016  and  October  31,  2016,  when  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  attempted  to  meet  with 

respondent  on  three  occasions  to  discuss  respondent's  reasonable  accommodation 

needs.  District  alleges  that  respondent  purposefully  refused  to  meet  with  Ms.  Griffin- 

Esperon  on  ail  three  occasions  and  that  the  failure  to  meet  constitutes  a  basis  to 

dismiss  respondent.  While  it  was  established  that  respondent  and  Ms.  Griftin-Esperon 

did  not  meet  on  October  17,  24,  and  31,  2016,  District  did  not  establish  that 

respondent's  failure  to  meet  with  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  on  those  occasions  is 

a 

reasonable  basis  for  respondent's  dismissal,  First,  the  October  17  meeting  did  not  go 

forward  because  respondent  simply  forgot  the  meeting.  Based  on  the  totality  of  the 

circumstances  at  the  time,  including  respondent's  professional  demands  at  Ramona, 

this  assertion  is  convincing.  Second,  the  meeting  on  October  24  did  not  go  forward 

because  respondent  called  in  sick  to  work.  District  provided  no  evidence  to  question 

respondent's  assertion  that  she  was  absent  from  work  because  of  illness.  Absence  due 

to  iliness  does  not  provide  a  basis  for  negative  performance  evaluation  in  this  instance. 

79, 

With  regards  to  the  third  scheduled  meeting  on  October  31,  District’s 

assertions  that  respondent  refused  to  proceed  with  the  meeting  does  not  fully  and 

accurately  reflect  the  facts.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that,  based  on  past  negative 

32

reasonabie  accommodation  meetings  experiences  with  the  District  in  which  she  was 

told  that  she  should  take  a  disability  retirement  rather  than  continue  working  at  the 

District,  she  felt  uncomfortable  participating  in  a  reasonable  accommodation  meeting 

with  supervisors  without  someone  present  on  her  behalf.  As  a  result,  after  the  October 

31  meeting  was  scheduled,  respondent  asked  people  she  had  been  working  with  at 

DOR  if  one  of  them  could  accompany  her  to  this  meeting,  a  claim  corroborated  by  at 

hearing  by  the  testimony  of  DOR  vocational  rehabilitation  counselor,  Pamela  Chase. 

Respondent  was  unable  to  schedule  someone  to  accompany  ner  to  the  October  31 

meeting  from  DOR  in  time.  As  a  result,  when  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  arrived  for  the 

meeting,  respondent  was  unable  to  provide  the  name  of  the  person  because 

respondent  did  not  know  who  would  be  accompanying  her  to  a  future  meeting  from 

DOR.  Respondent  did  not  then  refuse  to  proceed  with  the  meeting,  but  asked  Ms. 

Griffin-Esperon  if  she  could  audio  tape  the  October  31  meeting.  Respondent's  request 

to  audio  tape  the  October  31  meeting  was  denied  by  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  after 

consultation  with  District’s  counsel.  In  addition,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  instructed 

respondent  to  cease  her  practice  of  audio  taping  intake  interviews  with  clients 

immediately.  The  next  meeting  respondent  had  with  District  was  not  a  reasonable 

accommodation  meeting,  but  the  November  2016  meeting,  attended  by  DOR's  Ms. 

Chase,  during  which  respondent  was  counseled  for  her  performance  by  Mr.  King. 

80. 

Charge  19.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  from  August  2017  to  March  2018,  respondent  violated,  among  other 

things,  student  confidentiality,  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics,  SMH  Policies  and 

Procedures,  and  NASW  Professional  Code  of  Ethics,  when  she  routinely  did  the 

following:  (a)  asked  parents/caregivers,  “Is  there  anything  you  want  to  tell  me?”  or 

words  to  that  effect,  while  in  the  waiting  room  and  in  the  presence  of  staff  and 

33

students;  and  {b)  asked  parents/caregivers,  "Anything  you  want  to  see  me  for  today?” 

or  words  to  that  effect,  while  in  the  waiting  room  in  the  presence  of  staff  and  students. 

81. 

Respondent  testified  that,  because  of  her  visual  impairment  and  session 

time  constraints,  she  made  it  a  habit  to  ask  parents/caregivers  in  the  waiting  room  if 

there  was  anything  they  wanted  to  talk  to  her  about.  The  purpose  of  the  inquiry  was 

not  to  elicit  confidential  information,  but  to  take  the  parent/caregiver  back  to  her 

office  to  discuss  the  matter  if  the  parent/caregiver  responded  in  the  affirmative  to  her 

inquiry.  Respondent  credibly  testified  that  it  was  not  her  intent  to  violate  student 

confidentiality,  ethics,  regulations,  and/or  policies.  Her  inquiry  was  not  a  “best 

practice,”  because  it  was  based  on  her  assumption,  without  explicit  clarification  to 

parents/caregivers,  that  parents/caregivers  understood  respondent's  inquiry  did  not 

rnean  that  she  intended  for  them  to  discuss  a  confidential  matter  in  the  waiting  room. 

District  witnesses  testified  that  they  did  not  observe  respondent  discuss  confidential 

matters  with  parents  or  caregivers  in  the  waiting  room,  but  observed  respondent  take 

the  parent/caregiver  back  to  her  office  to  discuss  further  if  they  answered  in  the 

affirmative.  Parent/caregiver  witnesses  also  corroborated  that  respondent  did  not 

discuss  confidential  matters  in  the  waiting  room,  but  took  them  back  to  her  office.  No 

basis  for  respondent's  dismissal  was,  therefore,  established  for  this  charge. 

82. 

Charge  20.  Based  on  Factual  Findings  80  and  81,  it  was  not  established 

that  respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  assignments  without 

reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  District's  reasonabie  rules  and  regulations. 

83. 

Charge  27.  District  did  not  establish  that  on  January  17,  2018, 

respondent  failed  to  perform  her  duties  and/or  willfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular 

duties  or  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  when  she  allegedly  did  not  do  the 

following:  after  student  Lizbeth  M.  admitted  to  having  suicidal  ideations  and  seif- 

34

injurious  behavior  the  previous  week:  a)  assess  student  Lizbeth  M.  for  suicide  risk;  b) 

review  the  safety  plan  created  by  Lizbeth’s  school  site  to  determine  previously  taken 

steps;  and  c}  complete  a  Risk  Assessment  Referral  Data  (RARD)  form  for  student 

Lizbeth  M. 

84. 

Myr.  King  testified  that  respondent  was  counseled  regarding  her  January 

17,  2018  session  with  Lizbeth  M.  because,  after  he  reviewed  respondent's  progress 

note  regarding  the  session,  he  found  that  respondent  had  failed  to  prepare  a  safety 

plan  for  Lizbeth  M.  The  evidence  does  not  support  such  a  determination.  On  January 

17,  2018,  respondent  did  an  intake  for  student  Lizbeth  M.  at  Ramona,  and  assessed 

Lizbeth  M.  for  suicide  risk.  Lizbeth  M.  admitted  to  having  suicidal  ideation  and  self- 

injurious  behavior  the  prior  week.  However,  at  the  time  of  her  meeting  with 

respondent,  Lizbeth  M.  denied  having  any  current  suicidal  ideation.  During  their 

session,  respondent  verbally  reviewed  the  safety  plan  that  was  created  by  the  school 

osychologist  with  mother  and  client  the  week  prior,  but  did  not  prepare  a  new  safety 

plan  based  on  instructions  she  received  during  the  assessment  from  her  supervisor. 

Specifically,  respondent  called  Ms.  Serrano  during  Lizbeth  M.'s  assessment  to  ask  for 

clarification  as  to  whether  she  needed  to  do  a  new  Safety  plan,  explaining  that  one  nad 

been  done  a  week  prior  by  Ramona  High  School's  school  psychologist.  According  to 

respondent,  she  was  told  not  to  create  a  hard  copy  of  a  safety  plan,  just  to  get  a  copy 

of  the  school  psychologist's  safety  plan.  Based  on  her  understanding  of  the  proper 

protocol,  respondent  did  not  draw  up  a  hard  copy  safety  plan,  but  did  review  the 

safety  plan  verbally  with  the  parent  and  client  during  intake. 

85. 

Verbal  review  of  the  safety  plan  entailed  respondent  asking  her  chent  if 

she  had  any  current  suicidal  ideation,  which,  as  noted,  Lizbeth  M.  denied,  and  also 

identifying  triggers  which  led  to  depressive  symptoms.  Additionally,  respondent  went 

35

through  the  required  steps  to  take,  if  Lizbeth  M.  had  suicidal  ideation,  with  the  client 

and  her  mother,  including  whom  to  report  suicidal  ideation  to,  such  as  calling  911  or 

taking  the  cllent  to  the  emergency  room.  Respondent  also  provided  Lizbeth  M.  and 

her  mother  with  information  from  the  suicide  manual  regarding  hotlines.  (Exhibit  578.) 

Respondent  received  a  hard  copy  of  the  safety  plan  that  the  school  psychologist 

created  on  January  18,  2018,  the  day  after  her  January  17,  2018  session  with  Lizbeth  M. 

and  her  mother.  After  receipt  of  the  safety  plan  prepared  by  the  school  psychologist, 

respondent  reviewed  the  safety  plan  and  determined  that  it  was  consistent  with  what 

Lizbeth  M.  reported  to  her  during  their  session  on  January  17,  20176.  It  was  only  after 

respondent's  session  with  Lizbeth  M.  that  Ramona  clinic  staff  were  provided  with 

training,  clarifying  when  a  safety  plan  should  be  prepared  by  Ramona  PSW’s  in  a  case 

where  a  safety  plan  has  already  been  prepared  by  school  staff. 

86. 

With  regards  to  the  RARD,  respondent  did  not  have  a  Word  version  of 

the  RARD  which  she  could  fill  out  directly  without  assistance  of  a  reader  during  the 

January  17,  2018  session.  In  fact,  she  was  not  provided  with  a  Word  version  until 

February  14,  2018,  by  Mr.  King.  (Exhibit  595.)  Accordingly,  the  RARD  for  her  January  17 

session  with  Lizbeth  M.  was  provided  to  Mr.  King  by  her  then  CSA,  Ms.  Ibarra,  the  day 

after  the  intake,  on  January  18,  2018.  (Exhibit  578.)  Based  on  the  circumstances 

described  above,  no  violation  of  District  policy  by  respondent  was  established  with 

regards  to  Lizbeth  M. 

87, 

Charge  28.  Based  on  Factual  Findings  83  through  86,  District  did  not 

establish  that  on  January  17,  2018,  respondent  failed  to  perform  her  duties  and/or 

wilfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  duties  or  assignments  without  reasonable 

cause. 

36

88. 

Charge  36.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  on  February  23,  2018,  respondent  failed  to  perform  her  duties  and/or 

wilfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  duties  or  assignments,  when  she  allegedly  did 

not  do  the  following  after  becoming  aware  of  student  Chelsea  DLR.’s  suicidal 

ideation/behavior  a}  assess  student  Chelsea  DLR.  for  suicide  risk;  b}  supervise  Chelsea 

DLR  and  c})  complete  a  RARD  for  student  Chelsea  DLR,  as  more  fully  discussed  below. 

89. 

Charge  42.  The  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  demonstrated 

poor clinical  judgment  and  unprofessional  conduct,  and  failed  to  perforrn  her  regular 

duties  and/or  comply  with  District  policies  or  her  ethical  regulations,  in  her  actions 

towards  Chelsea  DLR  on  or  about  February  23,  2018.  The  allegations  were 

unsupported  by  persuasive  evidence  of  respondent's  interactions  with  Chelsea  DLR.  At 

hearing,  District  witnesses  Mr.  King,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon,  and  Ms.  Serrano  testified  that 

they  had  no  first-hand  knowledge  of  respondent's  actions  and/or  interactions 

regarding  Chelsea  DLR.  Ms.  Gonzalez  provided  vaque  testimony  that  the  principal 

once  called  because  they  needed  to  have  a  student,  whose  name  she  did  not  recall, 

assessed,  and  that  she  told  respondent  that  “you  might  want  to  check  with  them  and 

let  them  know  it’s  almost  lunchtime.”  Respondent's  specific  testimony,  on  the  other 

hand,  convincingly  established  the  circumstances  of  her  interactions  with  Chelsea  DLR, 

as  more  fully  described  below. 

90. 

The  District  alleges  that  respondent  violated  District  policy,  which 

dictates  that  employees  are  to  respond  to  potential  suicidal  students  immediately  or 

as  soon  as  possible,  by  taking  her  lunch  break  prior  to  assessing  the  student  for 

suicide  risk.  Based  on  the  totality  of  the  circumstances,  while  respondent’s  actions  in 

taking  an  hour  lunch  break  prior  to  assessing  Chelsea  DLR  did  not  constitute  “best 

practice,”  they  were  reasonable  under  the  circumstances  and  do  not  amount  to 

37

violation  of  District  policy.  On  February  23,  2018,  respondent  was  the  duty  worker  for 

the  day  and  was  working  with  her  reader.  At  about  12:30  p.m.,  Ramona’s  High  School 

orincipal  came  into  respondent's  office  and  asked  respondent  to  assess  a  student  who 

had  suicidal  ideation  the  week  prior.  No  imminent  suicidal  threat  was  communicated 

to  respondent  by  principal.  Assessments  generally  took  two  hours  to  complete. 

Because  respondent  was  feeling  tired  that  day,  wanted  to  be  alert  to  perform  a 

thorough  assessment  that  could  take  up  to  two  hours,  and  no  imminent  suicidal  threat 

was  communicated  to  her  by  the  principal,  she  asked  the  principal  if  it  was  okay  to 

take  her  lunch  break  prior  to  assessing  Chelsea  DLR.  According  to  respondent,  the 

orincipal  told  respondent  that  it  was  no  problem  and  that  she  could  take  her  lunch 

break  while  the  principal  and  main  office  staff  supervised  Chelsea  DLR. 

91. 

After  respondent  returned  from  lunch,  she  contacted  the  main  office  and 

the  school  counselor  brought  Chelsea  DLR  to  respondent,  who  proceeded  to  prepare 

the  safety  plan  on  her  computer  in  Word  directly  without  a  reader.  After  respondent 

completed  the  safety  plan,  which  included  assessing  Chelsea  DLR  for  suicide  risk  and 

providing  her  with  the  suicide  hotline  contact  information,  she  contacted  Chelsea 

DLR‘s  parents  to  inform  them  that  the  student  had  denied  any  current  suicidal  ideation 

and  describe  the  situation. 

92. 

The  next  morning,  the  principal  informed  respondent  that  she  had  given 

suicide  hotline  information  to  Chelsea  DLR’s  parents.  Respondent  provided  a  copy  of 

her  safety  plan  for  Chelsea  DLR  to  the  principal.  Respondent  was  informed  that  the 

principal  and  school  counsel  had  started  the  RARD  for  Chelsea  DLR.  As  a  result, 

respondent  was  unsure  if  she  was  to  do  a  separate  RARD  herself.  Based  on  her 

understanding  of  SMH  protocol,  resoondent  believed  that  she  was  to  give  her 

administrator  the  RARD  and  the  safety  plan.  However,  since  the  principal  was  the 

38

administrator  onsite  and  had  started  the  RARD  on  Chelsea  DLR,  she  was  unsure  as  to 

how  to  proceed  and  did  not  want  to  overstep  her  boundaries.  Respondent  contacted 

Mr.  King  to  clarify  if  she  needed  to  do  a  separate  RARD.  She  was  told  by  Mr.  King  that 

she  did  not  have  to  do  a  separate  RARD  because  it  might  be  too  many  RARDs  on  the 

same  child, 

cause. 

93. 

Charge  37.  Based  on  Factual  Findings  89  through  92,  District  did  not 

establish  that  on  February  23,  2018,  respondent  failed  to  perform  her  duties  and/or 

willfully  refused  to  perform  her  regular  duties  or  assignments  without  reasonable 

94. 

Charge  40.  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  February  23,  2018,  respondent  demonstrated,  arnong  other  things, 

poor clinical  judgment  and  unprofessional  conduct,  and  failed  to  perforrn  her  regular 

duties  and/or  comply  with  District  policies  or  ethical  obligations  with  regards  to  her 

actions  towards  student  Alejandro  B.,  as  more  fully  described  in  Factual  Findings  95 

through  103  below. 

95. 

 Alexandro  B.  was  a  challenging  special  needs  client  assigned  to 

respondent  by  her  Ramona  supervisors  who  had  approximately  three  sessions  with 

respondent  between  late  January  2078  and  late  February  2018.  According  to  V. 

Polanco,  Alexandro  B.'s  mother,  who  credibly  testified  at  hearing,  her  son  did  not  have 

any  more  sessions  at  Ramona  because,  after  the  mother  followed  up,  she  was  told  that 

respondent  was  no  longer  at  Ramona.  From  the  beginning  of  his  sessions  with 

respondent,  both  respondent  and  V.  Polanco  had  concerns  about  whether  respondent 

and  Alexandro  B.  were  a  good  fit  based  on  his  hyperactive  behavior  at  his  sessions 

with  respondent,  not  on  respondent's  professionalism,  which  she  praised  during  her 

testimony. 

39

96. 

On  January  23,  2018,  during  the  initial  session  with  student  and  parents, 

respondent  described  Alexandro  B.  as  “very  impulsive,”  taking  things  from 

respondent's  office  and  putting  them  in  his  pockets.  According  to  respondent,  it  was 

difficult  to  cornplete  the  assessment  during  the  first  session  based  on  Alexandro's 

impulsivity  and  based  on  parents  arguing  intensely  during  the  session.  V.  Polanco 

corroborated  respondent’s  testimony,  at  least  in  part,  describing  Alexandro  6.  as  a 

“nyperactive”  child  who  would  not  sit  still  during  the  session. 

97. 

Respondent  verbally  discussed  the  intensity  of  the  first  session  with  her 

supervisor,  Mr.  King.  Based  on  her  experience  with  the  family  during  the  first  session, 

respondent  decided  to  conduct  the  second  session,  which  occurred  on  February  6, 

2018,  in  a  different  mariner,  interviewing  the  parents  separately.  While  respondent  was 

taking  mother  and  child  back  to  her  office  to  interview  them,  Alexandro  B.  started  to 

grab  her  cane  while  sne  was  walking,  a  fact  corroborated  by  his  mother  at  nearing. 

Based  on  Alexandro  B.'s  actions  during  the  first  and  second  sessions,  respondent 

determined  it  was  not  safe  for  her  or  for  him  to  be  treated  by  her,  but  decided  to 

complete  the  intake  assessment. 

98. 

Alexandro  B.  was  scheduled  for  a  third  treatment  plan  session  between 

February  6  and  26,  2018,  but  the  student  did  not  show  up  for  the  appointment.  As  a 

result,  respondent  was  unable  to  get  the  parents’  signatures  on  the  treatment  plan  she 

had  completed.  Respondent  subsequently  left  a  message  for  Alexandro  B.'s  mother 

regarding  her  failure  to  come  to  the  treatment  plan  meeting  session.  At  some  point 

between  February  6  and  26,  respondent  and  mother  spoke.  For  the  first  time  during 

their  conversation,  mother  requested  a  copy  of  the  assessment  for  use  in  an 

Individualized  Education  Plan  (EP}  meeting  at  Alexandro  B.'s  school.  Respondent 

informed  mother  that  she  was  not  done  with  the  assessment,  and  that  she  would 

40

consult  with  her  clinical  supervisor  regarding  mother’s  request.  Respondent  also 

informed  mother  during  the  conversation  that  she  usually  provides  clinical  summaries 

for  client’s  use  at  IEP  meetings  and  that  she  would  get  back  to  mother  regarding  the 

matter. 

99. 

An  assessment  is  a  twelve-page  document  and  contains  extensive 

confidential  information,  such  as  family  history  and  traumatic  events.  The  clinical 

summary,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  synopsis  of  the  presenting  problem  and  intervention 

that  took  place,  such  as  if  there  was  an  intake  and  a  description  of  medications. 

Accordingly,  the  clinical  surnmary  serves  a  similar  function  during  an  IEP  meeting  as  an 

assessment  without  requiring  the  family  to  disclose  extensive  confidential  information. 

Respondent  understood  at  all  relevant  times  that  the  parent  hoids  the  privilege  and 

that  Alexandro  B.'s  mother  was  entitled  to  the  assessment.  However,  respondent  was 

concerned  about  the  extent  of  confidential  information  contained  in  the  assessment, 

and  wanted  to  ensure  that  mother  understood  that  a  clinical  surmmary  would  serve  the 

same  function  as  an  assessment  at  the  IEP  meeting. 

100. 

On  February  26,  2018,  respondent  spoke  with  Mr.  King  regarding  her 

safety  concerns  for  herself  and  Alexandro  B.  and  mother’s  request  for  the  assessment. 

On  February  27,  2018,  respondent  received  an  email  fromm  Mr.  King  in  which  he  denied 

respondent's  request  to  have  the  case  reassigned.  (Exhibit  609.)  Mr.  King  further 

instructed  respondent  to  “meet  with  the  mother  of  Alejandro  B.  regarding  her  request 

for  the  assessment  and/or  assessment  information”  and  “clarify  her  reasons  for  this 

request.”  (fd)  In  addition,  Mr.  King  directed  respondent  to  "offer  to  provide  her  with  a 

clinical  summiary  of  your  assessment  and  treatment,  for  use  with  the  school.”  (/} 

107. 

On  February  27,  2018,  respondent  received  an  email  frorn  Mr.  King  in 

which  he  asked  respondent  “if  the  father  knows  that  the  mother  wants  the  assessment 

4]

form  to  share  at  school  and  if  he  is  in  agreement  with  providing  this  information.” 

(Exhibit  608.)  Mr.  King  also  inquired  what  agreement  respondent  had  made  with 

parents  regarding  the  confidentiality  of  information  that  either  parent  shared  with 

respondent  when  the  other  wasn’t  present.  (/a!}  The  email  concluded,  “[Hlaving  a 

conversation  about  this  with  them  is  something  to  consider  before  releasing  any 

information  to  the  school.”  Ud} 

102. 

In  accordance  with  Mr.  King’s  instructions,  respondent  contacted  the 

farnily  to  reschedule  the  session.  As  of  February  28,  2018,  respondent  had  not  heard 

back  fromm  mother.  On  February  28,  2018,  respondent  wrote  an  email  to  Mr.  King 

referencing  their  February  26  conversation  regarding  her  concerns  with  the  case.  She 

notified  hirn  that  she  had  yet  to  hear  back  from  the  family  to  reschedule  the  session, 

that  she  was  going  to  approach  the  family  to  offer  them  the  clinical  summary,  and  that 

she  “would  try  to  abide  by  the  code  of  etnics  and  keep  the  client’s  information 

confidential.”  (Exhibit  665.) 

103. 

Volanco  P.’s  mother  and  respondent  did  not  subsequently  meet  or  speak 

orior  to  Alexandro  8.’s  March  IEP  meeting.  V.  Polanco  testified  during  hearing  that 

there  was  a  lot  going  on  during  that  time  and  she  did  not  recall  when  she  attempted 

to  schedule  sessions.  As  noted,  the  next  time  V.  Polanco  contacted  Ramona  to 

schedule  a  session,  she  was  informed  that  respondent  was  no  longer  at  the  clinic. 

During  her  testimony,  V.  Polanco  described  respondent's  treatment  of  Alexandro  B.  as 

“TGjood,  very  nice,  professional.”  Mother  was  concerned  with  the  length  of  time  intake 

took  to  accomplish,  but  testified  that  respondent  “was  providing  services  with  what 

she  was  - 

-  the  accommodations  that  were  being  made  her." 

104. 

Charge  43.  The  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that,  on  February  27,  2019,  respondent  demonstrated,  among  other  things, 

42.

poor clinical  judgment  and  unprofessional  conduct,  and  failed  to  perform  her  regular 

duties  and/or  comply  with  District  policies  or  ethical  obligations  with  regards  to  her 

actions  towards  student  eR.  and  his  mother,  as  more  fully  described  in  Factual 

Findings  105  through  122  below. 

105. 

District  seeks  to  terminate  respondent  over  her  decision  to  consult  the 

Department  of  Children  and  Family  Services  (DCFS)  regarding 

aR.  a  then  10-year 

old  autistic  child  who  was  referred  for  treatment  based  on  experiencing  auditory/visual 

hallucinations  at  the  time  of  treatment.  Respondent  suspected 

BR.  was  being 

neglected  and  felt  his  case  was  mishandled  by  school  staff  who  referred  the  matter. 

Respondent  is 

a  mandated  reporter.  Based  on  the  information  she  received  during  her 

session  with 

eR.  and  his  mother  on  February  27,  2018,  respondent  reasonably 

feared  aR.  was  being  neglected  and  exercised  sound professional  judgment  in  her 

handling  of  the  matter.  It  is  unlawful  for  District  to  discipline  respondent  for  complying 

with  her  obligations  as  a  mandated  reporter.  (Penal  Code,  §§  11666  and  1166.01.) 

106. 

An  on-duty  Ramona  social  worker  reviewed  the  referral  of 

BR's  case 

from  his  school  staff  prior  to  the  case  being  assigned  to  respondent.  Prior  to  her 

scheduled  intake  session  with 

Re.  on  February  27,  2018,  respondent  reviewed  the 

referral  and  noticed  that,  despite  the  fact  that 

Re.  was  referred  to  Ramona  for 

exhibiting  auditory  hallucinations,  which  were  reported  to  be  occurring  even  during 

the  referral,  no  interventions  were  suggested  to  SBR  's  parent. 

107. 

On  February  27,  2018, 

Be.  and  his  mother  (S. 

a)  were  an  hour 

late  arriving  at  their  scheduled  session  with  respondent.  Despite  their  excessive 

tardiness,  respondent  proceeded  with  the  session  and  provided  treatment  to 

eR. 

and  his  mother.  She  escorted  aR.  and  mother  from  the  waiting  room  to  her  office. 

At  the  outset  of  their  session,  respondent  covered  customary  intake  steps,  including 

43

reviewing  the  signed  consent  form,  asking  if  the  client  and  family  have  questions, 

explaining  confidentiality  and  its  limits,  including  the  fact  that  respondent  was  a 

mandated  reporter  and  that  everything  client  and  mother  said  in  session  was 

confidential  unless  she  suspected  child  abuse. 

108. 

Respondent  then  proceeded  with  the  assessment  by  asking  for  contact 

information  and  inquiring  of  mother  why  they  came  to  treatment,  reviewed  the 

symptoms  on  the  referral,  noting  how  long 

eR.  had  been  having  symptoms  and 

that  he  was  hearing  voices.  Mother  reported  that 

Re.  had  been  having 

auditory/visual  hallucinations  since  October  2017.  According  to  mother, 

BR's 

voices  commanded  him  to  shave  his  head  with  a  razor,  which  he  did.  Based  on  the 

information  provided  by  mother,  respondent  conducted  a  verbal  safety  plan  with 

mother  and  instructed  her  to  keep  all  sharp  objects  out  of 

BR's  access.  Respondent 

asked  mother  why  she  had  not  taken 

Re.  to  the  emergency  room  for  an  evaluation; 

mother  responded  that  she  thought  the  voices  were  part  of  Rs  autism  diagnosis 

and  minimized  the  severity  of  the  October  incident.  Mother  said  that  she  took  no 

action  to  seek  treatment  for 

ge.  from  October  2017  until  she  was  contacted  by  his 

school  regarding  his  auditory/visual  hallucinations.  In  late  December  2017  to  January 

2018,  mother  received  a  call  from 

BR's  school;  school  personnel  said  that  they 

were  concerned  because im  R.  had  reported  seeing  a  Chinese  boy  who  died  in  1940 

in  his  special  education  class  and  was  asking  that  the  music  in  the  classroom,  normally 

played  at  a  low  volume,  be  turned  up  to  a  loud  volume,  so  that  the  boy  would  not 

bother 

BR.  As  a  result,  mother  reported  that  she  had  been  referred  for  treatment 

by 

BR's  school.  No  emergency  treatment  had  been  sought  for 

Be.  by  his 

mother  between  January  2017  and  the  date  of  the  Ramona  intake  session  on  February 

27,2019. 

44

109. 

Respondent  educated  mother  about  the  different  things  she  could  do  if 

Be.  reported  hearing  voices  again,  such  as  calling  911  or  going  to  the  emergency 

room.  While  respondent  was  talking  to  his  mother, 

eR.  said  he  was  hearing  voices, 

including  the  voice  of  the  Chinese  boy.  Respondent  was  concerned  that 

RR.  a 

special  needs  autistic  child,  had  been  left  untreated  for  months  with  active 

auditory/visual  hallucinations  and  proceeded  to  educate  mother  about  child  abuse 

laws.  Respondent  asked  mother  standard  clarifying  questions  on  the  assessment,  such 

as  whether  parent  intervened  to  try  to  alleviate  the  problem.  Mother  responded  that 

she  told  school  staff.  When  respondent  asked  mother  whether  she  had  taken 

Re. 

to  a  doctor,  she  answered  she  did  not  because  she  felt  he  had  stopped  listening  to  the 

voices  and  it  was  not  a  concern. 

110. 

In  response  to  respondent's  questions  regarding  who  mother  had  talked 

to  regarding 

Re.  hearing  voices,  mother  said  she  had  talked  to 

BR's  school 

psychologist.  Respondent  asked  whether  the  school  psychologist  had  referred  mother 

to  an  outside  agency  to  assess 

Re.  for  the  voices,  and  the  mother  responded  that 

they  had  not,  which  was  concerning  for  respondent  based  on  her  understanding  of 

proper  protocol  in  a  case  like  SBR  's. 

111. 

Because  of  the  extent  of  mother’s  delay  in  seeking  treatment  for 

Re. 

from  the  time  in  October  2017  he  initially  used  a  razor  on  himself  in  response  to 

reported  auditory  hallucinations,  his  status  as  a  special  needs  autistic-child,  and 

respondent's  observation  of 

BR.  hallucinating  during  the  session,  respondent 

became  concerned  that  mother’s  actions  could  be  neglectful.  As  a  result,  respondent 

referred  back  to  the  limits  of  confidentiality  she  had  explained  at  the  beginning  of  the 

session.  In  response,  mother  was  insistent  that  respondent  meet  with 

ge.  alone  and 

left  the  session.  At  the  time  mother  left  the  session,  respondent  had  not  completed 

hs

the  entire  assessment.  Prior  to  mother  leaving  the  room,  ae.  did  not  tell 

respondent  that  he  was  afraid  or  that  he  did  not  like  respondent.  By  the  time  mother 

left  the  room,  they  had  been  in  session  for  almost  two  hours. 

112. 

After  mother  left  the  room,  respondent  conducted  a  mental  status  exam 

with  ae.  First,  resoondent  went  through  her  customary  preamble  prior  to 

conducting  a  mental  status  exam,  including  that  everything  in  the  session  was 

confidential,  unless  she  suspected  abuse,  and  that  there  was  no  right  or  wrong  answer. 

BR.  responded  no  to  most  questions  and  put  his  head  down  on  the  table  during 

his  session  with  respondent  as  she  went  through  the  exam  questions,  such  as 

orientation,  depressive  symptoms,  and  whether 

BR.  had  any  current  thoughts  of 

hurting  himself.  In  response  to  the  question  of  whether  he  wanted  to  hurt  himself  in 

the  past,  he  answered  yes.  aR.  also  reported  feeling  sad.  Respondent  asked 

BR. 

what  he  wished  for  and  what  he  was  worried  about.  He  reported  hearing  voices  during 

the  session.  In  response,  respondent,  trying  to  assess  if  there  were  any  safety  Issues, 

asked  if  the  voices  were  telling 

BR.  to  hurt  himself  again,  to  which  he  answered  no. 

BR.  denied  any  suicidal  ideation.  aR.  then  told  respondent  that  he  did  not  want 

to  do  this  anymore,  he  did  not  like  her,  and  he  wanted  to  get  out  of  the  room. 

Respondent  asked  him  to  wait  a  minute  while  she  got  a  sticker  to  give  to  him  and 

thanked  him  for  answering  the  questions.  By  the  time  respondent  walked 

BR.  to 

the  waiting  room,  they  had  been  meeting  alone  for  approximately  25  minutes. 

113. 

While  aR.  was  in  session  with  respondent,  mother  was  distraught  in 

the  waiting  room  and  discussed  her  dissatisfaction  with  respondent  with  Ramona  staff, 

who  notified  Mr.  King,  who  was  at  the  clinic.  Mr.  King  spoke  with  mother.  Mother  told 

Mr.  King  that  she  did  not  want  to  schedule  another  session  with  respondent  because 

she  felt  that  respondent  had  scolded  her  and  blamed  her  for  not  taking 

Re.  to  the 

46

doctor,  and  had  told  her  that  respondent  was  going  to  do  a  child  abuse  report. 

Mother  told  Mr.  King  that  she  no  longer  wanted  services  at  Ramona. 

114. 

Mr.  King  met  with  respondent  immediately  after  the  session  and  reported 

what  mother  had  told  him.  Respondent  categorically  denied  mother’s  allegations  that 

she  had  scolded  or  blamed  mother,  or  told  mother  she  was  going  to  report  her  for 

child  abuse.  After  Mr.  King  told  respondent  that  mother  was  no  longer  going  to  come 

back  to  Ramona,  respondent  told  Mr.  King  that  she  was  going  to  have  to  report  the 

matter  to  DCFS  because 

eR.  was  a  minor  and  autistic,  and  she  had  concerns  about 

his  safety.  Respondent  then  reported  the  matter  to  DCFS  with  the  intent  that,  if  they 

deemed  it  warranted, 

BR.  be  evaluated  through  their  Psychiatric  Evaluation  Team. 

115. 

Mr.  King  accepted  mother’s  uncorroborated  version  of  events  over  that 

of  respondent  and  formally  counseled  respondent  for  her  handling  of  SBR  's 

case  on 

March  12,  2018.  Respondent  provided  a  written  rebuttal  of  District's  allegations 

regarding  respondent's  handling  of  the  Rs  case.  (Exhibit  624.)  At  hearing, 

respondent  convincingly  testified  regarding 

BR's  case.  Mr.  King’s  testimony 

regarding  what  was  said  during  session  was  based  only  on  the  statements  of  mother. 

116. 

Mother  testified  at  hearing.  She  testified  that  in  October  2017, 

Re. 

used  a  razor  to  cut  his  hair  because  a  “bad  one”  made  him  do  it.  She  admitted  to  not 

taking 

Be.  for  treatment  at  the  time,  minimized  Rs  behavior,  testifying  that 

she  thought  her  son’s  reference  to  a  “bad  one”  was  a  “scam”  to  avoid  punishment. 

Mother  further  testified  that  she  was  contacted  in  December  2017  or  January  2018  by 

BR's  school  to  report  that  he  had  gone  to  his  special  education  classroom  teacher 

on  multiple  occasions,  saying  he  was  being  visited  by  a  “little  Chinese  boy  who  died  in 

1940”  and  that  when  the  music  in  the  classroom  was  loud  enough,  the  boy  would  not 

bother  aR.  Subsequently,  mother  met  with  the  director  of  special  education,  a 

47

psychologist,  to  discuss  potential  treatment  of 

Re.  During  the  meeting,  mother 

reported  the  school  told  her  that  they  were  not  prepared  for  the  kind  of  treatment 

BR.  seemed  to  require  and  provided  her  with  options  consisting  of  a  list  of  places 

where  she  could  take 

BR.  for  treatment.  Mother  chose  Ramona. 

117. 

Mother  testified  that  at  the  outset  of  her  and  Rs  session  with 

respondent,  “everything  was  good,”  but  that  after  mother  described  the  October  2017 

incident  and 

BR's  hallucination,  respondent  told  her  “that  what I  had  done  with  my 

son  was  negligence”  and  “that  she  would  have  to  do  a  report  because  of  professional 

ethics.”  Mother  further  asserted  that  respondent  told  her  that  the  people  at  the  school 

were  also  negligent  and  wanted  their  names. 

118. 

Mother  testified  that  respondent  also  told  her  that  “she  would  have  to 

report  it  because  of  negligence,  both  the  school  and  mine.”  Mother  testified  that  she 

believed  she  and  respondent  were  not  understanding  each  other  because  the  session 

was  conducted  in  Spanish  and,  according  to  mother,  she  believed  that  “at  times,  it  was 

very  hard  for  her  [respondent]  to  speak  in  Spanish,”  and  that  “maybe  she  [respondent] 

did  not  understand  my  Spanish.”  Mother  testified  that  she  felt  “very  bad”  and  “very 

uncomfortable”  during  the  session,  and  wanted  to  “run  out  of  the  room.” 

119. 

Mother  testified  that  it  was  respondent,  rather  than  mother,  who  asked 

for  respondent  to  meet  alone  with 

Re.  and  that  mother  took  him  aside  and 

convinced  him  to  meet  with  respondent.  While  mother  asserted  that  it  was 

respondent,  rather  than  she,  who  wanted 

Re.  to  meet  alone  with  respondent, 

mother  further  testified  that  she  wanted  her  son  to  meet  alone  with  respondent 

because  she  felt  that  respondent  was  not  believing  her  and  thought  that  if 

BR.  sald 

the  same  things  that  mother  was  saying,  then  respondent  would  realize  that  mother 

was  “right.”  Mother  testified  that  she  left  aR.  with  respondent  and  began  to  cry 

48

when  she  left  respondent's  office.  In  the  waiting  room,  mother  testified  that  Mr.  King 

offered  to  switch 

BR's  case  to  another  therapist,  but  that  she  refused  and  told  Mr. 

King  that  she  wanted  to  go  to  another  place.  Mr.  King  then  offered  mother  the  option 

of  doing  a  report  on  respondent  regarding  her  dissatisfaction  with  the  session,  which 

she  refused.  After  mother  refused  to  do  a  report,  she  was  told  by  Ramona  staff  that 

they  would  talk  to  respondent  about  what  happened  during  the  session  so  that  it 

would  not  happen  again  in  the  future. 

120. 

Mother  testified  that 

eR.  did  not  receive  any  other  therapy  regarding 

his  hallucinations  after  his  session  with  respondent.  Instead,  mother  took 

ge.  to 

Mexico.  According  to  mother, 

eR.  wet  his  bed  several  times  for  a  month  after  his 

session  with  respondent,  which  mother  attributed  to  the  effect  of  the  session  with 

respondent  on 

BR.  Mother  further  testified  that 

BR.  had  bad  dreams  after  his 

session  with  respondent,  testifying  that  he  said  he  dreamed  about  “the  woman  with 

the  little  eyes,”  a  woman  she  interpreted  to  represent  respondent.  Prior  to  his  session 

with  respondent, 

Re.  had  never  interacted  with  a  legally  blind  person.  According  to 

mother, 

Re.  received  therapy  at  his  school  during  the  subsequent  2018-2019 

school  year  when  he  was  in  sixth  grade  and  is  now  doing  much  better. 

121. 

Mother's  testimony  regarding  the  details  of  her  session  with  respondent 

is  less  credible  than  that  of  respondent.  On  direct  examination  during  hearing,  mother 

was  able  to  recall  the  details  of  the  session  without  hesitation.  However,  during  cross- 

examination,  mother’s  testimony  became  vague.  For  example,  she  testified  that  she 

could  not  recall  whether  respondent  had  informed  her  at  the  outset  of  the  session 

about  the  limits  of  confidentiality  and  that  she  would  have  to  report  anything  mother 

told  her  that  made  respondent  concerned  about  child  abuse  or  neglect.  She  further 

denied  that  respondent  had  informed  mother  she  was  a  mandated  reporter. 

49

122. 

Most  troubling,  mother  demonstrated  a  willful  denial  of  the  severity  of 

a  R.'s  cutting  his  hair  because  a  “bad  one”  told  him  to  do  it  and  his  experiencing 

auditory  and  visual  hallucinations,  which  she  attributed  to  his  “misbehaving.”  Based  on 

the  totality  of  the  circumstances,  mother’s  failure  to  continue  to  seek  therapy  for im 

R.  from  February  2018  until  the  next  school  year  in  2018-2019,  indicates  that  District's 

wholesale  acceptance  of  mother’s  version  of  events  is  unwarranted  and  that  the 

allegations  against  respondent  are  not  supported  by  the  evidence.  Respondent's 

concerns  regarding  potential  neglect  of  eR.  was  reasonable  and  she  acted  ina 

professional  manner  based  on  her  observations.  The  fact  that  mother  became  upset 

with  respondent  during  treatment  because  she  was  confronted  with  potential 

unpleasant  realities  related  to  her  care  of 

Re.  does  not  support  a  finding  that 

respondent  acted  unprofessionally  in  her  handling  of  the  case. 

123. 

Charge  44.  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  respondent  demonstrated,  among  other  things,  poor  clinical  judgment 

and  unprofessional  conduct,  and  failed  to  perform  her  regular  duties  and/or  comply 

with  District  policies  or  her  ethical  obligations  with  regards  to Ci”  S.  and  his 

father,  i”  S. 

124. 

Ramona  clinic  primarily  serves  clients  that  are  covered  by  Medi-Cal 

insurance.  During  the  2017-2018  school  year,  Ramona’s  policy  regarding  providing 

services  to  clients  with  private  health  insurance  dictated  that  PSWs  attempt  to  link 

clients  with  private  insurance  treatment  options  because  treatment  of  private 

insurance  clients  was  limited.  For  example,  private  insurance  clients  could  not  be 

referred  to  the  District's  psychiatrists  if  treatment  required  such  a  referral. 

125. 

In  accordance  with  the  policy,  respondent  was  expected  to  provide  short- 

term  therapy,  consisting  of  10  to  12  sessions,  and,  if  clients  required  more  services,  link 

50

them  to  private  insurance  treatment  sources. 

mm 

S.  was  a  client  who  was  assigned 

to  respondent  who  had  private  health  insurance  coverage.  In  respondent's  training  in 

the  therapy  process,  respondent  was  taught  that  the  day  that  she  was  to  terminate  her 

client  would  be  the  first  day  that  she  met  the  client,  so  to  ease  the  impact  of  the 

termination  process,  she  was  to  remind  the  client  and  family  that  this  was  short-term 

therapy  consisting  of  only  10  to  12  sessions. 

126. 

Consistent  with  policy  and  her  training,  resoondent  proceeded 

accordingly  with Cis.  educating Cis.  and  his  father  about  the  diagnosis 

and  the  limits  of  amount  of  sessions.  This  was  especially  vital  in Ci”  S.'s  case 

because  respondent  felt  that  the  student  needed  to  be  referred  to  a  psychiatrist,  which 

was  not  possible  through  SMH.  Accordingly,  in  order  to  ease  the  transition, 

respondent  gently  reminded Ci 

s.'s  parents  to  speak  to  private  insurance,  and 

informed  them  that  she  could  provide  the  family  with  a  clinical  summary  and  was 

available  to  call  private  insurance  on  their  behalf. 

127. 

In  response  to  respondent's  references  to  private  insurance,  parents 

indicated  that  seeking  private  care  was  a  cost  issue  and  that  they  wanted  to  proceed 

at  Ramona.  Respondent  informed  parents  that  she  understood  the  cost  issue,  but  that 

based  on  OR 

s.'s  diagnosis  and  best  suggested  interventions,  in  her  opinion  he 

needed  to  see  a  psychiatrist  and  respondent  was  not  a  psychiatrist. 

128. 

As  treatment  went  on,  respondent  gently  reminded  the  family  about  the 

number  of  sessions  remaining.  Based  on  the  family’s  concerns,  before  the  twelve 

sessions  were  concluded,  respondent  spoke  to  Ms.  Serrano  to  see  if  she  could  provide 

Ci”  S.  with  additional  sessions.  Ms.  Serrano  suggested  that  respondent  keep  the 

family  until  the  end  of  the  school  year,  so  respondent  extended  the  therapy  sessions 

with  the  parents  and fe 

S.  to  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

51

129. 

Prior  to  meeting  with  Os.  and  his  family,  respondent  had  not  been 

told  that  she  was  not  to  speak  with  families  about  how  many  sessions  they  could  have 

at  Ramona.  Her  intent  in  communicating  the  limits  of  treatment  was  to  ensure  that  the 

family’s  expectations  regarding  treatment  were  accurate  and  to  educate  them  about 

Ramona’s  private  insurance  treatment  policy.  Respondent  was  not  made  aware  that 

Ci  s.'s  father  had  complained  about  her  communicating  the  number  of  sessions 

to  the  family  during  treatment  until  she  was  counseled  by  Mr.  King  on  March  12,  2018. 

130. 

At  hearing,  father  testified Ci”  S.  was  covered  by  private  insurance. 

He  testified  that  the  family  initially  believed  that  treatment  with  respondent  at  Ramona 

was  an  unlimited  free  service.  At  the  outset,  respondent  explained  the  limits  of  the 

number  of  sessions  they  could  have  at  Ramona  based  on  the  fact  that  they  had  private 

insurance  coverage  and  told  the  family  that  they  could  get  more  help  at  Kaiser, 

father’s  insurance  provider.  Respondent  testified  that  they  discussed  the  limits  of 

sessions  “a  couple  of  times”  during  treatment,  not  repeatedly,  as  alleged  by  District. 

131. 

According  to  father,  he  explained  that  the  family  had  a  budget  and 

asked  if  there  were  any  other  free  places  where  they  could  take  eC  S.  for  help. 

Father  testified  that  he  was  dissatisfied  with  the  treatment  he  received  from 

respondent  because  he  felt  that  she  was  treating  father  more  than Cm  S.  Father 

was  unaware  that,  in  response  to  the  family  request  for  additional  free  services, 

respondent  had  spoken  to  Ms.  Serrano  about  what  additional  services  she  could 

provide  the  family.  Father  was  not  fully  aware  that  his  son's  sessions  had  been 

extended  beyond  the  policy  limit  for  private  insurance  clients  based  on  respondent's 

communication  of  the  family’s  concerns  to  Ms.  Serrano.  He  “assumed”  that  respondent 

did  not  speak  to  a  supervisor  to  communicate  their  concerns  because  no  supervisor 

came  to  directly  speak  to  the  family. 

52

132. 

Father  expressed  his  feeling  that  respondent  should  have  provided  more 

support  to  the  family  and  felt  “hurt”  that  she  did  not  provide  more  free  service  after 

the  family  told  her  about  their  financial  limitations.  Father  testified  that  he  rejected 

respondent's  opinion  during  treatment  that  his  son  might  benefit  from  prescribed 

medication  and  did  not  seek  additional  treatment  at  Kaiser  for  financial  reasons.  While 

father  expressed  dissatisfaction  at  the  hearing  with  respondent's  treatment,  he  did  not 

seek  another  therapist  at  Ramona  and  his  prior  complaints  were  based  on  the  number 

of  sessions  received  by  the  family,  rather  than  the  quality  of  respondent's  service.  In 

fact,  father  described  respondent's  treatment  of 

mm 

S.  during  treatment  as  “nice.” 

According  to  father,  respondent  treated  him  “[L]ike  a  nice  lady,  like  a  human  being.” 

133. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  District's  allegations  that  respondent 

“repeatedly”  advised Ci  s.'s  father  that  time  was  running  out  on  his  services  and 

did  not  speak  to  her  specialist  regarding  the  case  is  unsubstantiated  by  credible 

evidence  and  mischaracterizes  respondent's  conduct.  The  fact  that  father  was 

frustrated  with  respondent  because  of  the  limits  to  the  treatment  his  family  could  be 

provided,  based  on  Ramona’s  policy  for  treating  privately  insured  clients,  does  not 

provide  support  for  this  relevant  alleged  cause  for  termination. 

Discussion 

RESPONDENT'S  EVIDENCE 

134. 

At  hearing,  respondent  disputed  the  charges  against  her.  Respondent 

loves  being  a  District  PSW  and  Is  dedicated  to  helping  students  and  their  families.  She 

asserted  that  she  performed her  job  to  the  best  of  her  abilities  under  the 

circumstances,  testifying  that  any  issues  associated  with  respondent's  Welligent 

software  recordkeeping  were  based  on  the  fundamental  ineffectiveness  of  the 

53

District's  accommodation  of  a  CSA.  Respondent  explained  that  it  required  additional 

time  to  perform  her  functions  using  a  CSA  intermediary,  but  that  the  District  refused  to 

believe  her,  instead  attributing  the  delays  to  deficiencies  in  respondent's  interpersonal 

skills  and  allegedly  abusive  behavior  towards  CSA’s,  which  respondent  disputed. 

According  to  respondent,  the  CSA's  were  not  properly  trained  and  they  made  good 

faith  errors  that  were  attributed  to  respondent  —  all  facts  that  her  supervisors  were 

unwilling  to  acknowledge.  Respondent  testified  that  she  repeatedly  notified  her 

supervisors  of  the  issues  associated  with  the  CSA  accommodation.  While  supervisors 

did  attempt  to  facilitate  the  logistics  of  the  respondent-CSA  working  relationship,  the 

District  refused  to  acknowledge  the  fundamental  flaws  inherent  in  the 

accommodation.  Most  troubling,  supervisors,  who  had  no  prior  experience  or  training 

working  with  a  visually  impaired  clinic-based  PSW,  refused  to  acknowledge  the  fact 

that  working  with  an  intermediary  caused  respondent  to  use  additional  time  to 

accomplish  her  job  duties.  As  a  result,  respondent  was  in  a  position  where  she  would 

inevitably  fail  if  she  was  required  to  work  as  a  clinic-based  PSW  and  perform her  job 

duties  using  a  CSA  intermediary.  Accordingly,  respondent  requested  accommodations, 

which  included,  most  notably,  a  transfer  to  a  school-based  PSW  position  which 

required  significantly  less  Welligent  recordkeeping.  However,  all  such  requests  were 

refused  by  District  without,  respondent  argues,  valid  justification. 

135. 

Respondent  testified  that  after  she  improved  at  meeting  her 

recordkeeping  deadlines  during  the  2017-2018  school  year,  the  District,  tired  of 

dealing  with  her  blindness  and  her  consistent  self-advocacy,  began  to  dernand 

perfection  from  respondent.  She  asserts  the  District  acted  in  a  petty  and  bad  faith 

rnanner  towards  her,  as  reflected  in  the  District's  charges  related  to  her  conduct  that 

was  either  neutral  or  which  should  be  encouraged  in  PSW’s,  such  as  complying  with 

her  duties  as  a  mandated  reporter  or  innocuously  asking  parents  before  sessions  if 

a4

there  was  anything  they  wanted  to  discuss  with  respondent  privately  before  she  met 

with  their  chidren  for  counseling. 

136. 

Respondent’s  testimony  that  it  takes  her  longer,  as  a  visually  disabled 

person,  to  accomplish  tasks  through  an  intermediary  was  corroborated  by  the 

testimony  of  Ms.  Chase,  DOR  vocational  rehabilitation  counselor  with  Blind  Field 

Services.  At  the  time  of  hearing,  Ms.  Chase  had  worked  with  blind  individuals,  low 

vision  individuals  and  people  with  vision  problems  for  nine  years  at  DOR,  providing 

casé  management  with  a  primary  objective  of  job  retention  services.  In  the  case  of 

respondent,  frorn  2013  to  2017,  Ms.  Chase's  function  was  to  assist  respondent  in 

Keeping  her  District  clinic-based  PSW  position. 

137. 

During  her  testimony,  Ms.  Chase  described  the  assistance  she  provided 

to  respondent.  Her  support  included  providing  assistive  technology  to  help 

respondent  perform  the  duties  and  function  of  her  PSW  job,  and  training  on  the 

assistive  technology.  In  addition,  Ms.  Chase  would  travel  to  respondent's job  site  and 

help  respondent  explain  and  educate  District  on  what  respondent  might  need  to  do 

her  job  effectively,  including  providing  training  to  CSA's  on  how  to  work  with  a  visually 

disabled  person.  According  to  Ms.  Chase,  she  encouraged  respondent  to  use  an  audio 

recorder  during  her  sessions  because  of  the  difficulty  vision  impaired  people  have  in 

taking  notes.  Ms.  Chase  confirmed  that  respondent’s  vision  software,  JAWS,  and 

Welligent  were  incompatible  because  JAWS  does  not  read  Welligent.  As  a  result,  she 

described  respondent's job  situation  as  “a  very  unusual  situation  because  [respondent] 

doesn’t  have  the  means  to  go  in  the  computer  to  do her  job  because  of  the  software 

not  being  compatible." 

138. 

Ms.  Chase  stressed  that  “for  every  hour  that  a  sighted  person  has 

working  on  a  project,  it  takes  someone  who  is  visually  impaired  three  times  as  much 

33

compared  to  that  one  hour.”  Accordingly,  she  suggested  that  respondent  should 

spread  her  appointments  to  allow  more  time  for  discussion  with  her  reader  before  and 

after  the  appointment,  and  for  collaboration  in  making  sure  that  everything  was 

written  down  and  documented.  Ms.  Chase  also  stressed  the  need  that  a  reader  not 

only  be  trained  on  Welligent,  but  on  how  to  work  with  visually  impaired  people, 

training  the  District  never  provided  to  any  of  respondent's  CSAs. 

139. 

Ms.  Chase  attended  respondent's  November  2016  District  counseling 

meeting.  Prior  to  the  meeting,  she  testified,  she  and  respondent  had  been 

communicating,  trying  to  schedule  someone  from  DOR  to  attend  a  reasonable 

accommodation  meeting  with  respondent  and  her  supervisors.  Ms.  Chase  said  it  was 

necessary  for  another  DOR  counselor  to  attend  the  reasonable  accommodation 

meeting  because  she  was  unable  to  attend  the  meeting  originally  scheduled  by 

respondent's  Supervisors. 

140. 

Ms.  Chase  observed  that  the  November  2016  meeting  she  attended  with 

respondent  and  her  supervisors  was  a  “cut  and  dried"  write-up  meeting  regarding 

respondent's  alleged  late  recordkeeping,  rather  than  a  reasonable  accommodation 

meeting.  She  described  that  sne  and  respondent  were  frequently  cut  off  by  the 

supervisor  reading  the  write-up  when  they  tried  to  respond  or  question  the  evaluation; 

Ultimately,  the  parties  agreed  that  respondent's  supervisor,  Ms.  Serrano,  would  send 

emails  directly  to  respondent,  rather  than  placing  her  comments  in  the  Welligent 

program  that  was  not  directly  accessible  by  respondent.  Ms.  Chase  expressed  that 

“nothing  got  resolved  as  far  as  the  reasonable  accommodation.” 

141. 

Respondent  and  Ms.  Chase’s  assertions  that  rellance  on  a  reader  causes 

visually  impaired  people  to  require  more  time  to  accomplish  tasks  than  people  without 

visual  impairment  was  supported  at  hearing.  To  ensure  due  process,  respondent  was 

36

assisted  by  a  reader  throughout  the  hearing  in  this  matter  to  read  exhibits  that  were 

discussed  with  witnesses,  by  counsel,  and  during  respondent's  testimony.  Based  on  the 

inherent  delays  in  the  intermediary  process,  the  hearing  proceeded  in  a  slower  manner 

than  those  hearings  which  did  not  involve  a  visually  impaired  respondent. 

REASONABLE  ACCOMMODATION 

142. 

Respondent  arques  that  the  District’s  assignment  of  a  reader  violated  the 

District's  obligation  to  afford  her  a  reasonable  accommodation.  The  District  had  an 

affirmative  duty  to  provide  respondent  reasonable  accommodations  that  would  permit 

her  to  perform  the  essential  functions  of  her  job.  (Govt.  Code,  §  12940,  subd.  (m);  2 

Cal.  Code  Regs.  §  11068,  subd.  (a}.}  Particularly,  District  was  obligated  to  “engage  ina 

timely,  good  faith,  interactive  process  with  [respondent]  to  determine  effective 

reasonable  accommodation,  if  any,  in  response  to  a  request  for  reasonable 

accommodation  ...”  (Govt.  Code,  §  12940,  subd.  (n).}  As  part  of  the  interactive  process, 

the  ernployer  must  “consider  any  and  all  reasonable  accommodations  of  which  it  is 

aware  or  that  are  brought  to  its  attention  by  the...  employee,  except  ones  that  create 

an  undue  hardship.”  (2  Cal  Code  Regs.  §  11068,  subd.  (e).)  Typical  reasonable 

accommodations  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  reassigning  the  employee  to  a  vacant 

position,  making  adjustments  to  work  equipment  or  the  work  environment,  job 

restructuring,  modifying  employer  policies,  and  altering  when  and  how  essential  job 

functions  are  performed.  (2  Cal.  Code  Regs.,  §§  11065,  subd.  (p}(2){A),  (E),  (G),  Gy,  (IN); 

11068,  subd.  (d}.) 

143. 

The  District's  effort  at  accommodation  turned  out  to  be  ineffective. 

Whether  the  District  violated  the  ADA  and  FEHA  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  decisian’s 

inquiry.  However,  based  on  the  weight  of  the  credible  evidence,  it  is  clear  that  the  CSA 

reader  for  respondent  during  the  2016-2017  time-period  was  not  an  effective 

of

accommodation  and  respondent  cannot  be  terminated  based  on  inherent  deficiencies 

in  the  accommodation.  District  cannot  establish  that  the  late  timekeeping  was  the 

result  of  respondent's  unfitness  for  service,  rather  than  the  result  of  the  ineffective 

accommodation.  (Factual  Findings  15-41.) 

144. 

Respondent  testified  that  District  was  intent  on  counseling  her  for 

alleged  deficiencies  in  her  performance,  was  unwilling  to  understand  the  limitations 

that  she  had  in  effectively  performing  her  duties  within  the  mandated  timelines,  and 

was  unwilling  to  provide  her  with  requested  equipment  to  be  able  to  perform 

effectively.  Respondent’s  testimony  on  this  point  is  convincingly  corroborated  by  the 

testimony  of  Pablo  Murillo,  an  area  representative  for  United  Teachers,  Los  Angeles 

(UTLA).  Mr.  Murillo  is  the  UTLA  representative  who  accompanied  respondent  to  several 

of  her  District  conferences  during  the  2017-2018  school  year.  Mr.  Murillo  described 

the  District's  attitude  at  the  meetings  at  “nonchalant,”  asserting  that  management's 

demeanor  towards  respondent  was  “below  standards,”  and  that  “they  didn’t  seem  to 

really  care  to  address  the  needs  that  she  had." 

145. 

With  regards  to  respondent's  reasonable  accommodation  request  to 

transfer  to  a  school-based  PSW  position,  it  is  evident  that  District  denied  the  transfer 

request  without  valid  justification,  which  tends  to  support  respondent's  arguments 

that  the  District  did  not  meaningfully  engage  in  an  interactive  reasonabie 

accommodation  process.  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  testified  that  District  did  not  transfer 

respondent  to  a  school-based  PSW  position  because  it  required  Welligent 

recordkeeping  as  part  of  the  position’s  duties  and,  therefore,  respondent  would  have 

similar  issues  in  timely  recordkeeping  as  she  did  in  a  clinic-based  PSW  position. 

However,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon’s  testimony  regarding  the  duties  of  a  school-based  PSW 

was  unconvincing,  as  tt  was  based  on  a  faulty  understanding  of  the  duties  of  a  school- 

38

based  PSW  and  was  not  based  on  first-hand  experience.  This  was  credibly  testified  to 

by  both  respondent,  who  had  previously  held  a  school-based  PSW  position,  and 

respondent's  character  reference  witness,  Dr.  Irene  Lara,  who  has  been  employed  by 

the  District  for  the  past  20  years  in  primarily  school-based  PSW  positions  and  had  also 

held  a  clinic-based  PSW  position  during  her  tenure.  According  to  both  respondent  and 

Dr.  Lara,  Welligant  recordkeeping  demands  for  school-based  PSW's  are  significantly 

less  than  those  of  clinic-based  PSW’s.  In  addition,  according  to  Dr.  Lara,  the  District 

had  vacancies  for  school-based  PSW’s  consistently  over  the  past  five  years. 

146. 

Nevertheless,  Ms.  Griffin-Esperon  did  not  agree  with  respondent's 

reasonable  accommodation  request  to  transfer  respondent  to  a  school-based  PSW 

position.  Her  position  was  based  in  part  on  her  willful  refusal  to  acknowledge  the 

decrease  in  Welligent  recordkeeping  demands  inherent  in  a  school-based  PSW 

position,  and  in  part  on  respondent’s  relatively  recent  request  for  transfer  to  the 

Ramona  clinic.  As  a  result,  respondent  engaged  in  the  formal  District  reasonable 

accommodation  appeal  process. 

147. 

Victoria  Badrmnus-Wellington,  District’s  Director  of  Litigation  Research  of 

the  Educational  Equity  Complhant  Office,  is 

a  facilitator  for  reasonable 

accommodations  for  the  District.  At  hearing,  Ms.  Badmus-Wellington  described  the 

District’s  reasonable  accommodations  appeal  process  generally.  Initially,  there  is  an 

interactive  process  that  starts  at  the  site  level  with  the  supervisor  and  the  employee.  In 

Situations  where  a  supervisor  and  employee  do  not  agree  as  to  the  accommodations 

requested,  the  employee  has  a  right  to  make  a  formal  request  with  the  District’s 

reasonable  accommodation  department.  If  the  employee  still  feels  that  they  are  not 

being  accommodated,  they  have  a  right  to  appeal.  A  committee  meeting  ts  then 

scheduled.  An  employee  file  is  generated,  utilizing  the  records  available  through  risk 

39

rnanagement  or  the  reasonable  accommodation  department.  The  committee  members 

review  the  file  prior  to  the  meeting.  The  committee  first  meets  with  the  employee,  then 

with  supervisors  and  District's  legal  department  to  give  therm  an  opportunity  to 

provide  input  regarding  the  essential  functions  of  the  job  or  the  feasibility  of  the 

accommodation.  The  committee  then  deliberates  and  issues  its  decision.  The 

employee  is  not  provided  with  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  input  provided  by  the 

supervisors  before  the  decision  is  made  by  the  committee. 

148. 

In  the  case  of  respondent,  Ms.  Badmus-Wellington  testified  that  the 

committee  denied  the  request  for  a  transfer  to  a  school-based  PSW  position  based  on 

information  from  respondent's  supervisors,  one  of  whom  she  identified  as  Ms.  Griffin- 

Esperon,  that  respondent  would  “still  have  a  significant  arnount  of  documentation  and 

paperwork  she  would  have  to  do”  in  a  school-based  PSW  position  and  because 

respondent's  transfer  request  “had  already  been  accommodated.” 

149. 

Even  if  the  District  did  not  want  to  transfer  respondent  to  a  school-based 

PSW  position,  respondent's  argurnent  that  the  District  could  have  taken  other 

reasonabie  steps  to  make  Welligent  directly  accessible  to  respondent,  thereby 

eliminating  the  need  for  the  inconsistently  effective  reasonable  accommodation  CSA, 

and  faciiitating  respondent’s job  performance,  is  well-taken.  Respondent’s  DOR 

witness,  Ms.  Chase,  and  Sue  Sweetman,  one  of  the  owners  of  Sweetman  Systems,  a 

company  which  sells  technology  and  training  for  people  who  are  blind  and  low  vision, 

testified  regarding  adaptive  technology  avenues  that  could  have  potentially  made 

Welligent  directly  accessible  to  respondent's  JAWS  software  by  developing 

programming  scripts.  Ms.  Sweetman’s  company  was  retained  by  DOR  to  work  with 

respondent,  which  included  performing  an  evaluation  at  respondent's  jobsite  during 

which  Ms.  Sweetman  observed  that  respondent's  JAWS  did  not  work  with  Welligent. 

60

150. 

Ms.  Badmus-Wellington  testified  that  respondent's  request  to  make 

Welligent  directly  accessible  to  her  was  rejected  because  “it  was  completely  financially 

unfeasible  to  consider  altering  software  for  an  individual  employee.”  However,  on 

cross-examination,  Ms.  Badmmus-Weillington  demonstrated  that  her  assertions  as  to  the 

cost  of  making  Welligent  directly  accessible  were  speculative  and  that  she  did  not 

understand  that  respondent  was  requesting  a  modification  to  JAWS,  rather  than 

Welligent.  Further,  her  testimony  is  unconvincing  because  she  admitted  that  the 

committee  took  no  steps  to  obtain  any  estimate  to  determine  how  much  it  would  cost 

to  allow  a  technical  fix  that  would  allow  respondent  to  directly  access  Welligent  and 

did  not  consider  whether  respondent's  requested  technological  improvernent  could  be 

subsidized  in  whole  or  in  part  by  DOR.  Instead,  she  testified  that  the  committee 

determined  the  CSA  was  an  effective  accommodation  and  all  performance  deficiencies 

were  attributable  directly  to  respondent's  performance,  rather  than  the  District's 

reader  accommodation. 

CHARACTER  REFERENCE  AND  PERFORMANCE  EVIDENCE 

1571. 

Respondent  is  51-years  old.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Mexican  agricultural 

workers  and  the  first  person  in  her  family  to  earn  a  college  degree.  Respondent 

provided  testimonial  evidence  and  submitted  character  reference  letters  attesting  to 

her  honesty,  integrity,  diligence,  and  inspirational  perseverance. 

152. 

Most  notably,  in  corroboration  of  respondent's  testimony  that  she  is  an 

effective  PSW  and  should  retain  her  District  position,  respondent  presented  the 

testimony  of  two  of  her  former  clients  and  their  parents  at  hearing.  Both  former  clients 

and  their  parents  movingly  testified  about  the  positive  therapy  experiences  they  had 

under  respondent's  treatment  at  Rarnona,  describing  respondent  as  a  kind,  caring,  and 

effective  PSW. 

61

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Standards 

1, 

The  Board  may  not  dismiss  respondent,  a  perrnanent  employee,  except 

for  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a),  or  44933. 

The  causes  for  dismissal  include  immoral  conduct  (88  44932,  subd.  (a}(1},  44939}, 

unprofessional  conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a}(2)),  dishonesty  (8  44932,  subd.  (a}(4)), 

unsatisfactory  performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a){5)),  evident  unfitness  for  service  (§ 

44932,  subd.  (a}(6)),  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  state's  school  laws  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 

State  board  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  (§  44932, 

subd.  (a}(8)},  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable 

cause,  as  described  by  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district  (§  44939). 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  dismissal  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commussion  on  Profassional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means 

“evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citation.]” 

(People  ex  rel  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal App  4th  1549,  1567) 

Causes  for  Disrnissal 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

3, 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  has  been  described  as 

We 

“that  which  violates  the 

rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  such  conduct  which  is  unbecoming  a  member 

of  a  profession  in  good  standing.” 

iW 

(Board  of  Education  of  the  City  of  Las  Angeles  v. 

62

Swart  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553,  quoting  66  Corpus  Juris  55,  overruled  in  part  on 

another  ground  in  Bekraris  v.  Board  of  Education  (1972)  6  Cai.3d  575,  587,  fn.  7.) 

a. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  1-152  the  Commission  unanimously  concludes 

that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct.  Accordingly,  cause  for  dismissal  was 

not  establisned  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a). 

UNSATISFACTORY  PERFORMANCE 

5, 

Unsatisfactory  teacher  performance  is  unprofessional  conduct  as 

measured  by  an  objective  standard  of  fitness  to  teach,  such  as  performance 

evaluations,  and  provides  a  grounds  for  dismissal  separate  and  apart  frorn 

unprofessional  conduct.  (§  44932,  subd.  {a)(5};  Perez  »  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1983)  149  Cal App.  1167) 

6, 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  1-152,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establisn  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent's  performance  was  unsatisfactory.  Accordingly,  cause  for  disrnissal  was  not 

established  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5}. 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

7. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 

inadequacies.  [Fn.  omitted."  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal  App.4th  1429,  1444  (Woodland).}  This  cause  for 

discipline  connotes  a  “fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on 

receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 

63

school  district.”  (bid)  “Unprofessional  conduct’  is,  as  it  were,  often  a  lesser  included 

form  of  proscribed  behavior  within  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service.’  Thus,  conduct 

constituting  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  will  often  constitute  ‘unprofessional 

conduct.”  But  the  converse  is  not  true.  ‘Evident  unfitness  for  service’  requires  that 

unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  a  defect  in  temperament  —  a  requirement  not 

necessary  for  a  finding  of  ‘unprofessional  conduct.”  Ua  at  p.  1445.) 

8. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  1-152,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

respondent's  evident  unfitness  for  service  as  a  District  PSW.  Accordingly,  cause  for 

dismissal  was  not  established  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}{6). 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OR  REFUSAL  TO  OBEY  BOARD  REGULATIONS 

9. 

Persistent  violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  one’s  employing  schoo! 

district  is  another  independent  basis  for  dismissal.  (§  44932,  subd.  (a}(8).)  Persistent 

refusal  requires  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San 

Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  vu  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985) 

174  Cal  App.3d  1176,  1196.)  The  term  “persistent”  in  this  context  can  be  defined  as 

“refusing  to  relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition...  stubborn; 

persevering  ...  constantly  repeated.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School 

Gist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal  App.3d  77,  82.) 

10. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  1-152,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

respondent's  persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  board  regulations.  Accordingly, 

cause  for  dismissal  was  not  established  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a\(8}. 

64

VWILLFUL  REFUSAL  TO  PERFORM  REGULAR  ASSIGNMENTS  WITHOUT 

REASONABLE  CAUSE 

11. 

Willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 

as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district  is  a 

separate  basis  for  dismissal.  (§  44939)} 

12. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  1-152,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

respondent's  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 

as  described  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district. 

Accordingly,  cause  for  dismissal  was  not  established  pursuant  to  section  44939. 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

13. 

The  phrase  “immoral  conduct"  as  used  in  the  Education  Code  is  to  be 

construed  according  to  the  common  and  approved  usage,  having  regard  for  the 

context  in  which  the  legislature  used  it.  (Palo  Verde  Unified  School  Dist.  of  Riverside 

County  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  CalApp.3d  967;  see,  e.g.,  Board  of  Ed.  of San  Francisco 

Unified  Schoof  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  CaLApp.2d  808  [falsifying  attendance 

records  for  purpose  of  securing  continued  employment  and  defrauding  state  and 

district].}  The  “immoral  conduct”  charges  against  respondent  are  based  on  District's 

allegations  of  falsification  of  timekeeping  records. 

14. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  48-75,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct.  Accordingly,  cause  for  dismissal  was  not 

established  pursuant  to  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a}(1)  and  44939. 

65

DISHONESTY 

15. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  permits  dismissal  of  a  permanent 

employee  for  “dishonesty.”  Applying  the  “common  and  approved  usage,” 

www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary  defines  “dishonesty”  as  meaning  1)  lack  of 

honesty  or  integrity:  disposition  to  defraud  or  deceive  and  2)  a  dishonest  act:  fraud. 

(Palo  Verde  Unitied  Sch.  Dist.  V.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  971  [applying  the 

rule  of  common  and  approved  usage  to  the  phrase  “evident  unfitness"].) 

16. 

Based  on  Factual  Findings  48-75,  the  Commission  unanimously 

concludes  that  District  did  not  establish  through  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

respondent  engaged  in  dishonesty. 

Disposition 

17. 

Inthe  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education,  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214, 

(Morrison),  1  Cal.3d  214,  the  California  Supreme  Court  described  the  factors  to 

consider  when  determining  whether  a  credentialed  employee's  conduct  and  overall 

impact  on  students  and  the  school  community  renders  the  employee  unfit  to  teach. 

Here,  if  cause  existed  to  terminate  respondent  for,  e.g.,  unprofessional  conduct,  the 

Morrison  factors  would  be  applied  to  determine  whether  respondent's  conduct  and 

overall  impact  on  students  and  the  school  community  renders  her  to  be  unfit  to  be  a 

District  PSW.  However,  the  Commission  did  not  consider  the  Morrison  factors  because 

District  did  not  establish  any  of  the  causes  for  discipline  against  respondent. 

Accordingly,  a  Morrison  analysis  would  be  superfluous. 

18. 

|The  Commission  concludes  that  dismissal  is  not  warranted.  The  evidence 

established  no  cause  for  dismissal.  Respondent  should  be  allowed  to  return  as  a 

District  PSW. 

66

ORDER 

Respondent  Isabel  Ybarra  is  not  terminated  as  a  certificated  employee  of  the 

Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED: 

November  5,  2019 

DATE  >>: 

November  4,  201  9 

DATED:  November  5,  2019 

oe  DocuSigned  by: 

Wine  Jenteer 

See  ADD1484FB8193489.... 
IRINA  TENTSER 

Administrative  Law  Juage 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

not  DocuSigned  by: 

Kayetal  Souler 

t 
t 

‘wan  154F  237 ESF  184A... 

KRYSTAL  FOWLER 

Commissioner 

not  DocuSigned  by: 

“Naenee  1  OF 88445FCACACC... 

JUDY  STELLA 

Commissioner 

6/

