BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FOR  THE  SAN  JACINTO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JAMES  RIZOR, 

OAH  No.  2018120769 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

DECISION 

On  March  18,  19,  and  20,  2019,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  San  Jacinto,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of  the 
following  members:  Kimberly  J.  Belvedere,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings;  Jessica  Holbrook,  Chino  Valley  Unified  School  District;  and 
Sharill  Cortez,  Perris  Elementary  School  District. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Attorney  at  Law  with  the  law  firm  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya, 

Ruud  &  Romo,  APC,  represented  complainant,  Matt  Hixson,  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Personnel  Services,  San  Jacinto  Unified  School  District  (SJUSD). 

Carlos  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law  with  the  Law  Office  of  Carlos  R.  Perez,  APC, 

represented  respondent,  James  Rizor,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

The  record  was  held  open  to  permit  the  committee  to  deliberate  and  reach  a  decision. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  on  March  29,  2019. 

ISSUE 

Did  respondent’s  conduct  concerning  his  interactions  with  students  in  the  classroom 

during  the  first  few  days  of  the  2018-2019  school  year  warrant  his  dismissal  based  on 
unprofessional  conduct;  evident  unfitness  for  service;  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to 
obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of 
the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her;  or  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school 
district?

PROTECTIVE  AND  SEALING  ORDER 

The  names  of  the  minor  students  referred  to  in  this  matter  are  subject  to  a  protective 

order.  Any  document  received  as  evidence  in  this  matter  that  contains  the  name  of  the  minor 
student  shall  be  redacted  before  any  disclosure  to  the  public.  No  court  reporter  or 
transcription  service  shall  transcribe  the  name  of  any  minor  student,  but  shall  instead  refer  to 
the  student  by  their  initials  E.P.,  C.B.,  D.E.,  and  C.C.  Exhibit  1A,  which  contains  the  actual 
names  of  the  minor  students  and  their  corresponding  initials,  1s  ordered  sealed.  A  reviewing 
court,  parties  to  this  matter,  their  attorneys,  and  a  government  agency  decision  maker  or 
designee,  may  review  Exhibit  1A  subject  to  this  order,  provided  that  the  documents  are 
protected  from  release  to  the  public. 

SUMMARY 

Although  several  of  the  factual  allegations  were  not  established  and  the  cause  for 

dismissal  regarding  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  was  not  established,  all 
other  factual  allegations  and  causes  for  dismissal  were  established  warranting  respondent’s 
dismissal. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Procedural  Background 

PRE-HEARING  MOTIONS 

1. 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  both  parties  filed  motions  in  limine  seeking  to  exclude 

evidence.  Many  of  the  issues  dealt  with  in  the  motions  were  already  addressed  in  an  October 
12,  2019,  Order  by  ALJ  Mary  Agnes  Matyszsewski.  Those  issues  not  resolved  were  as 
follows:  respondent  wished  to  ensure  that  allegations  or  instances  of  misconduct  more  than 
four  years  old  would  be  limited  to  the  purposes  stated  in  ALJ  Matyszewski’s  Order; 
complainant  moved  to  strike/exclude  virtually  all  of  respondent’s  evidence  and  witnesses  due 
to  untimely  disclosure  under  the  statutory  deadlines  and  discovery  cutoff  deadlines  set  forth 
in  the  Pre-Hearing  Conference  Order. 

Respondent’s  motion  was  granted,  in  part.  Complainant  is  permitted  to  raise  facts 

and  evidence  concerning  allegations  of  misconduct  that  occurred  over  four  years  before 
service  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  provided  that  the  allegations  and/or  evidence  are  relevant 
to  the  Statement  of  Charges.  In  other  words,  given  that  there  is  an  allegation  of  evident 
unfitness  for  service,  persistent  failure,  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  assignments,  whether 
respondent  received  warnings  or  other  counseling  or  discipline  in  the  past  is  relevant  to  this 
case.  However,  no  prior  misconduct,  allegations  of  misconduct,  or  discipline  imposed  that  1s 
over  four  years  old  is  permitted  to  be  used  at  present  as  a  sole  basis  to  dismiss  respondent. 
Respondent  was  advised  to  make  the  necessary  objections  during  the  hearing  if  he  believed

information  being  introduced  or  elicited  through  testimony  was  being  used  for  an  improper 
purpose. 

1 

Complainant’s  motion  with  respect  to  exclude  more  than  three  character  witnesses 

was  already  granted  by  ALJ  Matyszewski  prior  to  hearing,  and  respondent  represented  that 
he  did  not  intend  to  call  more  than  three  character  witnesses.  Complainant’s  motion  with 
respect  to  exclusion  of  evidence  was  denied.  Although  some  of  respondent’s  evidence  was, 
in  fact,  submitted  after  the  statutory  discovery  cutoff  and  the  discovery  cutoff  date  set  in  the 
pre-hearing  conference  order,  there  was  no  evidence  that  complainant  was  unduly  burdened 
or  prejudiced  by  the  late  disclosure.” 

JURISDICTIONAL  MATTERS 

2. 
(SJHS). 

Respondent  is  an  English  teacher  currently  assigned  to  San  Jacinto  High  School 

3, 

On  October  8,  2018,  complainant  sent  a  document  entitled,  “Notice  of  Proposed 

Recommendation  for  Suspension  Without  Pay  and  Dismissal,  and  Statement  of  Charges 
(Statement  of  Charges)”  to  respondent  notifying  respondent  of  the  district’s  intention  to 
recommend  to  the  governing  board  of  the  district  that  respondent  be  suspended  without  pay 
pending  his  dismissal  from  employment. 

4. 

Respondent  was  given  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  matter  at  a  Skelly  meeting 

on  October  19,  2018,  if  desired,  where  he  could  be  represented  by  a  representative  of  his  choice. 
Respondent  did  not  elect  to  attend  the  meeting.° 

  

'  ALJ  Matyszewski’s  Order  stated  that  the  Commission  shall  not  make  any  decision 

relating  to  dismissal  based  on  any  matters  occurring  more  than  four  years  before  the  filing  of 
the  notice  except  as  follows:  (1)  as  allowed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944, 
subdivisions  (b)(2)(A)(1)  and  (b)(2)(B);  (2)  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44938  for 
complainant  to  proceed  on  a  charge  of  unprofessional  conduct;  (3)  for  purposes  of 
determining  whether  respondent  persistently  violated  district  policies  and  rules;  (4)  for 
purposes  of  determining  whether  respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular 
assignments;  (5)  if  equitable  principles  apply;  or  (6)  to  impeach  any  witness. 

*  There  were  some  photographs  and  documents  that  complainant  did  not  see  prior  to 

the  hearing,  however,  it  was  established  that  these  photographs  and  documents  were 
provided  to  complainant  by  an  e-mail  attachment.  Complainant  was  unable  to  open  the 
attachments  or  view  them,  however,  so  complainant  was  unaware  of  what  the  e-mail 
attachments  contained.  Complainant’s  objection  was  noted  and  counsel  was  given  time  to 
review  the  photographs  and  documents  prior  to  hearing. 

>In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 
Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering  disciplinary 
action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “pre-removal

6. 

7. 

5. 

On  November  13,  2018,  complainant  presented  the  Statement  of  Charges  to  the 

board.  The  board  approved  the  recommendation  to  suspend  respondent  without  pay  pending 
his  dismissal.  Respondent  was  given  30  days  to  request  a  hearing. 

On  November  28,  2018,  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing  on  both  his 

suspension  without  pay  and  dismissal. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleges  that  respondent  engaged  in  conduct  that  was 

unprofessional  conduct;  evident  unfitness  for  service;  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 
the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  government  of  the 
public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  employing  him  or  her;  and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 
reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  school 
district. 

The  conduct  underlying  these  charges  is  summarized  as  follows: 

Paragraph  5  of  the  Statement  of  Charges:  In  or  about  August  2018,  respondent  regularly 
used  the  words  “fuck,”  “shit,”  “ass,”  “asshole,”  and  “bullshit”  while  in  class  leading  instruction, 
none  of  which  related  to  the  lesson  plan. 

Paragraph  6  of  the  Statement  of  Charges:  In  or  about  August  2018,  during  instruction 

and  in  front  of  his  class,  respondent  used  inappropriate  language  related  to  sexual  behavior, 
genitalia,  and  bodily  functions.  Specifically,  respondent  a)  made  a  joking  reference  about  a 
female’s  menstrual  cycle;  b)  told  student  Z.M.  that  he  has  “no  balls”;  c)  told  his  students  that 
some  of  them  were  here  only  because  their  parents  “bought  a  bottle  of  wine”  and  d)  told  an 
African-American  student  that  he  should  check  his  DNA  because  of  respondent’s  sexual 
history,  there  might  be  a  genetic  relationship. 

Paragraph  7  of  the  Statement  of  Charges:  On  several  occasions  in  August  2018, 

respondent  wasted  student  instructional  time  for  inappropriate  purposes  unrelated  to  any 
approved  lesson  plan,  as  follows:  a)  demonstrated  to  students  how  to  do  “water  shots’;  b) 
described  in  detail  the  process  of  how  students  can  drop-out  of  school;  c)  told  students  that  the 
school  practices  social  promotion  in  lieu  of  adequately  preparing  students  for  the  future. 

Paragraph  8  of  the  Statement  of  Charges:  In  or  about  August  2018,  respondent  made 

several  female  students  uncomfortable  due  to  unwanted  touching.  Specifically,  several  students 
reported  respondent  inappropriately  touched  one  or  more  female  students’  shoulders,  hair,  and 
arms. 

  

safeguards,”  including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a  copy  of  the 
charges  and  materials  upon  which  the  action  is  based,  and  the  right  to  respond,  either  orally 
or  in  writing,  to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The  Supreme  Court’s  directive 
gave  rise  to  an  administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly  hearing,  in  which  an  employee 
has  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon  which  the  proposed  discipline  1s  based.

Relevant  Prior  Employment  History 

8. 

On  December  11,  2007,  respondent  received  a  letter  of  reprimand  and  notice  of 
unprofessional  conduct  for  continued  use  of  class  time  to  discuss  inappropriate  topics  that  were 
not  germane  to  the  lecture.  Specifically,  he  was  reprimanded  for  discussing  suicide  and  drug 
use.  Respondent  was  warned  to  conduct  himself  in  an  appropriate  and  professional  manner  at 
all  times  and  focus  classroom  discussion  on  topics  that  were  directly  or  indirectly  linked  to  the 
topic  of  instruction. 

The  specific  incident  connected  to  this  prior  history  occurred  on  October  4,  2007,  while 

respondent  was  teaching  Language  Arts.  During  that  class,  respondent  made  comments 
concerning  what  is  the  best  method  for  committing  suicide,  such  as  a  heroin  overdose,  and  also 
stated  if  he  were  to  commit  suicide  he  would  do  so  on  a  boat  rigged  with  explosives.  None  of 
these  comments  were  related  to  the  planned  lesson  for  the  day. 

9. 

On  December  6,  2010,  respondent  received  a  six-day  suspension  for  using 

course,  obscene,  and/or  sexually  vulgar  language,  including  making  references  to  masturbation 
and  male  genitalia  while  leading  classroom  instruction;  and  making  sexualized  comments. 
Specifically,  respondent  was  alleged  to  have  called  students  “bitches”  during  class;  making 
inappropriate,  condescending,  and  demoralizing  statements  to  students  about  graduation 
requirements  (i.e.  that  they  were  in  the  class  because  they  were  low  performers);  telling  students 
they  are  headed  to  the  prison  system;  telling  female  students  that  teenage  boys  just  want  to  get 
them  pregnant;  telling  students  that  girls  sit  in  class  and  put  on  makeup  all  day  and  boys  play 
with  themselves  all  day;  telling  boys  if  they  ever  got  his  daughter  pregnant  he  would  “cut  their 
dicks  off’;  and  telling  students  —  while  reading  a  passage  written  by  Benjamin  Franklin  —  that 
Benjamin  Franklin  “liked  to  fuck.” 

Because  respondent  had  already  been  suspended  in  the  past,  the  district  offered 
respondent  an  opportunity  to  reform  his  conduct  and  placed  him  on  a  workplace  assistance  plan, 
commencing  April  27,  2011.  Respondent  was  given  directives,  as  follows:  conduct  himself  in 
an  appropriate  and  professional  manner  at  all  times;  cease  from  using  inappropriate  language, 
including  the  words  fuck,  dick,  bitch,  or  any  other  swear  words;  cease  and  desist  from  any 
conduct  which  might  be  construed  as  humiliating,  belittling,  insulting,  and  or  demeaning;  cease 
and  desist  from  any  and  all  inappropriate  communications  and  avoid  overly  personal 
communications;  focus  on  the  topic  at  hand  during  instructional  time;  avoid  any  situation  that 
may  cause  any  student  to  feel  uncomfortable;  immediately  assume  the  proper  role  of  a  teacher 
and  discontinue  any  teaching  style  in  which  you  have  assumed  the  role  of  friend,  buddy,  peer, 
or  other  such  relationship  with  students;  and  attend  and  participate  in  any  harassment, 
sensitivity,  or  other  training  suggested  by  the  district. 

10. 

On  September  23,  2013,  respondent  received  a  letter  of  reprimand  and  notice  of 

unprofessional  conduct  for  conduct  between  August  2013  and  September  2013.  Specifically, 
respondent  was  alleged  to  have  made  comments  rife  with  sexual  innuendo  and  allusions  to  the 
female  anatomy  in  class;  insulted  students  by  referring  to  a  student  as  a  male  anatomical  body 
part;  and  inappropriately  made  physical  contact  with  a  female  student.

According  to  the  letter  of  reprimand,  respondent  told  a  student  to  “stop  moaning  because 

the  student  was  “not  experiencing  great  pleasure  or  pain”;  told  students  a  story  about  when  he 
lived  in  Germany,  where  he  disrobed  in  front  of  an  attractive  woman;  told  students  he  thinks  of 
female  breasts  when  he  looks  at  the  domes  of  the  San  Onofre  power  plant;  told  a  male  student 
to  stop  being  a  dick;  and  hugged  a  10"  grader  to  greet  her  and  kissed  her  on  the  top  of  the  head. 

Respondent  was  given  directives  as  follows:  conduct  yourself  in  an  appropriate  and 

professional  manner  at  all  tmes;  use  appropriate  verbal  and  visual  examples  in  class  and  at  no 
time  make  any  references  that  are  sexually  explicit  or  suggestive;  do  not  make  inappropriate 
physical  contact  with  students;  and  follow  all  previous  directives  given  to  him  by 
administrators. 

Evidence  Presented  by  the  District 

11. 

Testimony  of  all  the  district’s  witnesses  is  summarized  below. 

TESTIMONY  OF  MATT  HIXSON 

12. 

Matt  Hixson  is  the  Former  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel  for  the 

SJUSD.  Mr.  Hixson  has  served  the  SJUSD  as  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel, 
Director  of  Technology,  Principal,  and  Assistant  Principal.  His  duties  while  serving  as  an 
Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel  included  recruitment,  training,  retention,  and 
discipline,  up  to  and  including  termination. 

Mr.  Hixson  has  known  respondent  for  approximately  16  years.  During  the  2018-2019 

school  year,  respondent  taught  English  five  periods  per  day.  A  teacher’s  job  is  to  teach  the 
curriculum  required.  That  academic  year,  school  began  in  August.  During  the  first  week  of 
school,  Mr.  Hixson  received  a  phone  call  from  a  parent  concerning  a  female  student  in 
respondent’s  class.  The  father  complained  that  respondent  was  making  inappropriate 
comments,  using  sexual  innuendo,  having  students  model  alcohol  shots,  and  touching 
students  inappropriately.  After  receiving  the  parent  complaint,  Mr.  Hixson  spoke  with  his 
direct  executive,  Dr.  Sharon  Raffiee.  He  reported  to  Dr.  Raffiee  what  the  parent  had  alleged 
and  asked  Dr.  Raffiee  to  go  to  SJHS  to  investigate. 

Dr.  Raffiee  investigated  the  allegations  and  recommended  paid  disciplinary  leave 

because  several  students  provided  information  that  corroborated  the  female  student’s  father’s 
allegations.  Mr.  Hixson  prepared  the  Statement  of  Charges  according  to  what  he  was 
provided  by  Dr.  Raffiee. 

Mr.  Hixson,  Dr.  Raffiee,  district  counsel,  and  a  union  representative  met  with 
respondent  on  August  27,  2018.  The  purpose  of  that  meeting  was  for  respondent  to  respond 
to  the  allegations. 

Regarding  the  use  of  the  words  “fuck”  “dick”  “shit”  “ass”  “asshole”  and  “bullshit,” 

respondent  admitted  using  foul  language  to  connect  with  students  and  to  get  a  rise  out  of

students.  At  one  point  in  the  conversation,  respondent  referenced  a  book  by a  nationally 
known  scholar  who,  he  claimed,  encouraged  teachers  to  reach  students  at  the  ground  level. 
Respondent  told  them  he  considers  himself  someone  who  thinks  outside  the  box. 

Regarding  the  allegation  that  respondent  made  sexualized  comments,  respondent 

asked  for  clarification  and  did  not  automatically  acknowledge  making  sexualized  comments. 
Respondent  said  he  may  have  told  a  student  that  he  “had  no  balls.” 

Regarding  the  comment  that  respondent  told  an  African-American  student  to  check 

his  DNA  because  respondent  was  active  in  his  younger  days  and  the  student  could  be  related 
to  him,  respondent  said  he  did  not  use  the  exact  words  alleged  but  that  he  may  have  made  a 
statement  to  students  that  they  should  be  aware  of  their  backgrounds. 

Regarding  the  allegation  that  respondent  modeled  alcohol  shots  in  class  using  water, 

respondent  said  that  it  was  a  hot  day  and  he  was  trying  to  have  the  students  hydrate 
themselves  in  a  fun  way. 

Regarding  the  allegations  that  respondent  talked  about  dropping  out  of  school,  Mr. 

Hixson  did  not  recall  respondent’s  response. 

Regarding  the  allegation  of  inappropriate  touching,  respondent  said  that  in  the  course 
of  teaching  he  may  engage  a  student  by  touching  them  to  get  their  attention,  but  did  not  recall 
touching  anyone’s  hair. 

Approximately  two  weeks  after  the  initial  meeting,  everyone  met  a  second  time.  The 

purpose  of  the  second  meeting  was  to  tell  respondent  that  the  investigation  had  concluded 
and  the  district  was  recommending  resignation  or  termination.  Respondent  never 
acknowledged  wrongdoing  during  either  the  first  or  the  second  meeting  and  never  gave 
assurances  that  he  would  not  repeat  the  offending  conduct.  In  fact,  respondent  laughed,  and 
said  he  had  been  asked  to  stop  before. 

TESTIMONY  OF  STUDENT  E.P. 

13. 

E.P.1is  asenior  at  SJHS.  This  school  year  started  in  August  2018.  E.P.  is 

familiar  with  respondent  because  he  was  her  second  period  English  teacher  at  the  start  of  this 
school  year.  After  several  days,  she  reported  inappropriate  conduct  to  her  parents. 
Specifically,  she  told  her  parents  respondent  was  using  foul  language  in  class  and  being 
“imappropriate”  with  students. 

One  of  the  incidents  she  reported  was  that  respondent  had  students  do  “water  shots” 
in  class.  She  said  respondent  told  students  that  they  were  going  to  do  some  water  shots  and 
asked  one  of  the  female  students  to  do  a  demonstration  with  him.  He  put  water  in  small  cups 
and  handed  it  out.  When  he  and  the  other  female  student  had  her  water  cup,  respondent 
locked  arms  with  her  and  they  both  drank  the  water.  E.P.  was  not  sure  why  respondent  did

this,  and  no  alcohol  was  used.  Nobody  in  class  said  anything  about  it  and  most  of  the 
students  drank  their  water. 

Another  incident  she  reported  had  to  do  with  respondent  using  the  words  “fuck,” 

“ass,”  and  “shit”  on  three  different  days.  E.P.  said  respondent  told  them  he  used  that 
language  with  them  because  they  are  seniors  and  he  1s  comfortable  with  them. 

E.P.  also  recalled  an  incident  when  respondent  was  explaining  to  students  that  they 
should  not  have  to  ask  to  go  to  the  bathroom  because  if  students  ask  to  leave  class  he  will 
have  to  ask  them  why  —  and  then  a  female  student  would  have  to  say  “it’s  that  time  of  the 
month.” 

E.P.  recalled  an  incident  where  respondent  told  some  students  that  they  were  only  in 

existence  because  of  “a  bottle  of  wine.” 

E.P.  testified  that  respondent  also  told  students  that  they  did  not  have  to  get  a  degree; 

they  could  drop  out  of  school,  and  a  “lot  of  dropouts  make  a  lot  of  money.” 

None  of  these  incidents  had  anything  to  do  with  the  lesson  at  the  time. 

‘TESTIMONY  OF  STUDENT  C.B. 

14. 

C.B.  1s  a  senior  at  SJHS  and  had  respondent  for  second  period  English  the  first 

few  days  of  the  2018-2019  school  year,  which  started  in  August.  C.B.  testified  that 
respondent  used  foul  language  in  class,  specifically,  he  said  “fuck”  about  10  times. 

C.B.’s  testimony  regarding  the  use  of  “water  shots”  was  consistent  with  the  testimony 

of  E.P. 

C.B.  also  recalled  that  respondent  told  students  to  drop  out  of  high  school  and  made  a 

comment  about  putting  cameras  in  the  bathrooms. 

C.B.  recalled  that  respondent  touched  other  female  students  in  class  by  placing  his 

hands  on  their  shoulders.  He  did  it  to  her  once,  during  a  lesson,  where  he  was  saying 
something.  It  lasted  about  two  seconds  and  it  just  happened  one  time.  She  described  it  as  a 
“quick  tap.”  She  did  not  recall  respondent  touching  any  students  on  their  hair. 

C.B.  testified  that  respondent  told  the  class,  on  one  occasion,  something  about  “fuck 

you  fuck  your  family.”  C.B.  said  this  statement  was  made  in  connection  with  telling  students 
to  drop  out  of  school  because  they  could  make  more  money  without  a  high  school  diploma. 

None  of  these  incidents  had  anything  to  do  with  the  lesson  at  the  time.

TESTIMONY  OF  STUDENT  D.E. 

15. 

D.E.  is  asenior  at  SJHS  and  had  respondent  for  her  second  period  English 

class  at  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year.  She  testified  that  respondent  used  the 
words  “shit,  fuck  asshole  and  bullshit”  in  class  on  several  occasions,  and  never  gave  any 
explanation  as  to  why  he  was  using  foul  language. 

D.E.’s  testimony  was  consistent  with  C.B.  and  E.P.’s  testimony  concerning  “water 

shots.” 

D.E.  testified  that  respondent  told  one  student  that  if  he  did  not  want  to  be  in  class  he 

could  drop  out  of  school.  She  thought  respondent  was  serious,  but  also  not  that  he  was 
advocating  to  drop  out  of  school.  Respondent  did  not  tell  students  how  to  drop  out  of  school. 
These  comments  bothered  her  because  she  did  not  think  a  teacher  should  tell  students  to  drop 
out  of  school  for  any  reason. 

None  of  these  incidents  had  anything  to  do  with  the  lesson  at  issue. 

TESTIMONY  OF  RYAN  COGDILL 

16. 

Mr.  Cogdill  is  a  special-needs  aid  at  SJHS.  He  attended  respondent’s  second 
period  English  class  at  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year,  which  began  in  August 
2018. 

Mr.  Cogdill  heard  respondent  use  the  words  “shit,  damn,  and  fuck”  at  least  5  to  10 
times.  He  was  shocked  that  respondent  would  use  profanity.  It  drew  a  response  from  the 
students  that  varied  from  shock  to  comical. 

Mr.  Cogdill  did  recall  respondent  touching  students  on  the  shoulder  as  he  might  be 

walking  through  the  classroom,  but  it  was  just  a  tap  on  the  shoulder  and  only  happened  about 
five  times.  There  was  no  inappropriate  intent  and  no  students  ever  said  they  were  offended. 
No  students  pulled  away.  No  students  ever  said  anything  to  respondent  about  it. 

Mr.  Cogdill’s  testimony  regarding  the  “water  shots”  was  consistent  with  that  of  the 

other  students  who  testified. 

On  one  occasion,  while  respondent  was  speaking  to  an  African  American  student, 
respondent  told  that  student  something  along  that  lines  that  the  student  could  be  related  to 
him  and  he  should  check  his  DNA. 

Finally,  on  another  occasion,  respondent  told  students  that  high  school  was  not  for 

everybody,  and  if  they  did  not  like  being  there,  they  could  leave  and  get  a  career. 
Respondent  also  told  students  about  a  friend  of  his  who  went  into  construction  and  made  a 
lot  of  money.  Mr.  Cogdill  was  surprised  respondent  would  make  such  a  comment  because  it 
was  like  he  was  advocating  dropping  out  of  school.

Mr.  Cogdill  said  none  of  the  above-referenced  incidents  had  anything  to  do  with  the 

lesson  at  the  time. 

TESTIMONY  OF  SHARON  RAFFIEE 

17. 

Sharon  Raffiee,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Executive  Director  of  Personnel  Services  for  the 

SJUSD.  She  has  held  various  positions  within  the  district  for  14  years.  Her  duties  include 
hiring,  recruitment,  training,  and  discipline.  The  district  expects  all  teachers  to  adhere  to  the 
required  curriculum,  state  standards,  policies,  and  to  teach  the  skills  necessary  to  prepare 
students  for  college. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year,  she  was  notified  by  Mr.  Hixson 

regarding  inappropriate  conduct  by  respondent  that  had  been  reported  by  a  student  and  that 
student’s  father.  The  parent  was  upset  about  “vulgarity,  inappropriate  sexualized 
conversations,  and  student  touching.”  The  incidents  had  occurred  the  first  three  days  of  the 
school  year;  on  the  fourth  day,  she  immediately  went  to  SJHS  because  she  believed  it  was 
imperative  to  do  so. 
Dr.  Raffiee  took  statement  from  approximately  17  students,  wrote  a 
report,  and  discussed  her  findings  with  Mr.  Hixson.  She  also  later  assisted  Mr.  Hixson  with 
preparation  of  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

She  met  with  respondent,  Mr.  Hixson,  two  union  representatives,  and  district  counsel 

on  August  27,  2018,  regarding  respondent’s  conduct. 

Regarding  the  allegation  in  paragraph  5  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  concerning  the 

use  of  profanity  in  class,  respondent  admitted  that  not  only  did  he  use  profanity,  but  he  did  so 
consciously.  Respondent  also  said  that  he  used  profanity  to  engage  students  and  “help  get 
them  ready  for  life.”  He  also  said  it  was  a  form  of  communication. 

Regarding  the  allegation  in  paragraph  6d  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  that  he  told  an 

African  American  student  that  the  student  should  check  his  DNA  because  he  might  be 
related,  respondent  said  that  the  comment  was  “in  context”  because  he  was  building  the 
concept  of  family  among  the  students;  Dr.  Raffiee  said  this  made  no  sense  to  her  because 
students  had  reported  respondent  was  talking  about  his  younger  days  and  being  wild. 
Respondent  did  not  have  a  response  for  any  of  the  other  allegations  in  paragraph  6. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  7a  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  concerning  the 

“water  shots,”  respondent  simply  said  he  gave  students  water  because  it  was  hot. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  7b  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  concerning 

allegations  that  he  told  students  they  should  drop  out  of  school,  respondent  told  her  that  he 
simply  wanted  the  students  to  know  they  had  choices. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  7c  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  that  SJHS 
practices  “social  promotion  (i.e.  just  moving  students  along),”  respondent  did  not  have  a 
response. 

10

Regarding  the  allegation  in  paragraph  8  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  concerning 

touching  student’s  arms,  hair,  or  shoulders,  she  did  not  recall  respondent’s  response. 

None  of  these  incidents  have  anything  to  do  with  regular  teaching  assignments. 

At  one  point  during  the  meeting,  she  told  respondent  that  he  is  not  upholding  the  core 

values  of  the  district.  Respondent  responded  that  teaching  is  a  “dark  place”  and  sometimes 
when  you  shine  you  have  to  go  to  the  “darkest  places.”  Respondent  also  stated  in  the 
meeting  that  he  did  not  really  want  to  be  a  teacher. 

At  the  end  of  the  meeting,  Mr.  Hixson  made  it  clear  that  remediation  was  not  an 

option  because  respondent  had  been  warned  about  unprofessional  conduct  in  the  past.  Ata 
second  meeting  two  weeks  later,  respondent  was  informed  the  district  would  proceed  with 
his  dismissal. 

Evidence  Presented  by  Respondent? 

‘TESTIMONY  OF  STUDENT  C.C. 

18. 

C.C.1s  asenior  at  SJHS  and  was  in  respondent’s  second  period  English  class 
at  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year,  which  started  in  August  2018.  She  recalled 
respondent,  for  the  three  days  he  was  in  class,  as  a  very  “outspoken”  teacher  but  one  who 
was  “confident  in  himself.”  She  felt  he  was  a  good  teacher.  She  was  never  offended  in  his 
class.  She  never  saw  him  touch  a  student  inappropriately.  She  said  respondent  may  have 
patted  a  student  on  the  shoulder  very  briefly,  but  no  student  ever  complained.  Respondent 
never  yelled  at  students  and  never  assaulted  or  bullied  anyone.  C.C.  did  recall  drinking 
“cups”  of  water  once,  but  said  that  respondent  just  gave  them  the  cups  of  water  to  cheer  for 
them  since  it  was  their  senior  year.  Respondent  did  make  a  comparison  of  the  water  to 
alcohol,  but  it  was  done  in  a  “positive”  way  —  like  a  toast  to  them.  Respondent  never 
encouraged  anyone  to  drop  out  of  school;  to  the  contrary,  respondent  encouraged  them  to 
stay  in  school.  Respondent  was  very  inspirational  —  he  even  brought  backpacks  to  school  for 
students  who  did  not  have  them.  Respondent  was  active  in  an  after  school  club  as  well.  C.C. 
found  respondent  to  be  very  considerate  and  exciting.  He  encouraged  students  to  be  who 
they  wanted  to  be  and  told  students  they  needed  to  do  what  they  need  to  do  for  themselves. 
Respondent  told  students  that  some  of  them  may  not  enjoy  school  and  there  are  many 
different  options  without  school.  C.C.  said  respondent  did  use  the  words  “shit”  and  “fuck”  in 
class,  but  she  would  not  consider  them  a  “common”  part  of  his  language. 

TESTIMONY  OF  PAUL  HENDRY 

19. 

Mr.  Hendry  currently  teaches  English  at  SJHS.  Respondent  has  been  a 

colleague  of  his  for  eight  years.  Mr.  Hendry  was  also  a  department  chair  while  at  SJHS.  He 
and  respondent  had  also  been  filmmaking  partners  in  France.  Mr.  Hendry  believed 

  

*  All  witness  testimony  is  summarized  and  paraphrased. 

11

respondent  was  an  excellent  teacher  because  he  was  always  prepared,  always  interacting  with 
students,  and  always  developing  a  great  rapport  with  students.  Mr.  Hendry  often  saw 
students  coming  to  respondent’s  classroom  to  eat  lunch  in  his  room  or  simply  to  visit  or  get 
help.  Respondent  has  a  party  every  year  at  his  house  as  an  Earth  Day  fundraiser  because 
respondent  is  very  socially  aware  about  the  environment.  Respondent  is  active  on  campus  in 
an  environmental  club,  and  also  works  to  save  local  parks.  Of  all  the  teachers  he  has  worked 
with  in  32  years,  respondent  is  the  most  dedicated  teacher  he  has  ever  seen. 

TESTIMONY  OF  KENNETH  REED 

20. 

Mr.  Reed  used  to  be  the  history/social  science  department  chair  at  SJHS  and 

retired  in  2005.  He  and  respondent,  aside  from  being  colleagues,  are  also  active  in  the  Lion’s 
Club,  a  nonprofit  organization  focusing  on  things  like  conservation,  hunger,  ecosystems, 
ecology,  and  pediatric  cancer.  Mr.  Reed  thought  respondent  was  a  very  good  teacher.  He 
thought  respondent  did  an  excellent  job  and  was  well  regarded  as  a  teacher.  Mr.  Reed  saw 
how  respondent  interacted  with  students  and  respondent  had  the  students  very  involved  in  the 
classroom  and  out  of  the  classroom.  Mr.  Reed  was  “shocked”  when  he  found  out  about  the 
Statement  of  Charges;  he  admitted  that  he  has  not  seen  respondent  in  the  classroom  since 
2005. 

TESTIMONY  OF  FRANKLIN  PEREZ 

21. 

Mr.  Perez  met  respondent  a  number  of  years  ago  when  respondent  was  his 

sophomore  English  teacher  in  2001  at  SJHS.  He  testified  that  respondent  was  a  very  good 
English  teacher  and  was  personable  and  authentic.  He  did  not  recall  respondent  using 
profanity,  except  maybe  the  word  “shit.”  Respondent  knew  how  to  motivate  students  who 
were  slacking.  Mr.  Perez  testified  about  how  he  was  a  football  player  who  was  failing  out  of 
school,  and  respondent  worked  hard  with  him  so  he  could  qualify  for  spring  training.  Mr. 
Perez  recalled  very  few  positive  interactions  with  teachers  in  his  education,  but  respondent’s 
class  was  one  of  those  positive  experiences.  Mr.  Perez  continued  with  his  education  and  now 
teaches  world  history,  U.S.  history,  civics,  and  government.  He  is  working  towards  his  Ph.D. 
in  ethnic  studies.  Respondent  was  one  of  the  reasons  he  chose  to  pursue  a  higher  education 
to  improve  the  educational  system,  because  respondent  really  showed  him  what  a  difference 
a  teacher  who  cares  can  make  in  a  student’s  life. 

RESPONDENT’S  EXTRACURRICULAR  ACTIVITIES  AND  DOCUMENTARY  EVIDENCE 

22. 

Respondent  provided  his  most  recent  personnel  evaluation.  The  evaluation 

showed  he  either  met  standards  or  was  progressing  towards  the  standard  in  all  areas,  but  that 
no  areas  showed  he  exceeded  standards.  Respondent  said  that  he  thinks  he  1s  an  exceptional 
teacher  and  he  “does  not  put  much  faith”  in  evaluations. 

12

23. 

Respondent  submitted  awards  and  certificates  that  he  has  won  over  the  years, 

which  included,  in  part,  teacher  of  the  year,  certificates  of  achievement,  certificates  of 
recognition,  and  the  Crystal  Apple  Award.° 

24. 

Respondent  submitted  a  character  reference  letter  from  SJHS  Principal  Luke 

Smith,  dated  June  12,  2017.  The  letter  speaks  highly  of  respondent,  noting  that  respondent  is 
highly  motivated,  dedicated,  and  an  outstanding  teacher.  Mr.  Smith  also  stated  that 
respondent  used  innovative  approaches  in  the  classroom,  and  had  the  ability  to  connect  and 
build  relationships  with  students.  The  letter  described  the  contributions  respondent  made 
outside  the  classroom  during  his  entire  academic  career,  including  leading  clubs  and 
organizations  such  as  EcoMind,  Leo  Club,  Shakespeare  Club,  Ramona  Pageant,  Journalism, 
and  more.  Finally,  Mr.  Smith  described  respondent  as  a  highly  impactful  and  capable 
teacher.  Mr.  Smith’s  letter  pre-dated  the  conduct  at  issue  in  this  case  and  thus,  did  not 
reference  if  Mr.  Smith’s  opinion  is  the  same  in  light  of  the  present  allegations  of  misconduct. 
Mr.  Smith  did  not  testify. 

25. 

Respondent  submitted  several  photographs  showing  himself  engaged  in 

various  community  activities.  He  also  testified  regarding  his  activities  such  as  being  advisor 
of  the  Leo’s  Club,  a  club  on  campus  for  various  social  causes.  He  is  also  president  of  the 
Lion’s  Club,  the  adult  version  of  the  Leo’s  Club.  Respondent  also  submitted  photographs  of 
minor  students  from  various  events  that  were  not  admitted,  but,  the  photographs  appeared  to 
depict  what  respondent  represented  they  were:  a  community  college  field  trip;  students 
enjoying  misters  he  installed  in  the  hallways;  and  a  yearbook  photograph  from  a  club. 

RESPONDENT’S  TESTIMONY 

26. 

Respondent’s  educational  background  includes  community  college,  where  he 

obtained  an  Associate  of  Arts  degree  in  general  education;  another  community  college, 
where  he  obtained  an  Associate  of  Arts  in  Fire  Science;  California  State  University, 
Fullerton,  where  he  obtained  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  in  English;  and  California  State  University, 
San  Bernardino,  where  he  obtained  a  multi-subject  teaching  credential  and  is  also  authorized 
to  teach  single  subject  English. 

Respondent  served  as  a  seasonal-on  call  firefighter  for  12  years  until  he  was  injured. 

Around  1997,  respondent  became  very  ill  and  had  a  near-death  experience,  which  caused 
him  to  take  pause  regarding  his  life.  Respondent  decided  to  pursue  the  teaching  profession 
instead.  He  started  out  as  a  substitute.  He  came  to  SJUSD  as  a  high  school  English  teacher 
in  1998.  That  is  where  he  has  been  assigned  until  present.  He  has  taught  English  the  entire 
time,  except  one  year  he  taught  the  TIGER  academy  which  covered  a  wide  curriculum. 
Respondent  has  also  had  other  small  assignments  like  leadership  academies.  Respondent  has 

  

>  Respondent  included  a  “screen  shot”  that  he  said  was  sent  to  him  by a friend, 
nominating  him  for  teacher  of  the  year  for  the  school  year  2018-2019.  However,  respondent 
only  taught  for  one  full  day  of  the  2018-2019  school  year  before  he  was  removed  from  the 
classroom.  So,  this  unauthenticated  “screen  shot”  can  be  given  little  weight. 

13

taught  junior,  sophomore,  and  senior  English,  although  once  he  taught  freshman  English. 
Respondent  is  married  and  has  one  son. 

The  2018-2019  school  year  began  on  a  Thursday  in  August.  It  was  a  very  short 

introductory  day,  and  Friday  was  a  minimum  day.  The  following  Monday,  the  third  day  of 
school,  was  the  first  full  day  of  the  school  year. 

Regarding  the  allegations  concerning  the  “water  shots,”  respondent  said  he  did  it  as 
an  “ice  breaker.”  It  was  for  the  students  to  meet  and  greet  and  get  to  know  each  other.  He 
bought  paper  Dixie  cups  and  supplied  the  water.  It  was  very  hot  that  day  and  he  explained  to 
the  students  that  the  purpose  of  the  water  was  to  cool  off  because  they  had  been  helping  him 
bring  plants  and  supplies  into  the  classroom.  Respondent  designated  students  to  pour  the 
water  into  the  cups  and  some  students  said  they  looked  like  shot  glasses.  Respondent  said  he 
had  no  thought  of  that,  so  he  told  the  students  that  they  would  make  a  toast  to  them  being 
seniors.  Respondent  said  he  did  show  the  students  a  “locking  arms”  motion  like  when  the 
Russians  meet  each  other  and  lock  their  arms  in  a  toast.  Respondent  said  he  may  have  put 
students  in  an  awkward  situation  because  students  at  that  age  have  difficulty  communicating 
and  interacting  beyond  their  cell  phones. 

Regarding  the  comment  about  a  female’s  menstrual  period,  respondent  said  he  did 
make  reference  to  that  once  on  the  Monday  after  school  started.  He  said  that  he  was  going 
over  policies  and  procedures  at  the  beginning  of  class.  He  was  standing  by  the  classroom 
windows  and  he  told  students  “you'll  notice  that  is  the  boy’s  and  girl’s  bathroom”  but  “you 
are  seniors,  [and]  I  want  you  to  have  some  agency  at  this  point  in  your  life.”  Respondent  told 
the  students  he  does  not  want  them  to  have  to  interrupt  classroom  time  and  say  “I  am  on  my 
period”  or  something  like  that.  He  is  against  hall  passes  and  told  the  students  he  just  wants 
them  to  quietly  excuse  themselves.  Respondent  said  he  may  have  also  told  students  that  he 
did  not  want  to  have  to  have  a  student  tell  him  that  it  was  her  “time  of  the  month.” 

Regarding  the  use  of  profanity,  respondent  said  he  may  have  let  it  slip  out.  He  said 
sometimes  teachers  think  they  are  giving  a  great  lecture  and  a  student’s  hand  goes  up.  The 
teacher  thinks  the  student  is  engaged.  But  then,  the  student  may  ask  to  just  go  to  the 
bathroom,  and  a  teacher  will  think  “fuck.”  Respondent  said  that  1s  what  happened  and  it  only 
happened  once  on  the  Monday  after  school  started.  Respondent  denied  saying  “fuck  you  and 
fuck  your  family”  to  students.  Respondent  also  said  he  may  have  used  the  words  “shit”  or 
“asshole”  —  and  possibly  “bullshit”  —  the  previous  Friday.  Respondent  admitted  that  was  “a 
lot  of  swearing  for  that  short  span  of  time.” 

Respondent  said  he  never  told  a  student  that  he  had  “no  balls.”  Respondent  said  he 

did  tell  a  student  something  like  “you  gotta  have  some  balls  in  this  life.” 

Regarding  the  comment  about  some  students  only  being  born  because  of  a  bottle  of 

wine,  respondent  said  that  he  told  students  that  he  knew  some  of  them  realized  they  were 
only  here  because  of  an  “accident.”  Respondent  said  he  was  telling  students  that  their  lives 

14

are  not  about  how  they  were  born,  but  how  they  live. 
classroom  procedures  and  purpose. 

It  was  during  a  conversation  about 

Regarding  the  comment  to  an  African  American  student  about  DNA,  respondent  said 
they  were  talking  in  class  about  policies  and  procedures  responsibility,  agency,  and  intention. 
Respondent  said  that  he  was  telling  students  that  his  success  as  a  teacher  is  dependent  upon 
his  success  as  a  human  being.  He  said  he  was  telling  students  that  part  of  his  job  is  to  create 
happy  and  healthy  human  beings  and  “not  miserable  idiots  that  think  they  can  do  whatever.” 
Respondent  said  he  believes  he  told  students,  collectively,  that  they  are  a  family.  He  told 
students  that  if  there  was  an  earthquake  and  the  ceiling  started  shaking  and  pinned  us  down  — 
he  didn’t  care  how  much  you  think  that  person  next  to  you  is  a  jerk,  you  would  be  closer  than 
twins.  Respondent  looked  at  two  African  American  students  1n  class  and  told  them  that  they 
might  not  think  of  him  as  family  because  of  their  skin  color,  but,  if  you  check  your  DNA, 
you  never  know.  Respondent  did  say  something  about  being  wild  in  his  younger  days.  Yet, 
respondent  said  by  making  the  comment  he  did  not  mean  to  say  that  he  was  directly  related 
to  the  students  or  that  their  parents  were  sexually  promiscuous. 

Regarding  dropping  out  of  school,  respondent  said  he  did  not  tell  students  they 
“should”  drop  out  of  school  but  rather,  that  they  “could”  drop  out  of  school  if  they  wanted  to. 
Respondent  said  that  some  students  had  told  him  in  the  past  that  they  felt  like  they  were  just 
holding  a  spot.  He  felt  that  telling  students  they  could  drop  out  was  consistent  with  his 
overall  theme  of  personal  responsibility  and  living  with  a  purpose.  He  told  students  that  if 
they  did  not  want  to  be  there,  they  need  to  find  something  else  for  themselves.  He  told  them 
that  they  can  take  the  GED  when  they  turn  18.  Respondent  also  told  students  about  a  friend 
of  his  who  used  to  be  a  “ditch  digger”  who  made a  successful  living. 

Regarding  the  allegation  that  respondent  told  students  the  school  district  only 

practices  social  promotion,  he  said  he  did  not  make  any  comment  in  that  regard. 

Regarding  touching  students,  respondent  admitted  that  he  would  hold  his  clipboard 

and  walk  around  class  as  he  instructed  and  sometimes  “tapped”  a  student  on  the  shoulder  as 
he  was  walking  by.  He  said  it  may  have  been  3  or  4  students  and  the  tap  only  lasted  a 
second.  He  never  pinched  a  student,  but  recalled  that  while  talking  about  “shining”  and 
“owning”  oneself,  he  may  have  cupped  his  hand  like  Yoda  did  with  Luke  Skywalker  in  Star 
Wars  and  said  something  like  “luminous  beings  we  are.”  Respondent  also  said  he  did  not 
recall  ever  touching  a  student’s  hair,  but  if  he  did,  1t  may  have  been  when  he  was  telling  a 
student  “you  are  the  light  within  you”  and  not  your  “face,  your  hair,  your  nails,  etc.” 

Regarding  the  August  meeting  between  respondent,  his  union  representatives,  Mr. 

Hixson,  Dr.  Raffiee,  and  district  counsel,  respondent  said  he  believed  it  was  “more  of  a 
conversation”  than  anything  having  to  do  with  discipline.  He  did  not  mean  to  indicate  that 
profanity  is  acceptable  in  class.  Respondent  said  he  believed  the  meeting  was  more  of  a 
“philosophical  discussion”  and  had  he  known  it  was  something  that  would  rise  to  the  level 
that  it  has  now,  he  would  have  just  apologized  and  told  them  it  would  not  happen  again. 

15

Prior  to  concluding  his  testimony,  respondent  was  asked  by  counsel  if  there  is 

anything  he  wanted  to  say  to  the  Commission.  Respondent  said  that  the  job  of  a  senior 
English  teacher  is  to  prepare  the  kids  for  graduation.  He  said  he  tries  to  be  a  part  of  the  flow 
of  his  classroom  and  that  is  what  makes  him  an  effective  teacher.  He  does  not  consider 
himself  a  “vulgarian”  but  said  that  profanity  can  be  a  “tool  of  language”  that  arguably  is 
effective.  Respondent  said  he  can  comply  with  not  using  profanity  in  class.  The  whole 
process  has  “been  an  awakening.”  He  said  if  he  had  known  someone  would  spend  this  much 
money  regarding  his  use  of  profanity  in  class  he  would  have  been  much  more  cautious.  In 
the  future,  he  will  pay  much  more  attention  to  his  language. 

Respondent  acknowledged  the  prior  warnings  he  had  been  given,  and  his  suspension, 

regarding  unprofessional  conduct.  Respondent  said  he  thought  most  of  the  prior  incidents 
were  mischaracterizations.  He  said,  specifically,  that  the  December  11,  2007,  letter  notifying 
him  of  unprofessional  conduct  was  unfair  and  motivated  for  political  reasons. 

Respondent  feels  he  should  remain  a  teacher  in  the  district.  He  has  been  teaching  for 
over  21  years.  He  and  his  wife  decided  to  make  San  Jacinto  their  home.  He  is  committed  to 
the  school,  the  community,  and  his  family  is  established  here.  Respondent  became  one  of  the 
most  senior  teachers  in  the  school  district  within  six  years  of  starting  his  job  because  there  is 
such  a  high  turnover  rate.  People  cannot  believe  he  stuck  it  out  with  the  SJUSD  and  he  is 
often  asked  “why  do  you  stay  in  that  dump.”  Respondent  said  that  despite  the  fact  that  there 
are  “folks  in  leadership”  that  no  longer  want  him  in  this  school,  it  1s,  nonetheless,  his  school. 
Respondent  wants  his  job  back  because  he  knows  he  1s  not  a  threat  to  his  students  and  he  1s 
committed  to  serving  his  students. 

Respondent  said  he  has  become  a  defining  part  of  the  school.  He  has  helped 
revitalize  the  community  and  experiences  gratitude  working  at  SJHS.  Respondent  said  that 
the  charges  are  very  serious  1n  this  case  and  he  knows  he  “messed  up.”  He  said  he  is 
“ashamed  to  be  here”  and  he  “should  have  known  better.”  He  said  he  is  “ashamed  of  wasting 
all  the  resources  that  have  been  wasted”  on  him. 

Respondent  said  it  has  become  clear  to  him  that  he  cannot  use  foul  language  in  front 

of  minors.  He  said  he  knows  if  he  does,  he  risks  the  district  “squandering  time  and 
resources.”  He  will  not  let  that  happen  again. 

Respondent  said  he  educates  and  inspires  excellence  and  teaching  is  his  passion.  He 

knows  he  is  a  “menace  to  deal  with  from  time  to  time”  and  thinks  “this  whole  thing  is 
shameful.”  He  is  ashamed  that  he  might  have  hurt  someone’s  feelings,  but  is  more  ashamed 
that  the  district  has  wasted  so  much  time.  He  does  not  want  to  ever  be  in  a  position  again  to 
give  the  district  “ammunition  to  squander  public  money.”  He  said  he  will  not  allow  the 
district  the  opportunity  to  remove  him  from  the  classroom  “over  something  that  [he  believes| 
was  a  mischaracterization.”  Respondent  said  he  will  not  make  himself  a  target  and  will  not 
“afford  the  district  that  luxury  again.” 

16

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of Proof 

1. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  disciplinary  proceeding  is  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 
Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.) 

2. 

‘**Preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  evidence  that  has  more  convincing 

force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citations.]”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Company  (1990)  226 
Cal.App.3d  314,  324-325.)  The  sole  focus  of  the  legal  definition  of  ‘preponderance’  in  the 
phrase  ‘preponderance  of  the  evidence’  is  on  the  quality  of  the  evidence.  The  quantity  of  the 
evidence  presented  by  each  side  is  irrelevant.”  (/bid.,  italics  emphasis  in  original.) 

Applicable  Law 

3. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.) 

4. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the  Commission  may 
not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).) 

5. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  not  be  dismissed  except  for,  among 

other  things,  unprofessional  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  persistent  refusal  to  obey, 
willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  as  prescribed  by  the  reasonable  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  employing  school  district. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subds.  (a)(2),  (a)(6)  & 
(a)(8);  44939.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

6. 

“Unprofessional  conduct”  has  been  defined  as  “that  conduct  which  breaches 

the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession,  or  conduct  which  is  unbecoming  a  member  in  good 
standing  of  a  profession.”  (Shea  v.  Bd.  of Medical  Examiners,  (1978)  81  Cal.  App.3d  564,  at 
575;  Bd.  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553.)  Unprofessional  conduct  must 
also  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique  position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon 
whom  are  imposed  responsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in 
regard  to  other  callings.  (San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional 
Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.)  The  determinative  test  of  a  charge  of 
immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct  is  fitness  to  teach,  which  is  a  question  of  ultimate  fact. 
(Bd.  of Education  v.  Jack  M.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691.) 

17

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

7. 

Unfitness  for  service  means  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose,  unsuitable; 

incapable;  incompetent;  and  physically  or  mentally  unsound.”  (Palo  Verde  etc.  School  Dist.  v. 
Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  972.)  “Unprofessional  conduct”  and  “evident  unfitness  for 
service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same  thing.  Although  conduct  constituting  “evident 
unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute  “unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is  not 
always  true.  Evident  unfitness  for  service  requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to 
defect  in  temperament,  which  is  not  necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct. 
Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may  not  disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in  a  California 
Supreme  Court  opinion,  in  which  the  court  concluded  “unprofessional  conduct”  meant 
conduct  showing  a  teacher  was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria  must  be  analyzed  to  determine, 
as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  If  the  criteria 
are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”;  7.e.,  whether 
the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School 
Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1444-1445.) 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  SCHOOL  LAWS  OR  REGULATIONS 

. 

8. 

.  stubborn;  persevering  . 

The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by  lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent; 
.  constantly 

continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition  . 
repeated.”  And  in  the  judicial  decisions  of  this,  as  well  as  other  states,  the  word  has  been 
interpreted  to  mean  “continuing  or  constant.”  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union 
School  District  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  A  single  violation  of  a  school 
board’s  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of  a  permanent  teacher.  The  subdivision 
pertains  to  unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions,  and  hence  the  Legislature  has 
decreed  that  a  single  violation  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  dismissal,  apparently  to  allow  for 
correction;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of  school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to 
regulate.  (Governing  Board  of the  Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman,  supra.,  28 
Cal.App.3d  at  p.  84.) 

. 

WILLFUL  VIOLATION  TO  PERFORM  REGULAR  ASSIGNMENTS 

9. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44939,  the  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 

assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of 
the  employing  school  district,  provides  cause  for  an  immediate  suspension  and  the  filing  of  a 
notice  of  dismissal. 

Evaluation 

FACTUAL  ALLEGATIONS  AND  FINDINGS 

10. 

A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  the  factual  allegations  contained 

in  the  Statement  of  Charges  in  paragraphs  5,  6,  7a  and  7b. 

18

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  5,  respondent  used  profanity  during  the  first 

four  days  of  the  school  year,  and  witnesses  were  consistent  as  to  that  point.  Even  respondent 
admitted  to  using  profanity. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  6,  although  respondent  may  not  have  made  the 
statements  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  verbatim,  he  did  make  a  reference  to  a  female 
student’s  menstrual  period;  he  did  make  a  reference  to  a  student  that  he  needed  to  “have 
balls”;  he  did,  according  to  students,  tell  some  of  them  that  they  were  only  here  because  of  a 
bottle  of  wine;  and  he  did  make  reference  to  his  wild  youth  and  tell  an  African  American 
student  that  they  could  be  related.  All  of  these  proven  allegations  are  close  enough  in 
description  to  the  allegations  contained  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  to  be  sustained. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  7a,  respondent  did  demonstrate  “water  shots” 
to  students  and  make  reference  to  the  water  being  a  toast  or  celebration  to  their  senior  year. 

Regarding  the  allegations  in  paragraph  7b,  respondent  did  make  reference  to  students 

dropping  out  of  school,  pursuing  alternatives  other  than  school,  and  making  reference  to  at 
least  one  individual  he  knew  outside  of  the  academic  arena  who  did  not  go  to  school  and  who 
made  money. 

The  conduct  described  in  paragraphs  5,  6,  7a,  and  7b  all  constitute  unprofessional 

conduct,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2).  Given  the  prior 
warnings  respondent  was  given  regarding  his  unprofessional  conduct  in  2007,  2010,  and 
2013,  which  also  included  a  suspension  without  pay,  respondent  also  is  in  violation  of 
Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  persistent  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws 
or  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  of  the  school  district  employing  respondent.  The 
conduct  also  constituted  evident  unfitness  for  service,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section 
44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  for  the  reasons  discussed  in  the  Conclusion  portion  below. 

The  conduct  described  in  paragraphs  5,  6,  7a,  and  7b  does  not  constitute  willful 

refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  in  violation  of  Education 
Code  section  44939.  While  certainly  respondent  was  not  teaching  English  while  he  was 
engaged  in  the  activity  detailed  in  paragraphs  5,  6,  7a,  and  7b,  there  was  no  evidence 
submitted  that  he  failed  to  teach  English  or  perform  his  assignments  as  an  English  teacher. 

11. 
paragraph  7c  or  8. 

A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish  the  allegations  contained  in 

Although  respondent  made  reference  to  students  dropping  out  of  school,  he  did  not 

mention  the  term  or  concept  of  social  promotion  or  otherwise  advocate  that  the  SJUSD  only 
passes  students  to  move  them  along  as  opposed  to  giving  them  a  quality  education. 

Although  respondent  may  have  tapped  some  students  on  the  shoulder,  and  possibly 

the  hair  or  the  arm,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  touch  was  inappropriate,  illegal,  or 
otherwise  made  any  student  feel  uncomfortable.  No  student  testified  that  respondent  tapping 

19

them  on  the  shoulder,  hair,  or  arm  made  them  uncomfortable  and  to  the  extent  any  such 
comment  is  contained  in  the  written  statements  obtained  by  Dr.  Raffiee,  such  a  statement  1s 
administrative  hearsay  and  cannot  be  used  to  make a  finding  of  fact. 

CONCLUSION 

12. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  |  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the  Supreme 

Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a 
showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students, 
school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  The  court 
delineated  the  following  criteria  to  determine  whether  a  teacher’s  conduct  indicates  that  he  or 
she  is  not  fit  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students 
or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness 
in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  the 
extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct  in  question;  (6)  the 
praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may 
inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher 
involved  or  other  teachers.  (U/d.,  at  pp.  229-230.) 

13. 

In  Board  of Education  v.  Jack  M.,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  detailed  the 

process  to  be  considered  in  determining  fitness  to  teach.  In  addition  to  the  Morrison  factors, 
the  court  provided  additional  factors  that  may  be  considered  to  determine  if  there  1s  a  nexus 
between  the  conduct  and  a  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach:  (1)  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the 
questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any;  (3)  the  effect  of 
notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  impairment  of  teachers’  and  students’  relationships;  (5) 
disruption  of  educational  process;  (6)  motive;  (7)  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of 
conduct.  (d.,  at  fn.  5.) 

In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist  to  dismiss  a  certificated  employee  on  the 
basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  only  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  need  be  examined. 
(Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369,  384.)  In  this  sense,  the  purpose  of 
examining  the  Morrison  criteria  is  to  establish  a  nexus  between  the  proven  conduct  and  fitness 
to  teach.  However,  even  if  the  Morrison  analysis  shows  a  nexus  between  the  conduct  and 
fitness  to  teach,  it  must  also  be  determined  that  the  alleged  conduct  shows  evident  unfitness  for 
service.  (Morrison,  supra,  at  p.  1445  [emphasis  added].)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service” 
means  clearly  not  fit  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 
inadequacies;  it  connotes  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt 
of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  expectations  of  the  school  district.  (Woodland  Joint 
Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p. 
1444  [emphasis  added].) 

In  considering  the  relevant  Morrison  factors  in  conjunction  with  the  sustained 
allegations  contained  in  paragraphs  5,  6,  7a,  and  7b,  the  following  conclusions  are  reached. 

20

Likelihood  of  adverse  effects  on  the  students:  there  was  at  least  one  complaint.  No 

good  can  come  from  using  profanity  in  class,  using  vulgar  or  obscene  language  in  class, 
modeling  alcohol  shots,  telling  students  they  are  the  result  of  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  promoting 
alternatives  to  school  such  as  dropping  out.  Each  of  those  actions  can  have  an  adverse  effect  on 
students. 

The  degree  of  adversity:  this  case  does  not  represent  the  most  extreme  form  of  teacher 

misconduct,  but  is  nonetheless,  moderately  serious.  Students,  especially  high  school  seniors 
that  are  coming  of  age,  are  impressionable  young  adults.  Exposing  them  to  profanity,  vulgarity, 
modeling  of  alcohol  shots,  and  making  comments  with  sexual  connotations  in  class  (1.e. 
referring  to  a  woman’s  menstrual  cycle,  talking  about  “balls,”  referencing  bottles  of  wine  and 
how  students  came  into  existence,  and  telling  a  student  they  may  be  related  because  of 
respondent’s  wild  days  — all  this  behavior  is  adverse  to  an  appropriate  and  productive  learning 
environment.  In  addition,  students  come  from  different  backgrounds  and  may  have  different 
comfort  levels  with  having  a  teacher  make  such  comments  in  front  of  their  peers. 

Proximity  or  remoteness  in  time:  the  allegations  were  made  in  August  2018  and  the 

district  took  swift  action,  within  four  days  of  the  commencement  of  the  school  year. 

Extenuating/aggravating  circumstances:  respondent  has  repeatedly  engaged  in 
unprofessional  conduct  over  the  past  decade,  and  refuses  to  take  responsibility  for  his  actions. 
Although  respondent  attempted  to  make  amends  in  the  hearing,  his  closing  statement  was 
astounding.  Rather  than  recognize  the  inappropriateness  of  what  the  district  alleged,  respondent 
instead  blamed  the  district  for  “squandering”  public  resources.  This  does  not  evidence  the  state 
of  mind  one  would  normally  like  to  see  if  a  person  was  truly  remorseful  for  what  they  had 
done.°  To  the  contrary,  respondent  appears  angry  and  bitter  that  the  district  is  pursuing  charges 
for  conduct  that  he  believes  “mischaracterized”  what  truly  occurred. 

Most  of  the  factors  in  the  case  of  Jack  M.,  supra,  parallel  those  factors  listed  in 
Morrison,  supra.  However,  two  factors  -  impairment  of  the  teacher/student  relationship  and 
disruption  of  educational  process  are  relevant.  Respondent’s  conduct  impaired  the 
student/teacher  relationship  and  disrupted  the  educational  process  to  the  extent  that  he 
appeared  to  be  acting  more  as  a  “buddy”  or  “one  of  them”  rather  than  assume  the  proper  role 
of  a  teacher.  More  importantly,  while  doing  “water  shots,”  talking  about  menstrual  cycles, 
telling  students  about  dropping  out  of  school,  using  profanity,  and  engaging  in  all  the  other 

  

°  Rehabilitation  is  a  “state  of  mind”  and  the  law  looks  with  favor  upon  rewarding  with 
the  opportunity  to  serve,  one  who  has  achieved  “reformation  and  regeneration.”  (Pacheco  v. 
State  Bar  (1987)  43  Cal.3d  1041,  1058.)  Fully  acknowledging  the  wrongfulness  of  past 
actions  1s  an  essential  step  towards  rehabilitation.  (Seide  v.  Committee  of Bar  Examiners 
(1989)  49  Cal.3d  933,  940.)  While  a  candid  admission  of  misconduct  and  full 
acknowledgment  of  wrongdoing  1s  a  necessary  step  in  the  rehabilitation  process,  it  is  only  a  first 
step;  a  truer  indication  of  rehabilitation  is  presented  if  an  individual  demonstrates  by  sustained 
conduct  over  an  extended  period  of  time  that  he  or  she  is  once  again  fit  to  teach.  (See  /n  re 
Trebilcock  (1981)  30  Cal.3d  312,  315-316.) 

21

sustained  instances  of  misconduct,  respondent  was  disrupting  the  educational  process  — 
which  was  to  teach  English. 

14.  |  Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  since  1997,  and  certainly  has  done  much  good  for 
his  community  and  while  engaged  in  his  public  activities.  He  may,  indeed,  have  been  effective 
at  teaching  students  over  the  years  as  well.  However,  ultimately,  based  on  the  Morrison  factors 
and  factors  relevant  from  Jack  M.,  a  nexus  between  respondent’s  conduct  and  his  fitness  to 
teach  at  SJUSD  was  well-established.  On  this  record,  1t  does  not  appear  respondent’s  conduct  is 
remediable  because  he  has  received  notice  on  multiple  occasions  from  the  SJUSD  to  stop 
engaging  in  unprofessional  conduct,  yet  continues  to  engage  in  unprofessional  behavior.  Such 
behavior  therefore  evidences  either  an  inadequacy  or  fixed  character  trait  that  respondent  either 
fails  to  recognize  the  conduct  expected  of  him  by  the  SJUSD  or  knows  exactly  what  is  expected 
of  him  but  continues  to  willfully  disregard  those  standards.  Accordingly,  on  this  record,  the 
district’s  request  to  dismiss  respondent  must  be  upheld. 

ORDER 

Respondent  James  Rizor’s  appeal  from  his  dismissal  of  employment  by  the  San 

Jacinto  Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district’s  request  to  dismiss  respondent  is 
upheld. 

DATED -Aptil  23,  2019 

DATED: Aptil  23,  2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

Lolbvool. 
[Js 
JESSICA HOLBROOK 
Assistant  Principal 
Chino  Valley  Unified  School  District 

  

[Stari  Cates 
SHARILL  CORTEZ 
Principal 
Perris  Elementary  School  District 

QAAGA. 
ADD). 
OAUISVUULCITOUS ZZ 

DocuSigned  by: 

PERPAREZOCACIAD2 
DVUVVUDETULCVULES 

buuedere 

[  inber 
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

22

